a treatise of the tradition and belief of the christian of Asia Europa and Africa in the principal controversy of our time question i. whether saint Peter have authority over the other apopostle or only the presidency and whether his successor have the same authority the east church nilus archbishop of a a the cause of dissension Eccl. 5 1. thessalonica the apostle be in Jerusalem St. Peter take not upon himself the primacy neither say he be it lawful for i to make a canon upon the same but the apostle and the priest assemble themselves together for to consult thereupon and saint Peter reject they not but he begin to speak and after he saint james speak and they all do condescend to the opinion of saint james that be to say saint Peter himself and the rest of the apostle and priest Barlaam monachus graecus b b princip. cap. 2. I acknowledge that St. Peter be a universal pastor and teacher but he be not alone but also every one of the other apostle be in honour equal with he it be true that our saviour promise the key of the kingdom of heaven to saint Peter the which he declare to be no other thing than the power to bind and unbind but it be manifest that he give the same power to the other apostle say whatsoever you bind on earth shall be bind in heaven we do conclude then that all the apostle have equal and like honour in that which be belong to the church but saint Peter be prefer in this holy dozen and for that the other be present he propound the question and peradventure receive the honour to be set in the first rank Maior c c in 4. sent. dist. 24. qu. 3. say that the apostle receive with saint Peter a equal community of honour and authority but they will that he shall be their prince and this say of be confirm by this sign to wit that the grecian do follow the contradictory of our conclusion that be to say of the belief of the church of Rome and none ought to say that so great a people be in error a people I say that have receive the faith before the roman and the most part at the very first foundation or plant of the church d d (...) cr. cap 2. the muscovite deny that saint Peter be a true pope or a true bishop of the sea of Rome or that he be the only head of the militant church and they say that he receive not of jesus Christ full authority the same they believe of the bishop of Rome the which they maintain to be like other bishop the south-church aluares e e Descript. Aeth cap. 29. Prester-Iohn send to i to ask wherefore we have divide the church of Antioch and Rome see we profess to be christian and see that the church of Antioch be in a manner the chief until the council of pope Leo who three hundred and eighteen bishop assist I answer as I have say once before to his greatness that indeed Antioch be heretofore the head of the church which saint Peter govern and dwell in it five year and in Rome five and twenty year after that he inquire whether we do obey all that which the pope command we I answer he that we do and that we be oblige thereunto by the article of our holy faith which confess one holy catholic church whereupon he reply that if the pope will usurp so great prerogative as to use towards they a unlawful commandment they will not make any reckon of it and if by such mean their Abuna will presume so far they will burn the copy of such commandment Annot. by this discourse it be see that the aethiopian church do hold that the primate of the church may err and command unlawful thing although he do it in the quality of a primate for he command not by any other authority and that the judgement of the church be good and valuable without the advice and consent of the primate the reform church in the west the confession of England f f Art. 4. Christ be always present in his church and have no need of any lieutenant that shall succeed he total in the church neither can any one mortal man embrace in his understanding the catholic church that be to say all the part of the world much less to establish a good order and to administer and govern it well and due the apostle as saint cyprian say g g simpl. prael be all of a equal authority and the rest of they have the same authority as saint Peter have it be speak to they equal feed go through the universal world preach the gospel and as saint Jerome say h h all bishop in-what place soever they be either in Rome or in Eugubio or in Constantinople or in rhegium be of oneself same merit or calling and of oneself same priesthood the roman or LATIN church pope leo. i i Dist 19 the lord will that this holy charge shall belong in such sort to all the apostle that he have appoint and ordain it in the person of Peter as sovereign among the other apostle pope Stephan k k Dist forasmuch as the roman church over the which we do sit and govern have be propose for a mirror and example all that whatsoever she do ordain and command aught to be for ever inviolable observe card. Bellarmine l l tom. 2. l. 2. c. 17. and 18. the sovereign bishop be absolute above the counsel and can subject himself to their coactive sentence beside m m in praef. pont. this point be the most important of all religion and to hold the contrary be as much as if one will say that the church may perish and decay annotation there be three manner of government that be to say monarchy aristocracy and Democracie n n Bodin Repub. l. 2. c. 1. monarchy be when one alone have power to command aristocracy be when the lesser part of the people have the sovereignty in itself to give a law to the rest of the people be it to all in general or to some one in particular Democracie when all the people or the great part of they have the sovereign authority presidency be when in a state aristocratique or democratique there be one that have the first rank and the charge to govern in the assembly magistracy or superintendency be when he that be precedent have jurisdiction over the particular for to cause the law and statute of the commonwealth or monarch whereof he be a subject to be observe n n durand Eccl. lib. 3. c. 2. this charge and jurisdiction be give sometime for term of life and institute both in title and Office sometime for a certain time and in the form of a commission some man may demand whether saint Peter have simple the primacy that be to say the first rank or place among the apostle or whether he have jurisdiction over every one of they in particular or whether he have a monarchal authority over their company also whether have he the primacy in divine affair and in such sort that it be not lawful for his fellow to give to unto another the roman church do hold that saint Peter have authority in divine matter over the company of the apostle and that he that be elect and choose to preside or govern in the church have the same authority over it and be not oblige to follow the great voice in give his sentence according to the consultation of the counsel for proof whereof be allege thou be Peter and upon this stone etc. I will give thou the key n n matth. 16. I have pray for thou o o John feed my sheep strengthen thy brother and that the faith of the roman be renown through the p p rom. 1. world this opinion of the roman church be so particular that not only the catholic and apostolic church of the east south and of the north and the reform church of the west but also the rest that make profession to believe the roman church can approve of this point nevertheless this be the ground and foundation of the other for when one make profession of christianity it be necessary that he be resolve to which he ought to give credit to wit whether to the holy scripture expound by the great voice of bishop and of the apostolic sea which be the foundation of the east church p p 2. Respon. Jerem. fine or to a supreme head who have assistance of the bishop of his quarter which be the foundation of the latin church the church of Rome pretend that her bishop can err in the thing which he pronounce in the quality of the head thereof although that one whole council be of a contrary opinion but the council of Basil wherein be assemble all the latin church do hold the contrary yea many catholic roman doctor do maintain it in their writing say Bellarmine Camaracensis io. Gerson jac. florentinus Abulensis moreover it be the voice of the people that it be so and if one do ask a roman catholic wherefore he believe or do such and such thing he answer present that the church have so ordain it in say so he confess that the sovereignty belong to the church for be not that a heinous crime so to obscure the majesty of a monarch as to say that the estate do make law and edict and it be manifest that the roman catholic in so do do accuse the pope and the church of Rome of error to the which they give nevertheless the title of mistress of all other church and do confess that if there be any error in this there may be likewise in other opinion and consequent the grecian and the reform christian do build upon a far more sure foundation as for the place of the holy scripture allege by the latin church the foresay apostolic church do clear and manifest affirm that those place before allege do conclude nothing for a monarchy q q Apoc. 21. 14. that the church be found upon all the apostle in like manner as upon saint Peter that our lord pray for they all r r joh. 14. 16. that all have power to bind and unbind s s mat. 18. 18 to feed t t 1. pet. 5. 1. and confirm they u u act 14. 22 and that the faith of the church of thessalonica which be now the faith of the greek church be spread and scatter into all place 10 10 1. thes 1. and moreover that the lord make a promise to the company of the apostle more express than that which he make to s. Peter in particular I be say he with you until the end of the world mat. 28. 20. and withal two great lawyer of that time viz. hotman and Ranchin y y prim. Eccl. after many other have very ample write thereof z z Concil. from hence therefore the catholic and apostolic conclusion be take that the church which in her foundation be a monarchy because that jesus Christ be the king ought to be govern aristocratical by her bishop 1. cor. 12. which be equal in power although different in charge and degree for the order and policy thereof question 2 unto what bishop appertain presidency in the counsel and whether this presidency be a divine law or ecclesiastical the east church the answer to the council of Ausburge a a cap. 13. forasmuch as the church of God which be with we be the princess of all other church and that she guide the people of God in all knowledge and grace and glory in the pure sincerity of the of the apostolic tradition and of the father and for that also she have bear the first prerogative in the orthodoxal verity it be reason that all christian common wealth shall celebrate the divine mystery as she do Nilus archiepiscopus Thessalonicoensis b b primate l. 2. the latin say that the bless apostle saint Peter be constitute by the lord the prince of the twelve apostle and that he give into his hand the key of heaven against the which the gate of hell shall never prevail that he also pray that his faith shall not fail and such like thing as do manifest show the primacy of saint Peter and they say that the pope be constitute to be his successor and have receive of saint Peter all the primacy and that he can all that Peter can in thing concern faith and that it be impossible that he shall decline from the truth in matter of faith for if he shall fail all matter of faith will run to ruin but honorius bishop of Rome be a heretic according to the seaventeenth decree of the six universal council it may be then that the pope may decline from the truth in matter of faith yet grant that he err in the faith the word of the lord be not in vain that the gate of hell shall not prevail against the church c c mat. 16. 18 the piety and integrity of religion may be firm preserve in other bishop it be then manifest that it be not peculiar to the roman church to be found upon this stone for that shall be hard and grievous and not far differ from the jew baseness to enclose the church within Rome well then Christ have build his church but he build it upon the faith and doctrine of Peter and upon those that shall be keeper and observer of such a confession and if saint agathon affirm that his church to wit that of Rome never err from the truth it be no wonder for it be because that indeed very seldom she fall from the faith otherwise how shall a man interpret this place of scripture all be go out of the way they be all corrupt there be none that do good no not d d psal 14. 4. one moreover when he say that the church of Rome be not stay from the way of truth he speak of the time past and do not include the time to come and that which be to be note agathon speak that before the six synod Thevet e e Cosm. lib. 9 the patriarch of jerusalem as I have see do excommunicate out of the body of their church the which they hold from all antiquity aswell the pope of Rome as also all christian prince to wit those of the roman church because that they be separate from the greek church the which receive the gospel before the latin church Villamont f f voyages l. 2 cap. 22. the syrian do boast themselves to be the first christian of the world because that saint Peter have his seat seven year in Antioch before that ever he go to Rome which be the reason that the syrian will never submit themselves to the church of Rome Thevet i i Cosm. l. 10. c. 15. the christian of Traprobane and the land near thereunto do not acknowledge nor their father do never acknowledge the pope cardinal or prelate of Rome also the nestorian and other indian do call the pope a bishop unapprove k k Elucid c. 2. the ruthenian and moscovite do say that the pope be a heretic and do excommunicate he and his clergy at such time as they do celebrate the lord supper the south church ALuares l l cap. 26. Prester-Iohn call to remembrance that I have say that the church have draw these thing that be to say the ceremony of the mass out of the passion he demand of i what be this church and wherefore have we two chief head in Christendom the one at Constantinople in Greece and the other at Rome in Italy unto who I make answer that we acknowledge no more than one head of the church and although Constantinople be the chief in the beginning yet the same now be abolish for that the head of the church ought to be where saint Peter dwell because that jesus Christ tell he Petrus and etc. and then when saint Peter be in Antioch the church be there by reason that the chief head be then there resident the which be now come to Rome there be the ecclesiastical judge establish and so firm place that it remain there until this present moreover he tell i then that I yield sufficient reason for the church of Rome but he ask i what I can say of the church of Constantinople which be plant by St. mark and of that of Greece whereof saint John patriarch of Alexandria be head Annot. the reason of this great king be the very same with the grecian in the controversy against some cardinal in these word m m discept Graci and Caldei if that your roman church be the chief and mother of the other church by reason that saint Peter be her pastor it be more reason that Antioch shall obtain these title because she first embrace and receive his preach from thence it come that Antioch be call theopolis the city of God or else that church of jerusalem which obtain the great and sovereign sacrificer who preach and offer himself a sacrifice therein the universal history of the n n chap. of Ethiop indies make mention that the pope send Ouiedo a Spaniard to draw the abyssin or aethiopian to acknowledge the roman church but the emperor Claudius of Ethiope then reign chase he away and Ouiedo be compel to hide himself the reform church of the west the confession of Wittenberg o o cap. 32. we believe and confess that the church ought to expound the scripture but there be diverse opinion concern the church that be to say where it must be seek for and whether her jurisdiction be enclose within certain limit now we do think according to the holy scripture and the holy father that the catholic and apostolic church be not tie to any one certain place to one nation or to one sort of people but that it be in that place and with those nation where the gospel be sincere preach the confession of the switzer o o cap. 17. we do condemn the donatist which will enclose the church in a corner of Africa and we approve not the clergy of Rome who attribute the name of catholic only to the roman church Annot. the divine of tubinge in their letter do call the patriarch of Constantinople Oecumenicke and have seek the union p p Theol Virtemb of the east church the catholic ROMAN church pope Pelagius q q Dist 21. although that all the catholic and apostolic church establish through the universal world be a nuptial bed of Christ nevertheless the holy roman church be not prefer before the other church by any constitution of counsel but rather obtain the primacy from the holy word of our Lord the church of Rome be therefore the first sea of the apostle Peter she have no spot or wrinkle or any such thing but in these thing the high her degree be the great be her authority for the great have the power to command and the lesser be to yield obedience annotation saint Peter ought to be consider four manner of way first in the quality of a apostle send by God immediate as such a one that have no successor in the second place as a apostle simple have charge to plant many church in such manner s. mark and other evangelist their substitute which also be call apostle be his successor in the three place as a bishop and precedent in every church where he be that be to say in Antioch Rome jerusalem as Euodias do succeed he in Antioch Clement in Rome s. james the apostle and s. Simeon in jerusalem four s. Peter be to be consider as primate in the catholic church in such manner s. John the apostle entire belove of the lord succeed he have outlive s. Peter five and twenty or thirty year moreover that s. John be prefer before all the bishop of the world be apparent by that that he be take for one of the three pillar of the church and be one of the twelve foundation upon which the ordinary bishop of city be constitute and withal tradition confirm this for there be no church in the world which name not the apostle before the bishop yea the church of Rome prefer the apostle before the pope it remain then for we to search who be the successor of s. John in the catholic primacy whether polycarpus be his successor in Ephesus or Simeon successor to s. Peter in jerusalem or Albinus of Alexandria successor of s. mark successor and choose of s. Peter or Ignatius successor of Euodias and of s. Peter in Antioch or Evaristus successor of Clement and of Linus and of s. Peter in Rome there be two church which have contend herein more than eight hundred year that be to say that of Constantinople and that of Rome the roman church say that s. Peter have ordain be from God that Rome shall have the primacy and power to command and that for ever they of Constantinople say on the contrary side that our lord never speak any such word much less saint Peter himself and if any such thing have be some one of the apostle will have write of it this article be the foundation of all the doctrine and government of the church moreover saint Peter himself will have preach the same and saint John who succeed and outlive s. Peter will not have stay in Ephesus well then you see that all the church plant by the apostle not except any one do testify after many age that neither they nor their father never believe nor hold that the primacy by divine power be due to the church of Rome but rather that it appertain to whosoever shall be choose and elect by the great part of the church and that the bishop of Rome alone ought not to be q believe much less in his own proper cause in like manner many learned man of the latin church do confess that the reason wherefore Rome be hold to have the primacy in divine affair be a opinion of the vulgar sort so that rather to Constantinople appertain the primacy see it be give she by the apostolic church which they give not then to Rome be one of the last seat of saint Peter but only in regard of the imperial seat well then to make this the more intelligible it be necessary to know how it happen that the city of Rome now a day pretend that the primacy be due to she by divine right the above mention apostolic church do surmise as follow and say first that saint Peter have the first place among the apostle for he be oftentimes demand many thing by the lord and he answer in the name of his fellow over who nevertheless he have no jurisdiction nor authority although that some do think that he resign it to saint james when they be together at Jerusalem after that s. james be institute bishop that be to say after that he be stay that he shall make his ordinary residence there second that saint John during his life after the time of s. Peter have the first place among all the evangelist and bishop three that he never teach that Rome by divine right aught to be the mistress of the other church if he have s. polycarpus his disciple and other his successor in Ephesus have not debate so earnest and obstinate against the roman church touch the feast of easter four that after s. John the bishop of Rome obtain by just title the first place among the bishop which be under the roman empire for see that the citizen of Rome then reign over the inhabitant of other city he have be both proud audacious and unreasonable which will have prefer himself before their bishop especial without any ordinance of a council five that the church of Italy and other their neighbour through the lap of time give to the bishop of Rome not only the first place but also the superintendancie over the bishop near they in particular for to give his advice in matter that happen till a synod may be have six that the council of nice approve the same and ordain that Alexandria s s Alexandria be the great city of the empire after Rome joseph l. 4. c. 42. shall in like manner have the oversight of the church of Egypt and of Africa and that the church of t t Antioch be the three city josep jud. lib. 3. there be in this city 360. church of christian Antioch shall oversee those of the east and after a certain time because the imperial seat be transport unto Constantinople it be ordain that that bishop shall be overseer of the greek church and the bishop of jerusalem shall be admit to be one of the five for Palestina and those five be call patriarch seven that the bishop of Rome all this while have the first seat but yet without any universal jurisdiction but rather every one of the foresay five patriarch judge or rather give his advice and opinion till a council may be have as even to this day they of Constantinople although that they call themselves Oecumenicke be subject to synod but yet of Greece only eight that Maurice emperor of Constantinople will have take away the primacy from u u the grecian do call he Gregory dialoger Gregory bishop of Rome and 10 10 John nestente that be to say the young give it to John bishop of Constantinople who for a mark of his place desire to have the title of a general y y bishop and that Gregory do oppose himself against he lest he shall lose his place urge how insolent that title be and say that John will usurp dominion over the other bishop which peradventure be not the intention of John but he on the contrary side to show that he be content with the rank or place of his predecessor call himself the servant of the servant of God nine that phocas have slay Maurice give to the bishop of Rome which be then Boniface the first seat and title of general or universal bishop and yet without any jurisdiction or dominion over the other patriarch which notwithstanding the church acknowledge he not in that quality ten that Charles the great king of France have subdue with arm a great part of Europe the city of Rome crave his aid against the Lombard who be over come by the same king the roman proclaim he their emperor 11 that than the emperor of the east with the consent of the patriarchal and apostolic church take from Rome the primacy and give it to the say church of Constantinople 12 that than the roman see that by the ecclesiastical law they shall lose the primacy begin to say that the primacy belong as of divine right to they and to their bishop and consequent that the whole church together can not take away from they the first rank because that Rome be the sea of s. Peter 13 that after that they of the east have right say that he be successor of s. Peter which be elect confirm and approve by the great part of the church in what place soever he make his residence and that imitate s. Peter in doctrine and humility that the bishop of Rome have bring into their church many error and have innovate many thing without and against the decree of the counsel withal they have add to the symbol of nice of their private authority that the holy ghost proceed from the son even as from the father that although that the universal council have give the first seat to the bishop of Rome yet do not they believe that the church in future time can not take from he this place especial if the church of Rome shall fall into any error as they say she be already fall 14 that in the mean while the province of the empire of Charles the great to wit France Italy Germany and Spain remain under the bishop of Rome as be their near patriarch which be the reason that they now go about to persuade man that the primacy appertain unto he by God law but this shall be no prejudice to other church nor to the truth 15. that the bishop of Rome enrich with the gift and donation of the king of France and adventure believe themselves to be that which be repated of they have overthrow both spiritual and temporal monarch and have cause to be receive in place under obedience to they as well the law of their predecessor the pope make by the church of Rome as also those law which they themselves from time to time do add thereunto in somuch that the church of the east south and north with good reason have oppose themselves against these enterprise the confession and belief of the apostolic church about this question here in controversy be this that the first seat which be by divine law so far as be necessary for the order of counsel and be meet to show z z s. cypr. simple 150 unity be by the ecclesiastical law as also the sea that appertain to any such bishop who the catholic church shall judge to be fit and capable of such a charge question 3 whether miracle be sufficient proof that a christian nation ought to be hold for a true church and without error the east churches Marcus Paulus a a a lib. 1. cap. 17. and 18. venetian the citizen of the city of Tauris be Mahomet but there be some christian that inhabit there to wit nestorian and jacobite near to which town be a mountain which be once remove out of his place by the occasion that follow the sarrazin will to scandal the gospel say that it be write if you have faith as much as a groin of mustardseed matt. 17. 20. you shall say unto this mountain remove hence to yonder place and it shall remove well say the sarrazin mock the christian if your say be so excellent cause this mountain to remove out of his place then one of the christian fervent in faith speak to the mountain with a great confidence get thou hence the which incontinent remove in the presence and fight of all the people the very same author make mention of a pillar hang in the air which sustain the vault of a church in Sammarchan b b in the three book of his voyage cap. 4 Vilimont whosoever will see a thing worthy of memory must go to a little town call Sardinale inhabit by the christian of the church of the syrian where turk sarrazin or moor can dwell but they die before the year end c c D^^Kel M^sc ferd. Faber not far from the city of Muscovia there be a great monastery wherein be the sepulchre of one Sergius a abbot which monastery be very much frequent of the people for it be hold very famous for many miracle that be there wrought whereof it shall be sufficient to produce one which be that two blind man be restore to their sight there the same d d author it be a common thing among the muscovite to enchant serpent with word and chase away devil and deliver and help they that be possess Thomas e e Lopes Lopes the people of mangalor say that they go very often to the sepulchre of s. Thomas which be in their country who wrought among they many miracle the ecclesiastical history of f f Turcogr lib. 2. pach. Constantinople make mention that arsenius be institute bishop by the pope he be then become a member of the church of Rome for which cause he be excommunicate by the patriarch pachomius a little after that he die and his soul go with the soul of arrius and Eutiches heretic and his body be find black and swell which cause great fear to those that see he the meridian church aluares g g cap. 16. there be a sepulchre of one of the son of king Abram which they say be a priest among other miracle which they attribute unto he they say that the angel do minister bread and wine unto he when he celebrate the same author h h disc of Aeth cap. 17. they attribute the title of a saint to a certain king who name be Balibeta towards who the people bear such great devotion that all Ethiope do run thither where his body be bury which they report to work great miracle i i cap. 11. there be a monastery call abba Gariman retain this name of one which as they report reign in Greece who have forsake his kingdom retire to this place to do penance for his sin where he finish his day very holy and they report that he at this present do miracle the catholic ROMAN church GLoss canon k k reliq. and ven. sanct. tit. 22. we must inquire of miracle do in the life time and after death and to the end that these may be true miracle four thing be requisite first that they be of God and not frame by art or by the devil for miracle be wrought by the wicked second that they be contrary to nature as that of the rod of Moses turn into a serpent three that they be not wrought by word but through the merit of a man four that they be for the confirmation of the faith Annot. whosoever will know more ample the miracle of the latin church may read the legend and life of the saint the reform church the confession of the frenchman l l Art. 5. we believe that the word contain in the canonical write proceed from God and forasmuch as it be the very rule of truth it follow that neither antiquity nor custom nor the multitude nor human wisdom neither judgement nor vision nor miracle ought to be oppose to it annotation the east church do believe that the roman and ethiopian church do hold a erroneous and heretical opinion although there be miracle wrought among they in like manner the roman do pronounce a anathema against all christian that have not obey they as well against they of the east and south as also the north church notwithstanding their miracle the church of Africa refuse nay scorn to go and submit or subject themselves either to the greek church or to the latin church notwithstanding their miracle the latin church in the foresay canon do confess that miracle be wrought by wicked person the reform church say that miracle or the bruit of miracle ought not to be take as a mark of the true church and which be more they believe that they be not give they for confirmation of their doctrine because the same be sufficient prove in the holy scripture although that the truth itself be oftentimes hold in suspicion if then all the sect of christian do vaunt themselves equal to have miracle how can he that be out of the foresay church and be willing to become a good and a true Christian resolve himself by consider of their miracle sure if every nation do say that the miracle which be do among other people be not assure sign that the doctrine which they teach be altogether true we may herethen make this conclusion as catholic and agree upon by all in general that miracle be no proof of doctrine neither mark of the true church question 4 whether personal succession be a mark of the true church the east church BArlaam m m cap. 3. how absurd be it and out of reason to say that every one of the apostle be a pastor and common teacher of the universal world as s. Peter be and yet that none of they leave any successor but saint Peter only because that if any one of the apostle have leave for his successor either bishop or governor of the church wherein any of they finish his day and yield up his soul to God upon what reason command thou that all shall be create by the pope moreover if I shall affirm now that the other apostle have leave successor behind they among who none be first or last but all equal and of oneself same order peradventure you will not believe i but if I shall bring you here some unreprovable testimony you will not be able to withstand it it shall be saint Denis Areopagite in a epistle which he write to Demophilus a monk in these word moderate thou than thy desire thy anger thy purpose as it be convenient to the end that the holy minister may have authority over thou and the priest over they and the bishop over the priest and the apostle over the bishop the successor of the apostle for if any of they have commit any fault in his office he may be correct by they of the same order this man live in the time of the apostle and know exact the affair and business of those day which say that the successor of the apostle be of one equal order and calling the south church litourgia Ethiop pray for our prince the prince of our archbishop the lord Gabriel and the chief of the church of Alexandria and for the chief of our country our venerable archbishop mark and for the bishop priest and deacon of the right faith the reform church Heluet. n n cap. 18. the celestial father send his only son in who be the divine wisdom which be pour upon we through his most holy most pure and most perfect doctrine for he have choose his disciple which he make apostle and they be go through the universal world have gather together church by the preach of the gospel and afterward they ordain pastor in all the church of the world by the commandment of CHRIST through who successor he have until this present teach and govern the church the roman church carded Bellarmine o o Eccl. cap. 8. the five mark of the church be the succession of person in the roman church continue from the time of the apostle until now for that be the reason that she be call apostolic for if the ancient father have esteem it so great a argument to prove the true church by the continuance of twelve or twenty or forty bishop how much more ought we to esteem the infallible succession of more than 200 bishop especial because we see that the other apostolic see be decay and fail that be to say those of Antioch Alexandria and jerusalem wherein after that those place be take away from the roman by the persian and sarrasin sithence which time there be nine hundred year past there have be no succession and if there be any the same be very obscure annotation our saviour be now ready to ascend to heaven say to his apostle go through the universal world and preach the gospel unto all p p mar. 15. 16 creature etc. this commandment be execute as may appear as well in the holy scripture as also in ancient history that s. Peter be in Antioch s. Andrew in Greece and Moscovia s. james keep in judea s. John go into Asia s. Philip into Assyria s. Thomas into India s. Matthew into Ethiope s. thaddeus into Armenia s. Paul call from heaven preach in all country from Arabia unto Sclavonia well then every one of they leave successor and until this day there be not any one of those region where there be not christian bishop which plead to have succeed the apostle without any interruption Bellarmine say that if there be any succession it be obscure other do answer he that it be no more obscure under the persian and sarrasin than it be in the time of the ancient bishop of Rome under the roman pagan and persecuter of the church the east church never cease to vaunt and brag of their apostolic sea the christian of africa do exalt he of Alexandria and acknowledge no other head the abyssine by antiquity do hold the succession of that sea so certain that none among they can have the imposition of hand but by the hand of he that be especial choose by the church who they call Abuna and who they do believe to have his succession from s. Peter and s. mark the evangelist final if by personal succession a man pretend to know the true church he can know what part to take and although that the latin church only have the succession without interruption that can not be a sure mark see all those nation which s. write of do believe that the roman church be not the true church notwithstanding her succession we may here insert the catalogue of universal bishop according to the greek church proceed from s. Peter until the time of neophytus which now hold or late hold the sea at Constantinople but we will omit that for brevity sake this then here shall be the Catholic conclusion that the personal succession of the church of Rome or of any other be not the make of a true belief question v. whether the multitude of christian or the greatness of country be mark of the true church the east church VIllamont q q l. 2. c. 21. the church of the holy sepulchre in Ireusalem be govern by diverse sort of religious man some be roman catholic other be christian but schismatic and no adherent or lover of the catholic apostolic roman religion you have in the first place the grecian which be master and lord of the chief place of the church moreover there be there a certain people which multiply as well in Greece and Asia as also in Africa beside the r r lib. 2. ca. 22 syrian do very near imitate the use custom and manner of the grecian again the georgian do observe altogether the ceremony and error of the grecian in their sacrament Lovis Regius s s the empire of the king of Moscovia do extend towards the east almost unto the kingdom of Persia the south church VIllamont t t lib. 2. c. 24. the abyssines be a people of Ethiope that be to say a part of Africa and the great part thereof by reason of their large scope their king be by they call negus and in the persian tongue Prester-Iohn or Catholic which Prester-Iohn heretofore dwell in Tartary nevertheless he be yet one of the great king of the east and of the great power and might in all Africa and his kingdom do extend from the end of Egypt unto the indies this king have more than forty kingdom under he the u u l. 2. cap. 22. jacobite do inhabit a great part of Asia and live pell-mell with the turk persian and tartarian some of they inhabit near the river Nubius which be in the confine of Egypt and hold a good part of Ethiope and of the high indies insomuch that it be tell i that they occupy very near forty kingdom they call themselves christian of the first conversion and say that they be convert to the faith of jesus Christ by s. Matthew the apostle before the other nation they circumcise their child after the fashion and manner of the sarrasin the LATIN church BEllarmine 10 10 De not Eccl. l. 4. c. 2. the four mark of the church be the greatness or multitude and diversity of the believer for the church that be true catholic ought not only to comprehend all time but also all place all nation and all sort of people and that our roman church be the true church may be prove by this argument that be that before the time of Luther there be not in the world any more religion than these that be to say paganism Mahometisme the greek the nestorian the heresy of the hussite and the roman church the reform church the helvetian confession y y cap. 18. forasmuch as there be but one god and one mediator between God and man jesus Christ the Messiah one holy ghost one salvation one faith one covenant it follow necessary that there be but one church which be the cause that we call it catholic because that it be universal and spread through all part of the world and extend herself unto all time not be enclose within any time or place we condemn therefore the donatist which enclose the church in a certain corner of Africa and we approve not the clergy of Rome who affirm the roman church to be the only catholic church annotation there be two or three hundred year past since that it have be very hard to judge by the multitude whether the name of the catholic church appertain to the greek church or the latin church the greek church have the empire of Constantinople and Trebizonde and the northern nation who do maintain she but now she be diminish by the oppression of the turk as the latin be increase by the conquest of the spaniard far otherwise than it be heretofore for Almanie be half pagan and Spain sarrazin and this be at such time as there be division between the greek and latin so that if the multitude do give the name of catholic the grecian shall have have it and the certain time when they lose this title be not to be know notwithstanding all this these two church and that of the jacobite do profess themselves to be catholic the passage or proof before allege do show that every one of they be extend very wide under the name of jacobite we will comprehend the Cophites and the abyssin and we may add thereunto the nestorian for Masius tell we that these people be rather differ in name then in religion who testimony be report to be very true the reason wherefore they have in jerusalem diverse church and oratory the one near the other be to the end every nation may use that language which he best understand Bellarmine also seem to account these three for one for it be certain that before Luther time there be Cophites abyssine and jacobite the rest the same Masius as it be discharge of the crime of heresy which be impute to they I be assure say he z z praef. in Anaph they be free and exempt from that wicked doctrine of that infamous heretic Nestor for have read a great volume of their solemn prayer which they make to God I have find nothing that may offend any man of sound opinion in our religion if it be not this that I suspect they because that they in many place call not the virgin Marie mother of God but instead of this title they call she the mother of life and of light here be to be note that Villamont a a lib. 2. cap. 24. have some notice that Prester John have send to the pope to submit himself to the church of Rome and cotion the jesuite affirm that b b sacrifi the patriarch of the Cophites have do the like but we have now fresh news and know that there be no such matter well then if all those people do make but one church the same be as great or rather great and ample than the latin church and if the multitude be the mark of the true church it must be attribute to they as the great number of people but because it appear not that either they or the greek church do constitute or appoint the multitude for a mark of the true church and that it do not appear where that multitude be moreover because that those which now be few in number may exceed the rest hereafter and that the multitude of the latin be not so great to induce other to turn to their religion we will conclude that according to their belief the multitude of people or the greatness or largeness of region be not mark of the true church question 5 whether the primate of the church have any power or authority over the temporalty of commonweal the east church IEremie patriarch of c c Resp 1. cap. 16. Constantinople we ought to obey all principality and power and not only of good prince but also of evil prince and to observe inviolable their law notwithstanding that we must obey god rather than man and in another place he that resist sovereign power shall be condemn d d Eluc cap 3. the emperor of Greece have have the power and right to hold under their yoke the patriarch and all the clergy the which they place and displace when it seem they best Nicholas e e lib. 4. c. 36. the patriarch of Constantinople jerusalem Antioch and Alexandria possess neither town nor castle and entertain no soldier or archer for their guard much less do they clothe themselves either with cloth of gold velvet or purple and have no more revenue towards their maintenance habit and book then about 200. ducat by the year in their habit they differ nothing from the other people and they be no more rich clothe then the simple sort f f cap. 3. the prince of Russia do hold that it be lawful for the secular lord to beat and depose their patriarch bishop and priest Louis Regius g g l. 8. the king of Moscovia surpass in cruelty and rigour of command all the monarch of the world and have get such authority over all his subject as well ecclesiastical as secular that he may dispose at his pleasure of their life and good they confess public that the will of the prince be the will of God and therefore they call he the keeper of the key of heaven and God chamberlain the south-church THevet h h lib. 2. c. 13 the Gerich that be to say the emperor of Ethiope be as the pope in his country and cause all thing to pass under his hand both the temporal and the most part of the spiritual moreover he bestow benefice upon such man as be of good life and learning I mean the ecclesiastical and upon none else the reform church the confession of Ausburg i i Art. 13. there have be great disputation concern the authority and power of bishop wherein some have very ill handle both the ecclesiastical authority and the temporal power from this confusion have spring and arise great war and stir during the time that the pope rely upon the power of the key have not only institute a new manner of worship charge man conscience by reservation of case and by violent excommunication but also they have attempt to transport the kingdom of the world and to take the empire from the emperor but good man and those that be learn in the church have heretofore reprove these thing the roman church k k Maior and obed. admit that the grecian and other say that the primacy of the church be not give to s. Peter and his successor then doubtless they must confess that they be not of the flock of Christ who say that there be one fold and one shepherd we be teach by the word of the gospel that there be therein two sword that be to say the one a spiritual the other temporal for when the apostle say lo here be two sword the lord answer not that there be too many but say it be enough true he that deny that the temporal sword be not in the power of s. Peter take very little regard to the word of the lord who say put up thy sword into the sheath the one and the other be therefore in the power of the church to wit the spiritual and the material and both sword ought to be govern by the church the one by the priest the other by the hand of king and man of war but according to the will and permission of the priest for the one sword must be under the other sword annotation the bishop of Rome be obedient in time pass to the emperor of Constantinople but after such time as the city of Rome be take away from the emperor of of the east and king Charles surname the great have receive from the say bishop the title of emperor he and his successor grow so much oblige to the same sea of Rome that the pope persuasion join with their devotion have cause that they have give the high place to they which ought as their predecessor do to show themselves obedient to the secular power notwithstanding this when the latin monarch see their authority too much abate they can not suffer this indignity from thence arise those disorder which all Europe have see under the frederic Henry Philip surname the fair the faction of the guelph and gibelline and such like tragedy our realm of France have unto this present maintain some liberty which be heretofore purloin and take away from Italy Spain and England but now she foster and nourish in her bosom ingrateful child who daily endeavour and seek to receive the council of Trent beside if the emperor of Germany have oppose themselves against the attempt of Rome the grecian have pass far beyond they the pope will have take away before this time the title of emperor from the emperor of Greece the grecian by the consent of the apostolic sea have transport into the east s. Peter chair and notwithstanding the and enforcement of the roman court the empire of the east be maintain many age that be to say until the year 1453. a fatal end at which time the prophecy of Daniel shall be accomplish he shall plant the tabernacle of his palace between the sea in the glorious and holy mountain dan. 12. 45. yet he shall come to his end and none shall help he until that time this empire be not hold but from God and by the sword as the gloss of the canon the emperor say some man have not his authority from the pope but from God only and the same do I likewise allow of but where be that true emperor it be he of Constantinople for the other that be to say he of Germany be but a maintainer and defender of the church of Rome I must not pass over with silence how the roman do open injury to Charles the great king of France say that the pope give he the empire of the west which be most false and untrue for Charles obtain it by arm and have conquer and bring the city of Rome itself into subjection if it have please he or if they have not willing yield themselves unto he if he submit himself to the pope it be of courtesy and devotion and not of any duty as for the christian of the east they have be call melchite that be to say royalist or l l Melech a King imperialist because that they have never acknowledge none no not the great man in the world but the imperial majesty in like manner the christian of Africa be also melchite the ancient catholic church be melchite more than seven hundred year for there be never any council where the emperor have not the high place or that the pope of Rome yield not their due obedience the holy apostle have also be melchite yea our saviour jesus Christ himself for he pay tribute aswell for himself as for s. Peter likewise in the estate of the israelite a estate ordain of God the priestly sovereignty bow to the secular authority although that that high sacrificer have a unlimited jurisdiction and that he be the representative image of the great and eternal sacrificer jesus and as those that rank the high priest under emperor and king be royalist and emperialist in like manner in our time the reform christian have call those of the contrary opinion papist as who will say subject of a priest for in greek Papa signify a priest a name nevertheless which do not proper belong but to those that believe that the pope have power to judge and depose king by this which have be speak a man may see that the imperialist be catholic spread through the four quarter of the world and that their belief in this point have be from the beginning therefore he that be a melchite be a catholic and whosoever hold a contrary opinion be a heretic it be this heresy that keep the kingdom of Navarre under the spanish yoke it be this heresy that bring that frown fortune into our France and have be the ruin of she if her great and invincible Melech second by faithful melchite otherwise call politician have not preserve and defend she with the grace and assistance of he which be the only giver and translator of monarchy it be this heresy that the most puissant and mighty king of great Britain endeavour to quench and abolish in the heart of his subject a heresy which for a while lie hide under ash but meet with any proper matter will break into a great combustion every one may here see that the most part of christian do reject this opinion yea the roman m m Fr Paul of Venice in apology themselves although they suffer the pope of Rome to maintain it in the canon we will then conclude according to the general voice that the primate of the catholic church whether he be at Constantinople or at Rome or at Alexandria have no power or authority over temporal commonwealth question 7 whether all the doctrine necessary to salvation may be take out of the holy scripture the east church nilus archbishop of n n lib. 1. thessalonica this be not then the cause of this difference and much less the whole body of the scripture as if it be too short no it be not utter open and plain whereof this question be for to accuse the scripture be as great a fault as to accuse God but God be void of all blame o o lib. 1. dist. 11. b. Lombard the grecian say that the holy ghost proceed only from the father the which they believe say they because that the gospel p p John 15. which contain whole the faith that be to say the doctrine of the faith make mention of the father only the king of q q Resp rohit Moscovia if the gospel have not be write how can the word of God have be understand and if the apostle have not reduce into write their delegation or commission how have it be know to the world that they be send to man r r Elucid err the russian say that the teacher of the latin church be not credible because they teach but that they receive from the greek doctor conditional that they find nothing therein contrary to their own opinion Annot. the christian of the east be marvelous jealous of the tradition and ceremony of the father nevertheless they hold that the scripture be necessary against those that say that the church may err moreover they hold the same sufficient and a rule of faith and therefore admit not altogether the greek and latin doctor but judge of their doctrine which they can not do but by examine it by the rule of scripture the south church a Luares s s cap. 31. it be demand of i whether all those thing that be to say the custom of the roman church be contain in our book and whether they seem better unto i than those which they use I answer that I find our book reduce into a better order than their book be because that since the time of the apostle we have have always great master and teacher which be never employ in any other vocation but to compose and gather together the holy scripture and passage of the prophet and apostle scatter in many volume they reply unto i that they have fourscore and one book of the old and new testament and ask whether we have more I answer that we have ten time more draw and extract out of the old and new testament enrich with many exposition wherein be contain very deep doctrine Prester-Iohn cause one to tell i that he be not ignorant of the great quantity of book which we have but that he desire very much to know their name Damianus a go t t indor leg art. 11. the abyssin say that they have all the writing of Moses and the prophet and other book of the old testament the four evangelist and all the epistle of s. Paul and that they want not any book of the holy scripture whereof they recite a catalogue in my presence nevertheless the bishop Zaga a ethiopian seemee to count the book of the bible otherwise for he say that in the new testament there be five and thirty peradventure he comprehend those which aluar say that they call Manda and Abetilis divide into eight part but the same abyssin do believe that the holy scripture be sufficient for salvation without those for they deny not the name of true christian to those that have not those book and therefore they hold they not to be of equal authority with the other the same author say that the abyssin believe not that there be any power whether council or whatsoever able to make law which bind the conscience much less such doctrine as be not ground upon the scripture Annot. the ethiopian be of the opinion of the reform if they mean those fourscore and one book which be in the volume of the bible for the same number be to be find if one reckon the epistle of jeremy for one book by itself and if one do separate the history which be not find but in greek add to the book of Daniel and Hester moreover it be to be note that the abyssin do limit that which they hold for the word of God within the number of four score and one book against the opinion of the word not write and they demand if the fashion and manner of celebrate the mass be to be find in the holy scripture Aluares a Roman Catholic answer they clean beside the matter say that the roman church have doctor and teacher which have a doctrine far great and more perfect then that of the old and new testament the reform church subscribe not willing to this article for they make a contrary article as hereafter follow the reform church the confession of the french church u u Art. 5. we do believe that the word which be contain in these book proceed from God of who it take his authority and not of man and forasmuch as it be the rule of all truth and verity contain all that be necessary for the service of God and our salvation it be not lawful for man neither for the angel themselves to add diminish or change it the catholic ROMAN church i. Maior 10 10 in 4. sent. d. 24. q. 2. it be to be note that we do hold many thing to be divine law which be not express contain in the divine law to wit in the holy scripture neither may they evident be deduce from thence as for example not to ordain a woman to be priest or the institution of any one order in like manner we read not in the new testament and much less in the old that the sovereign bishopric be grant to the successor of s. Peter yet notwithstanding we hold the sovereign bishopric be by divine law the council of Trent y y 4. Sess. decret. 1. the council see that this verity be contain partly in write bookss and partly in tradition not write do receive and honour with equal affection piety and devotion aswell all the book of the old and new testament as also all tradition which appertain as well to faith as to good manner annotation first the roman catholic especial when they will serve their turn with the say of the father against the protestant do not distinguish the doctrine of faith from ecclesiastical policy which the grecian call (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) the protestant do believe that all matter of faith may be sufficient take out of the holy scripture and that that which belong to policy ceremony and circumstance have be let go by tradition not write such tradition which may be change by the catholic church that be to say by the mutual consent and good will of all christian people in like manner by the particular church under the consent and good like of the catholic church in sum that the scripture be the rule of the faith of the catholic church as the catholic church be the rule of the member thereof in that which concern policy or outward worship second the foresay mayor be deceive in say that the scripture prohibit not to ordain woman priest the prohibition be in saint Paul z z 1. tim. 2. 11. as for the order or inferior office of priesthood 1. cor. 14. 34. they be of mere policy and as touch the sovereignty of the bishop or pope of Rome it be certain that the scripture make no mention of it also tradition of the catholic church do contradict it it be object that the scripture make no mention of the perpetual virginity of the mother of our saviour whereunto some man answer that it a a Smith p. Vermil caelib may be gather out of the scripture and that whereas the holy virgin be call bless among all woman if she have not be always a virgin other virgin shall have excel she in blessedness he that marry do well say saint b b 1. cor. 7. 38. Paul but he that marry not do better well then those that have do best shall be most bless in heaven now if any man will restrain her felicity in regard that she bear our saviour he must give a account of that restraint three the cardinal of c c perron say that the holy scripture be sufficient to salvation because it do send we back unto the church and the church teach that which particular be want in the scripture but if that be so the holy scripture shall be manifest imperfect and insufficient for if the scripture teach we not where be the head as mayor avouch how may one know by it the body of the church and for to descant upon the comparison of the same cardinal if the king shall say to one my chancellor shall tell you the rest and then many shall arise for to speak unto who shall he hearken who shall be believe to be the true chancellor our saviour never say that the church shall continue in Italy or in France and that it shall fail in other country moreover it be certain that our saviour know all thing yet not as a bare man but by participation of the heavenly wisdom nevertheless he reveal not all thing to his apostle and the apostle know thing which be not lawful for they to declare but they may happy declare far more to their disciple than they have write to wit many discourse miracle and other particularity of the life and doctrine of the lord which get they a far more great and perfect knowledge in divinity moreover there have be very many profitable thing for the government of the church which be not write but be come to their successor by tradition but as concern that which be proper belong to faith and necessary as well for the church in general as for the particular thereof the catholic church believe that the holy scripture be sufficient to salvation question 8 whether all the book contain in the volume of the bible have a absolute and equal authority the east church DAmascenus the great doctor among the greek d d orth. ca. 204. the (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) that be to say the book replenish with all sort of virtue and the wisdom of Solomon the which be write in Hebrew by the father of Sirac be translate into greek by his nephew which although they be as the rest of the book very elegant yet be they not number with the other because that they be not contain in the ark Annot. although that saint John be a ancient author and that those christian of the east do to this day follow his doctrine in that point of the distinction of the canonical book from the apocryphal or less authentical yet the grecian have not have since that any council which make a new canon the south church the south church the egyptian and ethiopian do follow altogether the canon of the hebrew and receive not as true canonical the book of wisdom judith and maccabee and other they of those country have hereby give we this advice if any man can show that this testimonial be false he ought to be believe Villamont e e lib. 2. c. 23. say that he can not discover what book they hold authentical and that he think they be in Hebrew it be well know that the abyssin do retain very much of the old law and therefore one ought not to think it strange if those that call themselves israelite do conform themselves to the ancient church of Israel the reform church in the west the confession of the french church f f Art. 4. after the account of the book according to the canon of the hebrew we acknowledge these book to be canonical and a certain rule of our faith not so much for the consent of the church as by the testimony of the holy ghost which make we to discern they from the other ecclesiastical upon which although that they be profitable none ought to ground any article of Faith the confession of Wittenberg g g cap. 30. we do call holy scripture the canonical book of the old and new testament such as the authority whereof be never call in question in the church Annot. if any ancient or modern writer have doubt of the authority of some canonical book their doubt ought not to be impute unto the whole body of the church the catholic roman church the council of Trent h h Sess. 4 doc. 1 have account among the other ancient canonical book those which otherwise some do call the second canonical to wit judith wisdom and the maccabee say thus if there be any one that will not receive for good and canonical these book all whole and entire which have be accustom to be read in the roman catholic church let he be accurse annotation the foresay people of the east and south and the reform of the west say that our saviour and his apostle after he have receive for holy scripture and perfect authentical but only those book which be and have be since in the canon of the hebrew wherein the book of the maccabee wisdom and the three and four book of esdras be not contain that the author of these book be not as the prophet inspire of God who confirm their doctrine with miracle this be the cause why the church in that time receive the one into the canonical authority and not the other that the catholic church much less the roman can make new article of Faith to affirm that the ancient church know not nor teach the verity in that behalf and that the church have have since new revelation be a absurd thing in fine that they first which number these deutero-canonicall or ecclesiastical with the prophetical intend not to equalize they but rather think good to put they in the volume of the holy bible because that there be good precept in they and history whereby one may see the estate of the church after the time of the prophee until the come of the redeemer the council of Trent do hold likewise for and in suspect the 4. book of esdras although it be in the volume of the bible there be also learned man of great account in the catholic roman church as cardinal Cajetan Nicholas de lyra and other which hold not the book of maccabee for authentical book and the general voice be that the book of wisdom Syrach the three and four of esdras the maccabee and other although that they may perhaps call they canonical have not equal authority with the book of the prophet and apostle question 9 whether the latin translation be of the same authority with the original Hebrew and greek write by the prophet and apostle the east church NIcholas i i lib. 4. c 36. the christian of the east say that the pope of Rome who they hold for heretic together with their sectary have whole corrupt and change the gospel and other book of our religion in take away and add that which seem to they most fit to serve their insatiable covetousness the king of Moscovia k k see the answer to rohite the chapter which thou cyte out of apostolical epistle and gospel agree not with we here Lasicius mark that which follow the writing of the apostle be otherwise distinguish by the russian then by we for in their language there be in s. Matthew 116. chapter the most part of they so little that there be sometime but three little verse therein according as the sense of the discourse require and a little after he say that all that be do by one cyrillus a priest of the church of Constantinople which they do obey who understand the sclavonian tongue aug. l l epist Eras eugub say that the grecian hold the translation of the seventy interpreter which almost quite through differ from the latin translation Aluares m m cap. 31. say that Prester-Iohn ask he how many of the prophet have foretell the come of jesus Christ I answer say he that there be not any one among they which make not some mention of his come afterwards he ask he how many book s. Paul have write who answer one book divide into many epistle Annot. this discourse show that the church of Ethiope have never see the latin bible of the church of Rome and regard not to approve it if they find it differ from the Hebrew the reform church in the west the confession of the switzer n n cap. 1. we do receive only that interpretation of the scripture for orthodoxal and lawful which be take out of the scripture itself expound according to the true sense and meaning of the language wherein they be write Whitaker o o Sacr. scrip. contr. 1. we englishman do hold that the latin translation of the church of Rome be in very many place miserable corrupt and falsify and that it be not authentical and that the Hebrew and greek edition be sincere scripture the roman occidental church the council of Trent p p Sess. 4. decr. 2. the council consider that no small profit will redound to the church if of many latin edition of the holy scripture one be know to be authentic do ordain and declare that the same vulgar edition be hold for such and that none be so bold to reject it upon what pretence soever annotation the author of the vulgar latin translation be not know the roman catholic say that it be the labour of s. Jerome the reform church do think that s. Jerome be not the author thereof nevertheless the council of Trent do authorize it cardinal Bellarmine affirm that that translation be true and that the original be corrupt but there be many roman q q vatable Arias mont. aug Eugub and other catholic which do hold the catholic belief and have make new translation and consequent correct the vulgar those of the east church hold that only the greek original write by the apostle be authentical and as touch the book of the old testament they allow of the translation which be call the translation of the seventy or of Ptolomeus nevertheless they hold it not for a certainty that those be altogether the translation of the seventy which carry that name it be think that the apostle do use the translation of the say seventy the which nevertheless be not altogether conformable with the Hebrew but if they have approve it than it follow that there be not any error in that they have allege it moreover the Hebrew text be prefer before all other translation the latin do object that it be not reasonable to receive the Hebrew bible of the jew the greek do answer that our saviour and his apostle have the Hebrew bible and that they leave the same to their successor from who those of this present time have receive it from hand to hand and not from the unbelieve jew and therefore the vulgar translation be take from the Hebrew it follow therefore that the Hebrew be then in the church or else that the roman church have take it from the jew Masius r r Praf in Mosem Barcepha say that the syrian hold for authentical the syrian translation of one Theodorus peradventure they intend not to prefer or equalize it with the original Hebrew and that the grecian the moscovite the abyssine and the armenian will attribute each one of they to the translation use in their church as much as the latin do attribute to they which will be but so many particular opinion each one of they be reject by the other and therefore the catholic and assure opinion be that the latin translation of the roman church or any other have not equal authority with the original Hebrew and greek of the prophet and apostle question x. whether the tradition of the latin church be catholic and whether all christian nation be oblige to observe they the east church NIcolas s s lib. 4. 36. the grecian say that they be the first nation that be convert to the faith of jesus Christ and that in consideration and regard thereof they be the man that true and pure hold the tradition of the primitive church as it be preach and teach unto they by the apostle jeremy ecumenical patriarch write thus to the protestant of Germany t t 1. Resp in let these thing suffice you most dear brother which as you see do best of all accord and agree with the scripture unto we divine give according to the interpretation and exposition of the most wise and holy father inspire by God for we be not permit to trust upon our own particular interpretation or to understand or teach but only that which agree with the holy counsel and doctor of the church for fear that be once draw or lead out of the way of the evangelical doctrine and the path of true wisdom and understanding we do err and that our judgement be transport as a other Proteus one while to one fashion of belief another while to another well some of you will demand peradventure by what mean may a man attain to this that shall he do by the aid and assistance of God if he do attempt nothing and follow but that which have be ordain by the apostle and holy counsel for he that do well and constant continue within these limit shall march the very same pace and be of the very same faith and communion with we u u rel. ruth ca. 2. the moscovite deny that the church of Rome be the chief head of all other church say also that the say statute write canon and determination of the counsel of the church of Rome be nothing and that all counsel after the seven first counsel be not true catholic because that they be hold without their consent and 10 10 the latin do reckon 18. Bellar. tom. 2. lib. 1. cap. 5. approbation the church of the south aluares y y cap. 26. again it be demand of i what number of bishop be at the council of Nicei whereunto I answer three hundred and eighteen moreover they ask i wherefore we do not observe the statute and article of that holy council see it be therein ordain that priest shall marry I answer that of all that which be there ordain there be now nothing observe but only the great symbol or creed they put i also in mind of many other thing which be break and violate by pope Leo Aluares a roman catholic accuse the council of nice of heresy in the presence of Prester John and they pray i to recite they but I excuse myself say that I know they not although that in my judgement if that he infringe any they be such as savour of some heresy and that he have approve and cause to be observe those which he know to be holy and necessary the same aluares z z cap. 27. Prester John ask i whether we have a book divide into eight part which be compose by the apostle assemble at jerusalem which they call Manda and Abetilis the content whereof be by they observe but I answer he that I never know any such because it be not to be find in our country zaga-zabo a ethiopian bishop a a dam. a go leg ind. neither our patriarch nor our bishop do believe that either of themselves or in council they may make any law unto which any man shall be bind upon pain of mortal sin the reform church in the west the confession of the switzer b b cap. 2. s. Peter the apostle say that the holy scripture be not of any private interpretation and therefore we approve not all interpretation neither receive as a lawful exposition that which be call the opinion of the church of Rome we do not contemn the exposition of the father which do agree with the holy scripture we reject all human tradition although never so well adorn with fine title if be confer with the holy scripture they do differ and vary Zanchius c c h zancl 2 we do judge that those tradition must be retain and observe in the church which do manifest appear to be of the apostle observe ever in all the church although that there be no such commandment in the scripture it be not the part of a christian man author and one that fear God to reject that which be prove to have be receive by the consent of all church to reject that I say without just and necessary cause but if he attempt any such matter it must be debate in a general council the catholic ROMAN church the council of Trent d d Sess. 4. 1 the council consider that all doctrine and discipline be contain in book write and tradition not write follow the example of the catholic father and good interpreter of the faith do receive and honour with equal affection and piety all the book of the old and new testament and in like manner the tradition which do appertain as well to faith as to good manner as have be speak either by the mouth of jesus Christ or else by the holy ghost and always keep in the catholic church Roman by continual succession annotation there be no part of Christendom that hold not themselves to have the best form of government the three principal that be to say the grecian roman and abissin or aethiopian do claim their tradition from the apostle notwithstanding that they be find either to be different or contrary but in history their original be to be see especial the tradition of the grecian and latin as touch those of the abissin or aethiopian it be hard to find out the author nevertheless they have receive some of the greek and latin in the time of justinian the emperor as hereafter shall be say but the most part of their ceremony be take from the law of e e scal. emen. temp. in eph. Eccl. eth. Moses the reform christian f f the confession of Beza part 7 say that if ceremony must be it be more convenient to observe those which God have in time past ordain then to receive any paganism superstition that which bring most novelty into the latin church be the authority which be give to one alone for every pope will leave some remembrance of faith from hence do proceed so many canonize saint and fashion to honour they feast pilgrimage religion or order of monk and friar and such like blind devotion wherein the latin have surpass all people who accuse the foresay latin of presumption because they will make to pass for catholic those custom which be never ordain by the seven universal counsel they of the east church require the observation of those of the general counsel but not of any particular the reform christian do protest that they dispute not against catholic custom g g Melanchton lang. but against abuse and superstition or if any thing displease they it be the multitude of ceremony rather than any one of they consider in particular it be true that in reject those that have be bring only in by the church of Rome they have not spare the catholic ceremony h h Luther think that all christian nation will reform themselves the one after the other and also that that which seem to be a particular attempt will be corroborate and confirm by a catholic approbation howsoever it be the learned and great man among they do protest to submit themselves to a general and free council the frenchman likewise who have of late time begin and have less mean give they to erect or institute such a estate and form of church as be to be see in other country have nevertheless protest in like manner in the conference at Poissy that it will be easy for they to fall into accord in ceremony if the difference in doctrine be once appease so it be that the contempt of catholic government do get the say reform christian a evil opinion among other christian and that produce two effect the one that the say protestant consider ceremony but as outward show and the roman catholic i i matth. historiogr 1. 6 disc. 5. do confess that ceremony have just that name do condemn the custom of other nation without discern those that be catholic from other more particular or that be profitable and tolerable from those that be evil and nought and the other see themselves despise and contemn without reason persuade themselves that it be all one when one reprehend they in a matter concern faith saint Paul say that such ceremony have appearance of holiness in that they spare not the body and have no regard to clothe or feed the same but he say not that they shall abandon all ceremony rather say he he that eat do well and he that eat not do likewise well much less have he approve that one shall rend asunder or condemn the catholic church the other effect of condemn the catholic church be that a man can now a day read the writing of the ancient father nor the history of the apostolic church no not the holy scripture itself without find very many ceremony and fashion of speak not use among the protestant of France from whence it happen that many do change their belief be offend at the contemn of counsel as it be see by their writing and conversation and on the other side they of the roman church which do rely too much upon outward ceremony be more and more confirm in their opinion presume that they follow and imitate in all thing the holy scripture and the father nay the most learned and those that approve not in all point the roman church do not think it in any wise reasonable to prefer the advice or opinion of some particular and new writer before the judgement of ancient counsel in that which concern the policy of the church here it be to be mark that the modern chronicle in write the ecclesiastical history do cause the reader very often to err they write the name of the ancient bishop of Romein capital letter name they alone and recount their act and life and they gather their law ordinance and decree and make no mention of the canon which the other bishop have make in their church from thence grow the opinion that the say bishop of Rome be monarch of all the world as the emperor have be in temporal matter of their empire and that such law tradition and decree which be but only for the church of Rome be law give to the catholic church which be not so for it have be but of very late year that France Spain Germany and England have receive they that be to say three or four hundred year since as for other nation they have not receive and approve the same as yet but have invent other in fine the reform christian k k Daneus in lib. hear say that the estate of the church have be tolerable during the five first age and they approve not aerius and such like which in time past trouble the church in reject the ecclesiastical custom and from thence it follow that the custom receive during those first age be not those which have bring or do nourish the schism in Christendom and therefore all nation do avow that catholic tradition ought to be receive if the inestimable good of peace and agreement may thereupon ensue always provide that you comprehend not under the name of catholic those which only belong to the greek church or the latin or the abyssin aethiopian armenian or any other particular church question 11 whether the holy ghost proceed from the father and the son or from the father only the east church the second answer to the confession of Ausburg l l processione you see how many absurdity do arise on every side if it be conclude that the holy ghost do proceed from the father and from the son hold not a evil opinion in the name of the Lord for if the latin the church of Rome and other do bring approve witness as it seem likely to they that be to say Augustine Ambrose and Jerome we likewise can produce far more and more worthy of credit all which have pronounce that the holy ghost proceed from the father only and have prohibit upon pain of a grievous anathema to hold any other belief the roman catholic church the confession of faith by the council of Trent m m Sess. 3. decret. 1. we believe in the holy ghost the lord and giver of life which proceed from the father and the son which be worship and glorify together with the father and the son who speak by the prophet the south church saint Severus Patriarch of Alexandria n n Formul bapt. I believe in one holy ghost live which give life unto all who proceed from the father and the son the king of Aethiope o o epist of David in the name of God the father almighty creator of all thing visible and invisible in the name of God the son jesus Christ which be one with the father light of light in the name of the holy ghost God live which proceed from the father I be king etc. the reform church the english confession we believe that the holy ghost which be the three person in the holy Trinity be very God not make nor create nor beget but proceed from the one and from the other to wit from the father and the son in a manner unknown and unspeakable of man annotation LOmbard surname master by the school doctor of the latin church q q li. 1. dist. 1. say as follow touch the difference between the grecian and the latin in this question the grecian say that the holy ghost proceed from the father only and not from the son which they hold because that the truth in the gospel which contain whole the faith speak of the procession of the holy ghost make mention only of the father and also that in the princpal counsel which be celebrate with they their symbol or have be so fortify by the Anathemaes add that it be not lawful for any man to teach any thing touch the trinity otherwise then be therein contain in which symbol or creed the holy ghost be say to proceed from the father and not from the son and therefore say they all those be anathema that do affirm that he proceed from the son and a little after we do conclude that the grecian do accord with the latin in the matter itself although that they differ in word behold here the opinion of the master of sentence who to show that there be no difference between the greek and the latin in that point do only report the say and sentence of the ancient grecian who say that the holy ghost proceed from the father and the son but that have not satisfy his follower which think that the modern grecian hold not the belief of the ancient beside some of the latin doctor do confess that they understand not well the intention and meaning of the grecian other do call they heretic and schismatic the reform church do leave this question with the same irresolution we reject say Tilenus the error or as other term it the * * strife about word (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) of the modern grecian this difference have be the cause or at least wise the pretext of the schism betwixt the east church and the west the east church who will transport the primacy to Constantinople pretend that the pope of Rome abuse the church do take occasion to accuse the pope upon this article that pope be Nicholas the first by the report of Bellarmine who allege r r l. 2. c. 21. Anthoninus or adrianus as some will have it because that he have be so bold as to add of his own authority to the symbol of nice that the holy ghost proceed from the son and because peradventure he have not expound it full they of the east have accuse the latin of constitute two principle and the latin lay the fault upon they do impute unto they blasphemy say that they do derogate from the divinity of the son of God Lombard and other say that the difference be in word and not in the matter itself peradventure the grecian do deny the procession of the holy ghost to be from the son in one consideration and the latin do affirm it in another for to know if it be so we be constrain to enter into very curious consideration of divinity it be therefore necessary to mark that the son be consider three manner of way first as be the divine essence and the very same essence with the father for the action be of the person and not of the essence consider apart second the son be to be consider as a son and that formal so the son produce not the holy ghost for he which be produce so far as he be produce produce not in the three place the son be to be consider as a person and that be it which s. Austen regard when he say that the son have from the father not only to be son but also to be or his be that be to say to be a distinct person not to be simple the divine essence for the son have the same of s s Bellar. Christo lib. 2. cap. 19 himself and the person beget not the essence but the essence beget the person and if the son produce not in this manner that be to say as a person than the holy ghost proceed not from the son in any wise for as it have be say the holy ghost proceed not from the Sonn either as a essence or as a son well then if the grecian say not that he to wit the holy ghost proceed from the essence of the son be simple take neither from the son as a son the latin shall not take occasion to condemn they see that they say the same but because the grecian say and that according to the gospel that the holy ghost proceed from the father it be manifest that they deny not the procession of the holy ghost to be from the son because he proceed not from he either as a essence or as a son for if that be so they shall deny in like manner his procession to be from the father for the father produce not the holy ghost as a essence simple for the essence produce not neither as a father for if he have produce he as a father the holy ghost shall be then his son the grecian do hold that the holy ghost proceed from the father in such a sort as he can be say to proceed from the son and they have reason to say so because the holy ghost be in the person and from the person of the son the which the father have beget as a son and the father beget not a son which have not the holy ghost and his productive grace and fertility likewise the father be the cause the greek doctor do use this word (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) of the holy ghost both as a person and as a father but the son inspire not as a son neither in produce another person which shall produce the holy ghost this observation remain obscure if it be take without distinction that the holy ghost proceed from the father and from the son also the grecian shall seem to speak more proper than the latin the ancient doctor confess that the holy ghost proceed from the father as he speak more proper which say the king command than he that say the king go for the commandment proceed from the king as a king but the king go as he be a man if then the son be a inspirer the father be the cause even as a father but because that the grecian do absolute deny that the holy ghost proceed from the son deny thereby that his person be a inspirer a man must take heed lest he fall into a (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) for if by the word proceed they understand to have his original or beginning they say not ill consider the father alone be the beginning the divine do confess as much when they call the son this word spy the name of and the word show that it be to speak improper yet here one can speak proper enough therefore you may see that the holy ghost be say to proceed from the father alone in diverse sort the which the church of the east do regard but they regard not the reason wherefore he may be say to proceed from the son as also it be very hard to express how the person of the son be a inspirer without consider he either as a essence simple or as beget for in this person be consider but the essence and the relation as those school divine affirm the which relation have the place of form from which the action ought to proceed it be likewise very hard to say how the father inspire as a person without inspire neither as a father nor as a essence nevertheless we must so say see the son of God himself have say and teach so as his belove disciple saint John testify unto we which hear it of himself but because he have not say that the holy ghost proceed from himself the church of the east will not say so but do consider the father as father and the son as son and they say with their great doctor saint Damascenus t t Orth. fid. li. 1. ca. 13. (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) the father alone be the cause and beginning as well of the son as of the holy ghost that which move the latin to be so obstinate and to say that the holy ghost proceed from the person of the son be because they fear that otherwise man will feign or imagine inequality in the person and if the father do not communicate to the son the inspirative power he communicate not unto he all that be in he but he communicate unto he all except the constitutive property of his person nevertheless the truth be that the grecian confess constant the equality of the person and they say that the father do communicate all to the son but they seem to deny that that production be the action of the son because that the son do not inspire but the person already beget and resident in himself and they say moreover that there be (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) u u Damasc ibid. that be that the inspiration be one and the very self same action of they both the which nevertheless ought to be attribute to the father alone because that he alone be the beginning the latin do confess all this that be to say that there be oneself same inspirative virtue and consequent ownself same inspiration which proceed from the father yea even in that that it be the action of the son and that the father and the son do inspire because they be both one for the essence be the foundation of the power although that it be the person that do produce it it be as if one will search to know whether the light which shine sometime in the night time do proceed only from the sun or else as well from the sun as from the moon a man shall not do amiss to maintain both the one and the other I speak this yet not compare the most holy mystery with creature as some for want of a more solid discourse be wont and will make man believe so I say this only that there may be find logomachies as well in the one as in the other the conclusion according to the intention of all the church seem to be that the father as a person produce the holy ghost and as a father beget the son who through the inspirative virtue communicate produce also the holy ghost in such sort that the holy ghost be say to proceed from the son if one consider the action of the son simple but if one have regard to the begin of the same he proceed from the father only question 12 whether that the faith which God give be a sure and certain confidence of salvation the east church IEremie 10 10 1. Resp. jer. patr. cap. 4. let we approach to he which be without sin enter into repentance with assurance let we come to jesus which be most merciful with full confidence not have a ill conscience or doubt any thing for he that doubt can approach with assurance item y y cap. 13. we beg first the peace of our conscience and the salvation of our soul peace be a thing most profitable or rather a virtue which be altogether necessary for it be impossible that the trouble spirit shall have access unto God the south church saint Severus alexandrinus z z for. bapt. let we approach with a pure heart and confidence of faith and let we persevere in the confession of our hope without decline for he that promise we be faithful litourgie Aethiop let this bread and this cup be effectual unto we all that shall receive it with faith unspotted charity unfeigned perfect patience firm hope and confidence the reform church the confession of Bohemia a a cap. 5. the repentant be teach to confess their sin before those that have care of their soul and to receive of they absolution with confidence to enjoy without doubt the remission of their sin the confession of Wittenberg b b cap. 14. conf. see God have promise we his mercy free for his son sake he require in that regard that we shall abandon the doubtfulness of our flesh and conceive a most certain confidence in his mercy and to the end that may be he have place our salvation not in the merit of our righteousness which be unperfect but in the merit of his son jesus Christ item wherefore we do account that those which do command we to doubt of the grace of God do not only fight against the true belief of the catholic church but also do provide very ill for their soul health the roman church the council of Trent c c Sess. 6. cap. 9 albeit it be necessary to believe that sin be not pardon nor never shall be pardon but free through the mercy of God for the love of jesus Christ nevertheless it must be hold that sin be not pardon nor never have be par-pardoned to any which vaunt himself of his belief and certainty of the remission of his sin and repose himself only upon that although perhaps he be a utter heretic and that in our time this vain hope be far from all piety be preach with a great force against the catholic Roman church and we ought not to be assure that it must needs be that those which be true justify without doubt any thing do rely upon themselves that they be justify and that none can be absolve of his sin and justify but he that believe for a certainty that he be absolve and justify and a little after for none can know by the certainty of faith without all question of falsehood that he have obtain the grace and favour of God annotation the council of Trent say that confidence be a vain opinion a presumption a vice remote from all piety and consequent the way to damnation the reform on the contrary side do maintain that confidence be a theological virtue and that faith whereof the gospel make mention so often and be not hurtful but rather above all thing necessary to salvation and that he that repent aught to be assure that he be absolve before God especial then when he receive the sacrament the seal of the remission of sin and at such time say the greek as one be possess with the affection of he that say I have hate iniquity that be to say at such time as sin reign no more in that man although it do remain in he every one see that this point be of importance for if the say of the protestant be true it go very hard with the roman catholic because that they follow the doctrine of the say council albeit not all and cast far from they this hope as vain and deceitful and in so do can be save on the other side the reform do run in hazard if they do persuade themselves that this confidence come of divine inspiration which in the decree of the council be a vice far void from all piety but because that this be not a place to debate upon the reason which be allege on the one side and on the other it shall suffice to advertise you that out of the passage before mention be gather that the church of the east and south and many of the catholic church of Rome do hold with the reform contrary to the council of Trent that the faith which God give to the repentant be a firm assurance of salvation and consequent that whosoever have this assurance have the faith which God give question 13 whether a man may attain faith or confidence by his free will or do work proceed from faith and such as be profitable unto salvation by the same the east church IEremie d d 1. Resp c. 18 it be of we to choose and will but it be of God to perform and bring it to effect and because that which be most excellent be of he s. Paul attribute all unto he imitate therein the custom of man as when we see a house build we atttribute all to the chief builder yet nevertheless all be not do by he but by the workman and by the owner that provide the stuff but we attribute all unto he because he have lay the foundation and be the chief builder in like manner be it here for so say s. Paul also it be not in he that will neither in he that run which say prevent two mischief the one that no man exalt himself for grant say he that thou run or that thou do endeavour yet think not that which be well do be thou for if thou be not inspire from above all be in vain it be nevertheless confess that thou shall attain unto the end of that which thou desire because that thou run and because thou labour for he say not simple that we run in vain but that we run in vain if we think that all be of we and make not God the principal party for God will not that all shall be from he lest he shall seem to crown we for no service neither that all shall be of ourselves lest we shall happen to fall into a foolish opinion of ourselves for if we be proud of the least part thereof because it be in we how much more shall we be if we have all in ourselves item in recite of s. e e Chrysostome to the end that the greatness of his benefit exalt the not behold how he do humble thou that be say he by give grace through faith on the contrary side to the end that free-will have no prejudice he have also add that which be of we and again he have take it away for the same say he be not of we nay faith itself be not of ourselves for if he have not call we how can we have believe it be the gift of God the anaphor of the Cophites f f Anaph d. Basil and therefore o lord we thy unprofitable servant and miserable stranger who thou have vouchsafe to make administrator of thy holy mystery not by reason of our righteousness for we have do no good on the earth etc. Ethiop give we thy holy spirit to the end that with a pure heart perfect love and firm hope we may be bold with confidence and without fear to pronounce that prayer which thy dear belove son have teach his holy apostle the latin church the council of Trent g g Ses. 6. can 4 if any one say that the free-will of a man be move and stir by God do not cooperate at all in assent to God which move and call it to the end that he dispose and prepare himself to obtain the grace of justification and that he can consent if he will nay rather that he do nothing at all as a thing without a soul and that he be only a patient and no agent let he be accurse item h h can. 5. if any one say that the free-will of a man have be so lose and raze out after the fall of Adam that it be a thing without a name or rather a name without a thing and to conclude that it be a fiction that Satan have bring into the church let he be accurse the reform church the confession of the saxon i i Art. 4. those man that be well instruct have always distinguish outward discipline from the regeneration of the spirit which be the begin of eternal life and have teach that in man there be such a freedom of will to rule the external motion of the body that those which be not regenerate may in some fashion accomplish that discipline which be a external obedience according to the law but a man can deliver himself from sin and from eternal death by his natural strength for this deliverance and conversion of man to God be wrought by the son of God which do quicken we through his holy spirit and the will have once receive the holy spirit be never after idle or void the confession of Ausburg k k Art. 18. touch free-will the church do teach that man will have some liberty to work civil righteousness and to choose that which be conformeable unto reason but it have not the power to work spiritual righteousness which be the righteousness of God we confess that all man have free-will which have the judgement of reason nevertheless not such as that they be sufficient of themselves either to begin without God or to end without he in that which concern God but only in the work of this present life as well good as bad annotation some man do think that the difference touch free-will consist all in word which may be grant because that the roman catholic do not hold any thing to be in a man that be regenerate which the protestant do not confess with they that be that it proceed either in all or in part from free-will but the difference be in this that the protestant do think it necessary that a man shall have a assure faith the which say they proceed in no wise from free-will nor by consequent from the work that do proceed from this faith for if it proceed total from God it follow that the effect ought to be impute to he only if the latin will confess that God give this confidence they shall approve the opinion of the protestant and indeed many do so and therein be true catholic the church of Asia and Africa which affirm that it be necessary to salvation to have this confidence do also confess that it come from God and therefore beg it of he and consequent deny therein free-will as the protestant do and be contrary to the latin although that they do not debate with they about it and though they know it not agree with the protestant those protestant I say which believe that the grecian do contrary they as much or more than the latin and so it be certain that the fault be for want of understand the matter now to comprehend well this thing a man must mark the proposition of the patriarch jeremy and explain they to the end he may gather his meaning by his own discourse first he say that a man have power or ability to choose the good as well as the evil these term be strange to the m m Resp 2. jerem l. arb. protestant nevertheless they be true because that he speak of the soul which be the inward man and the chief part of a man for so he expound himself this soul be of itself apt to judge and choose the good that be to say that good which belong to moral virtue but the body which be the soul instrument do suggest unto it without cease those object which have appearance of good in such sort that the soul can resist but very hardly even as a ship which of itself be apt to be conduct any way be oftentimes carry by the wind against the will of the pilot. second jeremy say that a man attempt and that God effect the protestant do confess the same likewise say that a man may by his free-will do a civil work of n n the foresay confession of Ausburg justice and such as be command by God but because that of itself it profit nothing to salvation the same jeremy add that God effect by bestow that which be his own that be to say faith three nevertheless the protestant say that all proceed from God the same author say so also and in the very same term and show that the moral work be but as the matter even a matter unprofitable to the which God give a form that be to say faith even as a Housholder which will build provide the matter but the master workman make the house or building in such sort that all the commodity of inhabit which be the use of the house be attribute to he that build it four jeremy say that God do cooperate it be necessary here to mark that two cause may concur to one effect reason lead a man to a work of justice the holy ghost do likewise drive he and a man fortify with special grace execute it better then if he be carry alone by natural reason nevertheless all be attribute to God because that the soul be illuminate employ her natural faculty to a good end the which it will never do without God and for this cause s. Paul say that it be not in he that will nor that run wherein he teach that a man may will and run but because that in run he err s. Paul add to it that God must needs give his mercy which he do when he purify the heart through faith faith I say which not only make the moral work good which proceed of reason but also bring forth a far great number and make the righteousness of the faithful to exceed the righteousness of the scribe and pharisee for a man love God according to that proportion that he believe in he and a man do good work according to that measure that he love he and it can be otherwise for in all our willingness the principal part or all proceed from inspiration and in this consideration it be say that God give the will and the deed 5. when a man speak of faith it be necessary to distinguish it for the want of this be the cause of the strife about word the latin never speak but of that faith which Bellarmine define thus Catech. cap. 11. faith be a theological virtue who office be to illuminate the understanding and to raise it up to a firm belief of all that which God have reveal unto we by the mean of his church although it be a hard thing and far pass natural reason 6. the council of Trent say that this faith depend partly upon free will that be to say in as much as a man dispose himself to receive it and may reject it when it be offer he the protestant do call this faith historical and do confess that a man may further himself in receive of it for the authority of the church may move a man to believe that the gospel be a true history likewise the testimony of the apostle who be unreprovable author and the prediction of the prophet and the sibyl yet so that all this will be weak if God shall not illuminate the understanding to believe firm the protestant do confess also that one may reject this faith and fall into despair for this faith have her seat in the understanding as the roman catholic say very well but in such sort that the understanding draw not the will to accept and rest in it see that by this faith a man be not assure whether any (@) be give to himself but only he believe that it be (@) to some man in such sort that if he love God it be of a (@) proportionable to this faith he love he as the author of nature and as a benefactor to they that please he if he keep in some sort his commandment it be more then rather of service fear then of filial love it be impossible for a man to love he withal his heart who he mistrust 6. this be the cause that the church of the east and south together with the reform church of the west and that against the council of Trent do hold that a man must have confidence and assurance the confession of Saxony say as follow p p remiss art. 3. faith signify not only to know the history as the devil themselves do which believe and tremble but also signify to embrace all the article of the faith and among the rest this also I believe the forgiveness of sin and do believe that they be forgive not only unto other but also unto i 7. behold here the true knot of the question of free-will the protestant affirm that this faith of assurance depend not at all upon free will this be not to say that it be not a man which believe and which will but that he believe not nor will not if God of his extraordinary and especial grace will not that a man believe and be willing moreover this be not to say that natural the actual understanding can believe all that which be credible and that the will natural accept not all that which the judgement propose to be good but man be say not to help himself by his free will to receive this faith because that nature do not show to the judgement of man any reason whereby he may conclude that God love he and will fain be favourable and merciful unto he as jeremy very learned say in his second answer all that which be prove by argument be examine very profound by earnest inquiry or search but the simplicity of faith be more firm than the demonstration which reason do devise moreover man can reject this faith when it be offer he because that God have so order that a man judge and believe without any precedent debate and withal a man can have a will to reject it at such time as it be in the understanding because that the will natural and necessary but free for otherwise it shall be no will yield itself to that which the judgement esteem to be good and profitable the protestant in the confession of Saxony and Ausburg and other do confess also that it may be impute to the understanding by reason of other succeed object as the cause that vice reign in man for man have his free will to evil and God have not promise salvation to they which sin willing and notorious 8. as touch the christian of the south although that this question be not find handle in their writing yet they speak very sufficient they say that assurance of faith be a gift of God and therefore they beg it at his hand and they confess that a man can do any good in the world to wit by his free will moreover the council of Trent confess that this q q Sess. 6. 9 faith proceed not at all from free will every man say the council when he have regard to himself and to his own indignity and indisposition may have some fear and doubt of God grace see a man can know by any certainty of faith that he have obtain the grace of God out of this confession of the council a man may conclude that if God give this confidence as the apostolic church do believe against the say council than it be a supernatural gift and depend no way on free-will 9 but the reform stay not on so fair a way they say that we can do any good work through free-will they will say in as much as these work proceed of faith for in that they proceed from natural all reason which be no less in the faithful then in the unfaithful the free-will do cooperate also nevertheless they be not therefore true good that be to say rewardable but they be in that they proceed of faith or that they be address to a true end through faith and therefore the catholic church believe that God give a kind of faith call confidence which proceed not in any wise from free-will nor by consequent work consider as effect of this faith question 14 whether a man receive remission of sin by a confident faith without the work of the law the east church IEremie r r 2. Resp just the one have need of the other that be to say grace of the work and the work of grace as the light of the sight and the sight of the light as the soul of the body and the body of the soul see then that both the one and the otherdoth avail to salvation without doubt a man ought to have they both a true faith with work and the work of virtue through faith and a man ought to believe without doubt for doubt and perplexity in faith be no faith for that which be prove by argument though once receive be examine more profound by search but the simplicity of faith be more firm than the demonstration of reason and those thing which be believe without art be more strong than those that be artificial without all comparison for if one sound the depth of faith she be toss to and fro but if she be consider in her simple disposition she remain steadfast it be then most certain and not to be doubt that a man must believe without doubt it remain here only that we must with all our might seek and find in some fashion what that be because that we ought to apply ourselves to obtain salvation for faith without work and work without faith be equal reject of God the book call Dioptra s s Tur^ogr cur in ann. thou do descend o lord thou have take flesh to save all man preserve i by thy grace I beseech thou for if thou shall preserve i by my work the same shall not be repute grace for thou my lord jesus Christ have say he that believe in i shall live and shall never see death let faith be impute to i in stead of work for to justify i but let that faith suffice i for all it be faith that will absolve i it be faith that will justify i it be faith that will make i partaker of eternal glory for God require no other thing but compunction and mourn the church of the south anaphor cophit t t Anaph d. Basil lord which be praise by angel and archangel call holy of the seraphin which sit upon the cherubin and be praise without cease by their voice form by the divine word which will also be honour by a priestly function even by we which dwell on the earth not for that thou have any need of our worship or service but for to make we partaker of thy holiness support we o lord I say which approach to thy holy altar and disdain not we thy servant which do stand before thou for the blot of sin wherewith we be spot for thou which be our maker know and see what thy creature be for no man bear of a woman shall be justify in thy sight the reform church the confession of Ausburg u u cap. 4. when the gospel do reprehend our sin the astonish heart ought to hold for a certainty that the remission of sin and justification through faith be give we free through jesus Christ which be make a sacrifice for we and have appease his father albeit then the gospel require repentance yet neverthesse to the end that the remission of our sin may be certain it teach we that it be give free and that it depend not upon condition of our worthiness and be not give in consideration of any precedent work neither of any ensue worthiness or dignity for remission shall become uncertain if we shall hold it not to be give but after such time as it be merit by precedent work or else by some notable repentance the LATIN church the council of Trent 10 10 Sess. 6. ca. 8. when the apostle say that man be justify by faith and that free those word ought to be understand in that sense that the catholic church have always hold and expound they that be to say that we be justify by faith because that faith be the begin of the salvation of mankind the foundation and root of our justification without the which it be impossible to please God and to come into the company of the son of God and that we be free justify by reason that there be no other thing that go before justification be it faith or good work which merit the grace of justification for if it be of grace it be not of work otherwise as the same apostle say grace be no grace item y y can. 12. if any man say that justify faith be nothing else but the trust which one have on the mercy of God which pardon sin for the love of jesus Christ or that this trust be the only thing through which we be justify let he be accurse z z can. 13. if any man say that to obtain remission of sin it be only necessary that a man believe assure and never to make any doubt notwithstanding his own infirmity and indisposition that his sin be pardon he let he be accurse annotation time say Malancthon a a lang. have mollify the controversy touch justification for the learned agree in many thing which in the beginning they have in great disputation all do now confess and maintain that faith be needful that be to say confidence in Christ for the remission of sin of the which faith or confidence the school man make no mention melancthon do suppose that there be very many man in the church of Rome who they count learned that be not of the opinion of the council of Trent but confess with the church of the east and south and with the reform church that a man both may and aught to have assurance and confidence nevertheless the reform cease not to debate upon this point of justification as also upon that of free will not only against the latin but also against the grecian b b Respon. Resp jerem. the author of a certain discourse call pacific say that these be but strive about word invent to trouble the church because that one take this word justification in one sense and another in another sense one take the word faith in one sense and another in another sense in such sort that both the one and the other say true be take according to their meaning although that they differ in word we have say in the question precedent that the latin and the reform agree upon the point of free will if all the latin will confess that the faith of the elect be a full assurance we say the very same in this point of justification but to show where the difference be we ought not to use the word faith or justification without distinguish of what faith or what justification we speak the council of Trent say four thing first that faith that be to say that which be without confidence which the protestant call historical for the council acknowledge none other be the begin of man salvation and that this faith come from God the protestant do acknowledge both the one and the other to wit that it be necessary first that one believe that the gospel be a true history and then that one can believe perfecty and as he ought without the grace of God as the same council say second that this historical faith be the beginning and root of justification that be to say that it bring forth good work which God do approve and for which God justify a man that be to say he hold and declare he just the protestant say that this faith may bring forth a certain inherent justice through the which a man be c c Danaus eth. Christ justify that be in a sort but not absolute for a man that do one good work do a thousand bad work which do make he unjust so that the same man be good and bad just and unjust approve of God and condemn of God again God be unjust if he shall not hold himiust who he himself have justify well than he justify man according to civil righteousness in give this historical faith and in stir up in they charity such as it be that be proportionable to this faith one can say Bellarmine d d Crana lib. 64. love God himself as the author of nature if it be not by the help of special grace and so there be no difference in this point in the three place the council say that through this historical faith a man be not absolve of his former sin the protestant do confess as much and add withal that no more be he through good work which proceed from thence which say they be not good but for human society sake in the four place the council say that saint Paul and s. james speak of this faith in the example which they allege of Abraham the which say the council be justify that be to say find just in that he believe God but plain justify that be to say hold just of all when he effect the commandment of God the church of the east do approve this opinion but it be not needful to debate much touch the intention and meaning of s. Paul the scripture may receive diverse exposition and all orthodox it be certain that Abraham be justify in that he believe and more just in that he lay his hand to the work but there be two conclusion wherein the apostolic church and the reform church be contrary in the say council the first be that the say council do hold that through the work which proceed of this historical faith a man obtain other say a man merit that God shall pardon his former sin in impute unto they that do those good work the merit of the passion of our saviour the protestant on the contrary side say that such work proceed from such historical faith serve not to salvation hereunto the church of the east do agree who say that the work which proceed from a true faith be true good and they call this faith confidence which ought to be note to the end that none shall doubt the truth of the history for they declare sufficient that they mean that it be not needful that a repentant man shall doubt of his salvation that be also see more plain in that that they of the east have write before to the protestant of Germany who press very hard this point of confidence wherein they of the east do approve and confirm their say the second difference be in that the protestant say that a man be absolve they call it justify at that instant that he receive this confidence by divine inspiration and that without any consideration of precedent work otherwise grace shall be no grace as also without consideration of any future work for it happen sometime as it do to the good thief that a man shall have no time to do good work and if the faith of confidence suffice as soon as it be in fuse yea and suffice as a instrumental cause to put a man in possession of the passion of the lord which be the formal cause of absolution it follow that during all the term of a man life he need not seek any other instrumental cause of this application for when our saviour heal the sick he say not unto they love thou i although it be necessary that they shall have love he but he say to they believe thou for by this belief they be heal and that the church of the east do believe that this confidence put a man in possession of the grace of God they show in that which their patriarch say that his confidence unite thing separate and that distrust do disunite and separate they for what union can there be with God without remission of sin moreover the grecian confess that God inspire this confidence if it be so it follow that at that very instant a man obtain pardon otherwise God shall be the author of deceitful and vain confidence but some will then demand to what end serve good work the grecian and the protestant with one consent do answer that without they one can be save and if there be no good work a man fall from the absolution already receive and look how much force confidence have to put a man in possession of the merit of the passion of the lord so much evil work have that be to say so long as they remain and reign in the soul to break the union that faith have contract in like manner good work be cause of this justification or else may be say to be cause neither the christian church of this time nor the father nor the holy scripture do set down the order of every one of these cause according to the term of philosopher neither be it necessary it suffice that every one have faith and that every one give himself to good work and that he know that both the one and the other be necessary the difference between the foresay people and the protestant be that the protestant see that the latin do not attribute enough to faith or rather do not acknowledge this faith of confidence to the which they attribute so much can endure to have this faith disgrace and other christian hear of the commendation of this faith do persuade themselves that it make to the prejudice of good work for which cause they can by any mean hold their peace well then because that we have say that evil work cause man to fall from justification that be to say from absolution which be the belief receive without any contradiction in all time and by all christian people it may be object that among the protestant there be some find for all do not so as be to be see in the confession of Ausburg Bohemia Saxony and Wirtenberg which say that he that have this justify faith can fall from whence it follow according to their say that he which believe himself to be justify may give himself to all wickedness to this may be answer that those which hold this proposition either do not explain themselves well or else their explication be not well understand for they say not simple that every one ought to believe that he be justify but only he that be repentant aught so to believe also that repentance whereof every one may judge in his own soul show whether his faith be a justify faith and that he that shall say I will do evil be not at all repentant for these be quite contrary moreover those which be say to hold this opinion say ordinary that none ought to commit sin in hope to repent for none can or aught to promise himself that God will give he time and mean to accomplish it those which do haunt their sermon can bear witness if this be not a ordinary lesson well then what be this but to say that none can have this confidence at such time as vice and sin do reign in he and if one can have it be not this as much as to say that if one have it he may lose it in give himself to wickedness but behold here how their say be true forsooth because confidence of faith do coutaine in it historical faith which remain in he in who vice do reign as the council of Trent also say and this faith if he be elect will move he to repentance which end not in despair as in the reprobate but in a full confidence and all by the assistance of God the catholic conclusion be that a man receive remission of his sin at the very instant that the assurance of faith be infuse into his soul and that without any consideration of former or future work question 15 whether a man merit proper everlasting life by his good work the east church IEremie Patriarch Oecumenicke e e 2. Resp when we praise good work we do not pretend to exalt ourselves by they or to put our trust in they for we shall then sin very much in so do but we desire that man will give themselves thereunto as to thing that be especial necessary to salvation and the which every one be bind to exercise according to his power follow the commandment of God but if we trust in that great and incomprehensible mercy of God and his only grace in such sort that we do hope for salvation remain unfruitful and ingrateful that must not be by no mean for it will bring we no profit at all as for the rest let we judge of that which be in we although that there be not any thing that be perfect nevertheless the same do profit and make know what it be which we have in our soul to wit that we be charitable and obedient to the commandment of God and that we pretend not to be carry into heaven as people amaze and without understanding negligent and idle the which certain we can never obtain if we do not conjoin our own power and endeavour with the grace and mercy of God for in stick fast to sin we be just to be esteem fool and senseless as cleave to those thing that can help we nothing and which have no be in themselves be nothing the which we ought above all thing to hate and eschew because that they do provoke God wrath against we and do draw we back far from he therefore when we be even at the point to offend God let we prostrate ourselves before the judgement seat of Christ which be very terrible whereon he shall sit in a high and glorious place as a just judge before who shall appear all creature behold his glory and majesty for to render a account of all their word and action the king of Moscovia f f his answer to rohite a minister as concern that which thou write of jesus Christ the mediator and of his only name through the which we be save and of the remission of sin and life everlasting we believe the very same the south church anaphor cophit g g Anaph d. Severl forasmuch o lord as we be thy poor servant stranger and unprofitable who thou have vouchsafe to make administrator of the holy mystery and of the passion of thy Christ not for our justice for we have not do any good upon the earth but for thy mercy and clemency which thou have abundant pour upon we we do now approach with confidence to touch thy holy Alar and we which have offer the figure of the body and blood of thy Christ do adore and most humble pray thou that thy holy spirit do come upon we and upon these gift which we have offer and that thou will sanctify they the reform church the confession of Saxonia i i Art. 9 everlasting life say saint Paul be a gift of God through jesus Christ our lord and those which be reconcile or justify be likewise coheir with the son of God for his sake and not for their own merit in like manner those that repent be account just by faith by the only mean of the son of God and be quicken through he and for the love of he as also eternal life be give they for his sake and not for their merit and we must not doubt that the son of God have only merit for we a preparation to eternal life to the end that afterward we may merit by our good work the LATIN church the council of Trent k k Sess. 6. 32. if any man say that the good work of a justify man be the gift of God only and that they be not as good merit of he that be justify or that the same man that be justify do not true merit the increase of the grace of God life everlasting the possession and season of eternal life provide that he die in grace and also the augmentation of glory for the good work which he have do through the grace of God and the merit of jesus Christ of who he be a live member anathema annotation this question may seem to be a (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) because of the ambiguity of the word merit which in the writing of the father signify to obtain as the confession of Bohemia do well note in the which sense the protestant of Ausburge l l confess art. 4. have make no scruple to use it but because that the council say that a man do true merit we must confess that it speak of a merit which the protestant admit not of and even so cardinal Bellarmine show when he say thus some man do imagine that there be but one satisfaction to wit that of Christ and that we do not proper satisfy but that we do some thing in consideration whereof God do apply unto we the satisfaction of Christ that be to say that our good work be but condition without the which the satisfaction of Christ shall not be apply unto we or at the most but a disposition so say Michael bavius the which opinion seem unto i erroneous for the holy scripture and the father ordinary do call our work satisfaction and redemption of sin moreover if a man may by his good work merit life everlasting wherefore may he not satisfy for temporal pain which be less from this discourse of Bellarmine may be gather two thing the first be that in the roman catholic church there be some which hold the opinion of the protestant the other be that the council by these word to merit true everlasting life do mean that one may merit it and not that work be only cause or only disposition the protestant do oppose themselves against that very strong and firm and do maintain that merit take after the meaning of Bellarmine presuppose a man have be profitable to he of who he merit but man even when they be most perfect be unprofitable servant to wit to God and not to themselves or to their neighbour as our saviour say God do excel both man and angel from all eternity and in perfect beatitude and if he have appoint to bring they all to nought even as he create they of nothing he shall not be unjust if he do a deed of mercy in eternize they it be because he do it according to his promise free and not of merit for if a man by his good work have not oblige God to promise he oblige he not neither to effect the same if a beggar by ask alm do get ten crown no man will say that he merit they no although the giver have make he a promise well then to pray to God and to fast be to beg his mercy as touch the church of the east they use not the word merit but use the word (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) that be to say to obtain or to carry away a recompense which be a phrase of scripture therefore good work be recompenceable that be to say they dispose or make a man fit to receive a recompense but yet as a gratuity the same church do hold also that opinion which Bellarmine condemn that be to say that good work be cause without the which say their answer one can obtain salvation moreover the benefit of good work be recite vice be neither decent nor profitable and nothing else but the deprivation of all goodness good work do show what we be to wit whether we be in grace in fine good work be the cause of our salvation but by accident see that the omission of good work and the commission of evil do strange a man much from God as touch the christian of the south there have not be any disputation among they touch this question but they agree with we therein they call themselves unprofitable servant and confess that they have not do any good in the world it will be a great injury to the pure simplicity of those christian if one shall suspect they to hide a dissemble soul under those word it be to be note that the council of Trent do make two sort of recompense that be to say everlasting life and diverse degree of beatitude as concern life everlasting one will think it be thus by search the cause to wit that God love himself perfect because that he be the lover of perfect goodness and justice and that the person of his son which be the very same essence with the father have take in personal union the son of the virgin who consequent be perfect love that be to say he have perfect righteousness the which the deity have communicate unto he therefore it can be but that God give to this humanity all the felicity whereof it be capable well then this love and felicity shall not be perfect if it do not extend to the mystical body of this Emmanuel God and man that be to say to all they that be one with he as he be one with the father in like manner all those that be of that body be capable of that felicity by reason of the love that God bear to they in his son yea when they have not the mean to do any good work as it be see in little child which if they be save as it be confess it be only for the union which they have with the son of God who righteousness be recompense in they then if this righteousness of Christ be sufficient to make they happy it follow that the same be also sufficient to make those happy which be grownein year who by the very same mean have eternal life that be to say by reason of his perfect righteousness but as God love his son be a man in regard of his action that be perfect good by reason whereof God have give he a name above all name in like manner love he those which God have give he by reason of their good work although unperfect and therefore in consideration and according to the proportion of they he recompense they with sundry degree of felicity not that their work be the cause of everlasting life which be not absolute promise but to those which have perfect righteousness the catholic conclusion in this question be that a man merit not proper eternal life by his good work although that they be worthy of reward that be to say that they make a man fit to receive a recompense through the grace of God question 16 whether that there be a fire of purgatory or other torment where the soul be purify or punish and whether the prayer of the live do help to deliver they the east church NIcholas m m lib. 4. 36. the grecian do deny purgatory affirm that the prayer of the live do nothing profit the dead Villamont n n lib. 2. c. 21. the grecian do deny purgatory but you make they amaze if you ask they this question see that they believe not that there be a purgatory wherefore then do they pray for the forgiveness of their offence they answer that it be to the end God will put they in a more glorious place and that they be in mansion where the angel visit they often o o cap. 2. the moscovite affirm that there be no purgatory but that there be only two receptacle or place of receipt for soul that be to say heaven and hell the book of a grecian touch purgatory say p p Nilum thus we have not receive by tradition from our teacher that there be any fire of purgatory or any temporal punishment beside and we know that the church of the east do believe so the same author our lord in the gospel according to s. Luke teach what shall be the condition both of the one and the other say that Lazarus as soon as he be dead be carry by angel into Abraham bosom and that the soul of the rich man as soon as he be dead be carry into hell and there torment and also by the bosom of Abraham he signify the final estate of the belove of God in bless rest and by hell and torment final damnation and eternal pain and have leave no other place between both have any temporal pain and say that there be but one bottomless pit beyond the which none can pass which separate the one from the other and ordain a extreme and utter contrariety between they the south church aluares q q cap. 5. be arrive in the church they lay not the body within the grave but lay it near to it without sing any part of any service for the dead nor any of the psalm of David much less those of job whereupon I desire to know what they say they answer i that they sing that be to say they pronounce aloud the gospel of s. John entire Annot. by this it appear that the church of the south believe not that there be a purgatory because they themselves do not make prayer at the bury of their dead Damianus a go report by hearsay that they bury their dead with cross and prayer but Aluares who dwell many year in that place deny it peradventure the same Damianus take the lecture of the gospel for a prayer David emperor of Ethiope r r the letter of David we have cause a church to be build in honour of the most holy Trinity where the bone of our decease father be bury who enjoy as we hope eternal felicity Annot. our prince of the latin church which believe that there be a purgatory be wont to say speak of their decease parent God have mercy on their soul the reform church the confession of the switzer we believe that the faithful be transport to jesus Christ straight after corporal death and that they have no need of the prayer and suffrage of the live we believe also that the wicked be straightway cast into hell from whence they can come forth and that same which some man teach touch the fire of purgatory be contrary to christian faith I believe the forgiveness of sin and the all-sufficient purgation make by jesus Christ and his word very very I say unto you that whosoever hear my word and believe in he that send i have everlasting life and shall not come into judgement but pass from death to life the roman church the council of Trent t t Sess. 9 forasmuch as the holy catholic church guide by the holy ghost have teach according to the holy scripture and the ancient tradition of the father in the holy counsel and last in that holy universal council that there be a purgatory and that the soul which be there detain be help by the prayer of the faithful and principal by the acceptable sacrifice of the altar the holy council do command the bishop that they take pain and study diligent that the good and holy doctrine of purgatory which the holy father and counsel have deliver be receive hold teach and preach every where annotation this point here have no difficulty for as touch the prayer which they make in the east for the dead we will entreat in that question where it shall be debate whether it be lawful to pray for the saint which be in heaven only it be to be note that the council of Trent do feign that the holy scripture do warrant purgatory which the church of the east do deny and if the true interpretation of scripture ought to be take out of the apostolic church which have retain it from hand to hand from their father it follow that those place of scripture which the church of Rome do allege to prove purgatory be wrest by they to another sense as the grecian have show in their apology in the council of Basil and the author of the treatise of the fire of purgatory before allege do prove it very slender moreover many roman catholic doctor and of very good estimation do confess that purgatory can be prove by the scripture among the rest Alphonsus de Castro avouch not only that it be not prove by the scripture but also that the father do seldom make mention of it especial the greek father from thence say he it come that even until this present time the grecian do deny purgatory the catholic conclusion therefore here be this that there be no fire of purgatory nor any other torment where soul be purge and punish and that prayer serve not to deliver they but rather be superfluous and unprofitable t t 1. mach. 11 if that they be make to that intention question 17 whether the pope or any other can give indulgence or pardon to deliver man from temporal punishment the east church IEremie Patriarch gener. t t 1. Resp all these thing ought to be do free for God cause and not for any hope of gain consider that there be nothing more agreeable to God than that u u Elucid c. 2 the moscovite do condemn order blessing priesthood prayer fast indulgence jubile and ecclesiastical office and all that which the church to wit of Rome do dispense with by the authority of the key in like manner they mock at the obedience and authority ecclesiastical and yield no more to excommunication then to indulgence the church of the south zaga-zabo bishop of Abyssin 10 10 dam. a go leg ind. it be likewise the office of the patriarch to denounce excommunication against the obstinate the observation whereof be so straight that they let he that be obstinate die for hunger they give nor grant no indulgence the reform church confess sax. y y Art. 17. in time past those that do penance to the end that it may be perceive that they desire pardon with all their heart and to the end that their example shall profit other be not receive upon a sudden but the absolution be defer for certain day to the end that they may be see to ask it public afterward superstition increase so much that fast be ordain and abstinence from woman many year these wil-worshippes be too much augment the bishop again release they the relaxation of such custom be call indulgence the monk do not consider the history of these thing if they imagine that they make satisfaction for eternal pain or the pain of purgatory and other of this life or do add that satisfaction be ordain by the church to the end that these pain shall be qualify well we say that this application of indulgence by the which the pope apply the merit of the saint be invent at his pleasure the LATIN church the council of Trent z z Sess. 9 indul. forasmuch as the power to confer indulgence have be give by jesus Christ to the church and have be use in very ancient time with the like power as it be divine give the holy council teach and command that the usage of these indulgence which be very necessary for christian people and approve by the authority of the holy counsel aught to be receive in the church annotation the protestant say that the custom in time past be to appoint to repentant sinner a certain term during which by their good work they may give the church testimony of their repentance the same be as yet practise in the east and south church jeremy patriarch of Constantinople discourse hereupon as follow satisfaction be profitable if they be impose as a medicine by the spiritual minister that be to say for those that be proud covetous gluttonous incontinent envious quarrelous or give to such like vice who if they will convert and repent aught to submit themselves to the rule make according to the advice of the holy father but if those satisfaction be translate to the gain and profit of those that give they and not to the true end which be to provide for the salvation of the soul and to heal each sin which be the intention for the which they be institute in that fashion we do reject they and do say that they be ordain in vain which can by any mean be deny and we do pronounce remission of sin with some punishment adjoin for many consideration first to the end that a man for voluntary affliction may escape the inevitable pain of a other life bring forth fruit worthy of repentance say s. John every tree that bear not good fruit shall be cut down and throw into the fire to wit everlasting for God be not so much please with any thing as with affliction and therefore s. Gregory say tear be recompense with mercy second to the end that the inclination of the flesh to voluptuousness which be the cause of vice shall be take away three to the end that that punishment shall be a stay to the soul to the end it fall not into such like sin or worse four to the end that a man shall accustom himself to take pain for virtue be get with travail five to the end that a man may be assure whether he perfect hate evil nevertheless we do leave all these thing in those that depart for we do count that it be sufficient if in he that repent there be a true conversion therefore we do pronounce remission of sin according to the power of he that say if you remit sin they shall be pardon we believe that by the same mean the punishment be pardon for assurance whereof we do give the divine gift of the eucharist for repentance have his seat in the soul of the sinner but not to undergo punishment be in the hand of God which for this cause have real by his own humanity give remission as to the thief who do but desire of the lord that he will remember he when he come to his kingdom see here the doctrine of the church of the east touch satisfaction the protestant do proceed more compendious they be content that in regard of unknown sin every one do apply according to his discretion the say of s. John bring forth fruit worthy of repentance as concern sin know by the most part of the church satisfaction suffice not unless it make a reparation or public acknowledgement in ask pardon of God and the church for the scandal and if the offence be know but to a few the same acknowledgement be make in their consistory those that refuse do remain suspend or excommunicate until that they do obey and they give no indulgence there be also apappoint to the repentant a time of suspension from the sacrament more or less according to the fault as well for a punishment as also to the end that the church may see whether such repentance be true or feign by the fruit thereof the ancient church impose punishment and sometime so hard that they be constrain to release the rigour of they and that relaxation be call indulgence the church of the south do release or mitigate nothing at all and also reject indulgence in what sort soever they be take for this evil proceed from appoint punishment so hard that they be constrain afterward to revoke they but if satisfaction do consist in do good work it be very ill do to dispense with man for do all the good that be possible for they to do the people of the east and of the south allow not of this abuse but they condemn rather the opinion of the roman church which ordain satisfaction to avoid certain pain of purgatory and teach that by indulgence the say pain be escape without perform or make of any satisfaction yea as if by indulgence a man may be deliver from the obligation whereby he be bind to God to do all that be possible to obtain pardon of he also the apostolic church do believe that there be neither pope nor any other person which by indulgence can deliver man from the punishment that God inflict which if it be so that indulgence do not deliver a man from temporal punishment of this life as poverty sickness and death itself how can they deliver he from the pain of purgatory for there be the same reason for the one as for the other it follow upon the premise that the church can dispense with time and work lawful ordain for proof and disproof but may well release for just and reasonable cause the custom of confess secret sin and may pronounce remission without any confess as they of the east church do to this day by their synchorese as we will relate in his due place we will then make this catholic conclusion that the pope can by his indulgence deliver aniy from those temporal punishment which God inflict neither ought he to dispense with the do of all those work of repentance that be possible question 18 whether the soul of our lord and saviour jesus Christ descend into hell and whether it uscend into heaven the very sameday of his passion the east church ritual of the syrian a a the side of the lord be pierce through with a lance and thence issue water and blood a sacrifice for all the world his body be bury and his soul come back from hell and be unite to his body Moses the son of Cephas bishop of beth-raman b b parad. part. 1. John have write of corporal paradise in the prayer who title be wherefore this tree be call the tree of knowledge of good and evil and will teach as much as our saviour jesus Christ say thou shall be this day with i in paradise for there he prove by many argument that paradise be corporal the liturgy of saint Basil thou have appear in the last day unto we which sit in darkness and that by thy only son which give himself to death for our salvation and by reason of our sin descend into hell by his cross and passion the south church DAmianus a go c c indor legate art. 5. the aethiopian believe that Christ descend afterward into hell and have raze and break the gate thereof he come back into life the three day with great triumph over his enemy and over death and that after that he return into heaven from whence he come and that by his admirable ascension the LATIN church cardinal Bellarmine d d tom. 1. lib. 4. 5. durand affirm that the soul of Christ descend into hell not according to his substance but by some effect that be to say as it do illuminate and beatify the holy father which be in limbo Calvin have teach some such like thing touch the descent of Christ unto the soul of the holy father by his efficacy or virtue and not by his essence it contradict the holy scripture and the father to say that Christ return from hell the first day the reform church LAsicius Polonus e e Theol. Moscow cap. 12. it be the belief of the bohemian that jesus Christ descend into hell in his soul separate from his body to triumph over Satan the sybilles do derive this word which signify hell of the word Adam by reason that Adam descend this place seem to be elsewhere then in heaven Vrsinus f f Catech. Vrsin we must believe that which be certain to wit that Christ descend into hell in that fashion as we have say in suffer in his soul but if any one can defend that he descend in any other fashion it be well but as for i I can believe it annotation the ancient catholic church believe that the soul of the father in the old testament go to a place call in hebrew Scheol in greek in english Hell and all christian for the most part do believe that the apostle have teach so likewise see that there be not any one particular man know that shall be the author of this opinion and although that this article be not in the begin in the creed of the apostle as it be not in the creed of nice nevertheless have be receive without contradiction the same do argue that the belief be such before time and which be more the scripture of the old testament make no mention in any place that the soul shall ascend into heaven but very often it make mention of Scheol or hell and to descend I will descend into Scheol with sorrow for my son say that good man jacob and to descend signify to go to some low place it be true that the word Scheol signify sometime a grave but the catholic church take it here for hell for the greek translator approve by the apostle take it so as also saint Luke in this sentence of the psalm cite by s. Peter thou will not leave my soul in Hell for to understand well this question you must note first that it do not appertain to salvation to know whether the soul of the father be above or below provide always that one do not call the holy scripture into doubt which it be not do by and by although a man do not always attain to the true sense of it second there be two place that the most learned divine yea the ancient and now a day the latin and the protestant can hardly agree off so that in so do some proceed in one fashion other in another the creed say that our lord descend into hell and our lord say this day shall thou be with i in paradise some man will ask objection how ascend he into paradise see he descend into hell the great voice of the roman catholic g g Catech. Concil. and of the protestant be h h lasic Theol. Mosc that hell be paradise when our saviour be there but there be many learned man of the catholic roman as i i in 3. sent. dis^ 22. quest. 3. durand and the learned k k in apol. cap. Picus which think it absurd to say that paradise be in hell have think fit otherwise to agree upon it and have write that the soul of the lord go real unto the true paradise and descend not into hell but by efficacy or virtue on the other side among the protestant Calvin and Beozo have think more to the purpose to refer this word hell to the torment that our saviour suffer to the end that that which the scripture say that our saviour go to paradise shall be believe without run to any false or forge exposition also there be learned man among the latin and the protestant which do decline from the common opinion herein because that it seem very absurd unto they nevertheless because that none of the three be receive without contradiction it show that there be difficulty in they all for to say that the lord descend not into hell but by his efficacy or virtue be to wrest that place of scripture thou will not leave my soul in Hell to say that hell whereof mention be make in the creed be the torment which the lord suffer upon the cross be a exposition altogether unknown to the ancient and against the intention and meaning of those which add that clause to the creed and those protestant themselves for who this serve be ready to receive one more proper as be to be see in that sentence before allege of Vrsinus as for the rest one may give many exposition and all orthodoxal of oneself same place of scripture when one be not assure of the intent and meaning of the author so be it likewise in the creed but about these difficulty the apostolic church in the east do furnish we with a four exposition and that most ancient of all they hold with s. Chrysostome a very true catholic teacher that the soul of the father be in the latin call that place and Lymbus but improper and that our saviour descend thither and that he be the very same day in paradise and that paradise be no other place but the same which the thief conceive and mean for if our saviour have speak of one place and the thief have conceive and mean another his understanding have be deceive now the thief mean no other paradise but that earthly paradise for he can not know what paradise it be but by the scripture of the old testament which speak not of any other paradise it follow then that our saviour be that same day in that paradise and his soul be not leave in hell it be there also whether the father be conduct whereof some rose with the lord and be see in jerusalem it be in this paradise say they that Henoch and Elias be place in their body and peradventure Moses who appear at the transfiguration of our saviour jesus Christ and all the father be rapt up into heaven some in their body when our saviour ascend the other only in soul when he rise from the dead as the same saint Chrysostome say l l Serm. and this opinion be not only hold by the apostolic church of the east as we have understand by themselves but it be very true by all likelihood that the christian of Africa do consent thereunto for they be Cophites and of the same faith and religion as the Cophites syrian and assyrian be for in all the church the say book of Moses barcepha m m Masius proef in com. Moses barcepha parad touch the paradise before allege and the author which he allege who do confirm the same exposition be very much approve now this shall be for the catholic reader to follow and approve that be to say either of the foresay three opinion or else that of the church of the east and south which be that the soul of the father be in hell call in hebrew Scheol and in greek (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) and that the soul of our saviour jesus Christ descend thither yet be not leave there but the same day ascend into heaven question 19 whether all infant I mean those of the elect aie without baptism be damn and whether it be permit to the lay people to baptize the east church IEremie n n 1. Resp conf in baptism the matter be the water the form the word of the priest to wit these this servant of God be baptize in the name of the father of the son and of the holy ghost the instrumental cause be the priest although we do not condemn altogether that which be do by one that be no priest in time of necessity johannes Faber o o rel. Mosc in Russia no man be think sufficient to exercise the office of baptize if he be not a priest what necessity soever do happen Thevet the moscovite baptize not at all but within their church unless it be because they be very far from any church the south church aluares of the ethiopian p p cap. 5. they minister baptism to their male child when they be forty day old and to the female when they be threescore day old the infant not arrive to that age die without baptism the which thing be come to my knowledge I can not detain myself from publish in many place the great fault and error which be commit against the gospel where it be write that which be bear of the flesh be flesh and that which be bear of the spirit be spirit whereunto they answer i that for that matter the faith of the mother suffice together with the communion which she receive be with q q cap. 5 child they baptize not in font as we do but in the porch of the church with a pot full of water and that the forty day Thevet r r Cosm. l. 4. 2 the king of Maitachasi receive the gospel at the persuasion of king cephalian which be a christian and establish in his church eight bishop a notable company of priest and other minister there be also establish a Alcaide or Ismiel that be to say in their language a priest above all the other priest which within six day preach a thousand heresy among the rest that if a woman be deliver and the child die it be deprive of eternal be atitude and on the contrary side it be decree by a synod hold at that if a woman be ready to be deliver come to receive the sacrament after their usage law and faith and that afterward her child shall be bear dead by this sacrament only the child be baptize and free from punishment and damnation the LATIN church the council of Trent s s Sess. 6. c. 4. translation into the estate of grace can be without the water of regeneration or a firm purpose to be baptize the canon t t Dist 32. if peradventure there be no catholic to be find it be better and more religious to receive baptism of a heretic then to perish eternal the canon u u Consecr. dist. 4. that woman presume not to baptize if it be not in case of necessity the canon Romanus 10 10 the roman bishop take it not to be the man that baptize but the spirit of God although he that baptize be a pagan the reform church the confession of the switzer y y cap. 20. we do teach that baptism ought not to be administer by woman for s. Paul forbid they ecclesiastical office the confession of Ausburg z z Art. 9 bapt. touch baptism the church do teach that it be necessary to salvation as be a ceremony institute by jesus Christ the answer of the divine of Wirtenberg to the grecian a a Resp 1. Resp we do rejoice that there be many point of agreement between we and your holiness and among other thing that you hold that it must not be permit to any to presume to take upon he the office of teach in the church and to administer the sacrament which notwithstanding in case of necessity the laic may baptize annotation the protestant in France do hold that the infant of the faithful die without baptism be nevertheless save this word Faithful seem to be restrain to the elect for there be wicked christian against who God denounce b b exod. 20. that he will punish the iniquity of the father upon the child moreover it may happen that the parent may be God elect and nevertheless as all man be subject to err they may be negligent to procure baptism for their infant now it may be c c Calvin inst l. 14. c. 5. 22. doubt whether this fault be any prejudice to the infant these consideration perhaps have move christian people to incline to this belief that the church ought to hasten baptism because they know not who be the child of the elect and that one can err in provide for the salvation of these infant by baptize they by reason that in baptism a token or sign ordain by the lord the invocation of the holy Trinity be use and the pardon of original sin be ask for he that be baptize wherein we must believe that God hear his church the church always be carry away some with more care other with less the latin church fall into a extremity and believe the perdition of child not baptize in so much that she permit not only the laic but also woman to baptize yea pagan and heretic wherein she have a particular opinion and that which the other church approve not to show that they have a better hope of the salvation of the same infant and above all the rest the church of Aethiope which believe that they be sanctify in the womb of their mother the grecian do permit the laic to baptize but they think not the same to be true baptism and indeed the moscovite who be unite to the church of Greece permit not the ministration of baptism to any but unto priest and that within the temple or at least wise that be the place in time past for Faber have write so about a hundred year ago peradventure both they and the greek be then of this opinion and also now a day they rebaptize they that be baptize by the laic the protestant of Germany do permit the laic to baptize nevertheless they confess that the child of the elect be save without baptism as it be conclude by they at Wirtenberg in the year one thousand five hundred thirty six the church of England employ all the diligence that may be possible thus say the d d can. 69. canon if any minister be advertise of any sickness and danger of death or find any infant within his parish not baptize refuse to baptize they or do delay in such sort that be able to come in time where the infant be and to baptize he and the same infant happen to die without baptism by his fault the same minister shall be suspend for three month and shall not receive the favour of absolution until he acknowledge his fault from that which have be say a man may draw this conclusion as catholic and orthodoxal that baptism be the ordinary mean for infant to obtain salvation yet nevertheless God save extraordinary the infant of the elect which have not neglect baptism and that the church which know not the elect aught to hasten by all good mean the baptism of their infant question 20 whether confirmation be a sacrament that be to say a ceremony command by God and whether it do appertain only to bishop the east church SAcranus e e c. p. 2. the russian say that there be no sacrament of confirmation and therefore they receive it not and ordain their priest without it Vilamont f f l. 2. ca. 22. the grecian deny the sacrament of confirmation and of extreme unction Gagninus g g rut. relig. the moscovite abhor this sacrament of confirmation which they prove to be damnable because in all the counsel especial that of Nice it have be say I confesle one baptism and if there be but one baptism there be also but one unction and the priest and the bishop have the self same authority and virtue to dispense aswell with the one as with the other Thevet h h Cos lib. 19 cap. 12. they also differ from our roman church in that they reject the sacrament of confirmation as a superfluous thing because say they he which be anoint by the priest in holy baptism ought not to come under the hand of the bishop see that therein the authority of the bishop and of the priest be alike the south church the confession of zaga-zabo bishop of Aethiop i i damn a. go moreover it be to be understand that with we confirmation and chrism or the oil of extreme unction be not hold for sacrament neither be they in use as I see they be here in the roman church the reform church the confession of Wirtemberg k k cap. 31. we do not doubt but that the apostle in the begin of the gospel reveal and confirm at the festival day of Pentecost have give by the impositition of hand the admirable gift of the holy ghost to those which believe in Christ to the end that they shall speak in diverse language but of a personal and temporal act of the apostle there ought not to be a general and perpetual sacrament in the church without the commandment of God and it be a horrible thing to hear it report that the sacrament of confirmation which the bishop have accustom to minister to infant excel in dignity the sacrament of baptism for there be some which fear not to affirm the same as it be a thing say they do by the great that be to say by the bishop and can be do by the mean sort of priest so ought it to be hold in great honour and estimation the latin church the council of Trent l l Sess. 7. 2. if any say that those which attribute any virtue to the holy ointment of confirmation do injury to the holy ghost anathema if any say that the ordinary minister of holy confirmation be not a bishop only but also a priest anathema annotation the apostolic church of the east north and south do use oil after baptism think that this be the sacrament of confirmation we follow here a contrary opinion first because that his author before allege and other deny it second Zaga a bishop of Aethiop say plain that there be no oil among they that be hold for a sacrament three the foresay church do not hold the use of oil in baptism by the institution and commandment of God but by the ordinance of the church which say they have invent many thing so speak the patriarch jeremy touch the unction four the tradition among those people be to permit the bishop only to administer the say oil of baptism five they administer this oil only to show that in baptism the infant receive grace to bear the name of a christian a name which come from Christ which signify anoint that be it also which as jeremy declare always be call unction a mystery we will speak of this word in his place to end the church of Rome do both the one and the other they use oil in baptism as the other apostolic church but beside in particular they make it a sacrament moreover if they will have unction to be a sacrament a part it follow then upon that that the foresay church have baptism well nigh in the same simplicity or purity wherein it be ordain by our saviour for they add not any thing neither salt nor spittle as for the rest the protestant m m angl. can. 60 and cal. instit. li. 4. ca. 19 4. do approve confirmation by the imposition of hand as be to be see in the constitution of England but yet as a ceremony not call it a sacrament to conclude the council of Trent which be very near whole compose of italian and spaniard do excommunicate all the apostolic church for these two article first because they hold not beside the unction in baptism a sacrament of the unction of confirmation second because they say that although it be a sacrament yet the priest may administer it as well as the bishop but he that will believe the catholic church notwithstanding the anathema of the latin church will say that the oil may be as well apply by the priest as by the bishop in baptism and that it be no sacrament that be to say a ceremony command by God or by the church beside baptism question 21 whether particular confession stand by divine law and whether it be necessary to confess every sin by the ecclesiastical law the east church the answer of the church of the east to the divine of tubinge n n Resp 1. we say that he that confess receive perfect remission of his sin if he do confess they all and the circumstance thereof as far as he can remember nevertheless the sin which a man leave unconfess either by forgetfulness or because he be ashamed to utter they we beseech our merciful god that he will pardon they together with the rest and we hope that a man receive also pardon for such sin Panorm. o o Dist 5. c. in the grecian admit not confession say that it be not by divine law Gagninus p p rel. Mosc the mean sort say that confession do appertain to lord and that it be sufficient for they to believe in God and in his son jesus Christ and in the holy ghost Scarga q q Russ the russian stand not any more upon the state of confession for their pope or priest be soil with sin without make any other confession then that which they make once a year do approach to celebrate divine service the south church VIlamont r r lib. 2. c. 21 the lacobite never confess their sin to any man but to God only and that in secret aluares s s cap. 37. the custom of the priest of that country be not to keep secret that which be declare unto they in confession the author speak of a Portugal which dwell thirty year in Aethiope because he can do a better work then to open the secret of the thought to he to who all thing be know Annot. out of this discourse of aluares may be gather that if the abyssin do confess themselves it be not by recite of all their sin and above all the rest of sin punishable for that be dangerous for they that confess the reform church the confession of Ausburg t t cap 11. see then that confession be the cause that absolution be give in secret and that the custom of confess in particular cause that a acknowledgement of the power of the key and of remission of sin be keep and maintain among the people moreover see that this auricular confession profit much to forewarn and teach man we do retain it for these cause diligent in our church yet in such wise that we teach that the recite of sin be not by divine law and none ought to charge man conscience with the rehearse of they the synod at Sandomir in Poland u u ann. 1570. art. 2. no man shall be admit to the communion if first he have not be examine and absolve by the minister or by some of his fellow in that examination the rude be oppose and teach and in the end absolve the LATIN church the council of Trent 10 10 Sess. 4. c. 5. the lord have institute a entire confession of sin and by divine law it be necessary for all those which be fall after baptism it be most certain that priest can exercise their judgement without have knowledge of the matter in hand and that they can keep and observe equity and justice in enjoin penance or punishment if man declare their sin only in general and not in special from hence a man may gather that the penitent must declare in their confession all the mortal sin which they know in their conscience after such time as they have diligent examine they although that they be secret and hide and commit only against the two last commandment of the decalogue which wound sometime their heart more deep and be more dangerous than those which they commit public but because that all mortal sin and every sin according to desert do make man the child of wrath it be necessary to ask pardon of all by open and penitent confession annotation all christian do confess that the lord give to the apostle and to their successor unto the end of the world the charge of bind and lose to remit and to retain sin that be to say to denounce against the wicked and impenitent that they be in the estate of perdition and to the penitent and repentant that they be in the estate of grace in such sort that whatsoever the minister of the church which have this office do open or shut with the key which be give they that be to say according to the truth of the word of God be confirm and ratify in they some man peradventure will ask whether it be suffcient to preach it in general or it be command to certify every one in particular the catholic church answer that our saviour mean that it shall be do in the best form by follow his example thy sin be forgive thou say he to the particular if one consider well what be practise in the great part of the world he shall find a conformity in doctrine and belief but some diversity in the form and manner of proceed the jacobite confess not their sin but only to God as many author affirm the same be also true of some nation above all the rest of those who have their metropolitan in Caramit as Boterus say for that church extend into many part of the world the jacobite who come out of Egypt do report that particular confession be in use among those which be call there jacobite and Cophites the protestant in France confess their know sin either in the church or in their consistory and there receive absolution and their doctrine declare that it be very good for the ease of a trouble conscience to confess sin particular but none can learn when and how the same be practise the reform protestant of Germany Poland and Bohemia have establish a order to confess their sin and to receive absolution but without name their fault they of the east be not far from this form of proceed for they say that the number of sin which they require be not by any divine law but rather they confess that they hold it otherwise for the commandment of the church bind not unless it be in case of scandal but it be no scandal to conceal a unknown offence but the say church of the east do more that be they hold that a man be not bind to confess that which he be ashamed to declare which be to open a door to the proceed of the foresay reform for if a man be ashamed of all it follow that he be not bind to confess any moreover if shame do dispense wherefore do not other consideration of more importance do the same likewise as the danger to be divulge and afterward punish by the magistrate or dishonour for ever but to show how the church of the east do proceed in pronounce absolution without any confession make we be advertise that the pope that be to say the priest do it in particular but because that in that church of the east there be a patriarch which govern it seem unto they have regard unto all the church to who the key be give that if he declare that absolution it be more authentic and give more consolation to the conscience to content the curious reader we will insert here the form or manner of a synchorisme translate out of greek theophanes by God mercy archbishop of Constantinople new Rome and Patriarch our mediocrity y y that be to say purity Cuiac lib. 6. Gramm by the grace gift and power of the holy and live spirit which our saviour jesus Christ have give to his divine disciple and the holy apostle for to bind and loose the sin of man say receive the holy ghost to who you remit sin they shall be remit and who sin you shall retain they shall be retain and those that you bind on earth shall be bind in heaven likewise and those you lose in earth shall be loose in heaven we have by a successive descent receive from they this divine grace do absolve n. aspirituall son of the same in all thing wherein he have err or sin as a man and offend God in word deed or thought and in all his sense if he be under the curse of the bishop or priest or of his father or mother or if he be fall into any of his own sin have swear by a oath and not perform it or if he have transgress as a man in other sin and have confess they to his spiritual father and have receive of they the canon exact of all those thing and other whereby he be bind we do unbind and loose he by the power and grace of the most adore and holy spirit and also of all thing which he have leave unconfess whether they be by forgetfulness or shame all which be pardon he of the most merciful God which be bless eternal amen the latin otherwise call the roman catholic say that our saviour command every one to confess particular every sin and all the circumstance thereof to employ all possible diligence to remember they and that he that confess not all those memorable sin can be save if their opinion be true the apostolic church of the east south north and the reform or protestant in the west be damn and the gate of hell shall prevail against the catholic church he that list let he believe they so many there be that do hold with one consent that our lord and saviour jesus Christ have not command any particular confession by number our sin but that it be a ordinance of the church which nevertheless constrain no man to confess those sin which he be ashamed to declare question 22 whether the bread and wine in the holy sacrament be change into the body and blood of the Lord the east churches the answer of the patriarch jeremy a a cap. 10. the ten chapter do treat of the lord supper yet not ample but if we may so say obscure for among you man understand many thing touch the same the which agree in no wise with we the catholic church therefore believe that the bread after the sanctification be change into the body of Christ and the wine into his blood by the holy ghost provide that the bread be leaven not without leaven for the lord in that night in which he be betray have take bread and give thanks break it and say take eat this be say he not bread without leaven or the figure of my body but my body and my blood nevertheless at that time the flesh of the lord which he carry about he be not give to the apostle to eat nor his blood to drink nor now in the divine celebration of those mystery as if the body of the lord descend from heaven for it be a blasphemy to say so but both then and now by the invocation and grace of the almighty spirit the beginner or author of this mystery the bread be convert and change into the body of the lord and the wine into his blood and in another place he say thus and from thence it come that the mass or lump of bread be break in piece and it be not offer entire or whole which figure the passion of our saviour and at the time that this bread be offer it be common bread offer only to God but afterward it be make extraordinary bread and be change in deed but if we will by reason cause and effect debate and resolve thereof we shall need a thousand tongue and yet they will not be sufficient but our saviour have command to do this in remembrance of he and a little after he say that the church be signify in mystery and not as in symbol but as the member depend on the heart and as the bough on the root of the plant and as the lord say in that fashion that the branch be in the stock of the vine for here be not only a communion of name or a similitude of analogy but the identity of the thing themselves for the body and blood of the lord be true mystery which be not change into any human body but we be change into they for the better thing have ever the pre-eminence even as iron be unite with fire become fire but the fire never become iron and even as when the iron be glow hot we see not the iron but only the fire the property of the iron not be apparent even so also if a man may see the church of God as it be unite to he and participate of his body he shall see nothing else but the only body of our saviour by reason whereof saint Paul write you be the body of Christ the south church o our lord jesus Christ who substance be not create but be the pure word thou be the son of the father thou be the bread of life descend from heaven who will come in the figure of a lamb without spot for the redemption of the world now o thou lover of mankind we do most humble beseech thy bounty pray thou that thou will show the light of thy countenance upon this bread and upon this portable altar bless sanctify purify and translate this bread into thy spotless flesh and this wine into thy precious blood and let it be make a ardent and a acceptable sacrifice and the salvation of our soul and body for thou be our King the latin church the council of Trent b b Sess 3. c. 4. forasmuch as our lord and redeemer jesus Christ have say that it be his true body which he offer under the form of bread for this cause the church of God have always have the same persuasion and this holy council do again declare it that through the consecration of bread and wine all the substance of the bread be convert into the substance of Christ our lord and all the substance of the wine into the substance of his blood and this conversion have the catholic church convenient and proper call transubstantiation the reform church the confession of Wittenberg c c cap. 19 we believe that the eucharist be a sacrament institute by jesus Christ himself and the use thereof be recommend to the church unto the end of the world but because that the substance thereof be one thing and the use another we will speak in order of they both touch the substance of the eucharist we believe and teach that the true body and blood of our saviour jesus Christ be distribute in the eucharist and do reject those that say that the bread and wine in the eucharist be but sign of the body and blood of Christ be absent we do also believe that the almighty power of God be so great that he may either bring to nothing the substance of the bread or change it into the body and blood of Christ but it can be prove by the manifest word of God that God exercise in the eucharist any such absolute power and it appear that no such matter be know to the ancient church but as when he speak of the city of jerusalem portray upon a brick this same be jerusalem it be not necessary that the brick shall be change into the city of jerusalem in like manner when he speak of the bread this be my body it be not necessary that the substance of the bread shall be change into the substance of the body of Christ but it suffice for the verity of the sacrament that the body of Christ be true present with the bread yea rather the verity of the sacrament require that the true bread remain with the true presence of God for even as for the truth of the sacrament of baptism it be necessary that in the use thereof the water shall be and remain true water in like manner it be necessary in the lord supper that the bread in the use thereof be and remain true bread because that if the substance of the bread be change the verity of the sacrament remain not in his true nature the confession of England d d Art. 12. we say that the bread and the wine be sacred and celestial mystery and that by they jesus Christ the true bread of life eternal be offer unto they that be present that do receive his body and blood through faith nevertheless we say not that we believe that the nature of the bread and wine be whole change and reduce to nothing gall. let we lift up our spirit and our heart where jesus Christ be in the glory of the father and from whence we look for our redemption and let we not dwell upon these earthly and corruptible element which we see with our eye and touch with our hand to seek for it there as though it be enclose in the bread or wine for than our soul shall be fit to be nourish and revive by his substance when they shall be elevate above all terrestrial thing to obtain heaven and to enter into the kingdom of GOD where he dwell the confession of the french man e e Art. 36. we do confess that the holy supper of the lord be a testimony unto we of the unity which we have with Christ jesus because that he be not only dead and rise again for we but also nourish and feed we true with his flesh and blood to the end that we shall be one with he and that his life shall be our life and albeit that he be in heaven until such time that he shall come to judge the world yet nevertheless we believe that through the secret and incomprehensible power of his spirit he nourish and quicken we by the substance of his body and blood annotation all christian nation do with one consent agree that the bread and wine of the holy sacrament be convert into the body and blood of the Lord it be true which Alphon. de Castro say that the armenian have heretofore otherwise believe but he show not whether it be their ancient manner or whether any particular man bring it in among they as touch the abyssin there be mention make oftentimes of transmutation in their liturgy which they refer to the apostle according to the subscription thereof but the f f birth tabu geog abyss after many other historiographer do say that the say abyssin be not christian so long ago as they make we believe they report themselves to have receive the christian faith by the eunuch of queen candace and by saint Matthew and saint Philip but it be think in these part that in the fifteen year of justinian emperor of Constantinople Adad king of the auxumite make a vow to become a Christian if he get the victory against the king of the omerite which have obtain he send ambassador to the emperor justinian to have bishop send to he which be come thither convert his people to the faith both opinion may be true that be to say that Adad will have receive the faith and yet not after the form of the other ethiopian but rather after the east church in like manner the french man receive the faith under king Clovis the which faith notwithstanding be in France three hundred year before likewise great Britain be say to have receive the gospel by joseph of Arimathea yet nevertheless the roman do brag that they convert the english man five hundred year after howsoever it be the liturgy of the ethiopian come unto they from the sea of Alexandria as appear by the greek name which be insert therein Aluares say that they have another so brief that it be no soon begin but it present end one may doubt whether this be not the ancient if we have the book which the say Aluares say that they have in great number one may know whether they differ but howsoever it be it appear not that this belief of transmutation be receive in any place of the world as a new thing now a day it be a question whether the father have believe it or whether it be slip in by little and little if the latin and greek do allege proof out of the father the protestant do think they to be hyperbolical term for to lift or move man soul to the worship of the sacrament if the protestant do bring on the contrary side other proof some will answer they that the father do keep close that belief for fear of give occasion to the pagan to mock they we will leave these difficulty the father be not in the world now to resolve we but the church scatter through the universal world be as yet to bear witness of the tradition in this point as well as in other and to declare and explain their meaning to those that understand it not well then see that the bread and wine in the sacrament be change we must examine their discourse to find who do swerve from the catholic faith there be four thing in a true body first the matter second the accident and essential property three the form which the philosopher hold to give life or be to a thing four the hide property which depend upon the form as touch the accident and essential property of the body of the lord all do confess that they be not in the sacrament but rather the accident and property of the bread as concern the matter of the say body the latin do believe that it be invisible contain under the accident of bread and that the matter of the bread become nothing but the belief of the church of the east and south seem to be quite contrary to that first the patriarch jeremy absolute say that the flesh of our saviour which he carry be not give to his apostle to eat from whence it follow that they do eat some other matter which nevertheless be also the body of Christ moreover he expound it say that it be as iron or wood burn which be call fire because that the fire surmount or overcome and the matter of the iron be not reduce to nothing as concern the three he say in like manner that those that do communicate the sacrament be change into the body of Christ and that the church be the true body of Christ nevertheless every one confess that the matter of human body be not reduce or bring to nothing likewise one may see that the church be call the true body of Christ or else if the bread be call the true body of Christ this word true be put as opposite even as the same author do expound it to the bare similitude figure or proportion and not as refer to the identity of the matter the church of the south say the very same they do pray in their liturgy or service that God will change the bread and wine of the sacrament as he change the water into wine in Cana for the matter of the water be not reduce to nothing to give place to other wine create a new but the water lose his form and that matter which be before water receive the internal form and all the quality and property of wine these consideration and many other the which will be too tedious to recite do make some latin writer and among the rest to believe that the bread lose his form and not his matter no more than the accident and property thereof it be also to be note what the foresay jeremy say against consubstantiation that there be not two thing in the holy sacrament to wit the bread and the body of Christ but one only to wit the body of Christ give to note thereby that that matter which remain be no more the matter of bread but the matter of the body of Christ as in the miracle of Cana that matter which be then the matter of water when it have the form of water be the matter of wine when it have the form of wine and which be more there be no change wherein the matter continue not the same and if one well weigh the say of the father who believe some miracle to be in the sacrament he shall find that they do accord herein also they say that the substance of our flesh be augment by the eucharist and that there be two sort of the flesh of Christ we must then observe how they conceive that the bread be change into the body of Christ it seem that they will only have it a matter be it that it loose his form as say or loose it not which shall receive the form of the body of Christ and the hide property which do proceed from that form and that that form be join to the matter it be no more bread neither the matter of bread but it be the body of Christ and the matter of the body of Christ for as the philosopher say some will say it be a dangerous curiosity to sound these mystery but I answer that of two inconvenience the lesser be to be choose and that it be a most dangerous carelessness to leave the church in division and to cause christian to be wound and slay for want of teach that the difference be not so great as it be imagine moreover the learned man of the church of Rome have a thousand time more curious search this point and have leave themselves nothing to say in such sort that that will suffice to make up a peace which they have search out by debate among themselves this than may likely be gather out of the liturgy of christian people that the bread take the form of the body of the lord which for the matter and accident thereof be but only in heaven or that it receive the hide property of the form of the body of Christ although that this form be not without his matter these faculty and property serve as the say jeremy note to sanctify a man and to make he capable of everlasting life if it be demand what this form be the prince of philosopher answer that man understanding be as fit dispose for the knowledge of natural thing as the eye of a owl to behold the brightness of the sun and that learned Fernelius begin his book of physic thus when the spirit be free and unbound see the naked and clear substance of thing it enjoy a most perfect and clear knowledge but while it be wrap within the body it remain in extreme ignorance the philosopher and physician see in nature sundry admirable effect have judge that they can not proceed from the matter which be one in all thing but have be constrain to confess that the form or essence be the beginning and foundation of those effect but if they acknowledge man understanding unfit to judge of those form much less can divine determine this effect which they confess to proceed of the body of jesus Christ also that which we do attribute to the christian of the east and south touch the form of the body of the lord come upon the matter of the bread we can determine that their belief be such for they resolve upon nothing say that a thousand head be not able to express it which be nothing else but to signify that the sacrament may be say to be the true body of our lord jesus Christ although it be grant that the matter of the body of Christ be only in heaven for it suffice for a change even in thing preaexistent that there be a identity of form or else of quality and hide virtue as for the protestant though they hold not the belief of the same people yet they have not write against they but much against the latin who do constitute accident without a subject one matter in many place a body without his essential property one God and man live in the host or bread who hear not see not feel not nor taste not which be say the protestant a opinion contrary to the holy scripture and never enter into the imagination or heart of the ancient father or of the divine of the east and south church who never yield or give place to the latin either in quickness of spirit or in curiosity and who have have no want of heretic to give they occasion to exercise themselves in these difficulty whereinto some one among so many learned man as they have have in so many age and such as have write so many volume must have necessary fall if that they believe that the body of the lord be material in the host or bread now we must see how far the belief of the protestant differ from those of the east and other people which to perform we must enter into the consideration of secret or hide faculty and propriety there be two sort of opinion touch supernatural operation some think that God work immediate in the place where the thing be from whence it seem that the effect proceed even as when the water of the pool of Siloe be move or stir by the angel do seem to heal they say that God heal of himself and by himself even then after the touch of the water other do believe that this supernatural faculty be give to the thing themselves so that the say water receive of God such a virtue as some medicine or salve have in some disease for it be as easy for God to give those property to a form as it be for he to give they to those that have they ever since the creation of the world nevertheless this be not thus do by the devil who can create essence or being neither endue they with admirable faculty so that the devil do work the like by illusion behold here then the difference the foresay christian do believe that the matter of bread receive the form of the body of the lord or that the form of bread obtain the hide property thereof or that there be some spiritual thing which have the place of form in that matter and that thereupon depend the mystical union whereof s. Paul speak but the protestant who some call caluinist do hold that the body of the lord be only in heaven together with his quicken form and virtue and that a substance proceed from g g confess of coy he and be apply to the soul of man by the virtue of the holy ghost and that immediate which certain be a very slender disputation and of small estimation in comparison of the report which be make of it consider that all do confess that the bread be real the communion of the body of Christ as s. Paul say also these word this be my body be refer to the whole shall be speak without figure but refer to that which one see that be to say to the accident and to the matter through the accident they be figurative this consideration have cause that those who be call caluinist and lutheran and some grecian in Poland have treat of some mean of agreement imagine that the difference be not in but this union have be hitherto hinder by two opinion which fall into extremity Brentius Smidlin and other for the better prove of the real yea material presence have have recourse to ubiquity and on the other side as jurguieius find fault there be some who speak in such sort of the receive of the sacrament that they have destroy by their contrary term that which they think to have build up say that the faithful under the old testament receive jesus Christ as they receive he now a day from whence it shall follow that if there be any mystical union make it shall be wrought only by the divinity as in time past and not by the humanity whereof the holy scripture always bear witness that it have life in itself and that it quicken other say also that a man do participate of the body of the lord without the sacrament in the same manner as with the sacrament so that one receive but the sign at the most these man seem not to speak proper for one be not say to receive that which he have ordinary see here the diverse term that be use but the truth be that ubiquity be reject in the body by the lutheran and the real communicate with the substance of the body of Christ be confess by the other in the body as it be resolve in the synod at Rochel in France and at Torun in Poland we will bring in here two similitude by the which among other protestant do cause their meaning to be understand and do show that the communion which they believe be real and nevertheless have no absurdity in it the body of the sun say Calvin be only in heaven notwithstanding the light thereof be here upon earth therefore many do hold that light be a substance otherwise it shall not be find out of his proper subject moreover the philosopher say that wherefore then shall not the sun of righteousness have power to regenerate a man though his body be not on earth the adamant stone say Beza draw iron communicate itself with the iron through a admirable virtue without mingle his matter therewith in like manner the body of the lord unite itself with a man soul though the matter of his body be no where else but in heaven hereupon that be to be note which Gilbertus a learned physician observe that be to say that the form of the adamant be carry out of the limit of his own matter and be find in the loadstone subject and not in the air between both it may be say likewise that the body of the lord do communicate itself from heaven without extension multiplication or any mixture of matter if a man hold himself firm to these similitude he shall never set his imagination or thought upon the place of reality for these effect of nature be real and true to conclude a man may see by that which have be speak that the church of the east and those of the south do not approve this last opinion neither that of the lutheran withal as it seem they hold not that of the latin touch the real eat of the matter of the body of the lord neither the absurdity that follow thereupon for they do open deny that the apostle do eat the flesh that our saviour jesus Christ do carry about he this then be their say or opinion that the body of the lord as touch the matter and accident be only in heaven yet notwithstanding the bread and wine in the sacrament be change into the body and blood of the lord in such a fashion as none can utter or comprehend in like manner as the faithful which receive it be say to be change into the true body of Christ question 23 whether the change of the sign be make through these word or whether it be by prayer the east churches mark bishop of Ephesus in a treatise express make upon this point show that the bread and wine in the liturgy be not consecrate neither change through these word this be my body but rather by prayer and supplication h h Orient. eccles cap. 10. the great part of the grecian be of this opinion that the sign be consecrate by prayer and not through the word of Christ only Scarga i i p. 3 the russian imagine that the body and blood of our saviour jesus Christ on the altar be not make only through the word of God that be to say by the pronunciation of these word but also through the prayer of the priest the south churches Aethiop translate o lord this bread into thy true body and this wine into thy true blood bless sanctify and purify this bread and transport it into thy flesh without spot and this wine into thy precious blood and let they be make a ardent and acceptable sacrifice a remedy and save health both of our soul and body the reform church LIturg gal. and as our lord jesus Christ not only offer unto thou o God upon the cross his body and his blood for the remission of our sin but also will communicate they unto we as nourishment unto eternal life vouchsafe we this grace that with true sincerity of heart and a ardent zeal we may receive from he so great a benefit that be that we through steadfast faith may enjoy his body and blood and that from he all entire Beza k k Confes. 7. art. the conjunction of the thing signify with the sign depend upon the only ordinance and promise of God although it be not local nor in any natural manner these man on the contrary side that be to say the latin will by the virtue of three or four word have the bread to be change into the body and the wine into the blood of jesus Christ which will be plain sorcery the LATIN church the council of Trent l l Sess. 3. ca. 3. the true body of our lord jesus Christ and his true blood together with his soul and his divinity be under the form of bread and wine but his body be under the form of bread by the force and virtue of the word annotation in the liturgy of the church of the east and south there be three principal part as we have be instruct by those of that country the first consist in the history or narration of the institution of the holy sacrament at that time say they although one do pronounce these word this be my body it make not the consecration the second part be the prayer or prayer wherein they beseech God that the sign may be change then say they be the consecration make for by prayer a man obtain that which he demand and our saviour do the same after that he have take bread for it be say that he bless or consecrate it the three part be when they address their word to the people say take eat this be the body of the lord word which declare unto the people and teach they that it be that which be present unto they in like manner our lord jesus Christ speak to his apostle not to the bread when he say take eat this be my body the protestant do say as the foresay people that they do bless the bread and wine principal through prayer and not through those word to the which God have not give any intrinsical virtue to convert substance the difference between the church of Asia Africa and the reform be that those reform church ask not nor obtain not by their prayer as the foresay church do pretend that the bread be change into the body of Christ but do ask and obtain that that body may be give they in the communion which they ought to sue for all man alike do condemn the opinion of the latin who believe that transubstantiation be make by these word or to speak better by the last syllable umh this opinion of the church of Rome be the cause that the learned man among they who receive it do enter into very great difficulty and doubt among themselves in desire to take away some by one mean and other by other the absurdity which follow thereupon the christian reader may advise himself which doctrine he ought rather to follow whether that of the latin or the catholic which be that the consecration and communion of the body of the lord be obtain through the prayer of the church and not through any virtue hide in these word question 24 whether the outward form be real the body and blood of the lord without use of they the east churches Nichol m m li. 4. ca 19 the armenian do make the consecration in a chalice of glass or wood n n Eluc ca. 2. the russian do say that the sacrament of the eucharist consecrate the day of the holy supper be only meet to be give to the sick and not that which be consecrate every day and they keep it also all the year long in a cup prepare for that purpose sometime till it be full of worm and spoil and they give it in a little spoon moreover they consecrate salt in chalice of wood and cast the kernel thereof be dry among their small linen they consecrate for they that go to the war wheaten bread in the body of Christ and deliver it into the hand of the lie people who upon the very point of the battle do fill with some liquor or other the first vessel that come to their hand fit to contain meat or drink and put therein this bread they do communicate in order the south church aluares o o cap. 3. it be a marvelous thing to see the great harm and peril that the little child do endure in Aethiope who they make to swallow down the communion perforce pour water down their mouth as well because the host be of gross past as because of their continual groan beside they use chalice and spoon of wood the reform church BEza p p Confes. 7. art. the sacrament be ordain to be use according to the word of God and therefore be otherwise use they be no sacrament the LATIN church pope Pius q q consecr. dist. 2. per. if through negligence there do fall any of the blood down to the ground it shall be lick up with the tongue the wood shall be scrape and if it be not of wood the place shall be scrape to the end that it be not tread down under foot and it shall be burn and the ash lock within the altar and the priest shall do penance forty day annotation the passage or place before allege seem not to be to the purpose of this question nevertheless they satisfy sufficient we search out in this treatise the tradition of christian people and because that this question have not be dispute upon before this time a man can find any express testimony in so much that it must be gather from the practice of the church what her belief be some man will ask whether christian people do believe or have believe that after the usage of the sacrament the body of the lord be in the rest of the bread and wine consecrate and whether the rest of the bread and wine be holy thing or whether they have no holiness in they even as the water of baptism which be not scrupulous keep after it be once use the roman church hold the affirmative that be to say that the bread be lose the wine be shed or soak into wood be and still remain the true body of Christ as be to be see by the caution of the canon before allege but see that other people take not such care to keep the remnant and to gather they up religious it follow that they believe not that it be in any wise the body of our saviour jesus Christ when we speak of the remnant we mean not that which be pretend to be keep for the sick for that remainder be think to abide still change in those place where that custom be to wit in the east but not in the church of the abyssin or aethiopian the maronites of jerusalem who suck the sacrament of blood with a pipe can draw out all those that do eat with little reverence and do cast away the rest of the sacred bread attribute no more to it the abyssin although that they wash the basin wherein the sacramental bread be and do drink the water and also seem to do it with reverence and care yet nevertheless see that they cause the little child perforce to eat this sacred bread it can be otherwise but they must needs lose some of it as touch that which be practise among other nation to use wooden chalice that show manifest that they attribute not or that their ancestor have not attribute any divine virtue to the leave which soak into the wood howsoever the law of pope Pius be it be not observe for the wooden chalice nor the pipe be not scrape nor burn neither the ash keep within the altar from thence may be gather that they believe not that the remainder of the sacrament wherewith no man mean to serve his turn any more be the body of Christ question 25 whether we ought to consecrate one loaf for all the communicant or whether it be lawful to use little wafer the east church VIlamont r r lib. 2. c. 23. the grecian do in this fashion celebrate the consecration of the lord they take a leaven loaf of the value of two or three penny which they bless and break a little morsel out of the midst which the priest consecrate it be to be note that this morsel be great or small according to the number of the communicant Gagnin s s Descr sarmat the woman make a loaf to sacrifice with which they call Proscura they do consecrate the bread for the communicant in the mean time while the liturgy be say and the priest divide it into many portion and distribute it to the communicant who take it with a spoon and dip it in the chalice the south church aluares t t Descr Ethop cap. 3. they make a cake of wheaten flower without leaven the very same hour it be very white and fair be of the greatness and roundness of a platter and of such greatness as the number of the people require whereof there be but few in that monastery but in other church a man shall see a great number of people this bread be make big enough and substantial by reason that every one communicate this bread be call by they Corbon the reform church BEza u u quaest and Resp 194. the omission of break the bread take not away the very eat of the sacrament itself but only the true and lawful manner thereof even as a spot in one face blemish the grace of a man favour but abolish not his shape the LATIN church HOnorius 10 10 Laturg Cass Eulog it be report that the priest long a go take meal of every family the which the grecian do observe as yet and with the same do make the bread of the lord which they do offer for the people and after have consecrate it do distribute it to they for all those that have offer meal be find at mass and for they it be say in the canon remember these assistant which offer unto thou this sacrifice of praise but after that the church increase in number of people but decrease in holiness it be ordain to communicate three time in the year and for that the people do not communicate it be not needful to make so great a loaf it be ordain that they shall make they in the form of a penny and that the people in lieu of offer the same meal shall offer penny y y gem. a cap. 36. the host be of the bigness of a penny because that our saviour be sell for thirty penny annotation the christian nation contrary to the practice of the latin church do think that we ought to follow the example of the lord and to obey his commandment he break the bread and give the piece to the apostle and command they to do as he have do that be to say to give to the communicant the piece of oneself same bread this circumstance be note in that great mystery whereof saint Paul speak it be say he a great mystery in Christ and the church and he show that all the faithful do participate of the same body of the lord and be one body among themselves the cup of blessing say s. Paul which we bless 1. cor. 10. 16 be it not the communion of the blood of Christ and the bread which we break be it not the communion of the body of Christ for we that be many be one bread and one body for we be all partaker of one bread and as for the rest our saviour will that a man shall do that which he do and that in remembrance of he and this sacrament be not simple a memorial of he be consider as he be in heaven but a memorial of his passion and also of the effect thereof which be to make they that communicate partaker of his body be break for they all the foresay christian do think that those little wafer be not fit to call to mind that communion they show rather that the lord be not break and that every one have his Christ apart this therefore shall be the conclusion that in the holy sacrament the bread ought to be big enough and that it ought to be break and the part there of distribute to the people question 26 whether it be necessary to put water into the chalice or to put more wine than water or whether one may use any other liquor for want of wine the east church LVbelz a a Liturg. cassandri the armenian use unleavened bread and mingle not any water with the wine Alphonsus de Castro b b aduerss haer. l. 6. the seven heresy be that which be just contrary to the precedent for here the wine be put into the chalice in such wise that there be no water at all put therein and he say that there need not any mingle this be the error of the grecian which Guido carme do put in the six place it be also the error of the armenian Scarga c c err Mosc the muscovite in the preparation of the chalice do mingle two or three drop of wine in hot water in such sort that one can perceive the wine consume in the water also in stead of wine they use sometime the juice of apple which they colour with some red berry they make no scruple to put in so much water after the consecration that the wine be consume by the number of the communicant there remain no taste of wine at all Barbosa d d odoard barb. Cass the armenian that be in India in stead of the sacrament of wine by reason that in India there be no wine do take dry raisin and lay they in water all night to mollify or soften they and the day follow when they say service they strain they and use the juice in stead of wine the south church aluares e e cap. ult. in monastery and church they keep many raisin half dry which be lay in water for the space of twelve day till that they begin to swell then they take they and afterward put they under a press because that of the liquor that issue from they they celebrate divine service the reform church REspon. jerem. f f Resp 1. Resp we mingle not water with wine in the holy supper because that jesus Christ say I will not drink henceforth of the fruit of this vine and make no mention of any water in like manner we do not think it necessary to mingle any water yet if peradventure there be any we hold it indifferent the latin church HOnorius g g celeb. miss. 41. c. 13. a pernicious abuse be bring into the country that be to say that they put more water than wine in the sacrifice whereas according to the reasonable custom of the church they shall put more wine than water comp. Theol. h h lib. 6. if there have be more water than wine the consecration shall have be hinder Lochmaier i i par. cur cap. 9 but for want of wine one may omit the sign of the blood which yet he must do by dispensation from the pope annotation the diversity of the practice of christian do declare that this be a indifferent point for the which we ought not to contest and strive and the one part ought not to condemn the other the armenian do mingle no water the grecian mingle it not at the same time that the latin do the abyssine and indian mingle it not for any ceremony but use wine that have more water than wine the moscovite care not whether there be more wine or water also no man know whether our saviour do mingle more of the water or of the wine the protestant find no fault with the northern nation that use cider what shall one do say Bucanus in a region where be no bread as we wherein be no wine we must use such food as man use in those country for that agree with the intention of jesus Christ the catholic conclusion draw from that before allege be that there be neither divine or ecclesiastical law that condemn those that mingle or those that mingle not water with the wine whether it be by way of ceremony or without ceremony question 27 whether it be necessary to communicate under the sign both of bread and wine the east churches IEeremie Oecumenicke k k Resp 1. moreover we will answer to the abuse whereof you speak first you say that all aught to communicate under both kind and you say well for we do so even when we do participate of the venerable mystery nichol. l l li. 4. ca. 36. in the lord supper the grecian do communicate under both kind Vilamont m m lib. 2. 23. the nestorian do consecrate with leaven bread after the fashion of the grecian n n li. 2. ca. 21. when the jacobite do minister the communion to young child it be under both kind be therein conformable to the grecian and the syrian the south church THevet o o Cos 2. ca. 14 when they do communicate they receive under both kind which also I have see observe of the abyssin by their sect in jerusalem aluares p p cap. 3. their vessel be far big than we be but of a ill fashion use no plate and they celebrate the mass with the wine of raisin which they pour into the chalice in great quantity for all those that communicate of the body do likewise of the blood the reform church the confession of England q q Art. 12. there must be give to the people that come to the communion both the one and the other kind of the eucharist for the lord have so command and his apostle have so ordain through all the earth and all the ancient father and catholic bishop have imitate they the LATIN church the council of Constance r r Sess. 13. be advertise that in many church they have continue to administer to the laic the sacrament in both kind we do declare that although that jesus Christ do so see that afterward it have be receive by the priest and by the lay people under the sign of bread only that all this notwithstanding the law and authority of the canon and the custom approve by the church Roman have observe and observe to avoid certain danger that this sacrament shall be distribute under one kind and we do command upon pain of excommunication that no priest do minister the communion to the people under both kind of bread and wine annotation this question have no difficulty all nation except the latin do think that they ought herein to obey jesus Christ those that do hold the holy scripture to be true do confess that even in thing which seem to be of small importance God will be obey yea Adam and all his child and race for have eat of the forbid fruit be lose and God will have slay Moses because that his son be not circumcise Vzzah fall down dead because he touch the ark notwithstanding his good intention it be a wonder to see that those that believe this have yet make a law contrary to the divine commandment of God the fault be now a day know to many yet they will not confess that there be any error therein for fear least man shall call into question other doctrine so it be that all nation do confess that we ought to communicate in both kind of bread and wine question 28 whether the sacrament must be keep to be carry in procession and for other use or only to be carry to the sick the east church GAgnin s s Descr sar. they use the sacrament of the eucharist in both kind and they have a custom to use one fashion for the sick and another for the communicant for the sick it be keep all the year be consecrate the week before easter Scarga their pope that be to say their priest after dinner sometime half drink do eat with little or no reverence the rest of the body of Christ which be not eat by the faithful Gagninus they keep not holy the feast of the body of the Lord the south church ZAga Ethiop t t dam. go the sacrament of the eucharist be not keep with we in the temple or church as they do in Europe that be to say in the roman church the sick receive not the body of the lord but at such time as they have recover their health this they do because the priest and the laic do use to receive twice every week and all those that will receive it go to the temple and it be not permit neither to the patriarch himself nor to Prester-Iohn to do otherwise the reform church the confession of saxon. u u Art. 34. it be a manifest profanation to carry about in procession a part of the sacrament and to adore or worship it see that part be transfer to a use quite contrary to the institution where the text say take eat etc. the divine of Wittenberg 10 10 Resp jerem de Chirot the minister of the church be ordain among we to baptize and celebrate the lord supper both public in the temple and particular in the house of those that be near death the roman church CLement y y and ven. we must principal employ ourselves about the right use of this lively sacrament of the body and blood of jesus Christ which be the glory and crown of all the saint to the end that it may shine through a festival and special celebration to supply thereby that which be omit in the other office of the mass annotation all christian nation do agree together against the roman church that none ought to keep the sacrament to employ it to any other use then that to which our saviour have dedicate it to wit the communion and therefore it ought not to be carry in procession as pope Clement have of late time command in the institution of the feast of God or as for the reservation which be make to be carry to the sick it be not in use in the church of Africa but the grecian and latin do approve it yea and the protestant likewise as appear in the place before mention think thou say Beza that none ought to celebrate the holy supper of the lord Noah where else but only in a public assembly answer in the begin of the ancient church it be the custom to send the eucharist by the deacon to the sick be absent to who I doubt not but that the same do bring great consolation I desire hearty that this custom be put in use again the resolution of this question be that none ought to reserve or keep the sacrament but only to carry to the sick question 29 whether the sacrament ought to be elevate or lift up by the priest for to adore and worship it or for to sacrifice through that external ceremony the east church SAcranus a a cer. Mosc 2. the russian as also some among the grecian before that they prepare the chalice do light wax candle and show to the people the bread that be to be consecrate with the wine and water pour in the chalice and then the people fall down bend their body to worship and to commit idolatry but be once set upon the altar and consecrate it be not worship of any neither be it elevate or lift up the south church ZAga b b dam. goe in this ministry the sacrament be not show as I see they do here in the roman church aluares c c cap. 3. after that the priest come speak in his own language after our fashion and the very same word but that he do not elevate the sacrament but cover it the reform church the confession of Basil d d Art. 6. we adore not jesus Christ in the sign of bread and wine which we common call sacrament of the body and blood of the lord but in heaven on the right hand of God the father from whence he shall come for to judge the quick and the dead the LATIN church the canon e e lib. 3. tit. 41. ca. 10. that every priest do oftentimes teach his people to bow reverent when in the celebration of the mass the wholesome host be elevate and that he do the same when he carry it to any sick person annotation there be no catholic say f f Sacr. eu. l. 4. c. 29. Bellarmine that teach that the sacramental sign must be adore in themselves and proper with that worship which be call Latria but that they must be worship with a lesser honour which belong to all sacrament but we say that Christ must be worship in himself and that adoration or worship do belong to the sign in regard that they be conceive to be the same thing with Christ even as they that adore Christ be clothe upon earth adore not he only but also his habit for he command not himself to be strip naked the latin do accuse the protestant because that they worship not the sacrament or jesus Christ in the sacrament but if a man consider the matter well he shall find that they do all that Bellarmine require to show that there be a great defect yea impiety in they lay before they the example of all the christian of the world who say he do worship or adore jesus Christ in the sacrament every one and if one can show that the protestant do the same also those that search out occasion to complain shall they not have reason to be content Bellarmine speak of the worship of the sign and of the worship of jesus Christ signify in both these the protestant do use such adoration as Bellarmine himself do paint out those that honour our saviour be in his clothes have not any intention or meaning to honour or adore his clothes likewise follow the example of Bellarmine be it that a man have no intention to honour the sacrament he be blameless if Bellarmine do say that the clothes of the lord be worship I do answer he that in like manner the protestant do honour the sign in Germany they receive the sacrament upon their knee the constitution of g g can. 23. England do ordain the like in so do they do adore jesus Christ before the sacrament that be to say the sacrament with a more humble ceremony then the christian of the east do who as Vilamont say receive it not upon their knee the church of the south do the like if the frenchman do follow their example they adore it also and the roman catholic themselves do not kneel always when they pray or adore as it be see in the benediction of the table it suffice then in adore to have the head uncover according to the ordinance of saint Paul as for the rest those of the east do elevate or lift up the chalice in say to the people proschoman let we prepare ourselves holy thing be for holy people these word do show that this elevation of the cup be not to require any adoration nor to be a sign of a sacrifice but it be do after the example of jesus Christ who say to his apostle take eat in like manner it be very well speak to all the people that they may prepare themselves to take it yea our saviour do show it to his apostle when he say take and the apostle see it and when there be many people in a church and the altar be low it can be see of the people without elevation but there need not any ceremony of inclination or bow then for the elevation be not to that end it be good at the very instant of receive if the question be of the adoration of jesus Christ there be none that will not confess but that he ought to be worship proper and with that honour call Latria in the sacrament but the protestant say that to do this man must lift up their heart on high as it be say in all the syrian grecian roman and aethiopian liturgy these word corda do declare that we must worship he in heaven and such as he be in so do we shall not deceive ourselves but he shall deceive himself that imagith he to be under the figure for if he do honour he under they as if he be there in such manner as he be in heaven that be to say have his distinct part he be deceive for it be not so and on the other side one can imagine such a human body as it be say that he be to wit without dimension take up no place without order of part have the least part of his foot and arm with the least part of his head without see hear feel or move and yet live a man can comprehend such thing he conceive that which present itself before his eye that be to say the figure and err in the fact although that he have no evil intention think that it have be material moreover a man can know whether the priest have have a meaning to consecrate and so either one deceive himself or else can know whether he be deceive or no. but one can be deceive if he remember corda for so a man adore both jesus Christ with true worship and the figure as Bellarmine will have it this consideration also of the elevation serve to avoid a important question that be to say whether the ceremony of the external sacrifice be make in the very body of jesus Christ it appear here not to be so for if it be not make by the elevation as it be certain that the foresay people do believe see they make no elevation it be not make neither in the break of the bread for the body of our saviour can be real break nor in the distribution for that belong not to the essence of the sacrifice but rather to the sacrament it follow then that the ceremony of the sacrifice be not make outward in the proper person of jesus Christ and consequent it be a sacrifice pure mental and spiritual from this above write and from the practice of the apostolic church it follow that none ought to elevate the sacrament neither with a intention to cause it to be adore nor to offer it to God unless peradventure that he do it to show it to the people when he summon they to the communion question 30 whether the liturgy ought to be celebrate without a communion and whether the communion be the principal end thereof the east churches THevet h h li. 8. ca. 15. the armenian say the mass always in the company of two or three by reason that the priest minister the communion to the assistant upon solemn feast according to the observation of the ancient father Odoardus Barbosa i i Liturg. Cass the armenian which be in India do communicate salt with bread in steed of the host because that they consecrate for all they that be in the church and each one go to the foot of the altar to receive there a part melancton k k pace in the parish in Greece there be no private mass but the monastery do imitate the custom of the latin the south churches aluares l l cap. 30. the Debeteres do publish every where that they never hear such a mass mean the roman mass nor so divine celebrate by reason of the music and they find fault with no other thing but that one man alone sing therein without administer the communion to those that assist he in his office moreover m m they make a cake in bigness according to the number of the person in the town they make this bread great and more substantial because that they do all communicate the reform church the confession of Ausburg n n cap. 1. abus the institution do ordain that there be a communion that be to say that the minister of the church do deliver also to the rest the body and blood of our saviour the LATIN church the council of Trent o o Sess. 6. c. 6. the council desire that at every mass the faithful will communicate not only with one spiritual affection but also by receive sacramental the eucharist nevertheless if they do not so yet it condemn not mass as private and unlawful but do approve and command they annotation when our saviour institute the holy sacrament he break the bread and deal the piece and command that other shall do the like the protestant do accuse the latin for do the contrary for their priest do break the host but deal not about the piece which be the principal end of break the great part of christian people use the communion and above all the rest those of Africa which be the reason that marnix say that they have the lord supper but not the mass nevertheless the latin do call the mass the ethiopique celebration as touch the name it be neither mass nor supper for they call it Codash and the bread be call by the abyssin Corbon if question be about the thing itself it seem that every thing ought to be consider according to his principal end and the principal end of the Codash of the Cophites and abyssin be the communion the which communion be not at all in the latin mass but the same mass have another special principal end to wit the sacrifice it follow that the Codash or celebration of the Corbon be the supper according to the say of marnix and not the mass as father coton the jesuite p p Sacr. imagine as for the cross wax candle cense and procession which be in use in the foresay celebration they change not the essence of the sacrament but rather it continue entire for all that splendour of ceremony a man may gather by that which have be speak that the voice of christian be well nigh divide into two part the armenian indian african and the protestant of the west do not celebrate without a communion but the latin and grecian do I put the grecian in this rank because that although their liturgy hold more of the sacrament then of the simple sacrifice yet they do approve or tolerate the liturgy without a communion nevertheless they say that it be not their intention but that it be the fault of the people who present not themselves although that they be summon thereunto and they forbear not to celebrate the liturgy for see that action have diverse end they think that although they can obtain the principal yet they ought not to omit the other unless peradventure some man will say that the liturgy be a sacrament to the priest and serve the people simple as a sacrifice but because that particular liturgy be not ordain by any universal council which the one half of christian or rather more have not and the greek church have only by toleration and that seldom it may be say that the liturgy ought not to be celebrate without a communion which be the principal end thereof question 31 whether the liturgy be a sacrifice expiatory and propitiatory and obtain the intercession of saint remedy for disease and such like thing the east church IEremie q q 1. Resp c. 13 this holy action be sanctify in two sort the one by mediation for gift present because that they be present do sanctify those that do offer they and those for who they be offer and do make they favour of God the other by receive for that be unto we the true bread and drink as Christ say of these two sort the first be common to the live and dead for this sacrifice be make as well for the one as for the other the other appertain to the live only for the dead can neither eat nor drink what then do not that sanctification which come by receive concern they and be their condition worse than that of the live that be not so for jesus Christ communicate himself unto they in a fashion best know to himself the canon of s. Basil be far more famous than the other wherein be a excellent prayer he make no mention in that liturgy of offer the body and blood of Christ much less to ransom by that deed the live or the dead or to apply it for other Sigismundus lib. in every temple there be but one altar the south church ZAga bishop of Ethiope r r dam. go we say no mass for the remission of sin or the redemption of soul but the dead be bury with cross and prayer aluares s s cap. 5. I have see they bury person of all quality in oneself same manner without any difference without say any mass either for the dead or for the good of those that be live the reform church the confession of Wittenberg t t ord c. 20 if it be necessary to speak of the commemoration of that only sacrifice and of the application of the merit thereof than the minister of the church do not only make a true and due commemoration of the expiatory sacrifice but also do apply the merit of this sacrifice Bucanus the oblation of the unbloody sacrifice do continue safe and sound with we whether one regard the benediction of the sign that be to say the recital of the institution of the lord and the explication thereof join with prayer by the which as s. cyprian say the passion of the son in some sort be offer to God his father or that by that sacrifice one understand the profession of the faith or the give of thanks or the contribution of alm the latin church the council of Trent u u Sess. 6. 3. if any man say that the sacrifice of the mass be only a sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving or only a commemoration of the sacrifice make on the cross and not propitiatory and that it profit he only that receive it and that none ought to offer it for the live and the dead and that it be a cozenage to celebrate the mass in the honour of saint and to obtain their intercession to God let he be accurse annotation this be a very hard point to be understand first it may be demand whether the eucharist be a sacrifice second what that be that be offer three whether it be expiatory four whether it profit they that communicate not five whether it may serve to obtain the intercession of saint first all christian people do hold it for a sacrifice yea the protestant marcyr Beza and Chemnitius Bucanus call it with the catholic church a sacrifice not bloody every one see plain that it be so if therefore the ancient father have ascribe unto this holy sacrifice the prophecy of Malachi and other they be not peradventure far wide from the intention of the prophet nevertheless if the principal end of this action be to be a sacrament the name of sacrament be more fit and convenient for it in a sacrifice one offer at the sacrament one receive here one receive not because he have not first offer but one offer to the end he may receive second the difference be not such in the thing which be offer one can offer but either gift or jesus Christ but he explain not his meaning which speak on this fashion that be to offer jesus Christ he be offer only once when upon the cross he beseech God that he will receive his passion then present in satisfaction for all the sin of the world moreover he be a continual intercessor for man and present to God not a new passion which may be the formal cause of expiation for that be once do and can be do again unless he shall die again but he offer a continual sacrifice of that passion in that he incessant entreat that God will receive that very same passion and to desire of God to receive or accept a thing be to offer it to he well then if man do beseech he that he will accept and receive the passion of jesus Christ they offer it he even as jesus Christ offer it he but with this difference that jesus Christ offer it by himself alone and immediate and man do it by the mean and intercession of the great sacrificer and by second his sacrifice and adjoin their own vow but some man will say hereupon it follow that in all prayer jesus Christ be offer the be that there be four sort of offering the first be that by the which jesus Christ offer himself in suffer on the cross then he beseech god either by express word or in silence that God will receive his passion there present second jesus Christ at his last supper by the break of the bread and by the distribute thereof represent his passion and obtain of God that the apostle may receive that expiation which be to be merit by his then approach passion in like manner he be offer in the eucharist and that fashion of offer by sign be call sacrifice 10 10 we speak with the voice the heart and by sign say Bellarmine in his 2. book and 30. chap. imag. three under the law they offer sacrifice which figure the passion of the lord and his only sacrifice but those be bare figure for the father although that they know that they shall be save by the Messiah yet they know not altogether or at least clear that the same shall be accomplish by his sacrifice upon the cross and passion of our saviour it be to be see that the apostle themselves even after that they have be instruct can not conceive this in their heart and soul so that the ancient in sacrifice intend not to offer the only sacrifice of the passion of Christ four there be a mental sacrifice which be make every time that one beseech God to receive the sacrifice of jesus Christ but because that there be no visible thing therein neither the passion of jesus Christ nor the representative ceremony thereof therefore it be not proper call a sacrifice it seem that this before may be agree upon as well by the latin as by the protestant but behold here the difference the liturgy and among the rest that of the roman church do not explicate this point clear but say indistinct that God receive jesus Christ so that one can know whether it must be understand that God be entreat to receive or except the action present by the priest be consider in himself or whether one desire that God will receive the sacrifice of jesus Christ represent by the action of the priest moreover one can know whether he ought to understand that God receive jesus Christ consider in his passion or consider as he be believe to be in the hand of the priest for if a man pretend to offer he in this last fashion that will not be to present or represent the ancient and only sacrifice but to make another and of another quality although that it be the very same host and it be this very point that the epistle to the hebrew do contradict say Heb. 10. 5. to the 15. that jesus Christ offer not himself again that be to say consider in the estate wherein he be at this present but yet he offer himself as he be consider in the sacrifice of his passion always present before God that beforesaid which of other man may have be better explain be well and true distinguish may take away the offence rise thereupon but it be not in these day that these word of offering jesus Christ have trouble the christian world Peucer y y Chronol. li. 4 ca. Manuel write that in the time of the emperor Manuel comnenus this very same thing be debate in Greece even as it be here with we now a day in this time say he be argue that question touch the oblation which be make in the mass for the live and the dead some man do dispute of the canon of the greek which speak more strict than the latin that be to say that in the mass the son of God offer himself to his father and be offer by the hand of the priest and whosoever contradict that fiction be depose and banish hereby a man may see that many have believe that the meaning of the liturgy be that jesus Christ be offer be consider so as he be believe to be there which be take in that sense can be true and it be nothing to the purpose to say that because he be offer therefore it be necessary that he shall be there real and material for saint irenaeus z z aduer cap. 34. say that our altar be in heaven and likewise the host jesus Christ be also very near to God and the same Christ consider in his only sacrifice be in heaven as he be on the earth say it be true that all the foresay christian do think as it have be say that the matter which be the matter of bread be the matter of the flesh of jesus Christ in this fashion it may be say to be present in the sacrament but that be not of the essence of that sacrifice so as the church pretend when I name the church I do imagine that the doctor and teacher thereof if they have not well explain themselves will do it better hereafter three there be no great difficulty in the demand that be whether that sacrifice be expiatory and propitiatory if it be mean in that sense as prayer be call propitiatory there be no danger the publican say be merciful o God unto i a poor sinner this be do God be merciful unto he he receive remission and forgiveness of his sin and obtain all this by his prayer a man obtain no less in the sacrament four some man may ask whether the liturgy profit they that communicate not the africane be altogether for the protestant for they say no mass neither for the live nor for the dead as for the grecian they make no great matter for those that communicate not but admit that they say for they particular or that they do comprehend they in the public liturgy they distinguish and that very well say that in the liturgy there must be two thing consider first the prayer and gift which be present that say they do profit those which communicate not the protestant confess the same for they themselves in the prayer of the liturgy do pray for man well then to pray give and offer in the church to obtain God grace for another be a deed which can be evil all which be grant for those that be alive and communicate not for as concern the dead the grecian mean those that be in paradise as hereafter shall be declare therein they be not approve neither by the roman catholic nor by the protestant see neither the one nor the other pray for the saint which be in paradise now remain the principal point yea all the sacrament to wit the break and the receive thereof the grecian do secret confess that it be not institute to the end that those which eat and drink thereof shall obtain by that eat and drink any benefit for those that do neither eat nor drink thereof which be as much as to say that private mass be abuse be consider as a sacrifice and sacrament but yet that they profit those for who they be say in consideration of the prayer and gift nevertheless lest all shall seem to be attribute unto this holy sacrament they say that the same do very profit but God know how their irresolution be join with the practice of the church of Africa and of India do give we good occasion to gather that the great part do hold that such liturgy profit those nothing which communicate not whether live or dead unless only in consideration of the prayer which there be make five the question be to know whether the holy sacrament and sacrifice be institute to obtain the intercession of saint the heal of disease and such like if all this be beside and against the intention of jesus Chrrist it be manifest that it be a abuse to convert it to other use the council of Trent do excommunicate those that hold this to be evil it will be know whether this council be allow by the apostolic church the grecian a a 1. Resp c. 13 say that in their liturgy they make mention and remembrance of the saint but this be not to say that they think that the liturgy be ordain to that end likewise although that the armenian do kiss and salute one another in the liturgy yet no man will impute unto they that they do believe that it be institute for to kiss and salute one another if the roman catholic can show that the foresay nation do say their liturgy of purpose for to obtain thereby the intercession of saint it be a hazard but they will be find alone in that opinion attend to see if that will be we will here conclude as well upon this last article as upon the precedent and will say that the liturgy which the latin call the mass and the protestant the lord supper be a sacrifice wherein the communicant by the receive of the sacrament and prayer do obtain forgiveness of their sin and by their prayer and offering and not by the communion do profit those that communicate not but this sacrifice be not institute to obtain the intercession of the saint nor for any other use question 32 whether we ought to use in the church a unknown language as latin or any other and whether the people ought to read the holy scripture or hear it read the east churches BElon b b li. 3. ca. 12. when the priest in Armenia read the gospel the attendant do salute one another both on the right hand and on the left every one understanding the armenian tongue in which language it be always read Vilamont c c li. 2. ca. 22. the jacobite do use many language according to the several province where they inhabit have nevertheless one particular language which they use only in divine service but what language it be I can not discover d d li. 2. ca. 23. the nestorian use the chaldean language in their liturgy or divine service and in their scripture e e the armenian can speak diverse language but in their divine service mass prayer and ceremony they use the armenian tongue which be understand both of man and woman throughout all their country nichol. f f li. 4. ca. 36. the grecian do celebrate the liturgy in their own language to the end the common people may be able to understand they Vilamont the maronites do use the pure syrian tongue in their divine service Thevet g g Cos l. 9 c. 12. the moscovite have few preacher content themselves only with the lecture which the priest make every Sunday who read unto they the gospel and epistle of the apostle and the book of learned man in a language that they understand the priest in Russia do consecrate with the word speak by jesus Christ but it be only in the language of the country the south church THevet h h Cos l. 2. c. 14 I have see many bishop and have hear their mass which they say in the abyssin language the which be very near the arabic yea in the character themselves aluares i i cap. ult. all their book whereof the number be great be of parchment for they have no other paper and their scripture be read in the tigique tongue which be Abyssin the first country that receive the doctrine of the gospel the reform church Calvin k k Just. l. 3. c. 20. 33. it be evident that public prayer ought to be pronounce not in greek among the latin neither in latin among the frenchman and englishman as heretofore have be use but in the vulgar tongue to the end that they may be understand by the people for it be convenient that all be do in the church to edification for no man receive any fruit from a unknown language the LATIN church the council of Trent l l Sess. 6. c. 8. albeit the mass do contain much instruction for faithful people neveruerthelesse it seem not expedient to the father that it shall be celebrate every where in the vulgar tongue annotation in the catholic church of the east west north and south be manifest accomplish that scripture which say that all language do confess the Lord the church of Rome only say the protestant labour to hinder the same they will not permit the mass nor any part of divine service to be celebrate in the french tongue in France and which be more they have bring their latin service into America but the people can say m m 1. cor. 14. 16. amen to any purpose if they understand not that which be say in the church their vow and their intention can be join together with those of the priest the priest and the people which speak a language unknown and barbarous each to other may think one thing and say another behold here the confusion likewise one may gather by the place or sentence before allege that the foresay apostolic church prohibit not at all the read of the holy scripture for if it be permit to the laic yea command to be present at the read thereof be write in the vulgar tongue it follow that they may read it also in private there be roman catholic which on the contrary side do abhor and hate the same their doctor and teacher n n alph. hare not be ashamed to say that the translation of the holy scripture into the vulgar tongue be the mother of heresy but there be many catholic in the church of Rome which be not of this opinion and who read attentive the holy scripture imitate therefore the practice of the catholic church we will say that the language of the country ought to be use in every church and that it be good to read the holy scripture and to hear they read in the vulgar tongue question 33 whether the ordination of the minister of the church do depend on the pope of Rome the east church IEremie Patriarch o o 1. Resp c. 14 ordination be no further respect of we than the holy canon have prescribe and as touch the ordination of a bishop the first canon of the apostle teach we thus that a bishop be ordain by two or three bishop and a priest by a bishop in like manner the deacon and the rest nichol. p p lib. 4. c. 36. the four patriarch be create and elect by the metropolitan of the province who above all other thing take great care to elect he who be among they the maturest in year wisdom and holiness Gagninus q q Desc sar. rel. Mosc all the metropolitan of the ruthenian and moscovite have their authority from the patriarch of Constantinople and in the begin the metropolitan be elect and choose by the judgement and consent of the bishop and abbot and of all the spiritual order but now the great duke of Moscovia have this authority Thevet r r Cosm. li. 10. cap. 14. within the island of Gezert do the patriarch of the sect of the nestorian make his residence and also there the chief bishop reside be ordain to give order of priesthood and ministry according to the persuasion and custom of the nestorian the south church aluares s s cap. 34. the patriarch of the great negus who be over all Aethiopia be call Abuna without who there be none find which have authority to make priest but by he alone the reform church du plessis t t treatise of the church cap. 11. if our adversary ask we what be the vocation of those first minister which undertake the reformation of the church in these last day we will answer that it be the very same vocation and succession whereof they brag but that vocation which they abuse our man have well use and to the vain succession which they so much stand upon we have add the succession of true doctrine without the which all succession be but continuance of abuse and a vain title for John Hus Luther Oecolampadius Bucer capito martyr and other out of who school the minister be come forth be priest curate and doctor in divinity I forbear to speak of archbishop bishop and cardinal in Germany England Italy and France the LATIN church the canon u u Priu tit 33. 23. renew the ancient privilege of the patriarchal seat we do ordain that after the roman church which by the dispose of God obtain the principality of the ordinary power and authority over all the rest as a mother and mistress of all the faithful child of Christ that of Constantinople have the first place that of Alexandria the second that of Antiochia the three and that of jerusalem the four reserve for each one her proper dignity in such sort that after that their prelate have receive the pall or robe of 10 10 the bishop of Rome the which be the livery of the plenitude of the pontifical office and make unto he the oath of obedience and fidelity they likewise have licence to give the foresay pall to their receive of they the canonical profession and take of they promise of obedience to the church of Rome annotation the question be not here to know in what part of Christendom the true succession and ordination be to be find and which be the church that have it not this can be find out by the tradition of the church and the great number thereof for every one several do condemn in general and in particular all the rest it be sufficient to know whether they believe that it be necessary for bishop and priest to take their ordination from one head or chief whosoever he be it may be gather out of the author afore allege that they do think that the apostle have leave successor behind they in all part and quarter those successor have power to ordain bishop nevertheless for order sake the church have give particular charge and authority to the patriarch and metropolitan to ordain other bishop also the bishop of Constantinople jerusalem Antiochia Alexandria and other have equal authority every one in his own quarter and they be install into their charge by those of their quarter without encroach one upon another also those of the clergy of England have their odinay and lawful ordination for if the church of England do voluntary submit itself to receive ordination and confirmation from the church of Rome she may challenge her ancient right touch the pastor and evangelical doctor of other place the roman catholic do think they as much or rather more intrude without vocation see that Luther and themselves and other be no bishop and consequent exclude by their canon from the power to ordain but the answer be that indeed a priest alone as a priest can ordain but a priest authorize by a company of priest may for he have the place and power of the body of the Presbetery if a company of priest can make a priest a bishop the pope can not be a lawful bishop of Rome for he be not make bishop of Rome but by priest and cardinal deacon that be to say the princpal of the church of Rome it follow therefore that ordination depend not upon a universal head but only upon the patriarch or metroplitanes of every place question 34 whether priest and deacon may marry as well by God law as by ecclesiastical law the east churches THevet y y li. 10. c. 15. the priest in India be marry and nevertheless cease not to execute their duty and office item z z li. 8. ca. 15. the priest of the armenian be marry as all the rest of the east country item a a li. 4. ca. 2. no man be make deacon in Moscovia that be not marry nevertheless he be not permit to marry twice and he that marry twice remain among the lay people and he that remain continent although he can sacrifice by reason of age yet do he assist at the sacrifice b b li. 2 ca. 22. in Syria the priest be marry as in Greece in brief they do imitate very near the use and custom of the grecian Scarga c c past lib. 2. cap. 12. the russian and moscovite admit no man to be priest that have not a wife Thevet d d lib. 7. ca. 3. in Cyprus the bishop have in all age be marry as well as the priest the south church ZAga e e damn go mor. Aethiop the reason why priest be marry with we be because that saint Paul think it better both for the clergy and Laity to marry then to burn he himself say that a bishop ought to be the husband of one wife irreprehensible and sober and the deacon likewise item the bishop and priest can marry twice unless the patriarch will dispense with they aluares f f cap 26. it be demand of i in the presence of Prester-Iohn wherefore we do not observe the statute of the holy council of nice see therein it be ordain that priest shall marry and a little after he say thus beside his majesty cause i to speak more concern the marriage of priest ask i if it be ever know that the apostle be marry whereunto I answer that I remember not that ever they marry any woman after that they be call by jesus Christ and although that saint Peter have a daughter that be before such time as he be of the number of the apostle but they tell i that their book do command that they shall marry the which express saint Peter have in charge the reform church the confession of England g g Art. 7. we say that marriage be holy and honourable in all kind of people and each estate and as saint Chrysostome say that it be lawful for a marry man to mount up to the episcopal chair the LATIN church pope Lucius h h Dist 81. let such minister priest and deacon of the altar be choose for the service of the lord as observe and keep continency annotation the latin do note above all the rest that the christian of the east south and north be contrary to they in this point as well as the protestant the vulgar think that there be no other difference the foresay people notwithstanding do differ from the protestant in this one point that be to say that they never receive or admit any into the government of the chrurch but only those man that be marry this have be practise in all age peradventure the church have have respect to that which s. Paul say that a wise bishop must govern well his own family so that they will have none but age and approve man and whereas they admit not they that be twice marry it be because they want not convenient and fit man for that charge unto the which the most continent be prefer one may therefore say that church man may marry both by divine law and by ecclesiastical law but can marry twice and continue in their office without dispensation question 35 whether there be more than three order in the church that be to say bishop priest and deacon the east church ALlphonsus de Castro i i lib. 13. the grecian as Guido say beside the sacred order admit not any inferior order but only reader and they say that the other that be to say exorcist porter and acoluthyte ought not to be account among the order the armenian acknowledge but three order that be to say bishop priest and deacon the south church aluares k k cap. 34. there assemble a great multitude of people to receive imposition of hand of the Abuna for no other but he can give they order the say Abuna make a exhortation unto they in the form of a sermon than he cause they to pass through a tent wherein he be and make every one of they read on a book and if they can read he cause they to pass on further and upon those that be examine and be find capable he impose his hand and they be ordain deacon the reform church the confession of the frenchman l l Art. 20. as touch the true church we do believe that it ought to be govern according to the policy which our lord jesus Christ have establish that be to say that there be pastor elder and deacon to the end that purity of doctrine may have his full scope and course that vice may be correct and repress and that the poor and all that be afflict may be succour the LATIN church ISidorus m m Dist 21. all those that serve in Christ his church be call general clerk who name and degree be these the doorkeeper psalmist exorcist Acolythit subdeacon deacon priest and bishop and the order of bishop be four to wit patriarch archbishop metropolitan and bishop annotation first the church be compose of clerk so call of the word which signify heritage because that they be after a special fashion dedicate to the service of God and of the laic that be to say those of the common people so call because that they be the great part thereof of clerk some be bishop that be to say superintendant other priest that be to say elder other deacon that be to say dispenser second there be five degree of bishop according to the five sort of assembly or resort the parson or curate which reside in parish for so be the particular church in time past n n euseb l. 2. c. p. 1. call yea the great the bishop of the diocese govern the presbytery or the senate of the diocese the metropolitan in the provincial synod the patriarch in the synod of nation and the Oecumenicke or general as they call the bishop of Constantinople at this day which ought to preside or rule in general synod the bishop be consider without jurisdiction be by divine law let all thing be do in order say s. Paul if he be consider with jurisdiction and out of assembly he be by positive law let the bishop know say saint o o in epist tit. cap. 1. and Jerome that they be great than the priest more by the custom of the church then by divine institution this word more show that he acknowledge a certain divine authority in they therefore the bishop in the charge of rule or govern be successor of the apostle and evangelist for after they this charge fall to the most ancient pastor of every church one may gather by all likelihood that it be of such bishop which be speak in the Apocalypse write to the angel of Ephesus write to the angel of Pergamus but by and by afterward a man hold it better that the second sort of clerk be the elder whereof some be preacher and doctor and do all that which the bishop do the other do teach the rudiment or principle of religion but not in public p p ign. epist which if they befound fit to do they be call q q Dion eccl. hier. cap. 5. and have power to administer the sacrament have sufficient instruction contain in the formulary of the church these elder be call pape in Greece the russian have few preacher but only these r r Thevet 19 12. pape they be very profitable and necessary for little church and for the mean sort of people which get more instruction from a simple catechism then from a learned sermon they find many man capable of this office and use to choose those that be good and approve people and which be no charge to the church in Aethiope say s s lib. 2. c. 14. Thevet the priest after that they have say divine service do go to work to get their live see that the revenue which they have be not sufficient to nourish they and their family for they give not such donation to the church there as they do in these quarter of these priest the nouvelle 123. make mention we permit not that any priest be make which be not five and thirty year of age and s. Paul t t tim. 5. 17. say the priest that rule well be worthy of double honour especial they which labour in the word and doctrine the three sort of clerk be the deacon their office be to serve at the table or altar as well in the receive of the gift or offering as in the celebration of the liturgy four the laic do also employ themselves in ecclesiastical affair princess themselves do rule over the clergy of their dominion the elder of the people be in time past counsellor to the bishop saint Ambrose think it not good that man shall lose any benefit of time those of the clergy have since that cast away this precept altogether the laic which serve in the church be the subdeacon reader singer porter Acolytes labourer and diaconiss these according to the council of Nice ought not to be account among the clerk there be no monk in time past as concern the office of subdeacon lecturer etc. they have be in several time and place establish in a formal office yea and that with ceremony nevertheless and yet this be the question whereof divine do here dispute the catholic church do believe that these little office be not sacramental that be to say neither by divine nor apostolic institution question 36 whether there be a indelible or perpetual character imprint in the soul of clerk that do restrain they from become lay-man again the east churches GAgnin u u Desc sar. if any priest that be a widower do marry with another woman which be at liberty he be deprive of his charge and must not communicate with the clergy the south church aluares 10 10 Desc Aeth if it happen that a marry priest do accompany with another woman he shall be prohibit to enter into the church because that the lay-people enter not within or do not enter within the closet where the clerk be and shall not participate of their revenue this I know to be true because that I see one which be call before the patriarch for be find a bed with a woman the which he can not deny and confess the same in my presence for punishment whereof he be forbid to carry any more the cross in his hand and condemn to take upon he the estate of a secular man moreover if a priest that be a widower do happen to marry with a woman that be to say without dispensation as Zaga say he must remain among the lay people Alphonsus de Castro y y the armenian do hold that in the sacrament of order there be no grace bestow which they hold likewise of the rest of the sacrament the reform church the ecclesiastical discipline of the frenchman z z cap. 1. the minister shall be depose and degrade that teach false doctrine if after that they have be sufficient advertise they do not desist the latin church the council of Trent a a Sess. 7. ca. 4. forasmuch as in this sacrament of order be imprint a character which can be deface raise out or take away as in baptism and in confirmation the holy council have just occasion to reject as damnable the opinion of those which say that priest have a power which endure only for a time and that they may retire back again into their first estate and condition of Lay people annotation this before speak show the consent of four church against the council of Trent it be true that the grecian in their answer to the divine of Wittemberge do speak of a spragis a seal or mark interpret it a character peradventure willing to persuade man that the foresay church do hold with the roman church that in the soul of clerk there be a indelible and perpetual character so sure imprint that after their death it may be know it appear not that they have this opinion howsoever it be both they and the africane do hold the opinion which the council of Trent do call damnable to wit that there be not any such indelible or perpetual character which hinder a clergy man to take again upon he the estate of a secular man question 37 whether that the anoint of the sick be a sacrament and whether the observation thereof be now necessary the east church SAcranus b b Eluc c. 2. the russian do say that the sacrament of extreme unction can give any remedy against the stain of sin and that s. james speak of unction do mean that it be only to help and cure bodily infirmity Vilamont c c lib. 2. c. 2d the grecian do deny the sacrament of confirmation and extreme unction the south CHURHCES the confession of Zaga d d dam. goe it be to be note that with we confirmation and the chrism or the oil of extreme unction be not hold for sacrament nay they be not in use as I see here they be in these part according to the custom of the church of Rome aluares e e cap. 5. the abyssin use neither chrism nor oil of extreme unction the reform church the confession of the switzer f f cap. 19 confirmation and extreme unction be man invention whereof the church may rid itself without any damage and we have they not in our church the latin church the council of Trent g g Sess. 4. c. 1. this holy unction or anoint of the sick be institute by our lord jesus Christ as a true and proper sacrament of the new testament the virtue of this sacrament be the grace of the holy ghost the unction whereof serve to wipe out the guilt of sin if there be any as yet to purge annotation saint james command to anoint the sick cap. 5. 5. and to pray for they and add that prayer by faith bring health and remission of sin here be a difference between the roman catholic church and the reform church the church of Africa and Asia which do use it be manifest on the protestant part as touch the greek church those that have travel those part do protest unto we that this unction or anoint be not also in use there nevertheless jeremy write that they hold it until this present time as a mystery it be peradventure likely that the use of oil have be deliver by some one or other of the apostle but it be clear that it be ordain by s. james it be his tradition which since his time have be observe of we those of that country do tell we that they hold it not necessary and therefore it be not use although they hold it as a mystery to fill up the tale of the seven holy number witness that in his time which be but a hundred year since the moscovite and consequent the grecian do believe that this oil be only to heal disease but because that jeremy say that it serve for the body and the soul and allege for it the very text of saint james one may easy reconcile that place in say that the unction proper regard corporal disease nevertheless consequent it be a mark of remission because that God give not the one without the other and therefore a man may by this which have be speak gather that the meaning of the church be that the anoint of the sick be one of the seven mystery nevertheless the use thereof be not at this time necessary in regard that the same be purposely institute for the miraculous heal of disease question 38 whether there be seven mystery in the church and whether that two of they may be call sacrament the east churches IEremie y y 1. Resp Conf Ausb cap. 7. in the catholic church of the orthodox christian there be seven mystery or celebration that be to say baptism the anoint with holy oil the holy communion imposition of hand marriage repentance and holy oil the south church the confession of Zaga z z dam. goe it be to be note that with we confirmation and chrism or the oil of extreme unction be not hold for sacrament the LATIN church the council of Trent a a Sess. 7. ca. 1 if any man say that the sacrament of the new law have not be all institute by our lord jesus Christ or that there be more or less than seven that be to say baptism confirmation eucharist penance extreme unction order and marriage or that any one of they be not true and proper a sacrament let he be accurse the reform church the confession of England b b (...) we do acknowledge two sacrament which ought to be call by that name that be to say baptism and the eucharist annotation here be a question concern the word sacrament and mystery as touch the word sacrament no christian nation be hold to use it for it be ground neither upon divine law nor ecclesiastical catholic law the word be latin and the catholic church never speak latin but only greek in the universal counsel if therefore the protestant will call none sacrament but baptism and the eucharist they do nothing either against God or against the church but these two ceremony be by they esteem so holy and so authentical and to have such prerogative that they think it meet and reasonable to call they by some peculiar name first because that they be common to all those of the church second because that they have a visible substance or matter ordain by jesus Christ and three because that the holy scripture do attribute very much unto they but some will say the protestant be contrary to the east church both in the name and in the thing itself for that church believe that there be seven mystery here be to be note that as concern the word mystery the protestant have not as yet put it in use and have not define what that be which may be call mystery that word with they be further extend than the word sacrament and which be yet more they confess that the word sacrament may be take more large and they protest that they will never be superstitious about word Chemnitius say that it be never yet stand upon but that absolution of penitent may be call a sacrament Calvin say that imposition of hand in any ordination may be call a sacrament and the apology of the confession of Ausburg say the very same confirmation be command in the canon of the english church and Calvin desire that it may be use and practise the anoint or unction of the sick be likewise a sacrament yea even at this time as de Moulin b b in his answer to the demand say for the reason wherefore it be not use be because that man see not the effect of those day as concern marriage if it be likewise take simple they never call it a sacrament it be common both to the jew turk and pagan but if one speak of the marriage of christian consider as it be contract and bless in the face of the church it may be call as the patriarch jeremy call it a mystery or a mysterious action and a holy celebration and if all or the most part of ecclesiastical action may be call sacrament then more proper may they by they be call mystery for although that the word of God in itself be also call a mystery yet more particular when it be employ in some holy action the church of Africa hold not for sacrament neither the chrism nor the oil of extreme unction as zaga-zabo one of their own bishop and aluares who dwell many year in Aethiope do witness these man be more credible than titleman and such like who never be there peradventure the abyssin will expound they according to the belief of they of the east but see that here be nothing controvert but word it will be no inconvenience to make this conclusion that there be seven celebration in the church the which be call mystery and two principal b b (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) which may be call sacrament question 39 whether it be lawful or needful to pray for the saint which be in paradise the east church lord have mercy upon we remember the saint which have please thou from the beginning our holy father the patriarch prophet apostle martyr confessor evangelist preacher and all the righteous which be dead in the faith and especial the holy bless and ever-virgine Marie saint John Baptist and saint Stephan the protomartyr the south church the liturgy of Cyrill of Alexandria o lord have pity upon our father and brother who soul thou have receive give they rest call to remembrance our holy father the patriarch prophet apostle and above all the rest the holy and glorious virgin Marie saint John Baptist and saint Stephan grant o lord that the of soul they all may rest and repose in the bosom of our holy father Abraham Isaac and jacob grant that their soul may inhabit and dwell in a green place by the water of comfort in the paradise of pleasure from whence grief heaviness and sigh be chase away raise their body in the day which thou have ordain according to thy true promise which can fail the LATIN church BEllarmine c c Sanct. beat. the first question be whether the soul of the faithful separate from their body and such as have no need of purgatory be admit to enjoy the felicity which consist in the clear vision of God this have be the opinion of ancient and modern heretic that they be reserve until the last day in some secret receptacle where they see not God and be not bless but in hope Tertullian affirm it first Vigilantius follow he Guido attribute the same to the armenian the grecian hold it in the council of Florence Luther hold the very same error and Calvin d d instit l. 4. 20 also who bring no argument to prove it the reform church the council of Wittenberg e e cha. 24. mem. def. the state be all one of a saint which be at rest in Christ and a faithful man that die for he that die in the faith be a saint we do think it a thing agreeable to a godly soul to make a honest mention of his elder depart in the faith charity require that we wish and desire to the dead all tranquillity and felicity in Christ but there be no testimony in the prophetical and apostolical doctrine that the dead be help by prayer watch and merit or that they obtain in heaven a great felicity thereby annotation BEllarmine tell we that the church of Greece and Armenia do believe that until the day of judgement the saint do not enjoy that perfect felicity which be call the vision or sight of God they think say f f l. 2. ch. 21. Vilamont that there be none there but the virgin Marie and peradventure the good thief and that the rest be in certain chamber where the angel wont to visit they they will say lodging whereof our saviour speak in my father house be many mansion the africane do believe the same as may be gather by their liturgy Bellarmine attribute the same to Calvin as for the syrian their error say Villamont be not so great as these of the grecian for they believe that the righteous be in paradise and the wicked in hell and that in pray for the dead their pain be diminish albeit there be no place to purge soul the anaphore of the syrian g g Anaph d. Basil say thus o lord creator of soul and body remember those that be depart out of this world refresh they in thy tabernacle pass they thither from horrible lodging draw they out of darkness and dolour in like manner the opinion of the apostolic church be contrary both to the roman catholic and to the protestant but it be a curious question for they hold that the saint which be in heaven do not enjoy the vision or sight of God until the last day and that we ought to pray for they that be request that God will put they in a clear place or that he will keep they if they be his own or that he will raise they in the last day or that he will pardon they at the day of the h h 1. mach. 12 resurrection question 40 whether the saint do understand or see by reason of the vision or sight of God or by any other mean the prayer and affair of those that be upon the earth and whether it be lawful for they of this world to recommend themselves to their prayer the east churches IEremie Patriarch general i i 1. Resp c. 21 invocation agree proper to God alone and appertain to he both chief and very peculiar but that which be do to the saint be not proper due to they but if it may be so say rather by accident and grace for neither Peter nor Paul understand nor hear those that call upon they but it be (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) the spirit of charity that be in they according to that which be speak by the lord I will be with you until the consummation of the world the south church the liturgy of the ethiopian rejoice o lady for we will pray for thy health o virgin at all time mother of God and of Christ carry up our prayer on high unto the ear of thy son to the end that our sin may be pardon rejoice o lady for thou have bring forth unto we the true light jesus Christ pray for we unto he to the end that he may have pity upon our soul o thou good minister s. Paul the healer of disease which have receive the crown pray for we that our soul may be deliver through the multitude of the mercy of jesus Christ the latin church the council of Trent k k Sess. 9 Decr. 2. the holy council do command all bishop and all other who have charge to teach that they instruct the faithful concern the intercession and invocation of saint teach they that the saint do offer their prayer to God for man and that it be a thing both good and profitable to call upon they humble and to have our refuge to their prayer the reform church the apology of the confession of Ausburg l l of the invocation of saint we do confess that the angel do pray for we yea even in particular as in in Zacharie cap. 1. the angel pray thus o lord of host how long will thou be unmerciful to jerusalem melancton m m Langaeum if we must needs retain some intercession by reason of the custom receive albeit that the same be dangerous nevertheless it will be determine whether it ought to be constitute in that form which be in the ancient prayer of the church where invocation be make to God and not to saint and yet there be mention make of some intercession for it be certain that the saint in heaven do pray for the church in general as godly man do in this world the confession of Wittenberg n n invo^ cap. 2d the angel do pray to God for we in some sort but for all the prayer of the saint which be in heaven we must not take occasion thereby to call upon the saint for in the holy scripture there be neither commandment nor example thereof and see that it be necessary that he that be call upon shall be a searcher of the heart the saint ought not to be call upon annotation behold here two question the one concern faith or belief the other concern the practice of the church first a man may demand whether the saint do understand our prayer the roman catholic church do answer that they understand they in the vision or sight of God as in a glass the belief of the east church be contrary which say that the saint do not understand any thing at all and indeed as it have be say in the precedent question they believe not that the saint do enjoy perfect felicity in the vision of God but rather they hold with the reform church which do abhor this invocation of saint especial because the church of Rome do attribute unto they that which appertain to God and which God never communicate to any creature whatsoever to wit to have a habitual knowledge of the thought of man for if any prophet have have by revelation any knowledge the same be by a extraordinary dispensation s. o o pre Augustine say that if the saint have any care of the live it be even as the live have care of they to wit the one not have any particular knowledge of the estate of the other second the other question be to know whether it be lawful for a man to recommend himself to the prayer of the saint here they commit three logomachies the first be in the word to invocate or invocation which sound so ill in the ear of the protestant that they therefore do abhor all other christian jeremy bishop of Constantinople avouch that this word be improper it rest only then to find out a word more please and fit well then thus it must be to recommend a man self to the prayer of saint be to attribute unto they some divine matter but on the contrary side it confess they to be creature subject to the creator nay it be to debase they when a man do desire they to pray for he which be as much as to endeavour to stir up their piety and charity the second logomachia be in the word intercessor which they use for want of another to signify he that pray for another Bellarmine himself confess that jesus Christ be the only intercessor and therefore if the saint be hear it be by reason of jesus Christ the intercessor as well for the live as for the dead in like manner the saint dead and live be in the same rank and the saint depart be intercessor unto jesus Christ himself for the live the three variance in word be in that the grecian and the latin do pray thus saint Peter help we our lady have pity upon we we Bellarmine say that this be as if one shall say saint peter help we through thy prayer but the protestant will that man shall speak plain and they be as far from receive these term as the latin be little dispose to correct their hour or the grecian their horologe for so they call their book of prayer it appear not that the aethiopian use this manner of speech yea Hondius in his cosmographical cart or map say that they do in no wise call upon the saint Aluares neither say not that they do which he will hardly have forget if it have be so so that if they have no other invocation but that which be find in their liturgy a man may think that these be rather apostrophe and prosopopaeaes to stir they up to devotion then true invocatition as also the protestant do sing with the psalmist praise God you angel of great power you angel of God which do all that he command as soon as you hear his voice as for other matter two thing be object against this invocation or exhortation of saint practise by the grecian armenian and other of the east the one that it be a idle and unprofitable interpellation see that the saint understand not at all those that pray unto they whereunto they answer that the spirit of charity which they have understand the prayer and know the thought of man and that this spirit be promise they until the end of the world it seem that by this word (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) which they use they mean the holy ghost dwell in the faithful for the patriarch Gennade take it in this sense in that place of scripture which we have allege in the preface of this treatise where it be say that all the apostle have oneself same teacher to wit (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) so that the opinion of the grecian shall be this that it be good to recommend our soul to the prayer of saint because that the holy ghost which dwell in they and which understand the prayer of they that be live do move the saint to pray for they the other objection be that there be no commandment of God to recommend a man self to the prayer of the dead they answer that God command the friend of job to go unto job to pray he to pray to God for they and that there be no impediment why a man may not do the like to the saint that be dead the great argument herein be the custom receive from antiquity in the catholic church the intention or meaning thereof now a day be that the saint do not understand the prayer of the live nevertheless it be lawful for we to recommend ourselves to their prayer because that the holy ghost the spirit of charity which dwell in they do induce they to pray for the live either in general or in particular for those that recommend themselves to their prayer question 41 whether those that have be canonize by the pope be true saint the east church THevet p p Cos lib. 10. cap. 15. as concern the saint of the latin church which we reverence the indian acknowledge none of they except the apostle and prophet nor the grecian and javians likewise q q lib. 18. 10 the grecian do keep holy the festival day of saint as well as we not for that they acknowledge those which the latin and the church of Rome do reverence r r they speak ill of the saint of the catholic church and faith under the roman obedience Gagninus they reject the saint of the church of Rome and do hold they for great heretic the south church Thevet s s lib. 10. 15. the abyssin do acknowledge but very few of our saint honour in our church except Catherine by reason that her body be in mount Sinai saint Anthony a egyptian and s. Helen except also the virgin Marie who name be acknowledge throughout the universal world the reform church CHemnitius t t ven. Sanct. those of the church of Rome do worship many saint which never live as George Christopher and catharine this say have be use in the church of Rome that in earth man do worship the relic of many who soul do burn in hell they be worthy of the hate of all good man though there be no other reason but this that they have deprave by their fable the history of the life and death of the saint which doubtless be very full of true doctrine and consolation the LATIN church the gloss of the canon Gloriosus u u and Ven. the pope alone have power not only to extol some among the saint but also to canonize they first because it be one of the great matter that can be propound among christian second because miracle be attribute unto faith three because that if it appertain unto the pope to determine those thing that be doubtful in the scripture then by far great reason ought he to judge of holiness four to the end that the people shall not be deceive through the simplicity of many bishop and fifthly to the end there shall not be a infinite number of saint lest that thereby devotion shall grow cold annotation it be a thing confess that particular church may err namely in the canonize of 10 10 Bellar. Sanct. beat lib. 1. cap. 18. saint and by tradition of the catholic church the church of Rome ought to be hold for a particular church this above write do show that the most part of christian do not hold for saint those which the pope have canonize if any man say that the church can err I will answer that from thence it follow that it can be that she can undertake to canonize they who she never do while they be in their body the church can make a new article of Faith pope Leo the three say Bellarmine be the first which canonize saint before they be honour by custom and not by law the same be retain as yet in the east country where they name none saint but those ancient which live about a thousand year ago there be none in those church which think themselves able to know who those be who God have choose not because that none ought to hold for saint those who holiness the ancient church do acknowledge it will be worse to doubt it then dangerous to believe it charitable that which induce the protestant to say that Catherine George and Christopher never live be the falsehood of their legend Bellarmine confess that they be they of the east do believe that there be a certain man name Christopher but no giant they hold likewise that there have be a s. Catherine and a s. George both very renown in all the east but if credible history do contradict the story of their life it may well be say that they be not to wit such as they be imagine to have be to end see that the church have every one the memory of the saint who have live in their country the sure way be not to condemn they without good and sufficient proof nevertheless it be not a article of faith that they shall be all saint no nor those neither of the church of Rome for all the church do believe that those which the pope canonize be not undoubted saint question 42 whether it be lawful to paint God to bow or kneel before idol or image to bow the head or uncover it before church cross or picture of saint or when we take in hand holy relic and the book of the holy scripture the east churches DAmascen a greek doctor y y lib. 4. ca. 8. who can make a image of God who be invisible incorporal and incircumscriptible it be a great folly and impiety to seek to give a shape to he who be divine z z Eluc ca. 2. the russian do abhor the image of the roman catholic and do dishonour they as much as they can the moscovite have no image in their church but the picture of saint Nicholas and the virgin Marie they handle not the book of the holy scripture without bow their body many time in make the sign of the cross jeremy general patriarch a a 2. answer to the confession of Ausburg none ought to reprehend we if we incline or bow ourselves before the image of saint for we do bow as well before the one as before the other because that they be make after the image of God and saint Basile say that the honour of the image do ascend unto the first pattern and the israelite do kneel round about the tabernacle which bear the image of celestical thing and of all the creation the south churches aluares b b cap. ult. within their church be to be see many ancient remembrance of saint which be not upon the altar because it be not their custom but they have they within their vestry wrap up and mingle with many book and paper and they never bring they forth unless it be upon festival day upon the wall of their church be to be see the remembrance of jesus Christ our bless lady the apostle and prophet and all those in flat paint picture for their be no restoration or mend of they they will not have jesus Christ paint as he be crucify say that no man be worthy to see he in that passion Thevet c c Cos. li. 4. cap. 2. the cephalian do use image but only in flat or plain picture after the manner of the armenian georgian grecian and other of the east the LATIN church the council of Trent d d Sess. 9 2. the image of jesus Christ the virgin Mary mother of God and other saint must be have and retain especial in church and honour and reverence do unto they as appertain cardinal Bellarmine e e imag. cap. 21. the image of Christ and of the saint ought to be worship not only by accident or improper but also in themselves and proper so as that they limit and finish the adoration as consider in themselves and not only as they supply the place of the first pattern the reform church the confession of the switzer f f cap. 4. forasmuch as God be a invisible spirit and a infinite essence he can be represent by any art or image that be the reason why we do not stick to call with the holy scripture the image of God plain lie the confession of Bohemia g g cap. 17. the church be also teach that none ought to honour holy man as God much less image neither worship they with any honour or affection of spirit the which be due only to God annotation there be diverse and sundry opinion touch image first the mahometist will have none at all second the Iconomaques do think it unlawful to have any in their church epiphanius hold this opinion say that it be against the authority of holy scripture that the image of a man shall hang in a church but he cite not the place of scripture also the grecian and latin do not believe that so learned a man do write the epistle where the same be find three many protestant now a day do say that it be not expedient to place image in church confess thereby that the same be a thing of itself indifferent four Chemnitius say that image be profitable in regard of the history and decent for the ornament of church and that the abuse maybe avoid by the preach of true doctrine five the second council of nice after saint Basill and other follow by the church of the east and Africa do teach that it be lawful to bow down before image and because that the law of God be by some oppose thereunto thou shall not bow down to they the council answer by distinguish that there be two fashion of incline or bow the one Latria which be to have trust and confidence in that thing before which a man bow or to prostrate himself altogether before it the other be the inclination call Dulia which a man use when he meet with one of his friend for in the east country the custom be to bow their head in salute one another as they do put off their hat in France in this fashion say the council it be lawful to bow or incline before image and which be more the same council say that this inclination or bow do altogether tend to the thing represent the meaning of the council be explain in this verse behold the image but honour in thy heart that which it do represent moreover to the end that none shall think that this be some particular ceremony belong to image only the council and the grecian do hold to this day that pass before any church or cross or in take up the holy bible a man ought to incline or bow his head which be as much as for a man in France to put off his hat and that (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) say the council that be to say have the heart elevate up to God the abyssin do not pass beyond these limit they have picture in their church but the people very seldom enter into the place where they be they be not upon the altar towards the which they turn themselves in pray also if they do incline or bow their head it be in pass before church cross or the stone of the altar the ecclesiastical person enter not into the church with their hose and shoe on according to that which God speak to Moses put off thy shoe for the place where thou stand be holy ground he that come by a church if he be a horseback will alight until he be past it behold here the ceremony of the africane they of the east do pass these limit especial the lesser for they stand still while they pray and bow their head before the image but they kneel not down jeremy say that it be not in favour of the image for all the honour be carry to the pattern as if he shall have say that they be honour only by accident as when a man salute any one he put off his hat before his habit without have any meaning or intention to do it in honour of his habit so that whereas they pray before the portrait or image it be say they to stir up themselves to devotion and to show how much they honour the thing represent all these exception take no place among the protestant we ought not say they h h obs in harm Conf. Sect. 2. attribute to the image of saint any kind of worship either civil or religious for the same can be do without detestable superstition it seem that this be the great accusation which the protestant have against the church of the east and Africa nevertheless this custom be not now a day the ancient doctor which destroy the pagan idolatry have approve it their devotion do lead they to it peradventure no man will think it strange if he consider the person time and place those father may defend themselves as have the spirit rest upon they which be not grant to the mean sort of people the christian of the east have be always give to ceremony it be the custom to bow the head before the image of king and prince artabanus king of Persia say Suetonius worship the eagle and the image of the emperor the grecian at this time do argue thus if it be lawful to uncover the head in pass by the image of a king why not in like manner by the image of jesus Christ they of these country do answer that it be not the custom among they to uncover their head before the image of i i 2. Resp gre. king whosoever shall do it will be hold ridiculous in like manner if a man shall do so before the image of a saint the protestant will call it superstition the roman catholic do pass very often by church and image without once move their hat or bow their body neither do they so when they take in hand their hour or the holy bible the custom in these part be to put off the hat when in public act the king be name moreover the protestant in England do ordain that man put off their hat at sermon when they hear the name of k k can. 18. jesus in like manner all country have their custom that which be ridiculous and superstitious in one place be hold and esteem comely and religious in another the most expedient way will be in stead of call one another idolater and heretic to exhort one another charitable to do all to edification to avoid the appearance of evil and excess and not to scandalize the infidel and unbeliever if any infidel do enter into the church say s. Paul will not he say that you be out of your wit in like manner when a infidel or unbeliever do see a christian pray with his eye fix upon a image will not he say that he speak to the image entreaty obtestation and mutual demonstration do serve sometime to procure the peace of the church but injurious speech will never take away schism and the passage or place of scripture which be allege to make that seem unlawful which be but undecent do not cause either the superstitious to leave their superstition or the less devout their irreligion the strife found upon the equivocation of the greek word (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) edify as little a great part of the church will never consent to a manifest alteration those that govern the church do swear at their entrance to follow the tract of their predecessor but it happen very often that evil custom do ware away by lap of time although not so fast as those which be good the church of Rome never stay upon these term as Wicelius a roman catholic write yea one that be very much l l epist in exerc affectionate if I will say he I can produce the testimony of the primitive church by the which the use of the intercession of saint be coroborate but as I do affirm this so I also confess that it do grieve i that under pretext of I know not what Dulia it be affirm that one may and aught to honour with adoration the saint and their image the divine of the ancient church have preach to the people that they must honour but not worship or adore the saint well then if they have true speak thus of the saint what think you will they have say of the statue and image of saint worship in appearance and honour with the manner of divine worship those who in church adore image through any appearance seem not much unlike those which in time past worship god and goddess where be the sobriety of our understanding to bow or stoop before carve or melt image contrary to the law of God unless peradventure we will offend the jew the saracen and those which be part from we through such like enormity the strange nation of who we have speak to wit the christian of the east and south have very holy keep and observe the law of God touch adoration and have honour the soul of the saint in render to God that which appertain to God and to the saint that which appertain to the saint for who can find colour always to excuse himself if he daily be too much give to vice do foolish search out extremity by mistake the mean from this discourse of Wicelius a man may learn two thing first that the church of the east and of Africa be not fall into the error of the latin second that in the church of Rome there be good people which will not be idolater no not in outward appearance they be to be well advise whether it be tolerable for they to stay in the church of Rome and to call her mother and mistress and to hold they for heretic which do depart from she and yet withal to call her mother and mistress of idolatry for it be certain that she approve not only the appearance of evil which Wicelius condemn but also the evil itself and for the same cause Thomas of Aquin. have be canonize by she yea honour by a solemn feast as a saint and a true teacher and it be he that maintain that a man ought to adore and worship image with the same adoration or worship as the thing represent to wit the image of jesus Christ with Latria and those of the saint with Dulia in such sort that the image be also the object of adoration against which doctrine the learned earl m m in apol. he Picus have write who nevertheless deny not that a man ought to adore image but not say he with that adoration which Thomas maintain some man may ask if Thomas go beyond the mean in the adoration of image how shall we call that error and vice the image adore with Latria shall it not be a idol and he that adore it in like manner shall he not be call a idolater but this opinion be not yet forego in the church of Rome cardinal Bellarmine their great doctor maintain it we must not say he adore the image only by accident or improper as the grecian say but also proper and in themselves the foresay christian people be also contrary to the church of Rome in that they will not have the divine essence paint especial in the church and follow the opinion of their doctor Damascen although that there be some grecian in place near to Italy which take liberty herein as may be see in their horology print at Venice moreover they abhor image of Gould silver wood and stone as smell of paganish idolatry and have none but picture the conclusion of this question according to the opinion of the foresay people be that it be lawful but not necessary neither peradventure profitable to bow or uncover the head before church altar cross portraiture or image of saint or in handle holy relic or the book of the holy scripture that it be some appearance of idolatry to pass these limit that it be plain idolatry to adore image proper that it be a imitation of the pagan to have image of relief in church that it be folly and impiety to make a image of God question 43 whether it be lawful to vow single life whether monk ought to be of diverse order and whether it be lawful for they to beg the east churches IEremie the general patriarch n n 1. Resp you say that you prohibit not good work nevertheless you account holiday ceremony regular fast and monastical life unprofitable work that be not well do neither do it agree with the holy father for if you do approve all good work you will approve these thing for they be good and for instance Basil the great say that a contemplative life have one chief end that be to say the salvation of the soul Thevet o o lib. 6. c. 1. near to mount Sinai you shall find at this present a religious order of monk which be of good conversation and holy life found in time pass by the great emperor justinian the grecian do say that it be the first monastery of their religion for other they have none neither will the grecian and trapezontine emperor ever have any other order but that of s. Basil bishop of Cesaria who institute his order of monk in the east about the year of our lord 380. he cause those that profess his order to vow chastity which be not receive till they have attain to the age of eight and twenty year Gemistius pletho p p pelop. if the people give to meditation do not labour it be a superstition the three kind of impiety the south church aluares q q Descr Aethiop in all the dominion of Prester John there be but one order of religion which be of saint Anthony the hermit item the great traffic in fair and market be make by monk zaga-zabo bishop of r r Damin go Aethiopia with we the priest monk and all the minister of the church do live by their labour for the church have not nor receive not any tithe nevertheless the church have revenue and land which the monk do till and labour themselves and it be not lawful for they to beg from door to door neither to wrest or wring any alm from the people the LATIN church the council of s s Sess. 9 15 Trent in any religion whatsoever as well of man as of woman they must not make profession before sixteen year be accomplish sixtus t t Extr. and Pace let not the parish priest hereafter say that heresy be arise of mendicant friar see that in truth our faith have be illuminate and the church exalt by they and especial by the order of the jacobin and franciscan the reform church the confession of the u u cap. 19 suizer those that have receive from heaven the gift of a single life so that they be pure in heart and soul aught to serve the lord in that vocation so far forth as they feel themselves endue with this divine gift for such man be more fit to set their mind on heavenly thing they those that be distract with the affair of their family the confession of 10 10 cap. 19 Bohemia there be bountiful and peculiar promise make to they that be such and singular recompense so that a great reward shall be give to this excellent work to wit to he that shall voluntary leave father mother brother and wife those which have receive this gift aught to take heed lest they lose it nevertheless there must no snare be lay for any Calvin y y inst lib. 4. cap. 13. 18. we reject not monastic vow for any other reason but that they be rash make by those which have not the power to keep they z z Sect. 9 saint Austin prove that it be not lawful for munke to live in idleness a a Sect. 14. look how many monastery there be in these day so many conventicle be there of schismatic and to the end that their division may be better know they have give themselves diverse name they be not ashamed to glory in that which s. Paul have in execration 1. cor. 1. 12. say that the corinthian do divide Christ when they say I be of Paul and I of Apollo and I of Cephas and I of Christ and now a day they think that they may without do any injury to Christ call themselves Benedictans franciscan dominican annotation there be three thing to be regard in a monastical life first the will to live in a chaste single life join with the deed jesus Christ approve this will and this b b mat. 19 11 estate that be the cause that the grecian do extol it follow s. Basil but with hyperbolical term as may be see in their answer to the divine of Wittenberg they believe that if it be a divine and supernatural gift than it ought not to be esteem unprofitable neither as a human invention the hate which a man bear to the abuse of a thing ought not to prejudice the true use of it they call that life angelical a certain grecian expound that word have tell we that they believe that the life of the caloier be angelical as long as they do good but diabolical as long as they do evil second be to be note the custom of those that will follow this institution to associate themselves in college the protestant condemn not that the monastery say they be in time past house where some do labour and work with their hand other do exercise themselves to serve in the church the three thing to be note be the vow the protestant likewise do not absolute condemn it but in that say c c instit lib. 4. cap. 13. Calvin it be make by those that have not the power to accomplish that which they have vow the same author do think that a vow may be take at threescore year of age for s. Paul say let not a widow be take into the number under that age that canon of saint Paul have not be observe by his successor for afterward be they receive at fifty year of d d novel 6. age and after e e novel 123. that at forty nevertheless the same be continue and be as yet hold in the east church because it be necessary that he that vow shall have knowledge by long experience that he have receive of God power to accomplish and perform that which he have vow contrary to which the doctrine of the council of Trent be which say that a vow may be make at sixteen year of age the foresay church will not allow of diverse sect of munke and friar and therein be differ from the latin church or rather contrary to it as touch the beg of munke the proof before allege do show that these church approve it not among the latin themselves there be many which have condemn it as pope Nicholas the three f f verb sig c. 2. say in the church of Africa the solemn vow of chastity poverty and obedience be not use as in the church of Rome therefore the belief of the foresay church be that such may vow chastity as know by sufficient experience that they have power to accomplish and perform their vow and that munke ought not to bear the name of diverse sect nor consume by their beg that which appertain unto those which can labour question 44 whether the church ought to have festival day and fast day appoint and whether there be any divine or general ecclesiastical law about the same the east churches IEremie patriarch of Constantinople g g 1 Resp we ought not only to perform the commandment but also ought not to despise the institution of feast have in remembrance the 53. canon of the apostle which say if any one upon festival day eat not flesh etc. and the 69. canon say if any do not fast the holy Lent or wednesday and friday let he be depose Nicholas h h lib. 4. the armenian do keep lend neither eat any earthly flesh or fish and to show themselves much differ from the grecian upon certain friday they eat flesh and drink wine and all other food that please they Vilamont i i lib. 2. cap. 21 the grecian observe not the four time nor the vigille they eat flesh every Saturday they have four lent in the year the armenian keep not Christmas day holy Gagnin k k Desc sar. the moscovite do celebrate many feast of saint but not upon those day that the roman do celebrate they they have not at all the feast of upon the festival day the chief among they after service do spend the time in eat and drink but the citizen and artificer do betake themselves to labour and domestical affair and other business say that it be for lord to keep feast and to abstain from labour Genebrard have bring to light the calendar of the syrian greek and latin church wherein one may see the difference touch feast the south church aluares l l cap. 7. the aethiopian do keep lend and do begin it the Monday after ten day after shrove-tewesday and so they make their lent to continue fifteen day long take those day for advantage because that they fast not on Saturdays their manner of fast be not to eat until night communicate every day which be the reason why they sing not the mass during that time but only in the night and after service they communicate and then go to supper and even as they have these fifty day of Lent in like manner they take other fifty day after easter and the Pentecost wherein they fast not and then when it be not fast day they celebrate mass in the morning eat flesh during that time without except any one day the lord of Escales have bring to light the calendar of the church of Aethiopia wherein one may see the feast and the fast day there and how much they differ from we the LATIN church the council of lion m m Conf. dist. 3 it must be declare to the lay people what time they must keep holy in the year to wit every Sunday from eve to eve and to eschew all imitation of the jew they must also keep these feast Christmas s. Steven s. John etc. the fasting-day of the latin church be ordain De Consecr. dist. 3. and elsewhere the reform church the constitution of n n can. 33. England see that the authority of the holy father ground upon the example of the apostle have command to celebrate prayer and fast in the solemn ordination of minister and to that end have ordain certain prefix time for the foresay prayer and fast we honour their holy and pious institution do will and ordain that hereafter no priest nor deacon be ordain but upon those sunday which follow immediate after the fast of the four time vulgar call the ember week hitherto keep in the church of England the synod at Torun in o o of the year 1595. Art. 15 Poland we have think it necessary to appease the wrath of God with fast and prayer assemble ourselves together with one consent at certain time and to the end that we may not ordain any new thing touch this matter we have dedicate unto fast the day accustom four time in the year which be vulgar call the day of abstinence nevertheless we will not hinder the faithful to follow their devotion in observe fast and prayer at other time but on the contrary side we do exhort and stir they up thereunto Oecolampadius we have not learn out of God word any distinction of meat nevertheless that we may pray more sincere we do abstain not without fruit from meat not prohibit in consideration whereof the father have consecrate forty day before easter for to fast Zanchius p p in 4. the ancient institution of Lent can be simple condemn but the necessity which be enforce item telesphorus about the year 139. make mention thereof as a thing observe before his time we do ordain say he that all the clergy do abstain from flesh seven whole week before easter saint Ambrose say that before lend continue but six week the festival day of the church of England be set down in the book of common prayer of the say church Chemnicius and Zanchius do note those feast which be keep by the protestant of Germany annotation this question may have be omit nevertheless because that there be too many scrupulous people which take more heed to the external service of God then to the truth of belief it shall not be much beside the purpose to give here advertisement touch feast and fast it be therefore to be understand that the apostle never make in common any order touch feast and fast if they have it will have be know for the tradition will have be alike among all nation which be not nor never be incontinent after the time of the apostle the church of Asia where saint John govern yea where s. Peter and s. Paul teach be find to differ from the church of Rome touch the feast of easter there be no doubt but that the feast of the apostle be ordain a long time after their decease as touch fast there be two sort the one which be true and proper fast be abstinence from all kind of meat this fast be observe and very much use in Aethiop and among all the jacobite the other kind of fast be a abstinence from the most delicate and delicious meat against which fast the protestant do bring this sentence out of s. Paul q q 1. tim. 4. 1. the spirit speak evident that in the latter day man shall give heed unto the spirit of error and doctrine of devil which teach lie through hypocrisy command to abstain from meat which GOD have create to be receive with give of thanks some will demand whether the protestant do pretend that this place of scripture be absolute against Lent and observation of friday Zanchius answer no. Lent be institute before the year 139. and the author be not know for the constitution of telesphorus serve but to confirm that which be then already receive so that if some of the apostle be not the inventor thereof yet it be certain that it be some of their disciple all the rest consent thereunto the say also of s. Paul can be apply to that institution for s. Paul say that this forbid shall be in the latter day the same Zanchius say that Lent be free until the time of pope Gregory the seven that be to say until the year 1075. and that this pope do forbid in the latin church to eat flesh upon pain of mortal sin and that this prohibition so absolute and exact be that whereof s. Paul speak for otherwise it be not a true prohibition or forbid the roman catholic do bring other exception to wit that these meat be not forbid as evil of themselves another answer they that saint Paul say the use of they must not be forbid and speak in the same sort of marriage which be not forbid but only to those which have vow never to marry also unless one do vow not to eat flesh the use ought not to be absolute forbid he the latin say also that they forbid it not but for certain time the contrary part do reply that it be ever a forbid that which be white for one day say r r eth. 1. Aristotle be no less white then if it have be so a whole year as for the christian of the east they be more exact observer of fast and abstinence than the latin be although that their church have not this doctrine that it shall be unto they a mortal sin zeal and devotion be many time imitate by superstition the reform church have their fast and do keep they straight and the common people among they may fall into some scruple of conscience but that they be oftentimes advertise of their christian liberty it have be say before that the ethiopian do believe that the commandment of the church do not bind a man upon pain of mortal sin and in that point they be manifest on the protestant side as the grecian also be if they hold that which their ancestor hold all alike do believe that the bishop may both make law use their censure and impose certain punishment upon the infringer or breaker of they but not forbid as God if thou do eat of this fruit thou shall die the death both temporal and eternal so that some scruple be note among christian but the doctrine which they confess be that the church may ordain holy or festival day together with abstinence of all or some kind of meat nevertheless not so as to bind the conscience without contempt or scandal and the diverse practice thereof do show that there be no catholic ecclesiastical law which have ordain either festival day or fast day or the manner of keep those feast or fast  the conclusion of this treatise the council of Basil have declare the pope to be subject unto the church if the same be believe at this day by the latin as it be by all other christian it be sufficient to make a peace if the pope may transport that sea out of Rome the church may do it far better yea the east church may have do it at such time as it be great than the latin it follow also that all that the pope have ordain approve or tolerate be under correction if there have not be ambition in he or in his clergy of Rome he will have hear the catholic voice of the church this ambition be the cause wherefore the grecian do call he a archhereticke the indian a reprobate bishop the protestant the son of perdition those that live under he use not these term nevertheless they be not far wide from this belief if the duke of Venice shall presume to call himself monarch and that the most part take arm against he call he tyrant capital and principal enemy of the commonwealth and that there be other more patient than they which confess that in truth he be not such a one as he count himself to be nevertheless believe that he ought to be support I pray you will not all these citizen agree together in the principal point although they be of diverse opinion in the manner of proceed father a a Sacr. coton after many other make a argument here which he think to be invincible the son of perdition say he must sit in the temple of God according to saint Paul that be to say in the church of God according to b b upon the 2. epistle to the thess cap 2. 4. Crysostome and we must not go out of the church for out of it there be no salvation therefore we must continue under the son of perdition answer the temple of God be all the earth in this temple there be many episcopal chair which as pope Pelagius say be one nuptial bed of Christ that be to say which make but one church which beget child to God by baptism well then if he that sit in s. Peter chair teach not at all who will gainsay but that without forsake the church one may go to hear he which sit in saint Peter chair at Antioch among the c c stan. orach ep. Hosiu^^ armenian or in the seat of s. Andrew in Constantinople some will say that the protestant do not take this way but we have show that if ceremony be lay apart and that logomachies be eschew there will want but little of agreement and scarce will there be any discord but only in these four point first about image second prayer to saint three the time of make monastical vow four about the conversion of bread and wine in the eucharist and peradventure not so great as be imagine for the first it be decree in the second council of nice that one shall put off his hat in pass before a church a cross a altar a image or portrait of a saint have the heart lift up to God the protestant do call the same superstition see here be a great heresy a trim subject to divide christianity Panigarolas confess that one may altogether let pass image why not then this ceremony the catholic roman know well enough that sometime they be not use at all and Wicelius say that we ought to eschew all appearance of evil in the time of s. Basil there be toleration herein Vigilantius break the peace peradventure his injurious speech have be the cause why man do more in hate of he the second question whether one ought to recommend himself to the prayer of the saint be of the same nature they of the east church do confess that the saint do not understand our prayer nevertheless that the holy ghost which they have do induce they to pray and to cry abba father say s. Paul that be to say in general for those that recommend themselves to their prayer the protestant do confess that the saint do pray and that one may wish or desire that they will so do notwithstanding they hold it absurd to address our prayer unto they see that we do know that they understand we not melancton think that one may peradventure use the ancient manner that be to direct our prayer to God in make mention of the prayer which the saint do make so that all do tend to the same end but do differ in term the three difference be of lesser importance it be certain that in the time of the apostle the widow be receive without any regard to their age if there have be no abuse s. Paul will not have make mention of reformation if the caloier of the east and the antonian or Estafarus of Aethiop be not good people it be for the bishop of those province to provide and see to it as also they ought not to think much that other nation have find out a lawful remedy the four and last point be the question so much dispute upon now a day touch the change of the eucharist here without doubt be a difference in man belief but the reform church have not debate against the catholic church and be not separate from they of the east and the african for they be not in their union moreover those that deny it show themselves ready to communicate with they that believe consubstantiation which not withstand by their say be almost as contrary to the article of faith as the roman transubstantiation less occasion have they to hold themselves separate from the other apostolic church which as have be say believe not jesus Christ to be any where else then in heaven touch his humanity and their belief contain not any thing that do contradict the scripture although they be not able to conclude the same necessary out of the scripture the belief of these church be that by prayer the bread be change into the body of the lord as christian be and that in both there be a change not only in name but real because that some supernatural thing proceed from the matter of the body of the lord which be only in heaven be infuse into the matter of bread and from thence pass into the soul of the communicant and have the place of form both in the one and in the other and cause that both the one and the other be call after a special fashion the body of Christ because that they suffer a change through the obtain of a new form or else their form suffer a change through the obtain of new faculty and that be the reason why aswell the say church as the reform do confess that as s. Paul write the bread be the communion of the body of the lord the difficulty therefore lie in this point to wit whether the bread have positive in itself this form or faculty to communicate they unto the soul by itself or whether the soul receive they of the bread because that the holy ghost which be present in the bread as in all thing cause that when one receive this bread he receive the body of Christ by mean of this essence or faculty which proceed immediate from the same body if there be as much charity in man as zeal they may find this above mention tolerable until a universal and lawful council in the mean time it be the part of the lover of truth and enemy of heresy to search and seek out the truth sufficient contain in the holy scripture wherein if they find any obscurity which they shall not in those thing necessary to salvation it be their part to have recourse unto the voice of the church to the which our lord have promise his assistance and if they be not of one accord then to suspend their judgement or else with a holy liberty to try all and to retain that which they take to be good in every one of they if you proceed thus Christian reader you will no more say I be of Paul and I be of Cephas but rather you shall be true catholic and orthodox christian and in no manner idolater or heretic grecian nor roman papist nor huguenot lutheran nor caluinist protestant nor puritan and make they liar that seek to stain your beautiful and holy profession with name so infamous and unworthy of honourable people and true christian a advertisement to the reader those that do build religion on ceremony will think that this book be lame or maim because that it do not declare those which be observe by every nation but we think it a labour as much unprofitable as envious to the most judicious reader calecas a roman catholic have write a volume against the grecian wherein he speak almost of nothing else that we may not omit any thing of importance we do advertise that there be two evil ceremony find among the grecian the first be that they use leaven bread in their sacrament the other that they abstain from thing strangle and from blood in both they think themselves ground upon the holy scripture the grecian have oppose themselves against the latin in answer to the confession of Ausburg do reprehend they because they use little wafer unleavened and not ordinary bread as our saviour do they do not think that this word bread agree to those host or wafer and that most common that name be not give they moreover to make their fashion seem better they have think good to say that jesus Christ do not institute this sacrament in the day of sweet bread as for unleavened bread the roman catholic do not insist much upon it and it be not so important a matter of faith to know upon what day the sacrament be ordain provide that one pretend not to prejudice thereby the history of the gospel the passage or sentence whereof may be better reconcile through the one act 15. 15. then through the other as for abstinence from thing strangle and from blood it be found upon the decree of the apostle assemble in jerusalem the which decree they do not think to be abrogate because that their church which they hold to be true and catholic have still observe it yea this manner of abstinence have be confirm by the six synod there be likelihood that they have remit this to a general council for they have not much press this point against the latin the aethiopian be both in the one and in the other on the roman and protestant side in France the protestant do use leaven bread after the fashion of the grecian against the church of the abyssine in the south be object that they be rebaptize every year but the ambassador of Prester-Iohn say that the cause why they bathe themselves in river and pond be not because that they think it necessary to salvation but they do it upon the day of the epiphany in remembrance of the baptism of our saviour it be to be note that this ceremony be new among the abyssin for their king David which reign but about some hundred year ago say that the same be by the institution of his grandfather the roman catholic have no occasion to impute this unto the abyssin for a error see that in the church of Rome they baptize bell and contrary to the practice of the apostolic church they sprinkle water every day enter into their church for remission of venial sin a custom take either from the jew as the grecian do reproach they or else from pagan idolater the other accusation against the jacobite be because that they tolerate circumcision upon which say thus they circumcise their child both male and female but they borrow not that from the jew insomuch that the same be not for any religion sake as aluares also say but it be a ancient custom for Herodotus witness that the ethiopian in time past likewise use it it have be likewise think by some that the jacobite baptize with fire but the historiographer and those of the country do certify we that the same be not so but they make incision in their temple either for comeliness or else for their health sake if the ethiopian have no other error than those which appear unto we we may peradventure appropriate unto they by better right that place of scripture cant. ca. 1. than the ancient donatist can attribute it unto themselves * @ *