



A discription of Italie, and the causes of the
subtilitie of that Nation.
Cap. 1.
THe Italians inhabite the right arme
of the continent of Europe, which
hath Spaine in place of the head,
France for the stomacke, for the belly
Germany, and Denmarke for the
left arme: From that part of Italie
which extendeth more to the Southward,
and from the other bounding
North, with his two armes, which are parts of the maine, entring
further into the Sea then the rest of the bodie, haue from
all times the other principall partes of Christendome, sustained
great ruines, cruelties, losse of goods and other oppressions: of
the first, because it goeth farre beyond all Nations bordering
Northward, in inuention, craft and worldly pollicie, witnesse
Aristotle, Strabo, Caesar, Plinie, and other approoued Authors:
of the second, in respect of their surpassing streight and corporall
puissance, by reason of the colde situation of the place. That
which produceth such effects in Italie, is the moderate temperature
of the clymate, situate in a subtill ayre neere vnto the
sea euery where, without any excesse heate or cold: and beside,
another cause is, the trading and great dealing that the Italians
haue with the people of Asia, of Affrica, and Europa, as
also with the Ilanders, or a great part of them with whome
they haunt, and liue. By reason whereof, besides that they are
of themselues verie wittie and subtill headed, all cunning slightes,
craftie conueyances, and deceitfull cosinages, are so proper and
common to them, whereby they can fetch vnder other people,
and are so cunning to finger from them their money, and can
moreouer, so closely couer their actio^s, that of a thousand hardly
one could euer come within them to perceiue their iugling.
For as any deceit or cosinage finely handled, is not perceiued
but of those which know it, and looke verie neere vnto it, deceiuing
those which haue their eye but on the naturall and externall

shew: so there are none but those which curiously seeke out
the beginning, the progresse and aduancements of the Romane
and Italian gouernment, and the meanes whereby they haue
drawne money from other nations of the earth, since the time
of Romulus, to this present day, who can finde out their fetches
and shifts, or discouer the maskes wherewith they are disguised,
to aduance and enrich themselues by the ouerthrow and
pillage of others. Albeit, it is not inough when we haue gone
so farre, if besides we throw not away the mufflers which depriue
vs of sounde and true iudgement in things of this world,
as are custome, hate, loue, obstinacie, and enuy, which are euen
so many plagues and corruptions, ouerthrowing quite the iudgement
and cleare vnderstanding of man in all things: for if custome
carry vs away, the Italian may preuaile, not only of
an hundred, but of more then a thousand and fiue hundred yeeres,
which was the verie time that Iulius Caesar an Italian, pillaged
and ruined, not only France, but also all other parts of Europe.
Therefore we should deserue to be commanded and gnawen
to the bare bone, for euer hereafter, as wel as in time past,
that could looke to these matters no sooner. The cause of all,
haue been but our blinde affections which peruert vs in true
iudgement, the which now we must needes cut off, to haue only
reason for our guide, which is the true and essentiall difference,
that separateth man from other Animals, and maketh him iudge
truly of all things: otherwise wee robbe our selues of the most
excellent and precious iewell we haue, to become as bestiall as
the bruit beastes. From hence springeth then also the cause of
so great diuersitie of opinions in our Continent, the principall
and chiefest part of the world, for that some suffer themselues to
be gouerned by the cleere light of reason and vnderstanding, and
other some let themselues be caried away headlong with their
owne affections and customes, and this is the cause why the
inhabitants of the Orientall. Asia vnder the dominion of the
great Cham of Tartarie, whose Empire is two thousande
leagues in longitude, do hold him for the sonne of God in earth,
and why? those which liue vnder the great Turke belieue Mahomet
to be a greater prophet then Iesus Christ: and why? the
Iewes scattered in great multitudes follow the customes of

their fathers, reiecting the true Messias, to looke for another:
and why? Christendome is so troubled by reason of the Romish
constitutions, which some beleeue to be holie and necessarie to
saluation, and others altogither contemne: being none other
meane of reconciliation amongst vs, but to cast away these
blinde mufflers of customes, hatred, and consideration of losse
or gaine, and to suffer our selues to be directed by the cleare light
of the heauenly word, by the vnsearchable workes of God, and
by liuely reason clarified with authenticall histories of time.
Putting but this in practise once, wee shall soone discouer, and
cleerely see with our eyes the wonderfull deepe subtilities of Italians,
and hereafter beware how we be ouerrought by their
pollicies.


Cap. 2.

How in the persons of Romulus, and Numa Pompilius,
their were two kindes of gouernmentes prefigured among
the Italians.

FIrst we will consider, euen as in the murther of Abell,
committed by Cain, God did prefigure vnto vs, that the
good should be persecuted by the wicked for his seruice sake
till the end of the world: so also in the person of Romulus
first founder of Rome, and murtherer of his brother Romus and
Tassius his companion, as also in the person of Numa Pompilius,
a most subtill and ingenious inuentor of a forged religion,
to establish his owne gouernment. God would manifest
vnto vs, that this nation should serue it selfe heereafter, with
murthers and apparance of a counterfet religion, to laie hands
on others kingdomes, and to snatch away the substance of other
peoples: for we see euen as their first domination began
at the first by effusion of bloud, and after by cloake of religion:
so also it is come to passe, that the first glorie of the great Empire
of the Italians, to the which all Europe was brought in
subiection and made tributarie, was gotten by the great murthers
so commonly committed in the time of Marius and Sylla,
contriued by Augustus Caesar, and by Anthony, which
lustre being by long tract of time dimmed and extingnished, is

by a cleane contrarie maner restored and restablished vnder a
faire shew and cloake of religion.


Cap. 3.

How the subtill Italian borroweth the name of the Pope,
to come to his pretences with more facilitie.

NOw I pray thee Reader, be not persuaded, that I meane
by this discourse contemptuously to blame the Popes of
Rome in their owne persons, or any holy constitution in the
Church of Rome: My desire is only to lay open the deep reach
and subtiltie of the Romanes, who by a great foresight and immutable
order, haue been able so to handle their affaires, and to
dispose of Popes, of Kings and Princes of the earth, in such sort
that they haue got the head and rule ouer them, and fetch round
summes of deniers out of their cofers, and from their commons
besides. For proofe hereof, I will maintaine the like preposition,
that was held to Augustus Caesar, the greatest, happiest,
subtillest, and most pollitike Monarke of the worlde. It was
this, That he commanded indeed all nations, and all the world
trembled at the excellencie of his nature, but yet that his wife
commanded him, and his daughter her mother: giuing thereby
to vnderstand, that it was they that ruled only, borrowing his
name to authorise and establish what they listed. So I say, that
whatsoeuer is ratified, published and receiued vnder the name
and authoritie of the Popes, it is but the counsell and inuention
of the Italians of Rome, who to authorise their doings, couer
them with the name of the Pope, and therefore must be
attributed to them, as to the inuentors, persuaders, and contriuers
of that which proceedeth from his holines.


Cap. 4.

A liuely patterne of Italian subtiltie, in the person of Katherine
de Medicis, and her Florentine Counsell.

FOr confirmation of that which goeth before, and for demonstration
of the matter, let vs set before our eyes the estate

of France, in the time that Katherine de Medicis, Queene-Mother
liued, and we shall see, as in a cleare glasse, that she and
her Councell of Italians got between them the whole gouernment
and disposing of all the affaires in France, into their hands,
and like bloodsuckers sucked the bloud of the poore people so dry,
as if it had beene crushed out in a wine-presse: so that by such
crueltie, men perished in France by famine, nakednes, and hearts
griefe, by thousands and millions, and neuer were there so many
died by poyson of Serpents and other venimous beasts, nor
by the crueltie of Tygers, Lybbards, Crocodiles, Lynres,
Beares, and other deuouring beasts, since the creation of the
world, as by their tyrannous crueltie, shewed whilest they bore
the sway. This could not any one French man perceiue to
come to passe, for so smal a matter, as to haue matched ye daughter
of an Italian Duke with a younger brother of France:
But herehence proceedeth it, that this nation is so ingenious
and subtill, that vpon the least occasion which may be, it maketh
way and meane to enterprise and effect the greatest matters
in the world, and moreouer, to laie the blame and grudge
that commeth by their stingings and exactions vpon other mens
shoulders: fine workemen I warrant you: that can so closely
couer their dealings with the name and authoritie of great Prelates,
Kings or Princes, that the hatred and blame may lie vpon
their neckes, and the profite be put in their owne purses.
And sure this nation can make so sure way so far before hand,
and so contriue their plots, that then at the length onely men
can perceiue them, when it is cleane past their power to finde
out any remedie to preuent them.


Cap. 5.

How of anie light occasion, this Nation can deuise to
effect great matters.

FOr euident proofe hereof, this Italinesse had not remained
lo^g time in France, but Monseur le Dauphin, who was
to rule ouer vs, as lawfull heire to the Crowne, vanished
quickly by some perfume, or by some other Italian deuise,

thereby to giue entrance, and make a gap for the Italians to
rush in, to the managing of the greatest partes of the affaires
of France. And this occasion beeing redoubled by the death of
King Henry, they tooke fast hold of her haire which groweth
before, not letting her slip out their hands to runne after her,
iudging the two best means to procure the gouernment of this
estate to this woman and themselues, was first of all to bring
vp those which should rule ouer vs in all lasciuiousnes and pleasure,
to make them more effeminate then their owne mother,
and likewise in the ignorance of good letters and in well gouerning
an estate, to the end that their Italinesse being more forward
in knowledge of these things then they, (to the great aduantage
of Italians) might sease wholly on the gouernment
of the kingdome, and the entire disposing of all France: and
secondly, to sow debates, and stir vp warres among the French,
least that their vnion and concord might disturbe or not permit
the rule, gouernment, and aduancement of a straunge nation
ouer them, who could not suffer or permit any gouernment to
the onely daughters of our Kings of France it selfe,


Cap. 6.

The Romane soweth diuisions, and putteth away the snbstance
of a people, to enrich himselfe, and to do with it
at his pleasure.

THese two breaches being made in the body of France, the
Italians persuading themselues, that if then when they
had yet no way to set in foote, which was but in the time of K.
Henry, they were able to frame among them such disorder, that
Francis the first, hauing left seuenteene hundred thousande
crownes in his coffers, albeit he had paide ransome in Spaine:
the said Henry hauing raigned but a while, had left his heire
behinde him indebted fortie three Millions, which was a most
straunge and maruellous debt, considering the great tributes
which he had exacted of his subiects, of the employing whereof,
there could be none account heard, notwithstanding the best
friendes and louers of the communaltie, made a motion and were
verie instant. They haue at this present farre more abilitie by

the authoritie and subtilitie of their Italinesse, to prosecute the
ruine and vtter subuersion of this estate: the which to bring to
a low ebbe: they must fill full of ciuill warres, and so ouer loade
with such heauie burthens of subsidies, taxes, and new rereages,
that they poore people remained quite ruined and troden
downe, so that it could neuer since recouer foote againe: and
the better to feare and torture them thereunto, to locke them
vp in prisons, and there to make them rot miserably, if they did
not pay their intollerable ransomes, exceeding in many partes
of France, more by the third part then the yeerely reuenue of
the poore Pesant did amount vnto: not disburdening him therby
any thing at all of his charges in finding souldiers, of whom
he was daily sore gnawen, deuoured, beaten, and oppressed, besides
the extremitie shewed vnto him in paying the fines of his
wine, without the which he could by no meanes be discharged.
Thus this subtill nation hauing gotten on their side some Italionate
Frenchmen, to take their partes, and to fortifie them
somewhat more: as also to laie part of the blame of these pilleries
on their backs, do all things at their owne will and pleasure,
to the enriching of themselues, and to the vtter ruine of
the poore commons, who abide the greatest smart of all. And
he which would desire to know what is become of all these excessiue
heapes of mony leuied in this kingdome: let him goe to
Florence, to behold the sumptuous buildings which there haue
been erected by our ruines, and there let him see the wondrous
wealth wherein many Florentines swimme, which came but
like poore snakes into France, and now how they haue altered
their state. But if the people of France had had as much witte
and wisedome as they: they should at the first haue laide their
heads togither, and concluded to haue chased them backe into
their owne countrey, and foreseeing the debates and quarrels
that they began to sow euery where in France, haue sent them
backe to their owne home: as they themselues once serued the
French, when they were in their country, in like maner.



Cap. 7.

How this Nation going about to ruine a countrie, beginneth
with some one estate, and from thence commeth
to all the rest by degrees, and how the French can by
no meanes take such opportunitie when it serueth
them.

ALthough they haue been alwaies voyd of all mercie and
compassion towardes the poore people, hauing drenched
them drie, and brought them to great miserie, yet they haue
shewed as little fauour as might be to Churchmen, making
them to be gnawen to the bare bone with tenthes, and to be
puld a hole lower by sale of their goods, maintaining all inequalitie
amongst them, making floods of riches to run downe
the heeles of some Italianate spirits, their coherents, and as for
those who take paines daily in diuine seruice, which the French
Romans wil not meddle withal, nor so much as with the tip of
their finger to turne ouer one leafe of it, they may haue a sore
drowth, but the diuell a whit of drinke will they giue them to
coole their thirst. Their Nobles they were saluted so oftentimes
with summonings to assemble themselues, who held any
landes of the Crowne, to bee seassed for the affaires of the
warres and paiment of souldiers, and withall put to such pinches
and daungers, to ruine one another: with such extreame
costs and charges raised by the vaine enhancings of their gold
chaines of their Order, for all paiments and wages employed
onely for the payes of the Italians, and other strange nations.
As for the Officers, although that their offices were sold vnto
them in the wane of the Italian power, ten times dearer then
in the raigne of any former Prince or King, they were so fleeced
and pulled away by substitution of others, that did robbe
them of all the profit and honour that might grow therby, who
in their turne also were pilled and brought to nothing, by restoring
the mony that was sucked from them, that first bought
them: so that by that time all their landes were counted, there
was nothing to be laughed at on no side: but only the Florentines
and their partners, who might wel laugh in their sleeues,
hauing so much the more to drinke, filling their purses, with

the emptyings of others, so that by such deuises they haue so
well sucked out the substance of the French, that since the comming
of this Italianesse into France: they haue picked more
pence out of the coate of this people, then during the raigne of
twelue Kings before. The tokens wherof most manifestly appeare,
especially vpon the poore pesants by their nakednes, who
go apparrelled but with old linnen cloth in the greatest coldes,
and are besides constrained to humble themselues so low, as to
liue vpon Oates and Pease like bruit beasts. The cause and
originall of all these miseries proceeding of the marriage of one
Italinesse in France, aspiring to make way for her adherents,
and to get the Crown into her own hands, making our kings
odious to the whole world: and this sheweth well, that they
are so ingenious, that of the least occasion that may serue to
fauour them: they know how to finde and fetch out greater aduantages,
farre beyond the reach of any nation in the world
beside. This thou shalt easily perceiue, if with the consideration
of that which goeth before, thou cast but thine eye of vnderstanding
vpon the French, to see how great a number of the
Kings daughters haue been married into Italy, as Madame
Renee daughter of King Lewes the twelfth, to the Duke of
Ferrara: others to the King of England, and into Spaine, to the
Dukes of Sauoy, and of Lorraine. By meanes of whom, although
they were all descended of farre more noble houses then
her, yet the French could neuer by any such occasion tyrannise
and impouerish these people, neuer making the least commoditie
thereby, or get any other preferment: but to the contrarie,
they still left behinde them verie much of their owne, as in the
marriages of the King of Spaine, and of the Duke of Sauoy,
where they got to their shares the fairest fleeces and conquests
of France. And this may verie well shew how grosse witted
we are in France, and how ingenious and subtill the Italian is
at euerie opportunitie that may happen. See wherfore I wold
faine be able to perswade the Popes, quite to forsake this nation
to come into Swicerland, and into France, verie curteous
and good people: to deliuer themselues from the yoake of that
nation which is the most corrupt in the whole world: for if one
onely Italinesse were able to chaine our Kings at Paris, and

within a litle therabouts, and with one winke of her eye make
tremble Constables, Marshals of France, gouernours of prouinces,
and by the least word or letter alter the Parlaments of
France, what may ten 1000. Italians do, enuironing a Pope?
It is certaine, they may force his will by violence, depriuing
him of his libertie in his gouernment of ye church. Or if he bow
not that way which they wold haue him, they wil not sticke to
giue his holines some dramme of such perfume, as they did to
the deceassed Queene of Nauarre. This is the cause why commonly
we see foure or fiue Popes to die, during the raigne of
one Emperour. Wherefore he should do well either for loue of
his life or his libertie to retire and come away from amongst
them.


Cap. 8.

Vpon what occasion the Romanes changed their Monanarchie
into a populer estate: that is to wit, vppon the
rauishment of Lucretia, committed by their king Tarquinius.

BVt to make a more liuely representation of the great wisedome
of the Italian, we must mount a litle higher to the beginnings,
progresse, and aduancement of this admirable domination,
whether by degrees it hath eleuated it selfe in perceiuing
the Tarquins their kings were verie vicious, and nothing valerous,
they spied out matter inough quickly against them to
be rid of them, so iumpe at that time fell out for their purpose
the rauishment of Lucretia, perpetrated by Tarquinius their
King: wherupon they made a commotion against him, by and
by to thrust him out of his kingdome: not that they meant to
restablish any other in his place, but to alter this forme of gouernment
(although it be absolutely the best, when kings rule
as they should do, and behaue themselues well) and to institute
another, which should exalt them (as they thought most likely)
aboue all other peoples, and make them all tributarie to
them. Now this was their order, to haue a Senate wherein
men of the greatest spirites, verie well learned and experienced
were only admitted, by whom euery yeere should two Consuls

be chosen, who should alwaies haue the conduct of warres: and
besides if any important affaires chanced, then was there elected
one to be a Dictator, and such a one as was most worthie
of all Italy to command and to resist, whom soeuer came against
the Romanes. So that if one Consull lost a battaile, the estate
was not thereby ouerthrowne, because his fellow had mustered
in a readines another Army readie to fight and giue battell
againe, so that if he also were vanquished, they had for all that
good hope yet, being the Dictator to come, vpon whose valour
and experience, they most of all relied, (as on Marius and Fabius,)
for he set in incontinent for the third man. This is the
reason, that when the enimies of the Romanes had gotten two
fieldes against them, as diuers times did Pyrrhus and Hanniball,
they were not dismaied for all that, and thought themselues
thereby neuer a whit the more ouercome, whereas contrariwise,
if any King, Prince, or common wealth had once had
an ouerthrow by a battell in the field, they could not so soone recouer
their losse, but would iudge themselues straightwaies
ruined, and ouerthrowen. By this meane, their domination
seemed altogither inuincible, till by their owne Armies, by ciuill
broyles and domesticall iarres, they conspired their owne
ruine and destruction.


Cap. 9.

How the Romanes by pretence of their Faith, founde
meanes to augment their Domination.

ALbeit, that this so goodly order and forme of gouernment
might haue beene sufficient to make them surpasse
all other people, yet they perceiuing that the breaking
of faith and promises, did worke the ruine of all
estates, that made no conscience to violate them: the Italians
well aduised hereof, as those that saw well inough that Faith
was the most firme bande of humane societie: and that where
it raigned not, euen did stand verie flipperie, and were alwaies
staggering, tottering, and shakyng with feare, and mistrust:
to the end to binde themselues most strictly to the obseruation
of the same, and to make all the world belieue that they would

inuiolably keepe their promises, they builded a Temple of
FAITH: to the which they gaue great honour and reuerence.
Whereupon euerie one assuring them selues in their
fidelitie, desired their league and friendship, and to couer them
selues with their protection and fauour, sparing neither tribuite
nor subiection to obtaine the same. This was a most
rare peece of pollicie and wisedom, found out by them, whereby
they bore sway, and drew profit from all other peoples: albeit
otherwise the Italians were farre surpassed by them in number
and forces. Hereby may we then see euidently, that they haue
a spirite more sublimate and ingenious, then any other nation
that liueth vnder the scope of the heauens.


Cap. 10.

The ruine of the first Romaine Domination, and the causes
thereof.

BVt as all earthly thinges come in processe of time, to faile
in glorie and naturall force, so this braue Signiorie which
seemed to sway the whole earth, fell at last to decay and
ruine, because at the first beginning they did but shaue and
clip those which were subiugated and forced to take hold on the
cordes of the empire, to make them a little gentler and tamer:
afterwardes they fell roundly to fleying of them: besides the
horrible and detestable cruelties of Nero, Caligula, Commodas,
Heliagabalus, and other such like monsters, made this
nation odious, and spited of manie others, who beginning a
little to discouer, that the Romaines had not brought them in
subiection by any greater power or multitudes, whereby they
excelled them too that waies, but rather had gotten the vpper
hand, by sowing quarrels amongst them, by supprising them
vnawares, and establishing among them a better order of militarie
discipline, then was before: they resolued with hazarde
of their liues to ouerthrow their tirannie, and to pull downe
their intollerable Domination to the ground. Amongst other
the people of the North, enuironing the left arme, I mean
the Gothes, the Saxons, and Hungarians who hauing experience

of their strength, to bee farre passing that of Italians,
obseruing a better order in their warfare then before, set forwarde
and prosecuted so lustilie, the course of their hartie enterprises,
that they became in short time maisters of the citie
of Rome, and many other partes of Italie. In like manner
Arthure a most valiant king of England, accompanied with
sixe hundred thousand men, victoriously ouerthrew Lucius the
Romaine Senator, marching with no lesse number of souldiours
then he, pretending to make the English tributarie, as
they were before time. The Gaules likewise cast of their
yoke, and the Almaines got from them the dignitie imperiall,
into their owne handes, whereupon ensued the totall subuersion
of this their first earthly violent, and forced Domination,
vnder the which, they had yoaked in the neckes of all the
rest of the people of Europe.


Cap. 11.

Of the beginninges and first foundations of the second
Domination of the Romanes in christiandome.

THey then perceiuing by their profound wisedom, that
there was no meanes to be had, for the reestablishment
of their first Domination, because the nations of the North
most strong and warlike, had made proofe that the corporall
strength of Italians, was farre inferiour to theirs, and that it
was impossible to bring them euer so low againe by armes or
force, to yeelde them that obedience they had done in former
time: yet the Italians lay other ambushes for them, and begin
to deceiue these people, to bring them vnder againe, by a
victorie altogether spiritual, voluntarie, and nothing at all carnall,
tastiug nothing but a spirituall gouernment, and such a
one as might guide men to life euerlasting: and to lay the
foundation stones of this Domination: they must vphold that
there is none other meane to be brought for the confirmation
of the christian Church, but by establishing of a soueraigne
Heade and vniuersall Bishop, in like manner forsooth, as it is
in the Monarchies and Empires of the world. Perswading

themselues, that if they had carried awaie this pointe
once, they might verie well preuaile in the rest, seeing that
Rome had beene the seate of the rulers and Emperours of the
earth, they might rather then any other nation com by this
prerogatiue, to dispose of christian people, vnder the cloake and
authoritie of their vniuersall Bishop, at their owne will and
pleasure, so that they might without euer striking stroke, or
shedding bloud, be kinges, and make money come apace from
al prouinces, which should protest to hold ye christian part. And
for a fairer shew and more credit of the matter, it were verie
meete to publish by word of mouth, by reporte and writings,
that Rome had beene the seat of S. Peter, and that he suffered
martiredome there, so that thereby he had planted in that citie
a more excellent dignitie and prerogatiue, then in anie other citie
of the world.


Cap. 12.

How in creating an vniuersall Bishop at Rome, the Italians
entred into possession of a farre more excellent
Domination, then that which they had lost before.

THese two pointes being once granted them, the Italians
might verie well dispose at their pleasure, of all christiandome,
putting on but the cloake and authoritie of their vniuersall
Bishops. This was an easie way for them to hold,
for the recouerie of a more excellent Domination (being now
spirituall and heauenly) then the first which they had lost, and
by this prerogatiue might they make the purest and most precions
golde and siluer of all christianitie, to flie to Rome. It
was most easie of all to make this currant among other Bishops:
perswading them that all this did but encrease their
dignitie and profit, and inuest them with a power to make
heade against the kinges of the earth, to cast of their yoake,
and neglect all their magistrates. By reason whereof, this inuention
was found good, and passed quickly without any contradiction:
but there was onely a little strife betweene the Bishop
of Rome, and him of Constantinople, for the superioritie

of them two. But yet on the Italians side, there was no
meane to make them forgoe this dignitie, they would in no
wise lay it downe, because they foresaw that therby they could
make what doctrin they listed curra^t throughout all churches,
and their constitutions to be receyued euerie where, as the decrees
of their soueraigne and heauenly Court: they could make
them selues redoubted and feared of the kinges, and princes of
the earth, as though they were the onely Porters of heauen
gates, and that no man coulde come in there, but by their
leaue, meane, and fauour. To make the rest of the Clargie receiue
this inuention, there was no more adoe, but to performe
it with a smell of the augmentation of their dignitie and profit,
and they straight waies embraced it, with all ioy and gladnesse:
for whilest that men are liuing here in this earth, verie
few are found, but will suffer themselues to bee infected with
such plagues, which (as Galen saith) are Auarice and Ambition,
which bring vnto the soule that which the falling sicknesse
doth bring to the bodie. And if there be anie found anie
found amongst the rest, which haue the glorie of God, and
the saluation of men in greater regarde, it is in so small number,
that the greater part shall soone ouercome the better, and
bring them quicklie to a contrarie bow.


Cap. 13.

How the people follow none other religion but that
which their Pastors teach them, and how the Romanes
giue vs one according to their owne nature.

TOuching the people (by whom I comprehend Nobles,
Citizens and Pesants) in matter of religion, they will
embrace that which their Pastors shall preach vnto them, or
that wherein they haue beene brought vp, without making any
further choice: So that if a man be of the Empire of Tartarians,
he will frame himselfe to the forme of diuine seruice
that is there established: in like manner will hee doe that is
borne among Turks and Iewes, Lutherians, and Catholiks:
the worst is when he is grounded in one, he wil take no knowledge,

nor make none examination of anie other, but will haue
them all in detestation, and shall be as glorious in his owne, as
if he had found some pretious treasure of inestimable valour,
especially when he hath his eyes dimmed by sensible, terrestriall,
and humaine religion.
The Italian is not here to seeke how to deale with him,
he can handle the matter so well, that he will fetch some substance
from him, without any warre or violence, and at his
owne pleasure: and to effect the same, he hath no more to doe,
but to winne to his side the Doctours and Priestes, which instruct
the people, who may teach them a religion which is altogether
agreeable to their owne nature. But here is the
point of controuersie, which hath and shall be euer betwoone
God and men: that God wil be honoured with a seruice agreeable
to him selfe, and of the qualitie of his owne nature, to wit,
spirituall, diuine, and heauenly: and wee humaine creatures,
cleane contrarie will serue him with a seruice that is nearest
and best agreeing to our owne nature: for it is his will, that
when we adore and inuocate his holy name, we should lift vp
our spirits aboue the heauens: and we desire to finde him here
below on earth, in our Temples, vnder some visible forme,
which we may see and touch, because that our earthly nature
taketh farre greater delight, in that which it seeth with the bodily
eyes, then to transport it selfe in spirit aboue the azured
heauens, so farre distant from vs. In like manner those which
will make their prayers to the saintes of Paradice, take great
pleasure to haue their images here below on earth, sauing a
long iourney to goe into the kingdom of heauen to seeke them.
God will haue his diuine seruice proceeding from his diuinitie,
and such a one whereof he himselfe is the authour: and we take
more delight in that which is humaine, and proceedeth from
our owne braine, because it most consisteth in visible things,
to be beholded with these our bodily eyes: as are sumptuous
and goodly Temples, glistering with costly glasse windowes,
triumphantinges, liuely pictures, images exquisitely carued
forth, most precious clothes, of Arras, Chalices, Crosses of
the finest Ducket gold, height of Piramides, Copes of crimsin
veluet, others of cloth of gold and siluer, which are thinges

most pleasant to the eies to behold. And to delight the hearing
with songs of Mnsicke, noyse of Organs, and sound of Belles:
al these things are delectable in deed, and haue some shew of humane
wisdom, for all that haue they not God for any Authour:
neither did Iesus Christ nor his Apostles euer institute or occupie
the like: rather they taught vs to despise the world, and
all that is therein, to aspire vp to heauen, instructing vs to renounce
our selues and all the lustes of the flesh, to do the holie
and perfect will of God, to take vp our Crosse and wade thorow
many tribulations into the glorie of God. And this cannot
we abide, we must haue a religion which wil helpe to augment
our dignities and earthly riches, that we may liue here
in all voluptuousnes and securitie. And because the Gospell taken
in his puritie is quite contrarie to that, there is nothing in
the earth that this nation hateth more, then to heare speake
thereof: farre preferring a worldly felicitie present, which by
no meanes they will forgo, vpon hope of any eternall, absent,
and hidden ioyes which are to come.


Cap. 14.

A comparison of the diuine seruice inuented by the
Italians, with the counsell of some subtill
Phisition.

HE that would thorowly examine the forme of Religion
planted by the Italians, by the authoritie of their soueraigne
high Priest, shall finde all these things afore truely obserued
amongst them. So that flying therby, with wings swifter
and stronger then the wings of any Engle, they are able to
beate downe to the ground those that are so sawcie as to withstand
in any thing, or gainsay in any wise the formes of their
seruices, which they haue introduced to fetch vnder their subiection,
the greatest Potentates of the earth, and to draw thereby
deniers and reuenues from them: imitating herein some craftie
Phisition, who preferring a good bootie of siluer before the
health of the sicke patient: will learne what meate and drinke
pleaseth best his appetite, and hauing found, that he loueth claret

wine aboue all things, and sugar to make it haue a daintie
taste, which he taketh: imagine that he goe visit the patient,
who will straight begin to tell him, how he can get no recouerie
of his sicknes, albeit he hath vsed much blood letting, taken
many pilles, and other phisicke, which hath brought him verie
low, and put him to much paine: this same impudent Phisition
that tell him, that all that serued but to weaken him, and to take
away his stomacke: and by mouing a question to the sicke patient,
shall aske him, if he loue not well good claret wine? He
answering, with all his heart, this Phisition shall reply, that
he will warrant him to recouer his health againe, if hee leaue
taking these hard medicines, and those pilles so bitter in swallowing,
and to get some daintie wine of most delicious taste,
if he should send his man ten miles for some, to haue alwaies at
the least, three or foure good bottles in his Celler in store. And
bid him besides, least the vapours should sume too much to intoxicate
his head: to take Coriander comfits at the end of his
repast, and assure him that this wil make him more lustie againe
then all the phisicke in the world. I let you iudge with what
audacitie the sicke shall dare to imbrace this counsell? But if
it chaunce after he hath been verie ill, and his sicknes begin to
grow away, he come to recouer straight here vpon, how will
he honour this Phisition? he shall neuer be able sufficiently to
set foorth his praise. But in the seruice of God it is otherwise,
we must eate the bread of affliction and sorrow, drinke the water
of bitternes, which are verie bitter and loathsome drugs to
swallow, as things much offending our taste, whereas in the
seruice inuented by the Italians, there is nothing but yt which
is verie pleasant to our humane senses, and which doth verie
well agree with our carnall nature: and therefore do ignorant
men imbrace with a most ardent desire, all that they inuent,
which when they haue once receiued, is hard to be rooted out of
them, because their eye sight is not quicke inough to discouer
the marke whereat they shoote, which is only to beare rule, and
to share and make boote of the money which they get from
them.



Cap. 15.

That they care not at Rome for any diuersitie of
Religions, so they tend only to maintaine
their Domination.

THis is most manifest, for if any man inuent any new form
of religion neuer knowne before in the world, apparelling
himselfe after a straunge fashion neuer seene before, vsing iestures
altogither rediculous and foolish: liuing after a most austere,
to cruell and brutish maner, as do the Capuchians, Fucillians,
and such like foolish orders of Friars, all shall be approued
and receiued by the Italians with great plaudities, so that
such religions will serue them for a wall and defence for their
kingdome and gaine: but if any one appeare or come neare
them that dare speake against such abuses, and touch them to
the quicke a litle, leaning vpon the pillar of that doctrine, which
hath been giuen from the terrestriall Paradice, they will shake
a heauen and earth, and remoue all a world, to stop his mouth
and kill him, with great exclamations, that he went about to
sow new doctrines, and begin some new sect of religion: whereby
we may cleerely see, that vnder this cloake of religion, they
do but aspire to be rulers; and to finger mony from other peoples
and nations: and that all the warres and ciuill broyles
which haue so long troubled Germany, Swicerland, all Flanders
and France haue byn broched and begun by them for such
matters, albeit, those who had the conduct thereof, enterprised
them for the zeale they bore to their owne religion.


Cap. 16.

That the Romanes are not contented to staie themselues
with that which is spirituall, but would also dispose the
kingdomes of the earth at their pleasure.

THat the Italians shoote at this marke also, I bring euident
proofe, that when they had set their matters in so good

forwardnes that the Emperour and the other Christian kings
had graunted this title of soueraigne high Priest and vniuersall
Bishop to their Prelate of Rome: for to be a greater staie
and pillar of the Christian Church, and to keepe the other Bishops
and Pastours in better order, and within the compasse
of their dutie, they are not content to rest with that: passe further,
and cause to preach and publish by word and writing, that
their Bishop is Christes onely Lieftenant on earth: to whom
all Scepters and Crownes must yeeld humble obeisance and
be subiect, hauing full power to take them from whom he list,
and giue them againe to others, as it may best please his Holines.
And touching the kingdome of heauen, hee hath it so at
commandement, that he hath power to open it to some, and to
shut it to other some: as he that keepeth the keyes of heauen
gates in his owne handes: as for Hell, his power serueth him
as well to send thither whole Cart loades of soules, no man so
bolde for his life as to aske him why nor wherefore. These
things made Kings and Princes so sore astonished, that the Emperours
at their Coronation abase themselues so low, as they
promise to serue the Pope, for Subdeacon to hold the stirrope
while he get on horsebacke, and to leade his Horse by the bridle
a litle while. A worthie peece of homage for the Italians to
remember, who haue exalted their Sea and Bishop to so great
preheminence. Of which act they may be well ashamed, as also
of the dispossessing of Childericke, descended from Pharamond,
of the Crowne of France, to inuest Pipin, great Maister
of the Pallace, whome he had sent with his Army to succour
the Romanes, against other Italians, in recompence of
his conquestes which hee forgaue the Pope, and the people of
Rome, which was a reward out of other mens purses, for it
cost Childericke full deare. He learned not this by the succession
of the Apostles, neither did he herein imitate Iesus Christ,
for he himselfe paide tribute to Caesar: and he (whose heire and
successour he saith he is) teacheth him another lesson in his first
Epistle, Feare God, Honour the King. And S. Paul writing
to the Romanes, willeth that euerie soule bee subiect to
the higher powers: and that in resisting them, they resist the
ordinance of God. Likewise S. Iohn Chrisostome interpreting

this place saith: that by these words, (Euerie soule) is
meant Apostles, Prophets, Euangelists, Bishops and Monkes,
none excepted. In like manner the high Priestes representing
the person of Iesus Christ, did neuer enterprise to make such
braueries against Dauid, Salomon, and their successours, kings
of Ierusalem. Is it then likely that a Bishop or poore Monke
should go about such high enterprises of his owne motion? wee
may easily iudge that it is the Italians of Rome, who vnder
the couering of their names, and by their subtill meanes extort
from them such things to make themselues rulers, and get mony
vnder the maske of their authorities from other peoples and
nations of the earth.


Cap. 17.

That to make the kings of the earth vassalles tributary to
the Romanes: they sow warres amongst them, and vse
Censures.

ALthough the Italians hauing aduanced their capitall Citie
and high Priestes to so high dignitie and soueraigntie,
ought to haue rested content without encroching any further:
yet such is the naturall inclination of this nation, that hauing
an inch granted them, they will take an ell: they begin now to
cast about and deuise some meanes to winde vnder their armes
the neckes of Christian Kings and Princes, to bring them to
be their tributarie vassals. To make way to this, considering
that from the beginning the Popes were not admitted in the
election of Emperors or the Kings of France, by reason wherof,
they could not so well master them, nor turne and winde
them at their pleasure, because they durst not enterprise against
them so freely: the Councell of Rome taketh away this obstacle,
and worketh so wel in the matter, that the election is translated
to the Priests of Rome, who are my Lordes, the Cardinals.
That once dispatched, seeing themselues greatly aduanced
thereby, they contriue other meanes which they see more
fit to effect their purposes, whereof one is to stirre vp warres
and debates betweene Christian Kings and Potentates, wherby

they may destroy and weaken them selues, by their owne proper
armes, and bow more at ease their neckes vnder the Italian
Domination. The other is by the Popes censures to set
them together by the eares with domesticall and ciuill quarrels,
and in the meane time while they iarre, to get some prouince
or kingdom from them into their owne handes: it is
long since the Romanes vnderstood this practise: yea a good
while before the domination of Caesar. For desiring to bring
Greece in subiection, wherein there were two inuincible
leagues, to wit: of the Achayans and Ethobians, who held
so fast together, that it was impossible to vanquish them any
way by armes: they found out this hole to enter in, to make
them fall to warres and diuisions among them selues, so to ruinate
their owne countrie, that they might more easily set foote
into their prouinces. And if we looke well vnto the violeries
that Caesar won on this side the mountaines, the Italians redoubting
the Switzers, more then any nation in the world,
as Cicero saith in his Philippickes, we shall see that Caesar
charged them by surprise, at great disaduantage, and against
the law of armes: they hauing passed the one halfe of their armie
ouer the riuer Soane, and the other remaining on the other
side of the riuer, could not come to fight: being as yet then
no declaration made of open warre, betweene the Switzers
and him. Besides he tooke Ariomistius chiefe Captaine of
the Almanes, and all his troupes at vnawares, and assailed
them in time of truce: after to couer his sport, and to make
the matter good, he saide that he had discouered, how they went
about to surprise him. By meanes whereof hauing furnished
his armie with two strong and warlike peoples, and hauing
by diuisions that he sowed euerie where, got most of the
Gawles on his side: being beside verie skilfull to keepe good order
of militarie discipline: it was an easiie matter for him to
ouerthrow all other peoples. Amongst the rest the English
withstood him most couragiously at the first, and gaue him repulse,
but he went another way about with them, for before he
departed, he kindled such quarrels and diuisions among them,
in the which they were verie hote one against another before
he returned to set vpon them againe: wherefore it was an

easie mater for him to vanquish and conquest them afterwardes.


Cap. 18.

The Councell of Rome, setteth kinges and christian
princes together by the eares, and the way how they
discouer all their counsels and enterprises.

THe Romane Councell hath got some more aduantage by
this their pollicie and deuice, since the creation of their
Pope: for pretending to bring all kinges, peoples and princes
of christianitie, Catholikes, as well spirituall as temporall vnto
their subiection, vnder cloake of their Bishops, they haue
spunne the thred of all the warres which haue beene betweene
the Emperours, and other christian princes, so to bring them
on their knees, and to vndermine them that waies, that they
must still of force haue recourse to them, as to a place of refuge
and protection, the onely meane to pull downe their hautie stomakes,
and to set the Italian farre aboue them. To passe ouer
this plancke well, they haue giuen the name of Cardinals
to the priestes of Rome, granting the sonnes and brethren of
kinges and christian princes, to be honoured with the same
title and estate: suffering them also to remaine with their
traine amongst them. To the end that by these their creatures
they might handle and turne the other at their deuotion,
make them arme their people, and march against their neighbours
at their pleasure, and disarme againe and retire, their
forces when they should serue God. Considering also that
by such persons, the Councels wils, and determinations of
kinges and christian princes, to the which they are called,
should thereby be reuealed and manifested to them. The
quicke spirited Venetians, hauing long time since discouered
this pollicie, being a people of Italie verie subtill, and well aduised,
would neuer permit that any ecclesiasticall person should
be admitted into their Councell, because they had all taken the
oth of the Pope of Rome. See then it appeareth that the Romanes
are priuie to all the counsels and enterpriser of the princes
of the earth, and of their highest and soueraine courtes,

they discouer all their actions, as well as if they were present,
where on the contrary, not one of these can come within them
to vnder feele their consultations and dealinges, they are so
close and secrete, whereby we may iudge clearely, how farre
they surpasse all other people in inuention and subtiltie of wit.


Cap. 19.

The great force of Excommunication, to put the kinges
of the arth in feare, to make them their tributaries,
and the magnanimitie of our kinges in France.

NOw I come to another deuice of theires, by the which
they haue so cunningly triumphed ouer the kinges of the
earth, neuer striking stroke for the matter, and without any
daunger at al, and yet they haue brought them vnder as much
or more then euer the auncient Romanes did by their Trophees
and great victories, to wit: by excommunication, with
the which they so frighted them, that if they had neuer so little
displeased them: by and by they were threatned with rebellion
of their subiectes, to haue their scepters taken from them, and
others to be inuested therewith incontinent, hauing no way
in the world to resist or saue them selues, but in humbling them
selues vnder the greatnesse of their Bishops, yeelding them
selues to be the Popes vassals, or in paying them otherwise
some great and intollerable tributes. By this meanes they
exacted from Iohn king of England, that all his subiectes
should pay him a penny sterling for fire, for the murther by
him committed on the person of Arthure Duke of Britanie,
his owne Nephew and heire, which tribute the Italians mined
from them, more then the terme of trhee hundred yeares,
albeit the fault of this murther was not in the people, and therefore
they payed this tribute verie vniustly, and against all reason.
Yet they found meanes to augment this tribute verie
much, by the death of the Archbishop of Cauterburie, who
was executed by command of the king. Yet had the Italians
nothing to doe in the matter, hauing no interest at all therein,
being neither his heires nor children. Another tribute was

exacted of the Polonians, for the murther committed on the
person of Stauislaus their Arch-bishop, to, which is paide for
S. Peters tongue. The Pope hauing thundered by excommunication
against the duke of Venis, he was faine to make
him quiet, to creepe on all foure like a Dog, hauing a rope about
his necke, to be absolued. The kinges of Nauarre, and
Granade for disobeying him, were dispossessed of their kingdomes,
which were bestowed on Ferdinand king of Spaine,
yet the Italians did not forget themselues in this match, as
in deed they must nener: for it was vpon this condition, that
they should afterwarde be held of their Pope of Rome. Pope
Nicholas excommunicated the kinges of Naples and Sicilie:
and making them turne ouer a new leafe, inuested the Duke
of Aniow brother to Lewes the ninth, yet not forgetting him
selfe, as we saide before: vpon condition to pay him eight thousand
ounces of gold yearely reuenue. He excommunicated also
Philippes le Bel king of France, because hee would not
hold his kingdom of him, as his vassall: but he being discended
of the race of Hue le grand Countie of Paris, quaked not a
whit at the matter, but with a magnanimious courage, proper
to the kinges of this race, constantly resisted, and neuer
trembled at the hearing thereof, as other christian kinges did,
whose great magnanimitie hath beene continued by his successours.
This was the cause that the Italian Councell laide
their heades together to doe their vttermost to ruine this Monarchy,
by forraine forces, making it to bee assailed on euerie
side, and hauing set the Armies of the Empire of Spaine and
England, to thrust this race out of their kingdom, which seemed
to them inuincible. But perceiuing all that tooke not
effect, as they did wish, they haue filled the State full of ciuill
warres, thereby to weaken and diminish the force of this kingdome,
and to make way to inuest some other with ye Crowne:
who should thinke him selfe borne vnder an happie planet, and
greatly beholding to them, to come by it so easily, yeelding
him selfe therefore there vassall and homager, hauing purloyned
a kingdome by there meanes. Who also would be easily
entreated to let slip the accords confirmed betweene our kings
and the popes for the priuiledges, and liberties of the French

Churches, and touching the presentations of Benefices, reserned
to the Nobilitie and other patrones of the Layty, onely
translating them ouer wholy to the Pope, and so to enrich
more and more the citie of Rome. And by this meane we
should see this flourishing kingdom parted, as a bootie and pray,
betweene the Italian: keeping for his part, the spirituall, and
his confederates who shoulde haue the temporall for their
shares.


Cap. 20.

That it is a verie false pretext that they take, to refuse
the King for his religion sake, seeing they haue a spite
at all his race, and wish them no more well, although
they were neuer so great catholikes.

THat this hath beene the drift of the Italians, the proofe is
most manifest in this, that although Charles the ninth,
and Henrie the third of this name his brother, were the most
religious obseruers of the ceremonies of the church of Rome,
and more precise then any kinges that had beene before them,
sparing nothing to ruine and rout out the religion of the protestant
Huguenots, not so much as their owne persons, life,
treasure, nor liuings, nor their faith and honour beside, which
is more. Yet for all that, could they neuer winne the fauour
and good will of the Italians, nothing neare other princes,
who had wrought little in comparison of them. And what
was the cause hereof but that the Italians foresaw that a
race of auncient, and so long time inuested with the Crowne
of France: would neuer abide that they should haue anie rule
or prerogatiue ouer them nor in no waies permit that the liberties
and couenants made betweee their predecessors, the
kinges, and the Popes for the benefit of their kingdome should
be infringed. This is the reason why the Councell of Rome
hath sought all meanes possible to enstall other princes in their
roome, and to bring it to passe: haue emploied all their Preachers,
begging Friers, and other Ecclesiastikes, to vomit out
all kinde of blame and shame most opprobriously against the

said King Henry the third deceassed, placing him in the rancke
of the most abhominable tyrants, and murtherers of the world,
whome by their count, hee should surpasse in the periode of all
mischiefe: extolling aboue the heauens with the highest titles
of praise which they could deuise, some other Princes, thereby
to adiure them, and make euerie one honour them, loue them,
and make much of them. But to shew that the Italians and
their partners meant no good, not onely to the deceased Kings
person, but also to all his race in generall, see wee not plainly
that when they had by treason caused him to bee murthered,
they continue their selfesame practises towardes those of the
house of Bourbon, issued of the last sonne of S. Lewes, called
Robert Countie of Clermont? vpon whom, seeing they can
laie no blame, for that they are the true and lawfull heires of
this Crowne, they thinke to disherite him who is the eldest son
and heire, whose place he holdeth and representeth: vpon a coulour
onely that he beleeueth not as much or more in the Constitutions
of the Church of Rome, as in the word of God, and
by this text, they win the good will of the people, and of other
ignorant people. But when they contemne those of this house,
making warre against them, who haue been most zealous and
affectionate to their Constitutions, who haue also for defence
thereof, exposed their liues and goods to all daungers, as haue
done the Dukes of Mont Pensier, both father and sonne: do they
not shew, that they are thorowly resolued to destroy this race,
and to translate this Crowne vnto some other progeny? Touching
the Kinge, who is at this present: they should neuer
be able to attaint or staine him with note of any crueltie, tiranny,
nor any other insufficiencie to rule, for to blame him for
sticking to that religion wherein he hath been brought vp, it is
not likely they will, for the same reproch would fall vpon their
pates, if they should not perseuere in these. But he offreth them
faire, and more then they will accord to, that is to be heard in
a place of free assembly, to eramine louingly all these thinges,
and to stand to that which shalbe awarded for both sides. Wherin
he sheweth, how impudently and falsly, they argue and condemne
him to be an heretike. And as for those who magnifie
and exalt the ofspring, and descent of other houses to make the

world beleeue that this whence he is descended, is base, poore,
and of no name, they are lesse able to speake of the great, high,
and noble families of Christendome, then are Bats and Moles
to discourse of the greatnes, height, essence, beautie, and admirable
operations of the Sunne: for seeke among all the Empires
of the Assirians, Persians, Grecians, Romans, Almans,
Iewes, Tartarians, Mahometans, and ouer all the face of the
whole world beside, and you shall not finde a King of greater
race, nor of more auncient family then this, hauing had xxviii.
Kings in his house before him, and all lineally in race masculine:
and of his mothers side being the issue and heire of a Queen,
who with her mother the sister of Francis the Great, excelled
in wit, learning, and hautie courage, all other Christian Princesses,
that euer haue been before them. And touching the great
bountie and vertue both in time of warre and peace of the house
of Bourbon, neither Kings nor Princes, since the death of S.
Lewes, but this race hath farre gone beyond them, as all the
Cronicles of France shall witnes sufficient. And touching his
wealth, he hath alway had twentie times as much as hath had
any aduersarie he hath, hauing at ye time of his succession more
then a million of rent, by his patrimony and yeerely reuenue,
which he might haue multiplied to as much more, if hee would
haue pinched and sucked his subiects, by taxings, sales of Offices
and rearing of tributes, as some Italians haue caused to bee
done in France. Let them then laie away these false cloakes
wherewith they disguise the truth of things, and let vs beleeue
for a troth, as it is true indeed, that the Italians seeke nothing
els but to translate the Crowne into some other house, which
will bow their neckes vnder their commandements, and suffer
them to fish this Realme for siluer, to plant amongst vs the
Spanish Inquisition, to admit the Councell of Trent, and to
take the right of presentations from the Nobles, to finger them
themselues, and wipe their noses of the best and sweetest profits
that belong to the Realme.



Cap. 21.

The great subtilty of the counsell of Rome in getting into
their hands the Souerantie of the newfound world
conquered by the Spaniards.

BVt I cannot so often call to minde the conquest of the
new world, as I wounder at the great subtiltie of the
counsell of Rome, and againe at the more then great simplicitie
in the Spanyards and Portingales behalfe: for the Italians
perceauing to their great griefe their Domination and
tributes, to bee cut of in the East and North partes, as well
by the conquests of the Turke, as by the preaching of. Luther,
as also Pope Alexander the sixt had set in his foote at
the parting of stakes, and made the diuision: geuing on halfe
to the one king and the other to the other, reseruing for himselfe
the seesimple, principall Iurisdiction and Souerayntie,
making these two Kinges consent to bee his vassals, and to
holde their countries of him, although he had neither right of
seruice, nor of possession, and was not the discouerer neither.
Yet see, this parte was handled with such cuning and craft,
that the Italian became therby Souerayne Lord of twise so
much soyle and country as all Christendom vnder the name of
their Pope, And by what meane? you shall not finde it to bee
by his great trauels, perils, and expences, but by the laboures
bloudshedings, and armes of the Spanyardes who venture
bodyes and goodes, exposing themselues to infinte perils, troubles
and hazardes, to shipwracks of the sea, in danger of many
Pyrates and Rouers before the can come thether: and when
the are once there and entred into the country, fainte to fight
many combats and battels, and worse then all this, to fall into
many strange and incurable diseases, which proceede of
chaunge of ayer and habitation, when men transporte themselues
into farre countryes, where the clymate is of farre more
excessiue heate and colde then their owne was. Now whileste
these nations endure these trauels and sorrowes, worse then
twenty deathes, the Italians are at whome in there sumptuas

and braue pallaces, out of all daunger, passing the time in al voleptuous
pleasure, neuerthelesse they haue the most pretious
and fayrest fleece of their conquestes reserued for them, euen
as well, as if they themselues had bine the onely attempters
and atchiuers of theise so hawty and dangerous exploytes.
But let vs looke a little yf there were euer any Kinges or Emperours,
who griped so easily whole countries and kingdomes
from others, as these doe: Cyrus, one of the first, after hee
had sustayned infinit turmoyles and trauels, lost his life and
had his head put in a bole of bloud, to quench it so insaciable
desire of blood: Alexander the great found himselfe in ofte^ Ieoperdies
to lose his also, and was many times ouer matched,
and put to the worst. Iulius and Augustus Caesars, the most
politicke and wisest heads of the world, neuer made any conquest
but by bloody fightes and victories, exposing themselues
to a thousand dangers both by sea and land: But now the
counsell of Rome taking there ease at thir owne home, neuer
approching any da^ger for the matter, haue inuested themselus
with the Seigniorie and Domination of the greatest countres
that euer haue bine conquested by the sword. O subtill heades,
more subtil and cawtelous then subtiltie it selfe. O that the high
reache of thine inuentions are eleuated many degrees abone all
other nations of the earth. O that thou forseest long before the
euent of things, and canst choose the gaynest wayes to attayne
thy desires: few or none there be that can discouer thy meanning,
thou winnest first the heart of the greatest part of those;
the third of whose ruine thon meanest to spin: afterwardes to
vnderprop thy selfe against those that refuse thy Domination,
and will not become thy tributary vassals. Thon wilt knowe
all things, and yet thou wilt keepe other people in such ignorance,
that they shall know nothing: thus thou vsest them at
thy pleasure, lest they should bewray thee in thy subtill shifts,
and beware of them hereafter. This is they reason why a long
time thou hast layd a blocke in the way, that all matters of
great consequence either concerning Religion, or otherwise of
any other great importance could not be registered but in thine
old mother toung the Latine, and sore against thy will it hath
bine if the haue bine written or Printed in any other language

because that it maketh a breach, and sheweth a readie way for
many to come to discouer the fertilitie of thy spirit, abounding
with so many subtilities, fetches, drifts, and deceites. See this
is the cause also why thou wilt not permit the nations of the
new conquested countries to vnderstand any thing concerning
religion or matters of State, that thou maist lead them by the
noses, and handle them as if they were so many bruit Animals
that had neither wit nor reason.


Cap. 22.

The causes why the mony that is transported to Rome, is
called by the name of Quintessence.

NOw we haue sufficiently spoken of the Dominations of
the Romanes, we will passe to the next point touching the
extraction of the Quintessence of purses, where ye must note
that I take purses, for the gold and siluer that is put in them,
speaking by a figuratiue speech, for I borrow these termes by
a similitude: for euen as in all liquers, be it of Wines, Oyles,
Plants, Sulpheres, Allums, Antymoines, and other Mynerals,
they who are skilled to draw out the tinctures or proprieties,
and can seperate them from the terrestriall and elementall
bodie, as could that great Philosopher Paracelsas Gesnerus,
and he that wrote the booke intitled, le Medecin Liebant:
these haue the sweete fruition of the finest and most precious
part of the bodies and naturall substances, whereof the more
celestiall and spirituall part is called Quintessence. In like
maner the Romanes hauing learned by incomparable skil and
artistry, to draw vnto themselues the most noble portable, the
most desirable and fairest coyne of all Christendome, leauing
the grosser, and more terrestriall sort of baser monies to the
Kings, Princes, and people of Christendome for their vsage,
appropriating to themselues the more spirituall and celestiall
part, which they can tell how to seperate from the temporall
and earthly: are verie well said to draw the Quintessence out
of their purses*



Cap. 23.

Of the excellencie of the mony which is carried to Rome
out of other countries, and how the Italians onely can
fetch it thither.

TO shewe this by a familiar example, regarde but a man
that is of base condition, who hath onely but fiftie or sixtie
crownes of yeerly rent for a peece of land that he holdeth by
feefarme, lying within the demaines of some Baron or Countie,
he will make more account of that peece, then of three or
foure times so much lying among Pesants, or that he gathereth
among country Farmers, bragging of it euerie where.
Now see we some Bishop, or poore Monke comming to bee
Pope, to haue rentes and tributes out of the kingdomes of
Spaine, Portugall, Naples, Sicily, and Polonia, and as hee
was woont also out of the kingdome of England, where as all
Christian Kings and Princes take no tribute: but for the most
part of poore, base and miserable people their subiects, readier to
take then to giue, and this must they do by Taxes, Subsidies,
Fifteenes, and such like paiments. Herein we may see the marueilous
excellencie of the Popes tributes aboue those of all our
Kings. And to shew how the sweetest mony and most desired
of all, goeth still to the partes of Rome: marke but the common
fashion of euerie one, that falleth into want of mony: hee
wisheth straight but to haue a hundred or two of crownes out
of the Abbots or Bishops purse, who is next to the place where
he dwelleth, as being such fellowes which haue least need, and
yet haue the greatest plentie of all: albeit, they may wish for
it long inough before they haue it to fill their purses, because
they can deuise no shift proper for the obteining of their desire,
although they be his verie next neighbours. But the Italians,
they can worke such a way, and handle their matters so well,
that they can scrape and hooke to them a thousand crownes from
one place, and twise as many from another, the distance of an
hundreth leagues or more, and the difficultie of passing ouer
the mountaines cannot hinder them a iote.



Cap. 24.

How that this mony when it is transported to Rome, doth
flie with an incredible swiftnesse.

YEt to prooue better that the name of Quintessence, is properly
attributed to the gold that they share from other people
of Christendome, I pray thee gentle Reader, consider that
the substance of Quintessence is of so celestiall a nature, that
if it be not verie closely kept, and enclosed within some vessell
for that purpose, it leeseth straight the vertue, and flieth away
by vapours into the ayre: so this gold which they fetch so farre
to Rome, hath such an excellencie more then all other money
hath, and hath both value and vertue, none like it, that we haue:
not onely for that it is leuied with such wonderfull celeritie,
and vnusuall speed. (For when they purchase any collection of
mony, or any other Bull of an Abby or a Bishoppricke, they
spare no Horse flesh to gather vp the summes taxed, and hauing
gotten them vp once, they must go in post, and chaunge Horse
so often, that it seemeth the Flie with a Swallowes wings: no
height of mountaines, no rough, narrow, steepe, stony, hellow,
crooked, nor raggie waies, no depth of snowes, nor hardnes of
yse or frostes, no riuers that can staie or stop the passage of this
mony, it must to Rome, it must flie, it must not creepe on the
face of the earth: and sure it is of a wonderfull swiftnes in comparison
of the heauines, delaie, and long time that the monies
of Kings, Princes, and other great Estates are in getting into
their coffers, whe^ ofte^times before they can get it in, they must
force the good wil of their subiects, and be driuen to chuse out men
that shall sit vpon their Subsidies and other Imposts, and others to
collect the same, they which will not take such charges vpon
them but by great constraint, and being vrged by necessitie, and
then the poore people paie such summes sore against their will,
putting it of as long as they may. Then must there be straining
of moueables, and much heauing and shouing to haue them
againe, hatred, despleasure, anger, ill will, much adoo, and great
delaie on euery side, so that it will aske commonly three, or foure

moneths at the least, to collect, and deliuer in these Deniers to
the receipts, although it might easily be carried thither in three
or foure houres: and in verie deede may be saide to march but
with wodden legges, in respect of the swift course and great celeritie,
of that which is transported to Rome. This may verie
well shew, that the qualitie and nature thereof, is farre more
excellent and pretious, then of that coine which the Kings and
Princes of the earth possesse. Yet some may peraduenture reply,
that that which commeth by the sale of offices, approcheth
verie neere the nature thereof, I will confesse so, but I will also
answere, that such trafficke is but an Italian tricke and inuention,
for that by all lawes and ordinances, both of God and
man, all such sales are forbidden as most pernicious, and greatly
damageable to the common wealth, and matters most vnworthie
and vnbeseeming all good Christians, that haue the feare
of God before their eyes.


Cap. 25.

A description made, by learned men which hath alwaies
feared the Councell of Rome, and the causes why.

I Thinke I haue said inough of the Domination and filching
of mony, wherewith the Italians haue a great while preuailed
to fill their pockets, and to master the world. Now must I
speake of the meanes wherwith they serue their turn to maintaine
the^selus in their estate, and to make it good against al other.
And albeit, in inuention and deuising, the yare so cunning, and
can passe and make seeme good to euerie one, that which they
haue inuented and deuised: yet are they farre more expert in
keeping their estate, and can remoue and preuent all lets that
may endamage them to hold their owne. Foreseeing then that
they had intangled the people of Europe within their Domination,
vnder the pretence and cloake of religion, there was no
more likelihood that the people might euer pull their neckes out
of their yoake, being farre grosser and harder to receiue anie
chaunge, then the people of Affrike: seeing also that all that
they feared was, lest that some, addicting themselues to the contemplation

of Gods workes, to the studie of Philosophie, and
to the reading and perusing of the holie scriptures in the language
wherein they were written, might view all the religions
that are vsed vnder the scope of the heauens, and seeke out
the first causes, principles, and inuentors thereof, and hauing
curiously examined all, might make these conclusions: viz.
that all religion is either diuine or humane: that the diuine is
proceeded from God, the other from men: that by the diuine,
there is nothing required at our hands but to offer our selues,
soules, and bodies to God, to do that which is his will, which
is to follow vertue, and to flie vice, to call vpon him and adore
his holie name, and for our sinnes, I haue recourse vnto the
mercie that he offereth vs in Iesus Christ, the which he offereth
vs freely without our mony or riches, onely enioyning vs
charitably to helpe and loue one another. On the other side, casting
their eyes vpon humane religion, they shall see that all religions
that men haue, whether they be Pastors of the church,
or who soeuer they be: for their authours, tend onely but to get
rule, and to draw away the substance of those that embrace them,
and are fitter to tye men by the feete to this earth, then to carrie
them vp to heauen, where the seate of God is. Concluding
likewise this: that, that religion is best, by the which God is
best serued: then it must needes follow, that following his will
declared by his word, he is better serued, then by the traditions
of men: wherefore we must not go beyond that, as being the
onely obiect of faith, and as being the onely thing which agreeth
with his Doctours and Preachers in all the partes of the
world, to wit, the Firmament, with his admirable greatnes
and beautie almost incomprehensible: the Planets placed betweene
it and vs: the ayre, and that which is engendred therein,
the earth, the water, and the creatures which liue and moue
in the same, altogither setting forth from the one ende of the
world to the other, the greatnes, maiestie, wisdom, prouidence,
power, and bountie of God the Creator and preseruer of the
same. On the other side, seruing to conuince vs of weakenes of
spirit, of ignorance, of blindnes, and vncapablenes to comprehend
his essence, his profound wisedome, and the meane wherby
he hath created all these things, how he conserueth them in

their being, and how he worketh euery daye in the diuersitie
of so many things which we see before our eyes, to learue vs
thereby, that it is an intollerable auragancie, and presumption
in men to thinke to be his councellers, to make lawes, like
lictle Kings, in his Church, which he calleth the Kingdome of
heanen, and his Spowse: to there great shame which name
themselues seruants in the same, by whome agreat ouersight
and rashnes (not to be borne with all,) goe about to establish in
it certaine humaine Constitutons, as though they weere to
comma^d and not to obay. For seeing that it is his Spowse: seruantes
must not be so saucie as to make Lawes for her to bee
at their checke. Seeing then that hee is the soueraigne King,
and him before whome all things are present, no man may
enterprise such things without encroching vpon his kingdom,
reputing himselfe of greater wisedome then hee, who is his
creatour, which are greuous offences deseruing very great
punishments, and cleane contrary to our dutie towards God,
which is to shew our selues, humble, lowly and glad to bee
taught by him, and to tremble at his words, as this Dampish
earth an insensible and deafe creature taught vs, at the publication
of the law, when it reeled, trembled and was readie to
shake in sunder at the voyce of God. Moreouer what fayre
shew soeuer they can set on the Constitutions of Pastors, the
shall alwayes be humaine, and whosoeuer obayeth them, obayeth
but men and there inuentions. But he that woulde
looke with a vigilant eye to the neere examination and deepe
sownding therof: shal easily discouer, that their only purpose is
to amplifie there authoritie more and more still, and to drawe
coyne from people secretly, selling that at an hard and deare
rate which God geueth vs freely, and offereth vs most gratis.
And this is the reason why the Italyans fearing lest the publications
of such doctrine altogether heauenly and diuine, would
make there Domination shake from the top, quickly turne it
vp side downe, and soone diminish all the profits that the reape
out of the countries of all Christendome, by meanes of their
reaching inuentions: they haue therefore by a most subtill
peece of prouidence toke order in the matter that the Doctrine
and lessons of these men come not to light by remedies which

seeme to be the fittest in the world for their purpose.


Cap. 26.

The first meanes that the Romanis vse to maintaine their
Domination.

FIrst, to preuent lest any should attaine to so great knowledge
in the holy Scriptures, that they should finde out of
themselues the most perfect and onely wholsome meanes
of saluation to consist therein, and to despise all other humaine
seruices: the haue caused all that concerneth the Diuine
seruice to be written and pronounced in a tongue out of vse
with all nations, the vnderstanding whereof cannot be attayned,
but in consuming many yeares great trauels, and much
cost, to thende to keepe the people still in ignorance of the true
way to serue God. Taking good heede not to translate it into
Italian, lest by and by they should proue to lerned to suffer the
councell of Rome, to handle them as they haue done. And beside
all this to vse the matter so, that the that vnderstand Latine
should not learne to much by the lecture of the Epistles
and Gospels, the haue set downe an order that the shall sing
the^ with such a Note, that those which vnderstand the tongue
very well otherwise, shall not vnderstand much more in that
place, then the ignorant people: for to speake troth the councell
of Rome vseth the word of God no further, but so fare as it
will serue for there Domination and enriching in other partes
of Christendome, and would be willing that whatsoeuer therin
is contained importing any disaduantage to their dealinges,
had bine cut of fiue hundred yeares since, for that they haue no
neede of it, obseruing therein verie well the saying of a certaine
Philosopher vsed in these speaches: Take heede leste in seeking
to much the Heauen, yee loose not the earth. Which
is as much to say: that they must prefere earthly things before
the kingdome of God. As we see the Italians doe, interpreting
or reading Gods commandements when the cutof the defences
made in the law of God, againste Images: whereof one
is, not to make Images, another not to bow downe to them,

and the third not to worship them. Would they euer do this,
thinke you, but that they foresee that the true vnderstanding of
this commandement, wold coole and freeze the zeale of those that
bring offrings to the worshipping of their Images, with the
which they licke their lippes full sweetly. But they will not I
warrant you, peruert or misconster this article. Thou art Peter,
and vpon this Rocke will I build my Church. All the
world shall heare, what these wordes signifie, they will want
no Trumpets for the matter, that they may therby be Dominators
and Kings, and fetch in mony by Cart lodes to Rome:
such force and vertue haue those wordes, so sure a staffe vnto
them is the rocke of S. Peter. See then this is one mean most
ingeniously inuented, to containe the people within the obedience
of the Romane Councell.


Cap. 27.

A second meane that they haue to keep men in their seruice
still.

BVt iudging that to be a sufficient remedy to withhold learned
men, who by reading of the holie scriptures, by true
contemplation of thinges created by the handie worke of
God, and by the great harmony of both these, ioyned togither,
should be brought to the knowledge of the Creator, and to the
true seruice conuenient for his holie name, and so fall to be opinatiue,
reiecting the Italian Domination, and by such meanes
shake their so sure gouernment, and make it totter a litle. Against
whom being men well armed with sound arguments, it were
a most dangerous thing for the Italians and their suppostes to
deale by way of disputations: yet see they haue defenses and ramparies
to let them, for making any breach in their Domination.
First to make them hold their tongues: no more but to giue
them some fat benefice, some Abbey or Priory, and to schoole
them a litle with this lesson, that the veritie which they saie,
they know, is but poore and bare god wot, wearing but a thrid
bare coate, neuer able to make a man rich: (as it was apparant
indeed in him who was the Veritie it self, hauing no place

to hide his head in:) that beside it had the world, all Kings and
Princes of the earth for enemy. On the other side, he that wold
be employed for Rome, she had to command all ouer ye world,
and had the bestowing of Bishoppricks, Abbies, Priories, and
Parsonages, to aduance and make happie all those that imbraced
their part. Now of a great number few or none stand out
with them, but are ouercome with such temptations, and if there
be any that will not yeeld to them, we see by and by that the
Bishops and their Officials haue them in chace, and do their
vttermost to inflame the Magistrate against them, to put them
to death, as did the Priests of the old law, against Helias, Ieremias,
and the rest of the Prophets, and their successors, against
Christ. But if the Magistrates chance to wincke at them, the
Councell of Rome, hath caused Ecclesiasticall Counsellers to
bee admitted into all Courtes of Parlament to aduise, stire vp
and inflame all Presidents, Proctors of the King, and all other
councellours to make open warre with fire and sword against
such people, not without sore charge to the Iudges, to looke vnto
them, menacing their negligence herein with double punishment.
By reason whereof, it shalbe heard for them to escape
their handes. Whereby appeareth, how great the carnall wisedome
of this nation is, to maintaine and hold fast their reuenues
and Domination.


Cap. 28.

The third meane whereby they fortifie the^selues with the
Forces of three of the most mightiest in al Christe^dome.

NOt to be destitute of any one aide that might stand them
in steed, they found meanes to arme themselues with the
greatest Forces ye Christen men may yeeld, when they perceiued
that by such fellowes as are abouesaid, Princes, Cities and
common weales might be puld from them, which were no fish
for Prouosts, Controllers, nor Sergeants mouthes: they backed
themselues better with the most strong redoubtable and
puissant forces of all Christendome, as with the K. of Spaine
for the head, with the King of France for the stomacke, and the
Emperour for the belly, which are the principall parts of Europe.
So that if a man open his mouth to speake against their

Domination, you shall see the Catholike straightway, thunder
downe all with his Inquisition, and euerie man haue a fling
at him. Is there any that will set vpon them by main strength
for any other matter? Be the Lombards, Venetians, Neapolitans,
or whatsoeuer they be, they will but whistle at Rome,
and by and by ye shal see marching to their succour the Armies
of these mightie Princes aboue named. But the Romans, they
will make themselues poore when they should paie them, and
recompence their trauels: they can abide nothing worse then
that. For Childericke the King of France, for sending them
aide, lost the Crowne of France. And as for satisfaction for any
other aide that other Kinges of France haue giuen them,
they neuer put their hand to their treasures yet, to recompence
them: nor neuer adioyned any Duchy or kingdome to their
Empire: but haue alwaies been pulling from them. But in recompence
of all their labours, losses and expences, they haue
giuen this word (THRISE) which is vsed in forming a superlatiue,
to the King of France: although hee had as much
and more authoritie to take it to himselfe, then the Romanes
to giue it him. And to the King of Spaine they haue giuen this
word (Catholike) which he might haue taken himselfe if hee
would haue challenged it, no man to say nay. These names
haue continued from father to sonne, as if they came by inheritance,
by which the Italians haue plaied and wrought vpon,
as well the one as the other, as though the bare names had any
vertue or operation in them, to transforme the persons, and
to make them any other then they were, which should bee a
most manifest abuse. But when that a man hath any qualitie
of great vertue or vice, he may verie fitly haue some name of
honour or dishonour attributed vnto him. As S. Lewes was
so called for his holines of life. Philip le Bel, for his exceeding
beautie: and Philip le Hardi, for his hardines and valour. But
all this cannot be translated to their heires and successors, because
they are but qualities of speciall persons, and are proper
to them onely, from whom they cannot passe. For as it had bin
a most absurd thing to haue termed Commodus an Emperour
of Rome, and a most cruell tyrant, a Saint and a Philosopher,
because Marcus Aurelius his father, for his rare vertues,

sagesse and eloquence was so named: so also is there none
apparent reason why the Councell of Rome, should denominate
for flatterie, indifferently all the successors of this crowne,
Kinges most Christian. No more then with the Epitheton
that was giuen to Charles le grand, (1. the great.) And as for
the title of Catholike, it was falsly attributed to the King of
Spaine, because it signifieth as much as vninersall King: that
is, King euer all. Whereas at that time he was King only but
of the Spaines; for as yet then raigned the King of Portugall:
and beside he is not so much yet neither as King ouer all
Christendome. Although that such Epithets haue beene verie
vnfit, and falfly attributed indifferently to all: yet we see by such
toyes and deuises, they haue with a wet finger drawen more
Forces to their succour out of these kingdomes, then at this
present twentie millions out of any other Princes purse, would
do out of all Germany. By giuing them only these names and
titles, they make them march when they list, vsing them like
the great Canary Dogs, which are tied fast with a long chaine
and a coller. As for the Emperour to keep him vnder, they haue
bestowed on him some kingdome or Princedome, to make him
their owne creature and vassall, yet vnder the name of their
Pope, to set him forward, or pull him backe as they list, and at
their deuotion. And all this to the end, that if any went about
to shake or endomage their Domination at the head, hee
should straight assaile and bee shaken off by the Catholicke
King, if he came against the breast, the most Christian King
should trownce him, if he made at the bellie, the Emperour
should teare him: so that he should be met withall what way
so euer he came. Turne ouer and read the Histories of the memorable
actes and deeds of all nations in the world, and finde none
that euer hath so iusteled Kings and Emperours by a voluntarie
Domination, to make them march, without any pay at all,
as hath done the Councell of Rome. I speake not only by these
but by an infinit number of others, so he haue bin glad to obey
and follow them at all times, whensoeuer they stood in need.



Cap. 29.

A Demonstration how the Councell of Rome winneth to
their side, Princes, younger brothers, and maketh them
their voluntarie slaues.

BVt the sublimation of the Italian spirit is remarked to flie
farre aboue all other nations of the world, herein especially,
that perceiuing a few yeeres since, there were found many men
of great spirit in the Councelles of these Monarkes, who discouering
their drifts, began to counterchecke them a litle, not stirring
a whit at the first sound of the Trumpet, comming from
Italy, as they were wont to do in times past, they haue made
a cunning prouiso for this matter, drawing into their confederacie
and league, certaine younger brethren of the best houses
of the Princes in Christendome, who being not surcharged
with too much reuenues, nor too great gouernments, to imploy
themselues, runne like swift footed Greyhounds at the first call,
that is made for them. To make them march with more then
humane expedition, they must be charmed with praises up to
the heauens, far higher then the praises of many of those which
the Paynims held for Gods in this world. Comparing them
with the most worthy and valiant warriours which euer haue
been, terming them the verie portraitures of Alexander, in
diligence and hautinesse of courage: verie Images of Augustus
Caesar, in subtilitie and wisedome, and in zeale for the enlarging
and glorie of the Romane Church: true imitators of
Constantine the great, resemblers of Charlemaine, and as
great warriours as euer was the Romane Fertorius, to resist
and stand out boldly against all humane powers. And to set a
better hue on these so high commendations, if there be to be
found any externall beautie or corporall force in these Princes,
that must not be forgotten in no wise, but extolled to the ninth
degree: likewise, for the antiquitie of their houses, the great
Alliances with other Princes, the noble and famous acts of all
their predecessours, all this must be curiously dilated, not one
little forgotten. And besides, to passe them vp with the winde

of such vaine praises, and to eleuate their courage aboue al that
is vnder Luna, they forget not to abase and disgrace as much
as they can, the spirit, courage, and valour of these three great
ones, of whome I spake but now, as though they had not the
wit to enterprise any great exploites of armes: as though they
had no magnanimitie, diligence, force nor wisedome at all, to
execute such matters: notwithstanding the place and dignitie
they keepe, and the great meanes they haue in their power: but
they if they had their roome, it were inough to make them become
Monarkes of the whole world. The verie breath of these
so high commendations, doth so set on fire all the parts of their
soule and bodie, that it serueth them for winges to flie when
they go about any affaires for the Councell of Rome; who for
their part, to the ende to giue them feete to staie and stand surely
vpon, must not forget to aduertise them, that if they haue any
brethren or children, they may promote them to the dignitie
of Cardinals, so that they shalbe sure to haue as much Ecclesiasticall
reuenue as their backe will beare, so they may fill
their houses full of coine, which had but in meane quantitie before.
Now euerie one may thinke, that whilest they go about
these things, Coursers of Naples, Damasco swordes, plumes
of feathers, and precious stones, the rarest and dearest are also
presented them, as those only who are worthie to possesse them.
But aboue all, when they vnderstand that all that shalbe their
owne that they can conquest, which is temporall, and that the
Italians passe not but for the spirituall, then they are set on fire
with an inextinguible zeale. Then appeares there such a sodein
chaunge, and straunge metamorphosis in these Princes, that a
man would thinke that some new soule had entered into their
bodie, and dispossessed and chased out that which ruled there before:
for then treading vnder foote the naturall affection, that
they bore to their countrie, their sweete mother, who hath
brought them vp tenderly, and nourished them more delitiously
then all others: then farewell the homage and loyaltie belonging
to those whom God hath set in place for their superiours,
and the straight bond of amitie towards all their kindreds and
auncient friends, without any regard of those, who haue been
their planke to preferre them to so high degree and ranke of honour

which they possesse, such younger brethren, neglecting the
oath giuen to their Prince, transported with a most vnquenchable
heate, and zeale, without all gouernment of reason, cast
themselues headlong to embrase the affaires and practises of the
Roman Councel, with so violent affection, yt all their thoughts,
discourses, and imaginations, are occupied in nothing els, but
still how to continue the same. So that the feruent zeale to aduance
the Roman Domination, doth consume and gnaw them
night and day: falling into such disquietnesse for the furthering
therof, that they haue not so much as the patience to abide any
good aduertisements. But like as they were transformed into
more naturall Romanes; set their wits to deuise a thousande
things for their good and conseruation: refusing not to sustaine
all perils and daungers of bodie and goods, all watchings and trauels
for their sake. Making no doubt of conscience to set kingdomes
and prouinces any waies on fire: either by working
their ruine by their owne armes, or by forraine Forces, or to
do worse, to stirre vp theeues and murtherers, who by treason
and at vnawares, do shed the blood of those, who keepe themselues
fast locked within townes, causing all lawes and bonds
(both diuine and humane) of amitie and consanguinitie to bee
violated, persuading themselues that such butchery and murther,
may any way aduance the Italians: or els that such cruelties
should be to them onely sacrificers of sweete sauour, and seruices
most agreeable. See then ye arrows that be readie drawne,
made by this most ingenious nation, to the ruine and confusion
of those, who dare once open their mouthes to speake against
their profits or Domination.


Cap. 30.

Begging Friars sent abroad and emploied by the Romans,
to set vpon those that dare open their mouthes against
their Domination.

THe Councell of Rome hauing long time found that many
Cardinals, Bishops, and Colledges did not stir at the
first word, that they hard from Rome, to set vpon Princes and

commonweales, although they were their own creatures double
bound vnto them: first hauing ben aduanced by Kings and
princes by their leaue, and next, for feare to loose the fairest fethers
that they weare. They inuent, or howsoeuer giue place to other
kinde of fellowes, which they receiue into the number of
Cleargy men, that will make no such delaie as the other: I
meane their begging Friars, a most laborious kind of people,
supporting all trauel and paine, and doing so much good abroad,
that they will swell out incontinent, and haue at a baie those
that do but thinke any euill against the kingdome of the Romish
Constitutions. Let them hide themselues neuer so well,
they are sure to be drawne out of their dennes by this kennell,
who can open and discouer so well, that in the twinkeling of an
eye, they will set in an vprore all Christendome, exclaime against
Kings, Princes, and peoples, yea, against Bishops and
all other Cleargy men, that will not execute their resolutions
and commandements. Greatnes nor highnes cannot amaze
these fellowes, they will speake their pleasure, and that which
is in their heades, what soeuer come of it. Neither feare they
that their Prebends be taken from them, or that any other fine
be set on their head: for there is no more to be gotten of them,
then of the shauing of an Eg-shell. Besides, they need neither
gold nor siluer by the way to spend, for their lodgings are prouided
before where they shalbe relieued without a penny cost,
neither feare they any confiscation of their goods, nor that any
infamy fall vpon their children, for that they haue none at all.
See how they may be bold with all securitie, to speake any contumelious
reproches, and ignonimious slanders on Princes,
outraging them in their persons, caring not a point, and making
a small matter to do it.


Cap. 31.

Of the seruice of Iesuites, to blinde the youth withall, to
the end to make them adore the Italian inuentions.

BVt because this great rabble had not taken vpon them the
instruction of youth, wherin certaine learned Schoolemaisters
being emploied, discouered many things to the great

diminishing of the Romane authoritie, to make vp this breach,
the Italians brought in Iesuites of farre profounder learning
then the begging Friars, and with the same haue peopled the
most famous Vniuersities of Christendome, who being so
much followed by studentes, take no hire of them that heare
them, contenting themselues only with the gaine of their pensioners.
They hold opinion, that the Bishop of Rome is aboue
the Consuls, by this meane altogither ouerthrowing the authoritie
thereof. As for their Disciples, they tie them so fast by
the heeles, with the cords of the Italian superstitions, that they
put them in such feare that they tremble againe, if they transgresse
the least of them neuer so litle: and the more easily to
strike this feare into their hearts, they robbe the tender youth
of all iudgement and vse of reason. For to iudge truly of anie
question in controuersie, we must diligently heare and weigh
the reasons on both sides, all affection laide apart. These on the
contrarie, hauing brought their Disciples to belieue in the Catholike
and Romane Church, they conclude thus thereupon,
that they stop their hearing, and giue none eare to any one,
who soeuer dare speake against the Popes authoritie, nor against
the ceremonies which he hath instituted, nor dare once
so much as to reade any booke, which may call them in doubt,
as not altogither necessary to saluation: and that he which feareth
the plague, ought to flie from such places and persons which
are infected: so they before all thinges must take heede, not to
heare any, nor receiue any bookes which may go about to remoue
them from their opinion in one iote. These are their
propper foundations and grounds, whereby they do not onely
depriue their Disciples of all iudgement, but also of the vse of all
their natural sences, wherwith God hath indued man to make
choice of things, and to know how to put a difference between
good and bad: by this meanes, they make them not onely dull
spirited; but altogither as brutish beasts in heauenly and diuine
things, fighting directly against the instruction of S. Paul, who
teacheth vs to proue all things, praising in this place of scripture,
the diligence of those that did examine the Prophecies, to
know if Christ were the true Messias. And whereas the Prophets
did not cease to exclaime against the abuse of the Sacrificators

and Priests of the olde law: S. Iohn Baptist in like
maner: Christ also the soueraigne Prophet, the Apostles who
euer cried out against the false pastors. And S. Augustin complaining
of the multitude of ceremonies which were entred into
the Church at his time: and besides we haue seene heretofore
many Bishops, Doctors and Pastors do the same in contemning
the greatest part of them. These on the other side, hold
all good, and maintaine them, not onely ouer and aboue the word
of God: but further the^ this, beside ye word of God. By reason
wherof, if the Catholikes looke not about them, to bestir themselues
otherwise then they haue done since the entrance and creation
of these Iesuites, to shake off the yoke of the Italian Domination,
it will soone be restablished in the highest degrees of
soueraintie that euer was since it began. And there shalbe neither
King nor Prince be he neuer so strong nor mightie, but
the Romans will make him tremble at one winke of their eye:
and will put them in as bad feare as the poore Israelites were
at the publication of the Law, when they shall threaten them
with the thundrings and lightnings of their Romish excommunications,
to discharge all their subiects of the oath of their loyaltie,
to inuest others with their kingdomes and principalities,
so that the Italians shall triumph ouer them, as they did ouer
the Duke of Venice, trailing him with a cord about his neck,
for his disobedience to their Romish Bishop.


Cap. 32.

A brief refutation of the Iesuites.

BVt whosoeuer would not make himselfe obstinat against
his owne good and saluation, might easily helpe himselfe
out of these Iesuits halters, setting before his eyes how that
they alledge things contrary to that which they professe and cause
to be executed indeed. For this is the summe of their Doctrins,
that euery one most firmly abide in his owne Religion, without
hearing any thing to the contrary, and neuerthelesse they
haue enflamed the Spanyards to kill thousands and Millions
of the new world, because they would not change there Religion,

to embrace another. And as it is proper to shifters, deceauers,
and those that haue not loyall Marchandises, to deale
in secret, asmuch as they can, and closely to couer there action,
to sell there ware in darke places, to thende to keepe the truth
of the matter hidden, lest their abuse should bee discouered: so
theise which feare so much the examination of their Doctryne
conuince themselues, that it is not sownde, nor allowable.
Whereas that man that seeketh but the glorie of God, withont
any respect of any Domination, or wordly profit, will take
singular pleasure, seeing his Doctrine examined by the worde
of God, and with the workes that he hath created, and likewise
be delighted to maintayne and defend it against whosoeuer
would dispute to the contrarie. For all this, this would neuer
the Church of Rome permit, her pollocie is so great herein,
albeit Italy is replenished with a great number of verie
learned men and great Schollers, as well in Philosophy as in
any of the lawes: and very desirus to maintayne any dispute
against heretikes, (as the tearme them) who are so themselues,
to giue them their right title and definition, and against all
those that goe about to diminish or speake against there kingdome
and gaines, for that the repute not others for such. For
the are not so grosse witted as the Almons, who dispute about
the Consubstantiation and Infinity of the bodie of Christ against
the confession of the Switzers and Frenchmen, without
hope of any profit or Domination to bee gotten thereby:
But the Italian smelling out any profit or gaine in that which
is propounded, he will agree to all, and repugne onely in that
whereby he thinketh to receaue any dommage. Which is a
most cleare and manifest proof that there is nothing, but worldly
wisedome in all that he pretendeth and goeth about.


Cap. 33.

The councell of Rome is like to certaine Petifogging layers,
who will not consent to haue there causes disputed
and heard in open audience.


TO make this more apparent, we must note that when
the councel of Rome, wil neuer accord to haue there cause
defended in any open audience against there aduersaries, what
other thing thereby may be inferred, but that they secretly
yeeld that there cause is scant good, for the are not so grosse
witted, nor so much blinded, as the Iesuistes Schollers of
whome I speake euen now: but as crafty Layers of good
meanes and habilityes, finding there low matters like to goe
against them, prolong the indgement and curry fauour with
the Iudges as much as the can: yet seeing the plantifes sue
them hard, they will labour tooth and nayle to referre there
cause to those of the counsell, hoping by fauour and instance of
them, they may soner win there processe, then in any open audience.
And if the perceaue that all this doe not auayle, what
will the doe? the will hyer some manslayer, to kill there aduarsarie
by some villanous treacherye: euen so this counsell so
crafty and politick, vnderstanding of an assembly of states, or any
general day of hearing, ether in Germanie, France, or Spaine
the send in continent thether, and what by fauour and corrupting
with bribes, the will vse the matter so, that nothing shall
there be debated, which concerneth any way the kingdome of
Rome: vnlesse it tende to the aduauncement and furtherance
of their Domination. And if therebe any Chancellours or other
learned personages, who haue authoritie and meane to
moderate and order matters as they would haue, they are saluted
with congratulations, and promises of great rewardes,
and by that meanes wonne to their side. As for murthers, they
haue spilled more humane blood since Iohn Hue Bohemian
rose vp in armes, to challenge his Domination against them,
then all the quarrels and manquellers since Noes flood, in all
the broyles, brawles and quarrels that they haue made. Take
onely but the battels that they caused to be giuen by the Emperours
against the Bohemians, and against the Almans: the
persecutions in England, the warres of France and Flanders,
and all those that the cruell and bloodie Inquisition hath
destroied, both in Italy and Spaine: and the slaughters that
haue been in many townes of France, and in many other places
by their meanes onely, and you shall finde that they are

cause of the death of more then a million of men: and woemen:
and all becanse the would keepe there cause from debating in
Parlaments and nationall Councells. Whereby we see they
hane all deuises and craftes in their heads so ready, which may
serue them to preserue their Gouernment and continue their purloyning
of mony from other nations: who in no wise can come
neere them to practize any such subtilties, they are so grosse,
and such sleepy heades, that their is none amongst but the best
spirits, not subiect to be passionate, who can discouer there iugling,
and fine conueances.


Cap. 34.

The breefe confutation of a Pestifrous booke, published
in France, by the name of (the Catholike Englishman).

THis nation and there partners enuiyng the Gouernment
of the good French, who being wearied with so many troubles
and miseries, were amiably vnited to liue peaceablly together,
Catholikes and Protestants, the borrow the Eloquence
of some Italionate Frenchman, who falsely termeth himselfe
the Catholike Englishman, abusing the true vse of this gift
by the which (as Caecero saith) men which were altogether
rude, rusticall, cruell and sauage are transformed into a
more sweete and socyable nature, to vse it as a trumpet and
torch to giue allarum, and to kindle the burning coles of choller,
and vengeance in the herts of all Catholikes to make them
run headlong into heat and rage of stomack like vnto a Bare
rauished of her whelpes, to sack and destroye all those who dare
open there mouthes against the Italian Domination, vnder
the name of Popes: caring not by this pernicious councell to
make all Christendome so weake: that it might without great
resistance be inuaded of the Turckes, to abolish the name and
remembrances of all Christen people for euer: for by his councell
hee goeth about to make the Catholikes beleeue, that it
shall suffice them to flie like dogs vpon the Hugonots, to
pull out there throates to rout out there names, and to vanquish
them quite for euer: But this there cursed, craftie and

captious councell, hath not had such issue as they would haue
wished or looked for: it hath but abridg the life and hastened
the death of those that first tooke it in hand as namely of the
Duke De Ioyeuse, and the Lord de Saint Sauueur they bee
most affectionate partners, with great ignominie and dishonour
of so shamefull a flight of so many, who accompanied them
both in there actions: As also with the great reproch. disgrace
and ouerthrowe of men giuen to the Duke, De Aumalde
and all his toupes at the battell of Senlis, without speaking of
fiue or six armies beside, which without euer striking stroke
by sicknesse and long trauels ruined of themselues. Besides
the Parisians inflamed and bloodily bent to destroye some bodie
els then the Catholike Englishman shot at, haue gotten
but trauels, troubles, and inestimable charges by their malice,
hauing suffred the enimie to come and beate them into there
owne gates, to saise vpon there neerest townes, with out euer
lending ayde to any. And further then all this, they haue seene
there owne suborbes pillaged, and there forces, which the
iudged inuincible, destroyed before there faces, at the battell of
Yury being in chaunted by the venimous and pestilent Eloquence,
both of there pernicius Englishman, and also by the
blooddy sermons of one Francis Pinsenac very like vnto this
false and pretended Catholike, vnlesse as I may gesse it be the
very man himselfe, or his familiar frende of Orleans that hath
put forth this blooddy booke: which may rauish and quite cary
away with the force of his liuely Eloquence agreat part of the
Catholikes that reade it, to enterprise the slaughter and manquelling
of those, who doe not adore all that commeth from
Italy, Where I might spare it if any good had euer come to
Fraunce by it, or by any that are imployed on that parte. But
seeing that it seemeth that this nation is created for the scourge
and extreme ruine of the more Northren people, when he taketh
so their parte, making it good to the vtter ruine and ouerthrow
of vs all. Doth he not discouer, that he beleeueth neither
hell nor heauen? But is a villanous Atheist prefering the
worldly profit and honour, which he draweth from this partie
before the loue of his countrie, for the which as Caecero,
sayth, Euerie honest man ought not to refuse death. And

not as this wretch, to hasten it ruine. O verie rare and seede of a
viper: who seemest not to haue bine borne for any other good,
but the destrution of thy Countrie, which thou oughtest to
loue more dereely then thine own life. O pernicions Phisition,
whose Phesike is an hundred times more dangerous then
the malladie it selfe: who in steede of a gentle purgation
ministres Antimoyne not prepared, and ranke poyson, making
thy selfe ignorant, that seeing a sect is so farre growen, that it
is able to holde out by ware, and that it cannot be rooted out
by publike Iustice, how it must bee left and referred to the Diuine
Iustice and not to kindle a cyuill warre there vpon, which
doth but kil and corrupt men and bring al Religions to naught
beeing the greatest plague and the extremest callamitie, into
which men may run the^selues hedlong. But out of what schole
hath he set this his blooddy and tragicall doctrine? Not out of
this great and faithfull law giuer Moyses, who saith Thou
shalt not kill: nor out of the Royall prophet Dauid, councelling
men To flie from euill and doe good, seeke peace
and ensue it: Nor out of the other prophets, who haue endured
greuous persecutions, and neuer moued any of ther dissiples to
persecute againe or take any vengeance at all, nor of all the
sectes of philosophers, as of Socrates, Plato, Pythagoras,
Aristotle, and others, who alwayes laboured all the could to
wine men to peace, quietnes, goodnes, gentilnes, and mildnes
whereas this fellow will imprinte in there hartes all rage, crueltie,
outrage and madnes: whereby appeareth, that he is a
very limme and instrument of this olde and subtile Dragon,
who made Cayne conceaue in his harte the murther of his
owne brother Abell, the same which moued the preists of Ierusalem,
vnnaturally to sawe in twayne in the middest, this
heauenly and diuine Prophet Esaye, and to persecute the processe
and condemnation of Ieremie, He sheweth himselfe seton
by a more blooddy spirit, then euer were Marius and Silla,
who shed so much of there owne Citizens boodes: but rather
more like to Phalaris, Catiline, Nero, Commodus, and other
such cruell and saluage beastes, al together voyde of all humanitie
towardes there owne countrymen. His shamelesse
impudencie, and his so insatiable thirst after blood, is so apparant

that it is not to be hid: for he representeth himselfe as a
Standerbarer of Christs catholike church, who ought to here
his voyce, and doe after his commandements: who pronounceth
in the fifth of S. Mathewes Gospell that The mercifull,
pittifull, and peace makers are blessed, and that we must
forgiue, if we wilbe forgiuen. And the Apostle S. Paule
writing to the Romans teacheth vs To haue peace withall
men, without taking any vengeance, which belong onely
to God: And that if our enimie hunger we shonld giue him to
eate, and if he thirst we should giue him drinke, surmounting
his malice, by our mildnes and mercy. And last of all S. Iohn
in his first Catholike Epistle, saith, That he which hateth
his brother is in Darkenes, and cannot tell whether hee
goeth, because the Darknes hath put out his eyes.


Cap. 35.

How this false Catholike Englishman voide of all
humanitie, transformeth himselfe into all
crueltie and rage.

SOme were then to examine this bloodie booke, wherewith
he would infect all Christendome, with the rage and rancor
that possesseth his furious stomack, wherby he goeth about
to set the people of France togither by the eares, to destroy one
another, like fierce Dragons and cruell Tygers, it argueth his
cowardly, most dastard and effeminate spirit, for these are things
that are neuer in a man that hath any magnanimitie or greatnes
of courage in him: Wherein he sheweth that he is the verie
disciple and trumpet of the maligne spirit the diuell, that in
shape of a filthie and stinking hee-Goat, vseth the like speeches
vnto sorcerers and witches, who hauing forsaken Iesus Christ,
go vnto his sabboths to do him homage, where he giueth them
none other lessons, but to put in practise vengeance, murthers,
and cruelties, whose footesteps he followeth right, pretending

to ouerthrow in man all the cleere light of reason and vnderstanding,
and vtterly to extinguish that which maketh him foresee
in his actions, whether they tende to his honour, profit, and
securitie or no, before he vndertake them, to abse and make
him stoupe to blinde beastlie and furious passions, so to make
men flie one at another like mad dogs and cruel beasts, when we
see any aduantage of the side that we take: for his drift is, to
make the Catholikes roote out the Hugonots, as a people
not to be tollerated in religion: yet there is no people vnder
heauen that agreeth so well with them as they: be the Iewes,
Turkes, or Tartarians, against whom thou shouldest rather
scum of the froth of thy furie and heate to combat, and employ
the floud and force of thine eloquence, then conspiring the total
ruine of Christians, against those who receiue and allow of all
the bookes of the Bible, and the foure first Councels, with whom
hauing none other quarrell but for humane Constitutions,
thou oughtest rather to take part. And furthermore I say, that
the truest and best Catholikes and Protestantes, are for the
most part the surest and best friends that any Citie or common
wealth hath, and there is but the Cockle which groweth among
this good wheate, and other dogs and hogs, who smelling out
any commodious profite by the Italians and their supposes:
much like himselfe, who for rewarde of his forged crimes and
lies: smelleth out some Crosiers staffe, miter, or Abby, vnder a
false maske and shew of religion, passing not to be recognished
for the true sonne of the father of lies, and auncient slaunderer
the diuell, when maliciously and vntruly he bringeth the mightie
Princesse Elizabeth, for an example of wonderfull crueltie
against Catholikes, to make our French Nation conceiue a
great hatred and feare of our King: wherein I thinke, that his
father the diuel would haue been ashamed himselfe to haue published
such impudent lies, for as much as this gracious Princesse
the Queene of England, and our King of France, whom
he representeth as her imitator: haue neuer been accused of any
blame and reproach, but to haue been too mercifull and pittifull
towards such pestiferous mates, and seditious spirits, as is hee
himselfe, whom I should haue made knowne for the most pernicious
and damnable enemy of all Christendome, that euer

was on any side whatsoeuer, as him that hath fastened the authour
of his hope vpon a particular and temporall commoditie,
caring nothing at all to be cause of the subuersion of the common
weale, and to depriue himselfe of life euerlasting. But because
I am preuented by others that haue answered the booke,
I will not enter further to confute any particularitie thereof. I
thinke now by a most manifest and briefe description, I haue
set before the face of the Readers, as wel the meanes as instruments,
by the which the Italians know how brauely to conserue
and maintaine their Domination, to the great shame and
dishonour of those that are subiected thereunto as slaues: wherfore
it is now conuenient to manifest and propound the remedies,
by the which all noble and gentle spirites, louers of their
owne libertie, may easily deliuer themselues from their slauery
and thraldome.


Cap. 36.

The first remedy, by ouerthrowing the foundation stone,
vpon the which the Romane Domination is builded.

AS it were a smal matter for a Phisition to be able brauely
to discourse of the causes, beginnings, augmentation
and nature of any disease, if he should not giue remedies to cure
the same: so it shalbe requisite to set downe the meane whereby
men might as well in times past, as also hereafter, throw away
this Italian yoke, and keep their mony in their purses, without
enriching strangers with it: for this matter, I will begin
at the foundation stone, vpon the which they haue built, augmented
and eleuated there so great and loftie Dominatious,
that it hath no boundes here on the face of the earth, as haue
the kingdomes and empires of Emperours and Kings: but being
eleuated (if we will belieue them) as high as heauen gates,
shutteth and openeth them euen as they do the doores of the Consistorie
at Rome. In some this foundation stone is, that Saint
Peter had his Apostles seate at Rome, and there was martired:
whereof followeth, that the Romane Bishop is his successour,
and hath vniuersall charge ouer the whole world. For

the first I deny, seeing that neither the Acts of the Apostles, nor
any other of the Epistles of S. Paul, hath made mention therof:
and that he himselfe witnesseth that he was the Apostle of the
Iewes, called to those that were of the circumcision. For the second,
yt he was martired there I co^fesse, for that those of Rome
and their Emperours, to make a triumph of Iesus Christ,
and of his doctrine, and to quench their insatiable crueltie against
Christians, had caused S. Peter to be transported to Rome,
from another place where he was detained first prisoner, to put
him to death ignonimiously, and make him a publike spectacle
to the world. But for hauing by this crueltie and iniustice, depriued
the world of so famous and excellent seruant of God, that
they should be reputed his successours, there is no reason at all:
nay contrarie, I will stand to it, they ought therfore altogither
to be disinherited: for was there euer any man so impudent,
that for hauing murthered another, would dare to challendge
his succession? And if he had been borne at Rome, and appointed
Apostle to the same place, which he was not, neither they
haue made themselues vnworthie of all successorie, right and
title. For this were a prettie matter, that for vsing all crueltie,
and committing bloodie murthers against the seruants of God,
men should get domination and principalitie, as well in earth
as in heauen, it were farre wide to say so, and the greatest absurditie
in the world, that men might imagine. Nay contrarie,
Christ menaceth great punishment for the like matter, when
he cried out, Ierusalem, Ierusalem, thou which killest the
Prophets, thereby denouncing her ruine and ouerthrow by
the fire of Gods vengeance, foretelling her destructio^ to come,
and the miserable estate wherein she is at this present houre.
If then this were sufficient to depriue Rome of her succession,
yet furthermore, were she worthie to be depriued for her rebellion
against the Gospell, and the doctrine of S. Peter, wherein
she hath perseuered since the death and passion of Christ, hauing
brought foorth the most detestable monsters for Emperours,
as Tyberius, Nero, Calligula, Commodus, and Heliogabalus,
which haue euer been remarked to liue vnder the vaute
of the heauens: who as cruell beasts estranged and degenerat
from all Christian blood, by reason of ye enormitie of their liues,

could not suffer any such cleare light to shine there neere them,
being also set on by their sacrificing Priests, Pagans, and Idolaters,
who only taught publikely at Rome, soone to extinguish
the same. But if there were any good Bishops there, they laie
close, and did not openly discouer themselues, and were no part
of the bodie of this people, being indeed sent thither, from diuers
other partes: personages of great learning and eloquence, rather
to make residence there, then in any other part, for that
this citie was stil replenished with learned men, cunning Philosophers,
and Pagan Oratours: against whome it had not
been for Pastors meanely learned to haue disputed without ouerthrow
and conuiction. Yet all this hath nothing eleuated
the Italians, aboue any other people of Christentie, for hauing
Domination ouer them, but rather it bringeth lower and abaseth
them, as a testimonie of their great resistance and rebellion
to the truth, and the teachers thereof.


Cap. 37.

Constantine the Great, King of England, apposed himself
against the tyrannous persecutours of Christians, that
Italy brought forth.

BVt if ye come to aske me, what Nation hath more right
to haue the Sea of an vniuersall Bishop erected in it, then
Italy? I answere, that as Italy hath made it selfe vnworthie,
by bringing forth the murtherers of S. Peter, and of other tyrannous
and persecuting Emperors, hauing a long time made
resistance to the Gospell: so those haue best deserued it, who
being pushed forward with an holie zeale of Gods glorie, and
of the saluation of men, hauing abandoned their liues, kingdomes,
and treasures, to make passage for the Gospel throughout
the whole worlde, in destroying the doctrines of Pagans,
and all idolatry which had raigned before, more then two thousand
yeeres, all ouer the world, except only among the Iewes.
Now what nation hath that been, of so hautie and magnanimous
courage, which hath done God so signall a peece of seruice.
Surely it was England, which hauing brought forth that

great, and thrise sacred Constantine, who of a Pagan that hee
was, making profession of the Christian faith, and receiuing
Baptisme, straight began to warre vpon Maxentius the Romane
Emperour, a most cruell murtherer, and a great persecutor
of Christians, whome he vanquished, and planted the
true Gospell and kingdome of Christ, not onely in the Ile, his
natiue countrie that bred him; but also at Rome, the receptacle
of all Idolatrie, and from thence made passage for it vnto
Alexandria, the capitall Citie of all Affrica, to Constantinople,
and all that countrie bordering towards Asia, enlarging
the kingdome of the sonne of God, farre and wide (which
seemed at that time to be banished out of this worlde, by the
continuall warres of the Romans) destroying and ouerthrowing
wheresoeuer he went, that of Sathan, shewing himselfe to
be the Executour of that which Iesus Christ had foretold in the
twelfth of S. Iohn, saying: Now is the iudgement of this
world, now shall the Prince of this world be cast out. O
that the wonder of thy holie and almost diuine enterprises, do
make thee go farre beyond all humane creatures? for the light
that thou madest to shine in the world, surmounteth as much
that of the holie Kings of the old Testament, as doth the light
of the Sunne, the cleernes of the Moone. And as for that which
the Apostles and other faithfull Pastors which went before
thee, it was alwaies diuined, and entermingled with the darknes
of superstitious Idolaters, which had full course among the
Emperours and Kings of the earth: but thou great Instrument
of the Eternall, thou hast chaced farre out of thy sight,
all the sacrifices and seruices that men did dedicate vnto the diuil,
according to the witnes of S. Paul, who saith, that the Gentiles
did sacrifice vnto him. And more then this, it is thou great
Monarke, that hast so firmely planted and established this light
in the world, that what assaults so euer haue been made to extinguish
it, yet could it neuer altogither be put out and defaced.
If then one so great and diuine a benefite had proceeded from
Rome, as is from England, who could imagine how great
prerogatiues and honours almost diuine, they would challenge
from other people, whereas neuertheles the Emperour sprung
out of Italy, haue euer been the most signall persecuters of Iesus

Christ, and of his Martirs: for all that they haue cast such
cloudes ouer the eyes and iudgement of other peoples, that they
made themselues onely deemed worthie to haue the Sea of the
vniuersall Bishop: and by meanes of this prerogatiue, haue
made all the Kings and Princes of the earth, kisse the Pantofle
of their Prelate and Bishop. What would they haue done, I
pray you, if they had fought as much for the aduancement of
the Gospell, as they haue done for the suppression and extinguishing
thereof? It is verie likely they would haue exacted honours
and homages, more then diuine of those which should
liue vnder the obeisance of their Domination. For this nation
craueth neuer so litle subiect to worke vpon, to make it selfe to
be wondred at, and to bring the Septentrionall and Occidentall
peoples vnder their coram and subiection, for that they are
people lesse ingenious, and nothing to compare so subtil as they
are, which is a thing altogither straunge and wonderfull.


Cap. 38.

An example of the Italians subtill dealing with the Admirall
of Castillon.

FOr manifest proofe hereof, I shall not neede to seeke out but
one onely familiar example, well knowne of all, of the deceased
Admirall of Castillon, who was reputed a man of as great
counsell and experience, as was any in France: But the Queenmother
and her Councel of Italians, hauing a quarrell at him
aboue all other, made it well knowne, that the best French
pollicie and craft, could hardly auoyd the subtill snares and embuscadoes
of the Italians. For seeing that by force of armes,
they could neuer preuaile to vanquish or ouerthrow him, they
resolued to prouide for him, baites of peace and truce: by the
first conclusion whereof, they seised into their owne handes, all
the Cities, Castles, and all the munition that was in them,
which al the Forces of Italy, had not bin able to take in twentie
yeeres. Perceiuing this, they deuise to set againe vpon the
Prince of Condie and him, as persons destitute of refuge, to
retire themselues, with any Forces, but yet the Lord De la

Noue, by his great wisedome and accustomed valour, stood in
some good steed here, hauing seised againe the towne of Orleans
into his handes: they perceiuing the Army of this Prince
raunging almost in the hart of France againe, straight iudged,
that they had halfe taken them napping alreadie by this hooke,
and that they might hereafter verie well ouertake them. Hauing
cast this hooke to them the second time, they surprise them
once more: and so dispossesse them quite by this bait of a second
peace, of all their strong Forts and holdes once againe. Wherby
many began greatly to mistrust them: but to take away
all suspition, they practise quickly a confirmation of their
former peace, by conclusion of a marriage, by this vtterly to
ruine and cut the Admirals throat. He trusting to it, was taken
in the net that was laide for him. So that this may well
shew, that all our subtilitie is but a sluggish slight, in comparison
of the quicke carriage of the Italians, by reason that their
clymate is more Meridionall, and the region of France more
Septentrionall. True it is, that this great workeman of the
world, hathenriched those that inhabite the more Northren
countries, with many other goodly gifts, as to be more strong,
more faire and lustie, witnes many great Philosophers and learned
men, and this might serue vs for instruction, that seeing we
are endued with more strength, and are the greater number,
we should chace them out of France, and not suffer them to vsurpe
any Domination ouer vs at all, nor to accompany any of
our Princes or great Lordes, that might trouble or alter our
state. This is a verie good preseruatiue to saue and deliuer our
selues from their wiles and subtill slightes. Verie true it is, that
it is a great shame for them who name themselues Christians,
and haue been baptized to vse so much treacherie in their dealings,
whereas their auncestours who were but Pagans, and
knew not God, did keepe their faith inuiolable to all, to bee a
greater credite vnto them in all their actions whatsoeuer.



Cap. 39.

How the Bishop of Rome being created vniuersall, other
nations should not suffer the Italians to haue him only
to themselues.

LEt vs come now to the point I spake of, how that I did
not purpose to blame ye Popes persons, nor dispute against
their title of vniuersall Bishop, referring those that would take
delight in such disputation to the Treatise of the Church, made
by the L. of Plessis Mormay. But this is the pointe that I
proue, that seeing the Italians hold him for the vniuersall Bishop
of Christendome, it must needes follow by the nature of
contraries, that he can be no more particularly tied to Rome,
but that he is also as well Bishop of France, of Germany, and
Spaine, who cannot be conuersant and particularly resident
in all these places at once. Therefore his Sea ought no more
to be at Rome, then in other places; but he should wander ouer
all Christendom, as did the Apostles, seeing that they hold that
S. Peter Apostle of the Iewes, came to Rome, being six hundreth
leagues distant and more, from the place from whence he
came. So that if the Pope be resident any while in Italy, hee
ought to do the like also in other prouinces and countries: otherwise
he should depriue them of the right which vnto them apperteineth.
Wherefore they should neuer abide that the Romanes
onely should keepe to themselues the Bishop common
to all: to preuent them, least by that prerogatiue they should
rule the world at their will, and dispose and alter all things at
their pleasure. This shall verie well shew, that whatsoeuer we
co^ceiue and persuade our selues of the subtilitie and pollicie that
is in vs, they shall stil for euer farre go beyond vs. Witnes the
compositions made betweene King Henry the second, and those
that inhabite but the neerest borders of Italy, who retain some
sparkes and beames of their subtilitie hidden in them. As the
Duke of Sauoy, to whome this King with the assistance of
those, whom he deemed the best aduised and most sage parsonages
of France, yeelded vp a great country which he and his ancestours

had conquered with infinite charges, combats, and victories.
And yet without any blow stroken by ye agreement of one
marriage all was rendered: and all Lumbardie likewise by the
same pollicie. Must not then hereafter all Forthren peoples awake
themselues out of their so fluggish dulnesse, and not suffer
themselues to be ouercome with ye sugered words of this natio^,
although they be enterlaced with ye sweetnes of religion, or profit
of the common weal? And aboue all things to take heed how
they deale with them in any case, for they will be sure to haue
the surest ende of the staffe. But if euerie nation had practised
this in times past, and taken resolution of that which concerneth
either their affaires of Estate, or of religion, neuer making
the Councell of Rome priuie thereunto: out of how great
miseries, troubles, calamities, warres, quarrels, diuisions, and
hatreds, should Christians haue saued and deliuered themselues?
But at the least, we shalbe preserued in time to come, by experience
of these oppressions that are past, which cannot chuse
but be to our great good and profit.


Cap. 40.

That the Councell of Italy neuer made conscience to cut
off the authoritie of the Pope, when they smelt that
there was any thing for them to be gained.

WHen we come then to remember, how they make the
people belieue that the Church cannot stand without an
vniuersall Bishop: who without euer looking to that which
might follow thereupon, allowed verie well of all that: They
incontinent hauing this aduantage, made him proper to themselues,
and by such deuise haue vsurped a domination ouer all the
world: and prepared a way to fetch great summes of money out
of all parts of Christendome, vnder the name and authoritie of
this their Bishop. Whose authoritie notwithstanding they neuer
make conscience to abridge, when they smell any profit for
themselues: how did they practise in the great Pardons which
were sent abroad in the time of Charles the eight, and Lewes
the twelfth, by the which generall remission of all sinnes was

giuen, and Paradice opened to all those, that would go in pilgrimage
to Rome: Wherein I say, that they did limit and restraine
the power of their Bishop: for being vniuersal, as they
maintain, so also is his power extended ouer all, and not restrained
or tied within Rome. Wherefore did they this then? but
for a fine deuise, to enrich their Citie, by the concourse of diuers
straunge peoples, who flocked thither from all partes of the
world, to go into Paradice, preferring by this meane, the inuentions
of men, before the commandements and decrees of
God, and the way that he sheweth them to attaine to heauen.
This is an euident token, that this nation being most subtill,
measureth all things, as they see they may turne her to profite,
and augment her authoritie.


Cap. 41.

That other kingdomes may create and constitute Popes
within themselues, because the Italians refuse their
Pope of Rome to be common to all.

NOw if there had been in other nations any craft or sutiltie,
any thing neere like to that of Italy, after they had
perceiued how by this prerogatiue they were brought vnder
the iurisdiction of the Italians, and dreyned of their money by
this country, if they had straight pretended that the vniuersall
Bishop ought as well to visit, and be resident among other nations
and principall parts of Christendome, as at Rome: and
in case the Italians wold not consent, to haue told them plaine,
that euerie nation should haue proceeded to the election of an
other, in euerie seuerall countrie: as the Frenchmen for their
part, who held that the Gospell was first brought vnto them
by S. Dennis, and that therefore he is their Apostle, to constitute
the Sea of their Bishop at the Temple of S. Dennis for
France: and for Spaine at S. Iames Church in Gallitia: so
in like manner for other nations. And in case hereupon, they
should enter into choller and storme at this, they might be answered,
that S. Panl did admonish the Corinthes to follow
him, euen as he imitated Christ. And in good faith, it is honour

inough for these Romish maisters, in imitating them, to establish
the like order and gouernment, as they allow best of among
themselues: for truth it is, that the true manner of honouring
and worshipping of Saintes, consisteth in doing our vttermost
to imitate and follow their footesteps. According to this, euen
as they wold neuer consent to be depriued of their Pope, without
whom they cannot beare sway in the world, and purloyne
money from other nations not so quick spirited as they: so in
like maner, if the French would looke well into their affaires,
it were necessarie for them also to make a Pope among themselues,
to serue their own turne. And by the example of the Romanes,
they should endeuour their vttermost, to raunge vnder
their iurisdiction, not onely a whole kingdome, but also other
nations more Septentrionall, who are lesse ingenious then
they, and principally this might be effected by the Prouensals
or Gascons, being a people more meridionall then the other
Frenchmen. As for ye English, although by reason of the great
trafficke they haue into all partes by sea, they are not a people
altogither so dull spirited and grosse, yet they confesse, that the
French haue subtilly recouered that of them, by conclusions of
peace, which they by great victories had conquered from them
before. So that it is verie like by this meane, that if in imitating
the Italians, there were a Pope constituted but in France
onely, yet he should haue vnder his iurisdiction, England, Scotland,
Ireland, Norway, Friseland, and all the Netherland.
By this shift, they might fetch in coyne from these parts, after
the example of the Romanes and the people of Italy, who haue
had a hand of such people: whereas if the French had practised
such conter-pollicies, whereas the Italians contemne
them at this day, as grosse and barberous: they would haue
made as much of them, otherwise as a nation and people as
pollitike, craftie, and subtill as themselues might bee. All which
is to shewe, how farre they excell vs in inuention and subtiltie
of spirit.



Cap. 42.

Arguments in defence of a Pope, if there were any in
France against him of Rome.

BUt if any obiect, that the Italians would neuer endure
ye, for because he were first in possessio^ of one only Pope:
I agree well to that, so they were the stronger: but when
we see that many of our Kings haue passed cleare through the
countrie of Italy, without any contradiction, and gone as farre
as Naples, and that those that at any time went about to withstand
them, were by and by ouerthrowne, wee must needes
thinke, that it were great disaduantage for them to deale that
way, but if on the other side, they would go to dispute and combat
of wordes, to discide whether the succession of S. Peter
and the lieftenancy of Christ be tyed to Rome, or no: we shall
neede but to sende them to combat in this dispute with the
Lutherians, who maintaine according to the saying of Virgil,
that the propertie and true description of Rome is to containe
seuen mountaynes, thereby geuing vs to vnderstand that it is
the Citye remarked in the Apocalips, to be the seate of Antichrist:
Now in ye towne of Saint Dennis in France, there is no
such matter, therefore such qualitie cannot be attributed truely
to the Pope as the haue giuen him. But some may reply, ye the
people would neuer beleeue so much in any other Pope as in
him of Rome, to that I answere: that if they had made one
of as subtill a preist as him of Bellouet, if no man had gone
about to descrye his knauery (as some did) he might haue easily
preuailed for that poynt: for there was neuer any Pope of
Rome, who for his owne persons sake, nor for his miracles,
that euer was so followed with so great troupes, as was he of
whome I now speake. But if they went about to terrifie the
French Pope, by excommunications and interdictions, so that
he would but practize ye like against theirs of Rome; it is most
certayne, that whosoeuer would but looke on the one and the
other, should see the Italians farre more black in the face and
more melancholike, and the French farre more cherefull and

Iocande then they. See her then in mine aduise are medy which
being put in practise of vs as it ought, will ruinate the Domination
of the Italians and the counsellof Rome, in the personnes
of there Popes, which likewise would quit cut of the
way whereby the transport all our siluer from vs, As for those
who would not nor could not away with the Pope, shall by
that meanes keepe themselues exemted from there Domination,
without paying them any mony at all, no more then ye protestantes
doe, which will haue nothing at all to doe with them.
And here I will aduertise the Readers of a fine deuise to feare
the Romans, and to make there Popes tryple crowne shake
on his head, if they had but the newes carried them, how that
the most Reuerend Cardinall of Vendome were elected
Pope in France: it would make them all quake for feare, and
put them in worser case then if an Army of ministers should
goe thether to set vpon them: But if any Frenchman should,
to make them more certayne of it, tell them againe that hee
were wonderosly affectionate to the masse and to the ancient
ceremonies, they would thinke him more asse and sot then sottise
it selfe, because that is no part of the greife that tormenteth
them, but the name of their Pope onely. And if the Spanyard
likewise would but follow this example, the lead of Rome
that the haue sold for a dearer price then the finest golde in the
world, which men come to seeke so curiously out of all partes,
shonld tarie with them at Rome, to help them to make there
gutters of there houses, cestrenes to hold there water, or Carracters
to print what they please withall.


Cap. 43.

How the Roman Ecclesiastick knaweth the people of his
owne countrye, and teacheth those of other nations to
doe the like to their countrymen.

BUt because the Italians is so subtill and wary, that hee
will slip none occation, but he will take it fast by the haire
assone as it is present, and will neuer let go his hold til he haue
made thereof all the commodityes that it may yeeld: see he deleth

hardly with his owne countrymen to there great hinderance
and losse. Now they detayne a good peece of their gayne from
them, who making vp part of tbe body of the commonwealth,
hold there assemblies a parte, and neuerthelesse the themselues
are present at the assembles of others, who moreouer can of
themselues publish and by there owne reasons confirme that
which they will haue established and set downe* no man so hardye
as to open his mouth to speake to the contrarye, which is
the easiest meane to obtayne any thing whatsoeuer a man
would haue in this world. For look into the Soueraigne courts
and other Iurisdictions, where in there are many learned and
eloquent Lawyers, although they bee suspected to pleade the
weaker causes: yet so it is, that if they haue this aduantage
to propounde onely that which concerneth the iudgment of the
cause, being no aduerse partie or aduocate that dare speak any
thing to the contrarie: they wilbe sure to discourse and pleade
in such sorte and with such dexteritye, that the Iudge and the
Assistances shalbe so rauished and caryed way by there reasons
that they shall obtayne victorie of the cause, were it neuer so
vniust. Now the Roman Ecclesiasticke hauing won this aduantage
to himselfe to the great preiudice of the Nobilytie and
the Commons, and hauing beside giuen light and instrution to
those of other Countyes to doe the like, haue robbed all other
Estates of there goods and dignityes; tryumphing and swimming
in riches themselues vp to the chin: caring not a straw
to goe against there profession which should bee by contempt
of the world to afpire to heauen. For proofe hereof, there was a
president who was verie curious to count al the reuenue of the
Kingdome of France, and hauing made his computation, he
found that the some did amounte to twelue thousand Millyons
and that the Ecclesiasticks, who are not the hundreth parte
of the people carried away seuen parts hereof: Whereas in
the old testament they had but a tenth: neuer speaking of any
oblations that the haue at Baptismes, churchings, confessions,
and the great ransomes that thy extort after the death of
the deceased husbandes of poore widowes, orphans and pupilles,
vnder the coullour and pretense of their long prayers: all
which ought in deede to be employed to the instrution of children

and the marriage of poore parentles maydens: besides in
all the Churches of Cittyes, a man of any honour cannot scape
there nets, but he must leaue behinde him some halfe Teston,
a matter of two groates if he will not be in disfauour of these
Ecclesiastickes. Touching any charges, watchings and trauels
that they should be at, to teach, reprehend and comfort the
people as S. Paule requireth, these great pillers of the Church,
the Cardinals, Bishops, and Abbots, they draw back and will
not come neare them, and yet it neuer ingendereth any remorseof
conscience, to take fiftie thousand crownes of yearely
reuenue, referring the exercise of their charges to their courts,
who after their example discharge themselues by their Vicars,
and their Vicars, they hang all vpon the begging Fryers, so
that the Nobillitie and the people be well serued betweene
them all by this shift, which sheweth verie well that they can
deuise shifts and meanes now for their commoditie in this world.


Cap. 35.

Verie fit meanes to hinder the Ecclesiastick for medling
with that which concerneth the Magistrates.

TOuching the Magistrates to whom they are bound to
giue all honour, and yeeld them all subiection, they robbe
them in part of their Iurisdictio^ exempe themselues from their
power, and taking themselues the prerogatiue of honour, that
they owe vnto them. And further, that which is to bee noted
more strange, in steede of supporting the poore Priestes who
haue all the heauie burthen of their charges vpon there backs,
they still ouer loade them with so many seruises, and cut them
out so great quantitie of matter to sing, that those of Cities,
in lesse the^ ten or twelue yeares become so hoarse, that they are
not able to serue any longer, but must be cast off to goe seeke
where they can, by reason wherof, seing them at some sollemne
feast, surcharged with such quantitie of seruices, whereas they
sing on their part: for my part I bewayle their miserable condition,
esteeming it worse, then that of poore flaues and captiues
in the Romane Gally, and cannot chuse but argue those

of great inhumanity, who haue ouercharged them with so heauie
burthens: not only against all good reason, but also against
the ordinance of the sonne of God, and the briefe forme of praier
that he hath taught vs: but also against all humane order,
obserued in tendering of petitions vnto Kinges of the earth,
which are abridged with as fewe and short wordes as may bee
possible. See wherefore it were most necessarie to stop ye course
of such Italian influences, not to suffer our selues to be handled
at their deuotion, and not to depend any longer of them, as
heretofore we haue done: but to finde out the remedies hereof,
it is not an easie matter amongst the Northren people, because
that such drugs do not grow amongst them, no more then do
the Palme-trees and their Dates. But euen as one countrie
bringeth foorth oftentimes poyson, and the preseruatiue far the
same, euen so, he that would preserue himselfe from their domination
and draught of mony, that they vse to draine out of
other prouinces, shall borrow a good peece of wisedome, found
out at a time of great neede by the common people of Rome,
to restraine the course of the domination of their Senatours,
who had them before at aduantage, to villanize, abase, and reduce
them into bondage and slauerie, at their pleasure. The
common people perceiuing that they had their counsell apart,
where they might take secret deliberation, to increase their
authoritie, and to pull downe and gnaw the people, which should
be hard things for them to remedie, because the Senat did consist
of verie learned men, great Orators, and full of maiestie,
aduised themselues to create Tribunes for their owne defense:
which should oppose themselues to the ordinances of the Senate,
in case they did any thing diminish their libertie, and should
keepe the Senators short, that they should not tirannize ouer
them, nor draw their substance from them, as before time was
their common practise. By this meane the people was no more
exposted in pray to the Senate, but maintained still themselues
in their owne liberties: for euen as the bodie of man is verie
well at ease, when none of the Elementall qualities doth suffer
it selfe to be ouercome with the contrarie: so that commonwealth
euermore flourisheth, when none of her partes do suffer
it selfe to be in subiection to the other.



Cap. 45.

That it is verie requisite that the Magistrate should set
his hand to the reformation of Churches, because that
will neuer be done by meanes of any Pastors.

ACcording to this, there is no more effectuall remedie to
preuent the Ecclesiasticke, least he gnaw the rest of the
people: then to chuse out in euerie towne some learned and vertuous
man, which is not of the same qualitie, not too much addicted
to ceremonies and superstitions, who must haue an eye
to their counsels, constitutions, and preachings, and who must
also discouer their end: to the end they may see whether they go
about any thing to the preiudise of the Nobles, of the Magistrates,
or of the people: and if they do, to withstand them therin,
hauing power and authoritie to assemble the people, to aduertise
them by speeches and Orations in their Temples, how
that they go about to deceiue them. If in the time of Constantine
the Great, such Protectors had been chosen, they would
neuer haue permitted the Ecclesiasticks vnder shadow of Purgatorie
and praiers for the dead, to haue depriued the lawfull
heires of so many Counties, Lordships, Barronies, Feefarms,
and other landes, whereof they haue robbed and spoiled them,
nor that the goods of Hospitals giuen to the poore, should be eaten
and swallowed downe by them: for although that they
would not contradict such doctrine, yet perceiuing that vnder
the colour thereof, they pretended to make trafficke and sale of
the kingdome of heauen, and to sell for faire readie mony, life
euerlasting: they would haue gainsaid them, and reproued such
theeues, who vnder a false apparance of bringing men to heue^,
pretended to picke their purses, and to make them loose that which
they had on earth: they wold haue taken order at the least, that
the poore should not die for hunger, languishing and crying, seeing
the Priors of Hospitals to deuour their good, singing and
making merry. See then this is a good remedie whereby wee
might keep fasting the Italian and the Ecclesiastick, and make
them content themselues with their owne, and to keepe within

their owne limits. For to hope that euer they will reforme
themselues, they neuer did it yet, nor neuer will. For if you
looke since the death of Iousa to Iesus Christ, betweene which
there is more then a thousand yeeres, you shall finde that the
Ecclesiasticks neuer ceased to corrupt the true seruice of God.
By reason whereof, he gaue them ouer into the hands of their
enemies. And how to restablish them, he raised vp Iudges and
Magistrates: how also after they had Kings, he inspired many
to reforme and reduce his true seruice, hauing been abastardized
by the Ministers and ordinarie Priests of his Church. And
why, I pray you, were Prophets sent? But to accuse and conuict
the ordinarie Pastors of their impietie, rebellion, and disloyaltie.
After the maner of which Prophets, S. Iohn Baptist
termeth them a generation of vipers: and Iesus Christ calleth
them, theeues and robbers. And S. Paul in his time, cried
out against their abuses. And in the time of Constantine, they
had diuided Christendom into more then twentie seuerall sects,
all which this holy parsonage cut off in his time, reducing
them all to one vniforme confession at the Nicene Councell.
By whose example, Kings and Magistrates ought to set to
their handes: and out of the miserable dissipation wherein we
liue, to restablish one true way for the seruice of God, as Moses
did command them: to wit, that they should meditate in
his law day and night, to keepe it themselues, and to cause others
to obserue it also. And not to expect till the Pastors reforme it:
whereof a great number seeke but to enrich themselues, and
to sway ouer others.


Cap. 46.

That it is verie needfull to withstand the enterprises of
Churchmen, be they Priests or Ministers, and to chuse
protectors for the conseruation of the people.

ANd to take away the doubt that some may propose, to
wit, if such Tribunes are necessarie among those who
haue cast off the Popes yoke and haue Ministers. It is certain,
that the reason is all one: for to be persuaded, that they are

of better borne, and of more gentle nature then the sacrificing
priests, issued out of the race of Abraham, there is none apparance.
But to go no further then to the Apostles themselues,
if we looke but to the marke that they leuelled at before the Ascension
of Iesus Christ, and before he had sent downe his holie
spirit vpon them, we shall see that they were enflamed with an
ardent desire to be promoted, to rule and beare sway. So that, if
once they be tollerated to set downe articles and constitutions in
the Chnrch, euery one thinking himselfe wisest of all, and farre
to go beyond his predecessours, will endeuour to inuent and
bring in some new article, so that they will proceed so farre at
the last, that the Church shall finde it selfe replenished with humane
traditions againe, in steed of the Romish Ecclesiasticall
constitutions before abolished. And so it shall fall out as a thing
most naturall and common to all Pastors, that they will cause
their owne inuentions to be obserued more strictly, then the
commandements of God, and the preceptes of his most sacred
wore, as well by depriuing their sheepe of the Lords Supper at
their pleasure, as also by their publike exclamations in their
Sermons. So that also the violence that some vse in seeking
out curiouslie, those which had transgressed some articles of
their discipline, hath made men and women by thousandes to
reuolt from their Churches: and most true it is, that he which
too curiously seeketh out the doings of other, often forgetteth to
examine his owne, which is quite contrarie to S. Paules instruction,
who treating of the Lords Supper, commaundeth
Euerie one to trie himselfe. Whereupon the leagued Cautons
of Swisserland, one of the best peoples in the world, haue
abridged their Ministers of this power, which they of France
labour to establish amongst them euerie where. But if there
were Protectors of the Magistrates, Nobles and Commoners,
might not they verie well stop the course and progresse of these
matters? teaching them this lesson, that seeing they attribute
to themselues none other qualitie or condition, but to be the seruants
of the liuing God, that there is nothing more repugnant
to their profession, then to presume to make lawes in ye church,
which is the kingdom of God. And that there was neuer anie
seruant to King nor Prince, that durst attempt to vsurpe anie

such prerogatiue, how well soeuer he was fauoured of ye king.
And who was euer so sawcie a seruant, that being left to serue
and wait vpon the spouse of his Lord, forgat himselfe so much,
that he would rule ouer her by his own lawes and ordinances?
And what greater blindnes can there be, then to thinke to light
by our counsels the fountaine of all light and wisedome, which
is eternally resident in God? Who if he would be assisted with
any other counsellers in the gouernment of his Church: hath
he not Angels and Archangels by legions? Hath he not Noe
that great Heralt of iustice, Abraham the father of the faithfull,
Moses, Enoch, and Helias, the Prophets and Martyrs,
and more then fiue hundreth of the faithfull beside, which rose
from the dead after the death of Iesus Christ, as witnesseth S.
Paul. All which in knowledge, holines, and experience, go a
great way beyond the best and greatest spirits that may creepe
on the face of the earth, in the prison of their bodies. And by such
and such like reason, to keepe them within the boundes of their
vocation, which is, that in shewing themselues faithfull Embassadours
and messengers of God, they may in nothing goe
beyond the commission that they haue in charge.


Cap. 32.

That it is the dutie of Pastours to plant the Faith, and to
roote out vice and sinne, and not to make lawes.

FOr confirmation hereof, and to proue that there is more
doctrine and instruction in one onely Epistle of S. Peter
and S. Paul, nay to speake of lesse, in one onely Chapter,
the fift to the Galathians, then the most perfect and holiest
men in the world could euer accomplish or fulfill. And to the
end that the Pastors should endeuour themselues to roote out
the fruits of the flesh, and to plant those of the spirit, they are at
large set downe. First to wit, for the fruits of ye flesh these: Adultery,
fornication, filthines, dissolution, idolatrie, empoisonings,
enmities, strifes, enuies, anger, quarrelling, seditions,
sects, murthers, gluttony, drunkennes, and such like. Secondly,
for the fruits of ye spirit, these: Charitie, Ioy, Peace, Patience,

Clemencie, Bountie, Faith, Mercy, and Temperancie.
See then here is more worke cut out in this one Chapter,
then they and their disciples will euer be able to do, and in doing
this, they shall but do their dutie: beside consider all the instruction
of the whole Bible, and you shall see a bottomles sea
of doctrine, wisedome, and good lessons to teach vs to liue well,
seeing that this onely Chapter doth teach vs more then any
man in the world hath been able to performe and follow truly.
But he that would in good earnest come to the reformation of
the life of men, here is the soueraine meane, to pull vp by the
rootes out of their hearts, all incredulitie, the mother of all vices,
to plant therein faith, the spring of all vertues, as the Lord
Du Plessis Mornay, hath verie well aduised in his booke, Of
the veritie of Christian Religion: wherein he hath wrote a
most diuine peece of worke. For who is he that regarding the
shortnes and vncertainty of this life, who firmly beleeuing that
there is an euerlasting ioy and felicitie, into the which, all the
faithfull and vertuous enter: and that there are likewise eternall
paines prouided for the vniust, and vicious, who wold venter
to wallow in all vice, to be depriued of so great a benefite.
This is the marke at the which all pastors ought to le^^ll: and
not to make traditions and lawes, seeing there are so many in
holie scripture, that in examining our life by the perfection of
them, we are cleerly conuicted and attainted of our owne imbecilitie
and insufficiencie to fulfill them. For my part, when I see
an assembly of pastors congregated to make lawes, to bring
and conduct men more easily to life euerlasting, then the Prophets
and sonne of God, and his Apostles did (although they
are taken for Angels in respect of the rest of the people) meethinkes
I see as an absurd a thing as if the fifteene score blinde
folkes of Paris should take vppon them to goe mend all the ill
highwaies of Christendome, to make them fairer and straighter
then they are: as cunninger and more skilfull to do it, then
those that haue been emploied about it heretofore. But if you
will obiect, that Ministers haue made good lawes by their discipline,
against dansing, masking, and dicing. I yeeld, that at the
first fight, it hath a faire shew and apparance, but examining it
neerer, you shall finde that they take away therein, the authoritie

of the Magistrate, and vsurpe that which appertaineth
properly to the Kings and Princes of the earth: to whom only
it belongeth, to make inholitions vpon such things, to cause
them to be obserued by penalties and by priuation of the Lords
Supper, for that is exprefly prohibited by Gods word, and so
by consequent out of their commission. Moreouer, the Ecclestastickes
haue euer had this deuice, subtilly to intrude themselues
to the making of lawes, and to haue matters of small importance,
still referred to them, thereby to haue a gap to matters
of greater consequence, as the Tribunes may make ample
relation hereof, and proue it by many sundry examples.


Cap. 48.

That the controuersies about the Lords Supper, by which
the Pastors trouble the whole world, are easily to bee
accorded and quieted, if the Magistrate would but go
about it in good earnest.

WHerefore if we do not take some order for the peace and
tranquilitie of Christendome, by some such meane as I
haue set downe, in vaine otherwise shall we looke for any firme
and assured concord. For those who aboue all other, ought to
seeke for reconciliation betweene God and man, and afterwards,
between themselues, are nothing els but the verie instruments
of trouble and sedition, kindling the fires of discord euery where,
to set all in flame and conclusion. For to stay till of their owne
motions there fall out some accord betweene the Councell of
Rome and the Lutherians, and betweene them againe and the
Caluinists, touching our Lords Supper, that will neuer be no
more then between Caiphas and the Apostles of Iesus Christ,
wherefore if there be none other to step in amongst them, moued
thereunto by pittying the ruine of other Estates, which I
haue named, who must craue aide of the greatest Kings and
Christian Magistrates, to make them hold their tongues, they
will trouble heauen and earth about this disputation of the Supper
(a matter neuertheles verie easie to be accorded betweene
them.) For we all agree to this, that the faithfull taking the

bread and the wine from ye hand of their Pastors, receiue by this
meane the verie bodie and blood of Iesus Christ, to be vnited
with him, and made flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone. What
is it that is yet in controuersie, but onely the maner and forme
how that commeth to passe? Now the Capernaits, desiring to
comprehend the maner of this eating, Iesus answereth them,
that, The words that I speake vnto you are spirit and life.
As if he should say vnto them: there is none but those who vnderstand
the operation of the diuine spirit, and how he giueth
life vnto all creatures, who can comprehend how that is done.
But our soule which is detained prisoner in this bodie, she cannot
so much as conceiue how the spirite of God being infinite
and incomprehensible, hath it operation in all yt is in the world:
nay, that which is farre lesse, we cannot imagine how the Angels
of heauen, and the spirituall Damons, employ their Forces
to execute the iudgements of God, nor the temptations of
the wicked spirit against vs: nor how a legion of diuels may
be in one onely man, nor after what maner they lodge in him.
And yet thinges farre lesse then all these, cannot we comprehend,
as the essence of our soule: and whether it be within vs
or about vs. For how it can so quickly stirre and remoue all
the members of the bodie: nor also by what force the Adamant
which is in the rocks of ye North, can draw vnto it yron, being
in a ship more then ten or twentie leagues of. And whereas he
calleth his words Life: it is to giue vs to vnderstand, that as
our humane vnderstanding cannot conceiue, how God inspireth
life to all creatures, and giueth it to some liuing creatures
in the belly of their dammes, giueth it to an infinit number of
litle Animals, Locusts, and little Flies, and no man can comprehend
the forme and maner how he doth it, nor so mnch as
this, how many liuing creatures being pend in and depriued of
all externall light, for all that see most cleerely: so likewise must
we conclude, that God worketh in this Sacrament by a diuine
operation, and altogither incomprehensible, which man
cannot comprehend, nor shall not comprehend whilest he is resident
in this Elementall and corruptible bodie. It should suffice
vs to know what S. Paul teacheth vs: that, there is in vs
an interior and an exterior man. So that in this Sacrament,

euen as the exterior, receiueth the signes of bread and wine, so
the interior receiueth the bodie and blood of Iesus Christ, for
the nourishment of euerlasting life, without making any deeper
search of the maner how it is done. This point so concluded
vpon, it shalbe meete for the peace and tranquilitie of Christendome,
that the Tribunes should humbly entreat Christian
Kings and Potentates to imploy the power and authoritie
that God hath bestowed vpon them, to bury in perpetuall obliuion,
all these meanes deuised by the Ecclesiastickes, be it of
Transubstantiation, Consubstantiation, Infinitie of Christes
bodie, and many other quiddities, the fountain of troubles
and diuisions in Christendome, by this meane to preuent the
Italians, least for things wherin they haue none interest, they
ruine also other Estates of this Continent. And if any debate
should fall out betweene the Tribunes and the Ecclesiastickes,
and that they could not agree, that the King should assemble a
good number of men of profound knowledge and great experience,
and especially those that are best affectionate to the benefit
and quiet of their countrie, and without any interest in this
controuersie. The which should not be moued by the outragious
cries, and violent passions of mutinous and seditious preachers.
And to seeke out such fellowes as Messieurs Budee, de
l'Hospital, de Pibrac, and Monsieur Groulard, who is at
this present first President of Normandy. And looke what the
King shall resolue by the counsell of these learned men* to cause
thorowly to be obserued. And to go about these matters so secretly,
that the Italians heare no inkling thereof, least they by
their craftie conueiances, hinder not the happie successe of this
busines. To foresee this well, it shall neede but to make the
world belieue, that these assemblies were made for some other
purpose, and that some new occurrence had fallen out, and giuen
occasion to treat of religion, all vnder one.



Cap. 49.

That in vaine we looke for deliuerance out of the miseries
of France by any Assemblies of Pastors.

IF we doe not vse these or the like remedies, our hope shalbee
in vayne to expect for any goodly effect of Synodes or Assembles
of the Ecclesiastickes, because there shalbe alwayes but
one or two of the most learnedst and eloquentest: albeit the be
all of one nation, who shall dispose and carrie away all things
at there lust, all the rest seruing but to say Amen, and to subscribe
to there aduise. For when any one amongst them hath
got aname to be profou^dly learnd and to bemore subtil indisputing
then others, no man dare gayne say him, ye tremble al vnder his
authoritie: and if he besome what styrring and ambitious, and desirous
to beare sway: he wil make the^ receaue what Articles and lawes
he list, for yt hauing studied matter ynough to defend himselfe wt
Arguments to reach vnto his purpose, yt others shal litile think
of, and perfaming his matters with a litle apparant benefit
for them, they will let him carry them away so, and subscribe
to whatsoeuer hee would haue them. For that among them
there are few or none, who are accaustomed at such an instant
readylie to contradict and resist. But it goeth not so with Maiestrates
the greatest number whereof being brought vp and
exercized to plead in contradictorie iudgement, will not suffer
themselues so easily to be caried away, but can tell how to
withstand one another, what studie soeuer any partye hath
employed and come neuer so well prouided. Wherefore it is a
dangerous case to repose any confidence in the decisions of Ecclesiasticall
Assemblies, which in the olde Testament, neuer
wrought anie other effect but kindled the fire of persecutions,
first against the Prophets and afterwards against Christ himselfe,
his Apostles and infinite others of his martirs: and so
conclude, such Assemblies haue neuer bine but a plancke for the
Italians to passe to establish all there new Constitutions such
as are not yet altogether receaued in all parts of Christendome
thereby to sway ouer, and gnaw to the bone all Christen people

it followeth then hereby, that to take away the occasion of
this abuse, we must haue recourse to Soueraigne Princes
and to there Maiestrates, when it comes to the question of
establishment of the Christian Church, for so God did himselfe
as we finde in the olde Testament, and not to rune to Pastors
who being once out of the true way, will alwayes goe
worse and worse and euer come into it againe.


Cap. 50.

That all Christians are agreed of the place of ioye and
happines whether they must goe, but disagree concerning
the wayes that must leade them thither.

BVt because the Italian is so quick and pliable, that there
is no good order so well established, but hee can alter and
bring to confusion, either by seede of diuisions or by corrupting
persons by flattery, giftes and remuneratorie promises as
well Magestrates as other protectors of the people, employing
their vnto some Ecclesiastickes or others, we must needes
seeke out and vse some surer and perpetuall Remedy against
them, And because as I haue proued that there Domination
and great somes of mony they dreine out of other countries
hath no foundation but the bare cloke of Religion, by reason
wherof to preuent lest they surprise vs, we must be very carefull
and diligent to choose out the truth, for that the derill transformeth
himselfe into an Angell of light, and is an Ape to the
workes of God, to rob and deceaue vs. But not to bee deceaued,
we must at the first consider and examine curiously al that
is proffered and presented to vs for the way of saluation, of
what side soeuer it bee, to choose the best, otherwise our choise
shall alwayes be doubtfull, hauing no knowledge of neither of
the wayes which we might take. For in matter of Relligion
all haue one desire and shoot at one and the same marke, which
is to come the ioyes of heauen and in this they all agree, but
they disagree of the waies and the forme of seruices that they
ought to follow. And because they Counsell of Rome, teacheth
one kinde of waie and maketh manie take that roowte

with a goodly forwardnes, that they set them in thitherward,
and an externall forme of seruice, which with great delight, feedeth
humane sences very much, practizing all kind of murthers
and cruelties, on those that seeke to climbe to heauen any other
waies: There is also an other sort of men, who by liuely reasons
and great persuasions, go about to fetch backe from them
as many as they can, to lead them thither by other paths: but
the Romanes, to preuaile in this matter, say, that yt way whih
they teach, is the broad and wide way, wherein the Fathers
haue passed, the which is also more common to a great number
of people. The others they say, that this great way whereof
they esteeme so much, is that which leadeth to perdition, and
many there be that enter in. And that the way of saluation is
verie narrow and straight, and few there be that go that way.
And if that they which follow the great and large way, finde it
to be the better, they will not hinder them for going that way:
but yet requisite at their handes, that they will suffer them
peaceably to go by their straight and narrow way, which they
take to be the surer passage.


Cap. 51.

That men being contrary in opinions, co^cerning the way
of their saluation, they must receiue instruction of the
Ecclesiasticall bodies.

NOw in this conflict, if we looke onely but vnto men, and to
that which is on earth, we shall find our selues much troubled,
and thinking to chuse the best way, we shall take ye worst,
and neuer reach thither whither we minde to go. And if in this
iudgement we depend vpon Ecclesiastical Pastors, one shal allow
one way, and others shal teach another, grounding the^selues
diuersly on places of the scriptures, and the Doctours of the
Church. In such diuersitie, what should it then be needful to do?
we must lift vp our eies, cogitations and thoughts vpon on high,
to other Maisters and Preachers, who teach vs not by the eares
as mortall men do: but by the eyes of a visible, certaine and immutable
language: and aske neither gold nor siluer, nor domination
ouer vs for their paines: but freely offer vs their instruction,

with great bountifulnes and blessings towards vs, if we
take it thankfully, and we neuer neede to make any long and
tedious pilgrimages to finde them out. But it sufficeth to but
go forth of our habytacles, builded by the workemanship of
men, to enter into the great Pallace and Temple of the liuing
God, made with his owne hand, in the midst whereof, he hath
placed vs: to know and admire the wonderfull excellencie of
his workes, and to yeeld him the glorie and honour that he deserueth.
In doing this, to make our selues worthie beholders
of the same, when we shall comprehend with all admiration
the omnipotencie, wisedome and bountie of their framer, who
shineth in the same most gloriously: and although that vppon
the earth and in the waters of the sea, his sagesse, vertue, power
and bountie, is most amply proued vnto vs: yet would hee
giue vs more ample testimonies in the concauitie and extendue
of the heauens, to draw vs neerer vnto him, hauing set there
two great lightes, the one lower, the other higher, to the ende
that by them as by the Ladder of Iacob, we should go to finde
him out in his heauenly Tabernacle, to do him homage, and to
yeeld him all the loyaltie, wherein we are bound vnto him, as
holding our life and al our goods besides of him, putting our selues
still vnder his protection. And therefore to carry all reuerence
and due obedience towardes his lawes and commandements,
hauing our recourse vnto him when we are oppressed, or that
we fall into any necessitie or sicknes, giuing him thankes so oft
as euer he bestoweth any benefits vpon vs, in celebrating the
praises that the greatnes of his workes deserue. By the consideration
whereof, we shall perceiue our owne infirmitie, to
learne thereby to humble our selues before his diuine Maiestie,
and still to haue in admiration the superexcellencie and depth of
his wonderous workes.



Cap. 52.

That the lights of heauen do draw vs to seeke God in
heauen, and do witnesse, that their Creator is infinite
and incomprehensible.

ALthough that the lightnings, thunders, cloudes, raine,
snow and haile, which are engendred in the middle region
of the aire, yeeld such ample testimonies of the power, bountie,
and prouidence of God: yet mounting a litle higher, to the
torches of heauen, whereof the neerest vnto vs is the Moone,
keeping continually the course that God hath assigned her, to
giue light in the night, and to moysten all bodies: and from her
let vs mount higher by degree and degree, to euerie Planet, till
we come to Saturne, eleuated highest of all, and from him to
the starry firmament, and we shall see a number of those that
are farre bigger: for we cannot contemplate the firmament
with his blazing torches, infinite almost in number, may wee
cannot behold at one time the one halfe, but we shall be rauished
to admire the force and greatnes of the maker, who hath
framed a peece of worke so excellent, aboue al other wondrous
things? Now we haue been ledde so high with our bodely eyes
which can go no higher, we must haue recourse to the eyes of
our vnderstanding, the which being lightned and conducted by
the brightnes and light of Gods word, shal make vs mount yet
higher into two other heauens, to come where S. Paul by a
traunce and rauishment of the diuine spirit, saw Iesus Christ
the sonne of Iustice, and many other vnspeakable things in the
glorie of God, hauing full confidence and beliefe, that in his essence
being diuine, infinite, omnipotent, glorious, and quickning
all things, according as Dauid witnesseth: comprehendeth in
him all things, without being comprehended of any, and that
in his perfect light and glorie, all Angels and blessed spirits are
lightned and liue. But because that his infinitie, maiestie, glorie,
and brighnes, cannot be beholded of vs, for that it would rauish
all our sences, and our sight is not able to endure so pure
and bright a light: whereof Eliseus and Isaias being great Prophets,

hauing beheld but one onely beame, haue been throwne
downe to the ground, and not able to stand to behold it any longer.
But I must returne from this bottomlesse sea of glorious
brightnes, and come againe to the torches of heauen, which hee
hath set in his great Pallaice, wherein he hath placed vs creeping
vpon the earth, to receiue instruction at their handes: and
for breuities sake, I will go no further then the cleare and pure
Sunne, as the most perfect and accomplished image of his Creator
and maker, which representeth best vnto men, the wonderfull
profoundnes of his great vertues.


Cap. 53.

Of the Sunne, the very portraiture of his Creator, and what
are his workes and operations.

ANd first I say, that euen as men cannot comprehend the
quanty of his essence, being a thousand times greater then
it appeareth to our eyes, as by demonstrations all Astronomers
proue, nor likewise the qualitie thereof, nor the manner
how it casteth his heat and light ouer the whole world. So also
can we conceiue neither by our vnderstanding nor exteriour
secnes, the greatnes or qualitie of the diuine essence; nor how it
hath produced it operations in the creation of the world, in the
conseruation of the same, nor the manner how it worketh to
create in the faithfull the new man, which fighteth against the
flesh. Likewise as this great celestiall light is in perpetuall
operation and mouing, to runne his great race about the
whole world, alwaies doing good, and bringing infinit commodities
to other creatures: so God is alwaies watching and in
action for the benefit and preseruation of his creatures. Moreouer,
as when a thicke cloude hath depriued our sight of his
beames for a moneth togither or more, and that this let being
taken from vs, we begin to see his beames againe, which bring
a certaine ioy or gladnesse vnto vs, and driue the cold far from
vs: so the faithfull neuer seeke to behold God in his works
and vertues, but that they receiue great pleasure and delectation.
And besides, as when this diuine image retireth back from

vs into Capricorne, the Caldes comming from the Northparts,
and from the frozen sea comming to afflict all liuing creatures,
spoyling our mother the earth of all her trimme and good
ornaments, and making her naked and vgly to behold: so when
God angry at our sinnes, taketh his holie spirit from vs, the
prince of this world, of the aire, the God of this age, the ruler
of darkenes, which is, the diuel commeth to assaile, and enuiron
vs, to tempt vs and bid vs battell, and to annoy vs many other
waies. But as this great celestiall light goeth not from vs to
forsake vs: but to distribute his light to the people which liue
vnder the North Pole, and that by his long absence, wee know
better the benefites that wee receiue by his presence: so God
sometime holdeth his face from vs, to the end that desiring him
we should seeke for him, and shewing vs his countenance againe,
we should taste better what a benefit it is to enioy alwaies his
presence. For as this blazing torch comming towardes, being
leaped backward to approach vnto Cancer, beginneth to renue
the face of the earth, and to beautifie her with greennesse,
and with an infinit number of hearbes and floures of diuers colours,
giuing life to many hundreth thousand millions of little
Annimals, to serue for foode to birdes and fishes, to feede their
young withall, who by an harmonious melodie, full of all ioy
and gladnes, celebrate the bountie of their soueraigne the Sun,
which they receiue by such instrume^ts as it pleaseth him to vse
to heate againe that part of ye earth, from whence he had absented
himselfe so farre, wherein he magnifieth the omnipotencie,
bountie and wisedome of his maker, which hath attributed to
him so many vertues, to the end that we should wonder at him
in his so beautifull and perfect workemanship: so also he pulleth
downe our presumption, for that we cannot shew any such like
peeces of workema^ship, nay, we cannot so much as conceiue by
our vndersta^ding, how he giueth life to so many liuing things,
and how one onely floure is cloathed with such diuersitie of colours.
If it be so, then the greatest and quickest vnderstandings
are surmounted by the operations of one of the creatures of the
Almightie: how shall wee comprehend those of the diuinitie,
whereas it worketh in vs of it selfe, as in Baptisme, the water
of regeneration, or in the Lordes Supper, in the eating of the

bodie of Iesus Christ, or in the vnitie of the three persons in
one onely diuine essence? Wherby appeareth that this celestiall
bodie is to vs of it selfe a most excellent Preacher, to make
vs leaue of the vaine disputes of the maner hwo God worketh
in ye sacraments, to content our selus simply with the ordinance
that he hath giuen vs in instituting them, and neuer to go further
for the matter.


Cap. 54.

That this light reproueth those who detaine men in worshipping
images, and the workes of their owne handes,
to seeke God by them.

THis same Preacher also reproueth the spirit of me, of a
most brutish errour, when men being drawne by him to
the knowledge of the most high God, by an eleuation of their
spirits towards the highest heauens, they turne their backe to
him, seeking him here in earth, in buildings made by the handy
worke of men, forgetting the lesson of S. Steuen, the first Martyr,
which was: that God did not inhabite in Temples made
with the handes of men. Which the Sunne can likewise proue
vnto vs by an argument a Minore ad Maius. Thus, if it be so
that all the forces of men are not able to build an house big inough
to enclose and containe me: how is it then that they are
so foolish and presumptuous to thinke to lodge him that is infinite,
and hath his dwelling in the inaccessible light, of the which
I am but a sparke? how dare they thinke that he may be contained
nor comprised in houses made by men, and that the temples
built by them, and that their tapers and candles are more
agreeable to him then we his great lightes, who without waxing
old or consuming, do distribute continually to the world, so
great and admirable a light? For as for their temples they are
but earth: and grant that they be vawted with stone, couered
with bricke, leade, or state, yea were it with gold and siluer; all
that is taken out of the bowels of the earth. So that all your
buildings stand you in no more steed then earthes and holes do
to the Foxes, that is to preserue you from the iniuries of the

vehement heate, raine and cold: but you are not in any wise by
their meanes the neerer to God, nay rather when you are in
his temple of the world, they let you, that you cannot behold his
wondrous workes, putting as it were a barre betweene heauen
and you. And as for the images that ye place within them
in contempt of vs, by your most detestable ingratitude, seeing
that God doth preserue you by me and the rest of the celestiall
lightes, and doth bestow on you all kinde of blessings, is it not
then a great ouersight in you, that in forsaking vs who are the
workemanship of the Creator, ye will preferre before vs images
made by the deuise of men, albeit they approach in nothing,
neither in matter, greatnes, qualitie nor effects, to those that
are the handie worke of God. For first they are made of an
earthly and dead substance, which commeth nothing neere our
greatnes: without any mouing or operation: and without
the heate and light which we haue. Moreouer, they are but lying
Doctors, as Ieremy the Prophet saith: For they haue no
power, life, wisedome, light, nor bountie, neither can they see
any thing: is it not then falsly done to go about to represent by
them Almightie, who is the welspring of life and light: and him,
who is all goodnes it selfe, and afterward to translate vnto them
the honour that appertaineth vnto him? Further, one is pictured
that he is thrust into the side, and blood issuing out, which
was neuer so: another sheweth a laughing countenance, and
neuer laugheth. Other are pictured with eyes, and they see not,
some with eares and they heare not, and others with a mouth
and yet they speake not at all. Whereby appeareth, that there
is no veritie in their witnesse, and that all that they can do, is
but to transport the mony aut of our purses into the Italians
handes, or to some other of their supposes emploied in their seruices
onely. Nor we for our parts, being the true celestiall images,
do not represent any lye to your eyes, and the testimonie
that we yeeld to the Almightie is most true: wee haue not required
any oblations of your gold or siluer, nor any other seruice
or adoration, as the Italians haue done by their dead images:
and nothing els do we request at your hands, but that you
will yeeld to the Almightie* the glorie and honour of all things
as apperteineth to him, not giuing away any part thereof, to

any creature that euer was, or is at this present vnder the firmament.
See here briefly, what is the instruction and lesson of
him who marcheth as King among other Plannets.


Cap. 55.

How that Italians are prooued to haue abused the world,
in making men go to Ierusalem, by the forme of the firmament.

COme we now to this great, gilden, and azured Heauen,
whose speech is all one as before, publishing from one Pole
to the other, and ouer all the world, that what account soeuer
men make of their earthly Temples, they come nothing neere
it in beautie, greatnes, long continuance and lust. For the greatest
tempell that euer was built, was but of halfe aleague
in lenght, and the Astronomers afferme that their is fiftie nine
Millions of leagues from the earth vnto they starry Heauen,
and from they other side as much wherby it should follow that
my roundnes should containe verie neere three hundred fiftie
and fowre Millions of leagues, and yet for all that cannot containe
the infinite essence of God, How then doe men suffer
themselues to bee abused worse then brute beasts by the Romans
and their Italian Councell, who make them beleeue
that they can shut him into there pipes in their Temples, to
behold him therein, and to carrie him vnder their Canapes to
thende to rob you by this meane of your mony, and altogether
to begiule you. They same heauen being round and equally
distant in all partes from they earth: doth manifest vnto
men that their is no one place more nere to him or his heauenly
glorie, then another. In this he conuinceth of a shamefastlie
and falsehod the Roman Counsell, and those that mainetaine
it, who to approch to God, caused in times paste great
toupes of men to trot so farre as Ierusalem and Rome, to goe
the soner into God almighties Paradice, although indeede this
was but a maske and shift found out and practised by the Italians
to aduance and increase their Domination, and so to fish
mony out of Iudea Syria: notwithstanding by this consinage



they haue caused to perish in these voyages, that they made
them to vndertake both Christian Kings and Princes, and
more then two millions of men, speaking not of their great
trauels, perils, maladies, and other sorrowes: besides that they
haue made them endure, whose chaunce it was to returne from
so long a vyage. These are then they goodly and they Celestiall
lessons which are giuen vs from aboue, as most excellent
preseruatiues against the craft and cautelous dealing of the Italians,
by the which if we be not al together out of our wites,
we shalbe by them set at all libertie and winde our neckes out
of their Domination, and by they same meanes will keepe our
mony in our purses, to helpe vs at our neede, and also to doe
our freinds good, and these that we shall see stand in any great
necessitie.


Cap. 56.

The harmonie of they holy Scriptures of the Bible and
of the heauenly creatures to humble man to geue glorie
onely to God, and to seeke him aboue in heauen.

BVt to the one that we may be armed on euery side, God
hath not onely prouided for vs these heauenly instruction:
but also to instruct vs more familiarly, hee hath left vs his Apostles
and Prophets to teach vs all after one manner, and by
the same lessons, of they number of which if we will take the
most heauenly, to wit, King Dauid in his Canticles, I saie
they Prophet, S. Luke and S. Iohn in their Gospels, S. Paul
to the Romans and to they Galathians, and S. Peter in his
first Epistle; we shall finde they swetest harmony and goodlyest
Concordance that may be deuised to be found amongst all
the Preachers of his worde that are in the world. And see this
is the true touch stone, wherby we must examine all they writings
and doctrines of men: that is to wit: whether they agree
with they testimonies that God giueth of himselfe by his
creatures: which as they publish that all things are proceeded
from a supreme and former cause that doth maintaine and preserue
them: so also must hee giue him the hommage of all his

benefits, and to haue recourse to him as to a bottomeles fountaine,
to lade out of him all blessings, as well spirituall as temperall,
confessing his greatnes, bountie, and excellencie, in respect
of his great and admirable workes, to humble vs, and to
tame this pride growing in vs by nature, in exalting him as the
giuer of all that which wee haue, to depend wholy on his good
pleasure, and most holy will: And to make proofe of this great
concordance: the royal Prophet Dauid speaketh vnto the eternall
to this effect: Call vpon me when thou art in trouble and
I will helpe thee, and thou shalt worship me. Wherein we see
a strict commaundement to call vpon God, and to gine him
thankes, as an act properly due to the diuinitie and incommunicable
to all the rest of his creatures: as hee speaketh in another
place, To thee O God, who art aboue in the heauens, we
lift our eies.
For to shew vs the forme of calling vpon him, which is not
to haue our spirites fixed heere in earth in the workes of mens
hands: but to eleuate them towardes the heauens, as Christ
himselfe vsed saying: Our Father which art in heauen,
and so foorth: And as for faith, that it onelye ought to looke
vp to God: this Prophet verie well prooueth. In God is my
soule well pleased, he onely is my safegard, and the rocke of my
defence, he is my sauing health, and my strong fortresse, so that
I shall not fall, for hee holdeth me vp. And if we regard well, a
great part of the Psalmes, and amongest the rest, the 104. and
118 to what do they tend but to magnifie the excellence, beuty,
and greatnes of the workes of God? And surely, there is no
thing so excellent for man to practise, as to exercise himselfe in
the contemplation of them, to giue the praise and honour therof
vnto his Creatour. And all the rest of the Psalmes tend but
to extoll the admirable vertues of the liuing God, as his bountie,
power, mercie, iustice, liberalitie and clemencie. Moreouer,
there are certaine principall verses amongst the rest, which by
the riches of an immitable eloquence, do praise, set forth, and aboue
all things aduance his holy and diuine lawe: shewing that
the soueraigne felicitie of man consisteth in the mediation therof
day and night: forcing himselfe with all his heart, thorowly
to obserue the same. But after that hee hath thus spoken of

God, of his workes, and of his law: what saith hee, I pray you
concerning men, and of his owne person? when he saith. What
is man? hee is a thing of naught, and all that he worshippeth is
but vanitie: and in another place, the same kingly Prophet saith:
All are gone out of the way: they are all corrupt, there is none
that doth good, no not one. And speaking of his owne person,
although hee were the most holy king that euer raigned ouer
Gods people, he saith: Be mercifull to me O God a pore sinner,
etc. and that his mother hath conceiued him in sinne, praying
God to wash him, and to purge him from all his iniquities,
as him onely that could doe it.
Now hauing thus much spoken of man and of his doings, to
abate and pul down his pride and presumption, and not to leaue
him there, but to prepare him to seeke all that which he wanteth
in the person of his redeemer: imbracing him by a true and
liuelie faith, as being him that to satisfie the diuine iustice, shuld
carrie all our transgressions and sinnes vpon his owne backe,
as Dauid describeth in the 22. Psalme, and the Prophet Esay
in the 53. Chapter of his prophecie, which they did set downe
before the comming of Christ, and after his death his Apostles,
wel I haue prooued by a most admirable consent and vnity. He
that wil then no more submit himselfe vnder the Italian yoke,
to be raunged vnder their Domination: let him read quicklie
the aforesaid bookes, and consider and ponder them well in his
mind, weighing diligently euerie word, and euerie sentence one
after another: and conferring aduisedly the beginning with
the middle, and the end. Let him examine this doctrine with other
instructions that God doth giue vs particularlie both in
heauen and in earth: not to approoue and make them serue to
our fantasies and opinions, but laying all them wholie aside, to
take their instructions, and simplie to follow their lessens. In
this doing, he shall learne that we are all Burgesses and felow-Citizens
of the great Temple and sumptuous pallace of our
God, and that by the consideration of our vicious and poore nature,
he shall be taught to mount aboue the heauens, to inuocate
vpon God, and to obtaine by this meane, all things wherof
he shall stand in need. And from thence, comming vnto his
most holy and sacred word, magnifiyng it as the onely instrument

of our saluation, and a perfect declaration of the counsell
and will of God towards men: and hauing the knowledge of
these thinges, no man shall be able to withdrawe vs from this
way of warshipping GOD on high, to seeke him in Temples,
buildings, and other places of this earth, but if we goe to those
places that shall be onely to make profession of our faith, to bee
assistant at publicke praiers, to heare the word of God, to examine
whether the Doctrine that is taught vs be conformable
to these Doctors, of whome I haue now spoken: which when
we shall finde, we shall imbrace as diuine and of God, and putting
vs againe in mynd, and confirming those things which the
preached, we shall receiue it as most heauenly doctrine: but if
it tend to exalt men and their works only to please them withall,
we shall receiue it as proceeding from the presumption and
ouer-sight of men, who take themselues to be wiser then God,
and for such stuffe as may entangle the people in the nets of seruilitie,
and fill onely the purses of worldlie Pastors: wherefore,
without any regard from whence it proceedeth, whether from
Coucels or Synods, or fro^ any other sort of Ecclefiasticall persons
whatsoener, wee will reiect it, thinke our selues no more
hounden vnto the obseruation thereof, then to the dreames and
tales of olde women. On the other side knowing that life euerlasting
is giuen vs by the grace of God in our Lorde Iesus
Christ, and is offered gratis to all men: what ginnes soeuer the
Italians and such like can lay to drawe our money finely from
vs, we shall goe by them well enough, making as though wee
sawe them not, and as though wee neuer heard talke of them,
These are then the most sure and certaine remedies, by the which
all true Christians may easilie winde themselues out from the
Italian Domination, and make a prouiso, that their money be
no more transported to Rome, but tary at home iu their owne
purses.


Cap. 57.

The eonclusion of this present discourse.

VVHerhfore thou Spaniard, hauing they place of the
Head, which workest all that thou canst to reduce

vnder thy Domination other nations which should be the eye
of Christendome, thou oughtest to haue as much wit as any
other people, It is not then agreat blindnes for thee to behold
thy selfe in such slauerie to the Roman Counsell, that thou
art no more then the executour and drudge of their wills, and
that they make the tributarie to them in huge and infinit sumes
of mony, wheras thou diddest neuer get one penny from them.
And thou French man which art the hart of Christendome
from whom should flow all motions of vertues to encourage
the other partes, thou hast almost suffered thy selfe to bee ouercome
vnder the spirituall Domination of this nation, by their
flatteries and cautelous shifts, suffering them to put a knife into
thine owne handes to destroye thy selfe, to set all in combustion
and ruine, to thend that they may fish in thine ouerthrow
and destruction? As for Germany, the seat and residence of the
Empire, to the which the Apostles and the first Byshops of
Rome yeelded all obedience and subiection, what greater cowardlines,
shame and dishonor can there bee on her syde, then
that in degenerating from their ancient Cesars, and other Roman
Emperours, vnder the which all the world did tremble:
they are at this present becom the slaues and vassals of Rome,
and brought so low as to be glad to hold the Styrrop of some
filthy Monke, who hath been chosen Pope. And if heretofore
you haue had the eies of your wit and vnderstanding so much
dimmed by the darknes of the time, suffering your selues to be
made so very fooles, that they might vse you at their pleasure,
now in this great light which shineth at this present, and is
not yet gone from you, amend your former faultes to recouer
your honor, and seeke to rule and sway ouer them another
while in your turne, and to get from them againe vnder some
colour whatsoeuer all the money they haue in their fingers of
yours and your people paying them now at the last home according
to their deseruings and cursed intentions: and that according
to good rule that they haue a long time kept in Christendome,
they may haue their due desart at the last paid them
to the vttermost.
Laus Deo. Finis. G. B. A. F.

