



The Couenant betweene God and Man plainelie declared in laying open the first and smallest points of Christian Religion.
Question.

IN what state was man created first in the beginning of the world?

 Answere.
Of mans creation.
Man was created in a blessed state, after the image of God, Gen. 1.26.27. Thus God created the man in his image: in the image of God created he him. 
 Quest. VVas man created like vnto God in outward proportion of his bodie, as with heade, legges, armes, etc?
Ans. No, not in proportion of bodie (for God is a spirit, Iohn. 4.24. and not a bodie) but in inward graces of the minde, as in knowledge Coloss. 3.10. in righteousnesse and true holinesse. Ephes. 4.24. and such like.
 Quest. What? was man righteous, as God is righteous? was man good as God is good? was man holie, as God is holie? and was mans knowledge as much as Gods knowledge?

Ans. In these and such other graces, man after some sort resembleth God, and is like vnto him, but is not equall with God in any thing, for there is a dubble difference. First these properties are essentiall in God, and of his essence, so that he were no God if he wanted them: but in man they are accidentall, and the most part of men now want many of them. Secondly, they are in God in all fulnes, and without measure, as God is all goodnesse it selfe, all righteousnesse it selfe, all holines, all wisedome, all mercie, and so of all the rest: but in man they are in a certaine measure, according as the Lord gaue them, and as was sufficient for a creature. Wherefore we make not man equall with God, though we say that he was created like vnto God, and in the image of God in righteousnes, holines, wisedome, and such others.
 Quest. Shewe me then what that image of God in man is? and wherein principally it consisteth?
Ans.The image of God in man. These graces before mentioned, and such like, are the image of God in man. And they consist partly in the minde indued with such excellent wisedome, that he could giue apt and proper names to other creatures in the earth, Gen. 2.20. and spake of
the woman as he did, Gen. 2.23.
This is to be vnderstood according to the reueiled will of God. and with such free will and power to obey God, that if he would, he might haue continued in that integrity and innocency wherein he was created, and not haue sinned; so that the fault and cause of his miserie after his disobedience, is wholly and iustly to be ascribed to himselfe, as the holy Ghost witnesseth, Ecclesiastes cap. 7.31. This haue I found, that God hath made man righteous, but they haue sought many inuentions. And partly in the whole man, in whome the Lord hath set such an imperiall maiesty, that all inferiour creatures, as beastes of the earth, fishes of the sea, and foules of they ayre doe reuerence and obey him as their king and master.
 Quest. Whether did GOD bestowe this good creation, and blessed state vpon the person of Adam onely, or so gaue it to him that it shoulde also redownde to all his posteritie for an euerlasting inheritance?
Ans.All were created good in Adam. When the scripture affirmeth all mankinde through the disobedience of Adam to be subiect to death and damnation, Rom. 5.12. By one man sinne entred into the worlde, and death by sin, and so death went ouer all men: Forasmuch as all men haue sinned. It is manifest that all were created
in Adam good and righteous. For else they could not haue lost that they neuer had.
 Quest. Whether was Adam and all his posteritie to liue perpetually in that most happie state of life, wherein they were created, or had they some limitation of time, which beeing expired they should die, and lose their blessednes?
Ans. We doe not reade in the worde of God, of any prescription of time for life and blessednesse appointed to Adam at his first creation, but that he and his posteritie were to continue blessed for euer, if they continued obedient to God. For death came not into the worlde, but by reason of sinne, Rom. 5.12.
 Quest. Whether receiued Adam this blessed state to continue in it for euer, simplie and absolutely, or with condition?
Ans. Not simplie, and absolutely; but with condition.
 Quest. What was that condition?
Ans. That he should be obedient to God his creator as it was meete; and that if he disobeyed, he should then certainly die the death, Gen. 1.17. Whensoeuer thou eatest thereof thou shalt certainly die the death.
Quest.
^^^^ans Whether did Adam then keepe the condition,  and obey the commaundement of God, or no?

Ans. No, he kept not the condition, but disobeyed the commandement of his God, as we may read, Gen. 3.6. So the woman tooke of the fruite thereof, and did eate, and gaue also to her husband with her, and he did eate. 
 Quest. Whether did Adam onely sinne in this transgression, or all his posteritie sinned in him and with him?
All sinned in Adam.
Ans. All mankind in this first trespasse sinned in Adam and with Adam. For as Leui being as yet in the loynes of Abraham, paid tithes in Abraham vnto Melchizedek, Gen. 14.20. Heb. 7.9.10. So all mankind being then in the loynes of Adam, sinned in Adam.
 Quest. VVhat happened then to man after he had disobeyed the commandement of God?
Ans. That death and eternal damnation,
All men dead in Adam. which God forewarned him of, Gen. 2.17. befell to Adam, and to all his posteritie. For thus saith the Lord, Gen. 3.19. In the sweate of thy face shalt thou eate bread, till thou returne to the earth, for out of it was thou taken: for thou art dust, and to dust shalt thou returne. And in an other place thus: By one man sinne entered into the worlde, and death by sinne, and so death went ouer all men: forasmuch as all men haue sinned, Rom. 5.12. And againe, In Adam all die. 1. Cor. 15.22.
 Quest. Shew me then mans state after his
fall, and what it is.
Ans. First, man is conceiued and borne in sinne,
The state and misery of man after his fall. and commeth sinfull and filthie into the worlde, as the prophet Dauid saith of himselfe, Psalm. 51.5. Behold, I was borne in iniquitie, and in sinne hath my mother conceiued me. And Iob. chap. 15. vers. 14. saith thus: What is man, that he should be cleane? and he that is borne of a woman, that he should be iust? Againe, who can bring a cleane thing out of filthines? Iob. 14.4.
 Secondlie, the whole course of mans life is wicked and wretched, as the Apostle describeth it, Ephes. 2.2.3.12. namely, that man in this state walketh according to the course of this worlde, and after the prince that ruleth in the ayre, euen the spirit, that now worketh in the children of disobedience fulfilling the lust of the flesh, and of the minde: that man is the child of wrath, a straunger from the couenant of promise, without hope, and without GOD in the worlde. Thus farre the Apostle speaketh. Dauid also hee saith, Psal. 58.3. The wicked (that is, all that are not regenerate, but lie in the sinne of Adam) are straungers from the wombe: euen from the bellie haue they erred, and speake lies. Their poyson is
like the poyson of a serpent, etc. Reade Psalm. 36.1.2.3.4. and Tit. 3.3. Gen. 6.5.
 Thirdlie, his departure out of this short and transitorie life, is most woefull and damned. For he goeth into euerlasting fire prepared for the diuell and his Angells, Matth, 25.41. Where the worme dieth not, and the fire neuer goeth out, Marke. 9.44. Esai. 66.24. and into a lake of fire burning with brimstone, Apoc. 19.20.
 Quest.
Of our redemption by Christ. VVhat then? is all mankinde vtterly loste and condemned for euer? is no man able to recouer that fall, and redeeme himselfe from that condemnation?
Ans. No man of himselfe, is able to redeeme himselfe from death, because he is not able to ouercome death.
 Quest. Is there any other meanes then for mans saluation and redemption?
Ans. There is yet some hope,
Christ is our redeemer. and that onely in Christ Iesus. For first GOD, seeing (Esai, 59.16.) there was no man able to redeeme himselfe from death, of his meere mercie and grace promised Christ to bee the redeemer and Sauiour of all that beleeue in him, Genne. 3.15.
He (that is, Christ the blessed seede of the virgin Marie) shall breake thine head (that is, destroy him that had the power of death, that is, the deuill, Heb. 2.14.) and thou (that is, the serpent, euen Satan) shalt bruise his heele. Reade Gen. 12.3. Esai. 7.14. And secondly in the fulnesse of times, he sent him, as the storie of the Gospell witnesseth. For God so loued the world, that he hath giuen his onely begotten Sonne, that whosoeuer beleeueth in him should not perish, but haue euerlasting life, Iohn. 3.16. and 1. Iohn. 4.9.
 Quest. What hath Christ done for our redemption?
Ans. He hath done especially fower things for vs.
 Quest. What is the first?
Ans.Christ made man First Christ being in the forme of God, and equall with God, made himselfe of no reputation, and tooke on him the forme of a seruant, and was made like vnto men, and was found in shape as a man, Philip. 2.6.7. For he in no sort tooke the Angels (that is the nature of Angels) But he tooke the seede of Abraham. Heb. 2.16.
 Quest. 
Christ suffered death for vs. What then? or wherefore was this?
Ans. Secondly, because the iustice of God required, that humain nature, that sinned, should beare the punishment for sinne, Christ hauing
taken our nature vpon him, humbled him self, and became obedient vnto the death, euen the death of the crosse. Phil. 2.8. For it was meete that the Prince of our saluation, euen Christ, that he might bring vs to glorie, should be consecrated through afflictions, Heb. 2.10. Wherefore Christ was made a cursse for vs, that he might redeeme vs from the cursse of the law, Gal. 3.13. According as it was prophesied before, Esai: 53.4.1.
Quest. VVhat is the third thing? 
Ans. Thirdly, Christ in that our nature, which he tooke of the virgin Marie, fulfilled the law for vs,
Christ our righteousnes. and imputeth his righteousnes vnto vs that beleeue in him, Rom. 8.3.4 For Christ is the end of the law for righteousnes for euery one that beleeueth, Rom. 10.4. And these two latter, that is, the second thing and the third which Christ hath done for vs, are plainely and briefely set downe 2. Cor. 5.21.  For he hath made him to be sinne for vs which knew no sinne,
Christ at Gods right hand maketh request for vs. that we should be made the righteousnes of God in him.
Quest. VVhat is the fourth thing?
Ans. Fourthly, Christ that suffered death for vs, is risen againe from death, and as a glorious conqueror, is triumphantly ascended into the heauens, and sitteth at the right hand of the maiestie in the highest places, Heb. 13. maketh
request for vs, Rom. 8.34. and is able perfectly to saue them that come to GOD by him, Heb.  7.25.
Quest.
Christ our reconciliation. Are we then, that through sinne were separated from God, reconciled to God againe by Christ?
Ans. We are, so many of vs as truely beleeue in him. For God hath set him forth to be a reconciliatio^ through faith in his blood, Rom. 3.25. And he hath reconciled vs to God, 1. Ioh. 2.2. Ephes. 2.16.
 Quest.
Of mans vocation and calling Seing then we obtaine al mercie and goodnes of God through Iesus Christ, who not onely nowe is, but also from the beginning hath alwaies beene the hope of all the endes of the tell me and of them that are farre off in the sea, earth, further by what meanes wee that nowe liue may come to the knowledge of these mysteries of saluation? For he that knovveth them not, cannot haue the benefite of them.
Ans. Though I might answere you in one word, and say, that we know these things, and are made partakers of them by the ministerie of the word, yet to speake more distinctly and more plainely for euery mans vnderstanding,
Two meanes of our vocation I answere at this time, and say there are two meanes, whereby
we are made partakers of saluation in Iesus Christ. 
The worde and the Spirite
Quest. What be those meanes?
Ans. They are the word of God outwardly sounding in our eares, and the spirite of God inwardly working in our hearts.
Quest. Doth God then call some men,
The word and the Spirit both necessarie for an effectuall calling. and at some tymes by his vvorde, but others and at an other time by his holy spirit?
Ans. No, that is not my meaning. But albeit that alwayes for the effectuall calling of any, the outward worke of the worde, and the inward grace of the spirit do concurre and may not be separated; and albeit the Lorde for this cause hath promised to accompanye the ministrye of his worde with the grace and power of his spiritte, Esai. 59.21. yet my purpose is to speake of them seuerally for further declaration of them.
Quest.
God hath called men diuers waies by his word in former times Hovv doth GOD call men then by his vvord? for I take it to be your purpose to speake of the vvord first.
Ans. God in the beginning so came to men as they were able to abide his presence and spake vnto them him selfe either by visions, or by dreames, as Elihu affirmeth Iob. 33.15. And as he appeared to Abraham, Gen. 15.1. to Eliphaz the Temanite
Iob. 4.13. And to Iob, as he himselfe confesseth Iob. 7.14. That those patriarks might instruct their families, Gen. 18.18, 19. But afterwards the Lord writte his owne will and word, Exo. 31.18. And vpon the request of the people Exod. 20.19. Deut. 5.24 etc. promised to raise them vp prophets, and by them to speake to the people, Deut. 18.15.19.17.18. Wherefore after that time the Lord ordinarily appeared to his prophets by visions or dreames, as Moses saith, Num. 12.6. and they spake vnto the people. Moreouer the Lord ordained a publicke ministerie at the same time, euen Aaron and his sons successiuely to be priestes, and the rest of the Leuites to help them. And thus God called whom he would to the knowledge of mysteries of saluation by visions, and dreames til the time that he deliuered Israell out of Egipt. After that time he gaue his word and his wil in writing, which conteined the meanes and misteries of saluaon, and ordeined a publick minysterie to read and preach the written word of God to the people, himselfe alway being resident among them in his owne Tabernacle betweene the Cherubims which were ouer the mercy-seate and ouer the arke of the couenant to resolue them of all doubtes, Exod 25.22. and 19.42. Num. 7.89. and Exod: 28.30. Num. 27.21.
Iud. 20, 18.7.28. and 1. Sam. 22.10.15. And further spake to the^, by prophts as it pleased him.
Quest. But God doth not speake to vs now after that manner. 
Ans.In these last daies God hath called men by his sonne God spake to the church of the Iewes after that manner til the comming of Christ in the flesh. But now in these last daies the greate prophet so long since foretold, Deut. 18.18:19. Euen Iesus Christ is come, and by him doth GOD speake vnto vs, Heb. 11. and by them whom he hath sent, first the Apostles, and then the ordinary ministers of his word. And now the whole counsell of God is written for our instruction.
 Qu. Can no man atteine to the knowledge of these mysteries of saluation by naturall reason,
Naturall reason cannot reach to the mysteries of saluation and by consideration of the workes of God, but only by the word of God?
Ans. No, no man. For Paul 1. Cor. 2.7. calleth the reuelation of these mysteries, the hid wisdom of God, which the wise men of the world cannot attaine vnto. And the same Apostle in the ninth verse, alleadging the prophesie of Esaias Chap. 52.14. and Chap. 64.4. saith further, that these mysteries are such things, as the eye of a natural man by light of nature and reason hath not seene, neither the care hath heard, neither came into mans heart.
 Quest. VVhether doth God call all men by his
word, and so reueale these mysteries of saluation vnto all, or vnto some men only?
Ans.The gospel sonded throughout the world. That which the prophet Dauid spake Psa. 19.4. of the creatures of God, and namely of the heauens, the same hath the holy Ghost affirmed also of the word of God, Rom. 10.10. that their sound went out through al the earth, and their wordes into the ends of the world.
 Quest. Hath the gospell then beene Preached in euery nation vpon earth, as we see it is preached among vs at this day?
Ans. Although the gospel was not euerie where preached in that plentifull manner that we haue it now, yet the Apostles commanded by Christ to goe into all the world,
Niceph. li. 3. Cap. 1. Auent li. 2 and to preach the gospel to euerie creature, Mark: 16.15. were dispersed throughout Asia, Europe, and Afrik, as Eusebius lib. 3. reporteth out of Origene, and so preached, that by their ministerie the sound of the gospell came in some measure to all people vpon earth. Whereof Paul being prisoner at Rome giueth good testimonie in his epistle to the colossians Chap. 1.23. If ye continue in the faith, and be not moued from the gospell, which hath beene preached to euery creature which is vnder heauen
 Quest. Whether do all that heare these misteries preached vnto them, receiue the saluation that is offred in the gospel?

Ans. Christ shewed by a parable of seede sowne in the ground, Mat. 13. That there are diuers sortes of hearers,
Many hearers, few beleuers: so that some men receiue the seede of the word into their hard heartes, as if it were in the path waies, and the euill one commeth, and catcheth away that which was sowen in their heartes. Some receiue it as in stony ground, and assoone as tribulation commeth for the word, by and by they are offended. Others receiue it as among thornes, and worldly cares choke it. Lastly other some receiue it as into good ground, and they bring forth much fruite. Then of foure sortes of hearers, but one only bringeth forth fruit, wherefore Christ saide in an other place, (Math. 22.14.) Many are called but few chosen. And to make men with greater care and reuerence to attend vnto the word of God preached, that they may be saued, he saith in the end of the parable, If any man haue an eare to heare, let him heare.
 Quest. Can you tell me who those be that receiue the word of God when it is preached as into good ground, and bring forth the fruit thereof?
Ans. Those which haue not onely the word outwardly sounding in their eares, but also the holy spirit of God inwardly working in their hearts which is the other meanes of obtaining the mercies of God in Christ, as I noted
before in answering your 23. question.
 Quest. Then, to come to the other meanes of our calling, which is the inward worke of the spirit, is it necessarie that the mercies of GOD in Christ outwardlie preached by the ministerie of men, should inwardly be applied and appropriated vnto vs by the secret worke, power, and grace of the holy ghost?
The inward worke of the spirit is necessarie for aneffectuall calling.
Ans. Yea verely, it is most requisite, that to the outward ministery of the word should be adioyned the inward working of the spirit to beget faith in vs, and thereby to apply, make proper, and profitable vnto vs, that which the word hath declared. For except a man be borne of water and of the spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. Ioh. 3.5. And this inward working of the spirit, is that which pricked the hart of those three thousand which heard Peter preach, and were conuerted to the faith. Acts. 2.37, 41. And which opened the heart of Lydia. Act, 16.14. and which opened the mysteries of saluation to babes, but hid them from the wise and men of vnderstanding Math. 11.25. and which reuealed vnto Peter that Christ was the sonne of God, Math. 16, 17 and whereby Paul could say, I liue by the faith of the sonne of God, VVho hath loued me, and giuen him selfe for me, Gallat. 2.20.
Quest. Is it not possible for vs to attaine, to the
mercies of God in Christ by the outward hearing of the word onely, except we haue also this inward grace and working of the spirit?
Ans. No verelie, for Christ saith, Iohn. 6.44. No man can come to me except the father drawe him. And againe, Iohn. 8.47. Ye therefore heare not my wordes, because ye are not of God. And the Apostle Paul saith, 1. Cor. 2.11. As no man knoweth the things of a man saue the spirit of a man which is in him: euen so the things of God knoweth no man, but the Spirit of God. And yoong Elihu perceiuing the follie that was in three ancient graue religious men, Iobs friendes, and admiring at it, at the last said, Verelit it is the Spirit in man; and the inspiration of the Almightie, that giueth vnderstanding, Iob. 32.8.
 Quest. Were it not good then to leaue off hearing the word, as some men doe, and seeke by speculation, reuelation, praier, or by some other meanes, to obtaine the grace of the holie Ghost?
Ans. No,
The ministerie of the worde and the worke of the spirit goe together. that were great ignorance to forsake the word which we are warned to seeke after, Ioh. 5.39. for God doth ioine these two together, and alwaies accompany the outward ministry of the word, with the inward work and power of his holy spirit, according as he promised long since by his prophet Esaias, Ch. 59.21.
My spirit that is vpon thee, and my wordes which I haue put in thy mouth, shal not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of the seed of thy seed, saith the Lord, from henceforth euen for euer. So that he which desireth the work of the spirit, must attend vpon the ministerie of the word, as vpon the holy meanes which the Lorde hath appointed. And for this cause it is, that the worke of regeneration, wrought both by the word and also by the spirit, is sometime attributed to the spirit as Iohn. 3.6. that that is borne of the spirit, is spirit, and sometime to the worde as 1. Pet. 1.23. Being borne a new, not of mortall seede, but of immortall, by the word of God, who liueth and endureth for euer. And 1. Cor. 4.15. Also faith (without which no man can please God, Heb. 11.6.) is said to be the fruite of the worde, Rom. 10.14. how shall they beleeue in him, of whome they haue not heard, and the fruit of the spirit, Galat. 5.22. But the fruit of the spirit is loue, ioy, peace, long suffering, gentlenesse, goodnesse, faith. Whereas it is the effect of them both.
 Quest. Whether doth the spirit inwardlie worke alike in all the hearers of the word?
Ans.The diuers worke of the worde in diuers hearers. No, for some men will not suffer the spirite to worke vpon them, but oppose themselues against the worde, and so want
the grace of the spirite, as those did, whose heartes brast for anger, when they hearde the worde at Stephens mouth, and they gnashed at him with their teeth, Act. 7.54. and those which were full of enuie, and spake against those things, which were spoken of Paul and Barnabas, contrarying them, and rayling on them, Act. 13.45. And faith is not proper to al men, 2. Thes. 3.2. And in another place Paul saith, To the one we are the sauour of death, vnto death and to the other the sauour of life, vnto life.
 Quest. Who then are partakers of these two means effectually, that is, of the outward ministerie of the word, and of the inward grace of the spirit, so that they are effectually called, that they in deed beleeue, and bring forth the fruites thereof?
Ans.The elect onely effectually called. Those which are ordained to eternal life. And as many as were ordained vnto eternal life, beleeued, Act. 13.48. And Christ saith, Iohn. 10.26. But ye beleeue not: for ye are not of my sheepe, as I said vnto you. Paul saith, Rom. 8.30. Whom he predestinate, them also he called effectually. Iohn saith, he that knoweth God, heareth vs: he that is not of God, heareth vs not. Hereby know we the spirit of truth and the spirit of error, 1. Iohn. 4.6.
 Qu. Are no others partakers of these two means the outward ministery of the word and the inward worke of the spirit, but the elect of God onely?

Ans.Many gifts of the spirit are co^mon to the reprobate There are many besides Gods elect that are in some measure partakers of both, though not effectually, and some retaine both for a longer time, and some for a shorter time, as it appeareth in the parable, Math. 13. for some receiuing the word into their hard harts, as it were in the path way, let it goe againe by and by; as it came in at one eare, so it went out at the other. Some receiue both as among thornes, and the couetous desires of the world choke it. Some as among stones, but when troubles, and the very crosses of Christ come vpon him, he letteth the grace of God wither away rather then his bodie should suffer, Saul had the spirit of the Lord to giue him much grace, and turne him into an other man. 1. Sam. 10.6. Neuerthelesse it is saide, 1. Sam. 16.14. But the spirit of the Lord departed from Saul, and an euill spirit sent of the Lord vexed him. Iudas receiued such grace of the spirit that he was a preacher of the gospell, yet after he had determined to betray the Lord of life, and after he had receiued the soppe 'Satan entred into him, Iohn. 13.27. But to let passe other giftes of the spirit, such as were in Saul, Balaam, Iudas, which were for execution of such speciall duties, and to passe ouer also the gift of the Spiritte which consisteth in knowledge and is common to diuels as to men, Iames. 2.19.
and in the gospell often did the diuels confesse Christ: it seemeth, Heb. 6.4. that some tast of other manner of graces, and yet fall away in the end. But the spirit of adoption, and regeneration seemeth rather to be proper to the elect onely. But this would require a larger treatise, and is of late verie pithily and plentifully handled by others.
 Quest. Can you iudge of these, and discerne who haue the spirit of regeneratio^, and who want it and consequently who are elect, and who are not?
Ans. No,
The elect and the reprobate cannot be discerned at al times for it is certaine there wilbe tares among good corne, that is to say, the hypocrits among true beleeuers whiles the world indureth. But we must iudge the best, and thinke most charitably of all that outwardly receiue and professe the word, and yeeld some obedience vnto it.
 Quest. Then to leaue this iudgment to the Lord, to whom it belongs, I pray you tell me, what the state is of those men, whom the Lord doth effectually call with an holy calling?
Ans.The blessed state of the^ which are effectually called. Although I may answere you generally, that mans state, when he is effectually called, is most happie and blessed, yet if I would descend to the particulars of this blessednes, I must confesse with Dauid, Psal. 40.5. They are moe then I am able to expresse. For although we are partakers of the promises in Christ, Eph. 3.6.
Citizens with the saintes, and of the housholde of God, Ephes. 2.19. partakers of the godlie nature, 2. Pet. 1.4. the brethren of Christ, Psa. 22.23. Heb. 2.11. a chosen generation, a royall priesthood an holy nation, 1. Pet. 2.9. the iudges of the world, 1. Cor. 6.2. called to Gods eternall glorie by Christ Iesus, 1. Pet. 5.10. come to the mount Sion, and to the citie of the liuing GOD, the celestiall Ierusalem, and to the companie of innumerable Angels, and to the congregation of the first borne, which are written in heauen, and to God the iudge of all, and to the spirits of iust and perfect men, and to Iesus the mediator of the newe testament, and to the bloode of sprinkling that speaketh better thinges then that of Abell. Heb. 12.22. and although now we be the sonnes of God, neuerthelesse yet it doth not appeare what we shalbe, 1. Iohn. 3.2. And the Apostle Paul giueth the reason hereof, 1. Cor. 2.9. The things which the eye hath not seene, neither eare hath heard, neither came into mans heart, are, which God hath prepared for them that loue him.
Quest. When God calleth any man with an holy calling, from that miserable state of conde^nation, whereof you spake in your answere to my 12. questio^, vnto this blessed state ye haue now spoken of, I pray you tel me what condition he requireth of man, or what couenant he maketh with man?

Ans.Of the couenant of God. When God calleth man with an holy calling, and receiueth him to his mercie and fauour againe in Iesus Christ, then there are as it were indentures drawen between God and man, conditions on both sides agreed vpon, and so a new couena^t made between God and man.
 Quest. What is that couenant, or what be the conditio^s, or what be the words, or where shal we find any such thing in all the scripture?
The summ of the couenant.
Ans. Although this couenant was made before, euer since the blessed seede of the virgin was promised, Gen. 3. yet we may see it more plainly set down afterward, Ge. 17.1. between God and Abraham in these words, I am God all sufficient: walke before me and be thou vpright. In the first words, God for his part promiseth that he wilbe god al sufficient vnto Abraha^, to blesse him with al necessary blessings for this life, and for the life to come, as it is afterward in the text declared. In the latter words the Lord requireth of Abraha^, obedience, that he walk vprightly before God. Likewise where this couenant is renewed againe, Exod. 19.5.9. between God and the Israelites, the Lord for his part freely and of his own meere grace and fauour promiseth, that he wil be their God, and make them a kingdome of priests, and an holy nation vnto himselfe. And on the other part he requireth that they should obey his voyce
and keepe his commandements. And the condition of obedience which God requireth, and man promiseth is the chiefest thing which is vrged and required of vs in the scripture, as to him that will take paines to read the places, it appeareth, Deut. 7.12 and 10.12. and 1. Sam. 15.22 Ierem. 7.23. And this couenant is vsually repeated in the old and new testament, and very often in these wordes. I wilbe your God, and ye shalbe my people; as Ierem. 31.1.33. and 2. Cor. 6.18. zachar. 8.8. and Heb. 8.10. Ezek. 37.26.27. and 2. Cor. 6.16.
 Quest. I pray you shew me the meaning of this couenant more fully?
Ans. The meaning is very plaine and manifest, that whereas man before through Adams fall was the child of the deuil, Act. 13.10 Iohn. 8.44. the seruant of sinne, Iohn. 8.34. and 2. Pet. 2.19. without God in the world, Eph. 2.12. now he is become the sonne of God. Galat. 3.26. the seruant of righteousnes, Rom. 6.17.19. and an inheritour of the kingdom of heauen, Iam. 2.5. if so be that he continue in the couenant, and obey the co^mandements of God.
 Quest.
The condition of the couenant, is to be obedient to God. When man entreth into this couenant with God, doth he solemnly promise, and straitly binde himselfe to keepe all the commandements of God?
Ans. Yea, he doth bind himself to be obedient
to al Gods commandements as I haue shewed, els there could be no couenant. And when Moses had been the second time in the mount with God, and brought with him the two tables of the couenant, then he red them to the people, who answered with one voice. Exod. 24.3, 7. All things which the Lord hath saide, we will doe, and be obedient. For except a man be resolued in himselfe to obey the commandementes of God, it is to no purpose euer to thinke of any couenant. And Christ sheweth by two examples, of a man that purposeth to build a house, and of a king that minds to make warre, Luk. 14.28. etc. That it is lost labour to enter into Gods couenant, except we be resolued to do what the Lord commaundeth. 
Man breaks the couenant.
Quest. Is there any man in the world, that keepeth this condition, and that breaketh not the commaundementes of God?
Ans. No indeede there is no man that can so absolutely keepe the co^maundementes of God as he ought to doe, but he daily offendeth.
 Quest. Are not all men then as deepely condemned for so many sins as we daylie commit,
Christ is our righteousnes. as euer Adam was for his first disobedience?
Ans. No, for Christ hath not only suffred for vs, and reconciled vs to God againe, but
also fulfilled the law for vs. Ro. 8.2.3.4. and 10. imputing his obedience to vs that beleeue that hereafter we should not be condemned againe.
 Q. But doth God accept of Christs righteousnes and fulfilling of the law, as if we our selus had fulfilled it?
A. Paul saith 1. Cor. 1.30. That God hath made Christ to be our righteousnes, that we should be made the righteousnes of God in him 2. Cor. 5.21.
 Quest. What say you then for our sins which we daily commit, doth Christ answer for them all?
Ans.Christ is our mediatour. I answer with the Apostle. 1. Ioh 2.1. If any man sinne (of infirmitie, not of obstinacy and malice) we haue an aduocate with the father, Iesus Christ the iust, who appeareth now in the sight of God for vs. Heb. 24. Who euer liueth to make intercession for vs, and is able perfectly to saue them that come to God by him, Heb. 7.25.
 Quest. If the case be so as you say, that Christ is our righteousnes, and we the righteousnes of God in him, and that he is our reconciliation, and now appeareth in the sight of God making the attonement for vs, it skilleth not for our obedience it is no matter whether we sin or not, we may take our pleasurs of this world for we are not vnder the law but vnder grace.
Ans.We must not return with the dog to his vomit. Not so, for then our condition should be farre worse and more damnable then it was befere we were redeemed by Christ, as Peter telleth vs 22. Pet. 20. For if they, after they haue escaped from the filthines of the world, through the
knowledge of the Lord, and of the Sauiour Iesus Christ, are yet tangled againe therein, and ouercome, the latter end is worse then the beginning. For it had beene better for them, not to haue knowen the way of righteousnes, then after they haue knowen it, to turne from the holy commandement giuen vnto them. And Christ saith, that if a man hauing an euill spirit, driuen out of him, shall admit him to come with seauen other spirits worse then himselfe, and returne and dwell there, the last state of that man is worse then the first Luk. 11.26.
 Q. What shal we say or do the^ for we al sin daily?
Sin must not reigne in vs.
Ans. Though sinne cannot vtterly be abolished out of our mortal bodies, but we all sin daily: yet the Apostle teacheth vs what we must do, and saith Rom. 6.12. Let not sin reign therefore in your mortall body, that ye should obey it in the lustes thereof.

Q. Is it sufficient for vs after we be reconciled to God by Christ, that we suffer not sin to reign in vs

Ans.The combate betweene the flesh and the spirit. If we feele in our selues a combate betweene the flesh and the spirit, such as Paul speaketh of, Galat. 5.17. so that we allow not the euil which we doe, but desire and striue to do the good we cannot attaine vnto, it is no more we that do it, but sin that dwelleth in vs Rom. 7 10. And then though in respect of the infirmitie of the flesh we cry out with Paul Rom 7.24.
O wretched man that I am, who shall deliuer me from the bodie of this death? Yet we may likewise reioyce with the same Apostle. Rom. 7.25. and say, I thanke God through Iesus Christ our Lord.
 Quest. The papistes say, that after our baptisme and regeneration, we must by our workes merit saluation, and for our sinnes of infirmitie make sitisfaction by our good deedes. What say you to this? for ye saide before, that Christ maketh satisfaction for all, if your doctrine be true, shew me the papists error.
Ans.Popish il workes confuted Hereunto I answere two waies. First, if our sinnes committed before baptisme and before our regeneration were so great that they could not be purged by any mans works, but the death and blodsheding of Iesus Christ was necessarily required to wash vs and make vs cleane; then I say that sinne committed after regeneration, can in no wise be purged by workes of men, but only by the bloud of Christ: My reason is, because sinne is alwayes of one nature, though some sinnes be greater then other. And because sinnes committed after Baptisme are greater then sinnes committed before regeneration. For before regeneration wee walke in darkenesse, (though we haue so much light as is sufficient to make vs excuseles) and so commit much
sinne through ignorance: but after regeneration we are in the light, we haue more knowledge, and greater power to resist sinne. And therefore sinne committed after regeneration, is greater then the sinne committed before in the same degree. Wherefore if sinne committed before regeneration, cannot be purged but by the bloud of Christ, it is manifest that sinne after regeneration can no other way be forgiuen then by Christ, whose death is effectuall and auailable aswell for sinnes after regeneration as before. Secondly, the greatest papist of them all, yea the Pope himselfe, I thinke, can doe no greater, nor no better workes then did the Apostle Paul. But he after his regeneration, fleeth to the mercie of God in Christ, and saith, Phil. 3.8.9. That he counteth all his righteousnes losse for Christes sake, and desireth to be found in him, not hauing his owne righteousnes which is of the law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, euen the righteousnes which is of God through faith. wherfore except the papists looke otherwise to be saued then Paul was, or haue better works then he had, they cannot be saued by them. I might ad hereto, that the wages of sinne whether it be before or after regeneration is death, Rom. 6.23. And thereon infer, that popish
works may deliuer the^ out of popish purgatorie for they are both of them popish dreames; but no works of me^ can deliuer from death and hel. No mens works can deliuer vs from this death of the body, for we se all die, much lesse from death of body and soule in hel. But these neede not:  there is sufficient sayd before.
Q. If works do not iustifie vs wherefore serue they? is there any vse of the?
Four causes why we must do good workes. Io. 15, 8. serue they to any purpose?
Ans. Christ answereth this question Math. 5.16. saying, Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good workes and glorifie your father which is in heauen. For as a leude sonne dishonoureth his father: so a wicked Christian dishonoureth God, and causeth all men to speake euill of God, as the Lord complaineth by his prophet Ezekiel diuers tymes, that the Iewes in Babilon pulluted Gods name among the heathen. But by a holy conuersation, there is greate occasion ministred to glorifie God. Besides good workes serue for edification of our brethren. Somtimes they may serue for to winne vnbeleeuers to God, 1. Cor. 7.16. and 1. Pet. 3.1. Lastly they are notable testimonies to our consciences, that we are Gods elect, as Paul sheweth Rom. 8.1. etc: Phil. 2.12. and Peter also 2. Pet. 1.10. and. 1. Io. 3.19
Quest. But to returne to that I desired specially
to know,  euen to the couenant of God againe, for whether it hath beene your answeres or my questions that caried me away, I know not, I pray you now shew me, whether the Israelites continued in, and kept that holy couenant, whereto they bound themselues with such sollomne consent.
Ans. Many and the most part of them transgressed grieuously,
The Israelites transgressed the couenant of God often. and brake their promise with God both in the wildernes before they entred into the Land of Canaan, as it appeareth in the bookes of the law Exod. Leuit. Numb. and deut. And Moses plainely telleth them Deut. 9.7. Remember, and forget not, how thou prouokedst the Lord thy God to anger in the willdernes, since the day that thou diddest depart out of the Land of Egipt, vntil ye came vnto this place ye haue rebelled against the Lord etc. And the Lord himselfe complaining of their often rebellion, saith. They haue tempted me this ten times and haue not obeyed my voice. Numb. 14.22. And also after they were come into the promised land, as it is to be seene in the former prophets which wrote things done and past as Iosua and the rest, and the latter prophets which also foretold things to com as Esai and they following. And the prophet Dauid til his dayes maketh relation of all, Psal. 78.10.37.41, etc. and Psal. 106.

 Quest. What saide the Lord, or what did he, when they had thus broken his couenant?
Ans.Man punished for breaking his couenant with God. He was exceeding wrath with the people, and often smote them with grieuous iudgments: for when they worshipped the calfe, Exod 32. The Lord minded to destroy them, had not Moses stand in the breach to turne away his wrath, Deut. 9.14.18. Ps. 106.23. When they murmured he consumed them with fire. Numb. 11.1.3. When they lusted after flesh, he slew them with an exceeding greate plague, euen the strongest of them and the chosen men in Israel, Numb. 11.33. Psal. 78.31. When they refused to enter into the Land of Canaan Numb. 14. The Lord sware in his wrath, that they shoulde not enter into his rest, Psal. 95.11. when they committed fornication with the daughters of Moab, the Lord slew 24. thousand of them Num. 25.9. The books of Iudges, Samuel and kings are full of examples.
 Quest. Doth not the Lord also breake his couenant and promise, when man is vnfaithfull and disobedient,
Mans vnbeliefe maketh not Gods promise voide. and so all the couenant betweene God and man is made voide and of none effect?
Ans. No, God forbid that we should think or say so, for the gifts or calling of God are without repentance, Rom. 11.1, 29. The Apostle saith, Heb. 6.17.18. that, God willing more
abundantly to shew vnto the heires of promise the stablenesse of his counsell, bound himselfe by an oath, that by two immutable things (that is, his word, and his oath) wherein it is vnpossible that God should lie, we might haue strong consolation, which haue our refuge to hold fast the hope that is set before vs, which we haue, as an ancre of the soul, both sure and stedfast, etc. And herupo^ Dauid said, Psal. 89.34. his couenant he will not breake nor alter the thing that is gone out of his lippes. And Paul saith, Rom. 3.3. For what, though some did not beleeue? shall their vnbelief make the promise of God of none effect? God forbid: Yea let God be true, and euery man a lyar. And againe in another place: If we beleeue not, yet abideth he faithfull, he cannot deny himselfe 2. Tim. 2.13. The prophet Esai he also saith, Chap. 54.10. For the mountaines shall remooue, and the hils shal fall downe: but my mercy shal not depart from thee; neither shal the couenant of my peace fall away saith the Lord that hath compassion on thee. And in many other places of scripture besides these, the stablenes of Gods couenant is declared as Iere. 31.35. and 33.20.25.26.
 Quest. This is a most sweet and comfortable doctrine, wherefore I pray you giue me some reason of it, if there be any to be rendred? for it is an vnmeasurable mercie of the Lord, to perform his promise, though man breake his.

Ans.The couenant renued two waies. It commeth to passe two waies specially that God keepeth his couenant, when man doth not. First the Lord is mercifull, and gracious, slowe to anger, and abundant in goodnes and trueth, reseruing mercie for thousandes, forgiuing iniquitie, and transgression and sinne, Exod. 34.6. and deliteth rather in the conuersion, then in the condemnation of a sinner, Ezek. 18.23. and therefore by patience and long suffering inuiteth men to repentance, Rom. 2.4. protesting that his waies are not like to our waies, that is, that he is not vnreconciliable as often time we are Esai. 55.8. that if men hauing broken the couenant of God, doe repent, and turne to the Lord, preuenting his further iudgementes by repentance, the Lord hath promised, Deut. 30.1.2.3. that he wilbe reconciled. For if we acknowledge our sinnes, he is faithfull and iust, to forgiue vs our sinnes, and to cleanse vs from all vnrighteousnesse, 1. Iohn. 1.9. And thus though man breake Gods couenant, yet by repentance the couenant is renewed and continued, Deut. 4.31.
Secondlie, when men continue in their sinnes, and doe not by repentance turne to the Lord, and renewe the couenant betweene God and them, then the Lorde powreth his indignation vpon them, till he haue destroyed
and weeded out the chiefe rebels and great sinners, and then after some chastisement will he bring the rest as it were by strong hande into the bonde of the couenant, as the prophet Ezechiel sheweth, Chap. 20.33.37.38. And thus as the Lorde chose man at the first making of the couenant, euen of his own mercie, for all men lay vnder the curse by reason of sinne: euen so doth the Lorde of his mercie continue the couenant, as the same prophet Ezekiel speaketh in plaine wordes, Chap. 36. vers. 22.32. Thus saith the Lorde God, I doe not this for your sakes, O house of Israell, but for mine owne holy names sake. And in another place, I might euen deale with thee as thou hast done, when thou diddest dispise the oath in breaking the couenant. Neuerthelesse, I will remember my couenant made with thee in the daies of thy youth, and I will confirme vnto thee an euerlasting couenant, Ezek. 16.59.60. And in the verse following he plainly telleth them, that he doth renewe this his couenant of his meere mercy, but not by thy couenant, that is, not because thou hast kept the couenant, for thou hast broken the couenant on thy part.
 Quest. I pray you shewe these two waies of the continuance of the couenant betweene God and man, by some examples.

Ans.Examples of renewing the couenant. When the Lord brought Israel out of Aegypt, there was a solemne couenant made between God and them, Exod. 19.3. etc. But whiles Moses was in the mount with God to receiue the lawes of the Lord, the people made a molten calfe, and so brake their promise and their couenant with God. Wherfore through the Lordes long suffering that did not presently destroy them, but inuited them to repentance, and through Moses prayer to God, and reprouing of them and of their idolatrie, they fell to repentance and humbling of themselues before God, Exod. 33.4. etc. and the Lordes anger was so pacified, that he commaunded Moses to hew him new tables of stone (for the first writen with the finger of God were broken, Exod. 32.19.) and came vp into the mountaine the second time, for the Lord now pacified, woulde vouchsafe to renewe the tables of the couenant againe. Exod. 34.1. And Moses hauing receiued the lawe the second time, came downe to the people againe after fourtie daies, and then reade the lawe to the people and renewed the couenant againe, Exodus. 24. verse. 3. etc to verse. 9. Where all the people answered with one voyce, and saide. All the thinges which the Lord hath said, will we doe, and be obedient, vers. 3. and 7.

 When Iosua waxed olde, and was readie to enter into the way of all the world. Iosh. 23.14. and when there was some inclination to idolatrie among the people, then Ioshua before his death called all the tribes of Israell to Shechem, Ioshua, 24.1. etc. and expostulating the matter with them in very many and most pithie wordes throughout the most part of the chapter, specially ve. 14. etc. at the last brought them to this, that they put away their strange Gods. vers. 23. and said, vers. 24. The Lord our God will we serue, and his voyce will we obey.
And so Ioshua renewed the couenant, vers. 25.
 In the booke of Iudges it is written generally, chap. 2.8.11. that after the death of Ioshua and of the Elders, the Israelites forsooke the Lord, and followed idols, and that when they repenting but a little, cried to the Lord, hee was mercifull and sent them Iudges to deliuer them out of their enemies handes. And particularly it is afterward often said, When the children of Israell cried vnto the Lord, the Lord stirred them vp a Sauiour as, chap. 3.9.15. and 6.7. and 10.10. which words are sometime also to be vnderstood, and so vpon their repentance was the couenant in those daies often renewed as in one place specially, and in steade of many, it is manifest, euen, Chap. 10.16.

 In Samuels daies the people repented, and he renewed the couenant between God and Israel, 1. Sam. 7.2.3.4. etc.
 Because in Sauls daies religion was not regarded, Dauid in assembling al Israel to setch the Arke of God to Ierusalem, seemeth to renewe the couenant of God, 1. Chro. 13.
Asa King of Iudah encouraged by Azariah the prophet, destroyed idolatrie in his kingdome, restored true religion, and most gloriously renewed the couenant of the Lord their God, and reuiued the lawe of Deut. 13. as it is at large declared, 2. Chro. 15.12. etc.
Iosiah that good young king renewed the same couenaunt, 2. Kinges. 11.17. and 2. Chro. 23.16.
Iosiah that worthie king of religious memory likewise renewed this couenaunte, 2. Kings. 23.3. and 2. Chro. 34.31.
And though there be not the name and word of the couenant expressed, yet it is not to be doubted but that Iehosaphat and Hezekiah in reformation of religion renewed the Lords couenant.
 But after the Iewes were come out of Babylon to Ierusalem againe, Ezra returning the next yeare after the buylding of the Temple was finished, found that the people
by marying straunge wiues had broken the Lordes couenaunt, wherefore with greate feare and trembling, he procured that they put awaie their straunge wiues, and so the couenant was renewed. Ezr. 10. 
 About thirteene yeare after Ezra, (Ezr. 7.1.8. Nehem. 2.1.) came Nehemiah out of Babylon to Ierusalem, and builded vppe the walles of the Citie, and abode there twelue yeares (Nehem. 5.14.) in which space among other thinges, he finding that the people had transgressed the couenant againe by taking of straunge wiues, did renewe this couenaunt againe, and caused them to put away their straunge wiues, as the whole matter is declared in two whole Chapters, Nehem. 9. and 10. And heereto I might adde verie well, that which happened when Nehemiah that zealous prince returned to Ierusalem the second time, Nehem. 13.3. etc. But thus I haue gone through the whole storie of the olde Testament, and shewed howe the people ten times by a speciall kinde of repentance broke off their sinnes, preuented further iudgementes, and verie solemnely renewed the couenant betweene GOD and them. And I wish with such hearty desire as I beare to Gods glorie, and to the salvation
of my brethren, that these fewe, but worthie and notable examples, might driue vs all to repentance generally, and to the renewing of the Lordes couenant, which by our sinnes we haue broken, and so preuent greater iudgements which hang ouer our heades. For the Lorde by famine and dearth, by diuers and straunge diseases these fewe yeares past, euen such as neyther wee, norour fathers haue knowen, by a most terrible and fearefull plague and pestilence, which made vs all to tremble, by taking away many good men, euen some of the best men in the lande, doth euen thunder from heauen his terrible voyce to driue vs to renewe the couenant of our GOD, least if we consider not his fearefull iudgementes, but continue still in our sinnes, his holy hand, which yet is stretched out still, take holde on iudgement, and he execute vengeance on his enemies, and weede out them that hate him before he will renewe his couenant againe. For that as I saide before, is the seconde way of continuing GODS couenant, and whereof also I will giue you one example or two. For that it is a terrible kinde of renewing the coueuaunt, and there are not, as I thinke, many examples of it.

When the Israelites were come to Kadesh barnea (Deut: 2.14.) in the second yeare after they departed out of Egipt, they sent twelue men to searche the land of Canaan, that they might the better know which way to enter into it, and set vpon the inhabitants Num: 13. But ten of these twelue at their returne brought vp an euill report of the land Num: 13.32. Whereat the Israelites murmured and rebelled grieuously Num: 14. for which cause the Lords wrath so kindled against them, that he sware they should not enter into that land. But the Lorde made them continew in the wildernesse 38. yeres afterward, till he had destroyed all those rebels and not left one of them aliue Deut: 2.14. And all those also which followed Baal Peor Deut: 4.3, 4. Afterward the Lorde of his mercie had compassion on their posteritie, and in the 40. yere after their departure out of Egypt, when they were in the plaine of Moab by Iorden Num: 33.48.50, the couenant made at Horeb as I shewed before, was nowe againe renewed, as it is largely sette downe Deut: 29.
 Againe though by the meanes of Iosua, Samuel, and many good kings the couenant was often renewed, as I shewed before, yet their sinnes and their rebellions so mightely
increased day by day, that at the last the lorde caried the Iewes captiues into Babilon, and there weeded fro^ among the rest, the rebells, and the great sinners, and destroyed them Ezek: 20.38. and after seauentie yeres had compassion of the rest, and of his meere mercie, not of their deserts, brought them to Ierusalem againe, and renewed his couenant with them, euen of his mercie Ezek: 16.61. and 36.22, 32. And that we may throughly see this couenant was renewed of Gods free mercie only, both Ieremie before the captiuitie began, saith, It is the Lords mercies that we are not consumed, because his compassions faile not Lament: 3.22. and also Malachi after the captiuitie saith, Because I the Lorde change not, therefore ye sonnes of Iaccob are not consumed Malach: 3.6.
 Lastly, when the Iewes were returned out of captiuitie, and the couenant of grace was renewed, yet for all that Zerubbabel or Iehoshua, that Haggai or Zachariah, that Ezra, Nehemiah or Malachi could doe, they waxed worse and worse, and to fill vp the full measure of all their sinnes, they finally crucified the Lorde of life, euen the Lorde Iesus Christ our alone Sauiour: wherefore the Lorde hath nowe reiected them as reprobates, and scattered them vpon the face of
the earth, as fearefull spectacles of his heauy wrath euerie where. All this notwithstanding the faithful God, which keepeth couenant and mercy to a thousand generations, hath still continued his couenant to a fewe of the Iewes, as Paul sheweth Rom: 11.1. I demaund then, hath God cast away his people? God forbid: for I also am an Israelite, of the seede of Abraham etc. and to teach vs that this proceedeth of the Lorde free mercie, he saith Vers: 5. Euen so then at this present time is there a remnant through the election of grace.
 Quest. By this you haue said, it appeares to be a most fearefull thing to enter into Gods couenant. Were it not better to be out of the couenant?
Ans. It is not onely a fearefull thing, but also a most damnable thing to be out of Gods couenant, for they that be out, haue no hope of saluation. And to be in the couenant, is only blessednes, if man continue therin. As the magistrate is not to be feared for good workes, but for euill, Rom. 13.3. so the Lord is not a terror to them that keep his couenant but to them that breake it.
Quest. I see, and it is too manifest to be deried, that there was continually a couenant made betweene God and man vnder the law before
Christ came. But now in the tyme of the Gospel is there, or ought there to be any such couenant?
Ans.The couenant of God vnder the gospel. Yea, there ought to be, there hath beene, and is at this day, and shall be to the end of the world. When Iohn the baptist began to preach the gospel, and gather a new Church, a new people for Christ, he renewed this couenant with all those whome he baptised. For when the scripture Math. 3. witneseth, that he admitted none to baptisme, but vpon confession of their sinnes, which was both a renouncing of them, and also a promising of amendment of life, and of obedience of God; and that many voluntarily submitted themselues to his order, which was the ordinance of God, and receiued the sacrament of Baptisme, which is the signe of the couenant, and to be ministred to none, but only to them that are in the couenant: it is more then manifest, that Iohn gathering a holy people to the Lord out of that corrupt and disordred state of the Iewes, renewed the couena^t of God. when Peter conuerted so many at one sermon Act. 2.38. He admonished them of repentance, and so after they had yeelded themselues to the couenant of God, and promised to do what the Lord commaunded, they receiued baptisme, which is the signe of
the couenant. The same is to be affirmed of those whome Paul conuerted, Act, 19.17.18. And afterward when the Apostle planted Churches in diuers places, it appeareth many wayes that they at the first made the couenant betweene God and them; els they could haue planted no Church. For declaration herof mark what Paul speaketh of the Church which then was at Rome, Rom. 6.17. But God be thanked, that ye vvere the seruants of sin, but ye haue obeyed from the heart vnto the form of doctrine, vvhereunto ye were deliuered. The same co^me^dation he also giueth of som other Churches as of the Church at Corinth 2. Cor. 9.13. Which by experimente of this ministration, praise God for your voluntary submissio^ to the Gospel of Christ. And of the Church of Macedonia, 2. Cor. 8.5. They gaue their owne selues first to the Lord and after vnto vs by the vvill of God. And of the Church at Philippi Phillip. 2.12. Wherefore my beloued, as ye haue alwaies obeied, not as in my presence only, but novv much more in mine absence etc. Out of these and diuers such other places, it is euident, that where the Apostles planted any Churches, they caused all the beleeuers to promise to doe whatsoeuer the Lord commaundeth. But I will conclude with one word. When Christ the mediator renewed
this new couenant betweene God and man, the Apostle Heb. 8.10. rehearsing the couenant, mentioneth the very words wherein it was first made, and wherein it hath so often beene renewed, euen these; I vvill be their God, and they shalbe my people. Which general wordes the Apostle Paul applieth to the Church at Corinth, 2. Cor. 6.16.
 Quest. Can you shevv by examples hovv this couenant hath beene continued, and renevved vnder the Gospel, as you did before vnder the lavv?
Ans.The continewance of the conenant vnder the Gospel Although the history of the gospell in the new testament conteine in it but a short time, that from the time when Iohn Baptist began to preach, to the end of the Actes and writings of the Apostles there is not full foure score yeare (I except the prophesies) that we might shew the repetition of the couenant from time to time, as we did out of the old testament, which conteineth a historie of things done in that Church from the beginning of the world almost til Christ came in the flesh, euen till the dayes of Alexander the greate who liued about 330. yeares afore Christ came: Neuerthelesse that which is written Deut. 29.14.15. Neither make I this couenant, and this oath vvith you on ly, but asvvell vvith him that standeth here with vs this day before the Lord our God, as
vvith him that is not here vvith vs this day, (that is, with the posteritie which is yet vnborne) and Deut. 31.10. of the repeating of the couenant euery seauenth yere more solemnely, must be taken more generally then for the posteritie of Iacob only, and being rightly compared with my last answere before will proue sufficiently that the couenant hath beene renewed often vnder the Gospel, as it was vnder the Law. Besides, that which is wanting, in the new testame^t by reason of the shortnes of the story, is somwhat touched and in part supplyed by ecclesiasticall writers, which haue recorded some of the practises and customes of the churches in their dayes.
 Qu. VVhat hath any ecclesiasticall vvriter spoken hereof? or vvhat hath beene the custom of the Church herein?
Ans. Ecclesiasticall writers make mention of two manners of catechising, which differed both in regard of time, and in respect of persons: the one was before baptisme: the other was after baptisme: the one was catechising of them that were strangers from the couenant; the other was of them that were in the couenant: the one was of heathens before they were receiued into Gods couenant and into the fellowship of the Church; the other was of the children of the faithful.

 Quest. What is there vvritten of the former manner of catechising, that we may therein see the continuance or renuing of the couenant?
Ans.^^e former maner of catechising.Iustine, sometimes a heathen Philopher, but after a famous martire of Christ, reporteth in his second apollogie of Christians that if any heathen man desired to be receiued into the fellowshippe of the Church, he was first catechised in the principles of reliligion, and then hearing further the word of God as it were the conditions of the couena^t, afterward came into the face of the congregatio^ and co^fessed that he did beleeue, and promised that he would obey the word of God, wherupo^ he was baptised and receiued into the fellowship of the Church. Now when the Church obserued this order, it is cleare that they co^tinewed the couenant of God among them. And that this order might be the better obserued, the church appointed sometimes, and in some places a longer space, at other times and in other places a shorter time for catechising of heathens before they were baptised. Socrates lib. 7. Cap: 30. writeth that the Burgonians werseauen daies inlearning their catechisme, and then baptised the eight, Ierome ad pammachiam saith, the custome in his days was to catechise them fourty daies, and then to baptise them. Tertullian de baptismo writeth
that there were two times in the yeare, ^^ster and Whitsontide specially appointe^ (...) the Church for baptisme, and strangers: (...) the couenant were instructed in the principl^ of religion all the rest of the yeare against these two times. And thus farre the couenant was continued, that no stranger was admitted into the societie of the Saintes, but he first solemnly entred into Gods couenant, and promised to doe what the Lorde commaunded in his worde.
 Quest. You haue sufficiently shewed me that the Church was so mindfull of the couenant that they receiued none into their felowship, but those onely that submitted themselues to the ordinances of God, which is a thing worthie good consideration. But my desire was and is to know if the faithfull themselues beeing of the couenaunt, did at any time repeate it or renewe it.
Ans. The second manner of catechising,
The seco^d manner of catechi^sing. whereof I spake before, and which now is to be declared, sheweth the continuance of the couenant euen among the faithfull. For the place, Deut. 26.14.15. whereof I spake a little before, teacheth vs that when the Lord receiueth any into his couenant, hee doth not receiue that partie alone which then in his owne person doth promise to
doe what the Lord commaundeth, but also (...) his infinite mercie he receiueth that mans ^^^teritie though then vnborne, euen for ^housandes of generations,
^^e former manner of cachis^. as also it appeareth, Gen. 17.7. I will establish my couenant betweene mee and thee and thy seede after thee in their generations for an euerlasting couenant. And the other place of Deut. 31.10. before mentioned also, as touching the solemne repeating of the lawe and couenant: euen both these places teach vs that there ought to be a continuall repeating of the couenant, which thing hath well beene obserued in this other kinde of catechising. For the children of the faithfull which were baptised in their infancie, when they came to yeares of discretion haue been taught both priuatly at home, and publikely in the congregation, what great thinges the Lorde did for them and for their forefathers when he receiued them into his couenant: which thinges when the children of the faithfull had learned, and were able sensibly to render a reason of their faith, then they in the presence of the congregation did openly declare their faith, and promised to obey the commaundementes of God, and so in their owne person renewed Gods couenant, and were then confirmed to be of the couenant. And
this is that which in auncient times was casled confirmation, howsoeuer the detestab^^ two horned beastes and antichrist^^^ Rome haue abused it. Also that the ^^^^dren of the faithfull might be religiou^ ^^structed in the principles of religion,
Two chief ticles of and know what greate thinges God had done for them, and be able thereof to render a sound reason and sensible,  before they were confirmed: there were in the primitiue Church catechisers which instructed both heathens before they were baptised, and also the children of the faithfull before they were confirmed. Such catechisers or doctors were Pantenus (Euseb. lib. 5. cap. 9.) Clemens (Euseb. lib. 6. cap. 6. Origene (Euseb. lib. 6. cap. 8.) and others after them in the Church of Alexandria in Aegypt. And such a catechiser was Optatus at Carthage in Ciprians daies, Ciprian. lib. 3. Epist. 22. And by these and such other meanes was Gods couenant repeated, renewed, and continued from generation to generation, euen to these our daies as you see.
 Quest. Was there any other custome in the primitiue Church to declare the continuance of this couenant?
Ans. The Church then so diligently kept this holy couenant, that if any man performed not
his promise of obeying Gods commaun^^^entes, but transgressed, neyther vpon due ^^^^^ition amended his fault as Gods lawes ^^^houd; the same person was banished and ex^^reth unicated out of the companie and fe^^^wship of the faithfull till hee amended. And you see excommunication continueth to this day, so that you neede no more to let you vnderstande what care the Church of Christ hath had of the co^tinuance of Gods couenant.
 Quest. It is most true and euident vvhich you say, and I am therewith satisfied. But as excommunication is continewed in the Church, so I wish catechising were also continewed, that though there be fewe or no heathens at all which desire to be of Gods couenant (so neare is the fulnesse of the gentiles come in, and so neare may we feare least our reiection bee at hand, whereof Paul long since admonished vs, Rom. 11.22.25.) yet the children of the faithfull might be instructed, and so continue the couenant of God, why is not this catechising now vsed?
Ans.Catechising continued. It is continued amongs vs or else the fault is in the preachers, who are enioyned to catechise the youth of their parish euery Lordes day in the after noone. And the children of the faithfull thus catechised and taught the principles of religion, are to
come into the face of the congregation assembled in the Church, and there to confesse their faith, and to promise obedi^^^^ vnto the commaundementes of Go^ ^^^^^ding to that little and short catechi^^ (...) forth by authority,
Two chief ^^ticles of wherein the holy practises of the primitiue Church are most worthily and liuely expressed as touching this thing speake of,  euen the continuance and renewing of the couenant. For therein the childe openly promiseth in his owne person three thinges: first to forsake the flesh, the world and the diuell; secondly to beleeue all the articles of the christian faith; thirdly to keepe God holy commaundementes.
 Quest. What are the principles of religion that long since were, and now are, or ought to be taught in the Church of Christ?
Ans.Of the principles of Christian religio^. Those which are set downe by the holy Ghost, Heb. 6.1.2. as for example. 1. First, repentance from dead workes, that is, both true sorrow for former sinnes, and also in regard of the time to come, a renouncing of the workes of the flesh, the worlde and the diuell. 2. Secondly, faith towards God, that is, a confession of the trinitie, and of our saluatio^ by the mercies of God in Iesus Christ our Lord. 3. Thirdly, the doctrine of baptisme, that is, the mysterie and the meaning of
the sacramentes. 4. Fourthly, laying on (...) handes, that is, that the children of the (...) being catechised, should make open (...) of their repentance, of their faith, (...) sacramentes of God, and so haue handes laide vpon them, and be confirmed to be of the couenant of God, and of the visible Church. 5. Fiftly, the resurrection from the dead, that is, that albeit they should die and their bodies be laide in the earth, yet at the last day they should be raised vp to life againe. 6. Sixtly, eternall iudgement, that is, that God the eternall iudge, who will then condemne the wicked to eternall condemnation, will giue them that are thus receiued into his holy couenant, and accordingly continue therin, an euerlasting crowne of glory in his heauenly kingdom for euermore.
 Quest. Why are not our children now a daies taught these principles of religion?
Ans. They be. For when they are taught the Lords praier, the articles of Christian faith, the ten commandements, and the meaning and vse of the sacraments, then do they learne these principles of religion before mentioned. And if you consider well the questions propounded and answers made by children in our churches where there is a godly and painefull minister, ye shall see that these things are both taught
and learned. For when our children in answering the minister, solemnly renounce the flesh the world, and the diuell; when they conf^^^ the articles of christian faith; and wh^^^ promise to obey Gods commaundement (...) that little catechisme established by authoritie requireth:
Two chief articles of then they plainely shewe they haue learned these principles of religion, and keepe the custom of the primitiue Church,  and so the couenant between God and ma^ is renued and continued from generation to generation.
 Quest. I pray you declare and lay open these principles of religion more fully, and first for their order, secondly for the summe of them.
Ans. That order I thinke best,
The order to be obserued in the principles of religion. which is most naturall and most agreeable to the couenant of God. For where there is no couenant between God and man, there these principles of Christian religion are not regarded. But where there is a couenant made betweene God and man, God first requireth that his gracious promises should be beleeued, and secondly that his commandements should be obeied. Againe as the fire is before the heat, the sunne before the light, the fountaine before the riuer that runneth from it, and generally as the cause efficient is before the effect, so is faith before the law. For good works are the fruites of faith. Thirdly without faith neither the sacramentes
can be comfortable vnto vs, nor our obedience see ptable to God, nor yet our praiers be hard (...) granted. For without faith it is impossible (...) God. Heb. 11.6.
^^^st. Then your meaning is, that the first place of right belo^geth to faith, the second to the commandementes.
Ans. Whether we respect the time in the making of the couenant, or the naturall order of causes, or the expresse word of God, faith must needes be set before the workes of the Law.
Quest. But what say you to the other priuciples of religion, as prayer, and the sacramentes? what place will you assigne to them?
Ans. The order agreed vpon for faith and for the law, there needs no great question to be made for the rest. For the sacraments are as necessarily annexed to faith, as the seale to an obligation. And praier likewise followeth the commandements, that what wants soeuer we find either in our faith, or in our obedience to the co^mandements by reason of our manifold infirmities, we should by earnest and often praiers craue of God that he would minister vnto vs some supply by the powerful presence of his Spirit, and specially that through the obedience of Iesus Christ we may be accepted.
 Quest. I vnderstand then it is your meaning to obserue this order; to speake first of faith and of
the sacraments, secondly of the commandements and of prayer. I pray you therefore let me heare what the chiefe articles of faith be, which we ought to beleeue.
Ans.Two chief articles of faith. The holy ghost setteth downe two principal articles of our faith Heb. 11.6. in these wordes, He that commeth to God must beleeue 1. that God is, and 2. that he is a rewarder of them that seeke him. 
 Q. Concerning the former of these two articles, is there any ma^ which denieth that there is a God?
Ans. The Apostle saith not, he that co^meth to God must beleeue that there is a God, as though he had to deal with Protagoras who doubted whether there were any God or no, or as though he had to deale with Diagoras Melius, Theodorus, Cyrenaicus, Eumenes, Tegeates, and such like who denied flatly that there was any God: but he saith, he that commeth to God, and so professeth God, must beleeue that God is, that is, that he is such a God as the word describeth him to be, omniscient, omnipotent, iust, righteous, mercifull, gracious etc. and not to say in hart, God seeth me not when I commit iniquitie Psal. 10.11.13. and Psal. 50.21. or, though I commit these abhominations yet God wilbe mercifull vnto me and not punish me according to his word Deut. 29.19. Rom. 2.3
or to haue any other such imagination in his heart. He I say that commeth to GOD must not haue any of these, or any such other cogitation in his minde, but must faithfully and firmly beleeue that God is euen such a God, as he sheweth himselfe in his word. Yea he that commeth to God must not hypocritically confesse him with his mouth, and most impiously denie him in his workes Tit. 1.16.
 Quest. Do you not then condemne many men in these dayes,, who say they are gospellers, and if ye demaund of them whether they beleeue that God is, will answere you angerly, and say ye abuse the^ to ask any such question, and yet in their deeds God wots are wicked men, as vsurers, drunkards, gluttons, whormo^gers, cruell oppressors, theeues, bribers, couetous, murderers, craftie deceiuers and such like, as without repentance shall neuer enter into the kingdom of heauen.
Ans. No if there be anie such, I condemne them not, but it is their owne deedes 1. Cor. 6.9. Rom. 8.23. Galat. 5.19. It is the word of God Iohn. 12.48. and their owne consciences Rom. 2.15. Tit. 3.11. that shall condemne such hypocrites at that day. Who nothing regarding the terror of the Lord (2. Cor. 5.11.) doe abuse his maiestie in a hie degree of presumptuous sinne, which is most dangerous and dreadfull. For the Lord hath
saide Deut. 29.19. That he will not be mercifull to such.
 Quest. But to leaue such to God, what say you more concerning faith in God?
Ans.Of faith It is first requisite that we know what faith is, before we can shew what faith in God is. 
 Quest. What is faith then how do you define it, or what doe you call it?
Ans.Two sorts of faith Before we can define it and declare what it is, it must of necessitie first be distinquished or deuided. For there are two sortes of faith so diuers in their nature, that they cannot both possibly be comprehended in one definition or description. 
 Quest. Which be those two kindes of faith?
Ans. There neither is, neither can there be any faith, but where two persons are, the one promising some thing, and the other receiuing and beleeuing that promise. And in either of these two persons there is a seuerall faith differing either from other, euen one in him that promiseth, and an other in him to whome the promise is made. But the faith of the one is so diuers and differring from the faith of the other that they cannot both be conteined in one definition.
 Quest. VVhat is his faith that maketh the promise?

Ans. It is truth, faithfulnesse, constancie in performing that he promised. This faith is specially in God, who is alwaies trew in all his doings, and faithfull in all his promises, as the scripture euery where witnesseth. And this faith ought to be in euery man truely and saith fully to performe all his promises made either to God or man. And the prophet Dauid saith, it is one of the markes whereby Gods elect are knowne and discerned from others Psal. 15.4. to performe that he promiseth though it be to his losse.
 Quest. What is his faith to whome any thing is promised, and which receiueth and beleeueth the promise?
Ans. It is a sure, a certaine, a full perswasion that in due time and maner we shall enioy the thinges which are promised.
 Quest. Now then to goe forward with your purpose,
Of the person of God what is it to beleeue that God is?
Ans. It is to beleeue that God is such a God as he hath promised to be vnto vs, and such a God as the word describeth him to be both in respect of his person, and also in respect of his properties or essentiall qualities, if I may so speake.
 Quest. I pray you shew me these two things you spake of the person and the propertie of God, and first what saith the scripture touching the
person of God?
The scripture sheweth these things, 1. that there is one God only in essence or substance: 2. that there are three persons, the Father, the Sonne, and the holy Chost: 3. that euery one of these three persons is God: 4. that there are not three Gods, but one God only.
 Quest. These are deepe misteries and difficult matters whereof you speake, yet I desire to beare somwhat of them, and first shew me that there is one God alone.
Ans. That there is one God only it is proued first by testimonie of the scripture Deut. 6.4.
There is but one God. Heare O Israell the Lord our God is Lord only. Secondly by the creation of the worlde Ierem: 10.10.11.12. The Gods that haue not made the heauens and the earth, shall perish from the earth, and from vnder the heauens. And Dauid saith Psal. 96.5. The Gods of the people are idols, but the Lord made the heauens. Thirdly by his prouidence, as it appeareth Esai 45.5.6.7, 8. the words I omit for breuity fourthly by the miracls which he wroght in Egipt and for deliuerance of Israel as Moses sheweth that the Lord is God alone. Deut. 4.34.35.36. And Christ also proued himselfe to be God by the miracles he did Iohn. 5.36. and 10.25.38.
 Quest. Shew me also that there are three
persons.
There are three persons.
Ans. This is manifest Esai 63.9.10. For there is first the Lord, that was troubled in their troubles: secondly, there is the Angel of his presence, which is Iesus Christ: thirdly, there is his holy spirit, which the Israelites vexed. And if you read the text, you shall see it plainely. Also when Iohn baptized Christ Math. 3.17. there is first Christ baptised: Secondly, there is the voice of the father from heauen: Thirdly, there is the holy ghost descending like a doue. Againe Math. 28.19. Christ commaundeth that baptisme be ministred in the name of the Father, of the son and of the holy ghost you may reade also 2. Cor. 13.13.
 Quest. Can it likewise be proued, that each of these three persons, is God?
Ans.The Father is god First concerning the father, I suppose there is no doubt, there fore it shall suffice to say with Iohn 3.16. God so loued the world, that he gaue his only begotten sonne etc.
Secondly; of the sonne thus speaketh the Prophet Esai.
The son is God. 9.6. But vnto vs a childe is borne, and vnto vs a sonne is giuen: and the gouernement is vpon his souldiers, and he shall call his name wonderfull, Counseller. The mightie God, the euerlasting father, the Prince of peace etc. Paul saith Rom. 9.5.
of whome came Christ, who is GOD ouer all blessed for euer. And in an other place it is said Heb: 1.8. But vnto the sonne he saith,
O God, thy throne is for euer etc.
Thirdly,
The holy Ghost is God. of the holy Ghost thus saith Peter act: 5.3. Why hath Sathan filled thine hearte, that thou shouldest lie vnto the holy Ghost. And in the next verse, thou hast not lied vnto men, but vnto GOD. Paul saith 1. Cor: 6.19. knowe ye not that your bodie is the temple of the holy Ghost. and 1. Cor: 3.16. knowe ye not that ye are the Temple of God, and that the spirit of God dwelleth in you?
 Quest.
There are not three Gods, but one God alone. Lastly it remaineth yet that you shew there are not three Gods, but one God alone.
Ans. In the sixt chapter of Esai, the prophet saw the Lord in a vision ver: 1. and the Angels cried one to an other, Holy holy holy is the Lord of hostes vers: 3. and the Lord commanded Esaiah to go and prophesie vnto the people vers: 8, 9. Nowe if it be demanded who this Lord was that appeared to Esaiah, and bad him go and prophesie, I suppose all men will easily grant it was the Father. And that it was the Sonne it appeareth Iohn: 12.41. These things said Esaias when he saw his glory (that is, Christs glory) and spake of him, that is, of Christ. And Paul witnesseth
that it was the holy Ghost act: 28.25. For in citing that sixt chapter of Esaias, he saith thus: Well spake the holy ghost by Esaias the Prophet etc.
Also the Apostle Iohn in his first epistle Chap. 5. Vers. 7. speaketh thus: There are three which beare record in heauen, the Father, the word, and the holy Ghost: and these three are one. 
 Quest. Now that you haue declared these foure things concerning the person of God, I desire to heare somthing also of the properties of God, as you promised before?
Ans.The properties of God We must first consider the properties of God generally as he is one God in Essence, and secondly the properties of euery person by himselfe.
 Quest. What say you then of the properties of God in generall?
Ans. He that co^meth to God must beleeue that God is, that is, such a one as the word describeth him to be, as for example, that he is omniscient Prou. 15.3. The eyes of the Lord in euery place hehold the euill and the good. That he is omnipotent Psal. 115.3. Our god is in heauen: he doth whatsoeuer he will. That he is eternal Psal. 90.2. from euerlasting to euerlasting thou art our God. That he is infinite 1. King. 8.27. Behould, the heauens,
and the heauens of heauens are not able to containe thee. That he is good, Math. 5.45. and 19.17. That he is mercifull, Exod. 34.6. That he is iust, Psal. 97.2. etc. And as they that come to God must thus beleeue that God is, so must they not say when they commit iniquity, The Lord shall not see: neyther will the God of Iacob regard it, Psal. 94.7. Nor in their destresse, despaire of the power and goodnesse of God, as the Israelites did, Psal. 78.19. nor in prosperity say as the Edomites did, Obadi. vers. 3. nor when they haue satisfied the desires of the flesh, wipe their mouth and say with the harlot, Pro. 30.20. I haue not committed iniquity, nor when they are threatned with Gods iudgements say contemptuously, Let him make speede, let him hasten his worke that vve may see it. Esat. 5.19. nor seeke deepe to hide their counsell from the Lord when they do euill secretly, Esai. 29.15. nor desperately say, We haue made a couenant with death, Esay. 28.15. nor denie the Lord and say, it is not hee, Ierem. 5.12. nor giue the Nazarites wine to drinke: nor commaund the prophets saying, prophesie not, Amos. 2.12. Mich. 26. nor sweare by the sinne of Samaria, Amos. 8.14. nor generally they must not thinke, speake, or do any thing, which the Lord forbiddeth in his word. But they must reuerently feare and obey the
Lord and his ministers, and all his ordinances. Thus must they beleeue that God is, which wil come to him to be of his house and familie.
 Quest. What say you now touching the special properties of euery person by himselfe?
Ans.The Father The Father is said to beget the Son, the Son is begotten, the holy Ghost proceedeth from them both, but the maner of the begetting of the Son and of the proceeding of the holy Ghost is vnsearchable and vncomprehensible, and therefore we may not be curious to inquire too farre of the maiesty least we be oppressed of the glory. Then to speake within the boundes of the scripture and of our owne measure, the Father is said to be Almighty, etc as was said before generally, not because those properties are peculiar to the first person only, but because the first person is as it were the fountaine and the welspring of the deity.
 Quest. What say you of the Sonne?
Ans.The person of the Son. The Son is specially to be considered as he is the mediator between God and man, and therfore as he is both God and man. Wherfore we must first co^sider his person, then his office.
Quest. What say you of this person?
Ans. He being God equal with the Father, assumed and tooke to his deity humain nature and was borne of the virgin Mary, Math. 1.18. etc. Luk. cap. 1. and 2. and 3. and so was one person
consisting of two natures, the diuine and the humaine.
 Quest. Wherefore did he take our nature vpon him, and became man also as we bee?
An. Because he must be the mediator betwen God and man, and by his owne death satisfie Gods iustice and reconcile vs to God againe.
 Quest. Could he not haue done this being God onely, except he also tooke our nature?
Ans. No, for if he had beene only God, he could not haue suffred death for vs: and if he had beene man onely, he could not haue ouercome death. Therefore that he might suffer death for vs to satisfie the iustice of God, who would not be reconciled to vs but by death, Gen. 2.17 it was necessary that he should be man and that he might ouercome death, and so deliuer vs fro^ death, and the ransom paid might be answerable and sufficie^t, Act. 20.28. and 1. Pe. 1.19. it was necessary that he should be God also
 Quest. Seeing then Christ is both God and man in respect of his person, what say you of his office?
Ans.The office of Christ. Christ our mediator being both God and man in one person, is in respect of his office annointed with the holy Ghost, (Act. 10.38.) to be a Prophet, a Priest and a King.
 Quest. How is he a Prophet, or what is his office in that he is a Prophet?
Ans.Christ our prophet. He is our Prophet in that the Lorde
hath appointed him to reueile vnto vs and teach vs the will and the counsell of God so farre as concerneth our saluation.
 Quest. How then did they that died before Christ came, had they no prophets? or knew not they the meanes of saluation? For I take it your meaning is, that Christ is our onely prophet.
Ans. It is true, Christ is our only doctor or prophet,
Christ our Prophet from the beginning and we are forbid to acknowledge any other, Mat. 23.8. But as the messenger or inferiour magistrate sent from the king with commission and authority to execute some duty, doth not make that therfore there is no king, or that there are two kinges: so other prophets being men and sent by Christ, do not make that Christ is not our prophet, or that we haue moprophets then Christ. And that Christ hath beene the great prophet to reueil the mysteries of saluation to Gods elect from the beginning of the world, I meane since the first fall of Adam, it may be proued by the testimony of Peter, who 1. Pet. 3.19. witnesseth that eue^ Christ though then he had not taken our nature, went by his diety and preached in Noe before the floud to those disobedient persons which are mentioned, Gen. 6. and which perished in the waters for not obeying Christ their Prophet, and now are, as Peter saith, in prison, that is in bell. And that Christ preached afterwards in
the other prophets it appeareth, in that he gaue commandement to that great prophet Moses Exod. 3.2. Act. 7.30. etc. And as the Lord said of Christ since he tooke our nature, Mat. 17.5. heare him: so the same Lord said of Christ long since, euen when Israel was newly come out of Aegypt, Exod. 23.21. Beware of him, and heare his voyce, and prouoke him not, etc. And whosoeuer wil not hearken to my words, which he (that is, Christ) shall speake in my name, I will require it of him saith the Lord, Deut. 18.19. as it is plainely expounded, Act. 3.22. etc. and 7.37. etc
 Quest. But seeing Christ hath been the prophet since the beginning, and now in these last daies took our nature and came and preached in his own person, after died, and rose againe, and is ascended into heauen, and sitteth at the right hand of the father, doth he not cease to do the office of a prophet?
Ans. No, as before his comming in the flesh he preached in the former prophets; so he now preacheth in the ordinary ministers of his word and saith of the^. He that heareth you, heareth me: and he that despiseth you, despiseth me, Luk. 10.16. 
 Quest. Then it is your opinion that there ought as great reuerence and obedience to be giuen to the word of God preached in these daies by silly poore me^ and sinners, as if Christ himself preached
Ans. Yea, For Christ saith, Iohn. 20.21. that as the father sent him, so he sendeth them.
Which words lest any man should thinke to be spoken to the twelue Apostles onely, Paul telleth vs, Ephes. 4.12. that Christ gaue aswel ordinarie pastors and teachers, as extraordinarie Apostles. Also preachers teach the same doctrine that Christ did, and that Christ commaunded them, Mat. 28.20. and hath promised to be with them alwaies vnto the end of the world. Wherefore as it was saide to the rich man in hell of Moses and the prophets, Luke. 16.29.31. so I say of the preachers of the world which teach nothing but that Christ commandeth them, that those which will not beleeue the word of God preached by men called to that office, will not beleeue though Christ came againe and preached. Iohn saith, he that knoweth God heareth vs. 1. Iohn. 4.6.
Quest. What say you more concerning Christ our prophet? 
Ans.Foure obseruations In his office of prophesie I obserue these foure things. 1. First, that Christ hath reueiled, and daily doth reueile vnto vs the whol counsell of God, so farre as concerneth vs and the meanes of our saluation. For Christ himselfe saith, Iohn. 15.15. All things that I haue heard of my Father, haue I made knowen to you. 2. Secondly, that the ministers of the word are the ambassadours of Christ: as Paule sheweth, 2. Cor. 5.20. Now then are we ambassdours for
Christ: as though God did beseech you through vs, we pray you in Christes steed, that ye be reconciled to God. 3. Thirdly, they that in these daies of the cleare light of the gospell, are ignorant of the means ofsaluation, shalbe excuseles at the day of iudgement. For if our gospel be hid, saith Paul, 2. Cor. 4.3. it is hid to them that are lost. Wherfore he saith in an other place, if any man be ignorant, let him be ignorant, 1. Cor. 14.38. 4. Fourthly, they that contemne saluation so plentifully offred, shal perish for euermore.
 Quest. VVhat say you now of his other office, of his priesthood?
Ans.Christ our priest. That he was ordained of God from the beginning to be our priest, euen our high priest after an other order and after a better order then that priesthood of Aarons was, as it appeareth, Psa. 110.4. The Lord sware and wil not repent, Thou art a priest for euer after the order of Melchizedek which sheweth that he was perfigured in Melchizedek from the be ginning, Gen. 14.
 Quest. What difference betweene Christ and Aaron, and their priesthoods?
Ans. Very great.
Differences betweene Christ and Aaron. First in regard of their parentage they differ, for Aarons linage and stocke is knowen and recorded in the scripture, Exo. 6.16.18.20. and elsewhere. But Christ answerably to the type of Melchizedek, is
without father, touching his humanitie, and without mother, concerning his deity, Heb. 7.3. Also Aaron came of the tribe of Leui, but Christ of the tribe of Iuda, Heb. 7.13.14.
 Secondly, the manner of their consecration was diuers, wereby it is euident that their priesthoodes are not all one. For Christ was consecrated priest with an oath, as it is, Psa. 110.4. The Lord sware, etc. but Aaron without an oath, Heb. 7.20.21. Againe, Aaron was made priest after the Law of the carnall commaundement, but Christ after the power of the endlesse life, Heb. 7.16. Also materiall oyle was powred vpon Aaron at his consecration, Leu. 8.12. but Christ was annointed with the holy Ghost, (Act. 10.38.) who at his baptisme descended like a doue and light vpon him, Math. 3.16.
 Thirdly their offices and the execution therof, differ in many things, as for example.
 The Leuitical priesthood was vnperfect, but Christs priesthood was and is perfect, He. 7.11.
 The Leuites died and had successors, and al their priesthood was temporary; but Christ, priesthood is eternall, and he liueth for euer, Heb. 7.23.24.
Aaron and his successors were priests only, but Christ is both king and priest, Heb. 7.1.2.
 As Melchizedek was greater then Abraham,
in that he receiued tythes of him and blessed him (for the lesse is euer blessed of the greater) so Christ and his priesthoode is greater then Aaron and his priesthoode Heb. 7.4. etc. Aaron and his successors offred the bodies and the blood of beastes,  but Christ offred his owne bodie and his owne bloud Heb. 9.12. and 10.5:
Aaron and his successors were sinners,  and offered sacrifices as well for themselues as for the people; but Christ being without sin (1: Pet. 2.22.) offred him selfe for the people only Heb: 5:3. and. 7.28.
Aaron and his successors offred oftentimes one manner of sacrifice; but Christ offred himselfe once only Heb. 10.11.12.
Aaron and his successors entred into the tabernacle made with handes; but Christ is entred into very heauen Heb. 8.6. and 9.11.24.
Aaron and his successors were but ministers, but Christ is the Author of saluation Heb. 5.9. And there are many moe differe^ces between the priesthoode of Christ and of the Ieuits, mentioned Heb 7. and 8. and 9. and 10.
 Quest. I pray you shewe me briefely what Christes office is, in that he is our priest.
Ans. In one word to answer you, it is to pray for vs, and to offer vp sacrifice
for vs.
 Quest. What was the sacrifice he offred for vs.
It was his owne bodie Psalm. 40.7. Heb. 10.5. Sacrifice and offring thou wouldest not but a bodie hast thou ordeined me:
Christes sacrifice And his owne blood Heb. 9.12. by his owne blood entred he in once vnto the holy place, and obtained eternall redemption for vs. And from all things, from which we could not be absolued by the law of Moses, by Christ euery one that beleeueth, is discharged act. 13.39. Heb 10. Verse. 1. etc. For he is the lambe of God that taketh away the sinnes of the worlde Iohn. 1.29.36.
 Quest. Doe you then comprehend the whole storie of his passion in this oblation of his selfe?
Ans. The history of his passion is at large set downe in the gospell, namely that he suffered in his bodie when he was hungry,
Christes sufferings when he was euill spoken of, when he was persecuted, beaten, buffeted, reuiled, crowned with thornes, crucified vpon the crosse, thrust into the side with a speare, so that at the last he gaue vp the ghost, died, and was buried: and that he suffred in soule when he saide to his disciples that his soule was heauie euen to the death, when he kneeled
downe three times and desired that cup might passe from him if it were possible, when in this his prayer he was in such agonie that his sweate was like droppes of bloud trickling downe to the ground, when he cryd vpon the crosse, my God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me, when he offred prayers and supplications with strong crying and teares vnto him that was able to saue him from death, and was also heard in that he feared Heb. 5.7. I say the storie of the gospell declareth these and others of his suffrings ple^tifully. But you required but the chiefe pointes of his suffering which was seene best in his sacrifice which he our priest offred for vs, and so accordingly I answered you, purposing but briefely to touch that which others haue handled at large.
 Quest. What prayers did he offer to God for vs?
Ans.Christs prayers for vs. We heard but now what earnest prayer he offred, when the curse of God due to vs for our sinnes, was laide vpon our nature in his bodie, that he hauing taken vpon him our nature, euen humane nature, and being co^secrated the prince of our saluation through affliction, might bring vs to glorie Heb. 2.10. But besides this he offred most sweete incense, a most comfortable prayer to God
for vs Iohn: 17. and it is worth the reading a thousand times. Also he being now entred into very heauen, appeareth in the sight of God for vs Heb: 9.24. and is able perfectly to saue them that come to God by him, seing he euer liueth to make intercession for them Heb. 7.25.
 Quest. What vse and comfort commeth to vs by his priesthood? 
Ans. First, we that beleeue in Christ, are deliuered from the wrath of God, and from the punishment or cursse of the law, because Christ was made a cursse for vs, Gal. 3.13.
 Secondly, we that beleeue in Christ are made righteous before GOD, because Christ hath fulfilled the Law for vs Rom. 8.3.4. and 10.4. and 1. Cor. 1.30.
 Thirdly, we that beleeue in Christ may boldly goe vnto the throne of Grace, and receiue mercie, and finde grace to helpe in time of neede, Heb. 4.16. Iohn. 14.13.
 Fourthly, we that beleeue in him, ought therfore by him to offer the sacrifice of prayse alwaie to God, Heb. 13.15.
Quest. Now that you haue shewed how Christ is our prophet, and our priest, let vs heare also his thirde office, and howe he is a
king.
Of the kingdom of Christ.
Ans. Christ was ordeined of God euen from the beginning to be a king, (Micah: 5.2.) and therefore to haue a kingdome, as we see he was prefigured in Melchi-zedek gen. 14.18 and as it is declared Heb. 7.1 and as it is manifest in the kings of Iudah who were types of Christ, as in Dauid; 2. Sam 7.14. Psal. 2.7. and 89.20, 26. in Salomon, 2. Sam. 7.45. Ps. 45. Heb. 1.8. And in others that succeeded til Christ came. For although the regal dignitie after the people were caried captiues into Babylon, was neuer in that glorious estate that it hath beene in before, according to the prophesie of Ezekiel Chap. 21.27. yet Iacobs prophesie Gen, 49.10, was verified, and the scepter or some shew thereof continewed in Iudah till Christ came.
 Quest. Was it then knowen to the Iewes before his incarnation, that he should be aking?
Ans.Christ acknowledged to be a king. As they knew before that he should be a priest, so did they know that he should be a king, for as his priesthoode and kingdome were both prefiguted in Melchizedec Gen 14. Heb. 7.1. as we haue heard before, so also his kingdom and priesthoode were prefigured in Iehoshua the hie priest Zechar 6.11.12.13. And therefore Ieremie Ch.
23.5. Ezekiel Chap, 37.22.24. and Zechariah Chap. 9.9. in expresse wordes called him a king. In the new testament he is acknowledged to be the king of the Iewes Math. 2.2. and 21.5. Iohn. 1.50, When Pilate asked Christ whether he were the king of the Iewes, he himselfe denied it not Iohn. 18.34.36.37. And this superscription did Pilate write ouer his heade when he was crucified, This is Iesus the king of the Iewes Math. 27.3.7.
 Quest. Seing then he is our king, shew me his kingdome.
Christs kingdome not of this world.
Ans. Christ not denying himselfe to be a king, tolde Pilate that his kingdome was not of this world Iohn. 18.36.
 Quest. If his kingdom be not of this world, whence then is it? or what is it?
Ans.The Chuch is Christes kingdome It is the Church of God that is Christes kingdome, and it is from aboue, that is, from heauen.
 Quest. VVhat is the Church of God? or how doe you define it?
Ans. It cannot easily be declared in one word, because vnder this name are comprehended somtimes all the elect of God, whether they be deade and departed out of this life, or they be nowe liuing here vpon the earth, or they be yet vnborne, and thus the
word, Church, is vsed Ephes. 1.22.23. Somtime by the name of the Church is ment the whole visible company of them that outwardly professe Christ and his Gospel in this world, as 1. Cor 12.28. Somtime it is vsed for some particular co^pany of those which professe the gospel, as the company that professed the gospel in the region of Galatia, the Church of England, the Church of France, the Church of Germany etc. And somtimes for the professors of the Gospel in one Citie, as at Ephesus, at Alexandria, at Corinth, or of one parish as we now vsually speake. Now though I might iustly tearme any of these the kingdome of Christ, yet this place specially requireth that we vnderstand the whole militant Church here vpon earth, and as it is visible.
 Quest. VVhat doe you meane then by the Church in this place?
Ans.The Church Both the whole multitude of the professors of the gospel in this world and specially the seueral companies of professors, and each of them, which haue the word of God preached among them, and the sacraments of Christ administred vnto them by Ministers thereunto called.
 Quest. How commeth it to Passe now that those which professe the gospell in this vvorlde,
are the Church and kingdome of Christ? for you saide a little before that Christes kingdom was not of this vvorld.
Ans. I saide before that Christes kingdom was not of this world and so I say still. Nenerthelesse Christes kingdome is in this world though not of this world.
Quest. Hovv can that be?
Ans.The faithful are strange in this life. Verie well: for he that is an English man borne, and a free denizen of England, may vpon occasion trauell into France or Italie, yet when he is in Italieor France, he is not of France or of Italy, but of England stil, and therefore reteineth the name of an English man when he is in France. He is only a stranger in other contries, his home is in England: And so the professors of the gospel in this world are as strangers, yet they are not of this world, but are of the kingdome of heauen.
 Quest. How can that be? this seemeth to me more strange then it was before. For they were borne in this world, were they not? they neuer came as strangers into this world out of any other new world, here they were borne, here they haue beene brought vp, here they liue, and shall till they dye. Did they euer come out of heauen? or what say you to this?
Ans. I can answer you this difficult and
straunge question very easily, and by a familiar similitude. If any man free borne in England, and partaker of the freedom and liberty of the land, do at any time renounce his freedome and liberty, he may well liue in England afterward, but he is none of the land, nor to be counted as one of England, but as a stranger. Againe if any man that is a free denison of London, or of any other place of liberty, and priueledge, do at any time disclaime his freedom and renounce his liberty, he is no longer a citizen of London, or a free denison of that place and liberty which he hath renounced, and if he remaine there afterward,
The faithfull renounce this world he is but as a stranger and a forener. So the faithfull that professe the gospell of Christ, though they were borne in this worlde, yet because they haue renounced the worlde they are none of the worlde, but are strangers in this worlde.
 Quest. Haue they that beleeue in Christ and professe his gospel rencunced this world and the priuiledges thereof at any time?
Ans. Yea they haue renounced it either when they were baptised, if they were heathens before, or else at their confirmation, if they were the children of the faithfull, as I haue shewed before in the first part when I spake of the couenant of GOD, and especially in answering
your 60. and 63. questions; as also in the beginning of this seconde part in answering your second question.
 Quest. I pray you repeate it here againe in a worde.
Ans. All men by nature are the children of Adam the children of their naturall parentes, borne into this worlde, and so by nature also the children of wrath, Ephes. 2.2. wherefore that we may be the children of God, and citizens of the kingdome of heauen, there are two things required, first that we be borne againe the second time, and secondly that we renounce this world.
 Quest. Shew me these two things more plainly?
Ans.The faithfull are regenerate. Christ saith Iohn. 3.3. except a man be borne againe, he cannot see the kingdome of God.
 Quest. How shall a man be borne againe?
Ans.Of our second birth To speake familiarly and plainely of this second birth or regeneration, I obserue these three thinges. 
 First the Church is our spirituall mother in whose womb we are conceiued, and of whom we are borne, as it is manifest in sundry places of the scripture. Esai. 51.18. and 66.7. Canticles cap. 3.4. and 8.2.5. Galat. 4.26.
Secondly, the fathers that beget vs are the ministers of the word, 1. Cor, 4.15. Galat. 4.19.
and 2. Cor. 6.13. And for this cause the Church and the fathers in the Church, are often called by the name of father and mother throughout the booke of the prouerbes of Salomon, and they that are thus begotten in the Church are called children and sonnes in the same booke, in these and such like wordes, My sonne, keepe thy fathers commaundement, and forsake not thy mothers instruction.
 Thirdly, the manner howe the children of God are begotten, regenerate, and borne a newe, is by the outwarde preaching of the worde, and by the inward working of the spirit, 1. Cor. 4.15. and 1. Pet. 1.23. If any man desire more curiously to know this mysterie of regeneration, then the scripture doth reueile it, let him heare what Christ saith, Iohn. 3.8. The winde bloweth where it listeth, and thou hearest the sound therof, but canst not tell whence it commeth, and whither it goeth: so is euery man that is borne of the spirit. Concerning our naturall generation no man can tell howe some part groweth into bones, some into gristles, some into sinewes etc. much lesse can any man conceiue of the spiritual regeneration.
 Quest. Then to come to the second point, how doe the faithfull renounce the world? do they not stall keepe their priuileges and liberties of their first birth and of this world?

Ans. No, they haue not the freedome and the priuiledges of two cities, or of two kingdomes, but when they are regenerate and made citizens of the new Ierusale^, of the kingdom of heauen, then they renounce and forsake the freedome of their first birth and of this world.
 Que. I pray you shew me this more manifestly.
Ans. I will make it manifest foure waies. First, by the practise of the Church and of them that are regenerate. For when any heathen man is conuerted to the faith and baptised, and when any of the children of the faithfull are confirmed, then they, the Church requiring it, do openly before the Church renounce the flesh, the world, and the diuell, as hath beene shewed before.
 Secondly, by the action of baptisme. For in baptisme a man is put into the water as if he were drowned, dead, and quite gone out of this worlde, and so dead with Christ: but immediately he riseth vp againe out of the water, as being raised vp with Christ vnto a new life. And so Paul expoundeth this mystery, Rom. 6.3. Knowe ye not, that all we which haue beene baptised into Iesus Christ, haue beene baptised into his death? we are buried then with him by baptisme into his death, that like as Christ was raised from the dead by the glory of the father, so
we also should walke in newnes of life.
 Thirdly, by the scripture, which saith that we haue forsaken this world, and are no longer of this world. Iohn. 15.19. If ye were of the world, the world would loue his own: but because ye are not of the world, but I haue chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hateth you. Heb. 13.14. heere we haue no continuing citie, but we seeke one to come. Read also, 1. Pet. 2.11.
 Fourthly, by the confession of the faithfull themselues for Dauid confesseth, Ps. 119.19. saying, I am a stranger vpon earth, etc. Abraham and his predecessors confessed that they were strangers and pilgryms on the earth, Heb. 11.13 Paul maketh like confession, 2. Cor. 5.1.2.3. 
 Quest. If the faithful be strangers heere in this world, what freedom or priuiledge haue they in the kingdom of heauen whereof they are?
The fredome of the faithfull.
Ans. They are no more strangers and forreners (as they were before their regeneration, and as all vnregenerate persons are) but they are citizens with the saintes, and of the houshold of God, Ephes. 2.19. and being raised vp together with Christ, are made to sit together in heauenly places in Christ Iesus Ephes. 2.6. and haue their conuersation in heauen, Philip. 3.20. that is to say, as worldly men are continually occupied in their mindes, and in all their labours about earthly things: so
faithfull haue their mindes and cogitations set on heauenly things. And so Paul admonisheth vs to doe, Colos. 3.1.2.
 Quest. Doth the scripture anywhere speake as you doe, and call the Church the kingdome of God, or of Christ, or of heauen.
Ans.The church called the kingdome of heauen. It is a great honor which the Lord giueth to the Church of the Iewes, Exod. 19.6. calling it a kingdome of priestes, an holy nation, which Peter applieth to vs, 1. Pet. 2.9. and Iohn saith we are kings and priests, Apoc. 1.6. But the Church is plainly called a kingdom in Daniel, Chap. 2.44 and 7.18. and the kingdome of heauen often in the gospel, as Mat, 11.11. the least in the kingdom of heauen is greater then Iohn Baptist. And the kingdome of heauen is like to a man which sowed good seed in his ground, Mat. 13.24. the kingdom of heauen is like to a draw net, Mat. 13.47. the kingdome of heauen shal be likned to ten virgins, Ma. 25.1. the faithful are called the children of the kingdome, Mat. 13.38.
 Quest. Now that you haue shewed that Christ is a king, and hath a kingdom, and that the Church is his kingdom: let me heare also how he ruleth and gouerneth his kingdome.
Ans.The church ruled by the word of God. Christ sitting at the right hand of God, ruleth in the middest of his enemies, Ps. 110.2. that though the world rage against him and
his Church or kingdom, more then euer it did against Dauids kingdom, yet he stil preuaileth against them, and defendeth his Church, for he shall crush his enemies with a rod of yron, and breake them in peeces like a potters vessell, Psal. 2.9. Apoc. 19.15. he shall wound kings in the day of his wrath, and shall iudge among the heathen, and fill all with dead bodies, and smite the head ouer diuers countries, Ps. 110.5. Apoc. 14.14.20. But in his owne Church or kingdome he hath ruled, doth, and will rule by the scepter of his word, and by the guidance of his holy spirit to conduct the elect safely through the wildernesse of this world into the land of euerlasting life. And thus Christ God and man doth and must raigne till he haue put all his enemies vnder his feet. 1. Cor. 15.24.
 Quest. How doth Christ rule his Church, which is his kingdom by the scepter of his word?
Ans. As earthly kings rule the kingdoms by good lawes established, by magistrates to execute these lawes and keepe the common people in peace and quietnes, and by prouiding for things necessary at all seasons: so Christ gouerneth his church and kingdome by his lawes which are expressed in his word, and by such persons as he hath ordained to rule his church vnder him and he himselfe by his prouidence watcheth ouer his church that nothing is wanting
to them that leade a godly life.
 Quest. Needeth not the Church then other lawes, as the Popes canon law, as it is called to gouerne his Church?
Ans. No. For the holy scriptures giuen by inspiration of God, are sufficient as Paul saith, 2. Tim. 3.16.17. And we are forbidden either to adde any thing to the word, or to take any thing from it, Deut. 4.2. Prou. 30.6. Apoc. 22.18.
 Quest. Then it is your meaning that all the Church be subiect to the lawes of God expressed in his word.
Ans. As kinges will not suffer, neither it is meete they should suffer any of their subiects to be gouerned by the lawes of a forrein prince or king: so Christ wil not abide that his church should be gouerned by any mans lawes, but onely by his own word. And if any man wil not be obedient to his lawes, heare what he himselfe saith, Luk. 19.27. Those mine enemies which would not that I should reigne ouer them, bring hither, and stay them before me
 Quest. What say you to the lawes of Christian magistrates, is not the Church gouerned by them?
Ans.(...). Christian magistrates make no newe lawes for the gouernment of Christes church, but by their authoritie and by their lawes is the worde of GOD defended,
and spredde abroade, and men are commanded to obey God, so that the Lawes of magistrates doe establish and countenance, the lawes of God, that wicked men doe not at their pleasure contemne the Lawes of God.
 Quest. VVhat vse do you now make of this doctrine, that Christ is our king, and that the Church is his kingdome?
Ans. First as Christ hath triumphed and doth triumph,
The vse of this doctrine. so shall we triumph ouer Sathan, sinne, death, and hel, Rom. 6.14. and 1. Iohn. 2.13. and 4.4.
 Secondly, as Christ was consecrated Prince of our saluation through affliction, so must we also suffer with him that we may be glorified with him Rom. 8.17. Coloss. 1.24. and 2. Tim. 2.12.
 Thirdly, our kingdome and citie which we looke for, is neither of this world nor in this world Heb. 13.14. but we are strangers and Pylgrimes here in this world and daily through patience looke for a citie hauing a foundation, whose builder and maker is God Heb. 11.10. 
 Fourthly, all they that are Christs disciples indeede, they haue alreadie renounced this present euill world, and while they continue here on earth as strangers, solong they vse this world as though they vsed it not 1. Cor.
7.31.
 Fiftly, they are blessed and thrise happie that liue in such a kingdome, in Christs kingdom, and vnder such a king. Blessed are the people that be so, yea blessed are the people, whose God is the Lord Psal. 144.15. for when Christ commeth to Iudgement, they shall meete him in the ayer; and so euer be with the Lord 1. Thes. 4.17.
 Quest. Hitherto you haue spoken of the Father and of the sonne, I pray you proceede, and let me heare somwhat of the holy Ghost?
Ans.The effects of the holy Ghost. I will only shew you some of the effectes of the holy Ghost, which are many and comfortable,  as for example: First, when we were by nature the children of wrath and our bodies no better then swinsties for diuels to dwell in, and we were ruled by the diuel Ephes. 2.2. then as the Lord outwardly called vs by the ministers of his word to resigne vp that our filthy house and harbor of vncleane spirits, and to make our bodies holy temples for Gods spirit to dwell in, the holy Ghost inwardly worketh vpon our soules to breede in vs a loathing of the diuel and of his workes, and a loue of God and of his graces.
 Secondly, the holy Ghost that beginneth his first motion in vs, and stirreth vs vp to a
desire of God and of his graces, doeth also goe forward, illuminateth our blind and darke vnderstanding, mollifieth our harde heartes, reformeth our froward wils, and so regenerateth vs and maketh vs new creatures cleane vessels, holy tabernacles, and commeth and dwelleth in vs, hauing before dispossessed the Diuel, and driuen him out of vs.
 Thirdly, the holy Ghost being now com vnto vs, and hauing taken vp his lodging in vs (1. Cor. 6.16.) he assisteth vs to keepe out the diuel that faine would reenter and possesse vs againe Math. 12.43.44. and worketh in vs euery good grace which we haue.
 Quest. What be those graces which he worketh in vs?
Ans. Whereas the father sheweth al things to the son, Iohn. 5.20. and the son declareth to vs whatsoeuer he hath heard of the Father Iohn. 15.15. the holy Ghost openeth our eares to heare, and enlargeth our heartes to beleeue the glad tidings of saluation 1. Cor. 2.10. Also the same spirit doth strengthen vs in our grieuous temptations. For if Sathan suggest into our mindes our former wretchednes when he possessed vs, the holy Ghost will tel our consciences that we are washed,
and sanctified, 1. Cor. 6.11. Tit. 3.4. And if the Diuel suggest to vs our sinnes committed since we were purged, the holy Ghost will tel our consciences that there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Iesus, and walke not according to the flesh, but according to the spirit Rom. 8.1. that though in respect of our infirmities we doe the thing we would not, and cry out with Paul, who shall deliuer me fro^ this body of death, Rom. 7.24. yet because it is not we, but sin that dweleth in vs, Rom. 7.17. we may likewise reioyce with Paul. and say, I thanke God through Iesus Christ our Lord. Againe if we be in distresse of bodie or soule or both, that we know not which way to turne vs, or what to say, then the holy Ghost helpeth our infirmities, and maketh request for vs according to the will of God with sighs which cannot be expressed Rom. 8.26. and if we be persecuted and brought before rulers for the testimonie of Iesus, this our comforter will at that instant put into our mindes what to answere Luk. 12.11.12. Math: 10.19. finally there is no grace of God in any faithfull Christian, but it is this holy Ghost, this comforter, that worketh the same in them, and leadeth them into all righteousnes Psal. 143.10. This holy Ghost opened the mouthes of the Apostles
to speake the wonderfull things of God Act. 2.4. And gaue such wisdom to Steuen as al his aduersaries were not able to resist Act. 6.10. and emboldened so many martyres that no distres no death could mak them shrink from the Lorde Iesus Christ: and as the Apostle witnesseth, there are greate varietie and diuersitie of giftes, so he saith it is one and the same spirit that distributeth them to euery man seuerally as he will. 1. Cor. 12.1. etc.
And to note one thing more, which I had all most forgotten, because we are strangers in this world, and walke by faith and not by sight (1. Cor. 5.7:) the holy Ghost is the earnest of our inheritance, which hereafter we shall haue in heauen 2. Cor. 1.22. and. 5.5. 
 Quest. What profit or vse redoundeth to vs of this doctrine?
Ans. First,
Hatred of sinne. it bringeth to remembrance our former state and miserie, to make vs to loath sinne as the poison of our soules. And they that consider deepely of it wilbe as loth to commit sinne, or keepe companie with notorious sinners, as weake stomaked men, or daintie dames are loath to come nere any stinking carion or filthy puddle.
Ioy in the holy Ghost.
Secondly, it will make the true beleeuers so to reioyce in God, and in the blessed state
of their calling to a better and more glorious life, that nothing can take their ioy from them,
Good workes. or make them despaire, Rom. 8.35.
 Thirdly, it will breede newenesse of life, and bring foorth many good workes as frutes of faith, to the glorie of God, and the good of others, and the comfort of their owne conscience. Heb. 12.1.2.
 Fourthly,
Peace of conscience it will bring peace of conscience and certainty of saluation to them that truelie beleeue and are regenerate.
 Quest. Now that you haue spoken of the first article of faith,
The seco^d article of faith. that we must beleeue that God is, I pray you goe forward and declare the other article, that we must beleeue that God is a rewarder of them that seeke him. For these two articles you set downe before in answering my sixt question. And first I would knowe who those be that seeke God.
Ans. Those whome God first sought, and found,
Who seeke God and called, and brought to himselfe, when before they were gone astray with the rest of all Adams posteririe.
 Quest. Doe none seeke after God before he seeke, and finde, and call them?
Ans.God first seeketh man. No, none, no more then the malefactor and the murderer seeketh for the Iudge. For Adam so sone as he had sinned, ranne away and hid himselfe among the bushes or
behind a tree from the presence of GOD Gen 3.8. And so doe all sinners Apoc. 6.15. they dare not abide the Presence of God the iust Iudge against whom they haue sinned. Abraham was an Idolater as his parents were Iosua 24.2. and sought not God, but God first sought him, and called him Gen. 12.1.2. etc.
 Quest. Doe you then make this a generall lesson, and true in all men?
Ans. Yea, for Christ saith none can come to me except the father draw him Iohn. 6.37.44.45. And in an other place Iohn saith, Herein is loue, not that we loued God, but that he loued vs Iohn. 4.10. and a little after Vers. 19. We loue him because he loued vs first. Hereof it commeth that some men giue heede to the word of God when it is preached, and loue it, and follow it, whereas others care not for it, but followe after pleasures and pastimes and vanities. 1. Iohn. 4.6.
 Quest. Seeing then none come to GOD but whome he seeketh and draweth to him, I pray you what is the reward that he giueth them, that seeke him.
The reward of them that seek God.
Ans. The same reward which of his mercie and grace he promised, when he first sought them and called them.
Quest. VVhat is that reward he promised?

Ans. He promised to be their God, and the God of their posteritie, that is, to giue them and their posteritie after them, all things necessarie for this life and for the life to come, as it appeareth when he called Abraham Gen. 12.1: etc. and Gen. 17.1. etc. read Psal. 24.5. and 34.9. and 1. Tim. 4.8. Heb. 11.9.10.
 Quest. What be the promises of this life?
Ans. Both earthly and heauenly.
Quest.
Earthly blessings. What be the earthly promises?
A. Those which are mentioned Leuit. 26. fro^ the third Vers. to the 14. Verse, and Deut. 28. from the beginning to vers. 15. And Exod. 23.25. Psal. 128. and in many other places. And those which the Israelites enioyed when the obeyed the voice of the Lord, as in the dayes of Salomon 1. King. 10.27. in the dayes of Asa 2. Chro. 14.6. and. 15.15. in the dayes of Iehosophat 2. Chro. 17.5. in the dayes Ioash 2. Chro. 23.21. and. 2. King. 11.20. in the dayes of Vzziah. 2. Chro. 26.5.8.15. And in the dayes of Hezekiah. 2. King. 18.7. and 2. Chro. 31.5.10. Reade Iereme. 31.12. Malach. 3.10.
 Quest. What be the heauenly blessings which God promiseth in this life?
Ans. They are many and greate, and to name some few particulars, he giueth them;

 First, peace of conscience betweene God and them, Rom. 5.1.
Heauenly blessing in this life. which is more worth then the Gold of Ophir. He giueth them his holy spirit to conduct them the right way to heauen, to be their comforter in all aduersities, and the pledge of their inheritance till they come to take possession of it themselues:
 Secondly, he grafteth them into the body of Iesus Christ, so that they are members of his bodie, they are of his flesh and of his bones, Ephes. 5.30. and as the branches receiue life and norishment from the vine: so in that they now liue in the flesh, they liue by the faith in the sonne of God, who loued them and gaue himselfe for them, Galat. 2.20. whereby they are made partakers of the godly nature, 2. Pet. 1.4. in that they are in some measure renewed and restored to the image of God, wherein they were first created in Adam, and so haue fellowship with the father and with the sonne, 1. Iohn. 1.3.
 Thirdly, God hath so vnited and conioyned all the faithfull together into one bodie, that they haue one head Iesus Christ, one spirit, one faith, one bapaisme, one God, and Father of all, which is aboue all, and through all and in them all, Ephes. 4.4.5.6. and therefore they mourne together as did Daniel, Chap. 9.3. and 10.2.3. Ezra, Chap. 9. Nehemiah,
Chap. 1.4. the prophets and others. Also they reioyce together, Rom. 12.15. And heere is the catholike Church, and communion of saintes, whose sinnes are forgiuen in Iesus Christ.
 Quest. What be the blessings which God hath promised them after this life is ended?
Ans. The Apostle declareth it in one word, Coloss.
The blessings of the life to come. 3.4. When Christ which is our life shall appeare, then shall we also appeare with him in glorie. For when the sonne of man shall come with power and greate glory to the iudgement of the worlde, and all his holy Angels with him, Math. 24.30. and 25.31. then shall the dead be raised vp. 1. Thes. 4.16. Apo. 20.12.13. and all shall appeare before the tribunall seat of Christ, Rom. 14.10. and 2. Cor. 5.10. and we that beleeue in him shalbe taken vp into the cloudes, to meete the Lord in the aire and so shall we euer be with the Lord, 1. Thes. 4.17. Apoc. 21. and 22. where shalbe fulnesse of ioy for euermore, Psal. 16.11. Whereas the wicked ones and the vnbeleeuers shalbe punished with euerlasting perdition, from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power, 2. Thes. 1.9.
 Quest. And is this the reward which God giueth them that seeke him?
Ans. You see the scripture sheweth that it is.
And seeing it is of the meere mercy of God that calleth and seeketh vp men that are vnworthy to come before him, and affraid of his presence; it is manifest that the reward promised is of the meere mercy of God. For as the sonne can deserue nothing at his fathers hands, because whatsoeuer he can do it is but his dudy: so sinfull man can deserue nothing at the handes of God, but when he hath done all he can, he must say, as Christ teacheth vs, Luk. 17.10. we are vnprofitable seruants.
 Quest. Thus farre you haue spoken of faith,
Of the sacraments. and of two speciall and generall articles of faith: now go forward I pray you and speake of the sacraments which you said before in the beginning of the second part, were annexed vnto faith.
Ans.Three things requisite to make a sacrament. The sacraments are as it were seales annexed to the couenant of God for to confirme our faith in that which God promiseth. And there are three things requisite in a sacrament.
Quest. What be those three things? 
Ans.1. A spiritual grace. First there must be a spirituall and a heauenly thing promised by God. For where God promiseth nothing,  there can be no outward signe or element, no more then a seale set to a blanke. And when God promiseth earthly things which are subiect to our senses, then our senses are sufficient witnesses to perswade our mindes. But when the Lord promiseth
spirituall and heauenly things, which our senses cannot reach vnto, then we haue need, and the Lord hauing compassion on our infirmities, helpeth our weaknesse, and by conuenient sensible things, setteth before our senses spirituall and heauenly thinges.
First therefore it is requisite that to make a sacrament there be some speciall grace promised, and that by God himselfe. For no man hath spirituall graces in his power to promise them to whom he will.
 Secondly,
2. A sensible thing there must be some outward and sensible thing that may liuely represent vnto vs, and set before our senses that heauenly grace which is promised; that our outwarde senses perceiuing it, may conueygh the truth and certenty thereof vnto our mindes. For as light commeth into the house at the windows, so al the knowledge and vnderstanding which we haue, commeth into our mindes at the windowes of our outward senses, and specially in at our eares and at our eies.
 Thirdly, the Lord himselfe must both chuse out that sensible thing which shall represent the spirituall grace,
The institution of God. and also by his own word and institution ordaine it, and all the manner of it, to that end and purpose. For as man cannot make a heauenly promise, because heauenly thinges are not in his power to giue them to
whom he will: so man may not without very great sinne presume to ordaine any outwarde thing to represent a heauenly thing, but this must be done by the Lord onely.
 Quest. I vnderstand these three thinges very well, I pray you now let me see what you call a sacrament, and how you define it?
Ans.Definition of a sacrament. A sacrament is a sensible thing representing a spirituall grace, instituted of God to confirme our faith and assure our consciences in the spirituall grace which the Lord hath promised.
 Quest. Before you called a sacrament a seale; is it no seale now?
Ans. I said so, and I haue not yet denied it, for when I said it was a seale,
A sacrament is a seale. I vsed a metaphoricall speech, because it is fitly compared to a seale. For as a seale set to the conditions that are agreed vpon by both parties, doth ratifie and confirme the trueth of them for both parties, and especially to him, to whom the promise is made: so a sensible thing instituted of God doth confirme the certenty of the spirituall grace which God hath promised, and specially to man to whom it is promised. Wherefore as the holy Ghost speaketh of the oath of God, Heb. 6.17. so may I in some sort say of a sacrament, that God willing more abundantly to shew vnto the heires of promise the
stablenes of his counsell (or of his promise,) bound himselfe by his seale or sacrament, that by two immutable things) the word or promise, and the sacrament of God) wherein it is vnpossible that God should lie, we might haue strong consolation.
 Quest. How doth a sensible thing instituted of God to be a sacrament, differ from it selfe before it be instituted, or from an other thing which is of the same kind, but not yet ordained of God for that purpose?
Ans. As wax put to a writing and sealed differeth from that it was before, and from other wax, which is not vsed for a seale: so doth the sensible thing in the sacrament differ from it selfe as it was before, and from other thinges of the same kinde, as for example: Water when it is ordained by the institution of God for baptisme, remaineth water stil, as wax in the seale is still wax; but in respect of the vse it is put to by Gods ordinance, it differeth from that it was before, and from other common water. The same may be said of the bread and wine in the Lords supper.
 Quest. Whose seale, or signes, or signe is the sensible thing in the sacrament, when it is so ordined of God to be a sacrament, and to represent a spiritual grace? is it the seal of God that promiseth spiritual grace? or is it the seale of the faithfull, to whom the spirituall grace is promised?

Ans.The sacrament is the seale both of God and ma^. Though there be no question but that it is the seale of God; yet it shall not be a misse so say it is the seale of the faithfull also. For as the Lord of mercy promiseth spirituall blessings, and writeth them downe in the bible, and thereto for our infirmities sake putteth his seale, the sacrament to confirme our faith, and this the Lord doth when he instituteth the sacrament: soon the other part ma^ promiseth his faith and his obedience, and likewise setteth thereto his seale by receiuing of the sacrament. For when man receiueth the sacrament, he doth for his part as it were set to his seale and bindeth himselfe by a further testimonie then his word was, to beleeue and to obey God. Wherefore Paul saith, Coloss. 2.14. that the Iewes by vsing the ceremonies of the olde lawe (which were as sacraments) did as it were subscribe their hands and set to their seales that they were sinfull and vncleane. And in like maner euery faithfull man by receiuing of the sacrament, subscribeth and setteth to his seale that he will performe that which he promised for his part. Againe as Christ saith, Iohn, 3, 33. that he which receiueth his testimonie that God is true: so he that receiueth the sacrament setteth to his seale that God is true and will certainly performe the spirituall grace which he promiseth, and setteth to his seale
that he will performe his promise which he hath made to God.
 Quest. What is the spirituall grace which God hath promised?
Ans.The spiritual grace that is promised. Where as al mankind sinned in Adam, and by reason of sinne was subiect to Gods eternall curse and to condemnation, Rom. 5.12. the Lord (that hath mercy on whome he will, Exod. 33.19.) of his vnspeakable mercy called vpon some, as he did vpon Abraha^, and promised him; first forgiuenes of his sins, and a celestial inherita^ce in the kingdom of heaue^ as we read Gen. 12.1.2, etc. for it appeareth, Heb. 11.10. that both God promised, and Abraha^ by faith hoped for the kingdom of heaue^. Secondly, God (who is not foolishly pitiful to forgiue me^ their sins contrary to iustice, for Gods iustice requireth the death of a sinner, promised also the meanes whereby Abraham should haue his sins pardoned and yet with iustice) and wherby he should be made righteous, and co^sequently an inheritor of the kingdom of heauen.
 Q. It semeth to me that you speak of two promises first of forgiuenes of sins and of eternal life, which ye ioine together; and seco^dly of the means wherby sins are forgiuen, and happines is purchased.
Ans. I wold make the promise, that is, the grace promised, to be but one grace or blessing: but because it is so ample of it self, and for our better
conceiuing of it, my desire is to lay open the seuerall branches of it. And for that cause haue I vsed moe wordes, as for example; Because all men are sinners Eccle. 7.31. and sinners shall not stand before God Ps. 5.5. nor inherit the kingdome of God, 1. Cor. 6.9. Therefore it is necessarie that our sinnes be perdonned and doone away, that we may be acceptable to God and capable of the kingdome of heauen. And because God hath giuen this generall law, Gen. 2.17. That whensoeuer man sinned, he should certainly die the death: and to satisfie his owne iustice gaue his only begotten sonne to take our nature of the virgin Mary and be man as we are in all things (sinne only except Heb. 4.15. and laid vpon him the iniquitie of vs all, Esai. 53.6. That is the punishment which was due to vs for our sinnes. And because Christ hath fulfilled the whole law for vs, and imputeth his righteousnes to vs that beleue in him, therefore I comprehend vnder that spirituall grace, the meanes which God ordeined for our saluation and redemption. If I could in fewer words comprehend the spirituall grace, which I said was the first of the three things that make a sacrament, I would very gladly doe it. But I had rather vse many words then not declare
the thing itselfe.
Quest. What is the outward and sensible thing, that representeth that spirituall grace? It may be that the heauenly grace that is promised, will better appeare in the visible thing.
Ans.Of the outward element. Because God hath ordayned moe sacraments then one, I must necessarily speake first of the number of sacraments, and then orderly of each sensible signe which representeth the spirituall promise; and in speaking of them seuerally, we shall see the institution also which is the third thing required to make a sacrament.
 Quest. How manie sacraments doe you say there are?
Ans.Two sacraments. There are onely two sacraments: the first is baptisme; the second is the Lords supper.
 Quest. It may be then that there are two promises, as I saide before, and so now two sacraments according to those promises. Is it not so?
Ans. No, there is but one promise consisting of diuers and specially of two braunches. And the visible signe in either of these two sacraments, representeth the whole promise. If any man will say that baptisme representeth more fully the former braunch of the promised
grace; and the Lords supper, the latter, I will not greatly contende.
 Quest. What is the visible thing in baptisme, which representeth the spirituall grace?
Of baptisme
Ans. It is water, as all men may see.
 Quest. Al men in deede see it is water which is vsed in baptisme. But did God euer make choyse of water to be the sensible element in the sacrament of baptisme? or did he at any time institute and commaund this sacrament to be ministred in water?
Ans.The signe in baptis. me is water. Iohn the baptist administred this sacrament in water Mark. 1. Math. 3. and it may appeare Luke. 1.8. and 3.2. etc. That he had an expresse commaundement for all that he did, though euery thing be not particularly set down in the word. And Christ in plain words commanded this sacrament to be ministred in water, Math. 28.19. when he said Baptizing them in the name etc.
 Quest. Iohn in deede baptized in water: but that Christ Math. 28.19. commanded this sacrament to be ministred in vvater, or wine, or oyle or sand, or any other thing, I cannot perceiue.
Ans. If this word, Baptizing, had bene translated by anie english word, you should haue seene it: for the word signifieth washing, and it might haue beene translated
washing them etc. And so the word is translated Mark. 7.4. Where it is saide, that the pharisies when they come from the market except they wash, they eate not. Thus the word is also expounded, Act. 22.16. Arise and be baptized, and wash away thy sinnes. For when he had saide arise and be baptized, he interpreteth in the next word the signification and meaning of this word baptized and, saith wash away etc. Wherefore you may hereby see that Christ commaunded water for the sensible signe in baptisme. For it is and alwayes hath beene the common custome to washe in water.
 Quest. I Pray you shew me then how water in baptisme representeth the spirituall grace which is promised.
The signe representeth the grace.
Ans. Before I laide out the spirituall promise, or the promised grace, specially in two branches whereof the one was forgiuenes of sinnes and eternall life; the other was the meanes whereby this blessednes shoulde be performed, or if you please so to take it, the author of this happines, which is Christ Iesus crucified for our saluation. Now, to answere you directly, when our bodies are washed with water, in this sacrament of baptisme, it teacheth vs that so also we, euen our bobies and soules are washed from sinne, and
that of vncleane, we are become cleane, and that of deade men in sinnes and trespasses, we are made aliue to God; and that this commeth by the meanes of Iesus Christ, who suffered death and shed his blood vpon the crosse for our redemption.
Quest. I pray you repeat this againe. 
Ans. God promised vnto vs the forgiuenes of our sinnes, he promised also to giue vs eter nall life, and all this by the death of Iesus Christ our Lord. This promise is alreadie performed, Christ is deade for vs, our sinnes are doone away and we are made partakers of eternall life, so much as may be in this present life. Now in baptisme, the water washing away the filthines of our bodies, as our senses are witnesses, doth represent the washing away the filthines of our sinnes, and teacheth vs that it is the blod of Christ, which purgeth our consciences from deade works to serue the liuing God.
Quest. Because you saide afore that the sacrament is also the seale of man, I pray you shew me how man setteth to his seale to confirm his promise in this sacrament.
Man receiuing the sacrament bindeth himselfe to perform his promi^
Ans. When man is called by the word of God to hope of saluation by Iesus Christ, and when man ioyfully receiuing and accepting of this grace offred, entereth into Gods
couenant, then man, the Lord so requiring, doeth promise to forsake the flesh, the world, and the Diuel, to beleeue in God, and to obey his commaundements. And when he receiueth baptisme vpon the former conditions, he goes into the water, and there is vnder the water, as if he were gone out of this world, and had forsaken this world, then he comes vp againe as a new borne man to serue God in newnes of life. And this verie action is as it were a seale, or the setting to of his seale, to testifie that he beleeues the promise of God, else he would neuer do so, and it testifieth his obedience in that he so receiueth this sacrament as God commandeth him.
 Quest. By whome ought this sacrament to be administred?
Ans.Baptisme must be ministred by the ministers of the word. By the ministers of the word, for this office was first committed to Iohn Baptist, secondly to the Apostles Math 28.19. and consequently to all the ministers of the word so that others may no more lawfully chaleng authoritie to baptise then to preach. Also it is a part of the ministry, and when the sacrament of baptisme is administred, then ought the couenant to be laide open and declared. For as men will not set their seales to a blanke not yet to a paper wherein the conditions are
written, except they first heare or reade the conditions themselues: so is it not meete that baptisme, the seale of the couenant betwen God and man be administred, except the couenant and the condicions of the couenant be first manifested that the church may see the ministers haue the warrant of the word for that they doe, and so all may be edified. Seeing then the couenant is to be declared before the sacrament is to be administred, it is not for others, that haue no commission to expound the couenant, to enterprise to minister the sacrament.
 Quest. To whome is baptisme to be ministred vnto?
To those which haue made a couenant with God, that is, to those,
Baptisme ministred to them only that are in the couenant. to whome God is gratious and hath promised that spiritual grace, whereof I spake before.
Quest. How shall we know who those be?
Ans. Those which make profession of the couenant of God, and of their faith.
Who are in Gods couenant. For God hath called a few here on earth into his couenant, and ioyned them together in a holy fellowship, and committed to them his oracles, his word, the tables of the couenant, the old and the new testament. And al they whome God doth call and offer, grace vnto, when they accept of that grace
offred, then they come into the Church, and professe their faith and their couenant with God, and craue to haue their names enrowled and regestred in the church, which is the kingdome of Christ, and so are made partakers of the manifould graces of God which are distributed in the Church by the ministers, which are appointed to be stewards of the manyfould mysteries of GOD 1. Cor. 4.1. And thus shall you easilie know them.
 Quest. Are no other entred into Gods couenant, but those that outwardly professe it?
Ans. None to mans knowledge, but they and their children.
Quest.
Children of the faith ful are in the comenant. Are the children of the faithfull in Gods couenant?
Ans. Yea they are in the couenant. For God sayth Gen. 17.7. to Abraham, and so to all the faithful that he will be their God and the god of their posteritie, and that his couenant shalbe aswell with their posteritie as with them.
 Quest. May all the children of the faithful be baptised in their infancie, because they are the children of the faithfull, and therefore in the couenant?
Ans. Yea, that is reason sufficient, and we neede no more. And for this cause the Israelits
circumcised their men children the eight day after their birth,
Children of the faithfull baptised. and Christians haue alwaies beene accustomed to baptise their children in their infancie.
Quest. Wherefore then serue God-fathers and God-mothers? or what is the reason why there are any? for if your former wordes be true, and your reasons good, I thinke there needs none. Onely it is sufficient to baptise them because they are the children of the faithfull.
Ans. I suppose the Church appointeth not God-fathers and Godmothers for any necessity,
Of God fathers. as though children could not be baptised truely and fully without them, but for order, for edification, or for some other good cause, as that if the parentes die before the children come to know the misteries of baptisme and of saluation, then these Godfathers and God-mothers may be in steede of parents and bring vp the children in the feare of God. Or if at any time those children be vpon some occasion doubted of, whether they be bapsed or not, then God-fathers and God-mothers may giue in their euidence, and testifie that they are baptised.
 Quest. When or vpon what occasion were they first in the Church? For I thinke the children of the Iewes had none when they were circumcised, nor the children of the faithfull when they
were baptised in the daies of Christ, of the Apostles, nor in the first age of the Christian Church.
Ans. I confesse freely that I knowe not certainly the first original cause and occasion, neuerthelesse because you moue this question I will shewe you so much as I knowe, and leaue it to the learned to iudge of. There seeme to me to be two causes whence this custome may come into the Church, but of whether of them twaine, or of neither of them, but rather of some other I will not determine. I will onely reporte them, and so leaue them to the consideration of the godly and the wise.
 The first cause is commonly in euerie mans mouth, and it is this: In former times of the primitiue Church when infidels were conuerted to the faith of Christ, they came into the congregation, and openly renounced the flesh, the worlde, and the diuell, then made confession of their faith in GOD, and promised obedience to the commaundementes of God, and so finally were baptised, as diuers auncient writers doe recorde. Nowe some men are of opinion, that from this custome was taken this order in the Church, that the children of the faithfull shoulde haue Godfathers and
Godmothers to answere for them when they were baptised, because they could not aunswere for themselues. Whether it were Hyginus of Rome that first brought vp this order about the yeare of Christ 140. as Platina and others write, or some other, it is not greatly materiall. The reasons which moued the first authors to ordaine this custome, as Gratian the marrer of the popes lawes (Auent. lib. 6.) hath set them downe C. 13. Q. 1. C. quod autem, etc. and de consecratione, dist. 4. in many Chapters, I will not at this present rehearse, but referre my selfe and the reader to the iudgement of M. Bucer in his censure vpon this question. For he was a man that loued our nation, and came out of Germanie to helpe vs, and though he builded vs not a synagogue, yet he commended to King Edward the sixt, in his bookes de regno Christi the platforme of the spirituall house of God, and how it ought to be builded.
 The second cause I gather by coniecture out of the fifth counsell of Carthage, Chap. 6. and it is this. About Carthage and specially further westward in that continent among the Moriscos or Moores, it often happened through hostile inuasions and troubles of the barbarous people, that many
christians were taken captiues, and some of them being young children. But when the Christians long after redeemed such as were taken captiues in their infancie, there grew a question, whether those were baptised before they were caried captiues or not. At Carthage about the yeare of Christe, 430. there were 73. learned men, Aurelius of Carthage being a chiefe man among them, assembled in a councell to determine of the causes of the Church and among other thinges they consulted of this also, what was to be saide or done touching those of whome there was no certentie whether they were baptised or no. This question they handled the rather, because the christians among the Moores sent their messengers to Carthage for counsell in that case. Heereon I comecture that the worthy fathers of the Church to preuent such doubtes afrerward, ordained that there shoulde be speciall witnesses at the baptisme of euery christians childe, which thing if they did, I suppose it was a very laudable decree, though at this day, the Lord be praised, there is no such cause, except among them of Hungaria, Austria, Slauonia and others bordering vpon the Turkes dominions, or vpon some other insidell nation.

 Quest. Then you thinke it is not meete to haue any witnesses at this day amongs vs when our children are baptised.
Ans. Not so. For though I will not certainely affirme what was the very cause of the first beginning of this custome, yet there may bee good causes rendered why there shoulde be. Also doe you not see that all reformed Churches obserue it as a conuenient order? And the Church of England doth ordaine it, the authority whereof must be obserued.
 Quest. Then I will demaunde no more of you concerning this matter. But seeing Pelagians long since. and Anabaptistes at this day denie that the children of the faithfull shoulde be baptised before they come to vnderstanding, and make confession of their owne faith; I woulde gladly heare some other reason why they shoulde be baptised in their infancie.
Ans.Baptisme of children. The reason I rendered before may be sufficient, and I will repeate it againe thus. With whomsoeuer God hath made a couenant, they ought to haue the sacrament of the couenant. But God hath made a couenant with the children of the faithfull, Gen. 17.7. Therefore they ought to haue the sacrament of the couenant which
is baptisme. Secondly the children of the faithfull belong to the kingdome of heauen, Math. 19.14. and therefore ought to be baptised. Thirdly if the reasons seeme too too general in that manner I haue deliuered them (for I confesse a wrangling sophister may take exception against them) I will reason as Peter doth Act. 10.47. Can any man forbid water, etc. that is, those which haue receiued the holy Ghost as well as we ought to be baptised. But children of the faithfull haue receiued the holy Ghost. This I prooue first because they are in Gods couenant, Gen, 17.7. Secondly because they are holy (that is to say, are sanctified, and haue receiued the holy Ghost) if but one of their parentes be faithful 1. Cor. 7.14. and much more when both their parents are faithfull. Thirdly, because that if the first fruites be holy, so is the whole lumpe also: and if the roote be holy, so are the branches also, Rom. 11.16. And therefore I conclude that the children of the faithfull ought to be baptised.
 Quest. Why doe we not nowe baptise our infantes the eight day after their birth, as the Iewes did circumcise their children?
Ans.Baptisme ministred the eight (...) The Iewes were bound to the obseruation of the ceremonial, law which taught them that a woman was vncleane seuen daies
after she was deliuered of a man childe, and the child proceeding from her was for those seauen daies counted vncleane also, and therfore could not be circumcised before the eight day, as you may read, Leuit, 12.1.2.3. But the ceremoniall law was abolished at Christs comming, and bindeth nor vs to obeserue it. Wherefore we are rather to learne this lesson from thence, that as the children of the Iewes were circumcised so soone as coulde be after their birth, and that was the eyght daye, which they might not pretermitte, and so were straitely charged to circumcise their children that day, without any delay: so the children of the faithfull ought to be baptised so soone as conueniently may be after they are borne, and specially the next Lords day after, if there be not conuenient oportunity sooner.
 Quest. And may not baptisme be deferred for many daies, or for a moneth, or longer?
Ans.Baptisme not to be deferred. The children of the Iewes were not deferred one day, but so soone as possibly it might be done, which was the eyght day, so soone were they circumcised by the expresse commaundement of the Lorde, Genesis. 17.12.14. And I knowe no priuiledge graunted to vs vnder the gospell.

 Quest. Some make great haste, and if the childe be weake baptise it at home by the midwife: and others stay very long till their friendes be come from farre, and that is sometime a moneth, sometimes two monethes, or longer, what thinke you of that?
Ans. I can say nothing to it, because I know no warrant out of the word of God for eyther of them both. But because they shalbe iudged by the word, Ioh. 12.48. therfore I wish all men to be carefull what they doe in so weightie a cause, and that they dally not with God.
 Quest. Doe not infantes goe to hell, if they die vnbaptised?
Ans. God forbid that we should eyther speake or thinke so,
Contempt or neglect of the sacrament, not the want depriueth men of Gods fauour. seeing the Lord neuer said so. But contrariwise the scripture witnesseth that they are in the couenant of God, and so in state of saluation, so soone as they are borne. And baptisme doth not make them Christians that were none before, but is the sacrament, the seale, the signe, the badge of them that are Christians before. As men become not seruantes to greate personages by putting on their coate with their badge, but first are receiued of some greate personage into his seruice and then after put on his coate and weare his badge
as an outward token to shew whose seruants they are. So men are first reconciled to God, receiued into his fauour, into his couenant, into his seruice, and so become Christians, then afterward doe they receiue baptisme as it were the coate, the badge and testimonie of their profession. Besides it is not the want of the sacrament that depriueth a man of Gods fauour. For the children of the Israelites were not circumcised all those fourtie yeares which they liued in the wildernes. The reason whereof was, because they were euer to remoue and iourney whensoeuer the piller of the cloud, that was their guide ascended and went forward Num. 9.18. etc. so that they were alwayes to attend vpon the cloude both night and day, not knowing when it would remoue, and therefore could not circumcise their children in the wildernes, as ye may reade Iosh. 5. Vers. 2. And the rest following to the ninth verse. And I wish you to reade the place. But it is the contemning or despising of the sacrament that depriueth men of Gods fauour, when they make no more account of it then Esau did of his birth-right, Gen. 25.32. then Ahaz did of the Lords helpe Esay. 7. and it is also the neglecting of it, when God offreth time and
oportunitie that we might haue it. And as many neglect the heareing of the word and say they can heare it when they list: so many neglect to offer their children to the Church in the Lords due time, and thinke they may haue them baptized when they will. Againe the Lord neuer saide, that whosoeuer died vncircumcised, or vnbaptised should be wiped out of the booke of life: but he hath saide, Gen. 17.12.14. That whosoeuer contemneth or carelesly neglecteth the sacrament, shalbe cut off from among his people. As if a maister should say of his seruant, if he despise my cloth, or if he will not put it on when I bid him, thrust such a fellow out at the dores, let him tary no longer in my house. Wherefore there is no danger to them that die before they can conueniently be baptized. But they had neede to take heede which neglect and pretermit the time when God doth offer it, and will tary for their friendes, as though the presence of their friendes were to be preferred before the pleasure of God. And for this cause it seemeth that God now and then shewes greate tokens of his wrath by taking out of this life lustie and strong childre^ without baptisme, because their parents neglect the time which God offered.

 Quest. Whether would you haue children baptized in the Church the congregation being assembled together, or in a priuate house?
Publique baptisme.
Ans. These matters are not to be ruled by mens desires, but by the word of God. When a childe is baptized, he is receiued into the fellowship of that congregation as a member thereof, and hath his name regestred among the Saintes. Wherefore it seemeth most requisite it should be done openly in the face of that congregation that all may take knowledge of him. Otherwise if it should be done secretly in a corner in hugger mugger, we know not who or what might creepe in the Church, which hath no interest in it. And the Churches to preuent inconueniences, doe not only appoint children to be brought into the congregation to be baptized in the presence of all, but also as if that were not enough, haue further appointed speciall witnesses for euery child that is baptized.
 Quest. One question I would aske you more, and it is this. You saide verie well afore, that in baptisme men were put vnder the water to resemble the death of Christ, and to shew they died with him, Iohn the Baptist baptized in Iordan Math. 3.6. and in Enon besides Salim, because there was much water Iohn. 3.23.
and Philip went downe into the water to bap tise the Eunuch Act. 8.38. and the custom hath beene of late yeres to put children into the water, why is not this custo^ now obserued? and why do they now only sprinkle a little water vpon the child?
Ans. That practise was holie and good, and may verie well be vsed,
Baptisme ministred by sprinkling on of water. and rather then sprinkling on of water in hote countries. But in these northeren and cold climates it might be dangerous to the young and weak infant, as perhaps it hath beene to some, and that is the cause why now water is rather sprinkled on children, then they put into the water. And least you should think this to be humane reason repugnant to the word of God, I would haue you to consider; First, that in the ould ceremoniall law there was purgation aswell by sprincling, Num. 19.9. as by washing Exod. 30.18.19. Leuit. 14.6.16.4. Secondly, that Cornelius and a great number with him were baptized in his house as it semeth Act. 10.47. Paul was baptized in the house of one Iudas of Damascus Act. 8.11 18. the keeper of the prison at Phillippi with all that belonged vnto him, were baptized in his house about midnight Act. 16.33. And these had no riuers ru^ning through their houses, as I suppose but rather had water powred or els sprinkled vpon them. Lastly consider
that in the primitue Church, when heathens conuerted to the faith, fell sick whiles they were learning their catechisme, and before they were baptized, if the sicknes grew dangerous they were baptised in their beds by sprinkling of water vpon them, as that worthie martire of Christ Capryan, a man of greate zeale, learning and iudgment in religion sheweth and approueth, Lib. 4. Epist. 7. Q.  Now I pray you shew me likewise the Lords supper, and declare what the spirituall grace is, what the outward sign, and by whom it was instiuted,
Ans. All these thinges you demaund,
Of the Lords supper. and mo also, are set downe in one place Math. 26.26. wherefore in laying open that place I shall answere all your desires.
 Quest. VVhat order will you obserue in opening that scripture?
Ans. The same which the text offreth.
 Quest. What doe you obserue out of the first words?
Ans.The time of the institution.And whiles they were eating) these wordes shew the time when this sacrament was first instituted, that is, the night before Christ suffred, at his last supper, when he and his disciples were eating the passeouer. So that when the ould sacrament of the passouer ceased, which was a representing of
Christ to come, then was the other, euen the Lords super instituted for a memoriall of his death, and to shew that he is already come. 
 Quest.
The author. What doe you note besides out of the text?
Ans. Iesus) this word sheweth the author who instituted the Lords supper, that it was God and not man, euen the Lord Iesus Christ.
Quest. What obserue you more?
Ans. Tooke the breade) in these words, and in others following,
The visible creatures. euen these, also be tooke the cup, is conteined the outward and sensible thing which Christ made choise of to represent the heauenly grace which was promised. The visible signe or sensible thing was breade and wine. The spirituall grace promised was remission of sinnes and eternall life by Iesus Christ our Lord.
 Quest. Shew me how the breade and wine represent the spiritual grace?
The comparison betwene the signe and the thing signified
Ans. You must remember that I told you before, how baptisme principally doth represent the former branch of the spirituall grace, and the Lords supper specially resembleth the latter. Wherefore as Christ was promised for our saluation and redemption, and that he should suffer death
for vs: so these sensible signes doe notablie represent the same to our senses, to assure our soules of the certentie of it. For the bread broken before our eyes, sheweth Christ was broken vpon the crosse, I meane crucified and put to death. Forotherwise there was not a bone of him broken. And the wine powred out before our eyes sheweth that Christs blood was shed for vs. Agayne as our senses tast the breade and wine, and we feele and finde comfort and norishme^t to ourbodies thereby; so our soules inwardly by faith tast of the benefits of our redemption by Iesus Christ, and our inner ma^ is cheared and comforted. And we reme^ber Christs death continually to our greate comfort til he come to iudgment: and thus liuelilie doe these outward signes represent the spirituall grace to vs.
Quest. What followeth in the text? 
Ans.The consecration.And when he had giuen thankes) these words are spoken both of the breade and of the wine, and the meaning of them is, that whiles they were yet eating the passeouer, in the latter end of the supper, Iesus hauing taken to him first the breade, then the wine, and hauing them in his hands or present before him, gaue thankes, that is, by prayer to God
did consecrate and institute these creatures of breade and wine seuerally to this vse, euen to be sacraments or outward signes of the promised grace. And this is the institution and consecrations as we speak co^monly. The very words of Christes prayer when he consecrated those sensible creatures of bread and wine are not expressed, and therefore the Church vseth her libertie in this prayer when this sacrament is to be ministred. 
 Quest. What followeth?
Ans. He brake it) these wordes are spoken of the breade seuerally, and the like also must be vnderstoode of the wine also seuerally, that it was powred into the cup. The meaning is plaine, that after Christ had taken to him these creatures and by prayer consecrated them to this holy vse, then he brake the breade, and powred out the wine for the disciples there present. 
 Quest.
To whom it belongeth. Proceede I pray you with the text
Ans. He gaue it to the disciples) in these words, as also in those following which are spoken of the wine, he gaue it them, he shewed to whome this sacrament is to be giuen, that is, to all the disciples of Christ, and to no other. For the sacraments belong
not to them that haue made no couenant with God.
 Quest. Doth the Lordes supper belong to all Christes disciples as baptisme doth?
Ans. Yea to all aswel as baptisme, but in due time, and after a due manner.
 Quest. What exceptions be these you make? or what difference is there, that the two sacramentes doe not appertaine to all alike?
Ans. The sacrament of baptisme is ministred to euery one that entreth into Gods couenant, and he cannot be receiued into the felowship of the saintes but by baptisme. Also baptisme is ministred but once, whereas the Lordes supper is ministred often. Wherefore as euery one in the Church is baptised at his first entrance, but with certaine conditions of renouncing the world, and of beleeuing in God, as hath beene shewed afore: so euery one after he is entred into the Church, is often made partaker of the Lordes supper but with certaine conditions.
Quest. What be those conditions? 
Ans. The Apostle, 1. Cor. 11.28. putteth this caueat or condition, that euery man trie and examine himselfe before he come to the Lordes table, whether they know what they doe, whether they vnderstand that mystery, whether they come with pure heartes
and cleane handes. Now if you see any in the Church that cannot, or will not, or doe not examine themselues, they may not be permitted to come to the Lordes table.
 Quest. Who be those that cannot or will not examine themselues?
Ans. There are diuers, as first infantes, idiots, lunatike persons, for want of discretion, and of the vse of reason cannot examine themselues, and therefore may not receiue the Lordes supper whiles they are in that state. Also there are diuers of discretion and iudgement in worldly affaires, but yet are blind and ignorant of the mysteries of saluation, and therefore cannot examine themselues nor discerne the Lordes bodie, neyther may be permitted to come to the Lordes table. Againe there are some that are able to examine themselues, but notwithstanding liue and continue in some knowen sinne and will not, or at the least doe not repent, nor satisfie the congregation whom they haue offended, and for that cause are to be kept from the Lords supper.
 Quest. What be the next wordes then in the text?
Ans.All partakers of both creatures.And said, take, eate) these wordes are spoken of the breade, and the like of the cup, drinke ye all of it, the meaning whereof
is so manifest, that there needeth no exposition. We learne heere that all were partakers both of the bread and of the winealso.
 Quest. What then be the last wordes of the text?
Ans.The exposition. The last wordes for the bread are these, this is my body, and for the cup thus, this is my blood of the new testament that is shed for many, for the remission of sinnes. In which wordes he expoundeth all that went afore, for when the disciples saw Christ extraordinarily take bread, and blesse it by prayer after an vnaccustomed manner, and the cup likewise, and giue to them commaunding them to eate that bread and drinke that cup for another purpose then for feeding of their bodies onely, as it might wel be perceiued by the whole action, they might marueile what the meaning of all that might be. Thefore Christ when he deliuered them the creatures, declared also the meaning, and said of the breade, this is my bodie, that is, this bread which I haue thus consecrated by prayer, and giuen to you commaunding you to eate it, it is the signe and sacrament of my bodie which is broken for your saluation, the same also is vnderstood of the cup.
 Quest. Is not the bread turned into flesh, and the wine into blood?

Ans.The dotage of the papisticall transubstantiatio^. No. For that were contrarie to the nature of a sacrament. I tolde you before that to make a sacrament, there must be a spirituall grace promised, and an outward sensible creature to represent that heauenly grace and the commaundement of the Lord to appoint that creature to represent the inuisible grace. Now the outward thing heere is bread and wine, the heauenly thing which is represented thereby is Christes body broken and his blood shed vpon the crosse with all the benefites of his death. But if there were any such grosse chaunging of the breade or wine, where were the creature which Christ instituted? where were the inuisible grace that should be represented? and where were the sacrament? and where were Christes institution? Moreouer all sacramentes are of one nature, but there was neuer yet so much as any doting man that dreamed at any time of the chaunge of the outward signes into the thinges represented and signified in any sacrament of the olde or newe Testament. For who euer hearde that any man saide that circumcision, or the paschall lambe, or the water in baptisme were chaunged into those thinges which they represent. Wherefore this dotage, if I ought not rather to say, blasphemie of the papists in this poynt, is more
a great deale then grosse and absurde, for it is a monstrous and horrible impietie. Thirdly, it is but the vsuall phrase of the scripture to terme the visible signe by the name of the thing signified, as circumcision is called the couenant, Gen. 17.10.11. Christ is called our passeouer, 1. Cor. 5.7. baptisme is called the fountaine of regeneration, Tit. 3.5.
 Quest.
Of the law NOwe that you haue spoken of faith and of the sacramentes, I pray you proceede to the lawe and open that also, for this order you propounded before.
Ans. After the couenaunt made betweene God and man, wherein man first professeth his faith, and then promiseth his obedience to God; the Lorde giueth his lawes and his commaundementes, that man may knowe howe and wherein to obey him. And when all Israell had promised to doe what the Lorde commaunded, Exodus. 19.5. then the Lord gaue his lawes from the toppe of mounte Sinai, Exod. 20.
 Quest. Gaue the Lorde no moe lawes but those tencommaundementes onely?
Ans. He gaue also the ciuill or politicall lawe, as it is called, and the ceremoniall lawe, but the ten commaundementes giuen
by voice from the toppe of mount Sinai out of the middest of the fire, (Deut. 5.22.) are the principall and chiefe summe of all, and abide for euer, whereas both the politicall and the ceremoniall were for the most part but temporal and serued for the morall lawe.
 Quest. What is the ciuill or politicall law? and wherefore serueth it?
Ans.The politicall law It serueth for the morall lawe to strengthen it and vphold it that it be not contemned nor broken; for the Lorde hath ordained the magistrate and giuen him ciuil authoritie ouer all persons and in all causes, that if any man of what calling soeuer doe violate the first or second table of the ten commaundements, and so offend against God or against man or against both, then the magistrate that beareth not the sworde in vaine is to punish him. And because the magistrate may not in execution of his office followe his owne affection nor other mens humors, the Lorde that inuesteth the magistrate, doth giue him the booke of the law, euen this politicall and ciuill law for his commission to tell him what and whome he shall punish, and whome he shall protect and defend. For as inferiour magistrates receiue their commission from their king and supreme gouernour, by vertue
whereof they execute their office, not declining therefrom eyther to the right hande or to the left: so kings and supreame gouernours receiue from God the great king of all the worlde their commission which they may not exceede. And the politicall lawe is the commission which God deliuereth into the hande of the magistrate that he may proceed to execute his office according vnto it. Wherfore Moses the supreme magistrate among the Israelites, gaue the same commission to the magistrates which were vnder him, that he had receiued of GOD, and charging them faithfully to execute their office, giueth them the reason, and saith, Deut. 1.17. For the iudgemente is Gods, as if he had said, looke to your duetie, and though you be inferiour iudges set vnder me, yet do nothing in my name, neither follow your own affections, for I am but vnder another, euen vnder God, and his lawes I giue you by which ye must iudge, and not any of mine own making, and what sentence you pronounce, what iudgement you giue, it is neyther in your owne name, nor in my name, but in the name and authority of GOD, and when you giue sentence, it is as if the Lord gaue sentence. Therefore take heed to your selues that ye make not the Lord
a lyar and in giuing false iudgement say, this is the will and commaundement of God, for he will not suffer his maiesty to be so foully abused, the iudgement is the Lordes. After the same manner did Ichoshaphat, charge the iudges and magistrates that were vnder him, and saide vnto them, 2. Chro. 19.6. Take heede what ye doe: For ye execute not the iudgementes of man, but of the Lorde. And as inferiour magistrates brought hard and difficult causes before Moses, when they were not able to decide them, Deut, 1.17. so if there were any cause so dfficult that Moses himselfe coulde not determine, he brought it before the Lorde to be discoursed, Leuit. 24.11.12.13.14. Numb. 9.8. and 27.5. and Deut. 1.22.23. compared with, Num. 13.2.3.
 Quest. Whether is the iudiciall lawe now abrogated and repealed since the comming of Christ?
Ans.How farre the ciuill law is a brogated. So farre as it serueth to preserue and maintaine the morall law, it remaineth and shall abide for euer. For the Gospell disableth not the magistrate, but giueth him as much power and authority as euer he had vnder the lawe. Neyther yet doth the Gospell set the magistrate at libertie to doe what he list, but would haue him
aswell now obedient to God, as euer he was vnder the law. But concerning the iudiciall and politicall law which God gaue to the Israelites, it doeth not so binde the magistrate now vnder the gospel, as before it did vnder the Law. For there are many things, in it peculiar to those times, to that nation of the Iewes, and to that land of Canaan, which now concerne not vs, neither binde the magistrate to see them executed, as deuiding of their inheritance by Lots, keeping of euery mans inheritance within the same familie and kinred, mariages of women that were inheritrixes within the same tribe, with diuers such others. Also there were diuers things in the ciuil Lawes of the Iewes; the equitie whereof only now remaineth and the verie thing it selfe according to the letter is not to be vrged, as they had diuers punishments appointed diuersly for diuers offences, which they were straitly bound vnto; but the verie same are not now to be vrged, and executed precisely according to the wordes and letters of the Law; but according to a generall equitie, that sinne be alwayes punished. Whosoeuer among the Iewes did steale an oxe or a sheepe the magistrate was bounde to make the theefe to restore fiue Oxen for one Oxe, and
foure sheepe for one sheepe Exod. 22.1. but now the magistrate is not bound to the letter of this law, but to the equitie, that sinne be punished, and some reasonable satisfaction be made.
 Quest. What is the ceremorial law?
Ans.The ceremonial law. It is the ordination of such things as belong to the worship of God, and that in outward significant ceremonies, which generally and most espicially represented two things; First, the condition of mankind as it is both by corruption of nature in Adams fall, and by grace in Iesus Christ. Secondly the spirituall worship of God. The condition and state of mans corrupt nature appeato be polluted in that they had so many washings, sprinklings, and cleansings, and to be damnable in that bruite beastes were slaine for their offences and sinnes, as themselues witnessed by laying their hands vpon the heades of the beastes when they were to be slaine. Their state by grace was shewed to be most hap and blessed in that the beastes, which were slaine for their sinnes, did represent and foreshew Christe the immaculate lambe of God, which should be slaine for their redemption and saluation. And how all the ceremonies of the Iewes did represent the true and spirituall worship of
God, which now is vnder the gospel, the epistle to the Hebrewes declareth at large especially in three Chapters 8.9. and 10.
Quest. Whether is the ceremonal Law abrogated? 
Ans. Al the outward ceremonies of it are abrogated, but the true spirituall worship signified by them remaineth and shall abide for euer.
Quest. What is the mortall law? 
Ans. It is an eternall law of trueth,
The moral law. teaching man his duetie both to God and to his neighbour, whereunto are annexed, first a promise of eternal life to them that keepe it, secondly a commination and threatning of condemnation to them that breake it in any one point.
 Quest. Wheather were these conditions of life and death annexed to the law when it was first giuen to Adam (for you call it ane ternall law) or since when it was giuen and written at mount Sinai?
Ans. At both tymes; for the first is manifest Gen. 2.17. and the second likewise appeareth Deut. 30.15.19.
 Quest. All man kinde sinned and was dead and condemned in Adam by reason of his disobedience, how commeth it then to passe now that they haue life and death set before them
againe? or how happenneth it that there is life set before man if he keepe the law? Can man now by his workes recouer his first fall, and here after keepe the Law better then he did in his innocencie?
Ans. In Horeb the couenant of grace, made with their forfathers long before euer since the blessed seede of the woman was promised, was renewed, and the people hauing all their sinnes originall and actual freely pardoned in Iesus Christ, and being newly entred into Gods couenant, were as new bome babes, and so had life and death set before them againe.
 Quest. I thought the law had propounded death only to all men, because all men sinne, and not life to any, because no man keepeth the law.
Ans. The law giuen at the time of the couenant of grace, conteineth in it aswel the righteousnes of saith as the righteousnes of the law, as Moses sheweth Deut. 30.11.12.13.14. and Paul expoundeth it Rom. 10.6. for when the couenant of grace is made, Christ is the mediator, who of God is made vnto vs wisdome, and righteousnes and sanctification, and redemption, 1. Cor. 1.30.
 Quest. Whether is the morall abolished
now?
Ans. Partly it is and partly it is not, for it commandeth obedience, and that remaineth for euer, because all men are bound to obey the moral law. But where there is a promise annexed of eternal life, this promise remaineth for the faithfull, who fulfil the law in Christ, but it apperteineth not to the reprobate. Also the curse denounced against the breakers of the law remaineth for the vngodly, but shal not touch the godly who are iustified and saued by Christ.
 Quest. Whether is it your purpose to speake of the iudiciall, ceremoniall, and moral law or of some one of these only?
Ans. It is my purpose to speake of the morall law conteined in the ten commaundements specially, and to the end of euerie precept to ad the punishment appointed in the ciuil law for them that transgresse it. As for the ceremoniall law it is quite abolished, and therefore at this present I will say nothing of it.
 Quest. What order will you obserue in speaking of the morall lavv?
Ans. The same order they stand in. For they are deuided into two tables, and into ten commaundementes Deut. 4.13. Math. 22.37. But this must generally
be vnderstoode of them all, and of euerie one of them.
First, that wheresoeuer any vertue is commaunded, we must vnderstand the contrary vice is forbidden; and againe where any vice is forbidden, there the contrary vertue is co^maunded.
Secondly, because it was the Lordes purpose to comprehend much matter in fewe wordes for our benefittes, we must not rest vpon that particular thing only which is either commaunded or fordidden, but take with it all the causes, branches, and fruits of it and whatsoeuer accompanieth it.
Thirdly, though the things me^tioned in euery commandement be external, yet we must make the exposition to reach to the counsels, intents, and desires of the hearte, as al so to he words of the mouth, as Christ plainly sheweth, Math. 5.21. etc. in expounding the 6. and, 7. commaundements.
 Quest.
The first commandement. 15. Theu to come to the commandeme^ts, which is the first?
Ans. I The Lord am thy God, thou shalt haue no other Gods before me, Exod. 20.2.3.
Quest. Which of these two sentences conteineth the cemmaundement.

Ans. They both make but one comma^dement. For I tould you before, that where any thing is commaunded, there the contrary is forbidden. And where any thing is forbidden, there the contrarie is commanded. Wherefore I say the former sentence conteineth the commandement, I the Lord am thy God, and the latter sentence forbiddeth the contrary. Thou shalt haue none other Gods before me. So that if either were wanting, yet it must necessarily be vnderstoode. And these two sentences are els where often ioyned together as they be here, as Deut. 4.35 and. 6.4. Esai 43.11. Then wheras in all the other commaundements there is one thing only commaunded or forbidden, and the contrarie left to be vnderstoode, this commaundement expresseth both.
Quest. What is the summe and the meaning of this commaundement?
Ans. The meaning I take to be very manifest, that whereas other people and nations frame and take to themselues innumerable gods, as the Ammonites chose Molech Milcen to be their God Leuit. 18.21. and. 1. king. 11.5. The Zidonians Ashteroch Iudg. 2.13. The philistians Dagon Iudg. 16.23. the Moabites Chemosh Num. 21.29 the Syrians
Rimnon. 2. king. 5.18. The Assyrians Nisroch 2. king. 19.37. The Ecronites Baalzebub. 2. king. 1.2. The Babylonians Bell Esai 46.1. The Persians the Fire Socrat. lib. 7. Chap. 8. the Barbarous Masagete the Sunne, Herodot. lib. 1. the Egiptians almost all kinde. of beastes and birdes Herodot.
Epiphan. in Ancora ^0. lib. 2. the Grecians haue taken dead men for their gods Cicer. lib. 3. de natura deorum, the Romanes haue taken the gods of al nations, and whom it pleaseth the Senate to consecrate he shalbe their God, whereby it comes to passe that they haue moe Idols (for all the gods of the they haue are but Idols Psal 96.5.) then any other nation. And as the Romaines vnder their councels, and by the authoritie of the senate began to exceede other nations in this execrable Idolatrie; so their Emporours afterward by their owne authoritie, but aboue all other their holy cacolick Popes especially haue surpassed all that euer were before them. And not without great cause. For where others had nothing but vaine glory for making Gods, the popes haue also gotten great treasures of gold and siluer, first for making Thomas of Aquine, Thomas Becket, and an infinite number moe to be Gods, secondly through worshipping of their newe made Gods all the wealth of Europe hath
come to the popes coffers. For the popes haue made seuerall Gods for seuerall nations, for seuerall cities, for seuerall diseases, for seuerall dangers, and all for money. Wherefore though other nations had other Gods, 2. King. 17.30. yet the Israelites chosen out of the world to be the Lords people, should acknowledge no idoll of any nation to be their God, their helper, and their redeemer, but onely the Lord. And for this cause the Lord saith, I the Lord, or I Iehoua that haue created all thinges, of whom and in whom all things haue their beeing, euen I Iehoua am thy God, and thou shalt haue no other before me.
 Quest. What else doe you obserue in this commaundement?
Ans. I said before that we must not rest onely vpon one word commaunded or forbidden, but take all that appertaineth vnto it. As if we acknowledge the Lord to be our God, we must also acknowledge him to be almightie, righteous, iust, true, holy, good, gracious, etc.
 Quest. What more is there heere to be considered?
Ans. The third thing to be obserued in euery commaundement, and therefore in this is, that we doe not onely confesse with our mouth, but also beleeue in our hearts that the
Lord is our God.
 Quest. What is the vse of it then?
Ans.To trust in God. Although the commaundementes of the Lorde be exceeding broade and large that much vse may be made of them, yet at this present I will name onely fiue things, and; First we must learne to beleeue in him, and to repose all trust in him as in our onely God and helper to saue vs and deliuer vs in all distresses, and to giue vs all good and necessarie blessings. For the scripture euery where describeth God to be such a one, as Deut. 32.39. Behold nowe, for I, I am he, and there is no Gods with me: I kill, and giue life: I wounde, and I make whole: neither is there any that can deliuer out of my hand. And often else where, Psal. 115.9. and 125. Esay. 43.11.12.13.
 Quest. Is there any that professeth and acknowledgeth God, and trusteth not in him onely?
Ans. Yea there are many such, for how often did the Israelites distrusting Gods power and goodnes, murmure and rebell against the Lord and against Moses his seruant in the wildernesse. And how did a prince in Israell distrust, on whose hand the king leaned, when he said thus to Elisha the prophet, Though the Lord would make windowes in the heauen, could this thing come to passe,
2. King. 7.2. And how did king Ahaz distrust, when he answered to Esaias the prophet that promised him helpe from the Lord, I will not aske, neither will tempt the Lord, Esay. 7.12. And how did the Apostles distrust when they said Master Master, we perish, Luke. 8.24. Whereby we see clearely, that when we murmure against the Lords seruants, when we cry out desperatly because we see not the outward meanes of helpe, when we thinke that the Lords ministers speake to be vntrue or vnpossible, when we refuse grace that is offered vs, we the^ do not trust in God, we beleeue not in him. How doth the corrupt iudge trust in God when he wittingly giueth false iudgement for a bribe? the gentleman when he oppresseth his tenants to strengthen himselfe in his riches? Churchrobbers, miserly niggards, and all couetous men who scrape as it were to a heape the trash of this world, as though they could not otherwise liue? and that thinke to make goodly houses, and cause their memorie to last for euer? How trust they in God which dare not giue one smale penny, or one morsell of bread to the poore, for feare they themselues should want? The Apostle saith plainely, that such as repose their confidence in their riches that they gather them by right or wrong, that they keepe all to themselues,
they are idolaters, Ephes. 5.5. The poore man murmuring distrusteth God. The marchant whe^ he counterfetteth or corrupteth his warse, and the shop-keeper when he vseth false lightes, false measures, false weightes, they distrust God. When any man vseth vnlawfull meanes whatsoeuer, they distrust God, and they that put their confidence in lawfull meanes more then in God, and they that wil enterprice great matters without the Lords aduise and counsell, Esay, 31.1. Wherefore the further we wade into the vse of this commaundement, the further shall we finde our selues guiltie of distrust in God, and thereby perceiue that we are not in so good case as we thought we had beene, for keeping of this commaundement.
 Quest. What is the second thing you will obserue heere?
Ans. That we pray vnto God onely both in prosperity and in aduersitie.
Praier to God. Psalm. 50.15. Call vpon me in the day of trouble: so will I deliuer thee, and thou shalt glorifie me. And againe, aske and it shalbe giuen you: seeke and you shall finde, knocke and it shall be opened vnto you, Math. 7.7.
 Quest. Is there any that do not dailie craue of God by prayer whatsoeuer they neede?
Ans. Yea many. For in that I haue shewed there is great want of saith in many, so it
is certaine there is greater want of prayer in moe. For how shall they call on him whom they haue not beleeued? Rom. 10.14. And not onely they that distrust Gods power and goodnesse cease to call vpon him, but many also that repose all their confidence in God, often forget themselues, and pray not at all. Dauid beeing sore sicke, tumbled and tossed himselfe vpon his bed, and roared for verie griefe a great while before he remembred himselfe, and then at the last he praied, Psal. 32. The good king Asa sought not to the Lord in his disease, but to the phisicians, 2. Chro. 16.12. And there are with vs very many that doe as Dauid did, that is, lie groning, mourning, and sometimes weeping vpon their beddes in their sicknes, and cry out, yea roare for paine, and tumble from one side of the bed to the other, and out of one bed, or out of one chamber into another, and finde no comfort, because they cry not vnto the Lord that laid that sicknes vpon them, eyther for their sinnes, or triall of their faith and patience, or to awake them out of securitie, or for some other cause. And I thinke there are moe which doe as Asa did, that is, if they haue the gout, the palsie, the ague, the stone, the colike, the plurisie, or any other disease, if they send their seruantes on foote or on horsebacke, to fetch the phisitian
with all speede, they be stowe cost and spare not for any thing, they inquire the cause diligently, whether it came of cold or of heat, of ouer-streining themselues, or of idlenes as often it doth, or of distemperate diet by eating and drinking till they surfet and vomit. And all the house is too little to attend vpon them. But all this while neyther the sicke party by himselfe, nor the familie with him, nor with their neighbours do seeke by earnest praier to the chiefe phisician both of bodie and soule the Lord their God, who sendeth affliction to those that forget him in prosperirie, that he may driue them to seeke him in distresse as it is plainely declared in Hosea, Chap. 5.15. and 6.1.2. I will goe, and turne to my place (saith the Lord) till they acknowledge their fault, and seeke me: in their affliction they wil seeke me diligently. Come, and let vs returne to the Lord: for he hath spoyled, and he will heale vs: he hath wounded vs, and he will bind vs vp, etc. Paule teacheth vs the same doctrine, 1. Cor. 11.32. But when we are iudged we are chastened of the lord because we should not be condemned of the Lord. Thus we are taught to call vpon God by earnest praier, and doubtles the feruent praier of the faithful is very auailable with God, Ia. 5.16 But where is our obedience, where is our praier? forsooth that comes in last. For when the
phisician giues ouer his patient, and when his senses be gone, and he cannot speake, but is as good as dead, then we toule the bell, then we send for the minister to pray ouer him that is dead, whereby we shew what care we haue to call vpon God, when we doe thus as it were the day after the market, and so vse the minister or the ministerie for fashion sake. But in health how many great families, yea and such as would seeme very religious lie downe in the euening, and rise vp in the morning without praying together al the week long, al the yeare long, all their life long. And when many men be so carelesse of priuate prayer, it is not greatly to be marueiled that they care so little for publike prayer.
Quest. What is the third thing? 
Ans. That we reuerence and feare the Lord,
The feare of God. not with such a seruill and slauish feare as the reprobate haue, who feare the Lord and hate him, trembling onely at his iudgements, which they repine against, but with such a feare as a sonne beareth to his father, fearing of loue to displease him any way, and therefore feare to commit any sinne whereby the Lord might be displeased with them. For as godly men preferre the fauor of God before al the world, so they feare to displease him or to doe any thing that might displease him least they
should loose his louing fauour. Wherefore Moses ioyneth the feare of the Lord, and the keeping of his commandements together, Deut, 6.2. and 8.6. Dauid saith, Psal. 25.13. What man is he that feareth the Lord? him will he teach the way that he shall chuse. His soule shall dwell at ease, and his seed shal inherit the land. The secret of the Lord is reueiled to them that feare him, and his couenant to giue the^ vnderstanding.
 Quest. Who be those that feare not the Lord with this reuerent feare you speake of?
Ans. Those that feare men more then God, and temporall punishment more then eternall conde^nation, not considering what Christ hath said, Mat. 10.28. Feare not them which kill the bodie, but are not able to kill the soule: but rather feare him, which is able to destroy both body and soule in hel. Such be they which in persecution deny Christ and his Gospell, as Peter did, but vpon serious and hearty repentance when he wept bitterly, was forgiuen. Such be they that are diligent and ready to doe whatsoeuer a magistrate commaundeth, though it be flat contrary to the expresse commaundement of God, as did the ten tribes of Israel, when they obeyed wicked Ieroboam and worshipped the calues at Dan and Bethel, and after followed whatsoeuer Idolatrous kings commanded, as the prophet Micah complaineth
Cap. 6. The statutes of Omrie 16. are kept, and all the manner of the house of Ahab, and we walke in their counsels. And for this cause the Lord afflicted them as witnesseth the prophet Osea Chap. 5.11. Ephraim is oppressed and broken in Iudgment, because he willingly walketh after the commaundement, to wit, of their Idolatrous kings. Vriiah the priest is noted for obeying the commandement of King Ahaz and making an alter like to the alter of Damascus, 2. King. 16.11. But the poore women the Midwiues of Egipt, which had not beene instructed in true religion as Israel had, nor had not so much knowledge of God as, Vriiah the priest, feared God more then they, and would not kil the Hebrues children at the commaundement of Pharaoh Exod. 1.17. Yea the men that were of Sauls guarde would not kil the priestes at the kings commaundement 1. Sa. 22.17. The like godly feare we reade of in Daniel, and in his three companions, Dan,  3. and 6. and in the Apostles Act. 4.19.
Also we may reckon those in this number, that rush bouldly into al manner of sin, for which there is no penaltie or punishment inflicted by magistrates, and thereby they shew that they neither dreade Gods iudgements nor regard his commaundements.
Such be they that commit open or outragious wickednes: Absolom killed his brother Amnon 2. Sam: 13.28.29. burned Ioabs barly 2. Sam. 14.30. craftily stole the hearts of the subiectes from Dauid his Father 2. Sam. 15.2, openly rebelled against his father, 2. Sam. 15.10. etc. and lay with his fathers concubines in the sight of all Israel, 2. Sam. 16.22. Such a one was Ioab. who guilefully flew two men better then his selfe, Abner, 2. Sa. 3.27. and Amasa. 2. Sam. 20.9.10. and conspired treason with Adoniiah against Dauid and Salomon 1. king. 1.7. Such were the sons of Eli. 1. Sam. 2.2. Such are they that in Spaine can dissemble their religion. Such are they that openly prophane the Lords day, and contemne the word of God. And such are a greate number which liuing in riote call themselues good fellowes, though they set themselues in no good way, neither abhorre any thing that is euil. And whosoeuer will not submit themselues to liue in obedience to the commaundements of God.
 Quest. What is the fourth thing?
Ans. That we loue the Lord with all our heart, with all our soule, and with all our minde, Deut. 6.5. Math. 22.37. That seeing he is become our God, and hath done
so much for vs, and yet hath prepared greater things for vs then we can perceiue in this life, we should loue him as the author of our happinesse. And he that doth not thus loue God aboue all things, is not worthie to be one of his, Math. 10.37. He that loueth father or mother more then me, is not worthie of me etc.
 Quest. Who be those that loue not God with all their heart?
 First those that loue not neither reuerence his word, as first they that neuer come to the hearing of the word but against their willes, as delighting rather to hunt tauerns and alchouses, to keepe open their shoppes, to sit Idle at home, to cast their accounts, to walke into their gardens, about their ground, to remoue their cattel, to send their seruants to gather vp their dettes, and twentie such like things wherein they take greater pleasure then in going to heare the word of God. Secondly they that goe to the Church but spend the time there in sleeping, in talking, in meditating vpon worldly busines, and giue no attendance to the word of God. Lastly they that abuse the word of God either to defend and excuse their sinnes by the infirmities of holy men which are mentioned in the scriptures, as to excuse their drunkennes by the
example of Noe: their incest and addulteries by the examples of Lot, Iuda, Dauid, as thogh these things were written for men to imitate. But the holy Ghost hath written them for ensamples to vs: to admonish vs, on who^ the ends of the world are com, that we co^mit not the like as Paul sheweth 1. Cor. 10.6.11.12. that if any man thinke he stand, he should take heede least he fall: or else abuse the word in gibing, scoffing and mocking, and so turn the word of God into wantonnes to sporte themselues or others withall, as they doe that make plaies, comedies, or tragedies of the word of God, which is a horrible abuse. For the word of God is written, and the dispensation thereof committed to the ministers to saue the elect of God. 1. Tim. 4.16. and not to stage-players to make sport withal. Now whosoeuer they be that care not for Gods word or abuse it, as too too many do, it is as manifest as the sun in the midst of the firmament that they loue not God. Therfore let no man deceiue himselfe, and thinke he can loue God, when he doth not loue his word.
 Secondly they that loue not the saintes of God, but disdaine them, reuile them, intreate them euil, suffer them to be harbourles, hungry, naked, in destresse and miserie, and yet she who compassion to them. But
if a rich glutton, a cruel vsurer, a common blasphemer; a prophane Atheist, or a hypocriticall papist come to them, he shalbe curteously saluted, curiously interteined, often bidde welcom, and for him shall the fatt calfe be killed, and the best chamber in the house prouided and made readie. They Isay againe, that so highly esteeme the wicked, and so basely account of the Godly, they shew what loue of God is in them. For our common prouerbe is, loue me, and loue my dog: a thousand fould more then, Loue God and loue his saints, Iohn saith, whosoeuer hath, this worlds good, and seeth his brother haue need and shutteth vp his compassion from him: how dwelleth the loue of God in him 1. Iohn 3.17. And in an other place, If any man say I loue God, and yet hate his brother, he is a lyar 1. Iohn 4.20. When Christ would haue Peter to testifie his loue to him, he bad him feede his sheepe, Iohn 21.15. Christ gaue this admonition to all his disciples Iohn. 13.35. that by louing one another they should be knowen to be his disciples.
 Thirdly they that heare and see Gods name blasphemed, his word and truth slandered, peruerted and abused, yet they keepe silence and say nothing vnto it, it appeares they loue not God: for if their friend were so abused,
they would be very hote in his defence, but when God is abused, no man sayes any thing to it. And the world is so full of these, that he is counted a busie bodie that reproueth a blasphemous oath, and defendes the trueth. As no man that loueth his prince wil suffer his prince to be abused by word or deede, but he will and ought to defend him, though it be with his owne peril: so euery godly man wil be full of zeale and godly anger to see or heare the Lord his God to be abused. This zeale and godly anger was in Moses when he came with Ioshua from the top of Sinai and the two tables of the couenant of God in his hands. For when he came neere to the people and perceiued their idolatrie, he brake the tables of the couenant for very zeale, and sharply reproued them all, and commaunded the ringleaders of that Idolatrie to be slain. Exod. 32. This Godly anger and holy zeale was in Phinehas the Priest when he slew Zimrie and Cozbi. Num. 25.7.8. in Samuel when he reproued Saul and hewed Agag in peeces 1. Sam. 15.26.33. in Eliah when in defence of Gods truth he reproued Ahab boldly, and caused the false prophets to be slaine. 1. King. 18.18.40. And when he reproued Ahab for killing Naboth and his children. 1 King. 21; 19. etc. in Elisha when he reproued
Ahaziah 2. King. 1.16. and Iehoram 2. King. 3.13.14.15. in Erza, Chap. 9.3. in Nehemiah, Chap. 13, 17, 25. in Iohn Baptist, in Christ, and in the Apostles when they re proued sinne with bouldnes. Wherefore they that are as it were neither hote nor could, that they are neither grieued to heare Gods truth slandered, nor glad to heare God praised, they haue not the loue of God in the^. If a manseruant or beast be abused if his coate be but rent a little, how angrie wil he be? But when Gods name is blasphemed, his word euill spoken of, it is little regarded, as though it concerned vs not. Hereby it appeares we loue our seruants, our beastes or garments, better then we loue God.
Quest. What is the fift thing? 
Ans. That we giue thankes vnto God for euery thing we receiue of him dailie either for this life or for the life to come.
Thankes giuing to God. Wherefore if we doe acknowledge the Lord to be our God, and that we receiue euery good thing from him, we must of necessitie dayly praise him, as Dauid did almost in euery psalme, as Psalme, 34. and 103. and 136. and 147.
 Quest. Who be they that asscribe not all thanks and praise to God?
Ans. Those that sacrifice vnto their nets
and burne incense vnto their yearne as the prophet Habaccuk, speaketh Chap. 1.16. that is, those which ascribe al that they haue to their owne witte, to their owne strength, to the mony, to the ship, to their axe, to their flaile, to their spade, to their mattock, or to any other meanes whereby they get their liuing. For though God giue vs his blessings by ordinarie meanes, yet we are to acknowledge him to be the giuer of all. Many giue greate thankes to men for smal matters, but few doe hartely thanke God for their life and for all they haue. Least the Israelites should forget their strength and their redeemer, the Lord prescribed them a yearely protestation Deut. 26.5. etc. the wordes I omit because they are long, but reade them and ponder them diligently.
 Quest. What is the punishment which God hath appointed for them that breake his commandement?
Ans. It is death Exod, 22.20. He that offreth to any Gods, saue vnto the Lord only, shalbe slaine. Likewise we may reade Deut. 13. Leuit. 20.2. etc. not euerie one which transgressed in any of the particular branches afore mentioned, should be put to death, but he only that sinned in the highest degree, and reuolting from the Lord, chose an Idol to
be his God.
 Quest. What is the second commaundement?
The second commandement.
Ans. Thou shalt make thee no grauen image, etc. Exod. 20.4. etc.
Quest. What is the meaning of it?
Ans. The meaning is to prescribe the true worship of God. For as the first precept commaunded the Israelites to acknowledge the Lord onely to be their God: so this commandement sheweth how they must worship him, not leauing it to their liberty to worship him as they list. And this is the meaning of it. It consisteth of two partes: the first is the commaundement, the second is the reason.
 Quest. Shew it more plainely that God heere commaundeth how they ought to worship him. For I cannot yet perceiue it.
Ans. The Lordforbiddeth them to make any grauen images, or to bow downe to them vers. 4. and in the beginning of vers. 5. which cannot be vnderstood as though these images were Gods (for the first commaundement forbad all other Gods besides the Lord who is God alone) but as they represent God, that so he may be worshipped by images. Wherefore the Lord heere forbiddeth them to make any grauen or molten image to represent him, and so thereby to worship him. And the summe is, as if he had said, ye shal not make any image to resemble
me, neither shal ye worship me by such images. Now in that the Lord forbiddeth this worshiping of himself by images, we must vnder stand that he co^ma^deth the co^trary, that is, they must so worship him as he himself prescribeth.
 Quest. Seeing you haue laid down two branches of the commaundement; first making of images to represent God by them, and secondly worshipping of God by images: both which are forbidden, I pray you open both these more plainely. And first why doth God forbid vs to make an image like vnto himselfe, or to resemble him?
Ans. There may be many reasons alledged why the Lord is not to be represented by any image, and first it ought to be a sufficient reason to euery godly man, because God himselfe doth heere expressely forbid it. Secondly the Lorde in giuing of these ten commandements, of purpose vttred his voice that the people might heare him, but appeared not vnto them in any visible forme, because they should not make any fimilitude or likenes of him. Thirdly seeing God appeared not, nor was not seene, for no man hath seene God at any time neyther can see him, Exod. 33.20. and 1. Tim. 6.16. and 1. Iohn. 4.12. it followeth that there is not, neyther can be any image of God, because there is neyther painter nor grauer nor any other artificer that can make the
similitude of that he neuer saw, nor no other man that could describe it vnto him. Fourthly, there is nothing in heauen, nor in earth that is like vnto God. For God is a spirit, Iohn. 4.24. and not a creature and therefore cannot be resembled by any creature. Fiftly, they that haue attempted any such wicked thing, as to make an image of God, they haue shewed their folly by their dissenting one from another, when some haue painted God after one fashion, and some after an other, that their foolishnes may be derided, as Dionysius derided the superstitious heathen in his daies,
Cic. lib. 3. de natur. deor. and tooke away a golden beard from Aesculapius, saying it was an vnseemely sight that the son should be made with a beard, seeing his father was made without. Sixtly, they that haue tempted to make any similitude of God haue sinned, and the Lord hath punished them, Ro. 1.23.24.
 Quest. Seeing there are so many reasons why they neither could make any image of God, neither were permitted to do so, how commeth it to passe that God forbids them to worship him by an image. For if they might not make an image of God, yea if they could not make an image of him, it seemeth a needlesse thing to prohibite them to worship him by any such image. And yet that you noted as the second branch of this commaundement. I pray you therefore shew me the reason.

Ans. Ierome in his commentaries vpon the second chapter of Hosea hath a true sentence, Omnia idola ex mortuorum errore creuerunt, Al (this kinde of) idolatrie hath his beginning of an error conceiued of the dead. The reason and manner whereof is largely described by Plato, Lib. 11. de legibus. Laertius de vitis philosoph. Tull. lib. 3. de natur. deor. Plini. lib. 2. cap. 7. The booke of Wisedome, Cap. 14. vers. 14.15.16. Tertul. apolog. cap. 10. and 11. and 12. etc. Ciprian de vanitate idolorum and others. But the summe of all is this, as neare as I can collect it from the beginning. Ninus the first great conqueror of Assyria, to gaine more fame to himselfe, commaunded that his father Belus being dead should be rese^bled by an image made after his liknes, and honored for a God. And for the same cause built a te^ple for him in Babylon, and therin set vp his image, which Plinie saith, lib. 6. cap. 26. was there to be seene in his daies, which was about 80. yeares after Christ. The image was made like to Belus, and when the people bowed themselues to that image, they worshipped Belus and not the image. From this beginning of idolatrie first deuised by Ninus (not by Terah the father of Haran, as Epiphanius saith) did the like superstition spread it selfe among all nations: and cruell tyrants in euery country, after their death were consecrated
for Gods and worshipped by their images. And briefly to go forward with these new Gods a little before I apply it to this commaundement, I will passe ouer all other nations, yea the Grecians that abounded with these kindes of Gods, and in a word note the ripe wits of the Romans, who though they receiued this deuise from others, yet after they once found it, haue surpassed alothers, and of whom it is commonly said: Roma alios deos recepit, Caesares dedit, Rome receiued all their other gods (which were before that time) but they haue made their Emperours to be Gods, euer since they had any. And for their Emperours Ireferre the reader to Herodian in the beginning of his fourth booke, where vpon the death of Seuerus he sheweth that the Emperours were consecrated for Gods which left eyther sonnes or other to succeede them in the Empyre. The manner of the consecration he also declareth at large, that they had animage made like to the dead Emperour, which the laide in a bed, and for seauen daies space the Senators sate on the left side of the bed, and the noble matrones on the right side, and phisicians came daily to visite that sicke image in the bed. After seauen daies, as though the Emperour were newe dead, the noble young men of the citie caried the dead image
into the open place called Campus Martius, and put into it a costly tent filled with all kind of sweete odors, and after great solemnitie the senatos first, and then all the rest put fire to the tent, and when all was on a fire and a smoke, one let an Aegle fly out of the middest of the tent in the sight of all the people, and that Aegle was supposed to cary the Emperours soule to heauen, and so was he consecrated for a God euer afterward, and worshipped by an image. And now to goe a little further, the most holy Popes of Rome inferiours to none in all kinde of abhomination, haue thought it a chiefe point of their glory to be as skilfull in making Gods as any heathen, and therefore haue learned this of them, to consecrate and make new gods (they cal them saints, but they iuggle when they say so to be cast a mist before mens eyes, for their owne booke of ceremonies calleth it Apotheosis, that is, deifying) whom so euer they list. And as Herodian describeth the heathen consecration of Emperours: so the booke of the ceremonies of the Church of Rome, Lib. 1. sect. 6. declareth the blasphemous deifying of popish Gods. The chiefe pointes be these. First some men desirous to leaue his friende consecrated for a God after his death, goes to that cursed Calphas the Pope, and commending
his friende to haue liued a most holy catholike popish life, desireth his holinesse to consecrate him. Secondly the pope commaundes inquirie to be made of that dead person whether he were a right papist in his life time. Thirdly the Pope propoundes the matter to the company of Cardinals to see what they say to it. Fourthly the Pope and his crewe inquire more diligently whether that mans life was saintish as any sodomiticall frier or monke. Fiftly that antichrist with his crew consult whether the mans life was such that he deserues nowe to be made a God. Sixtly they decree to make him a God. Seauenthly there must be a great courte of the Pope his Cardinals, Patriarkes, Archbishops, Bishops, and Abbots holden to decree of the matter againe. Eightly the time and place are appointed for the deifying of that dead person. Lastly when they come to doe the deede, first there is great solemnity of many antichristian ceremonies, secondly that beast that counterfeites the lambe, but speakes like the dragon, he makes that dead man a GOD after this manner: Ad honorem sanctae and indiuiduae Trinitatis, and exaltationem fidei catholicae, ac Christianae religionis augmentum: authoritate ciusdem Dei omnipotentis, Patris, Filii, and Spiritus sancti,
and beatorum Apostolorum Petri and Pauli, and nostra; de fratrum nostrorum consilio decernimus; and definimus bonae memoriae N. sanctum esse: and sanctorum catalogo ascribendum; ipsumque catalogo huiusmodi ascribimus. Statuentes, vt ab vniuersali ecclefia anno quolibet in dei taelifestum ipsius and officium deuote and solenniter celebretur. In english thus: For the honor of the holy Trinitie, and for the aduancement of the catholike faith and Christian religion: we with the aduise of our brethren, by the authoritie of the same almightie God, the Father, the Sonne, and the holy Ghost, and of the blessed Apostles Peter and Paul and by our own authority do decree and appoint N. of worthy memory to be a saint, and to be registred among the saintes, and we doe inrole his name in the same kalender. Commaunding the catholike Church deuotely and with solemnity to celebrate his feast and worship euery yeare vpon such a day (as shalbe nominated.) And thus that Antichrist of Rome makes new gods and hath made mo then his kalender wil hold, I meane moe then there are daies in the yeare and for that cause he hath put out ofte^ one of his old gods, to prouide a place in the kalender, and a day in the yere to worship his new God. But now to turn to the co^mandement, and to your question, the Lord giuing his people speciall
warning of the superstitio^ of al heathens round about them, who had many Gods and worshipped their Gods by Images, doeth in this second commaundement expressely forbid Israell to worshippe him by any Image, that they should not be like the heathen. And for this cause the Lord appeared not in the likenesse of any thing when he gaue the law, but only caused them to heare his voice. For this cause the Lord in plaine words forbiddeth them to make any Image to resemble him. And to shew how he detesteth this Idolatrie, and to admonish them often and euery way; he saith further, that they shall not fall downe before any such Image to doe him any worship, that if the Israelites doe so at any time, they shalbe without al excuse. And hereby it appeareth how grossely the papists sinned, and how expressely against the wordes; and against the sense and meaning of this commaundement. For they haue Images of God the father, and of the sonne, and of the holy Ghost, directly against this commaundement. Againe when they say they worship not the Images, but God by the Images, that also you see is here statly forbidden. And to fulfil the measure of iniquitie, they haue made other Gods besides the Lord, euen those which they cal
Saints as I shewed before. But that the pope consecrated them for Gods and not for saints, it is manifest: for if they were faithfull beleeuers, they were Saints before, as Paul in the beginning of euery epistle almost calleth the faithfull Saints. If they were no Saints in this life, the Pope could not make them Saints afterward, neither did he professe so to do. Secondly the Pope appointed sabbaths and dayes of rest for them, that they might those dayes be worshipped. Thirdly the Pope appointed a speciall seruice and worship to be doone to euery one of them, on their seuerall Sabbaths. Fourthly the Pope appointed their Images to be made, and that men prostrate before their Images should worship the^. fiftly appointed that men should prayvnto them al, and seuerally to each of them for seuerall occasions: Al these and diuers such other things shew that the pope consecrated them for Gods, against the first co^mandement. And that popish Images should be made against this co^mandement. And hereby you maysee what acount is to be made of popish Images. 
 Quest. Whether then, doth this commaundement forbid the making of anie Image at all?
Ans. The Lord here forbiddeth to make any Image or any similitude to represent or resemble him: for he is not like to any creature
in heauen or in earth as Esaius sheweth Chap. 46.5.9. etc. and Chap. 40.18.25. But otherwise it is not simply vnlawful to make anie Image of other things. For God himselfe called Betzaleel and Aheleab Exod. 31.1.6. and filled them with the spirit of wisdome in all necessarie arts for the tabernacle, to ingraue and make Cherubims Exod. 25.18. and 36.1. to embroider Aarons garments, to make bels and pomegranats for the skirts of his garment Exod. 28.3.4. Likewise the Lord replenished two Hirans, otherwise called Hurames, the father and the sonne, with wisdome cunningly to worke euery artificial thing belonging to the building of Salomons Temple 1. King. 7.13. and 2. Chro. 2.14. and 4.16. and they made similitudes of Bulles, of Lions, of Cucumers, of Cherubims, of Pomgranats, of Palmetres etc. 1. king. 7. wherby it is manyfest that some Images are lawfull, euen those which are Images or Similitudes of such creatures as are obiect to our senses, whether they be in heauen or in earth or in the waters; and which are made for ciuil, and lawful, and honest vses or recreation. Or more briefely thus. Al artificial Images of the first table are vnlawfull: but artificiall Images of the second table are lawfull, if they be made for honest and lawfull
vses or recreation.
 Quest. Whether may not we now haue lawful Images in our Churches, as well as the Iewes had in the Tabernacle, and in the Temple?
Ans. No, there are many reasons against it. First, Moses, Exod. 25, etc. and Salomon, 1. Chro. 28.11.19. had expresse warrant and commaundement for that they did. Secondly, it appeareth. Heb; 8. and 9. and and. 10. that the Tabernacle, and the Temple with al their furniture, were types and figures to represent before the eyes of Israel the spirituall worship of God vnder the Gospel, and the glorious bewtie of that spirituall house and temple, whereof Peter speaketh. 1. Pet. 2.5. and Paul. Ephes. 2.21. Which Haggai prophesieth of Chap. 2.10. and is expounded Heb. 12.26.27. And thus you see there was good reason for those Images vnder the law. But there is not the like reason for vs now. For first, we haue no warrant, as Moses and Salomon had, to set Images in our Churches, and so it were sinne for vs to doe without warrant. Secondly, it were to turne them from a ciuil vse, to a religious vse, and so they should be conteined in the first table and against this commaundement. Thirdly, if they were set in Churches for ornaments,
that were to bring againe the abolished ceremonies, and to darken the true and perfect bewtie of the Church of Christ, which standeth not in outward painted walles, but in holynes and righteousnes in mens heartes, wordes, aad deedes, in hearing of the word, receiuing of the sacraments, and all other things which Christ hath commaunded.
 Quest. Who then be they that breake this commaundement? 
Ans. First, they that commit this grosse sinne of Idolatrie, and make Images either to represent God, or to worshippe him by them, as the Isaelites did when they made the calfe to worship God by it Exod. 32.4.5. and not that first time only, but a long time after in the wildernes did they breake his commaundement, as we reade Leuit. 17.7. Deut. 12.8. Amos 5.25.26. Act. 7.42. Likewise we reade of Michas Iudg. 17. of Ieroboam 1. King. 12.28. and the rest of the kings of Israel. The papistes a long time haue prophaned his commaundement, and yet doe.
 Secondly, they that worship not God after his own co^maundement, but ad sum thing to his word, or take somthing from it, or alter it, setting vp their owne deuises and traditions in steade of Gods ordinances, as
the Iewes did Esai 29.13. and are reproued by Christ: 15.8. Wherefore Ierome saith in Ierem. 32, in ecclesia ponitur Idolum, quando nouum dogma statuitur, When any new opinion is established, then an Idol is set vp in the Church. The Corinthians thus changed the right vse of the Lords supper 1. Cor. 11. Some indeuoured the like among the Colossians, euen to preferre their owne deuises to Gods word Coloss. 2.18. The papists are deepely guiltie in this point whether you consider the doctrine or the discipline which Christ commended to his Church. And herein they offend also, which in the congregation will pray priuately, or reade priuately, for though priuate praying and reading be good and holy at other times, yet then it is vnlawful, because God hath commaunded a publike worship in the assembly, where all ought to ioyne together with one heart and one voice, euery man according to his calling. They also that say they can serue God as well at home, as in the congregation.
 Thirdly, they that maintaine any vnlawful worship of God, that is alreadie in practise, say they will doe as their forfathers did, as somtimes the Iewes did Ierem. 44.16. And so doe the papists in maintaining their superstions,
which ought rather to be abolished. For whiles all such patrons of wicked traditions, haue no better reasons but because it hath beene accustomed, they may reme^ber that vulgar sentence of Cypryan ad Pompeium contra epistolam Stephani, consuetudo sine veritate vetustas erroris est, a false custom is an ould error.
 Fourthly, they that follow their good intents, and thinke God accepteth what they meane well, as Saul set a faire glose of a good intent vpon a foule sinne, when he tould Samuel the best of the cattel were reserued to be sacrificed to the Lord 1. Sam. 15. but Samuel tould him againe, that the Lord was better pleased with obedience then with sacrifice. And Salomon saith Prouer. 14.12. There is a way which seemeth right to a man but the issues thereof are the waies of death. Dauid had a good intent when he would haue builded a house for the Lord. 2. Sam. 7. But his seruice was not accepted. Peter meant well when he gaue Christ counsell to fauour himselfe, Math. 16.22. but he receiued a sharpe answere. The most parte of Christians in these dayes are sicke of this disease, and think all is wel which they mean well, in coming to the Church when they list, and going out in prayer, in receiuing
both the sacraments when, where, and how they please, and if they haue giuen offence to the whole congregation, they wil make satisfaction as they please, and so the word of God is not the rule of their life, and the minister standes for a Cypher to do what they bid him. But because they must all of them appeare before the Iudgement seate of God, let them heare before, how acceptable to God these their prayers be, such receiuing of the sacraments is, and generally how acceptable all such will-worships, and good intents be to God. For thus saith the Lord. He that killeth a bullocke, (is as acceptable to me as) if he slew a man: he that sacrificeth a sheepe as if he cut of a dogges necke: he that offreth an oblation, as if he offred swines blood: he that remembreth incense, as if he blessed an I dol: yea they haue chosen their owne wayes, and their soule deligheth in their abominations Esai: 66.3. But, if it were not to cast pearles before swne, so vnteachable is the world now a dayes, I could giue them good counsell in the words of the Lord Eccle. 4.17. and 5.1. Take heede to thy foote when thou enterest into the house of God; and be more neere to heare then to giue the sacrifice of fooles: for they know not that they doe euil. Be not rash with thy mouth, nor let thy heart be
hasty to vtter a thing before God: For God is in the heauens, and thou art on the earth.
 Quest. Who be they then that keepe this commaundement?
Ans. They that worship God in sincerity according to his own word, and not after mens fancies. For not euery one that saith Lord, Lord shall enter into the kingdom of heauen but he that doth the will of my father which is in heauen, saith Christ, Math. 7.21. 
 Quest. What if by Gods prouidence we liue in a Church where many abuses are, and God is not so purely worshipped as he requireth in this commaundement? shall we therefore breake off al felowship with that Church, in Gods worship, and goe to some other?
Ans. There hath not yet been any Church, as I suppose, which hath not had her wantes and imperfections, as in the Epistles of Paul, of Peter, of Iames, of Iohn, of Iude, it appeareth there were foule blemishes in the best Churches in the Apostles daies, and since alwaies haue beene, and now are, that a man cannot tell whither to goe, if he may not abide in that Church where diuers imperfections are. Wherefore I suppose many thinges are to be tolerated before we separate our selues from the Church, though euery man must keepe his owne handes thus farre cleane and vnpolluted,
that he doe no such thinges himselfe to iustifie, vphold, or countenance such abuses, but onely tolerate and suffer that he cannot redresse. And thus I suppose a man is bound to abide in the felowship of the Church so long as the foundation is holden, and Iesus Christ onely preached to be the alone sauiour of Gods elect, and the true sacramentes of the Lord be administred; though otherwise there be many abuses. I knowe, for my part, of fewe such separations that haue bene commendably made any where since Christ was vpon the earth, though all ages since his ascention witnes that great corruptions and foule abuses haue beene in euery Church of any note without exception. Of all other Churches, the Church of Rome that a long time boare sway ouer all Churches in Europe almost (the Grecians were neuer vnder the yoke of that antichrist) hath beene the worst, and degenerated most, euen from a true Oliue into a wild Oliue, from the spouse of Christ to be the synagogue of Satan, and yet few separations were made from that Church, till now of late yeares, when the prophesies of the reuelation were accomplished, and all generally almost went out of Babylon together and separated themselues from her. And the whole worlde seemes to approue
this separation to be made by God, that sent so many and so mighty deliuerers. That separation e the Waldenses or poore brethren of Lyons in Fraunce was commendable and praise worthy, though I remember not the like to haue happened in all popery, but many saintes of God, and many whole Churches liued vnder the Popes yoke, and tolerated many grieuous things till the time of deliuerance came. Againe I tremble to remember some separations that haue beene made because of the abuses that were in the Churches, as the Nouatians separated themselues from all other Churches; so afterward did the Donatistes: the Pelagians were not farre from such opinions: and nowe in our daies Anabaptistes forsake the fellowship of the Churches, and all these vnder coloure of holinesse, because they would liue most holily, and obediently to the commandements of God, and because they coulde not beare with some wantes that were in the Churches. But into what foule and grosse opinions, I meane heresies, these separating themselues, did fall, the learned knowe, and I suppose it not greately necessarie heere to repeate.
 Quest. What is the reason of this commandement? 

Ans.The reason of this commandement. For I the Lorde thy God, am a Ielous God, etc. Vers. 5.6.
 Quest. What meaneth the Lorde when he saies, he is ielous, or what signifies that worde?
Ans. It signifieth as much as, zealous, or to be moued with a very ardent affection and feruent desire, proceeding eyther of loue to saue the thing vntouched, which is loued Zachar. 1.14. and 8.2. or else of indignation and wrath against that thing which deserueth reuengement and punishment, Exod. 34.14. Nahum. 1.2. and heere it is vsed in both those two senses or significations. For the Lord saith, he is a Ielous, or zealous God, full of indignation and fierce wrath against them that breake this commandement, yea so feruentlie angrie, that he wil punish them vnto the third and fourth generation. Againe he saith, he is a Ielous, or zealous God, and carieth such feruent loue, such entire affection towardes them that keepe this and the rest of his commaundementes, that he will blesse them and keepe them for thousandes of generations, euen for euer and euer, so that whosoeuer toucheth them to do them any hurt, had as good touch the apple of his eye, Psal. 18.25.26. Zach. 2.8.
Quest. How commeth it to passe that the Lord beeing iust and righteous, will punish the posteritie
of the wicked that break his commandements? shall the childe be punished for the fathers, or grandfathers, or great grandfathers fault?
Ans. The Lord saith plainly, Deu. 24.16. The fathers shall not be put to death for the children, nor the children put to death for the fathers, but euery man shall be put to death for his owne sinne. And Ezek. 18.4.20. The same soule that sinneth shall die, yea the Lord saith. Ezek. 18.21.23. If the wicked will returne from all his sinnes that he hath committed, and keepe all my statutes, and doe that which is lawfull and right, he shall surely liue, and shall not die. Whereupon I reason thus, that if the Lorde, wil pardon the sinner himselfe when he repenteth, it is very certaine he will not punish the child for that offence which is pardoned vpon the fathers repentance. Therefore if you marke the wordes, you may easely perceiue there is no such thing heere said as you suppose. For the Lord doth not absolutely say he wil visite the children of the breakers of this commandement to the third and fourth generation: but he addeth this clause, of them that hate me, as if he had said, if the father hate me and breake this commandement, then will I with greate ielousie and anger visit him and punish him for his sinne. And if his sonne, or his Nephew, or his Nephewes sonne continue in the same sin,
and breake this my commandement or others as his fathers did, then shall my ielousie and mine indignation smoke against them all for a long time, as the prophet Ezekiel declareth plainely, Chap. 18.
 Quest. What is the cause why the Lords mercies and his loue reacheth to thousandes of generations, and his wrath but to foure generations? Is there not as great reason that the Lordes wrath should extend to thousands of them that hate him, as his mercy to thousands of them that loue him? Is there not as great equity in the one as in thother?
Ans. Me thinke you should not find fault either with the length of Gods mercies, or with the shortnes of his iudgements. Notwithstanding because you propound the question, I answer, that where the Lord in respect of mans sins and desarts by reason of sin, and of his own iustice, might iustly extend his anger to thousands and thousands: yet it pleaseth him to shew mercy in respect of his owne name and glory, as it is manifest. Ezek, 20.9.14, 22. and 36.21.22.23 32. For all this is spoken to and of the Church of God, not to them that are without. And that which Moses speaketh of all Israel in generall, may proportionably be applied to the singular parts of Israel Deut. 32.26, 27. I said I woulde make their remembrance to cease from among men; Saue that I feared the fury of the enemy,
least their aduersaries should wax proud, and lest they should say, Our hie hand, and not the Lorde hath done al this. The Lord that loueth his own vnto the end (Ioh. 13.1.) doth now and then punish them for their sins (Heb. 12.6.) and for that purpose giueth them into the hands of wicked me^, which being both his and their enemies and yet the rod of Gods wrath, Esay. 10.5. do not chastice them for their amendement, according to the lords meaning, but hauing once gotten them into their fingers, purpose to destroy them vtterly, Esay. 10.6.7. and reioice in the cruelty against Gods saints, Ezek. 25. and say they sin not against the Lord in so doing, Ier. 50.7, yea sometimes they exalt themselues blasphemously against the Lord himselfe, as though he could not saue his own people and deliuer them out of their handes, (Num. 14.16 and 2. King. 18.35. Esay. 10.10.11.) therefore the Lord, hauing respect to his own glory, in iudgment often remembreth mercy, staieth his visitation, and receiueth his own people to mercy againe (Esay. 54.7.8.) though they deserued a longer punishment: and then recompenceth his and their cruell blasphemous enemies seauen fold into their bosom, Esay 10.12.13. and Cap. 14. And this is the cause why the Lordes wrath is extended but to the third and fourth generation of them that breake his co^mandements, wheras to them that keepe his commaundementes
his mercy endure for euer.
Que. What is to be obserued out of this reason?
Ans. First, as in euery society men are kept in order, and drawen to perform their duty either by reward for doing wel, or by punishment for offending: so the lord in this co^mandeme^t, that eyther he may allure vs with his mercies to keep his commandements, or with his iudgments terrifie vs from doing euil, setteth both before vs, that by one means or other he may keep vs fro^ working our own destruction. And if our mind were as earnestly bent after heauenly things; as after earthly things or if we gaue so much credit to God as we doe to men: then as we spare no labour, neither feare any peril by sea or land by night or day, in the city or in the desart, to get the reward that man promiseth: so should we much more giue our selues wholly to do the wil of God, that we and our posterity to a thousand generations, might be blessed both temporally and eternally, with earthly and with heauenly blessings for euer. But alas, when we carelesly neglect, or wilfully contemne the keeping of Gods co^mandementes, our works are an open profession before the world, and our co^sciences are and shalbe witnesses before God, that we neither beseue the lords mercies, nor fear his iudgments. They are counted litle better then madmen that co^temn the lawes of men, and whe^ the iudge co^meth and sitteth on the bench their folly
appeareth For they are arreined, condemned, and executed. But they are counted wise men which despise Gods Laws and tremble no more then stocks, to heare Gods terrible iudgments denounced both temporally and eternally against them and their posteritie. Neuerthelesse they shalbe brought to iudgement, when it will be too late to repent, and then shall they receiue their full punishment. We see many struggle with this worlde to scrape welth together for them and theirs; but they striue against the streame, it will not do with the^ as they desire, the more they toyle, the faster it falleth from them like water, the more reuenewes they haue, the poorer the wax (Hag. 1.) and that by the iust iudgement of God, who crosseth the^ and visiteth them in all things they haue, and that because they worship him not after the rule of his owne word, but with the deuises of men, or with their good intents. And woulde to God such as professe Christ would spare but one howre of 24. to meditate vpon this commaundement, and in meditation thereof to compare their estate with it. For then should they see and learne, that the Lord blesseth them that loue him, crosseth them that hate him, and so amend what is amisse in them.

Secondly, we learne out of this reason, that which the phophet Ieremie teacheth vs Lament. 3.22. It is the Lords mercies that we are not consumed because his compassions faile not. For when we worship God with our good intents and when we will follow our owne and other mens deuises so stiffely and obstinately, that though the Lord tell vs of it, and admonish vs out of his owne word, and by his ministers, yet will we stop our eares and perhappes hate him for his labour, that is the messenger of such tidings: then the Lord, that might iustly wipe vs and our posteritie out of the booke of life, doeth notwithstanding in iudgement remember mercy (Habac. 3.2.) And for his owne names sake comforteth the third or the fourth generation againe (Esai. 54.7. This is mercie peerels. And yet nothing can moue our hard seared consciences to beleeue the Lord to feare him, or to loue him. Thus God deliuered Israell out of Egipt after 400. yeares miserie. Thus he deliuered them out of the hands of the Philistim many times, as we reade in the book of Iudges. Thus he deliuered them out of Babylon after 70. yeares captiuitie. Thus finally he sent Christ to deliuer them, that sat in darknes, fast bound with the chaines of their sinnes. And since Christ ascended gloriously
into heauen, the Lord hath deliuered his Church, first out of that hote persecution which lasted almost 300. yeres, and since againe out of the most miserable bondage of poperie. Yea euen we were lately deliuered out of a bitter persecution in the dayes of Queene Marie. And yet for all this we follow our owne deuises, our good intents, and in euery deede our hartes lust with greater fiercenesse then euer we did, for which cause we haue neede to feare least som destruction be at hande. For the nearer Gods iudgements are, the more incorrigible alwayes are the sinnes of men.
 Thirdly, we learne here, that they hate the Lord, that do not worship him as he hath commaunded them, but after their owne fantasies, and after the traditions of men. Though they say, yea though they sweare that they loue God; yet their consciences at that day shall conuince them, and God, who is greater then their conscience (1. Iohn. 3.20,) plainely telleth them in this place, that they hate him, Wherefore if the Lorde say we hate him it is not our hard heartes, our stiffe neckes, our obstinate minds, our brasen brows that can proue we loue him And let euery soule weigh with himselfe what it is to hate God. For certainly the
haters of the Lord shalbe found lyars.
 Fourthly, we learne that he which loueth the Lord in deede, keepeth his commaundements, and worshippeth him as he commaundeth in his word. Wherefore let euery one that loueth the Lord in truth, be diligent to declare his loue by obeing the voice of the Lord. For this is the loue of God that we keepe his co^mandements 1. Iohn 5.3. And the Lord loueth them that loue him Pro. 8.17.
 Quest. What is the punishment which the magistrate ought to inflict vpon them that transgresse this commaundement in the highest degree and grossest maner?
Ans. I suppose it is death, for though I remember not so expresse a commaundement for it as there is for the other eight co^ma^deme^ts (For there is no humane punishme^t appointed for the breakers of the last commaundement) yet but that which may be taken out of the word by collection, and these reasons perswade me so to thinke. First the transgressors of the third and fourth commaundements are punished with death, and therefore they that breake this commaundement ought likewise to be punished with death, seeing this is more generall then they both, so that the offences committed against them, may be reduced within the compasse
of this. Secondly the punishment appointed for the transgressors of the seauen first commaundementes is death, and generally you may obserue this order in all the commaundements of both tables, that the greatest sinne is first forbid, and the next consequently by order and by degrees, wherefore there is no reason to exempt this out of them all, seeing it standeth in the seconde place. Thirdly I take this to be a generall rule, that where no satisfaction can be made, there the punishment is death. Lastly, we see that Moses, Exod. 32.27. by the commandement of the Lord, put to death aboute 3000. Idolaters, which were ring-leaders to that Idolatrie in making of the calfe to worship God by, which was most directly against this second commaundement. And for these and such like causes I am perswaded the punishment is death. But this you must vnderstand both here, and in the other six first commaundements, that it is not euery particular branch, but the greatest sinne in the hiest degree that falleth vnder the power of the magistrates sword, that he may put him to death, as for example, if a man smite his neighbour and wound him, hauing a purpose to kill him, though this be a greate sinne against the sixt co^maundement, yet he
is not to be put to death for it.

Ans. What is the third commaundement?

 Quest. Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vaine etc. vers. 7.
Quest. What is the summe of this commaundement?
Ans. The whole standeth of two parts, whereof the first is the commaundement, the second is the reason.
 Quest. What is the summe of the commaundement, or the meaning of it?
Ans. It forbiddeth vs to take the name of God in vaine, wherein we must vndersta^d all manner of abusing his name by what meanes soeuer. For though it seemeth that the Lord noteth but that one greate blasphemie of abusing his name in swearing and forswearing: yet I admonished you before, that all other sinnes of like nature and qualitie were forbidden with their causes and effects. The Lord for breuitie sake, and for our infirmitie sake, nameth only in euery commaundement, either the most horrible sinne forbidding it, or else the most singular vertue commaunding it. Also we must on the contrary part vnderstand, that the reuerent vsing of Gods name is here commaunded.
 Quest. Because they abuse of Gods name in swearing is the chiefest sinne here forbidden,
I pray you shew me what it is to swere, and what is lawfull, what vnlawfull.
Quest. To sweare is to call God to witnes that we speake to be true, that so more credit may be giuen to our wordes. But there are so many maners of oathes, that it is more easie to reckon them vp, then to giue a general definition of them al.
 Quest. How many kindes or maners of oaths doe you make?
Two kinds of oathes. A voluntary oath.
Ans. First there are two kindes of oaths: the one voluntarily, when a man is not compelled to sweare; the other necessarie or constreined, when a man by authoritie is compelled to sweare. Againe a voluntarie and francke oath is either when one partie alone sweareth, or els when two parties sweare each to other of their owne accord neither hauing authoritie to compell the other. And one partie alone somtimes sweareth at the request of an other, as when Rahab hauing saued the liues of the two spies which Ioshua sent to view the land of Ierico, she requested them to sweare, that they also would preserue her life, when they had wonne that citie, Ioshua 2.12. and 9.22. Saul requested Dauid to sweare that he would not abolish his name out of his fathers house, and Dauid sware 1. Sam. 24.22.23. And sometimes also one
partie alone sweareth not being requested, as Dauid mourning for the death of Abner, who^ Ioab had guilefully murthered, protested and sware that he would eate nothing that day till the sunne were downe. 2. Sam. 3.35. and Dauids chiefe men of warre also protested and sware, that Dauid should not goe any more in his owne person to the battell 2. Sam. 21.17. and Salomon perceiuing that Adoniah his brother went about to worke treason protested and sware that he should die for it. 1 King. 2.23. And thus one partie or person sweareth voluntarily in a lawfull matter, and of importance, and vpon good occasion. For if a man sweare in an vnlawfull thing, and rashly, and when there is no cause, he sinneth greatly, as did Herode Math. 14. and Dauid. 1. Sam. 25 22. and Saul. 1. Sam. 28.10.
Againe sometime two parties voluntarily consent to sweare each to other, as did Abraham and Abimelech Gen. 21.23.24.31. Likewise Isaac and Abimelech Gen. 26.28.31 Iacob and Laban Gen. 31.53. Ionathan and Dauid 1. Sam. 2.42. And here also they that sweare in a thing vnlawfull, and without good cause, they offend, as did the Israelites Iu. 21.1. and the Iewes, which sware they would kil Paul Act. 23.12. And thus much for
voluntarie swearing.
 Quest. What say you then to a necessarie oath, as you call it, when a man is commaunded to sweare?
A necessarie oath.
Ans. According as I said before of a voluntarie oath, that if a magistrate commaund inferiour persons to sweare in a lawful matter, lawfully, vpon iust occasion, and when the thing is requisite, it is holy and lawfull on the magistrates part, and on his or their partes that sweare. If otherwise authority compell, and men yeeld to sweare in thinges vnlawfull, and without cause, they both sinne greatly. And I finde two speciall causes wherein a magistrate may commaund, and the inferiour person ought to take an oath by the word of God.
 Quest. What be those two cases in which a necessary oath is lawfull?
Ans. The first is when the superiour person or magistrate commaundeth the subiect and the inferiour person to sweare loyalty, allegeance, and fidelity to performe that which is his duety, as Abraham gaue his seruant charge to prouide a wife for his son Isaake, and caused him to sweare that he would deale faithfully, and according to the charge giuen him, Gen. 24.3. etc. Iaacob also vpon his death bed made Ioseph to sweare that he would bury him where his fathers were buried, and not in
Aegypt, Gen. 47.29.31. and 50.5. Ioseph made his brethren sweare, that they would bring their yongest brother Beniamin with them, when they came againe to buy more corne, Gen. 43.3. and a little before his death he made them sweare to cary his bones with them out of Aegypt, when God should deliuer them, Gen. 50.25. and Exod. 13.19. The king of Babel made Zedekiah king of Iudah to sweare alleageance to him, 2. Chro. 36.13. That good king of Iudah, Asa made all his subiectes to sweare that they would worship God, 2. Chro. 15.10.13.14. Thus the generall of the host taketh an oath of his souldiers. And thus kings cause their subiectes to sweare loyalty and obedience.
 The second is, when a man being brought before a magistrate by his accuser, is put to his oath to purge and cleare himselfe.
 Quest. Then if it be lawfull for a man to cleare himselfe of euery crime by his oath, it is to be feared lest many men will make shipwrake of a good conscience and forsweare themselues, if by their oath they may pay their debts, and escape all punishment. This seemes to me a strange doctrine and to giue to to much liberty to euil disposed men. Wherefore I pray you eyther open it more plainely or else proue it by scripture.
Ans. You say well, that if euery offender might purge himselfe by his oath, many great
inconueniences woulde follow. But it is not lawfull for a man in any cause or crime wherewith he is charged, to cleare himselfe by his oath. For the Lord hath set downe another lawe and an other order for triall of most matters, namely by witnesses, and not by oathes, Deut. 19.15. At the mouth of two witnesses, or at the mouth of three witnesses shall the matter be stablished, etc. Therefore a man may not purge himselfe by his oath in euery thing, but onely in some few speciall cases.
Quest. What be those cases wherein a mans oath may cleare him?
Ans. They are as I take it but onely two: the one, when a man deliuereth his neighbour any thing to keepe, and the thing be lost when it should be restored; then if the owner suspect that his neighbour whom he trusted with the keeping of it, hath deceiued him, and secretly by some meanes conueied it out of his house, and now saith he cannot tell what is become of it, or that it is stollen, then I say, in this case the owner may bring his neighbour before the magistrate, and shew that he suspectes him of fraud, and the magistrate shall put him to his oath. Which oath if he take and sweare by God that he knoweth not howe it went out of his house, or that it was stollen from him, that his oath shal cleare him, and the
owner shal accept of his oath, and be therewith content, and so that matter is ended. Exo. 22.7.8.
The other is, when a man deliuereth to his neighbour his beast to keepe for hire, as if a man hire a sheepheard or any other to keepe his beastes, if any of the beastes be hurt, or lost, or stollen, or deuoured by wild beastes, without any fraud or negligence in the keeper, then if the owner suspect the keeper eyther of fraud or negligence, but can proue neither against him, he may bring him before the magistrate. And if the keeper being put to his oath, will sweare that there was neither fraud nor negligence in him, his oath shall cleare him, he shall not make it good, the owner shal beare the losse, as it is, Exod, 22.10.11.12.13. And in both these two cases, in which a man may purge himselfe vpon his oath, it is worthy alwaies to be obserued, that if there be any witnesses to testifie either with them or against them, they are not to purge themselues by oath, but onely when no man can beare witnesse, as it is expresly said of the latter, Vers. 10. And no man see it. For when the trueth may be found out by the testimony of men, it is to take Gods name lightly and in vaine, to call him to witnesse. But onely when in these two cases no man can witnesse the innocency of these two persons, or conuince the latter of
fraude or negligence, or else the former of fraud onely, then is the suspected person permitted to cal God to witnes, who onely knoweth all his secrets, and so to purge himselfe.
 Quest. Is there then no other case, but these two only, in which a man may purge himself by his oth?
Ans. Because Paul saith, Rom. 14.23. whatsoeuer is not of faith is sinne, and because for my part I know no moe cases set downe in the word of God, therefore I suppose a man cannot cleare himselfe vpon his oath in any other cause. And in these two causes an oath is the ende of strife. In all other cases the matter must be tried by witnesses.
Quest. By whom must men sweare? 
Ans. By God onely, and by no other thing, Deut. 6.13. and 10.20. Esay. 65.16. For to sweare is to call him we sweare by to witnesse that we speake as our heart conceiueth, and so to make him the searcher of our heartes. But it is onely God that is the searcher of all mens heartes, 1. King. 8.39.
 Quest. What conditions are to be obserued in swearing?
Ans. The prophet Ieremy, Cap. 4.2. setteth downe three conditions. 1. In trueth. 2. In iudgment. 3. In righteousnes. In trueth, that is, both true things, not false things; and also truly with out fraud, guile, deceit, or shiftes, plainly and
simply. In iudgement, that is, soberly, aduisedly, when necessity requireth, not rashly as Herod did: see Leuit. 5.4. In righteousnes, that is, in things lawful and honest, not in things vnlawful, as those did which sware they wold neither eat nor drink til they had killed Paul. Act. 23.12.
 Quest. What if a man sweare rashly, and obserue not these three conditions; whether is he bound to performe his oath or no?
Ans. No, he ought not to performe it: but rather to repent betimes, then to ad a wicked deede to an vnlawfull oath. For that were to heap one sin vpon another. But if he repent him of his vnlawful oath, the Lord offereth mercy, Leui. 5.4.5.6. and 6.3.5. Num. 3.2.3. Notwithstanding if any man sweare to do a lawful thing he is bound to performe it, yea though there be discommodity in performing it, or if he was ouerseene, or compelled when he sware.
 Qu. What is the reason of this co^mandement?
Ans. The reason to perswade men to keepe this co^mandement, is that howsoeuer we flatter our selues and say we are innocent albeit we abuse Gods name, Deu. 29.19. yet the Lord the iudge of all will not pronounce vs guiltles and innocent at that day, when the secretes of all hearts shal be disclosed. And if the Lord pronounce vs then guilty, wo worth the time that euer we abused his name. But before the last
day of iudgment come, it is worth the reading to know what temporall plagues are prepared for false swearers, Zach. 5.4.
 Que. Then that we may haue more vse of this co^mandement, shew me who they be that break it
Ans. First, they that curse and sweare at euery word most blasphemously, as by the Lord, by God, by Iesus Christ, etc. or by any thing that is attributed or ascribed to God in the scripturs, as by his arme, his head, his ha^d, his blood his sides, his hart, his flesh, etc. either in earnest or in sport, as though it were a grace to sweare
 Secondly, they that sweare to do things vnlawful, as Saul sware to the witch that he would not put her to death, 1. Sam. 28.10. and that his sonne Ionathan shoulde die for eating hony when he was faint and weary and his sight beganne to faile him, 1. Sam. 14.39.44.
 Thirdly, they that commit periury, by swearing falsly, or fraudulently, or that they minde not to performe. Peter contrary to his knowledge sware that he knew not Christ, Mat. 26.72. and Saul sware that he minded not to perform, when he sware to Ionathan that he would not kill Dauid, 1. Sa. 19.6. Zedekiah performed not his oath to the king of Babel, Ezek. 17.16.18.19. Hatto the archbishop of Mentz co^mitted fraudulent periury when he sware to Adelbertus the Marquis of Bambarge, that he
would either make peace between him and Ludouicus the Emperour, or else bring him safe home againe. For with this traine did he get Adelbertus to go with him to the Emperour. And when they were set forward a little way on their iorney toward the Emperor, Hatto began to say he was hungry and the iourney was long, where upon Adelbertus requested him to returne and eate somwhat before they went any further. So they returned, and did eate and drinke. Thus the archbishop brought Adelbertus safe and sound home to his place again and therby thought himself discharged of his oath. And then afterward betraied him, and brought him to the Emperor, who immediatly put him to death Liuth prand. lib. 1. cap. 3. Vladislaus king of Poland, when he was chosen to be king of Bohemia brake the oath and league which that most worthy prince Iohn Huniad a little before had made with Amurathes the Turke; and through the means of pope Eugenius, and the instigation of that wretched Iulian the Cardinal, warring against the Turke, was slaine and a great number with him at Varna, as Paralipomena Vrspergensis do report, though Aeneas Siluius ashamed of such popish counsell, and such miseries as afterward happened to Christians in all those quarters bordering vpon the Turkes dominions, doth slilie
passe ouer so foule a thing, least he shoulde also shame that Romish chaire of pestilence. But this is a fruite of popish doctrine, when by their authoritie they commaund Christian princes to breake their oathes and promises that were lawfully made.
 Fourthly, they that vse to sweare indirectly as meaning to sweare by God, name the creatures of God, as the heauens, the earth, the sunne, breade; or the ordinances of God, as the Temple, the alter, the sacraments, and such like, which Christ reproueth Mat. 5.34. and 23.16. and the Apostle Iames Chap. 5.12.
 Fiftly, they that sweare by God and by Idols, making an vnlawful mixture, as Laban sware Gen. 31.53. The God of Abraham, and the God of Nahor, and the God of their fathers be iudge betweene vs. The God of Abraham was the true God, but the God of their father was an idol Iosh. 24.2. This sinne the prophet Zephaniah reproueth Chap. 1.5. them that sweare by the Lord, and sweare by Malcham. And Amos Chap. 8.14. They that sweare by the sinne of Samaria, which is as if he had saide by the sinne of Rome. For as the calues and other Idolatrie were the sinnes of Samaria: so is the masle and such like Idolatrie the sinne of Rome. wherefore when men sweare ordinarily; if I ought not rather
to say extraordinarely, by the masse, by the crosse, by the rood, by Peter, by Marie, by Anne, or by any other sinne of Rome, they commit the verie same sinne which Amos reproueth: for to sweare by these and such like Idols, it is not as willfull mad men say, to sweare them out of the country, but rather to sweare God out of the country, who will not deuide half of his honor to Idols, but haue it wholy ascribed to himselfe, and hath in plaine wordes forbid vs so much as to take the name of such Idols in our mouth Exod. 23.13. Ye shall make no mention of the name of other Gods; neither shall it be heard out of thy mouth, Ioshua Chap. 23.7. seriously admonisheth the Israelites hereof. Iereme Chap. 5.7. telleth the Iewes plainely that they forsake God by this kinde of swearing, and saith, Thy children haue forsaken me, and sworne by them that are no Gods.
And because men will sweare by Idols and so forsake God, and not suffer reproofe for it, that it may appeare such as feare God indeede, reproue not vnlawfull oathes of curiositie or captiousnes, but of conscience and of feare least by silence they should be guiltie thereof, who so list to reade Leuit. 5. in the beginning of the Chapter, shall see that the Lord maks them guilty of an oath, which
heare it and reproue it not.
But thus much of taking Gods name in vain by swearing vnlawfully. Diuers and sundry wayes is Gods name abused and taken in vain contrary to this commaundement without an oath, as First they that professe God and his religion, but in their liues prophane his comma^dements, in that they are talkers, but not doers of his law, of which sort there are whol swarmes at this day. Goe and consider all states and degrees and conditions of men, and thou shalt feele in thy heart that the Lord faith to euery one almost, what hast thou to doe to declare mine ordinances, that thou shouldest take my name in thy mouth (that is, that thou should take my name vpon thee and say thou art a Christian, thou art mine, and that thou belongest to me) Seing thou hatest to be reformed, and hast cast my words behinde thee? for when thou seest a theefe, thou runnest with him, and thou art partaker with the adulterers. Thou giuest thy mouth to euill, and with thy tongue thou forgest deceite etc. Psal. 50.16.17. etc. How many are there at this day which with their mouth professe they knowe God but by their workes denie him as Paul saith Tit. 1.16.
 Secondly, they that vnder color of religion
and of the name of God, commit horrible wickednes, as the sonnes of Iaacob did, when they slew the Sechemites. Gen. 34.13. etc. The Scribes and Pharisies vnder pretence of prayer deuoured widdowes howses Math. 23.14. Two horrible facts happenned of late yeares, the one at Holme in Sweeueland, when the king of Denmarke Christiernus the second by name, and a Christian by profession, through the craftie counsel and helpe of Gustauus archbishop of Vpsalis was peaceablie admitted into the citie with many ample conditions of peace and vnitie, whereto Christiernus did not only subscribe but also sweare. Neuerthelesse when he had refreshed him selfe and his soldiers a few dayes, he repaireth and contineweth for three dayes space a sumptuous and riotous feast for all the chiefe men of Holme, and the third day when there seemed to be least danger or feare, he apprehended them all, shut them vp in prison, and shut the gats of the citie that no man might come in or goe out, and then openly executed the chiefest men, and after let the souldiers loosse vpon all the citie, where such outragious cruelty was vsed, that no tongue is able to expres it, as Krantzius saith in describing it in a seuerall small treatise of this matter only. And
this was about the yere 1520. The other was at Paris in the yere 1572. August. 24. where vnder pretence of religion and peace, that worthie and noble man of France Gasper Colinius, and as many Christians as could be found, were murthered in such crueltie and horrible manner, as hath seldome or neuer beene heard of.
Thirdly, they that haue spirits of diuination or south saying, that is to say, familiars in them, as witches, charmers, coniurers, and such like haue, which the Lord forbideth Leuit. 20.27. And Deut. 18.10.11. Such as can tel men who haue stolen their horses, or other things: such as can vnwitch children or others that are bewitched, and can tel who bewitched them. And a greate number mo, as stargasers, astrologers, and prognosticators, as the prophet Esaias Chap. 47.13. calleth them, which can cast figures, tell natiuities, fortunes, and destinies; and are so excellently and so profoundly learned in the blacke art as it is called, that nothing comes amisse to hand but they can diuine by it, as by the hand, by fire, by water, by the earth by the aire, by siues or ridles, by flying or crying of birdes. Yea and that the world may see their skilfull vanitie, I meane Impietie, they can for neede diuine by smoake
or by a shadow. Neither doe they take vpon them to be Lords ouer mens bodies only, but they can temper their mindes also at their pleasure. And that which farre surpasseth all other things, they can tell the destinies and reade the fortunes of shippes, of houses, of cities, as Tarutias Firmanus found that Rome was borne in the eclipse of the moone, when Romulus laide the foundation, and thereupon would vndertake to read her destinie, as if the heauens had such a mightie operation in boardes, in timber, in iron, in tiles, brickes, stones, morter, daube, clay, straw, and whatsoeuer. This is a singular and a rare skill, of which such fooles boast, as though no man knew anithing but they only. Now if a man might haue leaue to pose them, and know the profounditie of their art, he should finde it a painted building whithout any foundation at all to rest vpon, and so hang by the heauens, as Mahomets tombe doth or heretofore did (as the report goeth) hange by the Loadestone at Mecha in Arabia the stony. And if a man consider either the ground of their art, or the effect of their prognostications, their learning will appear what it is. And first, what demonstration can they make of their art? (I speake not now of witches etc. but of greate astrologers
as they would be counted) whence haue they their names of the twelue signes of the zodiake, of fiue of their planets, and of the fixed starres? what is the nature and qualitie of each of them? If al astrologers that heretofore haue liued could not yet for all their learning make so much as one small demonstration to shew the ground and truth of their art, as learned men haue doone, and dayly doe in all trew liberall arts, it is a token that this Astrologie is a bastard, and hath no place among lawfull and trew artes. If the names that be giuen to the starres, and the properties ascribed to them be childish and ridiculous, or else supersticious and irreligious, as the^ selues know, there is no reason why we should beleeue them. The fiue planets Saturne, Iupiter, Mars, Venus, Mercurie, whence haue they their names? Are they not called by the names of most wicked, vile, and execrable persons that sometimes liued beastlike vpon the earth, and now for their vilanies are honored as Gods of heathen people which know not the trew God of Israell? And haue they not such qualities ascribed to them, as these wicked wretches were of, whose names they beare? If it be dema^ded why any of these planets should be of such nature as they affirme, they are at their
wittes ende. Likewise for the names and natures of the twelue signes. But it were too tedious to rehearse them, let the astrologer consider them, and how vaine they are. Also for the effectes of their diuinations and destinies it needeth not to say much. For first of although they professe much, yet they are daintie or rather warie of their skil, and in that point shew some wisdome, because they will not easily diuine and prognosticate. Secondly when they doe diuine, they speake obscurely, or doubtfully, or with exception, as hauing guiltie consciences, and fearing for shame to be taken in a lye. And so did Apollo, Iupiter Ammon and others in their oracles, that herein it may appeare whose scholers they are. Thirdly when impudencie makes them to diuine in playner speaches without any ambiguitie, the world is witnesse what liers they be. Tully in his seco^d booke de diuinatione sayth, that he hearde these wise astrologers prophesie much prosperitie and many prosperous yeares to Pompeius, to Crassus and to Iulius Caesar, all which prooued to be false. So many astrological prognostications as haue beene publissed in our dayes are so many witnesses of the falshoode of diuining astrologie, as sometimes one contrary to another, and yet both false.
And I maruell they do not remember tha^ pleasant iest of a philosopher, Mirabile vide turquod non rideat haruspex cum haruspicem viderit: It is a wonder that one of these astrologers can forbeare laughter, when he looketh vpon an other astrologer. The knowledge of the heauens for such vse as God appointed them, Gen. 1.14. is the good gift of God, and commendable as it may appeare throughout the booke of Iob, and by daily practise in kalenders, in dials, in nauigation, in Chronicles, in daies, weekes, moneths, yeares, and seasons. But this diuining astrologie is without reason, and condemned by the word of God in the places before cited. Wherefore I wish all prognosticators of things to come by vertue of astrologie (for I take the word as it is commonly vsed, and as it is diuers from astronomie) that because astrologie is void of reason, condemned by the scriptures, and hath no lawfull or good vse among men, they would follow tho examples of those we reade of, Act. 19.18.19. and confesse their vanitie, shewe their workes, and burne their bookes at Paules crosse.
 Fourthly, they that goe to these destinie readers, witches, sorcerers, inchanters, astrologers, or coniurers, to haue their children, or their cattell vnbewitched, to know who hath
stollen their horse, or hurt them any, or else to know their fortune, or aske their counsell in any thing according to that profession. For whiles they are going toward such persons for counsel they may remember that when the messengers of Ahaziah were on their iourney going to Baal-zebub to knowe whether their king should recouer of his disease, Elijah the Thisbite met them and saide, Is it not because there is no God in Israell, that ye go to enquire of Baal-zebub the God of Ekron, 2. King. 1.6. And they that goe to such persons for counsell, do shew openly that they say in their heartes, there is no God in England. They also that goe of curiositie to see if there be any such skill in them, as though they would go to take acquaintance of the diuell. They also that vse such medicines, and such ceremonies as these wise men and wise women prescribe them. Also shipmasters who dare not put out of their port, and beginne their voyage vpon certaine daies, as vpon twese day, or friday, least it should proue vnluckie. And therefore they are often carefull to make choyse of a luckie day, euen the Lordes day, that by breaking the Lordes sabaoth in the beginning, they may haue good lucke afterward.
 Quest. What is the punishment for them that breake this commandement?

Ans. It is death, Leuit. 24.16. He that blasphemeth the name of the Lorde shalbe put to death: all the congregation shall stone him to death, etc. whereof there is an example, Leuit. 24.12. etc. Num. 15.32. etc.
Remember the Sabaoth day, to keep it holy, etc. vers. 8.
 Quest. What is the summe of this fourth commaundement?
Ans. There are three thinges to be considered in it. First the commaundement, vers. 8. Secondly, the exposition, vers. 9.10. Thirdly, the reason, vers 11.
 Quest. What is the meaning of the commaundement?
Ans. The commaundement is short, and my purpose is to ioyne the exposition to it, to make but one speach of both, though I haue seuerally noted the distinct parts. And first note that the Lord comming with authoritie to commaund, doth in this commaundement only say, Remember, wheras in all the other he vseth authoririe and absolutely commaundeth. The reasons whereof may be three. 1. First, though all the commaundementes were giuen before, and knowen to the faithful, as partly by the secret worke of God grauen in their nature, and partly giuen by expresse commaundement,
as for example, the first commaundement was giuen to Adam, Gen. 2. and 3. and to Abraham, Gen. 12.1.2.3. and 17.1. the second was likewise giuen to Adam, and accordingly he taught his children to worship God aright, Gen. 4.3.4. and also Abraham, Gen. 12.7. the third commaundement is manifestin the lawfull vse of it, Gen. 14.22.23. and 21.23.24.31: this fourth was giuen. Gen. 2.3. the fifth appeareth in the sonnes of Adam, Gen. 4. and of Noah, Gen. 9.22.23. the sixt, Gen. 9.6. the seauenth appeareth, Gen. 20.3.26.9. in the godly care which Abraham had for the lawfull mariage of Isaak, Gen. 24. and that Isaak had for Iaacob. Gen. 27.46. and 26.1.6. and in the incest, and iudgement of Iudah, Gen. 38.18.24. the eight was well knowen, as we may see, Gen. 31.19.26.32.37.39. the ninth is manifest in the breach of it, Gen. 37.32. and 39.14.17. etc. The tenth being as it were the root from whence the breach of the other commandements springs, must needs also be know en, though it be so secret a sinne, and so deeply hid in nature that there are no examples of it eyther before or after the law giuen, although there may be some glimse of it in Iosephs mistresse, Gen. 39.8.9. though all these commandements, I say, were giuen before, yet the Israelites were growen into that obliuion of
them all in a manner, that the Lord repeating them againe, Exod. 20. speaketh with authoritie and commaundeth as though they had neuer beene giuen, or knowen, or heard of before, and least they should be forgotten againe, putteth them now in writing. But this fourth co^mandement was better kept in memory, and in practise, then any of the rest, and was but a little before repeated, Exod. 16.22.23.25.26. Therefore the Lord saith now but onely Reme^ber, as if he had said, concerning the saboth you know it verie well, and I gaue you commandement to obserue it but the other day, therefore see that ye remember it. 2. Secondly, as men giuing their sonnes or seruantes diuers thinges in charge, say of some principall matter, remember this, and though thou forget other thinges, yet in any case remember this: so the Lord, to let vs know what reckoning he maketh of the sabaoth, saith Remember the Sabaoth especially, forget it not. 3. Thirdly, he admonisheth vs of our carelesnesse and forgetfulnesse in the best thinges, when he saith Remember, as if he said, knowe thine owne slownes and dulnes, and keepe in mind my sabaoth, that thou forget it not.
 Qu. Seeing you haue giuen sufficient reason for the manner of speach in the first word, Reme^ber, I pray you go forward with the co^mandement.

Ans. The commaundement now standeth of two sentences: first, Remember the sabaoth day, secondly, to keepe it holy.
 Quest. Which, or what call you the sabaoth?
Ans. The Lord sheweth it himself in the exposition, vers. 9. and in the beginning of ver. 10. that it is the seauenth day, euen euery seauenth day, that is the Sabaoth day, that is to say, the day of rest, as if the Lord had said, euery seauenth day thou shalt rest.
 Que. Had the Iewes any other sabaoth daies, or daies of rest, that it was necessary thus to pointe out the seauenth day?
Ans. They had many saboths, ordaies and times of rest: as first euery seauenth day which is heere commanded, and Leuit. 23.3. then the first day of euery month, as it may be collected out of Num. 10.10. and 28.11.14. and 29.6. and as it is manifest, Psal. 81.3.4. Ezr. 3.5. Besides these two sabaoths of daies and moneths, they had euery yeare fiue sabaoths, as first the pasouer, the 14. day of the first moneth, Exod. 12.15. and 13.3. and 23.15. Leuit. 23.5. The second is the feast of haruest, or of Pentecost, or of Whit sontide, which was full seauen weeks after the pasouer, Ex. 23.16.34.22. Le. 23.15. Thirdly in the seauenth moneth they had three feasts, or sabaoths, as the first day of the seauenth moneth was the feast of blowing trumpets,
Leuit. 23.24. Num. 29.1. the tenth day of the same moneth was a fourth sabaoth, euen the day of reconciliation, wherein they were commanded to fast and reconcile themselues to God, Lenit. 23.27. and 16.29. Exo. 30.10. Nu. 29.7. Lastly the fift feast was the fifteenth day of the seauenth moneth, euen the feast of tabernacles in the end of their ciuil yeare when they had gathered in their fruites, Exod. 23.16 and 34.33. Leuit. 33.34.39. Also they had two other great sabaoths of yeares, the first was euery seauenth yeare, Exod. 23.10. Leui. 25.2.3. Deu. 15.1.9. etc. the second was euery fiftith yeare. Leuit. 25.8.
 Qu. Now I perceiue the seauenth day is the sabaoth or day of rest, which is here co^manded. But what is the reason why our sabaoth or day of rest is not the seauenth, but the first day of the weeke?
Ans. There was somthing ceremonial in this commaundement, as the Apostle witnesseth, Colos. 2.16.17. which was abolished at Christs comming as all other ceremonies were, in so much that Paul reproueth the Galatia^s for obseruing the sabaoth before named, Gal. 4.10. and that is the cause why we obserue it not now.
Q. I pray you what was ceremonial in the 7. day? 
Ans. I might giue you a short and ful answer in one word, and say; that wheras al the ceremonies of the Iewes were instituted either for order, or for signification, those which belong to order
generally (for such as were for particular order of that time, that place, and those people, are abolished) do remain and must co^tinually remain for edification and for comely and decent order, as Paul would haue al such indifferent things to be ordred. 1. Cor. 14.26.40. and the other significant ceremonies are abrogated. But because this answer is more general, the^ that euery one can make ful vse of, I wil specifie some particulars, which we haue no vse of, neither may haue. Significa^t ceremonies in respect of time are threefold, and some are remembrances of things past, some are as it were pictures to set forth things present, and others are types and figures of things to come.
 First the saboth was ceremonial, in that it was a reme^brance of the lords rest the seauenth day fro^ creating any more, and this ceremony is ceased. For though it is our duties at this day connually to reme^ber the power and goodnes of God in creating heauen and earth with all the host of them, and in resting the seuenth day: yet the sabaoth or seuenth day of the week is not appointed to vs at this day to cal that to our reme^brance, but as Paul plainly sheweth there was accremony in the seuenth day of the week Gan. 4.10. Col. 2.17. so we see the abrogation of it approued by the spirit of God, and the first day of the weeke chosen in steed thereof, Act. 20.7.1. Cor. 16.2. which is called the lords day, Apo. 1.10

Secondly, the sabaoth was ceremonial in that it was a signe and token to teach the Iewes that the Lorde did sanctifie them Exod. 13.13. Eccle. 20.20. For when according to Gods commaundement they rested so strictly from all kinde of ciuill workes that they might not gather Manna, nor bake nor boile their meate that day, Exod. 16.23.25.26.29. nor kindle a fire Exod. 35.3. nor pretend any necessitie to worke in most necessarie things, as in the building of the Tabernacle Exod. 31.13, or most necessarie times, as in seede-time or in haruest Exod. 34.21. which precise rest was full 24. houres, from euen to euen Leuit. 23.32. When, I say they rested thus precisely from al ciuil labour, they yeelded themselues wholy into the Lords hands, and to his will, that he might worke his will, euen their sanctification. For as the patient standeth, sitteth, or lieth stil as a stone without wagging hand or foote whiles the surgeant or phisician is working vpon him to cure him: so the Iewes resting from their owne workes so strictly, gaue themselues without resistance into the handes of God the Phisician of their saluation, that he might that day worke vpon them outwardly by his word and such ordinances as he had appointed, and inwardly by his blessed
Spirit to sanctifie them, for thus the Lorde doth sanctifie his elect, Iohn 17.17. Now though we be thus sanctified at this day, yet we haue not this vaile of the sabbath to shadow it vnto vs, but the shadow being taken away, we haue all things plainely declared to vs without parables.
 Thirdly, the verie day itselfe, the seauenth and no other precisely appointed to rest in, and to meditate of heauenly things, was to signifie that there ought to be one of seauen daies appointed for Gods worship; and to signifie that spirituall rest from sin into which we that beleeue are alreadie entred, Heb. 4.3.10. for in Christ Iesus we haue peace, righteousnes, and life,
 Quest. Whether are we commaunded so precisely to worke six dayes, that it is simply euill to rest from labour and to serue God any of those sixe?
Ans. This question seemeth to me so intricate, that I cannot answere it in one word as I would. For it is a needelesse question in respect of many masters, who are so farre from resting any of the sixe dayes, that they will not rest the seauenth, nor suffer their serua^ts or their cattel to rest. Many others do nothing els sixe dayes, yea and the seauenth also but rest vpon the alebench at cardes, tables,
dice. Some rest after the same manner in their owne howses all the yere longdiuers young gentlemen are brought vp to no other worke and that they ply night and day so earnestly that they haue scarse leasure to sleepe till they haue plaide away the lands and reuenewes which their parents left them. But to touch your question nearer, the Lord that bounde man to perpetuall labour as a punishment for his sinne, and commanded him to get his liuing with the sweate of his browes, doth not forbid him to lift vp his eyes to heauen to worshippe his maker. Neither was this commaundement of laboring six dayes giuen before the sabboth or together with it but after it, that whereas man was to serue his creator continually (the earth without labour and toyle yeelding her fruits) and specially the seauenth day, the Lordes meaning in bidding him to worke sixe dayes was to tell him that without his labour the earth would not giue her increase, and not to forbid him to worship God at any time. For the more earnest the people haue bene to serue God, the more hath the earth yeelded her fruite, and with lesse laboure Malach 3.10. Also you heard before that the Lord himselfe appointed the Iewes diuers sabbaths besides the seauenth day. And the Iewes
themselues at diuers times, and for sundry causes rested from ciuil labour, and kept sabbaths to the Lord, as 1. Sam. 7.6. And Dauid with al Israel kept a sabbath first when he brought the Arke of God out of the house of Abinadab, and secondly when he brought it out of the house of Obed-Edom. 2. Sam. 6. At the dedication of Salomons Temple they kept a sabbath or rest of seauen dayes long 1. king. 8.65. After their returne out of Captiuity they kept many sabbaths, as when the foundation of the Temple was laide Ezr. 3.8.10. at the dedciation of it when it was finished Ezr. 6.15.16. at the dedication of the wall of Ierusalem Nehem. 12.27. When they were deliuered from that death which Haman conspired against them Ester. 9.17.18.20.21. And at diuers other tymes, as it appeareth Ezr. 10.7.9.13. etc. Nehem. 8.18. Zach. 8.19. The primitiue Church likewise kept diuers sabbaths besides the Lords day, as commemorations of Martyrs Cypryan. Lib. 3. Epist 6. Beatus Rhenanus in Lib. Tertul ad Martyres. The feast of Easter, as we call it, the feast of Pentecost which at the first lasted fiftie dayes continually after Easter, but afterward was turned to whitsontide only as Ierome writeth in Galat. 4. The natiuitie of Christ. Constantine
the greate commaunded euery friday to be a sabbath or day of rest to the Lord Enseb: Lib. 4. de vita Constant. and Sozom. Li. 1. Chap. 8. 
 Quest. What is there more to be obserued concerning the sabboth or day of rest?
Ans. There is one thing more in the exposition which may not be omitted, euen this, that the sabbath or day of rest is to the Lord, that is, we may not rest that day to any creature, but only to the Lord. Which I note, first because heathens keepesabbaths to Idols, but specially because of the papists, who imitating the heathen, first consecrated deade men for Gods, as hath beene saide before in the 1. and 2. commaundements, and secondly appointed sabbaths for their new Gods. It is therefore saide in this comma^dement, that our sabbath must be kept holy to the Lord, not to any heathenish or popish Idol.
 Quest. What then if such a day be appointed by the Church to be a sabbath or day of rest to the Lord, as sometimes the Pope appointed to be a sabbath to one of his new Gods? doe you thinke it vnlawfull to keepe it to the Lord?
Ans. No, I doe not say so, I wish, and it were greatly to be desired, if it might be, that sabbaths appointed for the Lord were vpon
other dayes, that so all shew of euill might be auoided. But it is a thing not possible, except we should keepe no sabbaths to the Lord saue only the Lords day: for the Popes of Rome haue made so many new gods as there are dayes in the yere, as you may see in the kalender there is not one spare day. Yea and of later years the Pope hath bene put to his shiftes to get a day for some of his new made Gods: and because he was not able with all his keyes to make one day moe in the yere, he hath beene faine to blot out of the kalender, one of his ould gods, that his new god might put in his foote.
 Quest. You saide before that this commaundement consisted of two sentences, wherof you haue declared the former, wherefore I pray you now shew me the other also, and how we must sanctifie the sabbath?
Ans. We must sanctifie it so as the Lord hath commaunded. But to speake plainelie and briefely, I will follow the order here obserued, and shew first, what is to be doone that day, for it is saide, to keepe it holy: and secondly what may not be doone, for it is saide in the exposition, thou shalt not do any worke etc.
 Quest. How then must we keepe it holy?
Ans. I will shew it you by the practice, first
of the Iewes and secondly of Christians.
 First of all the Iewes had a holy conuocation according as they were commaunded: Leuit. 23.3. Six dayes shall worke be doone, but on the seauenth day shalbe the sabbath of rest, an holy conuocation etc.
Therefore the Iewes assembled themselues together that day both at Ierusalem, and in their seuerall synagogues which they had for that purpose in euery citie Psal. 74.8. Act. 15.21.
 Secondly, they had the law and the prophets read and expounded Leuit, 10.11. Nebem. 8.8. Act. 13.15.
 Thirdly, they had their sacrifices and other ceremonies Num. 28.9.
 Fourthly, they offred some thing willingly 2. king. 12.4.9. Mark. 12.41.
 Fiftly, they had prayer Psal. 141.2. Luk. 9.10. Num. 6.24.
The exercise of the Christians, and how they keepe holy the day of rest, apeareth to be answerable to the custom of the Iewes, but without ceremonies, for that they had their assemblyes vpon the Lords day it appeareth Act. 20.7. and 1. Cor. 16.2. and for the other foure, yea rather all those fiue thinges which we noted afore to be obserued of the Iewes, are mentioned, but without ceremonies
of the law, in one place, Act. 2.4. And they (being assembled) continued in the Apostles doctrine, and fellowship, and breaking of breade, and prayers. For first they were assembled; secondly they had the Apostles doctrine, that is, the ould testament and the new red and expounded, as may be shewed 1. Cor. 14. thirdly, they had fellowship, euen such as the Apostles taught them, that is, they did communicate their earthly things as euery one had neede, and the richer relieued the poorer: for so Paul ordeined in the churches 1. Cor. 16.1.2. fourthly, they had breaking of breade, that is, the administration of the Lords supper; fiftly, they had prayers. And thus was the day of rest sanctified.
 Quest. What is then forbidden to be done vpon the day of rest?
Ans. He saith, thou shalt not doe any work, Where you must note the persons, which are borbidden to labour about any ciuill worke that day. Thou, that art a king, a magistrat, afather, a maister, or any other superiour. Also thy sonne, thy daughter etc. Where two things are to be obserued: First that there is no libertie graunted more to the superiour then to the inferiour, to the greate then to the smal, to one then to another, but all of
what state or condition soeuer must sanctifie the Lordes day. Secondly that euery superiour standeth charged before God, not onely for himselfe, but also for those which the Lord hath put vnder his gouernment, that both he and they all sanctifie the Lordes sabaoth or day of rest. Both which lessons are very needfull to be often remembred in these our daies, because some men thinke themselues exempted from keeping the sabaoth, and others thinke they are to care for none but for themselues onely.
 Quest. Doe you precisely stand vpon the wordes, that we must doe no worke at al that day? There is mention made of a sabaoths daies tourney, Act. 1.12. whereby it seemeth there euer was and now is liberty to doe some thinges that day. What say you to this?
Ans. A sabaoths daies iourney was not a commandement from God, but a superstitious tradition of the Iewes, which by their traditions prophaned and abused the worde of God as Christ sheweth largly, Mat. 5.21.27.33.38.43 and 15.3. etc. 23.16. etc. But the meaning of the Lord is, that no ciuill worke should be done that day, whereby the godly ciuill pollicie should be violated, the worship of God neglected, and the commuandement of GOD trode vnder foot. For otherwise the Iewes did
many thinges vnder the law, and diuers things are lawful for vs that we may do the^. The Iews went to the Temple at Ierusalem that day, or else to their seuerall synagogues, according to their dwellings, some were further off, and some were nearer, but none brake the sabaoth in going to the ordinarie place of the assemblie, though he dwelt two or three howers iourney off. For they counted the distance of places more by their iournies, then by miles or such other measures. The priestes and Leuites were occupied that day busilie in killing, dressing, washing, burning of the sacrifices with incense, and such other exercises as belonged to the sabaoth. The people they also brought their cattell that day to Ierusalem to be sacrificed with such other thinges as belonged thereto, and yet brake not this commandement. Wherefore this may be set down for a generall rule both vnder the Lawe and vnder the Gospell, that workes of pietie and religion in Gods worship all are lawfull to be done, yea necessarie that they must be done vpon the sabaoth daie. Furthermore, vnto this I will adde two other generall rules, of which this is the first. That is lawfull to be done vpon the Lordes sabaoth, which necessitie vrgeth and compelleth men to doe. As for example, the Apostles constrained
with hunger plucked the eares of corne rubbed them in their handes, and did eate the corne vpon the day of rest, and yet polluted not the sabaoth, for Christ defendeth their doing to be lawfull, Math. 12.3. etc. Marke. 2.27. And who is he that will not drawe his sheepe that day out of a ditch, to saue it? And much more is mans life to be preserued. The second generall rule is this. Whatsoeuer charitie doeth specially require and presently, that may be done vpon the day of rest without breach of this commandement, as Christ healed him that had the withered hand vpon the sabaoth day, Math, 12.10.11. and the woman that had beene bowed together eighteene yeares, Luke. 13.12. and said it was as much charitie to loose her from Satans bonds on the sabaoth, as to loose an oxe from the stalle and leade him to the water. For the sabaoth was made for man, and not man for the sabaoth, Marke. 2.27. Wherefore whatsoeuer religion commandeth, or necessitie vrgeth, or charity craueth that day, the same may and must be done vpon the sabaoth. Then to visite the sicke, or others in destresse, to comfort them, to make their beds, to cure them, and diuers such charitable and necessarie workes may that day be done, yet so that neither godly pollicy and order be violated,
nor Gods worship neglected.
 Quest. I pray you shew me then who they are that breake this commandement?
Ans. There are so many that I cannot reckon the hundreth part of them, yet I will name a few; as, First, they that would bring vs backe againe to the beggerly ceremonies of the olde law, which are abolished, and would haue vs to keep the Iewes sabaoth. The Ebionites obserue it, Euseb. lib. 3. cap. 27. and others after them in so much that the counsell of Laodicea, Can. 29. forbad it more then 300. yeares after Christ. And at this day some men curiously trouble themselues and others about it. Contrariwise they who woulde haue no saboath or day of rest at all, but say all daies are alike sabaothes. For though one day be no better then another, yet there is and euer hath beene, by the Lordes appointment, one speciall day of seauen for the publike worship of God, which we also ought religiously to keepe holy.
 Secondly, they that forsake the assembly of the congregation that day, as too too many do. Some find fault with the ministery and ministers as if they were not of God: others haue no tast at all of the goodnes of the word of God, and therefore carelesly contemne the congregation, and lie in their beds, or sit idle, or are occupied
in their own affaires, or walk into the fields for recreation, or go looke to their ground and to their cattell, or spend the time at cardes and dice and drinking in the alehouse, or runne after plaies, pipings, dancings, or other points of sinfull felowship with a greate number moe which that day aboue all other daies in the weeke follow hard after great sinnes and that with greedinesse. And these ought to be excommunicated, if vpon due admonishment they amend not.
Thirdly, of them that come to the Church, it woulde make a godly Christians heart to bleede, to see the dishonor that is done to God that day, and to tremble for feare of the iudgements that hang ouer their heades for such disobedieuce and misdemeanor in Gods presence, that he may say with Dauid, Psal. 119. vers. 53. Feare is come vpon me for the wicked, that forsake thy lawe, and vers. 136. Mine eies gush out with riuers of water, because the keepe not thy lawe. For some come so late and goe away againe so soone, that it is all one as if they had not beene there.
Some come of custome. Some behaue themselues so vnreuerentlie as if they came to the market, or rather as if they came among some idle companie where they might take a nappe, seeing that for worldlie cares which runne in their
heades, they could not sleepe of all the last nightlong. Some come for fashion and sit like sottes, and ve haue no more of them but onely their bodily presence, they cannot tell what was said, or what they did there, but only that they went for company.
Other to shew their pride. Some come to shew themselues in their braue apparrell, in their proud lookes, in their loftie countenance, in their stately going, in their tripping and mincing after the same manner that Esaias the Prophet speaketh of Chap. 3.16. etc. And if their wanton eyes, their hautie lookes, with all their pride and brauerie be noted of others and talked of at dinner, O then it is well with them, then they haue their desire, euen the thing for which they went to the Church, then are the merrie and glad.
Others to intrappe the minister. Some come to the Church, as the Scribes and Pharisies came to heare Christ, to marke the minister that they may intangle him in his words, to watch whether he weare the surplus or not; if he doe weare it, some will not heare but goe away againe presently, againe if he doe not weare it, other will not heare him. And so the minister is watched on each hande, and had neede to desire wisedome of the Lord to walke holily in the middest of such a froward generation. Some come to heare
some strange doctrine, that is, some strange newes, (as if it were at Venice, which Citie is now giuen to heare nothing but newes, as sometimes Athens was, Act. 17.21.) and if they heare nothing but Iesus Christ purely and plainely preached, and such holy and holsome words as they haue heard before, they thinke they haue lost their labour. And these men are more puffed vp with an ambitious desire of bare knowledge, then inwardely touched with any zeale, feeling, or religious minde.
Some com for pleasure. Some looke that the preacher shoulde tickle their itching eares with an eloquent oration, and care not to haue their soules cured, which are grieuously wounded with many grosse sinnes. Some that come are such as the Prophet Hoseas speaketh of, Chap. 4.4. Thy people are as they that rebuke the priest. For one saith the minister wantes learning; an other saith he wantes vtterance, and hath no grace at all in his speach; an other saith hee vtters manie wordes but no matter; an other saith he is a flatterer and hath no conscience; another sayeth hee is so zealous that he forgettes himselfe, or is halfe madde as Paul was, Actes. 26.24. another saith hee speakes of the splene, and of malice noteth mee. And all these knowe not, nay
they will not knowe that there are diuersities of giftes, but the same spirite which distributeth to euerie man seuerally as he will, and that no man can say that Iesus is the Lorde but by the holie Ghost, 1. Corin. 12.3.4.11. Neyther doe they knowe that they themselues are like children sitting in the markets, which call vnto their fellowes, and say, We haue piped vnto you, and ye haue not daunced; we haue mourned vnto you, and ye haue not lamented, Math. 11.17. Some come to the Church but they hate Micheah, and heare him with ill will,
1. King. 22. because he neuer preacheth good vnto them, but euill: and therefore will not haue such to preach vnto them, (Mich. 2.6.) but get them an heape of teachers after their owne lustes, 2. Tim. 4.3. Some will come in the forenoone, and thereby thinke they haue pleasured God as greatly as if they had done some popish supererogant worke, but in the afternoone they will make themselues a dispensation though they neuer come at the Pope for it, and goe a sporting, or sit at Cardes and Tables or such like exercise. But for all their dispensations and liberties let them heare what the Lorde saith, Leuit. 23.32. From euen to euen shall ye celebrate your sabbaoth.
Some will come to the sermon but not to prayer,
Som com^ by halfes. others will come to prayer but not to the sermon. Some will come both to prayer and to the sermon, but if the Lords supper be administred, they wilbe gone, for either they are not (as the common vaine excuse is) or they will not be prepared for it. But let all that feare God truly heare what the Lord saith to the Iewes concerning the passeouer Exod. 12.47. All the congregation of Israell shall obserue it. And Numb. 9.13. The man that is cleane, and is not in a iourney, and is negligent to keepe the passeouer, the same person shallbe cut off from his people etc For the sacrament of the Lords supper a proportionable reason may be taken from the passeouer, and Paul wisheth the Corinthians to tarie one for another, 1. Cor. 11.33. But because I will not stand here to bring reasons to make it manifest, I referre the reader to that most worthie and religious smal book written by the Iewel of England, M. Iewel his apologie, a booke worthie of greater co^mendation then I am able to giue vnto it: in which as in the defence thereof, which should be in euerie Church, he sheweth that all the congregation ought to celebrate the Lords supper together, and that whosoeuer negligently or co^temptuously withdraweth himselfe,
to be excommunicated. Some gouernours of housheholdes come themselues to the Church, but they let their families, sons, daughters and seruants runne at random which way they will, or else send them about worldly busines. Some come in deede to the congregation, but so soone as they are out of the Church doore, their mouthes are full of cursing, swearing, contention, malice, and such lewde talke as they vsed before, which is a foule token they gaue smale reuerence to God in the Church. And if a man would enter further into this matter, he should finde moe abhominations. Now seeing there are so many vnprofitable commers to the Church, besides them that heare the word, but follow it not, and whome Christ compareth to him that builds his house vpon the sande Math. 7.26. it is not like the number should be greate of those which sincerely keepe and sanctifie the Lords sabbath aright. And among many other causes of Gods wrath, this is not the least, whie these diuers yeares past for eight or ten the Lord hath sent euery yere a new and strange kind of sickenesse, such as neither we nor our forfathers haue knowen, and why in the yere 1593. the Lord sent such a terrible plague and pestilence as amazed all, and slew many, and
made all nations round about vs a greate way of, afraide of our companie; and why we haue had vnseasonable weather and great dearth of almanner of foode these diuers yeares, whereas before the land was so blessed with al maner of plentie that we releiued many forren countries. And because neither the word nor the iudgements of God haue yet driuen vs to some such rare kinde of publike repentance as our sinnes require, the Lord looketh for, and others in former tymes haue vsed, as in the dayes of Iehosaphat, of Ezra, of Nehemia, but we continue in our sinnes, or rather wax worse and worse, therefore behold the hand of the Lord is still stretched out against vs, that we had neede to say with Ieremie Chap. 9.1. O that our heades were ful of water, and our eyes fountaines of teares, that we might weepe day and night etc. For if we accept not the condition offred vs Ieremie 17, 21. we shall certainely tast of the Iudgment denounced Vers. 27.
 Fourthly, they offend against this commandement, who take away the maintenance of the ministery. For where mainteinance is wanting, there can be no minister, and where there is no minister, there is no sanctifying of the sabbath, reade Malach. 3.10.
Quest. What is the punishment which is
appointed for him that transgresseth this commaundement?
Ans. It is death Exod. 31.14. He that defileth it (that is, the sabbath) shall die the death etc. He. that gathered stickes that day was put to death Num. 15.32.
Honour thy father and thy mother etc. Vers. 12. Q What is the summe of the fift co^mandement? 
Ans. Hitherto you heard the commaundements of the first table, which teach vs our duties to God: now followeth the seconde table wherein our duties towards our neighbour are conteined. But yet this is to be obserued, that when the duetie is performed to man, the obedience is giuen to God, who commaundeth vs to performe these dueties to our neighbours. Of all the commaundements of the second table this first onely is affirmatiue, the other fiue following are al negatiues. This first conteineth in these two things, first the co^mandeme^t, seco^dly a reason or a promise. The summe of the comma^dement is to honour our parents, which if it be duely obserued, it is a marueilous help for the keeping of the rest. For this well obserued, we cannot easilie breake the rest.
 Quest. Whome doe you call our Parents?
Ans. All our superiours may be called our parents, and that either by nature, or by
age or by office.
Quest. Whome call you our Parents by nature? whome by age? and whome by office?
Parents by nature.
Ans. They are our Parents by nature, which are the Parents of our bodies, and of whome we are begotten and borne, and these are so called in the scripture, as you may se a large catalogue of Parents and of their sons Gen. 5. and. 10.11. and in the 10. first Chapters of the first booke of Chronicles, and Luke. 3.23. etc.
Parents by age. They are our fathers by age, which are our elders in yeares. For thus speaketh Steuen hauing respect to the diuers ages of all that were present Act. 7.2. ye men, brethren, and fathers, hearken. And Paul giueth this admonition to Timothe, and saith 1. Tim. 5.1.2. Rebuke not an elder, but exhort him as a father and the yonger men as brethren, the elder women as mothers etc.
They are our Parents by office,
Parents by office. whom the Lord hath set ouer vs in any authoritie, as magistrates ouer all their subiectes, ministers ouer their flockes, husbands ouer their wiues, maisters ouer their seruants. Magistrates they are fathers of their Countries and of all that be put vnder them, specially of the fatherlesse, of the Widdowes and of the poore. Machir of the tribe of Manasses being Prince of Galead, Numbers 32.39. is called
the father of Gilead 1. Chro: 2.21.23. Ashur the prince, is called the father of Tekoa 1. Chro. 2.24. and 4.5. read also 1. Chro: verse: 42.45, 49.50.51.52. Iob saith I was a father vnto the poore Iob, 29.16. The Lord saith of Eliakim the sonne of Hilkiah, and he shalbe a father of the inhabitants of Ierusalem, and of the house of Iudah Esai. 22.21. Ministers are likewise called fathers in the scriptures. Micas saith to the Leuite Iudg. 17.10. dwell with me, and be vntome a father and a priest. The Danities afterward saide to the same Leuite Iudg. 18.19. Come with vs to be our father and priest. When Eliiah was taken vp into heauen, Elisha cryed saying 2. king. 2, 12. My father, my father. The king of Israell saide to Elisha, My father, shall I smite them? 2. king. 6.21. When Ezechiah fell sicke of his sicknes, whereof he died, Ioash. the king of Israel came to him, and saide, O my father, my father, the charet of Israel, and the horse-men of the same 2. king. 13.14. Paul. saith he was the father of the Corinthians, because in Christ Iesus he begat them through the preaching of the gospel. 1. Cor. 4.15. Maisters also are called fathers, as when Naaman the Syrian disdained the counsell of Elisha, his seruants came vnto him, and saide, Father, if the prophet had commaunded thee a greate
thing, wouldest thou not haue done it. 1. king 5.13.
 Quest. Seing the scripture speaketh thus, how commeth it to passe that Christ saith Math. 23.19. Call no man your father vpon earth: for there is but one, your father which is in heauen.
Ans. Many things are spoken in the scriptures, which seeme strange vnto vs, because we consider not well the occasion, nor the drift of the holy Ghost. Christ reprouing the ambition of the Scribes and Pharisies, teacheth his Apostles to be humble and lowlie minded, not loftie and proude: for this purpose he giueth them this generall admonition vers. 8. and saith, yee are all brethren. If any father haue a greate familie and many children, and make one of his sons his stewarde, another his clarke or secretarie, an other his bailife etc. one to ouersee things in the house, another to take charge of thinges abroade: it beseemeth not the sonnes being all brethren and so farre equall, to take vpon them one to crow ouer another, one to commaund an other imperiously, to looke for greate reuerence one of another; but that euerie one doe his office faithfully, and help one another as brethren, and in giuing honour (not in claiming ambition) to goe one before
another (Rom. 12.10.16.) So saith Christ, ye are all brethren, and haue al one father, as it is written, Esai 64.8. O Lord, thou art our father: we are the clay, and thou art ourpotter, and we all are the worke of thine hands. and Malach. 2.10. Haue we not all one father? hath not one God made vs? as if Christ had saide, though you haue diuers offices and callings, yet you haue all one father, euen God, and all our teacher, euen Christ: therefore affect not ambitiously titles of honour as the Scribes and Pharisies do, but diligently performe the duties of your calling with humility. And thus you see there is no repugnancie in the scriptures. For though the Lord hathe made one man father, and another sonne, yet God is father to them both, in which respect they are brethren both by creation and by addoption. And though one man be maister or Doctor and another disciple and scholer, yet Christ is Doctor, maister, and teacher to them both, as it is Math. 17.5, Heare him. wherfore that rare and excellent man of God M. Caluin hath most plainly expou^ded the plac, saying, that maistershippe or fathershippe is not forbidden by Christ, which neither violateth brotherly fellowship, nor dishonoreth God. But if any man wil lifte himselfe
so hie as to chalenge the name of Father in such sort that he doe not plainely professe and shew by worde and deed that God is father to vs all, and so moderate his fathership that he also she we his selfe a brother euen to them ouer whom he is a father by the Lords appointment: and if a doctor, master, or teacher so swell with pride of his calling, that he doe not manifestly declare himselfe also to be but a fellow disciple, and that Christ is our only chiefe teacher: if I say, eyther father or master thus ambitiously dishonor God our father or Christ our schole-master and shew not him selfe to be a brother, and a felow-disciple, he offendeth. And it is his pride which Christ reproueth. For authoritie is giuen to men to honour God withall, not to dishonour him: and to maintaine brotherly fellowship, not to violate. Christ then findeth fault with the abuse, not with the authoritie it selfe.
 Quest. What meane you by honour when it is said in the commandement, honor thy father, etc.
 This worde, Honor,
To loue our superiours. containeth in it especily these foure thinges: First, inwardly to loue our parentes and superiours from our heartes, not to hate them or curse them in our heartes, as it is written in the booke of the Preacher, Chap. 10. vers. 20. Curse not
the king, no not in thy thought, neither cursse the rich in thy bedchamber: for the foule of the heauen shall carie the voice, and that which hath wings, shall declare the matter. And Exod. 22.28. Thou shalt not raile vpon the iudges, neyther speake euill of the ruler of the people.
 Secondly, to reuerence and worship them, euery one according to his calling,
To reuetence them. with such outward reuerence as the manner and custome of the countrie, where they dwell requireth, as it is said of strangers that honored Salomon (but chiefly of them that should honour Christ in his kingdome) Psal. 72.9. They that dwell in the wildernesse shall kneele before him, and his enemy shall licke the dust, that is, they shall fall downe so lowe when they worship him, that their mouths shall touch the earth. So saith the prophet Esaias, Chap. 49.2. Also it is thus written, Leuit. 19.32. Thou shalt rise vppe before the hoare heade, and honour the person of the olde man, and dread thy God.
 Thirdly, to obey them, and doe that which they commaunde,
To obey them. as Paul biddeth vs, Rom. 13.1.2. Let euerie soule be subiect to the higher powers: and whosoeuer resisteth the power, resisteth the ordinance of GOD. Likewise Peter saith, Submitte
your selues vnto al manner of ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it bevnto the king, as vnto the superiour, or vnto gouernours, as vnto them that are sent of him, etc. 1. Pet. 2.13. read more, Prou. 23.22. and Coloss. 3.22. and Heb. 13.17.
 Fourthly to maintaine them, to succour,
To mainraine them. cherish, and defend them as occasion requireth, and as we are able, as to defend their liues in time of danger, though it be with perill or losse of our owne life: to maintaine and succour them if neede be in sicknes, in pouerty, or any other necessity, as Ioseph succoured his olde father Iaacob.
 Quest. Concerning the third of these foure things, I stand in doubt whethir superiours are to be obeied in all things; wherefore I pray you open that point a little further.
Ans. The Lorde that hath giuen vs that commaundement to obey our superiours, hath rendred a reason also why they ought to be obeyed. For as all honour and all obedience is due to God without any exception: so hath he most gratiously commaunded some of his owne honour and glorie to superiours, as if he had put some of his owne royall garmentes vpon them, thereby to cause vs to honour them, as for example; although the Lorde be God alone, Deut. 4.35. yet this
glorie hath he commuicated so farre to kings and magistrates that he calleth them Gods, because they are his vicegerentes, and sustaine his person in certaine causes, as you may reade, Exodus. 21.6. and 22.8.9. and Psalm. 82. And albeit we haue but one teacher or master, euen Christ, Math. 23.8. yet the Lorde hath put so much glory vpon the ministers of his word as to call them our doctors or teachers, because as the father sente Christ, so Christ sente them, (Iohn. 20.21.) with the worde of reconciliation as ambassadours to intreate men to be reconciled to GOD, 2. Corinth. 5.20. Although God onely be our father, Math. 23.9. Ephes. 4.6. our onely creator and maker as Esaias sheweth, Chap. 64.8. neuerthelesse he hath imparted this glorie to our naturall parentes, that they are called our fathers, because he hath giuen them this power and appointed them to begette vs. Notwithstanding that Christ alone is the onely heade of his Church and of euerie member there of, Ephes. 1.22. yet this honour is giuen to the husband, that hee is called his wiues heade, Ephes. 5.23. because he is to loue and cherish his wife, as Christ loued his Church. Whereby you may see first that obedience is to be giuen to all
superiours, and secondly that all obedience is not to be giuen to all superiours, but onely to euery one that obedience, which the glorie, that GOD hath imparted to each of them, requireth. And for this cause we giue one obedience to the magistrate, and an other to the minister, and an other to the master, and an other to naturall parentes, and eache wife an other to her owne husbande. Nowe whatsoeuer any superiour commaundeth according to the glorie which the Lorde hath put vpon him, that ought the inferiour to obey and doe. But if any superiour will extende his authoritie aboue the glorie receiued, he ought not to be obeyed in that thing. As for example, if the magistrate commaunde a subiect to giue him that honour which a wife oweth to her husband, and in all thinges to obey him as a wife doth her husbande, the subiect is not bound, neyther ought to giue that obedience to the magistrate. And that which is manifest, and so cleare in this example that no man can or will for shame denie, the same may be saide of the rest. For the authoritie of euerie superiour is finite and limited within certaine boundes and listes according to the measure and qualitie of the
glory which the Lorde hath communicated vnto him, and he ought not to go beyond that. For it is God alone who hath al authority ouer all without limitation or exception. And if any superiour doe go beyond his authoritie, yet the inferiour ought not therein to obey him.
And for this cause, when the Lorde commaundeth inferiours to obey their superiours, he doth now and then admonish them how farre they ought to obey. As when he biddeth the subiest obey the king, be saith in the booke of the preacher, Chap. 8. vers. 2. I aduertise thee to keepe the commaundement of the king but according to the oath of GOD. That is, with this limitation, or exception, that thou breake not the oath which thou hast sworne to God. For if the king commaunde thee to breake any of Gods commaundementes, to the keeping whereof thou hast bound thy selfe by an oath, thou must not obey him. So Christ saith, Math. 22.21. Giue to Caesar the thinges that are Caesars; and giue vnto God those thinges which are Gods. So Paule wisheth men to obey magistrates for conscience sake, Rom. 13.5. No we hee that obeieth further then GOD commaundeth, he doth it not for conscience sake,
but against his conscience, because it is the Lorde onely that bindeth the conscience. And for this cause Daniell and his fellowes refused to obey the kings commaundement Dan. 3. and 6. and the Apostles would not obey the commaundement, which the consistorie of the Iewes enioyned them, Act. 4.19.
Also when Commaundement is giuen to obey the ministers of the worde, Deut. 17.12. this clause or caueat is annexeth, that standeth before the Lorde thy God to minister there, as if he had saide, so long and so farre as he executeth his office before the Lorde. The same Christ teacheth vs, Math. 23. that whiles the scribes sit in Moses seate, all that which they command out of the worde of God, is to be obeyed. The same admonition doth the Apostle giue, 1. Thess. 5.12. and Heb. 13.17. Concerning children it is saide, Ephesians. 6.1. Children obey your parentes in the Lorde, but no further. Likewise seruantes must obey their masters, but in the Lorde, Ephes. 6.7.
Againe it is written, Coloss. 3.18. Wiues submit your selues vnto your husbandes, as it is comely in the Lord.
And reason teacheth vs howe equall these exceptions be. For it is a generall axiome among
the learned, that Lex inferioris non praeiudicat nec derogat legi superioris, the lawe of the inferiour is not preiudicall too, neyther diminishieth any thing from the lawe of the superiour.
 Quest. What is the reason of this commaundement: and howe doe parentes prolonge the daies of their children vpon earth?
Ans. The reason I take to be this, that as before the lawe, naturall parentes and gouernours of greate families had power to put to death such as within their house deserued it, Gen. 38.24. so after the lawe giuen at Horeb, that authoritie and more also was committed to certaine men of Israell chosen to be magistrates. And if any naturall sonne disobeyed his parentes, hee was brought before the magistrate and put to death, Deutro. 21.21. Likewise all inferiours were to be punished by the magistrate according to the qualitie of their trespasse, if they disobeyed their superiours. Wherefore seeing God hath giuen authoritie to magistrates to punish offenders, and to put them to death if their offence deserue it; and also made the magistrate a protector and defendor of them that doe well, as it is manifest,
1. Pet. 2.14. Rom. 13.3.4. Deutro. 1.16.17. the Lord in this commaundement chargeth inferiours to obey their suppriours and in so doing they shalbe defended and protected by their superiours from wrongs and from iniuries, and so haue their liues and their dayes prolonged vpon earth. Whereas otherwise if they disobeye their superiours, they haue authoritie to cut them off, and shorten their dayes.
 Quest. Why doth Paul say this commaundement is the first with promise? had not the second a promise added to it?
Ans. That which is added to the second commaundement is rather a declaration of the iustice and mercie of God, then any promise. But whereas God hath made many promises and greate to them that keepe his commaundements and specially Leuit 26. and Deut. 28 of all those promises he hath not annexed any one to any of al the ten commaundements, when he gaue them in Sinai, saue only this one promise, and that to this fift commaundement only, and so it is both the first, and also the last commaundement which hath any of all those promises annexed vnto it. For otherwise this promise perteineth to them that keepe the other commaundementes, as it is manifest, Deut.
6.2.  and 11.9.21. and 32.47.
Quest. Now that you haue shewed me the meaning of the Lord in this commaundement, I pray you declare who breake it, that so we may haue more vse of it.
Ans. First they that rebell against kings, princes, and magistrates, as did Dathau and Abiram the sonnes of Renben against Moses Num. 16. as did sheba the sonne of Bichri against Dauid 2. Sam. 20.1. as did Iozacar and Iehosabad against Ioash king of Ierusalem 2. king 12.21. as the seruants did against Amaziah king of Iudah. 2. king. 14.19. but are threatned with Gods Iudgements for their rebellion Mich. 1.13. And by treason were foure kings of Israel slaine within the space of 34. yeares, as we reade 2. king. 15.
Secondly, they that murmur against their princes and magistrates, and finde fault with paying of tribute, not considering that they, their wiues, their children, and al that they haue are preserued in safetie and peace, by the care, wisdom, and prouidence of their prince. Thus the subiectes in Salomons dayes murmured, as it appeareth 1. king 12.4. although Salomon made siluer in Ierusalem as plentifull as stones 1. king. 10.27. And vppon such sinfull murmuring, follow euil words
and railing speaches contrarie to the commaundement Exod. 22.28. Iob. 34.18. Thus Shemei railed on Dauid.
Thirdly, they that fauour and maintaine triators or mall-content mutinous subiectes giuing them countenance or enterteinement. And such be they that harbour our closse papists and disguised traitours the hipocriticall Iesuites, which are the vipers of England, and will eate out the bellie of England, to let the Pope, the instument of the redde dragon, come in againe, except their fosterers may be well looked vnto, and receiue according to their wicked desertes. And whosoeuer in England loueth hartely the Lords annointed our most gratious Queene Elizabeth that hath made siluer as plenteous as stones in England (for what childe, seruant, or begger hath not siluer in his purse at this day) and through the Lords blessing also hath made such deepe-peace, and roial prosperitie within the walles of England as neuer was in any nation since Salomons dayes; that I may spare to speake of the vnspeakable treasure of the gospel, whosoeuer I say, loueth his dreade Souereigne truly, detesteth these popish Iesuits and all poperie, as aduersaries to Christ, to the gospell, and to all Christian princes, and thereunto desire their fauorites
may be well looked into. For their malice is against the Gospell of Iesus Christ and against al the mighty mainteiners of it. And if the glorious light of the gospell should euer hereafter be quenched in Engand, how shall we sinful creatures in this world, which is full of darkenes, finde the way to heauen, how shal our posteritie and successors corn to saluation, yea and how greately shall God be dishonored, when papists, atheists and heathens throughout the world (for they haue al heard what greate things the Lord hath doone for England) shall say, where is now the God of England? what is now become of the gospell of Christ that was so plentifully preached in England? O that this were well considered of all that feare God. For my part, it is greater then I am able to expresse. The Lord for his owne glorious names sake shew mercie to England, and be good to them that shall come after vs, that our grape-eating set not posterities teeth on edge as the Israelites children did beare the iniquities of their faithers almost fortie yeares in the wildernes Num. 24.33. and that tollerated papists be not prickes in the eyes, nor thorns in the sides of our posteritie.
Fourthlie they doe not faithfully execute their office committed to them by the prince,
whether they haue office in the Church or the common wealth, but turne iudgement into gall and righteousnes into wormewood Amos 5.7. and 6.12. but bite with their teeth, and cry peace, but if a man put not into their mouthes they prepare warre against him Mich. 3.5. For as the kings throne is stablished by iustice and mercie Pro. 16.12. and 20.8.28. So for want of due execution it is ouerthrown. And where there is no vision, the people decay Pro. 29.18. Wherefore seing these two, adminstration of iustice, and sincere preaching of the word at two chief pillers to support a kings throne, and the Lord chargeth the kings to see both these duly performed, they that deceiue the king in these two, are meanes to pul downe his throne.
Also those that obey not the ministers of the worde of God, when faithfully they preach the gospell and deuide the word a right, they oftend against this commaundement, and are causes of greate wrath from the Lord, and of much calamitie among men. For as the Lord commaunded Ioshua to stand before Eleazar the priest, who should aske counsel of the Lord for him Num, 27.21. and as Dauid accordingly did in al his actions aske counsell of the Lord by the priestes and prophets 1. Sam. 22.15. and 23.2.4.6. And as
Iehosaphat prospered whiles he sought the Lord. 2. Chro. 17.3.4.5. and as Ioash did that was right in the sight of the Lord al the time that Iehoiada the priest taught him 2. kings 12, 2, as did also Vzziah King of Iuda in the dayes of Zechariah that instructed him in the feare of the Lord 2. Chro. 26.5. so they that haue not obeyed the word of the Lord declared to them by his ministers, haue purchased many miseries, as the prophet of the Lord tould Amaziah king of Iudah. 2. Chro. 25.16. I know that God hath determined to destroy thee, because thou hast doone this (that is; serued idols Vers. 14.) and hast not obeyed my counsell. for he counselled the kinge to forsake his Idolatrie. For it is a general rule and a truth grounded vpon the law of god Leuit. 26.21.24. and 2. Sam. 22.27. which Azariah the prophet tould Asa that good king of Iudah 2. Chro. 15.2. saying, The Lord is with you, while ye be with him: and if yee seeke him; he wilbe found of you, but if ye forsake him, he will forsake you. And which Semaiah the prophet tould Rehoboam. 2. Chro. 12.1.2.5. ye haue forsaken me (saith the Lord) therefore haue I left you in the handes of Shishak. And Abiah king of Iudah, reproued Ieroboam and all Israel 2. Chro. 13.9. for the same cause. In the Kingdom of Israel,
we reade not of one good King that continewed in the feare of God, and therefore they were depriued of the tokens and testimonies of Gods fauour 2. Chro. 15.3. And also oppressed with many calamities Hos. 5.11. Mich. 6.15. and at the last were destroied for being a kingdome. Likewise the chiefe cause of the destruction of Iudah and Ierusalem when he went into captiuitie, was because they would not obey the priestes and prophets of the Lord, as Ieremie witnesseth Chap. 35.15.16.17. and that also was the cause of their reiection at Christes comming Math. 23.37.38.39. This also is the cause whie the seauen famous Churches in Asia haue their candlestickes remoued from them. This is the cause of the miseries of Germany, Fraunce, and Flanders. And except there be more obedience giuen to the word of God among vs, then I can perceiue there is, we may daily looke for some greate iudgment from God. We had neede dayly to remember the comparison the Apostle vseth Heb. 2.2.3. where he sheweth that if the disobeyers of the Law giuen by Angels, were sharply punished, much more shall they be punished which obediently receiue not such grace as now is offred in the gospell. The Lord of mercie open our eyes that we may
see it; and mollifie our stonie hearts, that we may vnfainedly repent, and renew the couenant of our God, and so repent his iudgments.
Now if I should come to particular states and degrees of men, or to particular sinnes, to shew how that which the ministers of the word preach in the name and in the wordes of the Lord, is disobeyed; I should be too too tedious, although I haue alreadie ouershot my selfe, as hauing purposed but only to haue pointed with the finger to the capitall heads of things, whose braunches are more fully declared by daily preaching, then I am able to come nere vnto by writing, seuerall occasions mouing the Spirit by which they speake, to touch particulars most notably. What person so mean or so base throughout al the Land almost, that doth not despise the minister and the word he preacheth, as their workes declare? what man followeth no this fantasie? Let the minister preach neuer so much, he will doe what he list, and thinketh all is well if he doe not such open violence as the lawes of the Land will punish. what couetous Idolaters, what cruel oppressors, what vncleane persons, what deceitfull traders, what cunning iugglers in all dealings, what falshood in fellowship, what cosenage
in bargaining, what merciles misers, what discontented murruurers, what virulent hatred, what bloodie murders, that bloode toucheth blood? that a man might heere almost rehearse the sixt verse of the first chapter of Esaias. And yet for all this, who can say that such a man pricked in his soule with remorse of conscience for his sinnes, or else terrified with the iudgementes of God, hath giuen any notable testimonie of true repentance before he durst presume to come to the Lordes table? nay diuers commaunded to testifie their repentance because their offences were publike, doe shift it off, beeing more ashamed of mens faces, then afraide of Gods iudgements. And where then is the obedience giuen to the ministers of the worde of God? Salomon saith, Prou. 30.12. There is a generation that are pure in their owne conceit, and yet are not washed from their filthines.
Thirdly, children that disobey their parents,
They that disobey their parentes. and mocke them, as Ham did his father Noe, Gen. 9.22. of whome thus speaketh the holy Ghost, Pro. 30.17. The eye that mocketh his faher, and despiseth the instruction of his mother, let the rauens of the valley picke it out, and the yong eagles eate it. They that make mariages for themselues without their parentes knowledge, liking, and consent contrary to the law of God.
Ex. 22.16.17. So did Esau, Ge. 26.34.35.27.46. They that by dissention, and by their wickednes grieue their parents, as lacobs sonnes did when they solde Ioseph into Aegypt, Gen. 37.33.34.35. and when they guilefully slew the Sechemites, Gen. 34.30. So did Amnon grieue his father Dauid when he defiled his sister Thamar, 2. Sam. 13.21. and Absolom when he slew his brother Amnon, 2. Sam. 13.31. and when he rebelled against his father. 2. Sam. 15. They that smite their parents and therfore ought to be put to death, Exo. 21.15. Deu. 21.18. They that wil not be ruled by their fathers counsell as Salomon biddeth them, Pro. 23.22. but follow their owne fancies. They that entice children from their parents, or without their parents knowledge lead them to wickednes. They that run away from their parents. They that suffer their parents to famish for want and helpe them not though they be able. They that steale any thing from their parents, as Michah did from his mother, Iudg. 17.1.2.
Fourthly,
Wiues that disobey their husbands. wiues that are not obedient to their husbandes as they ought to be, but eyther forsake the guide of their youth, and forget the couenant of their God, Pro. 2.17. and with harlots be hauiour and subtile hearts, are alwaies babling, sometime within, sometimes without, lying in waite at euery corner to entice young
men to wickednes, and impudently kisse them and draw them home to their houses, as it were sheepe to the slaughter, and say their husbands are gone from home, as Salomon declareth at large, Pro. 7.10. etc. or else are continually chiding, Pro. 19.13. that the husband had better dwel in a corner of the house top, the^ in a wide house with such a wife, Pro. 25.24. or else are idle and do nothing, as though they ought not as carefully to looke to the things in the house, as the husba^d to the things abroad. Or els they wilbe wiser then their husbands and ouer-rule them. But if good and religious wiues woulde learn their duties, and how they ought to be haue the^selues let them read, Pr. 31.10. 1. Pe. 3.1. etc.
Lastly,
Seruants that disobey their masters. seruants breake this commandement when they are idle loiterers, and not painefull labourers; that looke for all their wages, but make no conscience to neglect their seruice; that wil work til they sweat when their master is present, but loiter so soone as he hath turned his back til they catch a cold with being idle. They that despise their masters which are ignorant of the misteries of saluation, and thinke it is no matter before God if they loiter when they haue such masters, not regarding that they cause their ignorant masters to speake euill of their God, of their faith, and of their religion. But these seruants may learne what Paul teacheth
them, 1. Tim. 6.1. Others whose masters haue knowledge and beleeue in God, they likewise grudge and mutter, saying, they are as good as their master, they are his brethren, and that God accepteth no persons. But these seruants consider not the Lords appointment, who could haue made the seruant a master, the subiect a king, the sonne to be the father, the yonger to be the elder, if it had pleased him: but seeing the Lord hath disposed of all men for the affairs of this life, let euery man be content with his calling and therein abide with God 1. Cor. 7.24. And let these seruants read Paul, 1. Tim. 6.2. Others neglect their seruice because their masters are too too hard and rigorous without cause, as though a seruant might doe euill for euill. But let these seruants reade, 1. Pet. 2.18. Also those seruants breake this commandement, which serue their masters as Ziba serued Mephibosheth, 2. Sam. 16.1.2.3. and 19.24.25. Other seruants when a man bringeth their master a present, or a bribe to obtaine vnlawfull fauour in an eull matter, if the master refuse it because he will not be corrupted, then they wil receiue something secretly, promising to do their best to corrupt their master. Sometime where the master is a good man and taketh nothing of his tenants but his rentes, the seruant wil goe in his masters name (but without
his masters knowledge) for something and keepe it to himself, as if it were Gehesie, 2. Kin. 5.20.27. Somtime when the master maketh the seruant his pursebearer, and biddeth him giue a shilling to a poore man, the seruant much like Iudas will giue the poore man sixe pence and put the restin his own purse. Somtime the seruant put in trust to sel his masters goods in the shop, in the fayre, in the market, in the marte, will alwaies be purloyning some to himselfe, whereby some masters are shortly consumed, and the wicked seruant by his wicked Mammon inriched. Some seruants make a couenant with theeues, and so rob their masters. Some seruants get great summes of their masters money into their handes, and runne away with it. Some betray their masters sonnes and daughters, to lewd company, or to be maried. Some do many thinges in their masters names, whereof their masters are ignorant. And there is neither siluer nor golde, nor any other thing so rare to he had at this day, as it is to finde a good and faithfull seruant.
How little reuerence youth giueth to age,
Youth disobeyeth age. is a thing more manifest to the eye of the world then that there needes any wordes to be spent about it. It were rather to be wished that they which are in authority would redresse it by punishment laid open euery boy that hauing but a
feather in his hat, or a poinado at his girdle, or a short cloake on his backe, or twelue pence in his purse, will iustle with euery man that giues him not the way, will saucely crow ouer auncient gray-headed fathers, and contemptuously abuse all ages and degrees, whom they stand not in awe of. So that the obedience they giue to any, proceedeth of a seruile feare of punishment, and not of any reuerence to God, or to his commaundements.
Now it remaineth on the contrary part to see how superiours for not performing their dueties doe also breake this commandement.
The dueties of superiours to inferiours. And heerein it will appeare that sometimes they are the cause themselues why their inferiours doe not obey them as they ought.
 First, when chiefe magistrates, whose duety is to maintaine true religion,
The duty of magistrats. and to administer iustice without respect of persons, Leuit. 19.15. Deu. 1.17. that iudgement may run down euen throughout their dominions like water, and righteousnes like a mightie riuer Amos. 5.24. do omit these things, and giue themselues to ease and pleasure; or else destroy religion, and peruert iustice, then through the iust iudgment of God it comes often to passe that their inferiours honour them not. Absolom tooke occasion vpon some wante of execution of iustice to rebell against his father; and
the holy Ghost hath noted it for our instruction, 2. Sam. 15.3. Because Salomon fell to idolatrie in his olde age, the Lorde both raised vp three aduersaries against him, euen Hadad the Edomite, 1. King. 11.14. and Reson the sonne of Eliadah, 1. King. 11.23. and Ieroboam his owne subiect to lift vp his hande against him, 1. King. 11.26. And also tolde him that he would rent the kingdom after his death that his son should be king but ouer one whol tribe of Iudah, and ouer part of Beniamin. 1. King. 11.11.12.13. when Ahab and Iezabell had put downe true religion and erected grosse idolatrie, and slaine the prophets of the Lord, as Elijah complained, the Lord threatned great destruction to Israell by Hazaell, and by Iehu. 1. King. 19.15.16.17. as also because Ahab had murthered Naboth and his sonnes, 1. King. 21.20.21.22.23.24. the accomplishment whereof together with repetition of the causes, we reade, 2. King. 9.7.26. and 2. King. 10. throughout the whole story of the bookes of Kings and Chronicles it is manifest, that want of administration of iustice, and want of maintenance of true religion, was the cause of ciuill tumults and insurrections, and of forren inuasions, as was partly touched before, when I spake of disobedience to the ministers of the worde. Wherefore Dauids song
of mercy and iudgement, Psal. 101. were a worthy glasse for all kinges and princes to looke in continually. And Salomon hath a memorable sentence, Prou. 16.12. It is abomination to kinges to commit wickednes: for the throne is stablished by iustice. Then as kinges woulde haue their kingdomes confirmed to them and their posteritie, and as they woulde haue all their subiectes loyall and faithfull: so let them maintaine Gods true and pure religion, and minister iustice vprightly without any respect of persons. And then will the Lord stablish them and their kingdomes, then will the Lorde protect them and their kingdomes, that no enemie shall be able to doe them violence. For there is no wisedome, neyther vnderstanding, nor counsell against the Lorde, Prouerbes. 21.30. And who is he that can say, that there was euer any man deceiued, that put his trust in the Lorde and kept his commaundementes. But heere is one thing which is not to be passed ouer with silence, that is, the king may not say to the Lord, I haue appointed magistrates, iudges, and officers, and commaunded them to deale iustly in iudgement, and if they doe otherwise, it is their fault and not mine: Neither may the king say to the Lord, I haue commaunded the ministers of the
word to preach truly and diligently, and if they either preach lyes and heresies, or be negligent, it is their fault not mine, I say a king may not thus answere the Lord, nor think his duetie so discharged. But if Cambises a heathen prince put Sisamnes a corrupt and wicked iudge to death, because he ministred not iudgement vprightly, and caused his skin to be fleade of him, and thereof a seate to be made for the next iudge to sit vpon, and placed Otanes his son iudge in his fathers roome, to sit continually vpon his fathers skin when he sat in iudgement, thereby admonishing him to minister true and vpright iudgement, as Herodotus writeth Lib. 5. how much more ought Christian kings seuerely to punish corrupt iudges, who by peruerting iustice bring danger of Gods wrath to the King and to the whole kingdome. A wise King sayth Salomon 20.26. scattereth the wicked, and causeth the wheele to turne ouer them. Moses that meeke man (Num. 12.3.) was angry with the captaines of the host for sauing the women of Midian aliue, whom they ought to haue slaine, and caused them afterward to put these women todeath Num. 31.14. Dauid confessing that the sonnes of Zeruiah were too hard for him 2. Sam. 3.39. so that he was not able, as being newly established
in his kingdome, to punish them according to their deserts, afterward as occasion serued, put Ioab out of his office and made Amaza captaine of the host in his roome 2. Sam. 19.13. and 20.4. That good king Hezekiah perceiuing that Shebnah the steward of his house (Esai. 22.15.) was a wicked man, and a secret fauourer of al the wicked in his kingdome, founde opportunitie to displace him, and brought him dowen from being chiefe steward, and made him but one of his scribes, and placed Eliakim stewarden in his rome 2. kings. 18.18. Zelous Nehemiah sent twise fro^ Sushan to Ierusalem with great authority, both times reproued the rulers of the people, first because they oppressed the people cruelly Nehem. 5.7. secondly because they suffered the people to breake the Lords sabbath Nehem. 13.17. The good young King Ioash did not only restore religion after the death of that wicked Athalia 2. Chro. 23.18. but also reproued Iehoiada the hie priest and the rest of the priestes for negligence in their office, and straitely commaunded that the things belonging to Gods worship should be better regarded 2. kings. 12.6.7. etc. And for this cause good kings in Ierusalem, haue not only restored true religion in the beginnings of their reigne, but
also proceeded afterward to redresse and make further reformation, as occasion required. So did Asa: 2. Chro. 15, 8. Iehosaphat 2. Chro 19. Ioash 2. Chro. 24.4. and Iosiah 2 Chro. 34.
And besides these examples there is a generall doctrine Leuit 2.4.5. that if the people of the land (that is, the magistrates especially) winke at sinne, will not see it, and so suffer it to goe vnpunished, then the Lorde will set his angry countenance not only against the sinner, but also against the people of the land. A notable spectacle of this doctrine is Ioshu: 22.18. When the Rubenites, Gadites, and halfe of the tribe of Manasses had built an alter on the south side of Iordan for a memoriall to their posteritie, that it might be knowen they were Israelites. But when the Israelites inhabiting within the land of Canaan heard that their brethren had made an alter, they supposing it had bene for Idolatrie, and therefore were afraide of Gods iudgements, and sent messengers ouer Iourdan to their brethren saying, Seeing ye rebel to day against the Lord, euen to morrow he wilbewrath with all the congregation of Israel, acknowledging that if they should suffer sinne vnpunished, the Lords wrath would burst out against them all, as the place euidently sheweth.
Yea if sinne be secretly committed, and kept close from the knowledge of the magistrate, yet the Lord wilbe angry with the whole land, as it appeareth in the example of Achan Iosh. 7. For though he only sinned secretly, yet the army of Israel was put to flight for his offence, and 36. men of Israel were slaine. The same is manifest Deut. 21 in that the magistrates must in such sort protest their innocencie, and so purge the citie from blood guiltines, when a man is found slaine in the field, and the murderer is not knowen. When Isaac soiourning in Gerar saide of Rebecca that she was his sister, Abimelech a heathen king afterward percieuing that she was his wife, called Isaac vnto him, and reprouing him for it, said, one of the people had almost lien by thy wife, so shouldest thou haue brought sin vpon vs Gen. 26.10. he doth not say, so shouldest thou haue brought sinne vpon him that had lien with thy wife only, but he saith, vpon vs, shewing that if sinne be committed, the wrath of the Lord wilbe against the whole land, and specially against them, to whom God hath giuen authoritie to punish it. Also vpon like occasion Abimelech had said before to Abraham Gen. 20.9, what haue I offended thee that thou hast brought on me and on my kingdom this greate sinne?

Secondly,
The dne ties of children. because the ministers of the word sometimes doe not their dueties, therfore it comes to passe that both the seruice of God is abhorred, 1. Sam. 2.17. and the ministers themselues are despised Malach. 2.8.9. Because ye are gone out of the way etc. therefore haue I also made you to be despised and vile etc. For as Paul setteth himselfe for a patterne for all faithfull pastors to follow Act. 20.18. etc. and giueth Timothie a reuerent and a dreadefull charge. 1. Tim. 5.21. and 2. Tim. 4.1.2. so there are feareful iudgements denounced against euil pastors in many places of the scripture, as Zach. 11.17. O Idle shepard that leaueth the flock the sword shalbe vpon his arme, and vpon his right eye. His arme shalbe cleane dried vp, and his right eye shalbe vtterly darkned.
 Thirdly, because husbands sometyme performe not their duties,
Duties of husbands. as they are taught Ephes. 5.25.28. Colos. 19. and. 1. Pet. 3.17. but when they cannot lawfully obtaine a bill of diuorcement, they make them selues a bill of wicked libertie, and giue themselues to commit adulterie and fornication with other women, therefore it comes to passe that their wiues are not obedient to them. 
 Fourthly,
Dueties of parents. because parents bring not vp
their children in the nurture and feare of the Lord, as Paul biddeth Ephes. 6.4. but either cocker them, and feare to displease them, as Hely did 1. Sam. 2.23.24. and Dauid did 1. king. 1.6. or pricke them vp in pride, and teach them to mocke and abuse others, and sometime the father will teach his sonne to miscall his mother, and fomtime the mother will teach her daughter to miscall her father, and thus the parents sport themselues with their children, and make no conscience to sweare and cursse in the presence of their children: therefore doeth it often come to passe by Gods iust iudgment that their children rebel against them, as Absolom and Adoniah did against Dauid, or grieue them, and bring them to such calamitie, as Hophnia and Phineas brought their ould father Heli; or wound their heartes with sorrow when they see them giuen to whordo^, stealing, to robbing, to spe^ding all they can rape or rend, to murder; to treason, to poperie, to arehisme, and so finally to come to the gallows; and when first through their parents wicked education, and secondly, through such a lewd life they come to ignominious deathes, it is most of al other to be feared, lest they depart hence to the diuell in hel. Salomon giueth parents good counsell Prou. 22.15. and 29.15.
But when foolish pitie doeth so possesse the parentes, that they cannot find in their hearts to correct their children whiles they are young, they must afterward, will they, nil they endure the griefe of it in the ende. Parents watch night and day with labour and paines taking, and often pinche themselues to prouide for their children earthly wealth but how to get them inheritance in the king do me of heauen, comes not once into their minde, though God specially charge them to instruct their children in the wayes of his lawes Deut. 6.7. And that is a token what reckoning parents make of God or of heauen. Thereforenoe maruaile though their children disobey them.
 Fiftly, maisters teach their seruants fraude, guile, robberie, impietie, and all wickednes, not only by their euil example but euen by their co^mandement, and therefore haue no cause to looke for obedience or fidelitie ar^ their hands
 Quest. What is the punishment for him that breaketh this commaundement?
Ans. It is death, as you may reade Exod. 21.15.17. Leuit. 20.9. Deut 21.18. etc,
Thou shalt not kil.
 Quest. What is the summe of this commaundement? or what is to be considered in
it?
Ans. This commaundement and the rest following are all negatiues, and the Lord beginning here with the greatest trepsasse that one man can possibly commit against another, euen murder, proceedeth by degrees dowenward from a greate offence to a lesser till he come to the least desire that is in mans heart to couet any thing that belongs to our neighbour, and forbiddeth them all. In this commaundement we wil first consider how many kinds of murder there be, secondly how many wayes it is committed.
 Quest. How many kindes of murder doe you say there are?
Quest. According as man consisteth of two parts, the soule and the bodie: so there is one maner of killing the soule, and another of the bodie.
 Quest. How is the soule killed?
Ans. As the bodie may be famished to death for want of foode or be destroyed with poison so there is a famishme^t of the soule when it is depriued of the spirituall foode of the word of God, and the Lord chargeth him as guiltie of blood that thus killeth any man Eze. 33.7.8. O sonne of man I haue made thee a watchman vnto the house of Israell: when I shall say vnto the wicked, O
wicked man, thou shalt die the death, if thou doest not speake, and admonish the wicked of his way, that wicked man shall die for his iniquitie, but his blood will I require at thy hande. Also they that teach and preach heresie or false and pernitious doctrine, which I suppose is compared to wormewood, Apo. 8.11. they poyson and destroymens soules, as that holy father the Antechrist of Rome doth, and as Mahomet hath done. For these two are pernitious enemies of mans saluation throughout the worlde almost, the Pope in Europe, and Mahomet in Asia and Africa.
 Quest. What say you then of the killing of the bodis?
Ans. The diuers kindes of murdering the bodie are so commonly knowen by lamentable experience, that I shall not neede to stand vpon it. But in one worde or two thus much. If the murderer be not knowen, but a mans life is taken away and no man can tell who shed that bloode, then all the Citie, towne, vilage, or parish where such murder is secretly committed is guiltie of that mans bloode that is slaine, but specially the magistrates and chiefe gouernours of that place, because they kept not better watch and warde for mens safetie, but through some negligence of theirs let a
mans blood be shed, and the murderer to escape and not be knowen. For as we haue a most commendable order for the safetie of mens goods, that if the Citie, towne, village, or parish next to the place where any man is robbed, doe not vpon the complaint of the man that is robbed, prosecute the theeues and robbers to apprehende them, then that Citie, towne, village, or parish seemeth to be priuie to the robberie, and for their negligence are to restore to the man robbed all that he lost: so the Lorde hath made a most holie and necessarie lawe, Deutro. 21. that when any man is murdered and the murderer vnknowen, then the elders or gouernours of that place shoulde in a solemne manner and with such ceremonies as the Lord there prescribeth, first protest that they were not priuie to that murder, vers. 7. and secondly by prayer to intreate the Lorde not to lay that murder to their charge, verse. 8. Of which lawe though the ceremonies be abolished, yet the equitie remaineth, that magistrates should haue speciall care for to preserue mens liues, and knowe that if through their negligence murder be committed, or after it is committed, the murderer winked at and suffered to escape, they
cannot be innocent before GOD. For if that order for safetie of mens goods be commendable and necessarie, a thousande soulde more holy and more necessarie is this law of God, which is for safetie of mens liues.
But to come to other kindes of murders where the murderer is knowen, sometimes a man is his owne murderer and killeth himselfe, as Saul and his harnest-bearer fell vpon their owne swordes and died, 1. Sam. 31.4. Achitophell hanged himselfe, 2. Sam. 17.23. Zimri set his owne pallace on fire and burnt himselfe, 1. King. 16.18. Iudas the traitour hanged himselfe, Math. 27.5. Act. 1.18. The Donatistes in Africa killed themselues when they should haue beene apprehended, and haue suffered iust punishment for their heresies; and some of them, whom Philastrius calleth circuitores, caused those they met in the way to kill them, and said they were desirous of martyrdome. For they termed themselues martyrs when they murdered themselues. The cause which moueth any man to kill himselfe is commonly eyther desperation, or else impatiencie. For some men thinking that nothing goes well with them except they may obtaine that they desire, whatsoeuer it be when they cannot haue it,
and begin to despaire to obtaine it, then they kill themselues. Others brought into some distresse that they must of necessitie suffer some punishment or some shame or both or other miserie and grief, through impatience kil themselues. As for those that haue killed themselues in hope of some good which by that meanes they would obtaine, they haue beene brought into a fooles paradise.
 Quest. What say you of them that kill others?
Ans. I say that sometimes one man killeth another wittingly and willingly, and sometimes against his will or of ignorance. And God pardoneth this latter, but condemneth the former, Exod. 21.12.13: Num. 35.10. etc. Wherefore there is often greate a doe to determine whether it be murther or manslaughter, wilfull murder or chance-medley. Voluntarie and wilfull murder according to the circumstances is somtime more heinous, then at another time, especially in respect of time, place, and persons; though all wilfull murder be most execrable. As for example, to kill a man when he is worshipping GOD, or executing iustice in the Church, in the presence of the king, or where he cannot defend himselfe; these thinges aggrauate the offence. But to kil
a magistrat as Iesuites doe, to kill natural parentes as the sonnes of Senacherib did, 2. King. 19.37. to kill a naturall brotheras Kain did, Gen. 4. and Abimelech, Iudg. 9. and Iehoram 2. Chro. 21. to kil infantes as did Pharaoh, Exod. 1. and Herode, Math. 2. to murder confederates as did Simeon and Leui, Gen. 34. these things are most execrable.
Quest. What say you of Moses that slew the Aegyptian, Exo. 2.12. of Phinchas for killing Zimri and Cozbi Num. 25.8. of Samson who slew many, Iudg. 14.19. and 15.15. and 16.30. of Samuel that hewed Agag in peeces, 1. Sam. 15.33. and of Eliah?
Ans. These extrordinarie workes, which the Lord hath wrought by his owne most holy seruants for the great benefit of his Church and which the holy Ghost hath so highly commended, I take it not to be the duety of any of the Lordes elect to call into question. These thinges are written to teach vs that the Lord both can and will prouide for the good of his Church, and manifest his power and glorie when and by whom it pleaseth him. But they are not written for vs to imitate, as you may perceiue by that one answere of Christ to his disciples when they woulde haue imitated Elias, Luke. 9.55. Yee knowe not of what spirit ye are. For in
all our doings we must walke after the commandements of God but not after euery example. And to be too curious in questioning of these thinges, were to examine the Lord by what authority he did these things by these his seruants.
 Quest. How many waies is murder committed?
Ans. First, when we hate our brother in our heart, Math. 5.22. Whosoeuer is angrie with his brother vnaduisedly, shalbe culpable of iudgement. And 1. Iohn. 3.15. whosoeuer hateth his brother, is a manslaier.
 Secondlie, when we shewe foorth our murdering mindes eyther by our frowning countenance as Kain did, and was reproued of the Lorde, Gen. 4.6. or by malitious, virulent, and spitefull wordes, Math. 5.22. Whosoeuer saith vnto his brother, Raca, shalbe worthy to be punished by the counsell: And whosoeuer shall say, Foole, shalbe worthy to be punished with hell fire.
 Thirdly, by committing the deede, and that eyther when we kill with our owne handes as Kain slew Abell, Gen. 4. and as Ioab slewe Abner. 2. Sam. 3.27. or when we procure others to doe it, as Dauid procured the death of Vriah. For though the Ammonites slewe him, 2. Sam. 11.17. yet Nathan tolde Dauid in plaine wordes that
he had killed Vriah, 2. Sam. 12.9. or when we consent to others that doe it, as when Abimelech slewe the sonnes of Ierubbal, Iud. 9.5. the Shechemites for consenting are accused of that murder, Iudg. 9.18. Abisai for consenting to the death of Abner, whome Ioah slewe is saide to haue killed him. 2. Samuel. 3.30.
 Quest. What is there further to be considered in this commaundement?
Ans. We must vnderstand that al forerunners of murder as preparations to it, are forbidden, as; First, anger, choler, hastines, which corruptions grow in our nature, and except by the grace of God we bridle them, they make men like brute beastes, so that vpon a sudden they will yeeld to their wicked and sinful humors, and strike whosoeuer commeth next to hand, and with whatsoeuer they haue in their hande, be it knife or other thing. Wherefore Paul admonisheth vs, Rom. 12.19. to giue place vnto wrath. And Salomon saith, Prou. 22.24.25. Make no friendshippe with an angrie man, neyther go with the furious man, least thou learne his waies, and receiue destruction to thy soule.
Secondly, enuie, strife, contention, taunting, mocking, quarrelling, etc. whereof commonly commeth hurt, which is to be recompensed
by the magistrate with the like, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, etc, Exod. 21.24. Leuit. 24.19. And very often vpon such brauling at the first followeth murder at the last. Wherfore Salomon giueth good counsell, Prou. 20.3. It is a mans honour to cease from strife: but euerie foole wilbe medling. And in another place, Cast out the scorner, and strife shall goe out: so contention and reproch shall cease, Prou. 22.10. For where enuying and strife is, there is sedition and all manner of euill workes, Iam. 3.16.
 Thirdly, quaffing and drinking till men be drunken and madde as wilde beastes, and care not neither can tell what they doe. For wine is a mocker, and strong drinke is raging. Prou. 20.1.
 Quest. What more doe you obserue in this commaundement?
Ans. That as all murder of what sort soeuer it be, and all the waies of murdering; with all such things as are preparatiues thereunto, or furtherers of it are forbidden: so on the contrary part are commaunded all thinges which may any way tend to the preseruation of mans life, as to feede the hungry, to cloath the naked, to lodge the barbourles, to defend them that are in danger, to helpe them that be in any kinde of destresse.

 Quest. Who be they that breake this commaundement?
Ans. First, they that kil themselues as som doe, because they cannot haue that thing they desire, and thinke it better not to liue, then to liue without that they would haue, or because they are impatient and will rather die then suffer that which troubleth them.
 Secondly, they that kill others any of those wayes which I named before, either with their owne hands, or else by wicked and cruel dealing oppresse others, and so as it were kil them by a languishing kind of death, For of such oppressors Esay speaking Chap. 1.15. saith, your hands are full of bloode, and Vers. 21. he saith that Ierusalem in former times had bene a faithfull citie, full of iustice and iudgement, but now they are murderers. Of like crueltie the prophet Micah complaineth Chap. 3.3. They also breake this commandement, which trouble, vex, and molest others that they dye for griefe and sorrow. For a sorrowfull minde drieth the bones Pro. 17.22. They that poison others secretly, which is a vsual practise among papists, Spaniards, and heathens. They that procure other to kil men, as Iezabel prooured the magistrates of the citie to put Naboth and his children to death. 1. king. 21.13. They that falsely accuse
others to cause them to be put to death. They that liue in continuall malice and hatred, wishing the death of others. They that suffer others to perish any way, when they might saue their liues, but doe not. They that for pleasure set men to fight before them as Abner and Ioab did 2. Sam. 2.14. as the heathen in former times were wont to doe, and as fence-maisters professing themselues to be Christians, now and then doe. They that appoint men to fight with madd or wild beastes. They that keepe either ruffianly seruants or any beast that vseth to kill men. They that intice men to commit things worthie of death, and then reioyce at their destruction, hopeing to get their Lands or goods. They that purpose to kill, though they cannot effect it, as Haman did. They that kil men in vnlawfull warres by Sea or by land.
 Quest. What other thing doe you obserue in this commaundement?
I willset downe two or three reasons to diswade men from murder.
 First, the Lord the greate king of all the world forbiddeth it in this commaundement, and therefore al men ought to consider diligently of all their wayes, for they must giue an account to God of all their actions.
 Secondly, because man is the image of
God, therefore men ought to be afraide of shedding mans blood, as the Lord himselfe doth admonish vs by this same reason Gen. 9.6.
 Thirdly, we haue all one father, and are brethren, and our neighboure is of our flesh as the prophet Esaias speaketh, Chap. 58.7. For which cause we ought to absteine from murdering of our brethren, as from hurting our owne flesh.
 Fourthly, we pollute the Land, euen the whole citie, or towne, or parish or place where we shed blood, and so make a greate multitude gulitie, and subiect to Gods fearefull plagues, as was shewed before out of Deut. 21. for blood defileth the Land: and the Land cannot be clensed of the blood that is shed therin, but by the blood of him that shed it Numbers 35.33.
 Fiftly, he that killeth a man, is the cause also of his owne death, for the magistrate is commaunded of God to put him to death that committeth murder, wherefore in respect of his owne life, if he regard not his brothers life a man ought to auoide murder.
 Sixtly, by reason of murder committed, often it comes to passe that a whole famimilie wife and children are vndone; and constrained to begge, or be in greate miserie, yea
and sometime two families. Wherefore euen for their sakes men ought to refraine from killing, and from all meanes that may prouoke thereunto. And if there be any man whome these reasons cannot moue, I suppose there can be noe reason why he should liue among men.
 Quest. What is the punishment, which is appointed for them that breake this commaundement?
Ans. It is death, as the Lord hath often saide, as Gen. 9.6. Exod. 21.12. Deut. 19.11. And in Num. 25.31. the Lord forbiddeth the magistrate to pardon wilfull murder, in these words; ye shal take no recompence for the life of the murderer, which is worthy to die: but he shalbe put to death.
Thou shalt not commit adulterie. 
 Quest. What is the summe of this commaundement?
Ans. This commaunde ment in the degree of the sinne it forbiddeth is next to the former, as it standes in place, and as adultery is next in degree to murther, as was obserued in the beginning of the sixt comandement, this co^mmandeme^t forbiddeth adultery, whor, dom fornication, incest, and such vncleannes, although here is mention made but of adulterie only, which is the capitall offence
against this precept.
 Quest. What order is to be kept, or will you follow in speaking of it?
Ans. Because this commaundement is broken both in mariage, and of them that be vnmaried, I wil speake of these two seuerally.
Quest How doe men in mariage breake; this commaundement? 
Ans. First in making of the mariage, and secondly after it is made. And first in making of mariages they offend against this law, who being the sonnes of God, match themselues with the daughters of men, that is, with them which are of an other religion. Secondly they that marrie with religious persons but otherwise then Gods word alloweth.
 Quest. I pray you shew me these two more largely, and first how mariages with them of an other religion are vulawful.
Vnequal mariages.
A. The Lord hath in plaine wordes forbidden his seruants and sonnes to make any mariage with infidels Exod. 34.12.16. Deut. 7.4. And the disobedience to this commaundement is reckonned to be one of the causes of the drowning of the world Gen. 6.2. And often in the scripture doeth the holie Ghost note this sinne, as Gen. 36.34. and. 37.1. of Esau for marying against this law, Also of Salomon
1. king. 11. likewise Ezr. 10. Nehem 9.2. and 13, 3.23. Malach 2.11. But Abrahams care for the mariage of his sonne Isaak according to the will of God, is commaunded Gen. 24.
Quest. What say you if a protestant match with a papist?
Ans. Considering that papists haue forsaken the couenant of God, are egregious idolaters, and in very deede deny Christ, in that they wilbe saued by their workes, there is neither scripture nor reason to iustifie a protestants mariage with a papist. And they that so match themselues or their children, prouoke the Lords wrath greately. The mariage of the faithful is the meanes to increase the number of Gods elect, and is as it were the seminarie or seede plot of the Church. And for this cause the Church ought to be very circumspect that none of the faithfull marrie either with papist, Atheist, or Infidel, least in steede of a holy seede there spring vp in the Church a prophane seede, in steede of lawful heires cursed bastards. For commonly the children that come of such a mixture of holy and prophaine seede, proue to be monstrous wicked, as we reade in Gen. 6. that the posteritie which came of the mariages of the sonnes of God with the daughters
of men, were giants, or tirants, wicked Apostates from God. As Anah let beastes of diuers kinds engender Gen. 36.24. contrary to the law Leuit. 19.19. whereof come fruteles mules and machoes: so the posteritie that commeth of vnequall mariages, are for the most part barren and voide of all godlines. And if such posteritie be fruitful,
Plini. lib. 8. Chap. 16. etc. it is commonly in excessiue wickednes, as I noted out of Gen. 6. And as the beast Thoes ing endered of a wolfe and of Hyaena Herodot. Lib. 4. as the Leopard ingendred of the Lion and the panther, and as others so ingendred of diuers kindes are of much fiercer and more cruel nature, then the senerall kinds of beastes are; so the posteritie of such vnequal matches are like to be worse then either papist or common Atheist, or infidel, as it may be seene vpon the borders of heathens when sometimes Christians and heathens marrie together. The like may be saide of the posteritie of Iewes and Christians, for some times there comes of them a third cast, as they co^monly call them, which is worse then either of the parents. And though there be a greate difference betwene papists and Iewes and Infidels, and a greate difference among papists themselues: yet it is in this, that some are not so bad as others,
and if a protestant would be curious in making choise of a papist, it is but as if out of many poisons he would chuse the weakest. The reason which Malachi vseth Chap. 2.15. to reproue the Iewes both for mariages with infidels, and for their often diuorcements, is this, because (the Lord) sought a godly seede: and the same reason serueth fitly for this purpose. For if the Iewes marying among themselues, but sining in this, that they put away their first wife and tooke another, could not haue a promise of a godly seede or posteritie: how can they that marie with papists hope that their posteririe shalbe godly. What man desirous of pure good wheate, will in seed-time wittingly mingle wheat and tares together, or good wheate and bad together, and therewith sowe his fielde and say he hopes all will proue verie good wheate in haruest? But as no simple man hath so little descretion, as thus to sowe his field: so I wish that wise Christians would not be so simple as to make a mariage betwene a protestant and a papist and say, they hope the children wilbe good christians.
 Quest. Secondly, then I pray you shew me whether among protestants or any true faithful people there be any exception for mariages one with a nother? for so you saide before.

Ans. There are diuers exceptions to be taken against certaine persons, why they may not be ioyned together in mariage, though they be both of them true beleeuers, and of the same religion: but at this present I will onely name two sortes of beleeuers, which may not by the word of God be coupled together in mariage. First those which are so neer of consanguinitie or affinitie, that the Lorde hath forbid them to marie together. Leuit. 18. Secondly, those which for some imperfections or wantes in themselues cannot performe mariage dueties.
 Quest. I pray you declare these two pointes, more largely, and more plainly, for I thinke they are at this day very necessary to be knowen.
Ans.What degrees of consangui nitie or affinitie may not marie. Of the former the Lorde speaketh thus generally, Leuit. 18.6. None shall come neere to any of the kinred of his flesh to vncouer her shame: I am the Lord. The particulars are afterward declared in the same chapter to shew how far this general rule is to be exte^ded. And notwithstanding that euery man may read the text, yet I wil do mine endeuor to lay open the particulars very briefly in these three rules.
First, a man may not mary his mother, his grandmother, or great grandmother, nor his daughter, nor his neece, nor his neeces daughter, eyther by consanguinitie or affinitie.

 Secondly, a man may not marrie his aunt, or his great aunt eyther by consanguinitie or by affinitie; because they are as it were his mothers.
 Thirdly, a man may not marrie his sister by consanguinitie or affinitie.
These three short and plaine rules containe in a manner the summe of all that eighteenth chapter of Leuiticus to vers. 18. where bigamie is sorbidden. Notwithstanding that these three rules may more easily be conceiued of the simple, these two lessons must also be learned. First, that affinitie reacheth not so farre as consanguinitie, but stayeth onely in the husband and in the wife, and goeth no further vnto the consanguinitie of eyther of them. As for example, Dauid the sonne of Ishai, marieth Michal the daughter of Saul. Now all that are of consanguinitie to Dauid, are of affinitie to Michal: and all that are of consanguinitie to Michal, are of affinitie to Dauid, in the same degree of affinitie to Dauid, as they are of consanguinitie to Michal. Dauids father, mother, brother, sister, vncle, aunt, cosen by consanguinitie; is Michals father, mother, brother, sister, vncle, aunt, cosen by affinitie. But this affinitie resteth onely in Michal, and recheth not to any of her consanguinitie. So there
is no affinitie at al betweene the kinred of Dauid and Michal. Ishai and Saul are not made of any affinitie though their children be maried together. There is no affinitie betweene Eliab Dauids brother, and Merab Michals sister: there is no affinitie at all betweene Ionathan Michals brother, and Zeruiah Dauids sister. The reason is, because propagation is by generation, as consanguinitie is spread farre by generation; affinitie is not made by generation, but by coniunction, as the word sheweth, affinis, qui ad alterius finem accedit, he is of affinitie, who commeth to the borders of an other kinred.
Secondly, because sundrie inconueniences may fall out both in consanguinitie and in affinitie, whereby that which is not expresly forbidden in the word of God, may sundrie waiesbe vnco^uenient, as in the mariage of cosin germans in consanguinitie; and if the father marie the daughter, and the sonne the mother, whereby affinitie is made: and because we ought not alwaies to stand precisely vpon that which is lawfull, but especially to respect what also is expedient, as the Apostle admonisheth vs, 1. Cor. 10.23. etc. Therfore it behoueth magistrates to haue due regard of these matters, to determine what is conuenient, and all godly Christians ought
most duetifully to obey whatsoeuer the magistrate decreeth in these cases for edification and for honestie, and for auoyding of inconueniences. For which cause also I desire the table of degrees of mariage, which is set forth by authoritie, may heere be inserted.
 Quest. Who are those, which for want of habilitie to performe the dueties of mariages, may not marie?
Ans. There are specially three sortes of beleeuers,
Persons vnapt for mariage. which are not fit for mariage. First children, who for want of ripe age are not mariagable. Secondly, Eunuches, who cannot giue that due beneuolence, which wedlok requireth. Of these Christ noteth three sortes. First those that are so borne, and haue naturall weakenes and imperfection that they cannot performe mariage dueties. Secondly those that are made chast by men, that is, gelded men, who against their willes are by violence disabled to marie, as it hath beene and is too too common a practise in Asia and Africa to geld men, that they may keepe the wiues and concubines of kings and of great men. Herodotus. lib. 8. writeth that one Panionius made a trade of these Eunuches, and solde them for great summes of money. But himselfe afterward receiued
a iustreward, and was made an Eunuch by Hermotimus, whom before he had offered that iniurie vnto. Volataranus writeth that Cocceius Nerua forbad this wicked practise at Rome. Thirdly, those which make themselues chast for the kingdome of heauen, not as Origen did, of whom Eusebius Lib. 6. cap. 8. writeth, but as Paul did, 1. Cor. 9.27. that is, by fasting, praying, watching, and taking great paines in their calling; beate downe their bodies, and bring it into subiection, and so obtaine of God the gift of continencie, that they may more freely and continually serue God, and not be hindred so much with incumbrances of worldly affaires, as maried persons are. The thirde sorte of them that are vnfitte for mariage, are such as haue some foule contagious, infectious, and vncurable disease, wherby the other party should be infected and depriued of mariage dueties, or else their children, if it were possible for them to haue any, shoulde be most miserable lazers full of all sores and diseases.
 Quest. Hitherto you haue shewed howe this commaundement is transgressed in mariage making, you said also there was some thinges to be obserued in mariage after it was made. What be those thinges?

Ans.Matrimonie ought to be chast and holy. I will note onely two thinges. First, that the husband and the wife be faithfull and true each to other, and remember the couenant of God (as Malachi, Chap. 2.14. admonisheth the husband, and Salomon, Prou. 2.17. admonisheth the wife if you list to reade the places) and not to commit adultery with other, which is the great sinne forbidden in this commandement. The second thing I note in mariageis that the husband and the wife liue chastly, and soberly and honestly in that holy state of mariage; not wantonly, not lasciuiously, not worse then brute beastes. For which cause the Lorde that is holie, biddeth all his people to be holy, Leuit. 19.2. and hath giuen maried persons a special precept, Leuit. 18.19. wherin the Lord respecteth both the chast behauiour of maried persons, and also the welfare of their posteritie, as not only diuines, Pellicanus vpon the forenamed place, and Ierome, Oecolampadius Caluin, and Lauaterus vpon Eze. 18.6. but also a very learned phisician Fernelius Pathologiae. Lib. 6. cap. 9. affirmeth.
 Quest. Now that you haue spoken of lawful contractes, and of holy wedlocke, declare also the faultes committed out of mariage against this commaundement.
Ans. Many waies do vnmaried persons also breake this commaundement, as by fornication
and whoredome, when a single man defileth a maid consenting to his lust contrary to the lawe. Exod. 22.16. or lieth with a woman betrothed to an husband, Deut. 22.23.24. etc. And if the priestes daughter play the whore, she must be burnt, Leuit. 21.19. Also stewes and baudery are forbidden, Leui. 19.29. Deut. 23.17. howsoeuer the Pope dispenseth with them. Also incest is forbidden whereof there are diuers examples, Gen. 35.22. and 38.18. and 2. Sa. 13. and 1. Cor. 5.
Also Sodomy and buggery, and all vnnaturall and monstrous lust, Leuit. 18.22.23. Finally the vow of chastity in them that haue not the gift, is the mother of all filthines, and was first set on foote by Montanus and other knowen heretikes, and afterward defended by beastly papistes.
 Quest. What is there more to be obserued in this commaundement?
Ans. As all these things are forbidden, so are all the meanes vnlawfull, whereby these thinges are procured, or maintained, which are many, and first of all our senses may inflame the lustes of the heart, for by them lust enters into the heart, or rather is there kindled. For as gun-powder is all in aflame so soone as fire toucheth it; so the corruptions of the hearte are inflamed when the obiect of sinne entereth
in at our senses.
 First,
Of the sense of feeling. because the sense of feeling or touching should not haue too much libertie to roaue euery where, there is a prouiso made in a certaine case that a woman shall haue her hand cut off, Deut. 25.11.12.
 Secondly, we may not suffer our eies to wander any way wantonly to looke vpon the beauty of a woman,
Of the eyes. for Christ saith, Math. 5.28. that such wanton lookes are adulteries. And the Apostles Iohn and Peter condemne the lust of the eyes. 1. Iohn. 2.16. and 2. Pet. 2.14. It is noted, Gen. 39.7. that Potiphars wife by casting her wanton eies vpon Ioseph, grewe vnto lust, and desired him to lie with her. Dauid looking from the top of his house at the first vpon a sudden, not thinking any such thing, after feeding the lust of his eye with more looking vpon Bathsheba the wife of Vrias, fell to further lust, and committed foule adulterie with her. But at an other time hee saide, Psalm. 119.37. Turne away my eyes from regarding vanitie. And all men that feare GOD, and so feare their owne weakenes will pray with Dauid, and doe as Iob did, Iob. 31.1. I made a couenant with mine eies: why then shoulde I thinke on a maide?
Thirdly, our cares ought to be shut from
hearing filthie and vnchast speaches,
Of hering lest thereby our heartes should be kindled with lust. For as the wicked stop their eares least they should heare the word of God Psal. 58.4.5. Act. 7.57. or the piteous cry of the poore Pro. 21.13. so they that feare God truely, will stop their ears against al euil words and deedes as Esaiah saith Chap. 33.15. He that walketh in iustice, that stoppeth his ears from hearing of blood, that shutteth his eyes from seeing of euill, he shal dwell on hie. For the holy spirit of God, dwelling in the elect, is grieued with hearing of euill words Ephes. 4.30. And that is the cause why the godly cannot abide to heare euil words.
 Fourthly, our tast must not be satisfied with euery pleasant meate and drinke; for the co^mon prouerbe is, sine Cerere and Baccho friget Venus, Lust is cooled when it wants daintie meates and strong drinke. But Salomon describeth the fruites of eating and specially of drinking wine Prou. 23.27. etc. to the ende of the Chapter, and Vers. 29. saith thus; To whome is we? to whome is sorrow? etc. and Vers. 33. Thine eyes shall looke vpon strange women. Lot that liued honestly before, lay with his owne daughters when he was drunken Gen. 19.32. Dauid made Vriah drunken to prouoke him to lust 2, Sam.
11.13.
Besides these things which moue our senses and from thence enter into our heartes there are many other things which are prouocations to vncleannes.
First strange apparel, that is, both newfangled fashions of apparel, and also such as is not meet for our sexe, as when a man weareth womans or a woman mans aparrel, which the Lord forbiddeth and detesteth as abominable De. 22.5. The woman shall not weare that which perteineth to the man, neither shall a man put on womans raimeut; for all that doe so, are abomination to the Lord thy God. When euery one weareth his owne apparell, that is, the apparel of their sex, then both men and women are newfangle and desirous of strange fashions. And England hath the fashions almost of al other nations rounde about, and yet they are not content with any, but daily affect new guises, and when none can be found, then they renewe the ould, and that of late is become a fine fashion. But they must be content to he are what the Lord saith to the Iewes Zephan. 1.8. And it shalbe in the day of the Lords sacrifice, that I wil visit the princes, and the kings children, and all such as are clothed with strange apparrell. And apply this to their new fashions and see how
they will agree together. It is to be feared, that except men and women breake off their sinnes by repentance, that these their new fashioned deuises neuer fitte their humors so well, but the iudgements of GOD for these and such like sinnes, will sit so close to their backes, that they cannot put it off when they would. But women at al times and in all ages haue surpassed men, as also at this day they doe, both for strangenes of the fashion, and costlynes of the garment it selfe. And that women may see themselues euidently, and truely, I will shew them a clearer and a truer glasse to looke in, then there is any in all the Exchange. This true and cleare glasse is with the prophet Esai Chap. 3. Vers. 16. and the rest following, Because the daughters of Zion are hautie, and walke with stretched out neckes, and with wandring eyes walking and minsing as they goe, and making a tincleing with their feete, therefore shall the Lord make the heades of the daughters of Zion bald etc. I wish al women to read the rest of the Chapter. And if they be loath to look in this glasse, for feare they shoulde see their deformities, yet they had better now se their faults while there is time to wash them away with teares of true repentance, then hereafter to feele the punishment, when
it wilbe too late to repent. For will they, nil they, one day they must looke in this glasse when it shalbe set in their consciences, from whence they can neither remoue it, nor turne their eyes from beholding it. For the Lord wil shortly bring al flesh to iudgement, when none can be hidden from him that sitteth vpon the throne. Wherefore I beseech all women, and specially those that make greater profession of religion, that they would tremble to dishonour God, to offend his little ones, to wound their owne soules, and cause the blessed word of God to be euill spoken of through their apparel, and that they would heare and follow the holy counsell of Paul, 1. Tim. 2.9. likewise, I will, that women adorne themselues in comely apparel, with shamefastnes and modestie, not with broythred haire of gould, or pearles, or costly apparel, but (as becommeth women that professe the feare of God) with good workes: and the counsel of Peter 1. Pet. 3.3. whose appareling let it not be outward, as with broidred haire, and gould put about etc. Man in the beginning was created good, holy pure, cleane, without deformitie, but afterward by his owne sinne he became euill, foule, filthie, vnclene, in so much that Adam and Eua hauing once sinned, were ashamed of God, of themselues
and each of other, and began to hide their filthines and their shame one from another with figge leaues Gen, 3.7. Wherefore afterward the Lord made them coates of skins to hide their shame Gen. 3.21. But now a dayes there is a strange metamorphosis or change. For that which was appointed of God to hide and couer their shame, they haue changed into a thing that sets out their shame to the world. For doeth not the attire, the gesture, and the countenance both of men and women, shew the vncleannes of their heartes and bodies? Salomon saith Prou. 7.10. There came out a woma^ with an harlots attire: whereby he telleth vs that there is some attire which is whorish, and which bewrayeth the iniquitie of the minde.
 Secondly, dauncing, as it is now commonly vsed, is an intisement to folly,
Of dansing as lame^ table experience may teach vs, if we be teach able. For young men and maides dance together and make such matches as bringe forth many bastards, Dinah Iacobs daughter was rauished without dancing. For she went out but to see or to be seene Gen. 34. And if the sight of Dinah inflamed Shechems luste, what will dauncing, kissing, and dalying together more then modestly, doe. The fruite of Salomes wanton and whorish dauncing
(for she was her mothers daughter) before Herode and the rest, was the beheading of Io. Ba. Mah, 14.6. etc. To speake of diuers kinds of dauncing, it needeth not, we haue too many by one. And to answer dauncing defenders, I would knowe of them whether they bring Dauids Psalmes, or baudie ballets with their pipes or other musicall instruments? And whether the dauncers com to refresh and solace their heauy hearts, their sighing souls, their sorrowful minds with some of the ioyfull songs of zion, or they come with disguised platformes to entrappe wanton women, to inflame their burning heartes, to feede their adulterous eyes, and to commit folly and defile their bodies. But if the dauncers be wantons, and come to delight their senses with vnlawful pleasure, and bring filthie and vnchristian sonnets, then no christian may for shame stand in their defence. Wherefore together with dauncing, I will put vnchast rimes, lasciuious songs, and sonnets, as prouokers and allurements to kindle our prone nature to breake this commaundement.
Thirdly,
Of stageplayes stage-playing and enterludes, are euen Satans shop or schoole-house to bring vp prentices and young scholers to the arte and mysterie of whordome and adulterie. For the deuil hath nothing to teach such wickednes
by, but it is all set abroade to open sale vpon the stage, and there it is either declared by foule and wicked words, or els most filthily and impudently resembled by gestures and actions, that there is not a greater mart in the vniuersal world for the diuels wares, then is the stage. The first deuisers of it were the infidell heathens, from thence we receiue it, howsoeuer the Lord forbid a man to weare womans apparrell, surely he doth disalow, that a man either in his owne or in womans apparel should vse adulterous and filthie gestures. Cypryan Lib. 1. Epist. 10. demaunded by Eucratius, what he thought of a man, that began to be ashamed of his playing vpon the stage, gaue it ouer, and now did but only traine vp young scholers priuately in his chamber, to make them fit for the stage, answered, that man was a maister non erudiendorum, sed perdendoru^ pueroru^, not of instructing, but of destroying youth, and therefore such a man was not worthie to be of the fellowship of the church. Tertullian Lib. de spectaculis saith, Theatrum proprie sacrarium veneris est, the theater, (or stage) properly is the chappell wherein whordome is committed. And a little after in the same booke he saith, Theatrum est priuatum consistorium impudicitiae, vbi nihil probatur, quam
quod alibi non probatur, The theater (or stage) is a priuate closet for dishonestie, where nothing is allowed but that which els where is disalowed. Chrysostome in his sixt homelie vpon Genesis, threatneth to excommunicate his auditors for running to playes except they leaue it. The counsell of Arles in France about the time of the Nicene cousel Can. 4. and. 5. and also the third counsel of Carthage, Can. 35. decree that stage-players are to be excommunicated. And seing there is not more filthie speach vsed in any other place, I will here leaue al filthie communication vpon the stage, and not make any seuerall speach of it, though there be sufficient occasion. 
 Quest. Seing you haue spoken thus much of the causes, I pray you let me heare somthing also of the effects of adulterie and vncleanenes.
Ans. The fruites or effectes of such vncleanenes must needes be many and loathsom. For as the tree is, such is the fruite. But of many, I will only name a few.
 First,
Returning to our vomit. man borne in sinne, polluted, and defiled, through the grace of God in Christ and the powerfull operation of the holy Ghost, is purged and made cleane, and in testimonie thereof receiueth the sacrament
of baptisme to assure him of his purgation and regeneration. But he that committeth fornication or adultery defileth himselfe againe, and it commeth to passe vnto him, according to the true prouerbe, The dog is returned to his owne vomit: and the sowe that was washed, to her wallowing in the mire, 2. Pet. 2.22. And this is one of the fruites of sinne. The Lord that washed vs from our sinnes, requireth of vs holinesse, as he is holy, Leuit. 20.7.26. and 1. Thess. 4.3.7. If a man be swept and purged, and after supper vncleane spirits do possesse him againe, the latter ende of that man wilbe worse then the beginning was, Luke. 11.24. And if I named no moe fruites of whoredome but this onely, it were sufficient to moue a godly Christian to possesse his vessell in holinesse.
 Secondly,
Banishment of Gods spirit. our bodies are the members of Christ, 1. Cor. 6.15. but he which coupleth himselfe with an harlot, is one bodie with her, and maketh himselfe that before was a member of Christ, nowe to be the member of an harlot. Which is not to come out of the hall into the kitchin, but out of heauen into hell. Againe our bodies are the Temples of the holy Ghost, 1. Cor. 6.19. and of the liuing God, 2. Cor. 6.16. and the Spirit of God dwelleth in vs, working our regeneration and sanctification.
Now they that giue themselues to vncleannes, do not only grieue the spirit of God which is in them, but they labour to expell and driue him out of them. For he will not dwell in such defiled and filthie bodies. Dauid once ouertaken by the infirmitie of his flesh, and fallen into this horrible sinne of adultery was so depriued of the comfortable feeling of the spirit of God, which he had felt in former times abundantly, that, though Nathan the prophet said vnto him in the name of the Lord, The Lorde also hath put away thy sinnes. 2. Sam. 12.13. he neuerthelesse cried pittifully and with a heauy heart, vnto the Lord and said, Create in me a cleane heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me. Cast me not away from thy presence and take not thy holy spirit from me. Restore to me the ioy of thy saluation, and stablish me with thy free spirit, Psal. 51.10.11.12. This then is an other fruit of vncleannes, euen to banish the spirit of grace out of our bodies (but if any man haue not the spirit of Christ, the same is not his, Rom. 8.9.) and to be without comfort, and without feeling of Gods fauor, and of the spirit of God, yea though we doe so truely repent, that our heartes inwardly bleed for sorrowe, and though the ministers of the word tell vs in the wordes and in the name of the Lord, that our sinnes are pardoned.
And if the penitent heart and heauy soule can very hardly be comforted, though the Lord send vs word by his seruantes that he hath forgiuen vs our sinnes; howe shall they haue any consolation at all, whose heartes are so hardened through custome of sinne that they cannot nor doe not repent, and to whom the Lord neuer promised any mercy or forgiuenes of sinne by his seruants.
 Thirdly, we are turned from darknes to light,
Disinheriting of our selues of the king dome of heauen. and from the power of satan to God, and haue receiued forgiuenes of our sinnes, and inheritance among them that are sanctified, Act. 26.18. and are become the sonnes of God, Gal. 3.26. and are made the heires of God, euen fellow heires with Christ, Rom. 8.17. But he that committeth sin is of the diuell, 1. Ioh. 3.8. and shalbe his sonne, his heire and partaker of his kingdome of darknes. And this is an other fruit of adulterie, euen to change our estate, and of the sonnes of God, to be made the sonnes of the diuell; and of heires of God, to be inheritours of condemnation. For this ye know, saith Paul. Ephes. 5.5. That no whoremonger, neither vncleane person, nor coueteous person, which is an idolater, hath any inheritance in the kingdome of Christ and of God. And againe. 1. Cor. 6.9. Neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor wantons, nor
buggerers, nor theeues, nor couetous, nor drunkards, nor raylers, nor extorcioners shall inherit the kingdome of God. Wherefore Peter admonisheth vs to abstaine from fleshly lustes, because they fight against our soules,  1. Pet. 2.11.
Fourthly,
Infamy and pouerty. concerning this present life also, and our conuersation among men, all manner of fornication bringeth with it two thinges which discredite men. First, an euill name; and secondly, losse of worldly welth. For not onely among Christians, but euen among heathen pagans adultery and fornication are odious, and most seuerely punished in many places, as it may appeare in the story of Abimelech, when he tooke Sarah to be his wife. The Saxones, and Germans before they were Christians, vsed most seuerely to punish adulterers with death, sometimes hanging them in chains ouer a fier till they were dead, and sometime burying them aliue in the earth. The Romans punished them with death, and Orosius, Lib. 2. cap. 8. saith, that Popilia a virgin for committing fornication, was put into the earth being aliue, and so buried and put to death. Neyther doth the infamie eyther soone cease, for his reproch shall neuer be put away, Prou. 6.33. or else rest vpon the sinner alone, but the children so vnlawfully begotten, haue a note and name of ignominie set vpon them, and are called bastards,
that is to say, strangers, because they are strangers from their fathers inheritance (for a bastard cannot inherit, neyther among Christians, nor among infidels) and because they are straungers in some sorte from the congregation of the Lordes people, as it is written, Deutro. 23.2. A bastard shall not enter into the congregation of the Lorde, namely, to beare office or to be aduanced to dignitie. And that adulterers and fornicators consume all their wealth, and waste their substance and their inheritaunce, which should be for them, for their whole familie, and for their lawfull heires or successours after them, wofull experience sheweth, and the holy Ghost witnesseth the same, Prouerbes. 6.26. For because of the whorish woman, a man is brought to a morsell of breade. And in another place, Hee that feedeth harlots, wasteth his substance, Prouerbes. 29.3. And this is an other fruite of whooredome. Wherefore if men eyther desire saluation in the kingdome of heauen, or feare condemnation in hell fire with the Diuell and his angels; if they regard eyther their bodies, or their soules; eyther themselues, or their posteritie; eyther their good name, or their wealth, there is greate cause why they shoulde auoyde all manner of whoredome
and fornication, and liue in holinesse and so brietie.
 Quest. What is there more to be considered in this commaundement?
Ans. Hitherto I haue shewed how this commaundement is broken, together with some fewe causes and effectes: nowe we shoulde also speak of the holy keeping of our owne vessels in holines, as the Apostle willeth vs, 1. Thes. 4.3. and so keepe this commaundement. For seeing God hath called vs by so holy a calling, we ought to cleanse our selues from all filthines of the flesh and spirit, and grow vp vnto al holines in the feare of God, 2. Co. 7.1. that our whole spirit and foule and bodie, may be kept blameles vnto the comming of the Lorde Iesus Christ. 1. Thes. 5.23. But I will leaue this to euery mans consideration.
 Quest. What is the punishment for them that transgresse this commandement?
Ans. Adulterie, and rauishment are to be punished with death, Gen. 38.24. Leuit. 20.10. Deut. 22.21.22. Prou. 6.27.29. But if a single man and a maide commit follie, the punishment was not death to eyther of them, because the man made recompence, and the maids father was satisfied, either with mariage of his daughter, or else with a dowrie, which
was fiftie shekels of siluer, Exod. 22.16. Deut. 22.28. The Church excommunicateth them till they repent publikely.
Thou shalt not steale. 
 Quest. What is the summe of this commaundement?
Ans. The sixt commandement gaue charge for preseruation of mans life; the seauenth for the honestie and chastitie of the bodie, to keepe it holy and vndefiled; now the Lord commeth a degree lower, and sheweth, that he doth not onely care for our liues, and for our bodies that they may be kept holy, but also for our goods, and cattell, our corne, our wares, our gold, our siluer, and whatsoeuer we haue that they may be in safety. The very consideration whereof ought to breed in vs all, first thankfulnes to God, for that he vouchsafeth so graciously to prouide for al that we possesse: secondly more faith in his prouidence and protection, knowing that who so dwelleth vnder the defence of the most hie, shal abide vnder the shadow of the almighty, as the prophet saith, Psa. 91.1. thirdly, greater loue to our brethren that because the Lord loueth them so entirely, and preserueth all they haue, we should for his sake loue our brethren, and doe them good. And this exceeding loue of the Lord
also is manifest, in that he hath sent magistrates as his owne lieutenantes, with great authoritie to protect vs, and all that we haue in safety, as was noted in the fift commaundement.
 Quest. How many waies doe men steale our goods from vs?
Ans. This is a harde question, because there are infinite waies to doe euill: notwithstanding I will note three waies of stealing, vnder which are manie contained. The first is by violence: the second by fraude: the third by vsurie, which is both by violence, and by fraud.
Quest. What is violent stealing? or who steale by violence? 
Ans. First, they that by strong hand, and by their power and might take other mens goods from them. Such are the eues and robbers that openly steale and rob at no one day in the hie waies or in any other place, as the Shabeans, and the Chaldeans which robbed Iob. Chapter. 1.15.17. Such are they that rob vpon the seas without a lawfull letter of mart. For if any man hauing sustained no losse by any aduersarie, of a meere coueteous minde to get wealth by right or by wronge, will come to the magistrate, and before him make an open
lowd ly and say or swe are, that he hath sustained losse, when he neuer lost penie vpon the seas and so abuse authoritie to purchase a letter of mart, that man may not thinke he can deceiue God. But if this be the beginning of his voiage, in abusing Gods lieutenant, in lying or in swearing falsely; what successe may he look for or what blessing, (I might say curssing) may he look for at gods hands? Nay with what conscience dare such a man enter the seas, wherein so mightie workes of the Lord are manifest euery moneth. Also if a man hauing a lawful letter of mart go beyond his co^mission, and count all fish that comes neere his net, and catcheth whatsoeuer he can get by mayn strength, where is this mans conscience? or what answeare will he make vnto the Lorde? It is meere foolish and irreligious to say as many doe, such a one is an enimie to God, to the gospell, to our nation, and to me, therfore I may lawfully rob him. For the Lorde hath neuer saide so in all his word. It is a meere deuise of thine owne, O man whosoeuer thou art, that saist so. For then say thus the murderer, the adulterer, the blasphemous swearer, is an aduersarie to God, to religion, and the gospell, to the welfare of our Land, and therefore I will kill him, or I will rob him. No, no, it belongeth to the magistrate to
punish him, and not to thee. The Lorde hath a greate number of aduersaries vpon earth, but no man may do them any violence but when the Lord biddeth, if then thou not commaunded by the magistrate, who is Gods vicegerent, yea forbid by the magistrate, (for when thou goest beyond thy co^mission, thou contrariest the magistrates commaundement) wilt for couetuousnes sake tak violently whatsoeuer thou ca^st, thou hast no warrant for thy doing. The Lord can, and will, and doth punish his aduersaries, when, by whom, and by what maner it pleaserh him. Therefore except thou hast beene of the Lords counsell and knowest his will, seeke not too hastily to inrich thy selfe by robbery. Moreouer when any vnlawfully rob vpon the seas, and bring greate purchases into the land and into their houses, let the cursse neuer beforgotten, which the prophet Zachariah Chap. 5. saw in a vision of a flying booke, which goeth forth ouer the whole earth for euery one that stealeth shalbe cut off aswel on this side, as on that; and euery one that sweareth, shalbe cut off aswell on this side, as on that, I will bring it forth, saith the Lord of hostes, and it shall enter into the house of the thiefe, and into the house of him
that falsely sweareth by my name: and it shal remaine in the middest of his house, and shall consume it, with the timber thereof and the stones thereof.
Such are they that hauing kings treasures in their hands, runne away with it, as Pactias did with the treasure of King Cyrus Herodot. Lib. 1. or being trusted with the treasures of Colleges or corporations, goe away with it.
Such be sheep-stealers, horse-stealers, men-stealers and a greate number moe.
Such be the mightie that oppresse the poor as Ahab oppressed Naboth. Robbe not the poore: because he is poore, neither oppresse the afflicted in iudgement. For the Lord will defende their cause, and spoile the soule of those that spoile them. Prou. 22.22. And such as helpe them in their oppressions are their companions.
Such are they that destroy other mens goods, as they that burne mens howses or their corne. Exod. 22.6. or that kil mens cattell Exod. 21.33.35. Leuit. 24.18.21. Absolom burnt Ioabs barley 2. Sam. 14.31.
Such are church-robbers, which take away the manteinance of the ministerie. It is a destruction for a man to deuour that
which is sanctified and after the vowes to inquire Prou. 20.25.
 Secondly, they that haue any thing in their hands that belongs to others, and yet withhould it, and deliuer it not, as the ministers of the word which hauing the dispensation thereof committed to them, doe not preach, but by silence withhould from the people the bread of life, and so shut vp the kingdome of heauen that neither they enter in themselues, nor suffer them that woulde. Wherefore except they repent of their former negligence, and hereafter amend, they shall feele that cursse which Christ for the same cause pronounced against the scribes and pharises Math. 23, 13. Therefore behould, I will come against the prophets, saith the Lord, (Ierem. 23.30.) that steale my word euery one from his neighbour. And Christ Iohn. 10.1.8. saith plainely, they are theeues and robbers. Such be papists that conceal the death of Christ as much as they may, and extol mans merits, and that shadow the second commaundement, to the intent to set vp their images.
They that haue receiued of their neighbour monie or any other thing to keepe, but either denie it, or deferre to restore it, when it is demaunded againe. Exod. 22.

They that find their neighbours purse by the way, or his beast straying abroade, and do not restore it, but keepe it to them selues.
They that being executors of willes and testaments, or otherwise put in trust with any thing, doe defraud widdows and orphanes, and withhould from them that which belongs to them.
They that being rich, and seing the poore and needie, shut their compassion, and withhould Gods blessings from the^. The Lord saith Pro. 3.27. withhould not the good from the owners thereof.
They that denie or deferre to pay their dettes to the greate losse of them that lent or sould any thing, and gaue them daie for the paiment.
They that keepe backe the seruants wages Leuit. 19.13. Deutro. 24.15. Iam. 5.4.
They that withhould their neighbours pledge
They that refuse to let their neighbor haue corne or other thing for their money, as many doe, they that defende not their neighbour from iniurie, when they may.
 Quest. Who are they that steale by fraude?
Ans. They that in selling vse false weights and measurs Leuit. 19.25. Deut. 25.13. Pro. 20.23.
that sell corrupt ware for good, and counterfaite for true Amos. 8.6. that defraude the simple and ignorant, that take double the worth of the thing in mens necessities.
They that in bying dispraise that which is good, to get it for a little Prou. 20.14. that perceiuing poore men must needes sel, will not giue halfe the worth. Ingrossors which gather all the corne or other commodities of the countrie into their owne handes that no man shall haue any to sell but themselues, and then they make their owne price as they will. Forestallers, which meet the commodities of the countrie by the way; and buy it before it come at the market, whereby the price of things is inhaunced, and the market is not serued sufficiently.
They that are purse-bearers and purloine some to themselues, as Iudas did.
They that buie or sell iustice, which ought not to be bought or sould.
They that game by vnlawfull games.
In a word, the breade of deceite is sweete to a man: but afterward his mouth shalbe filled with grauil Pro 20.17.
 Quest. What say you now of vsurie?
Ans. It is both a violent and a fraudulent theft.

 Quest. Some thinke it to be a lawfull trade; what thinke you of it? for you seeme at the first to condemne it.
Ans. I will answere you by leisure, and by degrees. And first I will shew in what things vsurie doth properly consist: secondly what it is: Thirdiy how many kinds of vsurie there be: and fourthly whether it be lawfull.
 Quest. In what things doth vsurie consist?
Ans. Vsurie cannot properly nor truely be saide to be in buying, in selling, in choping, or changing, or in any such bargaining. For in all these and such like there may be, and there is, fraud, guile, deceit, cosenage, cruelty, oppression, and iniurie; but no vsurie. Neither is there vsurie in hiering out of houses, lands, cattell, or any other thing, but in setting, letting, hyring, there is fraude and oppression, as in the former. It remaineth then that vsurie in properly and truely in lending only, and in no other thing whatsoeuer. But of lending there are twol ortes properly called by two seuerall names in latin, though we haue but one english word for them both. For which cause I must of necessitie vse moe wordes then I woulde, that I may make a plaine difference betwen
these two kindes of lending. The one kind of lending is, when the same thing that was lente, is to be restored againe, and not an other thing for it, as if a man lend his neighbour his cloak, his gowne, his horse, his carte, or any such other thing he looketh to haue the verie same againe which was lent, and not an other for it. The thing that is thus lent is properly called commodatum in latin. The other kind of lending is, when the same thing that was lent, is not looked for againe, but an other as good by weight, measure or number, as for example, a man lendeth his neighbour a loafe of bread, which the borower taketh as his owne, and eateth, and restoreth an other loafe for it as good and by weight. Againe a man boroweth a bushell of wheat and spendeth it, and after restoreth an other bushell as good and by measure. Againe, a man borroweth twentie shillings and layeth it out for necessary things, and after restoreth for it so much mony againe, and by number. And this lending in latine is properly termed mutuum. This also must be vnderstood, that all lending is free, and for nothing, but of good will: for if it be otherwise lente then franckly and for nothing, it hath another name. Now vsurie is properly in this latter kind of lending, and onely in it not in the
former, nor in any other kinde of dealing that is betweene men, whatsoeuer it be. The former kinde of lending is franke and free, of good will, for nothing: if it belent for any thing, then it loseth his name and is called, hired, for it is hired for such a thing, and for so much. This latter kinde of lending is also franke, and free, of good will, for nothing. For if it be lent for something, it loseth his name, and is most properly and truely called vsurie. And thus you see plainely that vsurie consisteth in no dealing that is between men, but onely in lending, yea, and in this latter kinde of lending onely. And to make it more plaine, it is not alwaies in this kinde of lending, but onely, when this lending, that ought to be franke and free, is abused to some gaine. So then vsurie is the abuse of this charitable lending.
 Quest. Secondly, then according to your promise, define vsurie, and tell me what it is.
Vsurie is a couenanted gaine for this latter kinde of lending, which is called mutuum in latine. And in this short definition you must marke these two things diligently. First that it is a couenanted gaine. For when a man lendeth frankely, and freely, of meere good
will, of conscience to succour and helpe him that is in neede, according as God commandeth; if the borrower restoring the valewe of the thing againe in due time and according to his promise, and according to his habilitie, wil in such a case freely giue something to the lender, because he hath gained much by that which was lent him freely, it is not vsurie in such a case to receiue that the borower frankly giueth: but this case is so rare, as it scarse needes to be named. Therefore to make it vsurie, there must be a couenanted gaine.
Secondly, that it is a couenanted gaine in the latter kind of lending onely, and not in the former
 Quest. Thirdly then, how many kinds of vsurie are there?
I know but onely one kinde of vsurie, and no moe; which is worth the marking, and hereafter will giue great light for the deciding of the controuersie, whether it be lawfull or no. For though some men committe vsurie in money, some in corne, some in bread, and others in other thinges, which make a distinction of the obiect of vsurie; yet the nature of vsurie is not by these thinges deuided. Wherefore I say againe, there is but one kind of vsurie onely.
 Quest. Now lastly, whether is vsurie a thing
lawfull or no?
Ans. I knowe it is no small controuersie among many at this day, and hath beene a long time, neuerthelesse because the handling of it falleth necessarily into the eight commandement, I will speake plainely what I thinke, and so referre and submit my selfe and my reasons to the censures of the godly learned in any place. I am of this opinion, that to take couenanted increase or lucre for lending of any thing that is put to vsurie is simplie vnlawfull, vnderstanding such kinde of lending as I named before, which in latine is properly called mutuum. For vsurie is not properly, neyther can be in that other kinde of lending, which is called commodatum. I am constrained to vse the latine wordes, because we haue but onely one English worde for these two kindes of lending. My reasons which moue me to thinke that vsurie is altogether vnlawfull, are these.
 First, the worde of the Lorde, Exod. 22.25. Leuit. 25.35. manifestly forbiddeth to lende vpon vsurie, for vsurie, or for lucre and gaine to any of the Lordes people, which are decayed and brought vnto pouerty, that they are not able to maintaine their estate. The wordes be these, Exod.
22.25. If thou lend money to my people, that is, to the poore with thee, thou shalt not be as an vsurer vnto him: yee shall not impose vsurie vppon him. And Leuit, 25.35. Moreouer if thy brother be impouerished, and fallen in decay with thee, thou shalt relieue him, yea the stranger and soiourner, that he may liue with thee. Thou shalt take no vsurie of him, nor vantage but thou shalt feare thy GOD, that thy brother may liue with thee. Thou shalt not giue him thy money to vsurie, nor lende him thy vitailes for increase.
 Secondly, in Deut, 23.19. it is thus written: Thou shall not giue to vsurie to thy brother: as vsurie of money, vsurie of meate, vsurie of any thing that is put to vsurie. Vnto this stranger thou maist lend vpon vsurie, but thou shalt not lend vpon vsurie to thy brother that the Lorde thy God may blesse thee in all that thou settest thine hande to, in the lande whither thou goest to possesse it. In these wordes there is a generall opposition betweene this stranger, that is, the cursed Cananites, and their brethren the Iewes. Where this opposition is to be obserued. For when the Lorde permitteth the Iewes to lend vpon vsurie to that stranger, he doth not meane all strangers, as the Iewes wrest the place, euen to this
day. For in the place before cited, Leuit. 25.35. the Lorde forbad the Iewes to giue vpon vsurie, not onely to their brethren the Iewes, but also to the stranger and soiourner, that is, to such strangers and soiourners as seeing the great workes of the Lorde and his fearefull iudgementes vpon Aegypt, forsooke Aegypt and went out with the Israelites Exo. 12.38. And many of them were circumcised, and receiued the religion of the Israelites, and worshipped the God of Israel. Such also were Moses his father in lawe and those that came with him, and dwelt with the Israelites and worshipped GOD as they did, and afterwarde in the scripture are called Kenites. Such also were others that ioyned themselues to the Israelites and dwelt amonge them. Wherefore it is often said concerning many thinges, that there shall be one lawe for the Iewe borne and for the stranger. But when the Lord permitted the Israelites to lend vpon vsury to that straunger, he meaneth onely those cursed people, the Hittites, the Girgashites, the Amorites, the Canaanites, the Perizites, the Hinites, and the Iebusites, whom the Israelites, were commaunded to destroy, Exod. 23.27. etc. Numb. 3.52. Deut. 7.1.2.16. and no other strangers. Now as we see to what strangers
they might lende vpon vsurie: so we must knowe that to their brethren whether they were Iewes borne or strangers and soiourners that dwelt among them, they might not lende vpon vsurie. Then whether they be rich or poore, that is no distinction to make vsurie lawfull or vnlawfull: but whether they be of those seauen cursed nations or not. For if they be of those cursed people, it was lawfull to lend to them vpon vsurie: if they were not of them, it was vnlawfull. And thus the Lorde sheweth by a distinction of people, namely of these cursed, and of all others, to whome it was lawfull, and to whome it was vnlawfull to lende vpon vsurie. This newe founde distinction of rich men and poore men was neuer made by the Lord, neyther hath it any warrant of the word of God, but onely some men couetously minded, haue coyned it of late yeares. And if we will approue our consciences before almightie God, we must say, Lorde, thine owne mouth hath spoken it, thou hast commaunded it, it is written for my direction and instruction in such a place of the scripture, and therefore, Lorde, I did it, else I woulde neuer haue attempted it, no not to saue my life, much lesse to increase my wealth. And whatsoeuer or whosoeuer shall otherwise shift
it of before men, shal euen be speechles before God. Neuerthelesse this is to be confessed, that the intendment of the holy Ghost in the forenamed places, is to forbid lending vpon vsurie to the poore: but we must hereewithall take the reason; because it was then practised onely vpon the poore, and it was an vncouth and vtterly vnknowen or heard of monster, that rich men should borrow of rich men vpon vsurie, and that of meere coueteousnes. For though there were many greate sinnes among the Israelites, yet this monster I suppose was then vnhatched No this kinde of vsurie is not once mentioned so much as in the last prophets, when perhaps such seede of cruell couetousnes was sowen, as we now reape the fruite of. But we must vnderstand that it is not onely the labourer that by his daily worke getteth his liuing, nor yet the meane husbandman, that is called poore, or said to be impouerished in the scripture; but also the rich farmer, the wealthy marchant, the landed gentleman, or others of greate calling, sometimes fall into decay, and wax poore, so that they haue as great neede to borrowe, as anie poore labourer. For the GOD of heauen that ruleth all thinges after the counsell of his will, sometimes bringeth downe great men, and exalteth
them of lowe degree. Wherefore the Lords meaning is, that if thy brother (whether he be labourer, artificer, husbandman, yeoman, marchant, gentleman, or nobleman) be impouerished and decaied, and his state beginne to fall, that then thou shoulde lend vnto him freely to helpe him, to vphold him, to maintaine his lawfull state and calling, but thou shalt not impose vsurie vpon him, that is, when he is falling, thou shalt not strike him downe and treade him vnder thy feete, but thou shalt take him by the hande, vpholde him from falling, and let thy strength, thy wealth support his weaknesse. For the Lorde offereth thee such an occasion to trie thee, whether thou wilt obey the Lorde thy GOD, and relieue him that hath neede of thy helpe, or thou wilt answere him, as Nabal answered Dauid, 1. Sam. 25.10. And for this cause I beseech all that feare GOD, to consider the reason which the Lorde vseth, Deutro. 23.20. That the Lorde thy God may blesse thee in all that thou settest thine hande to, to perswade men, freely and without vsurie to lende to them that are impouerished and decaied, as if the Lord had said, as thou would haue me to blesse thee, so helpe thou and relieue him that is decayed.

 Thirdly, that which the Lord permitted the Iewes to doe for the punishment and destruction of the cursed Canaanites, cannot possiblely be turned to a blessing to Gods people. But the Lord permitted the Iewes to lend vpon vsurie to the Canaanites for a kind of punishment to destroy them withall. Therefore if one brother lend to another vpon vsurie, whether he be rich or poore, it is to punish, and to destroy him, as wofull experience teacheth vs how true this is: for many whole families, man, wife, and children are destroyed and vndone by vsurie. The gallows are permitted and approued to the sheriffe or to some other vnder him to hang vp theeues, murderers, and such other malefactors, but God forbid that we should thinke them meete for good men. And so vsurie was permitted to the Iewes as a gallous, as a gibbet, or such other punishment to destroy the Canaanites, and how then can it be good for the Lords people.
 Fourthly, I reason thus. Where the principall is not warranted, there ought to be no couenanted and warranted gaine. But in this kinde of lending, which is called mutuum, and wherein only vsurie is, the principall is not warranted. And therfore there is no warrant in the word of God for vsutie.
That the principall ought not to be warranted, it may appeare two wayes. First by co^pariso^, and secondly by scripture. The co^parison shalbe betweene those two kindes of lending, wherof I spake before. For if in the former kind of le^ding, (where the same thing that was borrowed, is to be restored againe, and wherein lesse fauour is shewed to the borrower) the principall be not warranted, then much lesse ought it to be warranted in this second kinde of lending, where greater fauour is shewed to the borrower. But in the former kind of lending the principal is not warranted, if it perish without any falt of the borrower as it is Exod. 22.14. And if a man borrow ought of his neighbour, and it be hurt, or else dye. The owner thereof not being present (and therfore might suspect it perished through the misusage of the borrower) he (that is, the borrower) shal surely make it good. If the owner therof be by, he (that is the borrower shal not make it good. Therfore in this second kinde of lending the principall ought much lesse to be warranted. The scripture to proue that the principall ought not to be warranted in this second kinde of lending, is written Deut. 15. where the Lord commaundeth, that euery seuenth yere should be a yere of freedom for diuers things.
And if any man had lent any thing to his brother, which the borrower was not able to pay againe before the yere of libertie, that then the lender should freely remit and forgiue the debter the principall; the wordes are these Deut: 15.2. And this is the manner of the freedome: euery creditour shall quite the loue of his hand which he hath lent to his neighbour: he shall not aske againe of his neighbour, nor of his brother: for the yere of the Lords freedome is proclaimed. Seeing then the principal is not warranted, but must be remitted and forgiuen, if the borrower be not able to repaye it againe, according to Christs wordes Luke 6.35. lende looking for nothing agaiue, there is no scripture to allow lucre and gaine for the principall,  and so no vsurie alowed by the word of God.
Fiftly, I finde but one kinde of vsurie only in the scripture, and that alwayes condemned, neuer approued, as it may appeare in the three places alledged before out of the law, and Psal. 15.5. and. 109.11. Prou. 28.8. Eze. 8.13. and 22.12. and wheresoeuer else it is mentioned. Wherefore vsurie is not lawfull by the word of God. 
 Sixtly, I saide before, that vsurie is the abuse of lending. For when men couenante for some lucre and gaine for the lending of
that which the Lord commaundeth to be lent freely, and without any vsurie, then they abuse lending. Now the abuse of a thing cannot be iustified, and therefore vsurie is condemned.
 Seauenthly, vsurie is a thing so repugnant to nature and reason, that not only Christian nations, but heathens also, whose chiefest scholmaister is that instinct which is grauen in their natures, doe disalow ssurie throughout the world. For I neuer heard or read of any that doe approue of vsurie. Wherefore that which the Lord disaloweth in his word, and all nations vnder heauen mislike, cannot be lawful, neither ought Christians to defend it. And these are my reasons.
 Quest. But are not many worthie men in the Church of God, of a contrary iudgment?
Ans. Not any at all that I knowe of. For where diuers worthie men seeme to allow vsurie with som caueates and exceptions, I am of their minde, but I must ad this with all, that when they haue hampered, and hemmed in the vsurers on euery side, with such holy and religious caueats and lessons, they alter the qualitie of it, and make it noe vsurie, but a lawful kinde of trade and dealing. There are many strong poisons which the learned phisitian can so qualifie, that a
sicke person may take a potion wherein some of the poyson is. And so holy men of God haue done, and doe temper and qualifie the vsurers poison that they make thereof a holsom medicine for many distressed persons.
Quest. Whether is it lawfull to borrow vpon vsurie?
Ans. I will answer you this question by leasure, and by little, as I haue done the former. For there are diuers sorts of borrowers, al whose conditions are not alike, and therefore one answere wil not serue them al. And specially there are three sorts of borrowers. 
 First,
Som borrow of necessitie some men decayed or in greate distresse and neede, are constrained to borrow, either to supplie present wants, or to preuent great inconueniences. And because in these daies charitie is rather dead, then could, they must either borrow vpon vsurie, or haue nothing lent vnto them at al. These mens cases are to be pitied, and the Lord biddeth vs to lende vnto then freely, and forbiddeth vs to take any vsurie of them Leuit. 25.55. But the are not any where in the scripture forbidden to borrow vpon vsurie, when they cannot otherwise haue to supply their necessitie, no more then they are forbidden to
to giue a greate deale more for a thing then it is worth, when a miserly wretched oppressor knowing their present neede, and that they cannot haue that they want any where but of him, will not sell to them but for doubble the price. 
 Secondly,
Some borrow of couetousnes. others that are welthie and verie wel able to liue themselues, and also to relieue others, doe of meere couetousnes borrow greate summes of monie vpon vsurie, as especially three sortes of men do, first gentlemen of greate Landes and liuings, secondly, rich fermers and yeomen, thirdly, wealthie marchants. And that because they will buie all the Lands that lies neere them, or are co^modious for them, because the poore shall haue no place to dwel in, but by their leaue and good liking, because they wilbe richer then their fellowes, and generally because they are not co^tented with that blessed state the Lord hath set them in this life, and because they are not thankful to God that hath made the^ able to liue very plentifully, and to be co^fortable and helpeful to many besides, whereas he could, and can, and sometime doeth for mens ingratitude, pull dowen vnsatiable couetous men, and setteth vp the meeke and lowlie. And I thinke these borrowers vpon vsurie sinne greatly, and that
for two causes,
The first cause which moueth me so to thinke, is the couetous greedie minde, that moueth them to borrow vpon vsurie, when in trueth they haue no neede, and therefore ought to be content with their estate, and leaue that for others to buie and purchase which of themselues they are not able to co^passe but by this vnlawfull meanes of borrowing vpon vsurie.
The second cause is taken from the effects that follow vpon this vnlawfull borrowing vpon vsurie which are many but I will at this present obserue two effects onlie.
First these borrowers vpon vsurie, mainteine the cursed vsurer, as the receiuer doth maintaine the these. For though there are many of the first sort of borrowers, whom necessitie constraineth to borrow, and the moe a greate deale by these meanes, yet they all are not able to hould so many vsurers plowes going all the yere long as we see there are, but many vsurers should be constrained to cease from making so long furrowes vpon poore mens backes, and buckle themselues to some better trade.
The second effect is, that the poore are greatly hindred, and halfe vndone, by reason that these men borrow vpon vsurie. For
these borrowers vpon vsurie, giue so excessiuely much for the lone of monie, that they must either giue vp housekeeping, and take a chamber in the corner of a house in London for a time, or else greately diminish their house-keeping, that by pinching and sparing that way, they may get vp somwhat towards the paying of the excessiue vsurie, which the tormenting vsurer hath bound them vnto, Whereupon it followeth that the poore which were wont to be set on worke, no we liue idlie, and without maintenance, and which were wont to be relieued with much comfort, are now destitute, and shut out of the doores, and sigh and grone vnto the Lord for very miserie. O would to God these rich borrowers vpon vsurie would thinke it a more glorious thing for them to feede and cloath the poore members of Iesus Christ with some parte of that great wealth the Lord hath made them stewards of, euen for this cause among others, that they should comfort the needie Prou. 3.27. and so honour God with their riches Prou. 3.9. then by vnlawfull meanes to purchase much vpon earth to the great hurt and hindrance of the poore. For this pinching in house keeping to fill vp the vsurers bagges, is the vndoing of the poore.

But besides these two generall effectes, each of the borrowers vpon vsurie, hath his proper and peculiar effectes. The gentlemen borrowing vpon vsurie to buy more landes, racketh his rentes, and makes all the poore tenants to pay the vsurie. The farmer or yeoman selleth his corne and his cattell so much the dearer, and makes the buyer to pay his vsury. The marchant inhaunseth the price of his wares, and who so needes his marchandize, must pay his vsurie. And thus the cursed vsurer (for he is no where not so much as once blessed in the word of God, but continually cursed, besides the pitifull sighing of the poore which sendeth to God a daily curse against him into heauen) he is the head of all this mischiefe; the rich bowers, they are his vpholders; and lastly the poore commonaltie, they haue all the burden laid on their backs, though of al others they be least able. And thus the vsurers crooked plowe goeth forward.
 The third sort of borrowers vpon vsurie, are those Salomon speaketh of, Prou. 13.7.
Some borrow of hypocrisie There is that maketh himselfe poore, hauing great riches. For because they will pay no tribute to Caesar, beare no ordinarie charges of the common wealth, nor pay any man his owne, if they can once finger other mens goods, therefore wil they eyther borrow somthing of a vsurer,
or at the least so giue it out, that men might pitie their case, and let them alwaies scape scotfree. But these whiners neede rather the magistrates authority, then any other answere, and therefore I will leaue such hypocriticall michers without any further answere.
 Quest. What say you of the vsurer?
Ans. I will referre you for answere to, Pro. 28.8. to the booke of the preacher, Cap. 5. ver. 12.13.14.15. and to Ierm. 17.11. which places if you list to read the^, wil answer you fully.
 Quest. What say you of restitution where iniurie hath beene done?
Ans. I wish you to reade the seauen first verses of the sixt chapter of Leuiticus, and there you shall see, that the Lord will not accept his sacrifice that hath wrongfully taken any thing from his neighbour, before there be a recompence made.
 Quest. What say you more of this commandement?
Ans. As I haue said of all the former, that to consent to theft is stealth, and likewise in wordes to wish, or in hart to desire other mens goods, Math. 15.19. But I will onely ad two or three reasons to diswade all men from stealing by any meanes in thought, word, or deed.
 First, it is the decree of God that euery man shoulde liue vpon his owne labour, with the
sweat of his browes, Gen. 3.17.18.19. Christ therefore biddeth vs aske our daily bread, not other mens, Mat. 6. Paul saith, 2. Thess. 3.10. he that will not worke, ought not to eate. And the Lord will satisfie them with good, that walking faithfully before him, call vpon him, Psal. 81.11.
 Secondly, as thou wouldest not haue an other to take from thee, that which in a long time thou hast gotten with sore labour; so thou ought not to take from another. Mat. 7.12.
 Thirdly, the earth is the Lords, and all that is therein, that if thou walke honestly in thy calling, and put thy trust in him, thou needest not to lacke any thing: if thou distrust him, and steale thou makest God thine enemie, and then all thou stealest shall doe thee no good.
 Fourthly, goods euil gotten will not prosper with thee nor with thy posterity, and Zophar the Naamathite telleth Iob. Cap. 20. ver. 5.10. and Iob himselfe confesseth, Chap. 27.13.16. And Salomon saith, Pro. 5.13.22. The riches of the sinner is laid vp for the iust.
 Quest. What is the punishment for him that breaketh this commaundement?
Ans. The breach of all the former commaundements was punished with death, because there could no satisfaction be made. For this is generall, and as I take it, runneth throughout
all the commandementes of God; that where no satisfaction can be made, there the offender is to be punished with death. Wherfore seeing there may satisfaction be made for stollen goods, the punishment appointed for the theefe is satisfaction as you may read, Exod. 22.1. etc. If a man steale an oxe or a sheepe, and kill it, or sell it, he shall restore fiue oxen for the oxe, and foure sheep for the sheep. etc.
Thou shalt not beare false witnesse against thy neighbour.
 Quest. What is the summe of this ninth commaundement?
Ans. If you remember the degrees by which the Lord proceedeth in these fiue last commandements, as I haue noted them before in the beginning of the sixt commandement, then shal you see that here in this ninth commaundement the Lord forbiddeth a man any way to impaire the credit, name, or good estimation of his neighbour. And for this purpose the Lord elsewhere in the scripture somtime setteth before vs the excellencie of a good name to make vs more carefull of it, and sheweth how pretious a thing it is in the book of the preacher, Chap. 7.3. saying, A good name is better then a good oyntment. And in another place he saith, A good name is to be chosen aboue
great riches, and a louing fauour is aboue siluer and aboue gold, Pro. 22.1. And sometime to dehort vs from staining the credit and good name of our neighbour, he setteth out a false witnesse bearer in his proper colours, and saith, A man that beareth false witnesse against his neighbour is like an hammer, and a sword, and a sharpe arrow, Pro. 25.28. And yet for more safety of a mans good name, the Lord that made this law hath backed it or seconded it with an otherlawe, Deut. 19.15. One witnesse shall not rise against a man for any trespasse, or for any sin or for any fault thathe offendeth in. There is no exceptio^ eyther of person or cause, as it is more manifest, Deu. 17.6. Num. 35.50. Math. 18.16. but there must be two witnesses at the least, to proue any man to be otherwise then he professeth himselfe to be, and so to impeach his good name that he caried before. So great care hath the Lord euen of our credit and good name among them. Whereby euery man is admonished to walke soberly and sincerely in his calling, that he empaire not his owne good name by worde or deede: and also to follow the Lords example, and be carefull to maintaine, not captious or sclaunderous to impeach the good name of his neighbour. 
 Quest. What if a man offende and doe that which is euill, shal it not be spoken?

Ans. We may, and we must speake of it, but with discretion, as tendring his good, and not labouring to shame him, that loue may couer a multitude of sins, Pro. 10.12. and 1. Pet. 4.6. considering that thou thy selfe also art subiect to infirmities, and therfore should so behaue thy selfe to thy neighbour, as thou wouldest he should doe to thee, Galat. 6.1. And specially priuate offences are priuately to be spoken, and to the offender himselfe, and to no other except thou call an other to go with thee, as a witnesse to admonish him. But open and knowen, and publike offences, are to be reproued publikely according to the nature and qualitie of the person and of the sinne that is committed.
 Quest. Who be those that offend against this commaundement?
Ans. First they that falsely accuse others, as they that accused Naboth, 1. King. 21. and Irijah falsely accused Ieremie the prophet and brought him before the princes, Ierem. 37.13 and the princes that falsely accused him before the king, Ierem. 38.4. The ruler and gouernors falsely accused Daniell, Dan. 6.13. Haman wrongfully accused the Iewes, Ester. 3.8. We reade how Stephen was falsely accused, Act 6.11. and Paul likewise Act. 24.5. how that reuerent and worthy man of God Athanasius of
Alexandria in Aegypt was most falsely and impudently accused, Theodoret. Lib. 1. cap. 29. sheweth at large, and the story is worth the reading.  Secondly to false accusers we may ad also them that iustifie the wicked, as the scripture ioyneth them together, Pro. 17.15. He that iustifieth the wicked, and he that condemneth the iust, euen they both are abhomination to the Lord. And in another place, He that saith to the wicked, thou art righteous, him shall the people curse. Prou. 24.24. And Esaias Chap. 5.23. denounceth a woe against him.
 Thirdly, they that rayle vpon men and reuile them, as Shemie did reuile Dauid, 2. Sam. 16.5. The Iewes reuiled Christ, Math. 27.29.39.41. and him that was borne blinde, Iohn. 9.28. And many take pleasure in rayling vpon others, and glorie in their ripe and pregnant wittes, as though it coulde be a Christian glorie to reproach the image of God. And he that in euill speeches excelleth, he crowes, as if he had wonne the game, when he hath impudently disgraced and outfaced his neighbour. Which sinne reigneth euen in the countrey also among the meanest sort of people, as though there were the gammes of Olympus, and a gleiue or garlande for the worst. Others by reuiling speaches and tearmes couet to
prouoke men to requite them with the like, that thereupon they may picke a quarrell, either to fight, or to bring him in danger one way or other. Dauid saith that these mens wordes be very swordes. For as man pricked by his aduersarie with a sword, can hardly forbeare to defend himselfe by fighting: so the prouoking wordes of contentious men doe pricke the heart, that it is a difficult matter to bridle the tongue, and not to answere againe. There are a great number of halting papists, Iesters, and prophane persons, which by quipping and nipping make often iolly sport at rich mens tables, and therefore they are heartely welcome whensoeuer they com. And let them haue but an inckling whome they shoulde girde and taunt, and they will doe it smoothly.
 Fourthly, sclanderers which bring vp euill reportes vpon their neighbours, eyther by impudent vntruethes, or by wresting of their wordes and deedes, as Doeg both slaundered Dauid and Ahimelech, 2. Sam. 22.9. Siba slandered Mephibosheth with an impudent lie, 2. Sam. 16.3. and the scripture is full of such examples.
Fiftly, backbiters, which priuily and secretly whisper as in the night, that they may discredite others, as the Pharisies went about to
vndermine Christ, when they came behind his backe and saide to his disciples secretly, why eateth your maister with publicans and sinners Math. 9.11. And many there are in our dayes which reioyce if by secret wispering the can discredit the subiect with the prince, the seruant with the maister, the inseriour with the superiour, and one neighbour with another. 
 Sixtly, scorners, and mockers, which deride euery mans gestures, wordes, and deeds, or whatsoeuer is in them, as if there be any blenish in their nature, any imperfection, any want, any infirmitie, that they will take occasion by to mocke him, as the children that mocked Elisha, and said, Cum vp, thou bauld heade, Cum vp, thou bald heade 2. king. 2.23. When the Lord in his iudgemente hath made any man lame, or laide any other imperfection vpon him either of bodie or minde, some make a mocke and a scorne of it, whereas they ought rather to pittie his case and praise God because he hath dealt better with them. Others mocke men for their pouertie, but Salomon saith, He that mocketh the poore, reproueth him that made him Pro. 17.5. Others and too too many mocke them which exhort them to godlynes, as the men of Ephraim, Manasses, and Zebulun, mocked
Hezekiah and his messengers, when he exhorted them to come to Ierusalem to keepe the passeouer 2. Chro. 30.10. Sanballet and Tobiah mocked Nehemiah for building the wal of Ierusalem Nehem. 4.2.3. Ishmael mocked Isaac Gen. 21.9. When Christ came to raise vp the rulers daughter that was deade, many laughed him to scorne Math. 11.24. Michal despised Dauid 2. Sam. 6.16. When the holy ghost was sent vpon the Apostles, many mocked and saide they were drunken Act. 2.13. If you exhort men to godlynes, they will mocke you and say you are too too holy. Ieremie was daily mocked Ierem 20.7. For the wisdom of God is counted foolishnes of them that beleeue not. But Esaias Chap. 57.4. saith, on whome haue ye iested? vpon whom haue you gaped, and thrust out your tongues? And Salomon saith Pro. 24, 9. the scorner is an abhomination to the Lord.
 Seauenthly, they that are tale-tellers. For, a tale-teller maketh diuision among princes Pro. 16.28, And by comparing Leuit. 19.16. with Ezek. 22.9. you shall see the fruite of them.
 Eightly, they that harken to euil wordes, and receiue false tales Exod. 23.1. as Dauid to too lightly beleued lying Siba. 2. Sa^. 26.1. And co^only there is dissentio^ made among
deare friendes, when men giue credit at the first to euery flying tale.
 Quest. What reason will you render to diswade men from beareing false witnes.
That which hath beene saide is sufficient, not withstanding I will ad this more.
 First, Iames Chap. 3. of his epistle vers. 4.5. compareth the tongue to three things that is, to a bridle wherewith an vnruly horse is gouerned, to the rudder of a ship, whereby it is guided through the great seas, and to firie: and sheweth that as these three things wel vsed serue for good and necessarie vses, but abused or vnskilfully handled ar most dangerous and hurtful, so the tongue well vsed is full of grace, but abused is a world of mischief. For with the fruite of a mans mouth shall his bellie be satisfied, and with the increase of his lippes shall he be filled: death and life are in the power of the tongue, and they that loue it shall eate the fruite thereof Prouerbs, 18.20.21.
 Secondly, lying and false witnes-bearing shew that we should be the sonnes of the diuel. For the diuel is a lier, and the father of lies Iohn 8, 44.
 Thirdly, the Lord hateth a false tongue, Pro. 6.16.19. and 12.22. and therefore good men and godly ought not to loue it.

 Quest. What is the punishment which is appointed for him that beareth false witnes?
Ans. The same punishment he would haue brought vpon him, whome he accused Deut. 19.16.19.
Thou shalt not couet thy neighbours house, neither shalt thou couet thy neighbours wife, nor his seruant, etc.
 Quest. What is the summe of this tenth and last commaundement?
Ans. In all the former commaundements, some outward acte or deed was commaunded or forbidden, but in this last the Lorde forbiddeth only the desire of the heart.
 Quest. You saide afore in euerie commaundement, that the outward facte, was not only forbidden, also the inward desire of the heart, and you shewed it plainely out of Math 5.21. etc. and 15.9. how then commeth it now to passe that this commaundement conteineth nothing but that which was a parcell of each of the former commaundements?
Ans. My former answeare was sufficient, but not manifest enough to make plaine to euery one the difference betwene this commaundement and the other nine which goe
before, therefore I will briefely make the difference as plaine as I can.
First, that you may be fully perswaded that these wordes are not only a repetition or declaration of some things forbidden in the nine commaundements going before, but a new and an other commaundement euen the tenth (for you heard in the beginning out of Deut. 4.13, that there are ten commaundements) expressed by an other word, whereon yet I will not stand, the Apostle Paul shall answere you Rom. 7. who daily examining his owne wayes, and his owne heart by the co^maundements of the Lord, still supposed that bare thought and wandring lust had beene no sinne, till he came to this tenth and last commaundement, where he found it written thou shalt not lust. In consideration whereof he found himselfe deeplier guiltie of sinne, then before he supposed he had beene. Wherefore his wordes are manifest and sufficient to teach vs that here is an other commaundement, euen the tenth, both here, and also Deut. 5.21. in the tenth place.
 Secondlie now to declare the difference betweene this tenth commaundement and the other nine, we must consider sinne, and
the degrees thereof from the beginning to the end. And first of all there is originall sinne in euery man as the scripture beareth record Iob. 14.3. Psal. 51.7. Eccles. 7.31. which is not only sinne of it selfe but also the roote, from whence other sinnes doe bud and spring, and shoot foorth themselues, the fountaine from whence other sinnes flow and the nurce which feedeth and cherisheth other sinnes. In the second place we are to consider the fruites of this originall sinne,
Four fruits of the original corruption. which are four in number and in degree one proceeding after another, and as it were growing one out of another, or one vpon another
 And first out of original corruption, as out of a filthie puddle or chanell when it is stirred arise a sinfull concupiscence or lust with out consent of will, as it may best appeare in young children. For as that lust appeareth in them before they be come to the other three degrees following: so we must vnderstand it lurketh still in mans nature though in riper yeres it be not so manifest.
 In the second place there is the very same lust growne vp with age, and augmented with a generall and wandring consent of the heart, as it were with another fruite, which men shew forth when they say in their hearts,
and some times with their mouths, I would this mans house, landes, cattell, seruant, wife, maide, etc. were mine. Whereby they declare that they couet other me^s goods, and lust after them with an vnsetled and with a roauing consent of the heart, without any endeauour to obtaine the thing that is desired.
Thirdly, this former lust groweth vp, still increaseth as it were a new and third branch, as being growen taller and stronger then it was before, by a full, setled, and resolute consent of the heart, not only generally to wish and couet, but also to endeauour to obtaine that which is desired. And this desire sheweth itselfe in deedes also, as the former did in words only. For after a man hath so resolutely wished and lusted after his neighbours goods, that he will haue them if he can get them, he alwayes vseth meanes to obtaine them as occasion serueth. As if he lust after his neigybours fielde, as Ahab did after Naboths vineyard, he will seeke and vse all meanes to get it by force or by fraude. If he cannot flatter him, and fetch him in with intising words, then wil he finde some quirk, proue it concealed land, or enter some action against him to vndoe him, and by meere oppression obtaine it.

The fourth and last fruit of originall sinne is, when things so vnlawfully desired, are likewise obteined vnlawfully. And this fourth and last degree the Apostle Iames Chap. 1.15. of his epistle, calleth perfect sin, or sin finished. The fruit whereof springing from originall sin, and growing vpon the verie toppe of all these foure branches is death, as the same Apostle saith.
Now of these four braunches growing out of originall corruption, I passe ouer the first, as not mentioned expresly in this commaundement, because it is without any consent of heart, which consent is the thing here forbidden. For this tenth commaundemente is not only thou shalt not lust, but there is added, thy neighbours house. etc. to shew that here is forbid a lust with consent of hearte. For no man can couet his neighbours house but with consent of heart. The second branch then, which is coueting and lusting after our neighbours goods with a roauing and wandring desire (but without any setled and resolute minde to obteine it if we may) is the thing that is forbidden in this last commaundement. The third and fourth braunches are the desires and deedes which were forbidden in the former commaundements.
Wherefore the thing forbidden in this last
commaundement (that I may repeate it againe) is a roauing and raunging lust with a generall consent of the heart to wish it, yet so that a man should checke and reproue his owne heart, rather then he would his desire should be acco^plished. If a man couet his neighbours wife with a wandring kinde of lust, and if there were opportunitie to enioy her, but yet he would refuse her and sharply reproue his ranging desire, euen his lust is here forbidden. Which teacheth vs what perfection of loue to God, to our neighbours, and what holynes of life these commaundements of the Lord require at our handes. Wherefore let vs follow the counsel of Paul 2. Cor. 7.1. and cleanse ourselues from al filthines of the flesh and spirite, and grow vp vnto ful holines in the feare of God. And who so meditateth herein daily, shall finde sufficient cause in himselfe to humble himselfe before the Lord, as finding himselfe deeply guiltie of much transgression, that though he once thought with Paul that he was aliue without the Law, yet now behoulding his soule in this and in the former commaundements, as his face in a glasse, he shal see that sinne reuiueth, and that he him selfe is dead Rom. 7.9.
Quest. In what particular branches wil you
inlarge this commandement?
In the former commaundements each one hath his proper obiect, but the obiect of this commaundement goeth through all the rest of the second table, and in this is to be inlarged, namely in coueting our neighboures house, land, wife, seruant, oxe, etc. And the opening of one of these, shal serue for all. If a sonne hauing a couetous desire and wandring lust in his heart, and say thus in his heart, I would I were in possession of my fathers inheritance, he breaketh his commandement, though he neuer vtter it in word. And there are too many sonnes now a daies, which thinke their parents liue too long. For if the poet could say long since, filius ante diem patrios inquirit in annos, the sonne often counts his fathers age before he dye: we haue no cause to perswade vs that this is the golden age, but rather that according to the dreame of Nebuchad-nezzer Dan. 2. the golden heade, the siluer breastes, the brasen thighs are long since past, and we now liue in the time of the yron legges the feete whereof are partly yron, partly clay. For euen the loue betweene the father and the sonne sometimes is like the coherence of yron and clay. Againe if any rich Ahab desire his neighbour Naboths
house or land, though he neuer vse. Ahabs meanes to purchase it, yea though he would not haue it vnlawfully though he might, yet when he shall appeare before the tribunall seate of Iesus Christ, and the bookes or bills of inditements be reade, then shal he finde that wandring desire written in his own conscience with the point of a Diamond that it cannot be rased or blotted out, except he truly repent him of all his sinnes, and by a liuely faith wipe it out with the blood of Iesus Christ. Wherefore as euery man examining his owne soule shall finde himselfe guiltie of the breach of this commandement in any one thing, so let him trie himselfe in the rest, and therevpon humble himself and fal downe before the throne of grace, that in Iesus Christ our high priest, he may finde grace to helpe in time of neede Heb. 4.16. For Iames saith Chap. 4.5. The spirit that dwelleth in vs, lusteth after enuie. And Dauid saith Psul. 94.11. The Lord knoweth the thoughts of man, that they are vanitie.
 Quest. One question more I would demand, and it is this. Whether God hath giuen this law, these ten commaundements, that a man by keeping them may purchase to himselfe eternal blessednes?
Ans. I haue alreadie dissolued part of this
doubt before in the first part, when I answered your 50. question. Neuerthelesse I will giue you another answere to your demaund now, and repeate one answere twise ouer for to make it plaine.
First when Adam was created in the beginning, euen the sixt day of the creation, God did not create him cursed and miserable, and then gaue him a law by which he might merit blessednes: but God first created him good, blessed, and holy, and gaue him a blessed and happie life. Then afterward the Lord gaue to Adam a law Gen. 2.15. etc, not to purchase a happie life, for he had a blessed life giuen him before at his creation, but that by keeping the law which God gaue him, he might continue still in Gods fauour, and in that blessed state of his creation: for by transgressing the law he lost the blessed life which God had giuen him.
And this was the vse of the Law in the beginning, before the fall of Adam.
Secondly, when all man-kinde was lost in Adam, because of his disobedience as I shewed you in the beginning of the first part, there was none of all Adams posteritie that could redeeme himselfe by his workes, and merit the blessed life he had lost. For if man in innocencie could not keepe Gods
Law that he might continew in that blessed life he had receiued of God, much lesse is he able to recouer that he lost, seing he is now farre weaker then he was before. Therfore the Lord that is rich in mercie, and hath mercie on whome he will, did promise Christ, and in fulnes of time sent Christ, to take our humaine nature vpon him, and so by the sacrifice of his owne bodie once only offred vpon the crosse to make full satisfaction for our sinnes, and so reconcile vs to God againe. And thus by the death of Christ, and not by merits of men, we are reconciled to God, and restored to life againe. Now the Lord, that of his mercy hath thus brought vs to blessednes againe, doth not leaue vs lawles to liue as we list, and do what we wil, but hath the second time also giuen vs his lawes againe, not to purchase life thereby, for of his mercie in Christ Iesus our Lord he hath giuen vs a blessed life the second time, but that by continuing in obedience to his commaundements, and by keepeing of the law, we might abide and continue in the same blessed life which he hath freely giuen vs, and not by transgressing it as Adam did, lose our happie life as Adam did. And this is the vse of the law now to vs al that are reconciled to God in Christ,
euen absolutely and intirely to keepe the whole Law of God that we may abide blessed for euer: for if we but once breake any jot of Gods Law, we lose our blessednes againe as Adam did.
Wherefore the Lord seing that Adam in his in nocencie did not keepe the law and that we in our corruption, though reconciled to God, are lesse able to keepe the law then Adam was, hath also giuen Christ Iesus to be our righteousnes. Christ hath fulfilled the whole law of God for vs, and imputeth his disobedience to vs that beleeue in him, and therefore we desire with Paul to be founde, not hauing our owne righteousnes of the law but hauing the righteousnes of Iesus Christ. And thus in Christ and by Christ it is that we keepe the whole law, and so continue in the blessed life which is purchased for vs by Christs death.
Now it remaineth for vs, not to giue ouer our selues to all vncleanenes, but to striue to the perfection of that sanctification which is begunne in vs by the spirit of God, and so to walke after the motions of the spirit, not after the lusts of the flesh, as Paul teacheth vs Rom. 6. and 7.
Quest. Now that you haue spoken of faith, of the sacraments, and of the ten commandements,
it remaineth, that, according to your owne order propounded before, you should speake of prayer. Wherefore I pray you proceede to open that also.
Ans. I propounded it, as you say, and this is the proper place for it, that whether we giue thankes to God for any blessing and grace receiued either for our bodies, or for our soules, or for both: or else we craue any thing at Gods hands, as increase of faith, co^fort in the sacraments, or strength against the enemies of our saluation, and power to walke after the spirit, we should haue a direction out of Gods word that our prayers framed according to the wil of God, might be acceptable to him. And for this purpose the Lords prayer as the chiefest in all the word of God, for this purpose, were to be taken in hand, and laide out in his seueral partes and branches together with the vse of each part. And there are in it four things chiefely to be considered: first a preface in the first words; secondly a petition or crauing of such things as concerne Gods glorie and our necessitie in the four first petitions, thirdly a deprecation or desiring of God to put those things farre from vs, which are or might be hurtfull or dangerous vnto vs in the two last petitions, and fourthly the conclusion in the last wordes.
But by reason that I haue bene longer in the three former partes of faith, of the sacraments, and specially of the law, then I was purposed, and for other occasions I cannot at this present goe forward with prayer, as I haue done with the rest.
FINIS.


