


A Posie of sundry Flowers and Herbes, gathered out of the Garden of Gods Word, knit vp together, and set in the Frontispice of this Worke, for the smell of euery good Reader, as a sweet odour to the rest that followes:
It being full of diuine Caution and Example. (viz.)

HAGGAI 1 Chap. Ver. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11.
THis People say the This is Blacke Time, and a fearefull hearb; If Hearb-grace, or Gods mercy, did not grow by it, to quench his anger with mans repentant teares, etc. Time is not yet come, that the Lords House should be builded.

The Branches of this Time are many: (viz.)

Then came the Word of the Lord by the Ministery of the Prophet Haggai, saying:
Is it time for your selues (O Yee) to dwell in your seiled houses, and this House lye waste?
Now thus saith the Lord of Hostes; Consider your owne wayes in your hearts; ye haue sowen much, but ye bring in little; ye eate, but ye haue not enough; ye drinke, but ye are not filled; ye cloath you, but ye be not warme; and he that earneth
 wages, putteth it into a broken bagge.
Get you vp into the Mountaine, and fetch In this branch (being the middle branch) doth Gods mercy appeare, (if man will be warned.) wood and build this House, and I will be glorified, and I will take pleasure in it, saith the Lord; Ezra 6. 10. That ye may haue to offer sweet Sauors to the God of Heauen, and pray for the Kings life and for his Children.
Ye looked for much, and loe, it came to little; and when ye brought it home, I did blow vpon it, And why (saith the Lord of Hostes?) because of my house that is waste, and yee runne euery man into his owne If the Separatists and Browniti-call vermine of this time, would but smell well to this Branch, they might learne to loue me their mother Church much more then they doe; I meane as I am an ancient house of God. house.
Therefore vpon you the Heauen is staied from Dew, and the Earth is staied from yeilding her increase.
And I haue called for a drought vpon the Land, and vpon the Mountaines, and vpon the Corne, and vpon the Wine, and vpon the Oyle, and vpon all that the Earth bringeth forth; vpon Men, and vpon Cattell, and vpon all the labour of the hands.
When Zorobabel the sonne of Salathiel, and Ioshuah, the sonne of Iosedech the high Priest, with all the remnant of the People, heard the voice of the Lord their God, and the words of the Prophet Haggai, as the Lord their God had sent him:
Then the People did This Herbe may well be called Sage, or Sapience, for the Feare of the Lord is the beginning of Wisdome. feare before the Lord.
And the Lord stirred vp the spirit of Zorobabel, etc. and the spirit of all the People, and they came and did the worke in the house of the Lord of Hostes, their God.



Ezra 7. 27. etc.
Blessed be the Lord God of our Fathers, which This is Carduu^ Benedictus, or Blessed Thistle. hath put such things as these into the heart of our good King, to beautifie the house of the Lord which is in Ierusalem, etc.


2. Chron. 24. 8. 9. 10. etc.
And at the Kings commandement they made a Penny Royall, or the Kings Royall Penny or gift. Chest, and set it without at the gate of the house of the Lord; and made a Proclamation through Iuda and Ierusalem, etc.
And the Lords and all the People reioyced, and This may be called Angelica, when Angels are so offered. brought in vntill there was sufficient, etc.


2. Kings 12. 9. 10. 11. 12.
But Iehoiadah the high Priest tooke a Chest, This is (as I take it) Bursa Pastoris, or Shepheards purse or the Clergies Chest. and bored a hole in the lid of it, and set it beside the Altar, on the right side, as euery man cometh into the Temple of the Lord, etc.
And when they saw there was much money in the Chest, the Kings Scribe, and the high priest came vp and told the money, etc. and gaue it sealed into the hands of them that executed the worke, and such as had the ouersight of the house of the Lord. Thus they did day by day, and gathered money in abundance. And so the workmen wrought, and the worke amended through their hands, and they made the house of God as it ought to be, and strengthned it. So Iehoiadah Thus farre extends the pious branches of the good herbe called the Shepheards Purse. waxed old, and died full of dayes, etc. And they buried him in the City of Dauid, among the Kings, because he dealt well with Israel, and with God and his House.

Here followeth Mother-Time, gathered by the good King of our time, and sent to the Reuerend Kingly Bishop, Physitian, or Father of this Mother-Church, as an Herbe of most excellent vertue to cure all her diseases. (viz.)


Psalme 102. verses 13. 14.
THou shalt arise and haue mercy vpon Sion, for the This sweet Mother or Mountaine Time may also be called the precious ointment vpon the head, that ran downe vnto our Aarons beard: yea euen to the skirts of his Clothing: or yet more properly, like the Dew of Hermon, which (by a diuine Sermon) fell vpon our sacred hill of Sion. Time to fauour her, yea the set time is come.
For thy seruants take pleasure in her stones, and fauour the dust thereof.




A Parallel of present time with time past: Or, of a good King liuing, with a faithfull good King long since deceased.
IN the 18. yeare of the reigne of our good King Iames Ouer England, France, and Ireland., it pleased his sacred Maiestie to visit me (poore Church) and soone after to send the Gouernor of his City, with diuers of his Nobles, Reuerend Fathers, and Elders, to suruey my wants, and to returne vnto his Highnesse all my diseases and corruptions, and their causes; that so he might (like a most excellent Supreame head and gouernor in Church and Commonwealth within his Maiesties Dominions. Physitian next vnder God) take course for my cure. And so in the same yere he called a Parliament intending first to purge the land and the Temple, and then (I hope) to send his Nobles, etc. againe, that shall neuer cease till I bee totally cured, and most beautifully repayred.
This may then be worthily paralleld with the noble acts of that famous and faithfull King Iosiah recorded and renowned in the second Booke of the Kings, the 22. Chapter, and in the second Verses 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. etc. Verses 8, 9, 10. etc. Booke of Chron. the 34. Chapter.
For in the 18. yeare of his Reigne (when hee had purged the Land and the Temple of Heresie This is heauenly Hysope. and Corruption) It should seem this was at the end of a Parliament, which was a heauenly conclusion of one good worke, and a most sacred beginning of another. Nota quaeso, etc. he sent Saphan the sonne of Azaliah, and Maasiah the Gouernor of the City,
 and Ioah the sonne of Ioahaz the Recorder, to repaire the House of the Lord his God, etc.
And when they came to Hilkiah the high priest, they deliuered the money that was brought into the house of God, which the Leuites that kept the Entries had gathered of the hands of Manasseh and Ephraim, and of all that yet remained in Israel, and of all Iudah and Beniamin, and they returned to Ierusalem: and they put it in the hands of them Men did not then come like Beares to a stake to such a businesse, but like poore beggers to a xijd. dole. Happy was hee that could doe any thing which might dignifie and set forward the worke. that had the ouersight of the house of the Lord, and they gaue it to the Laborers that wrought in the house of the Lord, to repaire and mend the House: euen to Masons and Carpenters gaue they it to get hewed stone and timber for Couples and for Beames, etc.
And the men did worke, etc. And the Ouerseers of them to courage them forward, were Iahath and Obadiah, Leuits of the Children of Merari; and Zechariah, and Meshullam of the Children of the Kohathites, which all could skill of Instruments of musicke:
And ouer the bearers of burthens, and ouer all that wrought in whatsoeuer workmanship, were there Scribes, Officers, and Porters of the Leuites, etc.
Thus farre the Posie of heauenly Herbs and Flowers, gathered out of the Garden where millions more might haue beene culled for my purpose, but I hope this is enough to him that delighteth in sweet Odours of piety and good workes.
And to that end I will pray as followeth.


This Prayer or Petition is for the King, Prince, etc. and directed to the King of Kings.

O King of Kings, and Lord Omnipotent,
Direct, protect King Iames in Parliament;
Make all those wholesome Lawes he treats vpon,
T'approue him still, a second Salomon;
A blessed Peacemaker, Churches Amender:
And (in Great Britaine long) true Faiths Defender.
That euery Pen may write a sacred Story
Of all his Noble Acts, done to thy Glory:
And Sinne (corrupt and base) may (out of hand)
Be purged quite and cleane out of the Land.


His Sonne (likewise) thy Sonne (O God) so guide him,
That all good hopes and haps may still betide him;
And as he is a Prince of prudent carriage.
So blesse him (Lord) in Single life and Marriage;
Make him thy Iem of Iems, thy Pearle of Pearles,
(Next to his Maiesty) our Princely Charles;
Thy conqu'ring Champion when he goes to Warres,
(As he is Conqu'rer at the Tilting-barres;)
And thy strong Sampson (valiant in the Field,)
That he may fight and kill, and ne're be kild.


Blesse also all his noble Lords and Peeres,
His Bishops, Burgesses, and Knights of Shires,
And giue them Ioy, Prosperity, and Health,
That doe their best for Church and Common-Wealth.


O let not any man be so vnholy,
From henceforth for to beg a I meane such as are helpfull to one Subiect, and hurtfull to all the rest. Monopoly:
For well I wote, Much-ill proceeds thereby,
It wrongs the STATE, and sokes the Subiects drie;
Hardens mens hearts, all good I doubt it hath a little choked mens good deuotions towards me. designes doth choke,
And (such as pinch) doth to reuenge prouoke;

"(A thing inhumane, that one Christian Brother,


"Or fellow Subiect, should deuoure another.)



And for my Soueraignes loue to me last Lent,
Vpon a Holy day diuinely spent;

 Loue him (good Lord) and let him plainely see,
It's much the more for his great loue to mee;
That so his Highnesse may (without Omission)
Most royally proceed in the Commission
By Him appointed for my Restauration,
Vpon my humble Plaint and Supplication;

"For neuer came more honor to a King,


"Then my repayre will to his Highnesse bring:


"Nor can a worke be of more note or name,


"To raise Him and His seed Immortall Fame.



O let them be as Heauens bright shining starres,
That are my Friends, his true I haue 70. Commissioners and 40. almost are of the Parliament, I hope one good Phinees among them, will stand vp in my cause. Commissioners,
And such as seeke to frustrate his Decree,
DariusEzra. 6. 11. 12. etc. Sentence light on them for me,
Or turne their hearts, that they may rightly know,
I am thy House, so builded long agoe;
With State, with Honor, and Endowments plenty,
Though Woluish times, and Men haue made it scanty;
For buriall of the dead, for pious vses,
And not for Gods House was wont to be had in reuerence, but I and my Courts are made a place of Sir-reuerence, and as base as any Laystall, etc. Prophanation and abuses;
That so men may haue better conscience
To vse me (like Gods house) with Reuerence.


And let those base, prophane, and idle Rout,
That daily passe with burthens, in, and out;
Those that Such as I here meane loue neither Mother Churches, nor reuerend Fathers: They make a faire tall shew of Faith, but (as Maypoles) they grow slenderer and slenderer, till they come to bee Weather-Cockes, and then their Faith turnes with euery winde, and so be like the Tree that was hewen downe and cast into the fire; hauing neither Roor, Rinde, Sap, Bough, Branch, Leafe, Blossome, or Fruit of good Workes, etc. deride me with their scoffes and Songs,
That wish my downefall with their spitefull tongues,
Those hollow vpright Maypoles that doe hate,
To see their Mother Church be fortunate;
Those that haue suckt my Brests till all is drye,
And yet are backward me to dignifie;
All that pollute my sacred Courts and Walles,
Know there's a scourge for them, whense're it fals;

 O whip them soundly that abuse thy Temple,
That others may be warn'd by their Example.

Heare me thy Sion, from thy Sanctuary,


Helpe me (O God) make haste and doe not tary.



Sic Opto, sic Oro.



This is another Prayer or Petition, for the King, Prince, etc. and directed to the Prince of Princes.

O
Christ the Sonne of God,
Alpha and Omega,
Ruler of heauen and earth,
Orderer of all things,
Light of lights,
Very God of very God,
Sauiour of the world;


Preserue the King and Prince, I was cured of the Kings Euill by his gracious comming, and I hope (if he come once more) I shall be cured of the Wolfe and Dropsie, and preserued from feare of the falling Sicknesse.
Restore my Fame,
Iustifie my Friends,
Nullifie my Foes,
Cure all my euils and infirmities,
Endow me with plenty,
Prosper great Britaine,
Send peace to all Christendome.

And the God of peace, etc. make you perfect in all good workes, etc. So be it. Amen.




This is a Petition to the Kings Maiestie onely.
I hope to see the 26. day of March to be celebrated as a holy day for euer at my Crosse, for a Thanksgiuing to the Lord that he stirred vp the heart of my good King to visit me, and to take course for my good, and then will there be 3. holy daies of great solemnity togither: viz. March. 24 Coronation day. 25. Anunciation day 26. Visitation of St. Paules.

I Humbly beseech: Whereas vpon the 26. day of March last past, (being then Mid-Lent Sunday) it pleased your Maiesty (after the royall solemnity held vpon your Coronation day, and the Anunciation of our blessed Lady, etc.) to visit me with your Sacred presence in an honorable Assembly; and to declare your Kingly loue towards my Retriumphant estate by your own gracious speeches, and by the diuine Oratory of my Reuerend Diocesan at that instant, and soone after by a most Noble Commission, etc. For the which all people (my good Friends) that haue heard thereof, doe heartily honour and applaud your Highnesse, as a second Salomon.
That likewise it may please your Maiesty (now in this holy time of Lent, or some other time in the Interim of this high and most Honorable Court of Parliament at this present holden) to renew If a competent summe were in cash, and Scaffolds setting vp, and a Register appointed for a record of mens Beneuolences, as in Sr. Thomas Bodleis Library, I should not feare the wanr of money during my Reparation, or euer after. your pious fauour towards mee, by gaining some little beneuolence to set on the worke, as a free Offering or gift, and for redresse of my intolerable wrongs, by some penall Lawes, and seuere punishment of the offenders.
And I shall continue my praiers for your sacred Maiestie, your Princely Posterity, your long, peaceable, and prosperous Reigne; and for that Noble, Reuerend, and Worthy Assembly (by the helpe of my Well-willers) to the worlds end. And this poore man (who hath beene my voluntary
 seruant these 8. yeares, by Bookes, Petitions, and other deuises, euen to his owne dilapidations) will (according to his bounden duty) approue himselfe your Maiesties loyall Subiect, and my faithfull Proficient during life, etc.


St. Paules her Conceipt after this Petition.

OF many Molehils, Mountaines may be made,
By many Springs, great Riuers we doe see,
By many hands a Burthen's light tis said,
That (for some few) too waighty seemes to bee;


So many hands might make quicke worke of mee:
Though hard it seeme at first (most Royall King)
Yet once begunne t'will proue an easie thing.


And rather benefit then losse.
For so shall many worke and pay their debts,
And what rich Subiects giues, poore Subiects gets:
No Money goes out of Thy Land thereby,
Or from the Chamber, or Thy Treasury:
But all to offer freely at a Chest, One little free Beneuolence to begin, will be more prosperous then 1000. forced Collections or Taxations.
What gifts they please, as at a Mariage Feast;
So Mites to Millions at the last may rise,
And I be made a Princely Edifice.

Here followeth a Petition written in my name, and presented to the King, two dayes before his Maiestie came to visit me, (viz) on Friday the 24. of March 1619. But the Master of Requests then attending, tooke it away from his Highnesse before he could reade it, as many things had beene so taken before, to the great hindrance and griefe of the poore Author.






To the KINGS most Sacred MAIESTIE.
VVHereas (to the exeeeding great ioy of all my deare Friends, there is certaine intelligence giuen, that your Highnesse will visit me on Sunday next: And the rather I beleeue it, for that I haue had more sweeping, brushing and cleansing, then in 40. yeares before. My workmen lookt like him they call Muld-Sacke after sweeping of a Chimney.
May it please your most Excellent Maiestie (among your royall Intendments to be celebrated in me vpon that Holy day) to manifest (withall) your pious Affection towards Repayre of my Decayes, and I shall daily pray, etc.

The Authors Conceipt written vnder my PETITION.

St. PAVLES (O King) since I her suite began, This (for 500. li.) my Author can approue by oath that it came to me by my Complaint, which he made, that put Mr. Parker (a Benefactor) in mind to do me good, as handsell to bring on more good Customers.
hath gain'd by fiue (almost) eight hundred pound;
Grace thou her Suite, and I'me assured than,
each hundred will a thousand pounds be found;
Each thousand, ten; and euery ten, a score,
Till she breake forth in thankes, and craue no more.



A Petition to the PRINCE.

ONe onely Aduocate with God we haue,
(Christ Iesus, our sweet Sauiour, his deare Sonne)
By whom alone we get all things we craue,
in humblenesse, and iust petition;


Great Prince, you are my Soueraignes onely Sonne,
Resemble then the Course twixt God and man,
And grace my humble suite the best you can;
And (as I'me bound) so will I euer pray,
That God will blesse your Highnesse night and day.





A Petition to the Right Honourable, the Lords of his MAIESTIES most Honorable Priuy Councell.

FOR his sake which (for your sakes) once did cry Eli, Eli, lamasabacthani;
For their sakes, which (for Gods sake) did not spare
Or paines, or cost, or ought, for my welfare;
For all your Honors sakes, I humbly craue,
That now (if euer) I your helpes may haue:
My Suite is honest, iust and reasonable,
The Worke is good, the End most honorable:
Wherefore if you shall please to speake for mee,
Ile pray that heauen your dwelling place may be.


Your Honors now as aforesaid, and also when you haue ended your labours, if you please (as some of your forefathers haue done) to rest with me. S. PAVLES.





St. PAVLES concludeth in an Extasie, alluded to the sense of hearing, being as it were rauished with ioy of her hopefull successe.


VVHat Wight is he in England-Isra-el,
That knowes my wants, loues me, and can speake well?
Let him stand vp with Zeale and sound intent,
And speake for me now in this Parliament;
Is he a Leuite, Priest, Samaritan?
Hath he the voice of Angell, or of man?
Who should he be (sweete sense doe not thou erre)
Which doth in that high Court my Bill preferre?
O, now I know; hearke how the people sing,

Glory to God, and honor to the King.

I'st He indeed? is it that peerelesse Iemme?
(BEST OF BEST SPEAKERS IN IERVSALEM.)
I'st He that holds me still in Reuerence?
I'st He that gets me a Beneuolence?
I'st He that (for my good) lifts vp his Voice?
And doe the people thus for me reioyce?
Blessed be such a King, and blessed all
That thus doe honor me their Church of Paul.


Thus much (for the most part) of what was giuen to the King on Midlent-Sunday last.





Here follow other things of the Author, done long before, and not impertinent to that which is herein intended (that is) to stirre vp good mindes to set forwards a good worke. (viz.)



Certaine Additions,


Voyces and Visions,


Speeches and Parley,

Twixt Paules and Farley.

As they haue beene giuen to the King at sundry times, but not till now published.

S. PAVLES.
FIRST, recite to mee in briefe the Dreame or Vision thou hadst after thou didst publish my Complaint, which thou didst present to his Maiesty by a picture, and which picture thou intendedst to haue giuen to his Maiestie, if thy Petition had not failed thee.


FARLEY.
It was a Dreame in three parts.
1 The first shewing the King, This was in the life time of our gracious Q. Anne, and came to passe (in some part) the said 26. day of March, 1619. Queene, and Prince; with all the Nobles, Reuerend Bishops, and Clergy; Lord Mayor, Aldermen, Citizens,
 and people, comming as from the Tower (in great state and solemnitie) to offer for your good at a Chest standing at your great North-dore.
In this Dreame (me thought) I saw presents of Vide queso, etc. 1. Kings Chap. 5. vers. 8. 9. 10. etc. all the chapter. stone and timber sent by forreigne Princes, to congratulate with his Maiestie in that pious work intended for your reparation as * Hiram sent to King Salomon.
Also (me thought) I saw a Posie written in Capitall letters ouer your Gate next Cheapside, to this effect; viz. BEHOLD THE KING COMETH WITH GREAT IOY, etc. And (me thought) I saw a great glory in the Heauens, and heard two voices sounding in my eares, one towards the King thus, For thy Temples sake, etc. I wish thee all prosperity: The other voice sounding towards the midle of the city in these words, Many good things are done in thee, o thou faire City.
2. The second Dreame shewing the royall solemnities This part of my Dreame hath also proued true. at the Offering, and you in that ragged poore, and smoaky case, as now you are, and the King, etc. sitting to heare a Sermon in the same very Window and place where his Maiestie did sit indeed when He came to visit you.
Me thought I saw (among all your Grieuances that then were opened to his Maiesties sight and hearing) one thing written in Capitall letters, which was well obserued on all parts, (viz.)

VIEW, O KING, HOW MY WALL-CREEPERS,


HAVE MADE ME WORKE FOR CHIMNEY-SWEEPERS.


 The Psalme that was sung before the Sermon was (me thought) the Vide. 122. Psalme.
The Text was out of the 24. Chapter of the second Booke of Chron. the 10. verse (viz.)

And all the Lords and all the people reioiced, and brought in, and cast into the Chest, vntill there was sufficient.

The Preacher (me thought) was that Reuerend This approued true in part. Bishop of this Diocesse, whose lot was afterward to performe that taske in another Text appointed by his Sacred Maiestie.
Me thought he diuided the Text aforesaid thus, The Lords and People reioiced, and brought in, and cast into the Chest.
They not onely brought in and cast into the Chest (said he) but they also reioyced, for so (indeed) God is well pleased, who accepteth and loueth a Cheerefull giuer, and the cheerefulnesse of the Giuer doth much commend the Gift.
Then he obserued the readinesse of the People by the particle, All.
Not some of the Lords, or some of the people offered, but All the Lords, and All the People, euen the poore Widow cast in her Mite.
Then the peoples continuance in well doing. For (said he) they gaue not a little at the first for fashion sake, or in shew of deuotion, and then grew weary, but they brought in and cast into the Chest, vntill there was sufficient.
Therein he also obserued, how the End crowns the Action, for to beginne well, and not to end well is to bee a Christian by halfes, and that in
 the worst halfe too.
And these (mee thought) were the principall diuisions of the Text, whereat I was neuer a whit vext, etc.
After the Sermon was ended, I went in, and at two of your Pillars neare Sir Christopher Hattons Tombe (me thought) I saw two Chests, chained to two Pillars, one hauing these words and verses in Capitall letters written in a faire Table, hanging ouer the Chest as followeth, (viz.)


THE KINGS CHEST.

COme all good Subiects loyall, and liege people,
With chearful harts to help this Church and Steeple,
For here's the place of offering appointed
By IAMES our sacred King, and Gods Annointed:
Where such as (with deuotion) offer free,
Shall in true Register recorded be,
To their great honor, fame, renowne and praise,
From this time forward, to the end of dayes:
His Highnesse hath begunne for your example,
Come then I pray it's for Gods holy Temple.



THE QVEENES CHEST.

THis Chest, which here inchained you doe finde,
(Prepared for the gifts of Or kind Women. women-kinde)
Queen ANNE (chiefe foundresse, and S. Paules wel-willer)
Commanded to be fixed to this pillar,
And 'cause she would her pious heart vnfold,
Shee first put in a Princely showre of gold.
Come Ladies then, her goodnesse imitate,
And let Paules know shee shall be fortunate.

 Nay come all women, bring away your crownes,
Pounds, shillings, pence, from Countries, Cities, Townes:
O let it be to all a ioy and pleasure,
To helpe this Church with some part of your treasure:
It is a blessed worke, and well't doth suite,
That faithfull trees should bring forth holy fruite.
Your Offerings shall be kept in true Record,
Vntill the second comming of the Lord.
Come then (I pray) and let this Prouerbe stand,

When Women giue they haue a luckie hand.


These two Chests, one for the men, and another for the womens Offerings (me thought) one told me, were placed there, not so much for the present Offering, (which was then in generall at your North doore, for getting money to set on the Worke) but for future, during the time of your Reparation, and were attended by one appointed by the King of purpose to This Register or Record, is humbly required by, etc. as a Grace to what he hath done. record the gifts which should be brought in, either as volu^tary by the liuing, or as Legatory by the deceased; To the end his Maiestie might once a yeare see how his louing Subiects, and loyall people did second his Highnesse, and imitate his goodnesse (to their power) in his pious designes.
And thus I concluded my second Dreame, viz. As wicked workes doe bring our soules damnation, So pious workes are steps to our saluation.
3. My third and last Dreame was in this manner, Me thought I saw you suddenly renewed, beautifully repaired, and cured of all your euills, and infirmities.
And then (me thought) appeared a farre more
 glorious splendor in the Heauens then that which I saw in my first Dreame, and neare to the Kings Picture, (which (me thought) was rarely ingrauen and cut in stone vpon your Steeple) I saw eight Angels flying vp and downe, reioycing with great melody, and sounding Praises with Trumpets and heauenly Voices as followeth: (viz.)

1 Angell.
For this good worke King Iames shall rule in peace,
And 'cause (by him) the Gospell doth increase,


2 Angell.
Hee shall be prosperous in all his wayes,
Hee shall haue health, long life, and happy dayes.


3 Angell.
His Royall Seede shall mighty be and many,
And shall increase as much as ere did any.


4 Angell.
Hee shall plant Colonies in euery Nation,
To forward still the Gospels propagation.


5 Angell.
Like as the Sands on Sea, or Starres in Skye,
So shall his People grow and multiply.


6 Angell.
Hee shall haue conquest when hee goes to fight,
And shall put all his enemies to flight:


7 Angell.
And (at the last) to end our blessed story,
Hee shall be crown'd in heauen with endlesse glory.


8 Angell.
Where Angels and Archangels euer sings
All prayse and honor to the King of Kings.


S. Pa.
So be it.


Fa.
Amen.

 This glorious sound of the Angels, so much inflamed my spirits with diuine desires to heare and see more, (being also rapt and rauished with ioy at your beautifull appearance) that I suddenly start vp in my bed, and was thereby awaked.
And thus haue I ended my third Dreame, and as briefly as I could repeated all three of them.


S. Pa.
Did you not write a Booke of this at large, and giue it to his Maiestie when you presented the Table?


Fa.
Yes that I did, but for want of a Friend in Court, I failed of my desires, which was, to haue published it; such ill successe had I with my Petitions, that (although) his Maiestie seemed well pleased with any thing I gaue him in your behalfe, yet could I neuer get Reference vpon any: So that oftentimes I went by Chearing (alias Charing Crosse) in the Morning, and home by weeping Crosse at night.


S. Pa.
What time of the yeare did you fall into these contemplatiue Dreames?


Fa.
Vpon the Eue of S. Iames the Apostle it beganne, but it continued long after, as you shall see by the Prologue, which is before the Dreame in the Booke which I gaue to the King, in this manner;



The PROLOGVE.

VVpon the Feast of IAMES th'Apostle last,
At ten a clocke i'th night, and somewhat past;
I went to bed, and after I had pray'd,
I turnd me on my right side, and so laid;

 Intending there in quiet sort to sleepe,
Vntill the Larke did sing, or day did peepe;
So musing broad awake a little while,
At last a slumber did mine eyes beguile;
And what I thought but then, before I slept,
I dream'd thereon, and in that Dreame was kept
Foure houres at least, nay (as I now remember)
It did not end vntill the last Nouember;
Except some thrice, and then I felt some paine;
So dream'd, so wak't, then dream't, then wak't againe,
As if I had beene It might haue made a better head then mine ake aboue three times. made of dreame and sleepe,
Sometimes I laught, and sometimes waile and weepe,
By which I cal'd to mind a sacred Theame,
That all mans life is but a Sleepe or Dreame,
A Span, a Flower, a Ship at Sea, a Bubble;
Like to a Tale that's told, like Grasse, like Stubble;
Like any thing that soone doth change and fade,
Such is the life of man, whom God hath made;
I meane in this life, fraile and transitory,
Vntill he doe attaine the life of glory.


And then beganne my waking dreaming Story.


S. Pa.
Now I pray thee repeate the Conceipt thou madest in my name, which thou gauest to the Lord Mayor of London, when thou didst present my Complaint vnto him, a little after Christmas. 1615.


Pa.
I will giue you the effect as well as I can remember. (viz.)





TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sir Iohn Iolles Knight, Lord Mayor, etc. It was in his time, etc.
The Humble Petition of H. F. for S. Paules Church in London.
WHereas it is a laudable Custome in this Honourable Citie, that about this time in euery yeare, the Alderman of euery Ward doth present vnto the Lord Mayor (for the time being) all abuses, misdemeanours, annoyances and decayes, to the end they should be reformed, auoyded and amended.
It may please your good Lordship (in regard that no Ward-mote Inquest hath as yet taken notice of my decayes and annoyances,) to accept of this my Presentment made by my Friend, and to doe to mee His answer was Honorable and worthy at that time. what honorable fauour and respect you can towards my redresse: And I shall pray, etc.

S. Pa.

Set downe likewise, the Letter which you deuised in my name to the Reuerend Preachers that come to my Crosse, for it will not bee impertinent to be inserted.



F.

I shall gladly doe it as followeth. (viz.)



MY very Reuerend Friends, you are the Lords Ambassadors, whom therfore should you feare? You see before your eyes my miserable estate, how (of the fairest Caedar in Lebanon) I am become the least respected in London. Like a great withering Oake
 in a greene flourishing Forrest, and of the most remarkeable See-farre, a forlorne, and a forsaken Cypher; your Wisedomes know I haue raised and maintained many; O then let me not be forgotten in mine old age: you know likewise, that Briefe vpon Briefe goes currant for the restauration of the prophane houses of men, which haue been ruined by misfortune of fire, as I was, and how they are new builded and made better then before. I hope therefore you will do somewhat for Gods house. You giue thanks for the benefits that are bestowed on them that come with the Lords Ambassage to my Crosse: And pray for the increase of such benefactors. I desire that you would pray likewise for such Benefactors as will contribute to my good; that so the Church and Churchmen may thriue together. For the houses of men there are prouisoes and Couenants to tie the Tenants to reparation, or to forfeit their Leases: are there no such Prouisoes and Couenants for Gods Tenants? If there be not, then sure it is because hee holds them so worthy that they need not be bound: I say no more, because I doubt not of your loue and care. And so I commend you to the heauenly protection of the Almighty, and rest in silence euer hereafter as your louing Mother-Church,

S. Paules.



S. Pa.

Now set downe what other things you thinke fit, and let vs draw to conclusion.



F.

Then first I will write the Carroll which I gaue to his Maiestie on Christmas day, before his going into Scotland (viz.)




IN Paradise was Adam borne;
Iesus Christ but in a Stall:
By the first we were forlorne,
by the second saued all:

Glory be to God on High,


Ioy at Christs Natiuitie,


God preserue your Maiestie.



Euah out of Adam came,
Christ of Mary tooke his birth,
By the first came woe and shame,
by the second ioy on earth;

Glory be to God on High, etc.



Peace be still within thy wals,
Plenty to all needy soules,
So (good King) remember Paules.





This following I gaue to his Maiesty when he tooke Coach at Theobalds, in his Highnesse Progresse to Scotland aforesaid, as my faithfull Farewell or faire wish to the good successe of his Sacred Maiestie, and of all his Noble, Reuerend, and Worthy followers, etc. viz.


RIde on with honor (mighty King)
With Princely high Renowne,
From London vnto It may well be called ^^d^n, or a place of Ioy where so gracious a Peacemaker was borne. Edenburgh,
Thy natiue Seate and Towne:
And blessed be thy Maiestie,
In euery place thou goest,
Vnto the ioy of Man and Boy,
From highest to the lowest.


Ride on yee Noble Lords also,
God blesse you and our Master,
And in the Progresse as yee passe,
Defend you from disaster:
And Trinity in Vnitie,
Be still your guide and glory;
That of this time each penne may rime,
A pleasant Progresse story.


And ride yee on, yee Reu'rend ones,
For you are for our soules;
And when you are at Edenburgh,
I pray remember Paules:
For shee will pray both night and day
For your prosperitie;
Because your words much helpe affords,
In her necessitie.



Ride on likewise, yee worthy Knights,
With Iovialty and pleasure,
And see you haue a noble eare
To bring againe our No nation can haue a greater Treasure in a Prudent and a gracious King then we haue, if wee were so thankfull to God as we ought to be. Treasure:
Your fealty and loyalty,
The Lord will euer blesse,
And for the same you shall get fame,
And heauenly happinesse.


So ride yee on his Officers,
And Yeomen strong and trusty;
Some guard before, and some behinde,
Be valiant, bold and lusty:
Yet see you be for Courtisie
In Scotland well commended:
That loue and peace may still increase
vntill the world be ended.


And as in Progresse so in Regresse,
O, let vs euer pray,
That God will blesse his Maiestie,
And Queene and Prince alway:
That North, and West, and South, and East,
His glory wee may sing,
And nights and dayes giue thanks and praise,
For IAMES our Sacred King.





Now followeth a Welcome to his MAIESTIE, as I intended to present the same at Windsor, but was hindered of my purpose. (viz.)


VVElcome Dread Soueraigne from that Paradise,
Where Nature gaue thee Birth, Grace, Edifice:
Welcome Great Britaines Treasure, and best Iemme,
From Edenburgh to our Ierusalem:
Welcome Peace-maker, Louer of Vnitie,
Europes admired King for Maiestie,
And for all Vertues that good Kings befit,
As Mercy, Iustice, Learning, Wisedome, Wit.
Welcome tenne thousand times, and blessed be
All those that (with true hearts) doe welcome Thee,
And all thy Noble, and thy faithfull Traine,
That went with Thee, and brought Thee safe againe.


Such ioy succeed thy trauels to the North,
That thereby peace and concord may spring forth,
And spread it selfe throughout great Britany,
To the perfecting of true Amitie.
That so from East to West, from North to South,
Gods praise, and Thine, may be in euery mouth.
And to thy meeting with thy Turtle Royall,
(Thy sacred second selfe, thy Queene most Loyall)
Thy Princely Son, (our High and Mighty CHARLES,)
Thy Noble Councellors, Lords, Ladies, Earles,
Bishops, Clergy, Knights, Gentry, Commons, All
That long haue wish'd thy presence at Whitehall:
And thy true Citizens of famous London,
That (for thy absence) thought themselues vndon;
Such ioy succeed as neuer was before,
And God increase that ioy for euermore.
And as I pray, so pray all loyall people,
Neuer forgetting S. Paules Church and Steeple.





This following is another Christmas Caroll which I gaue to his Maiestie on the Christmas day next after his Highnesse Returne from Scotland.


THe This day we were saued from eternall death. fiue and twentieth of December,
And the This day from a sudden fearefull, and a most inhumane death. fift day of Nouember,
Let vs thankefully remember;


And with ioy for euer sing,
Praises to our heauenly King,
and be doing some good thing:


Glory be to God on High,
For our Christs Natiuitie, Nothing can be more remarkeable then Pauls Repaire, in thankfull memory of our wonderfull deliuery from the Gunpowder Treason.
And our great Deliuery.
God preserue your Maiestie.


Peace be still within Thy wals,
Plenty to all needy Soules;
Now (good King) remember Paules.

Here my Candle was cleane burnt out, and this last Caroll, was the last thing I presented to his Maiestie, vntill two dayes before His comming to visit you, (which was the Petition before recited.) In this Interim I grew much dismayed, for that I saw little hope of your helpe; many rubs I rannne through, many scoffes and scornes I did vndergoe; forsaken by my Butterflie
 Friends, laught and derided at by your Enemies; Let them that scoffe at this beware of Suretiship. pursued after by Wolues of Wood-street, and the Foxes of the Poultrey, sometimes strongly Incountred, and sometimes at the point of Death and Despaire: In stead of seruing my Prince, which I humbly desired, (though but as a doorekeeper in you) I was prest for the seruice of King Lud, where all the comfort I had, was, that I could see you, salute you, and condole with your miseries: my poore cloathes and ragges I could not compare to any thing better then to your West End; and my seruice to nothing lesse then bondage: So I was troubled in my sleepes, and dreamed I heard fearefull voices sounding in, and about you, which were as follow. (viz.)
The first voice (me thought) was in the Chappell which now is beautified and repaired by Mr. Raphe Chamberlein, and made a place of It lay before like a Swinestie, with dust, rubbish, and soote, and the windowes as if Hags and Hobgoblins had torne them. morning Sacrifice to the Lord.



Where a gastly Ghost start vp out of an old Tombe or Graue, and said thus:


HAd I and my Forefathers thus neglected,
To see Gods houses mended and erected;
Or for to giue of rich Endowments plenty,
That none which did his seruice might goe empty;


Qu. Where had his Word beene taught, to me expresse?
An. In vncouth places, Caues, and Wildernesse.
"O then repaire what to your hands we builded,
"Lest all your workes proue painted shewes ore gilded.





Then another Ghost appeared neare that which is commonly called Duke Humphries Tombe, and made a voice like the voice of Pitty. (viz.)


VVHen Winter with his blasts, flouds, frosts and snow,
Hath made all things looke old, and dead to see;
In comes the Spring: so once a yeare you know,
All Caedars, shrubs, and plants renued be:
O thanklesse man, is God thus good to thee?
Why dost thou then neglect his good example,
In many Springs not to renew his Temple.




Another starts vp vnder the Arches of the Consistory where the Lawyers get Fees, and sayes thus in answere of Pitty.


THe Causes why, This was Truth.
Ile soone discry;
For when men striue themselues to magnifie,
To flaunt in worldly pompe and rich aray,
They doe forget Gods house to dignifie,
That's left to runne to ruine and decay,
Alas, alas, alas, and welladay:
The time hath beene when such a famous Church,
Could not (for want of Friends) bin left i'th lurch.




Then spake Zeale out of the two Towers at the West End (viz.) Lollords Tower, and the Tower where yeur treasure Ardent Zeale two voices. was kept in a hole of your wall. (viz.)


 TO see a strange out-landish Fowle, 
A quaint Baboon, an Ape, an Owle,
A dancing Beare, a Gyants bone,
A foolish Ingin moue alone,
A Morris-dance, a Puppit play,
Mad Tom to sing a Roundelay,
A Woman dancing on a Rope;
Bull-baiting also at the Hope;

 A Rimers Iests, a Iuglers cheats,
A Tumbler shewing cunning feats,
Or Players acting on the Stage,
There goes the bounty of our Age:
But vnto any pious motion,
There's little coine, and lesse deuotion.


 FOr euery fashion base and vaine,
For purchasing, or greedy gaine,
For Let Mr. Criticke thinke I reach no higher then the Vulgar Vp-start in these two lines, or the Prodigall spend-thrift: I censure not the Pleasures and pastimes of the truely Noble, and of all others that exercise any laudable sports for Recreation of wit, and agility of body. Dicing, Drinking, foolish sporting,
Hunting, Wenching, Coaching, Courting,
There is enough in euery Function,
But to this Church is small Compunction.




This voice being ended, I awaked, and in an Impatient manner made this mine owne voice, as followeth. viz.


IF it be so, farewell Britania,
For I will goe vnto Virginia,
To see what Saluages will doe,
When Christians are so hard to wooe:
Take heed all Writers in this kind,
For Church Complaints are wasted wind.

So going to the Treasurer for Virginia, with Resolution to depart the Land with speed; hee being not then at leisure, appointed me to come Vpon a Saturday in Lent. the Wednesday following: and at my returne from Aldersgate to your presence againe, there came newes by a sweet Westerne gale of winde that his Maiestie would certainly come to visit you on Mid-Lent Sunday in great solemnity. At which most ioyfull Tidings I forgot Virginia againe, and attended with hope of some happie succcesse, to my hearty desires, towards your Reparation;
 which (I thanke the Lord) was performed to the full of my expectation for that time.

DOMINE SALVVM FAC REGEM IACOBVM.

Thus for your good I'ue written to the full,
Weari'd my Muse, and made my spirits dull;
Spent time and Coyne (good God) what shall I more?
Onely a good Successe I doe implore.


S. Pa.

Be of good cheere, and let God worke his will,
Speake to the King, for he is Gracious still,
If so thou canst not either speed or thriue
Let me alone, and doe no further striue;
Thy Charges hath beene great I must confesse,
Thy paines (likewise) I doe accept no lesse,
Therefore when any good to me doth fall,
Be sure my Loue shall proue Reciprocall:
And at the last, when Death shall strike thee dead,
Within my Wombe thou shalt be buried:
Where (for thy kindnesse vnto me expressed)
Thou shalt remaine, till Christ say, Come ye Blessed;
So to conclude, and make our Friends to laugh,
Ile tell thee what shall be thy Epitaph.

(viz.)

VNder this Stone, my HARRY lies interred,
Neuer till now, by Friends or Fates preferred,
For though by Death his Bodie's here in Dust,
By Christ his Soule's prefer'd among the Iust;
He (for my Good) did labour late and early,
His Christi'n Name you know, his Sirname's FARLEY:




Fa.

I humbly thanke your Greatnesse, and doe pray,

You may proue happy till the latter Day,


Expect each
Or the 26. of March.
Mid-Lent Sunday while I liue,

Something (for you) Ile to my Soueragine giue.



Veritate and Reuerentia.






Yea, because of the house of the Lord our
God, I will seeke to do Thee good, Ps. 122. 9.

Blessed may that Preacher bee, That will pray and speake for mee.




