


THE WORTH OF WOMEN.

1
MY infant Muse that slept in silence long,
Resolu'd no more her vntun'd notes to sing,
Asham'd to heare the ignominous wrong,
Detracting idle heads did daily bring
Vpon that noble sexe of women-kinde,
Prepar'd her selfe some Antidote to fince.


2
Within an humble valley where she lay,
That was with loftie hils inuiron'd round,
Through wch a pleasant christal brook did play
With pibble stones that roled on the ground,
Where chirping birds melodiously did sing,
To entertaine the sweet refreshing Spring.


3
There Philomela did bewaile the rape
Of wicked Terius that incestuous King:
And louely Laeda in her Swan-like shape,
Hid her blacke foote vnder her snowie wing.
The matelesse Turtle you might also see
Sit mourning by vpon a Willow tree.



4
Vindictiue Progne by her selfe alone,
Vpon an old decayed Trunke did keepe,
Vnder the which Halcyone did moane
Vpon a bush, whose dolefull note was, Weepe;
And Pyres daughters in those pleasant vaies,
Would oft be chattering prety wanton tales.


5
From hence among the lowly Mirtle boughes,
Oretopt with Pines and loftie Cedars tall,
She pearcht her selfe and made a stately rouze,
Wherewith a quill she from her wing let fall,
Intending now to take a higher flight,
She bids me make a pen, sit downe and write.


6
Which I obeying, had no sooner done,
But all the carping-critick-squint-eyd rout,
Like dogs to carion did about me runne,
And fortie faults in twentie words found out:
Each seuerall humour must his censure giue,
And at their verdict I must die or liue.


7
Their great god Momus did no sooner spie
My books rich title, but in heart repining,
Began to draw his goodly mouth awrie,
As if his worship had on Plaice bin dining;
Reades some few lines, and in a furious snuffe
Casts it aside, and sweares 'tis simple stuffe.



8
Which Zoilus straight snatcheth vp againe,
And viewing but a vertuous womans name,
Cries, fie vpon this poore mans silly vaine,
To reade his booke, it were a burning shame:
Whereat the rout of giddie headed geese,
Did all bestow at least a word a peece.


9
One cries, a woman is composde of feather;
Another sweares, their faith is like the winde;
A third, their zeale is made of frostie weather;
The fourth, a chaste one neuer yet could finde.
A fig for these, since better spirits know,
Saue ignorance, true knowledge hath no fo.


10
Emboldned thus my daring Muse goes on,
Attir'd with naked Truths vnspotted robe,
And Eagle-like beholds the dazeling Sunne,
Euen in the Apogean of his globe,
To teach these Criticks that haue err'd in this,
To know hereafter what a woman is.


11
Know then the woman, God did first create,
And with the man in Paradise did place,
Was for an helpe when he was desolate,
Coequall with him in the state of grace.
Out strait cries the multitude, 'twas she:
That pluckt the fruit fro^ the forbidden tree.



12
Euen heere this rable haue deuis'd a lie,
The Serpent pluckt, she gaue the man to eate,
VVho had free will this weake attempt to flie,
Knowing the heauy vengeance God did threat
VVhat time soeuer hee this fruite did taste,
That he should die the death and be displac't.


13
Which surely followed, for when God did call
For Adam as he vsually had done,
He now perceiuing his most wretched fall,
From his all-seeing presence would haue run
But finding no escape, cry'd out, and said,
I heard thy voice O Lord and was afraid.


14
VVhy hast thou eate of the forbidden tree,
Which I co^manded thee thou shouldst not stir,
He said the woman hath deceiued me;
She pleades the Serpent had beguilled her:
Whe^ God in iustice saw their fault was euen,
Both with a curse from Paradise were driuen.


15
Yet shortly after see how God did blesse,
Obedient Sarah, Abrahams faithfull wife,
And fruitfull made her aged barrennesse,
Euen in her latter dying daies of life:
A son she doth conceiue within her wom be,
From whom shall Kings, and realmes, and nations come.



16
A blessed mother of a chosen sonne,
VVith whom the Lord hath promised he will
Establish his couenant now beguune,
VVhich Isack is ordained to fulsill
And as with him saith God I haue decreed. Gen. 24 25.
So after him for euer with his seed.


17
This promise God inuiolate will hold,
Which to confirme he doth Rebeccha chuse,
A vertuous woman more esteem'd then gold,
Whom Isack for his wife doth not refuse:
From Esau she the blessing did obtaine,
To Iacob where the couenant doth remaine.


18
And as to Isack, so did God prouide
For Iacob faithfull women full of zeale, Gen. 29. 30.
Rahell and Leah are to him affi'de,
With whom the Lord most graciously doth deale:
For being barren, by their prayers conceiue,
Childre^, which they vnto successe shal leaue.


19
Though wicked Pharoh strictly did command Exo. 1.
The Mid wiues all men children to destroy,
This practise they would neuer take in hand,
But did his vild iniunction disobey:
And durst no child of his deare life depriue,
But fearing God, preseru'd them all aliue.



20
Whereat the King with anger them pursues,
Saying, How durst you my co^mandme^t break?
Which matter they so wisely did excuse,
As that the King had not a word to speake.
Wherfore God prosper'd the^ in all things wel.
And built the^ houses wherin they might dwel.


21
Now see how God miraculously wrought, Exod. 2.
By Pharohs daughter this poore child to saue,
Who vnto her by stratagem was brought,
Euen by the mercie of a senslesse waue:
She fearing nought her fathers sterne decree,
Gaue straight co^mand, it should preserued be.


22
And by the secret prouidence of God,
This infant to his mother doth commend;
The miracle effected by his rod,
His poore oppressed people to defend:
The Oceans parting testifieth most,
Wherein did perish Pharoh and his hoast.


23
Behold, the Lord a woman chuseth out,
In all the towne, his secret Spies to hide; Ios. 2.
Who being straight examin'd thereabout,
With constant zeale she seruently denide,
And closely them into a roofe conuayd,
Who otherwise their liues had surely payd.



24
And euen about the deadest time of night,
Out at a window she doth them conuay,
And to the woods aduisd them take their flight,
That so the spies might misse them on the way:
For wch good deed (as God had the^ inspir'd)
They faithfully performe what she desir'd.


25
His care of women he doth here expresse, Exo. 22.
With speciall charge the widowes to defend,
And not to hurt the children fatherlesse,
For I shall heare (saith he) their cries ascend;
Then with ye sword I wil your liues bereaue,
And children orphants with your widows leaue.


26
A most renowned woman next we find, Iudg. 4. 45.
A famous Iudge and sacred Prophetesse;
She vnto euery Israelite assign'd
His equall portion, were it more or lesse:
Vnder a Palme in Ephraim she abode,
And iudg'd according to the will of God.


27
To field she doth the Prophet Barak call,
Against the King of Canans mightie band,
Foretelling him that Sisera should fall;
For God will surely giue him to thine hand.
And Barak answering, said, I will not go,
Except thou likewise go with me also.



28
Then Deborah with Barak went along
Vnto mount Tabor where a while they stay,
Till Sisera with men and chariots strong,
Did call him downe where Deborah did say
To Barak, feare not, God for thee doth fight
And Sisera this day shall put to flight.


29
But to a woman he shall giue the fame,
For thy weake faith, which else thee was due
The wife of Heber, Iael was her name,
That with a naile this famous Captaine slue:
For which the Lord hath said, she shalbe blest
Aboue all women that in tents doe rest.


30
Thus God deliuered Canan to the hands
Of Israel, to Deborahs great fame,
Who while their townes depopulated stands,
An happy mother she to them became,
For many kings went forth with her to fight
And Israell grew happy in her sight.


31
A cheerful song she with the King doth strait,
Vnto her God with warbled notes record, Iudg. 5.
Hearken o Kings giue eare you Princes great,
The mountaines melted from before the Lord:
Yea euen Sinai at his voice did melt,
The heauens did drop, the earth his thunder felt.



32
The wife of Monoah being barren long,
God by his Angells most diuinely blest,
With such a sonne as is not found among
The Nazarites with heauenly strength possest:
Where with he shal begin to break the bands
And Israell saue from the Philistians hands.


33
Now Monoah, (as the Angell did commaund)
Vnto the Alter with his offering came,
Where while it burnt, his wife and he did stand,
The Angell loe ascended in the flame:
And Monoah told his wife there standing by
We haue seene God and wee shal surely die.


34
The faithfull woman comforts him and saies,
And if the Lord intended vs to kill,
He would not then accept the thanks and praise
Wee offer here according to his will:
Now God did blesse this child to be a man,
And made him mighty in the host of Dan.


35
Of Naomy and Ruth what tongue can tell, Ruth. 34.
The tender loue they each to other beare,
Together would they goe, together dwell,
Together they the Lord did serue and feare:
Together they would laugh, together cry,
Together liue, and eke together die.



36
And Naomy with feruent zeale did pray
Vnto the Lord, that of his mercie great,
He would on Ruth his louing fauour lay:
Who heard her prayer from his tribunall seate,
And graciously his blessings he bestowes,
As she was gleaning in the field of Boez.


37
A mightie man with riches great possest,
VVhom God inspired with an ardent flame
Of faithfull loue, which could not be supprest,
Vntill an husband he to Ruth became:
Fro^ who^ (by his decree, whose acts are wise)
A blessed generation doth arise.


38
A liuely patterne of rare faith indeed, 1. Sa. 1.
In barren Hannah we may here behold,
With teares which fro^ a contrite heart proceed,
Vnto the Lord she doth her griefe vnfold,
VVith feruent prayer she might a son obtain,
Vowing to giue him to the Lord againe.


39
God heard her praier, and granted her request,
She doth conceiue and eke bring forth a sonne,
Wch brought her disconte^ted thoughts to rest,
She magnifide the Lord for what was done:
And to the Altar where all knees do bow,
She brought the child, and there performd her vow.



40
A true Idea of a vertuous wife,
In Abigail is worthily exprest, 1. Sam 25.
VVho by her wisedome sau'd her husbands life
From Dauids iust reuenge, and all the rest,
Whe^ he had vowd of Nabals house, there shal
Not one be left to pisse against the wall.


41
And shortly after, God did Nabal smite
VVith sicknesse, whereof presently he died:
Then Dauid said: Blest be the God of might,
That hath my hands to shed his blood denide,
By her aduice, whose loue he now pursues,
And for her vertue to his wife doth chuse.


42
Vnspotted Tamar in a brothers power, 2 Sam. 13.
On who^ she thought she might her life depend,
Whilst he inhumanely did her defloure,
See how she mourns for what she ca^not mend:
Her clothes the rent, and dust and ashes throws
Vpon her head, thus desolate she goes.


43
Bathsheba by the Prophet is inspir'd,
To moue the King that Salomon might raigne 1. Kin. 1.
Alone (no doubt) the highest heauens desir'd,
Ordaining her the subiect to obtaine:
VVhich well appear'd by his diuine successe,
God did with wisedom, riches, honor blesse.



44
So rare that from the wild Arabian south,
The Queene of Sheha iournied many daie s, Kin. 10.
To learne sage wisdom fro^ that sapie nt mouth
To her immortall euerlasting praise:
Wch whe^ she did with wonder great behold
She gaue him spices, precious stones and gold.


45
And blest, saith she, be God which doth delight
In thee O King, and of his mercy great,
That so his people may be iudg'd aright,
Hath thee inuested in the iudgment seate:
This woma^ shal (saith God) in iudgment rise Luk. 11. 10. 31.
Against those people did their Lord despise.


46
How highly God of women doth esteeme,
The widow of Sarepta sheweth plaine, 1. Kin. 17.
Wch widow poore ye Lord doth worthy deeme
The holy man Eliah to fustaine:
When famine sore the country did oppresse,
By miracle he doth this woman blesse.


47
A little oyle she had within a cruse,
And meale likewise to make a cake withall,
VVhereby herselfe she iustly doth excuse,
Vnto the Prophet who for bread doth call:
Loe this is all is left my sonne and I,
VVhich I am dressing, we may eate and die.



48
Eliah said, woman be not afraid,
Make first a cake and bring it vnto me,
The meale is in thy barrell God hath said,
Nor yet the oyle shall euer wasted be,
Vntil the time the Lord doth send forth raine
The earth with plenty to possesse againe.


49
And she vnto Eliah brought a cake,
Then for her selfe and sonne did likewise dresse,
And many daies did this prouision make,
And yet her meale and oyle was not the lesse:
And to confirm her faith stil more and more,
Her sonne deceast, he doth to life restore.


50
An other widow straight the Lord hath found
On whom he doth most plenteously bestow, 2. Kin. 4
A miracle for euer to be crown'd,
Her vessells all with oyle doth ouerflow:
And ceased not vntill the woman said,
My vessells all are full, and then it staid.


51
Then came she to the man of God, and told
The blessings which she had receiu'd that day,
Eliah said, straight let the oyle be sold,
Wherewith thou mai'st thy creditors go pay:
And as the Lord this day thy state hath blest
So keepe thy selfe and children with the rest.



52
The faithfull Shunamite deserueth well,
To be recorded with this sacred crue,
Who did the holy man of God compell,
To eate with her at euery season due:
And seriously her husband doth inuite,
To build a roome, where he might lodge all night.


53
Wherefore Eliah prayed vnto the Lord,
She being barren, and her husband olde,
To make her fruitfull, and he doth accord,
The Prophet cald the Shunamite, and told:
For this good deed, wch thou to me hast done
Thou shalt conceiue, and eke bring forth a son.


54
And in due time this miracle was wrought,
By his great power, that rules the starrie skie,
A ioyfull sonne into the world she brought,
Which shortly after happened to die:
Hereby to show his loue doth neuer cease,
To life he doth this child from death release.


55
What title shall I giue this happy Queene,
Whose sacred worth, her state doth far exceed, Hest. 14
No eare hath heard, nor wa^dring eye hath seen
An act more bloudy, then is here decreed:
Her people all should be destroyd and slain,
Whose prayer and fasting did their liues obtaine.



56
Of Prouinces one hundred twenty seuen,
The Iews should die, the King had giue^ and seald
Which was opposed by the powerfull heauen,
And at this gracious Queenes request repeal'd:
And to a shamefull end the man she brought
That should this bloudy massacre haue wrought.


57
Thus Hester by the Lords out stretched arme,
Who neuer failes them that in him doe trust,
Preseru'd her people from this wofull harme,
And brought their foes euen down in the dust:
For as they thought ye Iewes to deale withall,
The same reuenge vpon their heads did fall.


58
When Sarah whom her fathers maides dispise, Tob. 3.
Was ouercome with hearts oppressing griefe,
Vnto the Lord for succour strait she flies,
Who heard her prayer, and granted her releife:
And husband of his grace, he doth ordaine,
Wch into mirth, her mourning turn'd again.


59
If wisdome, valor, worth, and zeale were lost, Iudith. 13.
And this rare patterne onely did remaine,
The world can scarce, of such another boast,
Whereby it might redeeme them all againe:
Who by her prayer, obtain'd from Gods high hand,
To saue a Cittie, and preserue a Land.



60
First dust and ashes on her head she throwes,
And all in sackcloth she doth fast and pray,
Then into Olofernes campe she goes,
Where she this famous Captaine doth betray:
With courage stout, and wisdom rare she vs'd,
His head she brought, wch al the land excus'd.


61
Then did she call the Elders of the Towne,
Saying behold what God for you hath done,
With stately wreathes, they did her straight way crowne,
And euery where with shoutes of ioy did run:
The riches great of Olofernes tent,
With one accord they doe to her present.


62
Thus while she was extold, and magnifi'd,
Whom euery eie with wonder did behold,
Vnto the Temple of the Lord she hi'd,
And off'ring all this wealth of plate and gold:
With humble zeale before the Alter bowes,
Vnto the Lord, and thus perform'd her vowes.


63
A mirrour of a chast religious wife,
Is faire Susanna, being fore distrest,
Who rather chose to loose her dearest life,
Then yeild vnto the Elders vild request:
Loe thus resolu'd, aloud for helpe did cry,
And false accus'd, she is condemned to die.



64
But see how God did graciously prouide,
To saue this woman by a childes decree,
Who did the Elders seuerally deuide,
And found them both in seuerall tales to be:
For wch vnworthy deed, their liues they pay
To her great honor, who they did betray.


65
A woman more then wonderfull behold,
Whose resolutions so vndanted are,
As by no earthly power, can be control'd,
More permanent then any fixed starre
Within the Spheare, of that celistiall round,
To whom fames trumpet giues the loudest sound.


66
Seuen sons she had, who by the Kings co^mand,
Because they would not his behests obey,
To violate the custome of their land,
Were all adiudg'd their dearest liues to pay
By sundry tortures, which she seeing plaine,
Imboldned them, still constant to remaine.


67
When six of them, the Tirant had destroy'd,
He wild his mother, moue the seuenth to turne
That so he might this cruell death auoid,
In stead whereof, she bids him boldly burne:
And Martyr-like, the Tirants rage defie,
Thus with his brothers he doth brauely die.



68
Like Hecuba for death of Pryam old,
The mother now all tearmes of life defi'd,
VVith courage greater then Sheuola bold,
And thus this euer honored Martir di'd:
Where we wil leaue the^ to ye world to mourn,
And to our Grandame Eue, againe returne.


69
And there behold, the race poore man had run
VVhen God and Angells did him both forsake,
Fit for precipice thou wert vndone,
And could'st no way, a good attonment make:
Till this rare creature thou dispisest so,
VVas chosen out, to mittigate thy woe.


70
Assist me now ye sacred Sisters nine, Luk. 1. 10. 27. 28. 29. 30.
That I with reuerence may her praises sing,
VVho was elected by the powers deuine,
A sanctifi'd and blessed birth to bring:
VVhen man to sin was subiect, and to thrall,
Became a sweet redemption for vs all.


71
For euer blessed be that glorious name,
Which God and Angells haue pronounced blest
Fro^ whose deare loins, our happy Sauiour came
That to the world brought loue, ioy, peace and rest:
And did not spare his precious bloud to spil
Condemned mans saluation to fulfill.



72
All honor praise and glory due be done,
To her whose seed hath conquered death and hel
A happy mother of a royall sonne,
Before whose throne, she doth in glory dwell,
Where she with Angells, and Ark-angells sings
Sweet haleluiah to the King of Kings.


73
This blessed woman if I could not find,
An other subiect to defend their case,
Might well perswade men, if they were not blind,
With enuious malice, vold of humaine grace:
To striue as much, their honor to maintaine
As they pursue the^ with such foule disdaine.


74
A second Mary doth this first succeed, Mat. 28. Ioh. 20. Mar. 16.
Whose loue and zeale, throughout the world is spred
The teares would make a marble heart to bleed,
VVhich for her deare deceased Lord she shed:
Deep plung'd in woes, in sorows great opprest
Her minde amaz'd, her sences dispossest.


75
In this sad passion to the place she goes,
VVhereas she thought our blessed Sauiour lay
No pen so dolefull can expresse her woes,
VVhen she perceiu'd the body stolne away,
A fresh she wept, and down her head she hung
Like lapwings yt are robbed of their yong.



76
The precious ointment yt with her she brought,
That glorious body to imb^lme and keepe,
She nought respects, since it was gon she sought
She sighes and sobs, and doth not cease to weepe:
Like Niobe this wofull womans feares,
As if she would dissolue herselfe in teares.


77
Then came the good Apostles to the graue,
Fro^ whe^ce they fou^d his corpes co^uai'd away;
Feareing the Iewes, were glad the^selues to saue
And soone return'd, not daring long to stay:
Whe^ Mary stil stood weeping at the tombe
And would not stirre for deaths most cruell doome.


78
But down her head she bowed into the graue,
Scarce giuing credit to her wofull sight,
Where loe at either corner of the caue,
She saw an Angell cloathed all in white:
Whereat agast she would a side haue stept,
Had they not spake and askt her why she wept.


79
For him I wept, ful fraught with greife she said,
Whose like on earth, shal neuer more be fou^d,
VVhom cursed Iewes most cruelly betray'd,
And now haue stoln him fro^ this blessed grou^d
They comfort her, and say, thy teares refraine,
For he thou seek'st, is rais'd to life againe.



80
But she continues still her wofull cheere,
And to her woes no comfort would allow,
Vntill our Sauiour did himselfe appeare,
And askt her, woman, wherefore weepest thou:
She taking him, the Gardner sure to be,
Said sir, if thou hast hid him, giue him me.


81
And Iesus answered, Mary, I am he
Thou seekest so, wherefore be not afraid,
Goe to my brethren, and report of me,
That thou hast seene, and heard what I haue said:
And will them into Galile to goe,
VVhere I will shortly meete with them also.


82
Twixt greife and ioy she stood amaz'd a while,
Then downe she falls, and worships at his feet,
And with a louing entermixing smile,
VVith teares of mirth she doth our Sauior greet
And to perform his wil with reuerence due,
She rose, she went, she ranne, she rather flue.


83
Vntill she came where the Apostles were,
Deep plung'd in sorow, and with griefe opprest,
To whom she did this ioyfull newes declare,
All she had heard and seene, she there exprest:
VVhich done, she strait returned back to find
The company that she had left behind.



84
Another sacred Mary with her came,
And with them also many women more,
For saue the Apostles (to their lasting fame)
VVere none but women did his death deplore:
Earely they rose before the breake of day,
Meaning fro^ thence to take the corps away.


85
A fourth most sacred woman of this name,
Doth with the rest preceding well agree,
A woman filled with religious fame,
At Iesus preaching she would euer be:
In humble maner, seated at his feete,
To heare his wisdome, and his doctrine sweet.


86
Her sister Martha must not be forgot, Ioh. 11. 15.
A most renowned woman full of faith,
Whose loue vnto our Sauiour ceased not,
And as the holy Scripture plainly saith:
Christ Iesus likewise loued them againe,
Who^ men would seem so slightly to disdain.


87
One only brother these two sisters had,
Who accedentally fell sicke, and di'd,
But hearing Christ was co^ming, they were glad
For on his power, these women much reli'd:
Which did alay, and mittigate their griefe,
Hoping by him, they might yet find releife.



88
Martha went forth her louing Lord to meete,
And humbly prostrate at his feete she fell,
Saying o Lord, and my redeemer sweet,
Hadst thou bin here my brother had bin well:
But this I know vndoubted truth to be,
What ere thou askest, God will giue it thee.


89
Then Iesus said, thy brother shall arise,
Yes at the resurrection Lord know,
I am the resurrection he repli'd,
Both of the liuing and the dead also:
Who this beleife shall stedrastly retaine,
Though he were dead, yet shal he liue again.


90
Beleiu'st thou this? Lord I beleeue it all,
And that thou art, that Sonne of God now sent
That should redeem poore sinful man fro^ thral
If he beleeue, becomming penitent:
O rare beleife, and faith of women kind,
Proceeding from a pure vnspotted minde.


91
Then backe she came and did her sister call,
Who hastely went forth her Lord to meete,
And with an heart opprest with griefe doth fal
With bitter teares before her Sauiours feete:
And with a mournful voice, O Lord she cri'd
Had'st thou bin here my brother had not di'd.



92
Be present with me euery wofull wight,
Who^ doleful griefe hath turn'd to dust and mold,
Euen in your saddest, and most mournfull plight,
Let me your gastly visages behold:
I may expresse the agonie he felt,
And marble hearts into compassion melt.


93
VVhen in the spirit he did grone with paine,
VVhich did his sad and heauy heart molest,
How with a troubled soule he gron'd againe,
Oh wherewith can his torments be exprest:
VVho could not be disburthned of his cares,
Vntill his passion burst it selfe in teares.


94
Oh ye mine eyes to conduit pipes would turne,
I might his teares perpetually deplore,
VVeepe sinfull man, and do not cease to mourne
Christs tears, although thou neuer weptst before
Shed now a teare from thy obdurate eye,
Or else hereafter be for euer dry.


95
In this sad plight vnto the tombe He went,
VVhereas deceased Lazarus was laid,
VVhere first he pray'd to God which had him sent,
Then Lazarus come forth, alow'd hee said,
who strait came forth, bou^d hand and foote also
Christ willed them to loose and let him goe.



96
Who can expresse the faithful thanks they giue
To magnifie this miracle he wrought,
Whereby they saw their dearest brother liue,
Which was a worke impossible they thought:
With ioyfull harts they doe not cease to sing
Continuall anthems to their heauenly King.


97
Now shortly after Iesus came againe
To Maries house as he had done before,
With heauenly ioy she doth him entertaine,
Who for her brother lou'd him more and more:
And as at meate with Lazarus he sat,
Vnder the table to his feete she gat.


98
Whereon she doth a costly oile bestow,
VVherwith she washt those euer hallowed feet. Ioh. 12.
Too pure she thought on mortall grou^d to go,
And kindly giues him many kisses sweet:
Not knowing how she shold her loue declare
This done she takes and wipt them with her haire.


99
But his Disciples murmuring, him told
This precious oile should be esteemed more,
VVhich for 3 hundred pence might haue bin sold,
And better far bin giuen to the poore:
But Iesus sharply them rebuking said,
Let her alone, why trouble you the maid.



100
The good that she had done he doth vnfold,
Saying, the poore shall daily on you call,
But me you shortly shall no more behold,
She brought this balme to bury me withall:
Where ere me^ preaching shal ye Gospel name,
This shalbe spoken to her lasting fame.


101
The faith of women all men may behold,
As in this following subiect well appeares,
Who had a bloudy issue long, and could
Receiue no helpe by phisicke many yeares:
Beleeued if she might lesus garment touch,
She should be whole, her faith and zeale was such,


102
With this stro^g hope she thrust into the prease, Mat. 15:
And touching but his very garments hemme,
Immediatly she felt the issue cease,
O famous faith, in estimable iemme:
He knowing what was done, lookt back to see,
And missing her, askt who hath touched me?


103
But she that knew, what miracle was wrought,
VVith feare and trembling at his feete did fall,
And for his mercies sake, she him besought,
To pardon her, and therewith told him all:
He said O woman, with a voice most free,
Great is thy faith, and it hath saued thee.



104
Next see the woman that in Canan dwelt,
By faith beleeues his mercies to obtaine,
How earnestly she with our Sauiour dealt,
Haue mercy on me Lord, she cri'd amaine:
And heale my daughter being sore perplext,
VVho with a diuell cruelly is vext.


105
He heard her well, but did no answer make,
Till his Disciples said, send her away,
She followed still, and would not him forsake,
Though he to her with bitter words did say:
It is not lawfull woman I should giue,
To dogs the childrens bread whereby they liue.


106
True Lord she said, and yet the dogs doe eate,
The croms which from their masters tables fal,
And still for mercy she doth him intreate,
VVho wondred at her faith, and said withall:
O happy wight with heauenly faith inspir'd,
Be it vnto thee as thou hast desir'd.


107
And in yt houre her daughter was made whole,
Vnto her euerlasting ioyes increase,
VVith faith as stedfast as the fixed Pole,
According to his will she went in peace:
Oh faith most rare, ye like hath not bin found
Worthy in leaues of marble to be crown'd.



108
The sinfull woman of the cittie Nain,
Doubts not by faith but she shal purchase grace Luk. 7.
And weeping at his backe she doth remaine,
A little while in most perplexed case:
Then down she falls, and with a sea of teares
His feete she washt, and wipt them with her haires,


109
Anointed them, and gaue them many a kisse,
VVhere at the Pharise in himselfe did say,
VVhere he a Prophet, as men say he is,
Hee'd know this sinner, and not let her stay:
When Iesus knew his thought, Simon said he,
There is a question I must aske of thee.


110
A certaine lender, lent a little summe
To one; and to another lent a great,
But neither able when the time was come
To pay: forgaue them both their seueral debt:
Now which of these think'st thou, will loue him better?
He answered, I suppose the greater debter.


111
VVell hast thou said, our Sauiour then repli'd,
Seest thou this woman that by faith is led,
Yet since I came, thou neither didst prouide
To wash my feete, nor yet anoint my head:
She hath done both, no kisse of thee I got,
Thy faith is great, o woman goe in peace.



112
Wherefore this woman thou dost here behold
Whose firme beleife, and constant faith is such,
As by no mans expression can be told,
Hath much forgiuen her, for she loued much:
To her he said, from sin I thee release,
Thy faith is great, o woman go in peace.


113
Elizabeth old Zacharias wife, Luk. 1.
A rare example wherein men may see,
The blessing followeth a religious life,
A faithfull woman she is found to be:
Whom God the Father by his Angells blest,
In barren age, and with a sonne possest.


104
A child adopted of his speciall grace,
And sanctifi'd euen in his mothers wombe,
Elect to goe before his glorious face,
And prophesie that he should after come:
To strengthen those whose faith was weake and fraile,
The glory of his people Israel,


115
Old Anna then a sacred Prophetesse,
Who serued God with fasting night and day.
Came forth and did her blessed Lord confesse,
While yet within his mothers armes he lay:
Redemption preacht, to her immortal fame,
To all that did beleeue in Iesus name.



116
VVhen as our blessed Sauiour did cast out,
The feind wher with ye dumb man was possest, ^k. 36.
Incompast with a misbeleeuing rout,
Whose wicked thoughts their euill minds molest:
To whom whilst he did wholesome doctrine preach,
Which to amend their sinfull life did touch.


117
A certaine woman lifted vp her voice,
And said the wombe had blest and happy lucke,
That broght thee forth, and let those paps reioyce
Which in thy infants daies did giue thee sucke:
This faithfull woman he doth well approue,
Among the rest with deere and tender loue,


118
VVhich loue he doth most manifestly show,
By miracles he wrought from day to day,
First vnto Peters mother he doth goe, Mat. 8. 14. 15. 16.
Where of a feauer very sicke she lay:
And meerely of his grace it doth him please
To cure her of that dangerous disease.


119
The Ruler then most humbly him besought,
To heale his daughter in extreamest neede,
VVho now was at ye point of death he thought, Mat. 9. 23. 24. 25.
And ere he came the maide was dead in deed:
But Iesus vnto Iairus spake and said,
Beleeue thou only and be not afraid,



120
And forth with into Iairus house he goes,
VVhere did attend him many weeping eies,
The multitude first out of doores he throwes,
Then to the maide he went and said arise:
And she arose with feare and wonder great,
He strait commanded they should giue her meate.


121
The woman like wise that was eighteene yeares
Tormented with a most infernall spirit,
Bound altogether as most plaine appeares,
And could by no meanes lift herselfe vpright:
Our Sauiour seeing straight way did appease,
And freely freed her of that strong disease.


122
He had compassion of the widowes teares,
The which at Nain in Galile he did meete, Luk 7. 10. 13. 14.
For her dead sonne exprest with many cares,
VVho now to death had pai'd his latest debt:
In such a measure he could not refraine,
To raise to life, and giue him her againe.


123
The Pharises and Scribes vnto him brought,Iob. 3.
The woman in adultery was found,
T'intrap him said, by Moses law she ought,
For to be stoned dead vnto the ground:
But Iesus said, let him that hath no sinne,
To execute this vpright law begin.



124
Whereat they all began to steale away,
Leauing her standing by her Lord alone,
VVho turn'd a out, and vnto her did say,
VVoman, where now are thy accusers gone:
No man is left she said, was here before,
And I accuse thee not, go sinne no more.


125
His loue to women neuer can be told,
See how he doth the widowes mite commend,
Aboue them all that offered pearle and gold,
Saying from superfluitie they spend:
When she poore wight from penury was glad,
To offer to the Lord euen all she had.


126
Ioanna with Susanna, and the rest,
For there were with them many women more
The which our blessed Sauiour dispossest?
Of wicked spirits, being vexed sore:
Wherefore most gratefully they him besought,
He would accept the substance they had brought.


127
Now last of all, as to the crosse he goes,
To finnish there his dearest virall breath,
A multitude of people saw his woes,
But none saue women did lament his death:
They weepe and waile, with shreekes and piteous cries, Luk. 1. 3 27. 28.
As if they would pull vengeance fro^ ye skies.



128
Vpon those cursed misbeleeuing Iewes,
Their blessed Lord and Sauiour did betray,
And for reuenge on those that thus abuse,
This holy Lambe, they neuer cease to pray:
Such gracious loue they did fro^ him obtain,
They know not how to show their loue againe.


129
And after his decease, the Apostles found
Most vertuous women still in euery place,
Priscilla was a woman much renown'd.
VVho taught Apolloes rare and heauenly grace:
For as this good Apostle plainly saith,
She tooke him home, and made him strong in faith.


130
Saint Peter also doth as much commend,
Tabitha for her charitable deeds,
Of almes that she vnto the Lord did lend,
Which fro^ her loue vnto good works proceeds
Who being dead, by prayer he doth obtaine Act. 9.
She is restored vnto life againe.


131
Behold what wonders God by wome^ wroght, Act. 16.
As holy Paul doth worthily declare,
To Macedon he is by vision brought,
VVhere those yt heard him only women were:
'Mongst whom with admiration he doth tell
Of Lydia, who there did purple sell.



132
A saithfull woman, one that God ordain'd,
To saue a kingdome by her good desert,
VVho in the seruice of the Lord remain'd
For it is said God opened her heart:
And she beleeu'd our words and was baptiz'd
With all her houshold as we them aduis'd.


133
This done we were determined to goe,
Along the coasts to make some further tryall,
But she coniur'd vs not to leaue her so,
Her earnest suite would suffer no deniall:
And lo together as we went to pray,
A certaine virgin met vs on the way.


134
Possessed with a spirit of diuining,
By which her master much aduantage got,
To vs she was with feruent zeale inclining,
And for her masters proffitt cared not: Act. 16. 16.
She follow'd vs and cride, these men are they
That to saluation teach the ready way.


135
And many daies continued in the same,
Till Paul was grieu'd for her, and turn'd about,
And to the Spirit said in Iesus name,
I charge thee from this woman get thee out:
And it obey'd that all commanding power,
Departing from her at that instant houre.



136
An other woman he doth straight recite,
He did in Athens at his preaching find. Rom. 1. 16.
Cald Damaris a most beleeuing wight.
VVith whom Triplena may be wel combin'd:
Triplena doth with Persiis well accord,
All faithfull women labouring in the Lord.


137
Amongst this crue he highly doth commend,
Phoebe a seruant of the Lord saith he,
For whom he doth vnto his brethren send,
That in the Lord we might receiued be:
And ayded by them in what ere she needs;
For she hath done most charitable deeds.


138
The blest Euangelist Saint Iohn doth write,
Vnto a Lady whom he calles elect,
A virtuous woman who doth much delight,
The lawes of her Redeemer to respect: 2. Ioh. 1.
And taught her children likewise to fulfill,
Our blessed Lord and Sauiours holy will.


139
For which saith he I doe not onely loue,
This most renowned woman of our dayes,
But all those Saints that loue the truth approue
Her zealous workes with euerlasting praise:
Which they in greater estimation hold,
Then Tagus wealth, or Ophirs purest gold.



140
Thus in this sacred booke of bookes we see,
The blesings God on women did bestow,
VVhich worthyly they did deserue saith he,
From whom such faith, such loue, such zeale did flow:
Such courage braue, such resolutions rare,
As monuments of marble shall out weare.


141
The histories that doe their praise recite,
In euery age so plentifull appeares,
That if I had ability to write,
I should not finish, liuing Nestors yeares:
Such monume^ts vnto their fame they build
A magasine might with the bookes be fil'd.


142
Yet to auoid the captious base report,
Of Puritant or Bible bearing poet,
As likewise to content the wiser sort.
On whom alone I freely doe bestow it:
I will insert of womens vertues rare,
A stanze, or two what histories declare.


143
For chastitie behold that Roman dame, Iustin.
That proud Tarquinius basely did subdue,
Disdaining to out liue her forced shame,
Did in her dearest bloud her hands imbrew:
For wch she is throwout the world renownd
And by the pens of Lawreat Poets crown'd.



144
Vnmatched Ouid doth as much commend,
Penelope Vlisses constant wife, Ouid.
Whose widowed hands the hanging web doth rend,
Whilst he in Lacedemon leades his life:
Euen like the Turtle that hath lost his mate,
She doth bewaile her desolate estate.


145
Vnspotted Daphue would not be allur'd, Ouid.
By powerfull loue, from whom amaine she flies
When fainting breath, her honors losse assur'd,
Alowd for chaste Dianaes helpe she cries:
Whose iust consent, vnto her earnest prayer
The lawrell doth perpetuall witnesse beare.


146
The daughter faire of Agamemnon King, Thucidides.
Whose loue and beauty was desir'd of many,
Held chastitie so virtuous a thing,
That she would neuer condiscend to any:
But constantly their ardent suites deni'd,
And thus this spotlesse virgin liu'd and di'd.


147
The virgin Lucia doth all praise exceed, Domitian.
With whom the tirant King was far in loue.
VVhen she perceiu'd it was so sure decreed,
What friendship could not force at last shoud proue:
Her star-like eyes she to the tirant sent,
That thus she might her honors losse preue^t.



148 Thucidides.
Sage Fedons daughter doth amaze my minde,
VVhose father being at a banquent slaine,
By sauage men, who likewise had combin'd,
This vertuous virgins chastitie to staine:
She to auoid this Tyrants fury fell,
Did headlong cast herselfe into a well.


149
Saint Ambrose of Pelagia writes as much,
VVho with her famous sisters and her mother,
That no rude ha^d her honors worth might tuch
Themselues did likewise in the water smother:
Such deare respect to chastitie they owe,
Their precious liues they doe for it bestow.


150
The Lady Bona to her lasting honor, Guice^^din.
Whose husband to the holy warres was sent,
Disguis'd to follow him she tooke vpon her,
Both shield and speare, mou'd with a chast intent
Wher brauely she his faithles foes did threat
And rescued him from many dangers great.


151
Braue Francis Sforsas souldiers to him broght,
A virgin rare of birth, and beauty great,
Whom she with friendship prayer and words besoght,
Then tyrant like the silly maide did threat:
But finding nothing could her honor staine
With gifts and praise he sent her home againe.



152
The women of Tutonicaes request,
When noble Marius had their husband slaine
VVas yt they might haue leaue to spend ye rest,
Of their vnhappy liues in Vestaes traine:
Where they like chastest turtles wold deplore
Their fatall losse, beholding men no more.


153
In Rome a woman being made aquainted, Cor. Tac.
With treason was 'gainst Nero great conspir'd,
VVhereof she happened first to be attainted,
Of whom the Iudges all the rest inquired:
With cruell torments she her life did pay,
Yet neuer any party would betray.


154
Renowned Loena did in sunder bite
Her tongue, and spit it in the tyrants face,
Because she would no secret bring to light,
For which th' Athenians to her lasting grace: Plime.
From whom such rare vnmatched virtue sprung,
A Lionesse set vp without a tong.


155
Rare Nicostrata mother to Euander,
Did first vnto the Latins shew their letters,
VVho till her time in ignorance did wander,
Yet afterwards acknowledge none their betters
In History, Philosophy, or Phraise,
Of eloquence deseruing worthy praise.



156
Aretha was in learning so profound,
That she in Athens publike schoole did read
Philosophie with iudgment graue and sound,
VVherein she did the learnedst man exceed:
VVhose Auditors as Pollio doth declare,
Philosophers aboue a hundred were. Pollio.


157
VVhen Lucius Scilla was condemn'd to die,
Who falsely had three thousand Romains slaine
That did vpon his word their liues relie,
His daughter Loelia did his life obtaine:
With one oration which she made in Rome
Whereat the Senate did reuoke their doom. Cicero.


158
Senobia was in learning so repleate,
Both Greeke and Latin to her sons she taught,
And did a rare epitome repeate, Pollio.
Of all ye warres wherwith the East was fraught:
Athenian Pericles, who soar'd so high
Did from Aspasia learne Philosophie.


159
Cornelia a famous Roman dame, Cornelia the wife of Africanus and Mother to the Greechi.
Such eloquent Epistles vs'd to write,
That Cicero a man of rarest fame,
Co^mends her workes with wonderful delight:
With Pallaes help to end rare Lucan broght
The battaile Caesar and great Pompey fought.



160
Alexandra, the wife of Alexander,
In Iury liu'd a Bishop many yeares,
Whose learned wisdom like a wise commander
Was reuerenc'd both of common-wealth and Peeres: Eicsebius
Dona the daughter of Pithagoras,
In sciences a famous scholler was.


161
Two Gretian women deepely learn'd indeed, Plato. Lasterna Axiothe.
The loue of Plato did so highly win,
That seated in his chaire about to read,
Before they came he seldome would begin:
In them saith he, sage wisdom doth remaine,
And memory graue maxims to maintaine.


162
In France a sect of women did remaine,
Cal'd Druides, to whom Aurelian came,
From Rome to France their counsells to obtaine
So much their wisdom was renownd by fame:
Mirrha Queene of Lydia men did call, Strabo.
Agiant for her wit, in stature small.


163
In Rhodes a Roman and a Greeke fell out. Eutropius.
Who both desir'd their cuntries worth to raise
The Greeke co^test ye Romans were more stout
But vnto Greece for learning gaue the praise:
Wherin said he our women more doe know
Then you in armes, whereof you boast of so.



164
Vpon which words a mortall warre insu'd,
'Twixt Rome and Carthage, til the Rodians came,
VVho earnestly intreate they would conclude,
To make them empires in this worke of fame:
To whose request whe^ they had both agreed
The noble Rhodians in this wise proceed.


165
Ten Greacian women they in Rhodes ordaine
VVith ten of Rome shall disputation hold,
Wch they with such rare learning did maintain,
In leaues of brasse deserues to be inrol'd:
For with the Rhodia^s to their great renown,
with Lawrell wreathes these famous women crown'd.


166
For sollid sentences and learning graue,
Vnto the Grecians they the praise decreed,
True eloquence they to the Romans gaue,
Wherin they thought they did ye Greeks exceed
But from each side such vertue rare did flow
As me^ could hardly who were victors know.


167
The worthy Rodians in perpetuall praise,
That after ages might their vertues see,
To each of them a monument did raise,
VVhereby their loue shall intermixed be:
Twenty huge Pillers of victorious fame,
Whereon was writ each seuerall womans name.



168
Two famous Theban virgins being told,
The Oracle had said they should enioy,
A conquest from the Orchymenians bold,
If two chast virgins should the^selues destroy:
Their country with victorious praise to kill,
Coragiously their dearest bloud they spill.


169
Braue Celia, that King Porsenna tooke, Salust.
VVith whom in hostage diuers virgins were,
With courage stout, by night his camp forsook,
Gat horse and swame a riuer, void of feare:
VVhereat the King amaz'd without delay.
Did raise his siege, and went with shame away.


170
Hermonia a Siracusan maid,
To saue her country did her life defie, Plime.
The wife of Asdruball was lesse afraid,
VVhen Scipio conquered then himselfe to die:
Great Mithridates wife and sisters three,
Shew'd farre lesse feare of death then he.


171
Resolued Portia hearing this sad newes,
Her husband, and her father both were slaine, Portia the wife of Brutus.
That tyrannizing sorrow should abuse,
Her noble spirit did so much disdaine.
The burning coales to eate she doth deuise,
Thus made herselfe a liuing sacrifice.



172
The pride of Aegipt that most glorious Queen
Did so much scorn great Caesars campe to grace
With captine bands, wher she shold ly between
Dispaire and hope in a contemned case:
With poisoned Asps, whose touch to death doth hie,
Brauely resolu'd she rather chose to die.


173
Philip proclam'd at Scyo euery slaue, Herodat.
That would come forth and with his army hold
With liberty their masters wiues should haue,
Which when the women heard, like lions bold
They sally out, and to their great renowne,
Beate Phillip and his army from the towne.


174
The Scyots by th'Egiptian sore opprest,
Vnarm'd to leaue the towne, with them agree, Iustine.
Wch when the wome^ heard they could not rest
Vntill they made them change this base decree:
With sheild and speare vncloth'd they march away,
Telling their foes that this was their aray.


175
Among the Amasons two Queens they chose
The forraigne and domestique state to guide,
Abroad Marpesia did subdue their foes,
At home Lampeda all things did decide:
VVith equall iustice void of loue or hate,
VVhich made them florish in a happy state.



176
Constantinople being round beset,
With furious Gothes that ment it to destroy, Cassads.
The Empresse bold to the wall did get,
VVhere valiantly she did them so annoy:
That many by her noble hands did die,
The rest were forst to raise their siege and fly.


177
Simeramis deserues to be inrold, Iustine.
In brasen leaues of euerlasting praise,
Who by her vallour like a Tygresse bold,
Her hardy foes inforst their campe to raise:
From Babilon they surely thought to take,
Which she with shame compeled them to forsake.


178
Senobia forst Aurelian to confesse;
With whom a famous war she long maintain'd
To conquer Xerxes was a taske far lesse,
Whose greatnesse with the name of feare was stain'd
The^ stout Senobia who with speare and sheild,
Came like the God of bataile to the field.


179
Penthiselia that couragious queene,
Encountered braue Achilles hand to hand,
Then which a brauer combat nere was seene,
Hippolita stout Theseus did withstand:
In single fight their honors to maintaine,
VVhereby they did immortallglory gaine.



180
The Queene of Carryall, like the God of war,
Did chase ye Rhodians like a hare with hounds,
Against whose valor nothing was a barre,
She burnt the wals, sackt their cheifest townes,
Whereby she forst the^ to her endlesse fame,
To build her image, and inscribe her name.


181
Immortall Tass^ thou canst neuer die,
So worthily Clornidaes fame to write,
Who boldly durst that champion braue defie,
Renowned Tancred, euen at single fight:
And so perform'd yt men could hardly know
The conqueror suruiu'd his conquered foe.


182
Vndanted Hector hadst thou liued now,
Howmuch thy hardest soule wold blush to see Iustine.
That earths great monarch should be made to bow,
And by a womans hand subuerted be:
Whose valiant head, she fro^ his body drew,
And did ye same in his owne blood imbrew.


183
Euen a^ a Lyonesse doth range the coast,
When she perceiues her whelps are made a pray
So Thamaris doth breake through Cyrus host,
And brauely with her sword did make her way
And to her frie^ds his royal head she brought,
Like Pallas with the spoils of Gergon fraught.



184
Amongst these Queenes oh let me not forget,
That Queen of Queenes, which in our age did raigne,
Who like a Comet in the skie was set,
Vnparalleld for euer to remaine:
To write her praise, I neuer shall aspire,
Whom euery eye with wonder did admire.


185
The worlds great Artist, nature did complaine,
Such beauty rare the earth did not enioy,
And that no other might the like obtaine,
She doth againe this heauenly stamp destroy:
Then all the powers supernall freely came,
And gaue perfection to this matchles dame.


186
Imperious Iuno at her feete did lay,
That all commanding Scopter which she bare,
Wherewith she did the pride of Spaine allay,
Supported France the Royall crowne to weare
And Belgia her peerelesse praise may sing,
Whose famous acts all Christendome doth ring.


187
Arete for her Temple chose her breast,
And with faire vertues did it freely fill,
Religious Vesta with chast thoughts her blest,
Minerua gaue her sacred wisedome still:
And royall Ceres who with a liberall hand,
With great aboundance did inrich her land.



188
The faithlesse Pagan, misbeleeuing Turke,
Virginian heathen, with the Indian Moore,
In who^ doth nought but secret mischeife lurk,
They all with reuerence did her state adore:
Great giftes they offer to her sacred shrine,
So was she blest, euen by the powers diuine.


189
An happy fight this blessed woman fought,
Whilst here she liu'd and wore the royall crown;
Her subiects all to peace and loue she brought,
The humble spar'd, and beat the haughty down,
Thus left her thron, wch time shal quit destroy
An euerlasting kingdome to enioy.


190
But now me thinkes I heare some whispering say,
This fellow sure is fearefully in loue,
Whilst other straight vnto my charge doe lay,
Some mercinary hire doth him moue:
No, no, my friends, it is a case more co^mon,
Wch you forget, my mother was a woman.


191
Whom nature taught me tenderly to loue,
And thinke it is a duty which I owe,
To her and women for her sake to proue,
The praise on them both God and men bestow:
No art so excellent hath euer bin,
But women haue bin famous actors in.



192
Tis true say, they there was a time of olde,
When women sure were better far then now,
Through this opinion diuers men doe hold,
I doubt not but the wiser will allow:
This costome nature doth to all men giue,
To thinke yt age is worse wherein they liue.


193
Virgill and Ouid many yeares agoe,
Do testifie that then the world was nought,
In stately stile of verse from them did flow,
Their sober lessons publickly they taught:
Homer might come with musike to his whores
Yet wanting mony, get him out of dores.


194
Either these men haue spirits of diuining,
Or else the world stands now as then it did,
If worse, it is by enuious mens repining,
Which if they would conuert from ill to good,
Thousa^ds of wome^ this bad age might name
That want rare pens to eternize their fame.


195
Like Romes Colassae I might write a booke,
Or the Egiptian Piramid of old,
If I should strictly striue to ouerlooke,
The vertues rare that are of women told:
Which I referre to men of better skill,
Who can this taske more worthily fulfill.



196
VVherein my pen already is growne dull,
VVanting that tinckture of heroicke straine,
VVith which braue spirits of our age are full,
Let this but animate their flowing vaine:
While my poore Muse shal wel contented be
Her humble valley once againe to see.


197
Where she with pleasure, did behold the Beare
The Wolfe, the Swan, ye Dragons head and taile,
The no meane Lion, and the fearefull Hare,
The dart which 'gainst the Griffen did preuaile:
The King of Egipt and his stately Queene,
Who for her beauty now in heauen is seene.


198
The crowne which Ariadne did obtaine,
From Venus, for becomming Bacchus loue,
The harpe of Orpheus, whose melodious straine
Made careles beasts, and senceles trees to moue:
The sonne of Danaae that Medusa slue,
The waggener that lustfull Phedra flue.


199
The son of Ioue who^ Satan would haue slaine,
The serpent holder bright Appolloes sonne,
The fish that sau'd Orion in the maine,
Alcides after all his labor done:
The horse of Bacchus forst his masters loue,
The bird yt brought faire Ganymede to Ioue.



200
The flying horse sprang from Medusaes bloud,
Bellepheron did vndertake to ride,
Who for his paines, was drenched in the floud,
The horse flew vp to heaue^, wher he doth bide:
The triangle which Ceres did request,
The Gods to place in heauen amongst the rest.


201
The wife of Perseus, and the monstrous whale,
The crow which by the wel the serpent found,
Ixions wheele, with Venus daughter pale,
The riuer wherein Phaeton was drownd:
Chyron that taught Achilles great in Greece,
The ship that brought home Iasons golden fleece.


202
The Rambe with Phirxes and her sisters went,
Ore Hellespont: Europaes roring Bull,
The twinns of Loeda: Iunoes crabe she sent,
To Hercules, who did in peeces pull
The Lion: iustice slue from earth to Heauen,
Who by her ballance found mens acts vneuen.


203
The Scorpion slue Orion with his sting,
Euthemiaes Sonne that with the Muses slept,
Disguised Pan, the Boy Ioues bird did bring,
The fishes Venus from the Giant kept:
All these the Gods haue stellifi'de in heauen,
With Pleiades, whose number once was seuen.



204
Vntil Electra seeing Troian fire,
Shrunke in her head, and neuer since was seen
Whose griefe doth make my pittying Muse (...)tir
Casting her eies vpon the louely greene:
Where she will mourne, among the shepheards swaine
Admires high hills, but loue she lowly plaine

FINIS.

