



AN EXPOSITION VPON THE SECOND EPISTLE GENERALL OF THE HOLY APOSTLE, Saint PETER.

CHAP. I.




VER. I.

Simon Peter, a Servant, and an Apostle of IESVS CHRIST, to them that have obtained like precious Faith with us, through the righteousnesse of God, and our Saviour IESVS CHRIST.


THE Bookes of the New Testament have been distinguished into three kindes: Historicall, Doctrinall, and Propheticall. 1. Historicall; such as containe the Birth, Life, Death, and Resurrection of our Blessed SAVIOVR, with his Divine Sermons, and Miraculous Actions; written by the foure Evangelists: Seconded by the memorable and famous Storie of the Acts of his Apostles. 2. Doctrinall; such as concerne our instruction in the knowledge of Christ, and teach us the way of salvation. These are the holy Epistles of Saint Paul, S. Iames, S. Peter, S. Iohn, and S Iude. 3. Propheticall; such as foretell the estate and condition of the Church militant to the end of the World: of which kinde is the Revelation of S. Iohn the Divine Yet doth not this distinction debarre the History from altogether medling with Prophecie, nor the Propheticall part from touching upon History, nor the Doctrinall part from the use of both the former. So the Evangelists, that wrote the story of Christ, do neverthelesse abound with heavenly Doctrines, containing in them the life-giving Sermons of that Supreme Bishop of our soules: Neither are they withou plentifull predictions; as of the destruction of Ierusalem, and the end of the world. So the holy Apostles, in their Epistles,
 together with their doctrines, by which they build up the Church, do also prophesie of future things: as S. Paul doth of the Calling of the Iewes, and of the comming of Antichrist; and the last Chapter of this present Epistle, hath been aptly called, Saint Peters Prophecie.
Concerning which, there have arisen two ancient doubts, like clouds to obscure the light of the Truth. Some have questioned the authority of this Epistle: others, the Author. 1. For those that have contradicted the Authority of it, excluding it out of the number of the Canonicall Bookes,Hist. 3. cap. 25. Eusebius,Lib. 2. Hist. cap 46. Nicephorus,De viris illustr. in Petro. Hierome, andHom. 18. in Ezek. Gregorie, make mention of them. They tell us of some such quarrellers, they tell us not their names: Such there were, but who they were, they do not say. Therefore, let their opinion be buried in the dust with them: for, this Booke lives while they are dead. 2. For the Author, some have denyed it to be S. Peters: and to this error, the supposed diversity of the stile hath induced them. As if the same Author might not diversifie his stile upon due occasion, according to the difference of the matter, or argument upon which, or difference of the person to whom he writes. The Epistle to the Hebrewes is of a more accurate stile, than S. Pauls other Epistles: Yet by an universall consent it is agreed upon to be S. Pauls. Certainly, the Author of this must be some grand Impostour, if hee were not one of those three Apostles,Matth. 17.1. that were present at Christs transfiguration upon the Mount: where hee solemnely professeth himselfe to have beene. The three witnesses of Christs Clarification there, were Peter, and Iames, and Iohn: No man affirmes Iames or Iohn to be the Author of this Epistle, therefore it must be Peter. And if he were not the Author of it, with what impudence should another Secretary call himselfe Simon Peter, a servant and an Apostle of Iesus Christ? To alledge, that Paul,Gal. 2.11. writing to the Galatians, doth plainly testifie, that he withstood Peter to the face, and that hee was to be blamed: therefore it is not likely, that Peter would write so faire an Encomium of Paul,2 Pet. 3.15. and ita admirandum praedicare. Such Critickes are farre from the sanctified spirit of an Apostle: for they, without respect to their private affections, or particular praises, sought only the truth of the Gospell, and the glory of their Master IESVS CHRIST.
The Majestie of the HOLY GHOST appeares in every line of it; therefore the Authority is indubitate. The Name prefixed warrants it to be S. Peters, therefore we cannot denie the Author. It remaines only, that we directly come to the matter: In which proceeding, the Spirit of Illumination direct me to write, and the Spirit of Sanctification direct you to read; that all of us, beleeving and living according to the holy Doctrine delivered, the Name of God may be glorified, and our deare soules everlastingly saved, through our Lord Iesus Christ, Amen.

Simon Peter, a servant, and an Apostle of IESVS CHRIST, etc.
WHerein we finde a double description: 1. Of the Author, who sends; Simon, etc. 2. Of the Persons to whom this Salutation is sent; To them that have obtained, etc. First, the Authour describes himselfe by his
Name, Simon Peter.Condition, a Servant.Office, an Apostle.Master, IESVS CHRIST.
In nomine humilitas, in conditione sanctitas, in officio dignitas, in domino majestas. His Name shewes him humble, his Condition holy, his Office gratious, by his Master who is glorious.

Simon was his proper name given him an his Circumcision. It is observable, that this Simon was commonly a happy name in the Scriptures. There was Simon Zelotes, a zealous man: Simon a Tanner, this Simons Host, a charitable man: Simon of Cyrene, that helped Christ to beare his Crosse, a compassionate man: and Simon Peter, a sanctified man. Not that grace is tyed to names; for there was a Simon Magus, a Sorcerer, a Witch, little other than a divell: but the favour of God makes any name as happy. No man hath now the mystery of his fortune written in his name. Names are not Propheticall, Much lesse magicall. The Civill use of names is for distinction; Nomen quasi Notamen: the religious use hath by good antiquitie been observed at our Baptisme.
So oft as thou hearest thy owne name, call to minde the Covenant betweene God and thy selfe in holy Baptisme; when God promised on his part to be thy God; thou on thy part to forsake his enemies, and to dedicate thy selfe to his service. It is a wretched forgetfulnesse not to remember thy owne name. What can he remember that forgets himselfe? It is pity the Sacramentall water was ever spilt on such a face; as forgets himselfe to be a Christian.
Whatsoever thy name be, let thy heart be Simons. It is said, to signifie Hearing, or Obeying: so do thou confesse, professe, love thy Master and Maker. Confesse him Ore, with thy mouth: professe him Opere, with thy life: love him Corde, with thy heart. So, thou shalt have Simon's omen, though not Simon's nomen. Albeit thou be nor called Peter, thou shalt be saved with Peter. Thus shall Christ blesse thy name with a good report upon earth:Prov. 10.7. The memorie of the just is blessed; with better reward in heaven, byLuc. 10.20 Writing it in the Booke of Life.
Peter, was his sir-name, given him by Christ himselfe, who was in this sense his God-father.Ioh. 1.4 2 When IESVS beheld him, h^^ said, Thou art Simon, the sonne of Iona, thou shalt bee called Cephas, which is by interpretation a Stone, or Peter. S. Mathew seemes to insinuate that Christ gave him that name in allusion to that Rocke of his confession.Mat. 16.18. Thou art Peter, and upon this Rocke I will build my Church: But then, Peter seemes to be that Rocke on which the Church is built? Not so; Peter in making this confession, Tu es Christus; Thou art Christ, the Sonne of the living God; either spake, Prae caeteris, as Ambrose, or Pro caeteris, as Augustine; before the rest, or for the rest: He was Prolocutor, or mouth of the rest. Therefore what was promised to Peter, pertained to the whole Colledge of the Apostles. To this exposition runnes the streame of the Fathers.Origen. Hom. 1. in Mat If thou confesse with Peter, and tibi dicetur, Tu es Petrus: Petra, est quisque Christi discipulus: If thou be Christs disciple, thou art Peter, thou art a RockeAug Tract 124. in Ioh. Petrus a Petra, non Petra a Petro: quomodo non a Christiano Christus, sed a Christo Christianus vocatur. Peter is derived from the Rocke, not the Rocke from Peter: as Christ fetcheth not his name from a Christian, but a Christian from Christ. But,Eph. 2.20. we are built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Iesus Christ Himselfe being the chiefe Corner-stone; our foundation is in heaven. Aristotle said, that a man is Arbor transversa, a tree growing with the root upward: So the Church is, Domus transversa, a house turned upside downe: for the foundation is above.1 Cor. 3.11. Other foundation can no man lay, than that is layd, which is, IESVS CHRIST. Peter in this kinde is not the Rocke of the Church: time was, he seemed rather to be a wave, than a Rocke, when Christ said to him;Matth. 16.23. Get thee behind me Satan, thou art an offence unto me. Let Peter have his desire, and his Master shall not dye; so Peter himselfe and the whole world had been lost. This defeats the Pope of his infallibility of judgement.
Thus Peter is a name of addition, imposed by our Saviour on Simon. Diverse of the Papists have derived the authority of changing the Popes names from hence: Because the two chiefe Apostles had their names changed; Saul into Paul, Simon into Peter. But Lorinus the Iesuite denies this to be the ground of their mutation. Indeed there is a double difference, in Authoritate and Effectis, for Authoritie, the Apostles changed not their owne names, but GOD; for effects, their natures were
 changed with their names: a Priviledge that few Popes had the happinesse to demonstrate. Though Sylvius elected Pope, could disclaime his wanton and idle bookes, and seeme to promise future gravitie: Aeneam rejicite, recipite Pium; forget Aeneas, and receive mee a Pious father, yet the new names have not altered the old conditions: they have proved the same men still. The first alterer of Popes names is held to bee Sergius 2. whose proper name was Os perci, a Swines countenance: the name would have served, had he separated his swinish properties. Divers other followed, but they lost not their former vices. One of their owne brings a testimony against them; that of all Christians Italians are the worst, of all Italians the Romans, of all Romans the Priests, of all Priests the Cardinals, and commonly the most lewd Cardinall is chosen Pope, yea, some have objected, and they sticke not to grant; Hominem non Christianum posse esse Romanum Pontificem; a man that is not a member of Christ, may yet be head of his Church.
Though change of names import an excellencie of grace, yet not a singularity, Iames and Iohn were Sonnes of thunder: were none so but they? Barnabas, Sonne; of consolation; none so but hee? Peter a Rocke; no rocke but Peter? Israel called so because hee was strong with God; yet so was Abraham, and MOSES, whereas some observe that our Apostle puts in two words into the Epigraph of this Epistle, which he left out in the former; Simon and Servant. And that our SAVIOUR did usually chide him by the name of Simon, but commend him by the name of Peter, whence they observe, it was Simon that erred, not Peter, his Person, not his Office. So Marke 14.37. Simon, sleepest thou? And in his confirmation,Ioh. 21.15. Simon thou Sonne of Ionas, lovest thou me more than these? repeating that word Simon thrice. But they forget that Matth. 16. Get thee behind me Satan; not Simon,Mat. 16 23. but Satan. Indeed Peters name was not changed, but onely he had one added: he was still Simon, but withall Peter. Abraham was not afterward called Abram, but Abraham: But Peter still was called Simon. So here he stiles himselfe; Simon Peter. The Iesuites say, he was alwaies after called Peter, I cannot call them the fathers of lies, that were to doe the Devill wrong; but the sons of lying. I am sure, he is many times after called Simon.
But will they now disjoyne these two names in one man? I wonder, when Simon sinned, whether Peter was guiltlesse! If Os porci had been damned, what would have become of Sergius secundus? Thus the poore Shepheard said to the great Bishop of Coleine; admiring his Pompe as a Prince, when his calling was but a Bishop: some replied, that he wore not such robes as he was Bishop, but as he was Prince. I but, quoth the Shepheard; Cum damnatus fuerit Dux, quid fiet de Episcopo? If the Duke should goe to hell for pride, what would become of the humble Bishop? Their names cannot secure their persons, not though they were Pii nominis. And yet as their lives have commonly beene ungodly, so the name of Pietie hath been least usurped among them: for there have been but five Pii. Res mira inter tot Pontifices solummodo quinque fuisse Pios. Here observe three circumstances.
1 The Apostles did prefixe their names to their Epistles. Indeed neither did Moses set his name before his booke, nor the Evangelists, Matthew, Marke, Luke, and Iohn,Chrys. before their Gospels: Because they Praesentibus scribentes, writing to those that were present, had no cause to put to their names. But the Apostles writing to those that were farre off, could not well avoid it in their Epistles, but why then did Paul suppresse his name writing to the Hebrewes? Quia non erant amico in Paulum animo: that Apostle was not in their bookes, they had no good affection toward him: so that finding his name in the frontispiece they might haply have rejected the Epistle, and not vouchsafed to read it. The Apostles could not alwayes instruct men by Sermons, as did the Prophets; nor by commentaries, as the Evangelists, nor by Dialogue, as Iob: but writing to remote persons and places, they were compelled to signifie their mind by letters: and the forme of an Epistle requires a prescription of his name that sent it. They prefixed their names therefore
 that it might be knowne, by what authority such letters were written, and with what certaintie of credit they are to be received.Verse 20. For as no prophecie, so no Epistle of the Scripture is of any private motion, Penna calamus, Scriba Apostolus, Dictator Spiritus Sanctus: The penne a quill, the Writer an Apostle, but the Inditor the Holy Ghost. This bindes us to beleeve and obey these sacred writings. Qui scripta non credit, scripta sentiet: He that will not beleeve what is written, shall feele what is written. Lege historiam, ne fias historia: Read the historie, lest thy selfe be made an history, and an ensample to the reading of after-times.
2 The Apostles did prefixe, not suffixe their names, according to our custome in our familiar letters. Let no man herein taxe them with a proud prelation: for where Gods Spirit is the dictator, wee must looke for no complements. And though in themselves they were the most humble men upon earth, yet being to write Apostolico jure, in the name of IESVS CHRIST, and to signifie themselves such as he had chosen to lay the foundation of the Evangelicall Church; it was fit and necessary, they should premention their names and Office. Paul endured all reproch to his owne person patiently, yet did still magnifie his Office. Ne contemptus Apostoli redundet in Evangelium: lest the contempt of the Apostle should prejudice the Majestie of the Gospell.
3 They prefixed their names, though upon them stucke some bl^mishes; to shew that albeit themselves were guiltie of manifold infirmities, yet the Gospell they delivered was pure from all imperfection. The blots of the Writers were no blots to the things written. Paul was a great sinner, Peter a greater: Apostacie in Peter, was greater than persecution in Paul; the one a sinne af^er knowledge, the other before; the one was done of ignorance, the other against conscience: yet Peter still speakes his name. Humane pens are dipt in the oyle of ostentation, not Scripturall pens: they spit in their owne faces. Moses wrote his owne incredulitie, David his owne bloudinesse, Ionas his owne repining at that mercie without which hee had beene most miserable. As if they acknowledged themselves not onely humano more errasse, to have erred after the manner of men; but even imp^o more peccasse, to have sinned after the manner of evill men. This they did; that none of GODS glory might cleave to their earthen fingers. Let this teach both you and us.
You of the Laitie, not to patronize your sinnes upon the example of others: as if you would fortifie your profanenesse from the infirmities of your Teachers. Lapsus Sanctorum ut non cadamus, non ut cadamus prabentur exempla. The falls of the Saints are recorded, not as warrants to encourage our wantonnesse; but as cautions to prevent and retard our precipices. 1. Wicked men love that in the Saints, which the Saints never loved in themselves, vices: and shal a man make their foile his jewell, their shame his glory? 2. Peccatum dicis, poenitentiam non dicis. Thou speakest of their sinnes, but not of their repentance. When Theodosius excused a foule fact, because David had done the like; Saint Ambrose makes this answer; Qui secutus es errantem, sequere poenitentem: Thou that hast followed David in his exorbitance, follow him also in his repentance. Hath thy mouth denyed with Peter, let thine eyes weepe with Peter. 3. They looke on the evill of good men, whereas they should rather looke on the good even of evill men. Noahs vertues are not Chams admiration, but his drunkennesse is his sport. Like flies, that skip over all the sound parts of the body, and light upon sores and ulcers. The Cloud that waited on the Campe of Israel, was light towards themselves, darke toward their enemies; it saved them, drowned the Egyptians. Let every Christian follow the light part; that shall guide him, the other will deceive him. 4. By disregard of the Ministers person, they evacuate the force of this Doctrine. Therefore GOD usually plagueth the contempt of his Preachers, by the invaliditie of his owne ordinance upon their soules.Mat. 10.12. When yee come to an house, salute it: and if the house be worthy, let your peace come upon it: but if it be not worthy let your peace returne to you. Let us rather take the best, than make the worst, of good mens lives.

Vs of the Ministerie, to preserve zeale and humility.1 Tim 4.16. Take heed to thy selfe, and unto the doctrine. Attende tibi and doctrinae: tibi, quomodo vivas; doctrinae, qualiter doceas: To thy selfe how thou livest, to thy doctrine how thou teachest. But still after our best endeavours, to our selves weakenesse and shame, to GOD the blessing and glory, Cathedram habet in coelis qui corda docet: he hath a pulpit in heaven, that teacheth the soule, that toucheth the conscience. It is he onely that mellowes the heart, and softens it with fitnesse for the impression of any Sermon. Thus for his name; now for
His condition, a Servant. Hugo observes that he doth omit this Title in his former Epistles, which hee inserts here: but I doe not like his reason. Because, saith he, there he spake of persecutions and troubles, quae non oportet serviliter ferri, cum sint dignittates, which ought not to be born with slavish cowardice, being rather honours than miseries. Indeed Christs Crosse must be borne Heroico animo, with a couragious mind: but still this sufferance rather insinuates, than exempts Service; for they properly belong to all those that faithfully serve God.2 Tim. 3.12. All that will live godly in CHRIST IESVS, shall suffer persecution. They are laid on them, as it were by a fatall kind of destinie, because they are the LORDS Servants. For outwardly, Sunt prosperi peccatores, miseri Sancti: there are generally in the world poore Saints, and prosperous sinners. Neither is a filiall service (Patientiae impedimentum, sed ornamentum, sed adjumentum;) a thing that does hinder patience, but beautifie it and helpe it. This reason then wants the weight to be received.
Yet I confesse there may be something in it, and a cause may be rendred, why the Apostle here useth that formerly omitted Title. True it is, that when GOD dictates voluntas facientis, ratio facti; the will of the Writer is a sufficient reason of the scription. But in sacris literis nil casu fit; in the holy Scriptures nothing is done by chance: every word, syllable, point, hath the efficacie: no blot ever fell from the pen of the Holy Ghost. There be reasons, though our shallow understandings cannot reach them.
1 Perhaps this may be a reason: our blessed Apostle wrote this Instante obitu, knowing his dissolution to be at hand: as he confesseth, Verse 14. Knowing that shortly I must put off this my tabernacle, as our LORD IESVS CHRIST hath shewed me. Therefore hee comforts his owne soule in this title, as old Hilarion did after him; These seventy yeares and upwards thou hast served the Lord, therefore now goe forth my soule with joy, etc. Thou hast served the LORD in life, in death hee will crowne thee.Luke 2.29. LORD, now lettest thou Thy Servant depart in peace, according to thy word.
2 Perhaps in regard of others hee useth it: for he writes of the comming of CHRIST to Iudgement; which time shall be a blessed day to those, whose consciences can witnesse with them that they have served GOD. When rebells shall be cast to the prison of rebells; then Euge bone and fidelis Serve;Mat. 25.21. Come thou good and faithfull Servant, enter thou into the joy of thy LORD. Then all hearts shall confesse; It was not inMal. 3.14. vaine, nor without profit, that we have Served the Lord: forVer. 17. they shall bee mine, saith the LORD of hostes, in that day when I make up my jewels; and I will spare them as a man spareth his owne sonne that serveth him. Then shall yee returne and discerne betweene him that serveth God, and him that serveth him not. Servit Christianus, Servat Christus; man serveth GOD, GOD saveth man, when the wicked shall acknowledge the godly, with groning and anguish of spirit;Wisdom. 5.4. we accounted his life madnesse, and his end without honour: now he is numbred among the children of God, and his lot is among the Saints. Thus as on earth, Serviens ad Legem, saepe fit Index; the Sergeant at law is often made a Iudge: so that yee that have followed me in the regeneration,Mat. 19.28. when the Sonne of man shall sit on his throne, yee shall sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.
3 Perhaps because the time of his Service was almost now ended; and therefore
 he might more boldly stile himselfe the Servant of Christ. For, let not him that puts on his armour boast, but he that puts it off. Hee may now looke sweetly both waies, with comfort to his life past, with joy to his reward to come. Pulchrum est ante obitum consummari vitam: It is good for a man to acccomplish his life before he ends it. Beatus juvenis qui bene vivit, sed magis beatus senex qui bene vixit: The Young man is happy that lives well, but the Old man is blessed that hath lived well. Praise the Marriner that brings the vessell safe into the Haven: Blessed Soule, that hath past the apprentiship of service, and is now gone to bee made free in glory. There are two speciall observations involved in this Title Servant, Christs excellency, and the Apostles humility.
1. This extolls the dignity of Christ, that so famous an Apostle creeps to him on the knees of lowlinesse; Lord, I am thy Servant. The world esteemed himEsa. 53.2. without forme or comelinesse; and when they see him without beauty, that they should desire him. The Psalmist speakes in his person;Psal. 22.6. I am a worme, no man: a reproch of men, and despised of the people.1 Cor. 1.23. To the Iewes a stumbling block, to the Greekes foolishnesse. But Peter stiles himselfe Servum Crucifixi, the servant of him that was crucified. Indeed the service of Christ is the honour of the Christian. Our Saviour admitted and accepted this just honour:Ioh. 13.14. Ye call me Master, and Lord; and ye say well, for so I am. Many in the World arrogate great dignitie to themselves, because so famous men are their servants. Ahasuerus might vaunt of his Vice-roys, the Turke of his Bassau's: But let all Scepters be laid downe at the foote of the Lambe, all sheaves bow to the sheafe of Ioseph; all crownes be subjected to him, that is crowned with unspeakable glory for ever.
2. This is a cleere remonstrance of Saint Peters humility; a famous Apostle; some have given him more, the primacie of the Apostles: yet what's his owne Title, a Servant of IESVS CHRIST. The godly are no further ambitious, than to belong to CHRIST. There is great suit to bee retained in the service of Princes: but the best is to serve the Prince of Princes. What neede hee wait upon a channell, that may dwell by a whole River? Or serve him that serves, when he may serve him that reignes? A poore estimation of our selves, gives us the richest estimation with God.1 Sam 15.17. When thou wast little in thine owne sight, wast thou not made the Head of the tribes of Israel? When thou wast little I then made thee great. Abraham sayes, non sum dignus: I am not worthy, etc. God dignifies him to be the Father of them that beleeve; Act. 1.23. When the lot was to be cast for an Apostle to supply Iudas roome, two were appointed; Ioseph and Matthias. Ioseph trinominis, of three appellations: Ioseph, the sonne of rest; Barsabas, and Iustus, sir-named so for his equity. Yea more, he was Frater Domini the LORDS brother. Matth. 13.55. Are not his brethren Iames and Ioses, etc. that is, Christs neare kinsman. Mathias but twice named in the Scriptures; both times in that one Chapter, Acts 1. yet the lot fell upon Matthias. Matthias signifies a little one: so the Gospell appointed for the day of his feast and memorie, commends little ones, Mat. 11.25. Thou hast hid these things from the wise, and hast revealed them to babes, to little ones. Notwithstanding the great titles and priviledges of the other, GOD sent the lot upon the little one, it fell upon Matthias. He that seemes little in his owne eyes, is the greatest in GODS account. It hath beene the humble and blessed acknowledgment of the Saints, that they are servants. Though we be new borne to our fathers Inheritance, yet now we are in our Nonage.Gal. 4.1. The heire, as long as he is a Child, differeth nothing from a servant, though he be LORD of all. Men make difference of their friends, children, and servants; GOD none. His friends must serve.Ioh. 15.14. Ye are my friends, if yee doe whatsoever I command you, children must serve, evenMarke 3.11. the Sonne must serve him. Every Christian souldiours Scutchion must be Patience, and his motto, I serve: yea, not only Saints, but Angels are glad of this title.Hebr. 1.14. Are they not all ministring Spirits, sent forth to minister for them, who shall be heirs of salvation?Revel 22.9. when Saint Iohn would have worshipped before the feet
 of the Angell, he replied,Rev. 22.9. See thou doe it not, for I am thy fellow servant. And let me goe yet higher; the naturall Sonne of GOD, and that by an eternall generation, put on him a serviceable nature;Phil. 2.7. He took on him the forme of a Servant. He was so formed, so habited to service, that he endured all sorrow, and fulfilled all righteousnesse. Art thou better than Apostles, better than Angels, better than the Sonne of GOD himselfe, Oh proud dust, that thou despisest the title of a Servant!
I cannot so briefely passe over that, wherein we must dwell all our lives, the service of GOD; let me consider in it three things; the liberty, the dignitie the reward. The libertie must be weighed both in the will of the Agent, and in the freedome of the Action.
It is a voluntary Service; constrained obedience is not worth GOD-a-mercie. The wickedest reprobates, yea the very devils must needs serve GOD; but can expect no wages, but hell. We know there is a necessitie, that shall draw him against his will, whom command cannot lead with his will. A te fiet, or de te fiet; but still Fiet. Either GODS will shall be done by thee, or be done on thee; but howsoever it shall be done in thee. Therefore the noble disposition is led, not forced: they are slaves, whom the feare of plagues onely terrifies from rebellion. But this Servant willingly puts his necke into Christs yoke: he denies his owne lusts, his owne gaines, his owne pleasures, his owne selfe.Mat. 19.27. Behold we have forsaken all, and followed thee. A good Servant hath these properties: a quick eye, a listning care, a ready foote, a working hand, an honest heart.
A quicke eye; attending the least becke of his commander.Psal. 123 2. As the eyes of servants looke to the hands of their masters; so our eyes waite upon the LORD our GOD. Paul speakes of (...) eye service. Col. 3.22. Servants obey your Masters, not with eye-service, as men-pleasers. This is a fault with men: but let us serve our GOD no longer, no further than he sees us: it is enough, his eye is never off our hands, our hearts,Psal. 139.7. Whither shall I goe from thy spirit? or whither shall I flie from thy presence? If I ascend up into heaven, thou art there: if I make my bed in hell, behold thou art there: if I dwell in the uttermost parts of the sea, even there shall thy hand lead me: if I say, the darkenesse shall cover me, even the night shall be light about me. Heaven hath the presence of his glory, earth of his providence, the sea of his wonders, the darkenesse of his light, hell of his power; no where to avoid his sight. Heaven, earth, sea, hell; all places named but Purgatory; perhaps God is not there. If he fills all places, and not Purgatory; rather than doubt his Omnipresence, I will beleeve there is no Purgatory.
A listening eare; such a one as Eli taught Samuel to find, when God calleth; speake LORD, for thy servant heareth.
A ready foote: Fidelis obedientia nescit moras; an obedient servant makes no delayes. Gods spirit often useth the phrase of rising early: Abimelech rose early to tell his dreame:Gen. 20.8. and 22.3. 1 Sam. 1.19. Iob 1.5. Abraham rose early to sacrifice his Sonne: Elkanah and Hannah rose early to worship God: Iob rose early to sanctifie his children. We say with the sluggard; Modo Domine, modo; by and by, LORD: Sed istud modo non habebit modum: this same dilation hath no measure. Gratia ab officio, quod mora tardat, abest; the service shall find no thankes, that found no readinesse. A good worke, the longer it stickes in our fingers the lesse acceptable.
A working hand: the life of service is worke, the worke of a Christian is obedience. The Centurion describing his good Servant, said no more but thus, Mat. 8. I bid him doe this, and he doth it. He that worketh not, is not Gods labourer, but his owne loiterer. We are all either Masters of servants, or servants of Masters; or servants to the State and commonwealth, or commanders of such servants: some may be all of these, all are some of these. We know what we require of our servants, what our Masters required of us. It were an easie thing to be a servant, if service consisted onely in kissing our hands, in making curtesies, in taking wages and wearing liveries. Many weare Christs livery, all live upon Gods trencher: but most have
 gowty fingers, they will do no work in Gods service. There is an habituall service; so the slave while he eates or sleepes, is in service still. But the actuall service pleaseth God; which consists inLuke 1.75. holinesse and righteousnesse before him. Many thus call themselves, but God doth not call them so. It is an everlasting rule,Rom. 6.16. ye are his Servants to whom ye obey. There is much service in the world, but it is to a wrong Master; but such can God point out, and put out; and order it, like Iehu; when he inflicteth vengance on the world;2 King. 10 23 not one Servant of the Lord be among them. If any thinke to passe in the crowd, and presse among Gods servants, without their cognisance, the wedding garment, a question shall be asked them, whereat they shall standMat. 22.12. speechlesse; How came you in hither?
An honest heart; and to make up this is requirable the accession of two things, Sanctitie and Resolution.
For Sanctitie; GOD that hath given thee a whole heart will not be served with a peece of it. Some make shew Servire, when indeed they study Saevire; as Herod, let me come to worship the child, when he meant to worry the child. They are like the Philistins Temple; there is the Arke, but Dagon too. Or like the Temples of Aegypt, faire without, but within full of Crocodyles. The eye is in the Pulpit, the heart in the Warehouse. Rotten kernels under faire shells: full of Herods and Naamans exceptives; In this forbeare us. What shew soever be made, oportet aliquid intus esse, there must be some hidden good within. The oake that is rotten at the heart, will never be good for building. Say to the hypocrite, as Simon Peter did to Simon Magus;Act. 8.21. Thou hast no part nor lot in this comfort: for thy heart is not right in the sight of God.
For Resolution; there must bee no reasoning, no disputing; let no man dare toIob 13.3. speake to the Almighty, or desire to reason with God. It is too farre, if with Ieremie, any man put him to hisIer. 12.1. Wherefore; wherefore doth the way of the wicked prosper? Abraham told not his wife, when he went to offer Isaac. PaulGal. 1.16. conferred not with flesh and bloud, when he went to preach among the Heathen. The Iesuites commend blind obedience: and call the Novices that examine their impositions Quae ristas. They exact a condition of their inferiours, as Nahash did of the Gileadites, that they may thrust out their1 Sam. 11.2. right eyes: otherwise allow them no covenant of peace: yea they put out both the eyes of their people. To God this blind obedience is good taken in that sense, without asking a reason. When man commands, enquire Quid, not Quis; what is bidden, not who bids. When God commands, consider, Quis, not Quid; who charges, not what is imposed. Beleeve what God saith, though in our thought impossible: doe what he commands, though in our judgement unreasonable. Galerius maximus seeking to pervert that blessed Cyprian to idolatry, wish'd him before sense of punishment to bethinke himselfe; Cave ne perias; take heed, you doe not cast away your selfe. His answer was short, but resolute; In re tam iusta nulla consultatio. the case is so cleare that it refuses deliberation. Say, goods, liberty, life it selfe is hazarded, yet God can reward all. The Apostles were cited by Christ to Ierusalem, and commanded not to depart thence,Acts 1.4. but to waite for the promise of the Father, to receive the Holy Ghost: They never alleadge; Is not this that Ierusalem which was a provocation to anger from the first building? the slaughter-house of the Prophets? the common sinke or sewer of all sinnes: yet wet with the bloud of our Master Christ? why Ierusalem? Is not any other place fitter? no, they dispute not, but goe thither with joy, what danger or unlikely hoods soever might affront them, they put on the resolution of Hester; Si pereo, pereo; if I perish, I perish. But there can nothing bee lost, that wee piously trust God withall.
For the liberty of this Service, know that Gods servant is the greatest Freeman.1 Cor. 7.22. He that is called in the Lord, being a Servant, is the LORDS free-man.Aug de Civit 10. Lib. 4. Bonus etiamsi serviat, liber est: malus etsi regnet, servus est: The good man is free, though he serves: the evill is bond, though he raignes. Nor is the vicious person
 the slave of one man: but Quod gravius est, tot dominorum quot vitiorum: which is more grievous; he hath so many masters, as he hath vices. Vis ut serviat caro tua animae tuae? Deo serviat anima tua: Debes Regi, ut possit regere; Wouldest thou have thy flesh servethy soule, let thy soule serve God; thou owest to thy King the right of government. Serve therefore willingly, and be free continually.
For the dignitie of this Office, the Saints have ever had a holy pride in being GODS servants; there cannot be greater honour than to serve such a Master as commands heaven, earth and hell: Non reputes magnum quod Deo servias, sed maximum, quod ipse dignatur te in servum assumere: Doe not thinke thou doest honour GOD in serving him; but thinke how GOD honours thee, in vouchsasing thee to be his servant. David could not study to give himselfe a greater stile, thanPsal. 116.16. O LORD, truely I am thy servant; I am thy servant, and the sonne of thy hand-maid: and this he spake, not in the phrase of a humane complement, but in the humble confession of a Christian. Yea, so doth our Apostle commend this excellencie, that (if wee note it) he sets the title of Servant, before that of an Apostle: first Servant, then Apostle. Great was his office in being an Apostle, greater his blessing in being a servant of Iesus Christ: The one is an outward calling, the other an inward grace: Damnatur Apostolorum unus, servorum nullus; There was an Apostle condemned, never any servant of God: Iudas preached to others, not to his owne heart; he healed their bodies, not his owne soule; wrought miracles upon others, not upon himselfe; cast out devils, yet himselfe was cast out as a devill. All which justifies that of Samuel,1 Sam. 15.22. To obey is better than sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of Rams. Prophets have beene excluded; many say,Matth. 7.23. Lord, Lord, we have prophecied in thy name; to whom it is answered, I never knew you; depart from me yee that worke iniquity. But never were Servants excluded; for the other, their booke and clergie cannot save them; It will be demanded of them at that day; Non quid legerint, sed quid egerint, non modo quid dixerint, sed quomodo vixerint. Bern. Not what bookes they have read, but what life they have led; not what they have taught others to doe, but what they have done themselves. God by this title commends Iob, the greatest man of the East:Iob 1.8. Hast thou considered my servant Iob? Paul cals Iames the Lords Brother, Galath. 1.19. other of the Apostles saw I none, save Iames the Lords brother. Iames cals himselfe the servant of Christ, Iam 1.1. Iames a servant of God, and of the Lord Iesus Christ; quite leaving out the remembrance of that other stile If it were such a noble priviledge to be a servant to Caesar, and free of the Roman State; that theAct. 22.28. Captaine confessed, with a great summe of money he obtained that freedome: what an honour is it to serve the King of kings? The good Emperour Theodosius held it more noble, to be membrum Ecclesiae, than caput Imperii; to be a member of the Church, than head of the Empire. It is better to be Gods servant, than Lord of all the world. This is the Dignity; now for
The Reward, it is immense and glorious.Eccles. 33.24. Bread, correction, and worke are for a servant. For bread, God gives us our daily bread; wee are all at his keeping. For correction, Heb. 12. he chastiseth us, because he loveth us. For worke, Matth. 21. he sends us to worke in his vineyard: we have from him Protection and Provision. For protection, Rom. 8.31. If God be with us, who can be against us? For provision, Luke 15.17. Even the hired servants of my Fathers, have bread enough, and to spare. But what is all this to that future glory, which was from everlastingnesse prepared for those servants! I know, they doe not ever speed best in this world: out of a related story let me draw this conclusion in earnest. A servant convicted of some misdemeanour before a magistrate, besought some favour for his masters sake. Why, whom doe you serve, said the magistrate? I serve God, said the delinquent: with that his mittimus was quickly made; away with him, hee scoffes at authoritie: not long after a great Lord sends for enlargement of this his servant: the magistrate upon the receit of the letters, sends in all haste for the prisoner; of whom he frettingly demands, why he told him not that he served such a Lord: The servant answered,
 because I thought you cared more for the Lord of heaven: you say, this is but a fable: you count him a foole that makes it a morall. O utinam tantummodo fictum, non factum diceretur: would God it were but a tale, and that our courses did not justifie it well though our reward be short on earth, let us looke for it with comfort in heaven. Ambrose said on his death-bed, we are happy in this, we serve a good Master.Iohn 12.26. Where I am, saith Christ, there shall my servant be: and if any man serve me, him will my Father honour. If we have done good and faithfull service to him, we shall heare him say to us;Mat. 25.21. Well done good and faithfull servants, enter into the joy of your Lord: and this joy be to us all. An Apostle: here he specifies his office.Apostle. Where observe two things:
First, he joynes together Service and Apostleship; and that for two reasons: 1. To distinguish and exemplifie his calling: for every man that is a servant of God, is not an Apostle of Iesus Christ.Hebr. 5.4. No man taketh this honour to himselfe, but he that is called of God. There must be a Calling; or else Sinne will answer when it is questioned, as Satan did when he was conjured, Act. 19.15. Iesus I know, and Paul I know, but who are yee? Christ himselfe did not preach publikely, till he was declared by God to be Doctor mundi, the great Prophet of the world: and had his confirmation from heaven, with Hunc audite. Neither is it enough to say, we are all Priests, Revel. 1.6. so we might say we are all kings, and turne rebels. There must proceed a mission and commission; or else whosoever runnes abroad, had better have stayed at home. 2. To shew that Apostleship was a matter of service; as an honour, so a burden. None are called into Gods harvest, butMat 8.38. labourers: Christ never bade us pray for loyterers and lookers on. As earthly Kings have some servants in ordinarie, other extraordinary: all Christians are Gods sworne servants extraordinary; so vowed in holy Baptisme, to serve him all the dayes of our life. By professing the true faith wee weare Christs livery, and by exercise of charity, the cognisance of that livery.Iohn 13.35. By this shall men know that ye are my Disciples, if you have love one to another. Princes and Preachers are Gods servants in ordinary: the Magistrate is (as it were) a finger of Gods hand, the Minister a Steward in his house. Though in a large sense all are the Lords Ministers: and it is usually said to those three States, Tu supplex ora, tu protege, tuque labora: The Prince must governe all, the Priest pray for all, the people worke for all. Yet strictly this office, as it hath especially the name of Ministery, so it hath the nature, for it consists in Service.
Secondly, it was the custome of the Apostles to magnifie their office. So Paul to the Romans.Rom. 11.13. Inasmuch as I am the Apostle of the Gentiles, I magnifie mine office. And this they did the rather to weaken the credit of false intruders.1 Cor. 9.1. Am I not an Apostle? am I not free? have I not seene Iesus Christ? Our Saviour himselfe accepted this honour.Iohn 13.13. Ye call me Master and Lord, and ye say well: for so I am. Is the terme [Minister] contemptible to any? That Christ who must save you, or you shall never be saved, cals himselfe a Minister, Matth. 20.28. The Sonne of man came not to be ministred unto, but to minister. If therefore men must Honorare bonum Dominum, etiam in malo servo, are bound to glorifie the good master even in the evill servant: and not onely to know1 Thess. 5.13 them, but to esteeme them very highly in love for their workes sake: Then much more1 Tim 5.17. let the Elders that rule well be (yes they are, but also be) counted worthy of double honour.
Of Iesus Christ: here he declares his master, where three collections arise:
1. They were Apostles of Christ, for none ever called themselves Apostles of God the Father: because Christ himselfe only was Apostolus Patris, the Fathers Apostle. He had other pastors under him, but he was that Great Shepheard and Bishop of our soules. He sent others, but Him hath the Father sent.
2. Christ onely hath authoritie to make Apostles: he chose them to the worke, that could enable them to the worke. Therefore none ought to take this charge upon them, unlesse they be either mediately or immediately called of God.
Some have no calling either of God or men, but runne on their owne errand.

Ier. 23.21. I have not sent these prophets, yet they ran: I have not spoken to them, yet they prophesied. Let them that set them on worke, pay them their wages.Ioh. 10.1. He that entreth not in by the doore into the sheepfold, but climeth up some other way, the same is a theefe and a robber. Either like the Sodomites they cannot find the doore: or like the Iesuites they will not find the doore. These later have runne so farre as the Indies, but who sent them? Impiger extremus currit mercator ad Indos: these merchants went not to fetch sheepe to Christs fold, but to sheere their wooll and flay their skins. They were not Apostles, but Alchymists, they went to fetch gold. I have heard much talke of their miracles; if I had all faith, even to remove mountaines; I could not beleeve them. But whatsoever their miracles were, I am sure their moralls were naught. The poore Indian refused (after all their commendations of celestiall glory) to goe to heaven, if the Spaniards should be there.
Some are called of GOD without man, by an immediate vocation. So were the twelve Apostles by CHRIST in his state mortall, Paul in his state immortall. Acts 9.
Some are sent of men without God: so Iason and Menelaus sought the Priesthood by unlawfull meanes of Antiochus: so Ieroboam made his priests. Alliance, Favour, Simonie have brought men of bad learning and worse living into the ministery. Which made one to say, that horses were more miserable than asses; in that horses went post to get asses preferment.
Others are sent of God by man; so Iosua was ordained of God by Moses, Timothy and Titus by Paul, the Bishops in Crete by Titus.Rom. 10.15. For how shall they preach, except they be sent? They that in these dayes goe without this warrant, climbe in at the window: and that we know is no faire possession of the house. Qui ingreditur per fenestras, ejicietur e soribus: he that enters in at the windowes, shall be cast out at the doores. God seales his approbation of the Churches calling, and answers it in the conversion of many soules. So that an industrious Pastor may say to his people;1 Cor. 9.2. If I be not an Apostle to others, yet doubtlesse I am to you: the Seale of my ministery are ye in the Lord.
3 They came not in their owne name, but in Christs; an Apostle of Iesus Christ.2 Cor. 5.20. We are Ambassadors for Christ, and GOD doth beseech you by us. We are sutors, not for ourselves, but for him: desiring to2 Cor. 11.2. espouse you to one Husband, and to present you pure and chast virgins to Christ. We preach not our selves, but Christ, neither our owne glory, nor our owne gaine. Not our owne glory: God is glorified in our infirmities. Woe unto us if we arrogate that, whereof God is so jealous that he will not give it to another. Not our owne gaine, we would then take any profession rather than this. There is no calling wherein a man may not live better, and grow rich sooner. A cluster of Law is worth a whole vintage of any other profession. Indeed in Rome, and throughout the Papall Iurisdiction, where respect of gaines, not of paines, guides mens dispositions; where little learning, and lesse honestie will serve to beare up, and to beare out much worship, more wealth: there great riches is in Clericall hands: It is their maine policie, by blowing up other states to enlarge their owne. Like the flouds that made warre against the woods;Esl 4 15. let us subdue them all, and make us more countryes. But for conscience; not a Pope preached these nine hundred yeares; yet I hope they have not beene poore. They have not Peters net to catch the soules, but Peters hooke to take all the fishes that have silver in their mouthes. It is said of Leo 10. that whereas others were only Popes but whiles they lived, he was Pope many yeares after he was dead Sacra sub extrema si forte requiritis hora, Cur Leo non potuit sumere; vendiderat. Iohn 22. left behind him two hundred and fifty tunne of gold: so that one wrote of him, Erat pontifex maximus, si non virtute, pecunia tamen maximus: Whatsoever he was in pietie, he was the chiefe Priest in mony. They inveigh against us for providing for our owne lawfull wives and children: yet admire themselves for providing for their harlots, and bastards, and minions. They come into the
 Church, tanquam ad auream messem; as it were to a golden harvest. The Friers were so long wilfull beggers, that they had beggard all the Christian world. The Iesuits hate all other Orders but the Capuchin: because the Capuchin askes nothing, the Iesuite would have all. Their artillery hath beene thus wittily described; the Capuchin Friers shooting from the purse, the Franciscans a little wide off it, the Iesuites hitting it in the midst.1 Cor. 9.11. I know who said, If we have sowen unto you spirituall things, is it a great matter if wee shall reape your carnall things? yet let us winne your soules, though we, never have your purses: the gaine of one soule is greater than the Indies:1 Thess. 2.19. For what is our hope, or joy, or crowne of rejoycing? Are not even ye in the presence of our Lord Iesus Christ at his comming? yes, ye are our glory and joy.
To them that have obtained like precious faith with us, through the righteousnesse of God, and our Saviour Iesus Christ. Here he comes to the persons to whom this Epistle is written: wherein consider six circumstances:
The
Generalitie of the persons,Qualification of this generalitie,Excellencie of this qualification,Equalitie of this excellencie,Meanes of this equalitie,Ground of this meanes,To them, all them.That have faith.Precious faith.Like with us.Have obtained it.Through the righteousnesse of God, and our Saviour Iesus Christ.
To them, all them; here is the Generalitie of the persons, for the word is indefinite. This is called a Generall Epistle; not in a metaphoricall sense, as Paul cals the Corinthians;2 Cor. 3.2. ye are our Epistle written in our hearts, knowne and read of all men: or as one cals Christ, an Epistle sent us from God the Father. Or as August. in Psal. 90. conc. 2. cals the Scripture, Gods Letter or Epistle sent us hither, de illa civitate unde peregrinamur: from that Citie to which we travell. But in a proper and usuall meaning; a letter of a friend sent to his friends. It is called a generall Epistle; not onely: 1. Because the doctrine contained in it, is orthodoxall and catholike. 2. Nor because the use of it is generall; even to us, aswell as to those to whom it was written. But, 3 because it was not directed to any one man; as those of Paul to Timothie, Titus, Philemon: of Iohn to the elect Lady, and Gaius; no, nor to one particular Church, as those of Paul to the Romans, Corinthians, etc. But to all the Saints, and worshippers of Iesus Christ, howsoever distressed, wheresoever dispersed, or whensoever despised; to all them that with humble faith, and sincere repentance secke our Mediatour.
For with God is no respect of persons;Iohn 1.29. Behold that Lambe, which takes away the sinnes of the world.Act. 13 26. Men and brethren, children of the stocke of Abraham, and whosoever among you feareth God, to you is the Word of this salvation sent. There is no difference of countrey, of condition, of estate. All which are exemplified by our Saviour Christ, Matth. 8. upon the Iew and the Gentile; the Leper and the Centurion. For Countrey, the Leper was a Iew, the Centurion a Gentile. For Condition, the Leper a man of peace, the Centurion a man of warre. For estate, the Leper poore, the Centurion rich. I know the greater danger is to the rich, and the sweeter promises are made to the poore: yet let not the poore presume, nor the rich despaire. The one may be pauper in arca, pauperior in gratia; poore in money, poorer in grace: the other may be Dives in seculo, yet ditior in Domino; rich for this world, yet richer for the world to come.Gal. 3.28. There is neither Iew nor Greeke, bond nor free, male nor female: for yee are all one in Iesus Christ. To them all, let no man deny his soule this comfort.
That have Faith. Here is the Qualification. The definition and excellencie of this Grace I referre a little further. Here that we may a little conceive the nature of it, we finde it often called a Hand; and that for two reasons: 1. As the hand fastens hold upon the object, to which the heart directs it: so faith apprehends Christ with his blessed merits, whereby we are onely saved. 2. As the hand is fittest for
 operation, and doth execute that businesse which no other member of the body can. So faith worketh godlinesse, and produceth those effects which no other grace in the soule can. For this purpose it hath an Instrument, Galath. 5.6. Faith worketh by love. The hand can receive a gift of it selfe, but it cannot cut a peece of wood without an Instrument: but by the helpe of that it can divide or fashion it to pleasure. So Faith can receive Christ into the heart, that most excellentIohn 3.36. gift of God the Father: but for the duties of the Law, Faith of it selfe cannot produce them. Ioyne love to it, and then it can: for Faith working by love performes all duties to God and man. Now of this Hand there be five fingers, which for methods sake we may order according to the letters.
There is Fruitfulnesse, it is not barren: forIames 2.20. faith without workes is dead: Nudifidians are Nullifidians. We will never take her for a true Lady, that hath not her Gentleman-usher before, and her servants following after. If you see not Repentance going before Faith, nor workes attending on her, know it is not shee. Opera pinguescunt fidem;Luther. Aug. Bern. good deeds doe batten Faith. Fides appellata est ab eo quod fit. Faith hath the appellation from doing. Two syllables sound when we pronounce Fides. Prima est a facto, secunda a Deo. The one is derived from Fact, the other from GOD. Interrogo te utrum credas, dices Credo. Fac quod dicis, and fides est: Doest thou beleeve? Yes, I beleeve. Doe what thou sayest, and that is faith. Wee may call Faith a Vine, Vertues the Branches, Workes the Grapes, Devotion the Wine. False faith is like a sandie earth; raine it never so much, no fruit ariseth.
There is Appropriation of CHRIST: by faith hee is made ours, by love we are made his. It was a peece of the Philosoph^rs meditation, that Totum in se habet homo, qui se habet: the beleever addes, Se habet qui Christum habet; Christum habet qui fidem habet, and in Christum credit. That man hath all in himselfe that hath himselfe, he hath himselfe that hath Christ, and he hath Christ that hath true faith.1 Iohn 5.4. This is the victory that overcommeth the world, even our faith: yea, more, it overcomes Christ himselfe. The world is overcome by faith, b^cause it cannot withstand it: Christ is overcome by faith, because he will not withstand it. Christ in a duell overcame the Devill, Matth 4. a Canaanitish woman so overcame Christ himselfe. He yeelded,Mat. 15.28. O woman, great is thy faith; be it unto thee even as thou wilt. This is able to smooth his countenance though it be frowning; to tye his hands though they be striking. The Lion of this wo^ld raged long, and still rageth,1 Pet. 5 8. seeking whom he may devoure.R^vel. 5 5. The Lion of the Tribe of Iuda conquered him: now Faith conquers the Conquerour. Quanta fidei vis, quae vincit Leonem, omnes and omnia vincentem? How great is the power of faith, that overcomes him who overcame all? Thus is God pleased to let Faith have an holy victory over himselfe: he loves this sanctified violence, and bids Faith wrastle couragiously with him, like Iacob; permitting his Almighty selfe vinci, vinciri; to bee conquered and mani^led from executing deserved vengeance. So Iob: Albeit thou kill mee, yet I will trust in thee; and because (saith God) thou dost trust in mee, I will not kill thee. It were honour enough for faith toHeb. 11.33. subdue kingdomes, but to atchieve the kingdome of heaven! enough to stop the mouthes of Lions, but to vanquish that roring Lion, and to1 Pet. 5 9. resist him! enough to quench the violence of elementary fires, but to deliver from the eternall fire of hell! enough to escape the edge of mens swords, but to escape the sword of GODS Iustice. O the matchlesse vertue of Faith!
There is Imitation of Christ: Faith hath two eyes; one lookes to Christs merits that we may be saved; the other to his righteousnesse that we may be sanctified. In Imitation there be two things,Zanch. Action and Affection. Action, for it is not enough to commend and admire the patterne, but we must follow it. Affection, for it is not enough to forgive because wee cannot revenge. This is no sufficient imitation of Christs love; for hee can, if hee please, bruise sinners to peeces, andPsal. 2 9. breake them
 with a rod of iron. But wee must forgive with a minde to forgive, and give almes with the minde of charity. Faith doth not thinke that heaven will fall into the lap, but endeavours to worke out salvation, not without feare and trembling: and seekes to follow Christ to blessednesse, the same way that he went thither.
There is trust in Christ; for there can be no faith in him without trust and dependance on him. This point throughly examined, would call in question many mens faith. The covetous worldling dares trust Christ to raise his body, and to save his soule, and to give him the Kingdome of glory hereafter: but he dares not trust him for his daily bread here. The fowles are fed, and the flowers are clothed by him; and will yee vex your soules with sollicitous cares? If yee doe, may not Christ say truly, that ye areMatth. 6.30. of little faith? Shall wee trust God with our jewels, and not with the box? As if thou durst not commit thy children to his protection; thou scrapest up wealth with the hazard of heaven and eternall peace: yet if thou be questioned concerning thy salvation, thou answerest, thy trust is in Christ. This is a false and deceiving faith; take heed, lest whiles he doth grant thee that wherein thou dost not trust him, worldly riches; he take away that wherein thou dost trust him, everlasting joy.
There is honouring of Christ: no man ever beleeved on him, but he desired to honour him. It is fit hee should looke for glory from us, so well as wee looke for glory from him. We honour the King under whom we enjoy our owne with peace: we honour the Physitian that preserves the health of our bodies: wee honour the Souldier that defends us from our enemies: O how much more should we honour him that saves our soules!1 Cor. 6.20. we are bought with a price, therefore let us glorifie him both in our bodies and spirits, for they are his. These be the five fingers of Faith, let us lay hold on Christ in life, he may lay hold on us in death, and beare us up in his holy hand to everlasting glory.
Precious Faith; Here is the excellencie of this qualification. As Athens was called Greece of Greece, so Faith may be called the Grace of Grace. It is Precious in regard of the Object, the Subject, the Act, the Effect, the Vse.
In respect of the Object; which in a larger acception is the whole Scripture,  whereof every parcell must be beleeved, without diminution or addition. Strictly this is Christ, who is not onely the Word of God, but God himselfe in the Word. I am the way, the truth, and the life. Non est qua eas nisi per me:Aug. Tract. 22. in Ioh. Iohn 6. non est quo eas nisi ad me. LORD, how shall we goe? Thou art our way: whither shall we goe? Thou hast the words of eternall life. There is no way but by him, no light but from him, no life but in him. CHRIST is a mutuall hand; to the Father one, another to us. An hand to the Father, by which he reacheth us: an hand to us by which wee reach the Father. The Fathers mouth whereby hee speakes to us, our mouth whereby wee speake to him: our eye to see by, foot to goe by; our pillar of fire by night, and cloud by day, guiding us thorow the desart of this world. It is a precious faith that layes hold on this precious object.Rom. 10 9. If thou confesse with thy mouth the LORD IESVS, and shalt beleeve in thy heart, that God raised him him up from the dead: (not onely dead, for so the Iewes beleeve him; but risen againe, for that is the faith of Christians: if thou have this faith) I tell thee from Paul, and Paul from GOD, to the comfort of thy soule; thou art presently justified, and shalt be everlastingly saved.Rom. 10.11. For the Scripture saith, (it is not the promise of man, but the assurance of GOD) whosoever beleeveth on him, shall not be ashamed.Gal. 6.14. God forbid I should rejoyce in any thing, save in the Crosse of our Lord Iesus Christ. There is nothing wherein men usually rejoyce, but the faithfull find it in Christ. Doth any man glory in knowledge?1 Cor. 2.2. I desire to know nothing among you, but Iesus Christ, and him crucified. This is the blessed knowledge; for it isIohn 17.3. eternall life. Doth any man glory in honours? It is Christ that hath made usRevel. 1.16. Kings. Doth another glory in Riches? Christ is a treasure never failing; andIohn 1.16. of his fulnesse have all we received. In libertie? CHRIST hathLuke 1.74. Delivered us out of the hands
 of all our enemies. In Princes favours? The King of Kings accepts us in him;Eph. 1.6. He made us accepted in the beloved. All good things are to be found in him; therefore he is a Precious object, and this a Precious faith.
 In respect of the Subject; the seate of faith is in the heart;Rom. 10.10. with the heart man beleeveth unto righteousnesse. It is not placed in the mind and understanding onely, but in the will and affections. Faith as Notitia, a knowledge, resides in the mind; as Fiducia, an assured perswasion, in the will. It is not a prattle of the tongue: Herods tongue belies his soule.Heming. Dicitis quod creditis, non facitis quod dicitis. Men say what they beleeve, doe not alway doe what they say, nor is it a floting opinion of the braine, a contemplative speculation of mysteries: but a certaine perswasion of the heart. There is a forged faith, and a forced faith: forged in heretickes; who will beleeve no God, but one of their owne making. They beleeve all that they doe beleeve, Sua side, non ecclesiastica, non catholica; with a faith of their owne, not with the faith of the elect, of the Church. No oracle, no article of holy faith, but they will conceive it, and receive it, their owne way, or not at all. Hoc non fidei, sed perfidiae: this is rather an art of treacherie, then of faith. Forced in devills; they acknowledge from their owne horror, and against their wills, that there is a GOD. It was the relation of a reverend Divine concerning an Atheist in England. A young man was a Papist; but soone fell in dislike of their superstition. He became a Protestant, but that did not please him long: England could not content him, he reeles to Amsterdam: There he fell from one Sect to another, till he lighted upon the Familists: the first principle they taught him was this; There is no God. As indeed they had need feare up their conscience, and damme up all naturall light, that turne Familists. Hereon he fell to a loose life, committed a robberie, was convicted, condemned and brought to die. At the execution he desired some stay, uttering these words; Say what you will, surely there is a GOD; loving to his friends, terrible to his enemies. Even the lewdest reprobates, that spit in the face of heaven, and wade as deepe as Iesuites in bloud, yet they shall have a forced faith. Though perhaps they say for the time, as Nero: Verebor esse cum faciam, Deum? When Seneca reproved him for his vices, and bad him live, ut facta superi comprobarent; that GOD might approve his ^ctions: He answered, Stulte, verebor esse cum haec faciam, deos? Thou silly man, shall I feare there is a God, when I goe about my villanies? But they shall one day beleeve and feele: there may be Atheists on earth, there are none in hell: no sooner come thither, but they know to their endlesse sorrow, that there is a GOD.De lu^is. lib. 1 cap 15. Bellarmine saith, that the faith of reprobates and devills, est recta and vera fides ex parte objecti; is a right and true faith in regard of the object. AndDe unico ^apt. contr petil. cap. 10. Augustine. comparing Peters confession, Matth. 16.16. Thou art Christ the Sonne of the living God: with the devills acknowledgement Marke 1.24. I know who thou art, even the holy one of God: saith, that though Peter for this was commended, and Satan expelled: albeit the same confession was beneficiall to the one, and not to the other: In utrisque tamen non falsa, sed vera; non neganda, sed agnoscenda; non detestanda, sed approbanda. Yet the faith in both was not false but true; not to be denied, but acknowledged; not to bee detested, but approved. Let this faith be granted true, so farre as it goes; yet as it hath many other differences, so this one especially. The faith of reprobates and devills is compelled ex evidentia signorum, by the demonstration of the signes; faith of the elect ex evidentia Spiritus, by the evidence of the Spirit. Theirs against their wills, ours from the ground of our hearts; for that is the seat and subject of all approved faith.
 In respect of the Act, it beleeves on Christ. There be three degrees or faculties of faith, as the Schoole speakes out of Augustine. First, to beleeve there is a GOD; and this is a faith incident to devills. Next, to beleeve GOD; to credit the history of the Gospell, and to assent that what GOD saith is true. This is called an Historicall faith, and may be in reprobates. Last, to beleeve on GOD, which doth ex duobus prioribus emergere; or as Chemnitius sayes, presupponit est includit: ariseth from
 both the former, and doth presuppose and comprehend both the former. The faith of a reprobate is a true faith specifically; a spark of fire is true fire, though it be not able to warme: a drop of water is true water, though it be not able to carry a vessell: a little sprigge may be a true Cedar, though it be not yet fit for timber. That figtree which our LORD cursed, though it bare no fruit, was a true figtree.Exod. 3.18. As the Israelites requir'd to goe three dayes journey in the wildernesse, before they did offer sacrifice: so faith hath three degrees before it come to that perfection, as may justifie the soule. Saving faith in a man hath this precious act, to rely on GODS mercie in Christ for his salvation. He disclaimes not his part in Christ, as the devils; Quid nobis tecum? Marke 1. What have we to doe with thee, thou Iesus of Nazareth? nor loseth it; as reprobates, Iohn 3.18. He that beleeveth not, is condemned already. But hee challengeth his portion in the bloud of Christ.Cant. 6.3.. I am my Beloveds, and my Beloved is mine. His body is in heaven, there I shall find it mine: his divinitie on earth, there I doe find it mine: his Gospell in my eare, to beget him mine: his Sacrament in my eye, to confirme him mine: his Spirit in my heart, to assure him mine. Angels are mine, to sight for me: Prince mine, to rule for me: Church mine, to pray for me: Preacher mine, to feed me.1 Cor. 3.22. Whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things present, or things to come; all are ours, and we are Christs, and Christ is Gods.
This faith doth not onely with reprobates, beleeve the Major of the Gospell, that Christ is salvation; but the Minor with Mary; that he is my Saviour. The devills beleeve much; but Reconciliationem suam non credunt:Bucer. Iam. 2.19. they cannot beleeve their owne reconcilement. Therefore saith Iames; horrentes credunt, they beleeve and tremble. Timor infidelitatis filius, saith Basil; Feare is the child of unbeleefe.in Psal. 3 3. Mat. 8 26. Why are yee fearefull, O yee of little faith? why are the Apostles called, (...), timorious, but because they were (...), of little faith?Rom. 5.1. But being justified by faith we have peace with God through Iesus Christ.Eph. 3.12. In whom we have bold nesse and accesse with confidence, by the faith of him. A Traitor condemned to death, knowes the King, and his prerogative royall, that he is able to pardon: his disposition, that it is mild and mercifull: yea, he knowes that the King hath forgiven many such offenders. But now for himselfe, hee hath no friends to the King, no word from the King to warrant his pardon: no hope, if he should intreat favour, that himselfe was a fit subject for this exercise of mercie. Still he trembleth; Sentit se miserum, etsi noverit Regem misericordem: he feeles himselfe miserable, though he know the King to be mercifull. So the reprobate knowes Gods omnipotency;Matth. 8.2. Lord, if thou wilt, thou canst make me cleane: he knowes his infinite mercie, that itPsal. 36.5. reacheth unto the heavens, and his faithfulnesse unto the clouds: he knowes GOD hath forgiven many, David for adulterie, Salomon for idolatrie, Peter for Apostacie, Paul for blasphemie. But for his owne part, he hath no friend to God, no mediator betwixt God and him, no Christ to speake for mercie: he hath no word whereby he can apply this mercie: no hope, that mercie would come upon his submission and seeking. Hee wants that justifying faith, to doe this precious act of application. A man is deeply in debt, non solvendo, in no case to pay: he heares and beleeves, that his Creditor is an honest man, that he hath dealt mercifully with others; remitted a third, halfe, the whole debt. But he hath neither promise from his creditor, nor perswasion in himselfe, that he will deale so kindly with him: for all this, he feares arrest and imprisonment, without baile, main prise, or any hope of deliverance. The wicked is deeply runne into Gods debt by his sinnes: (yea every man is taught to pray,Matth. 6.12. Forgive us our debts) for which he is subject to convention, conviction, condemnation. He knowes how this Creditor dealt with a servant. Matth. 18.27. because Non habuit unde; he had not to pay, the Lord was moved with compassion, and forgave him the debt. But this reprobate, through want of applying faith, hath no promise, no security, no hope that he shall be freed: but he feares the prison, where if hee bee once clapt up under the hands of that cruell Iailour, the devill; hee
 cannot depart thence till hee hath paid the uttermost farthing. It is then a Precious faith, that hath this powerfull are to beleeve a mans owne reconciliation.
 In respect of the Effect, because it hath precious consequents. Amongst many, consider five sweet fruits.
1 Peace with God, which is produced by that faith which justifies us. Receive peace, and be blessed: Crede and accepisti, beleeve and thou hast received it. Vpon our apprehension of Christ by faith, followes his satisfaction for us; upon this satisfaction we have remission: upon remission, reconciliation: upon reconciliation, peace. There is no quarrell against us in heaven; nothing but peace and joy, because we have truely beleeved.
2 Peace with our owne conscience. When that sterne Sergeant shall take thee by the throte, and arrest thee upon Gods debt, pay that thou owest: let thy faith plead, I have payed it. How? Produce thy acquittance, that bloudy acquittance, sealed in the wounds of thy Saviour, and given to thy faith. This shall turne the frownes of thy conscience into smiles: and that hand which was ready to hale thee to prison, shall now embrace thee with joy, encourage thee with kindnesse, and fight tor thee with conquest.
3 Victorie, faith knowes no other language but victorie.2 Tim. 4.7. I have kept the faith, now is layed up for me a Crowne. ItHebr. 11.33. subdueth kingdomes, even regnum Antichristi, the kingdome of the devill, there's victorie: wrought righteousnesse, though the world and sin withstood it, there's victorie: raised strength out of weakenesse, there's victory over nature: turned to slight the armies of the aliens, there's victor ie over malice and hostilitie: raised the dead, there's victorie over the grave: with patience and greatnesse of spirit, it endured mockings, scourgings, etc. miseries worse than death, there's glorious victorie. It overcomes the world, 1 Iohn 5.4. it overcomes the Prince of this world;1 Pet. 5.9. whom resist stedfast in the faith. It quencheth all the fiery darts of the wicked, Eph. 6.16. They are darts in respect of their sharpenesse, and fiery for their violence: one sinne kindling another, drunkennesse adulterie, adulterie murder. The whole world lieth wickednesse; Positus in maligno, that is in igne malo: set on fire of the divell.Cajetan. Yet faith quencheth all: Though they were as fiery as the Gun-powder treason, yet this shall beare them off, beate them off, and infatuate their malice.Royard. It is a Shield, this faith: this shield covers all, head and heart; understanding and will: ut non turbetur intellectus, ut non formidet affectus; that neither the mind bee confounded, nor the affection amazed. Yea, faith overcomes the King of heaven himselfe;Diez. appealing a Deo irascente propter peccatum, ad Deum placatum propter Christum; from GOD justly offended for sinne, to GOD sweetly pleased for Christ. It is able to remove mountaines; the great hills of distrust, the great heapes of iniquities; therefore Precious.
4 Good report:Hebr. 11.39. all those Saints through faith obtained a good Report. They say, Non patitur ludum Fama, Fides, Oculus: A mans credit, Faith, and his Eye, endure no just. Yet let thy faith be sound; and though injury wound thy eye, ignominie thy fame, yet thy faith shall make all whole. That mans righteousnesse, thorow all clouds, shall breake forth as the Sunne, and his integritie shine like the noone-day. All unjust aspersions are but as rubbish; they may seeme to fully him for a while, that he may shine bright for ever. Frustra condemnatur in terris, qui commendatur in coelis: How little is that man hurt, whom malice condemnes on earth, and God commends in heaven! Let the world accuse us, so long as our God doth acquit us.2 Tim. 1.12. I suffer these things, and am not ashamed: for I know whom I have beleeved.2 Cor. 10.18. For not he that commendeth himselfe is approved, but whom the Lord commendeth. Let God justifie, and let all the friends on earth or in hell accuse.
5 It blesseth to us all other blessings:Prov. 2.25. Hee that putteth his trust in the Lord, shall be made fat. Without this faith, we are accomptant for every thing we receive, to a bit of bread. There is no right to the creatures but by Christ, no right to Christ
 but by faith. Without this Quantum honoris, tantum horroris: as much horrour, as honour: no lesse wretchednesse than wealthinesse? But faith makes thy dignitie comfortable, thy wealth helpefull, thy wife, children, friends delightfull: Quia frueris in Domino, quibus uteris in seculo: because what thou usest in the world, thou enjoyest in the Lord. Yea, it blesseth even crosses and curses: Sine veste, non sine fide, etc.Fulgent. Thou wantest a garment for thy body, faith gives thy soule a rich one, the righteousnesse of Christ: thou lackest a house to dwell in, thou dwellest by faith even in the Lord Iesus, and he dwels in thee. If thou want bread, it reacheth thee the bread of life: if friends, it assures thee the favour of God, and the inseparable company of the holy Ghost: if health, it performes to thee everlasting life. Let me say with Seneca in another sense; Malo mihi successum deesse, quam fidem; I had rather want fortune, than want faith. Whatsoever worldly thing be lacking, faith can supply it: but if faith be lacking, who can supply that? Faith keepes us for ever from that mourning note, fuimus felices: we shall never say, we have beene happy.
In respect of the use; faith cleares our wayes as we goe; cheares our hearts as we  worke; perfumes the places where we rest; and refines our actions from that drosse and feculencie, which would else make them odious in Gods sight.Rom. 14.23 For whatsoever is not of faith, is sinne. Faith, like Iohn the Baptist, pointeth to theIoh. 1.29. Lambe of God, that taketh away the sinne of the world. Without this, God is no hearing God, no helping God, no saving God, no loving God at all. The Spirit shall convince the worldIoh. 16.9 Homil. 1 of good workes. of sinne, saith Christ; because they beleeve not in me. Infidelitati retinentur omnia peccata, fidei remittuntur. All sinnes are retained to unbeleefe, remitted to faith. Faith is the nest of good workes, saith our Church: let our birds be never so faire, our actions never so glorious, they will be lost, except they be brought forth in faith, This is thePsal. 84.3. nest, where the Sparrow and Swallow may lay their young, to keepe them safe; even Faith, which is close by thine Altars, O Lord of hostes. Heretikes and hypocrites may produce many goodly acts, and honourable deeds: but wanting this nest of faith, they have no where to lay their young. Therefore as the Lawyers speake, moritur actio cum persona; their workes are damnable with their persons. A Recusant in comming to Church against his conscience; rather to satisfie the Law, than to sanctifie his soule; is guilty before God, because that worke was not done in faith.
Now that a short corollary, or recollection of all these scattered branches to their root; Faith is precious. Conceive it some precious jewell,Cant. 1.10. Orat. 3. in Cant. facta de puro divinae cognitionis auro. thy cheekes are comely with rowes of jewels, thy necke with chaines of gold. Gregory Nissen makes one of those chaines to be sound and religions faith, which is made of the pure gold of divine knowledge. And to this pure and golden chaine he applies, Proverb. 1.9. They shall be an ornament of grace unto thy head, and chaines about thy necke. This is the richest collar that can adorne any soule.Salvian. Omnibus semper ornatibus ornamento est; quia sine hac nihil tam ornatum quod ornare possit: It is an ornament to all trimmings, for nothing is so garnishing and gracing, that it can become us without this. It is a jewell given us out of Gods owne treasury: aeterna aeternus tribuit, etc. Though faith be not it selfe eternall, yet it shall make all those blessedly eternall that have it. It is brought by the best messenger, Gods. Spirit: not the worthiest man on earth, not an Angell from heaven, is dignified to bring this treasure: but onely the Holy Ghost. It is laid up in the best coffer, in the sanctified heart: no treasure-house is good enough for this jewell; no cabinet but the heart. Lastly, it gives us the place it came from: it came from heaven, and it brings heaven with it. It is Christs wedding ring; to whom soever he gives it, he gives himselfe with it. It is beyond all estimation precious; it brought us more lands and revenues than the whole Indies. This is Maries choice, that better part that shall never bee taken from us.
Like precious faith with us. I come to the Equality, or rather Parity of this Excellencie; Like with us. The faith of the poorest beleever is as precious, as the richest.
 Peter is above them in office: in the effect and fruit of his office, they are like him. But Peter was thrice confirmed, and that by the mouth of Christ himselfe, to make him strong: how then could they have faith like him? The paralel is not drawne a quantitate, sed a qualitate fidei: nec dicitur, tantum fidei, sed talem fidem: The comparison is not of the quantity, but of the quality of faith: nor doth he say, they had obtained the same measure and degree of faith, which he had himselfe; but the same kinde of faith: not so much, but such faith. The act of faith is to apply Christ to the soule: and this the weakest faith can doe so well as the strongest, if it be true. A childe can hold a staffe as well, though not so strongly as a man. The prisoner thorow a hole sees the Sunne, though not so perfectly as they in the open aire. They that saw the brasen Serpent, though a great way off, yet were healed. The poore mans, I beleeve, saved him; though he was faine to adde, Lord, helpe my unbeleefe. So that we may say of Faith, as the Poet of Death; that dominos servis, and sceptra ligonibus aequat; it makes lords and slaves, Apostles and common persons all alike acceptable to God, if they have it.
I confesse, that this excludes not the degrees of faith: there is aMatth 6.30. little faith: and there is a Great faith;Matth. 15.28. O woman, great is thy faith. God deales in spirituall proceedings, as in naturall; ad extrema per medium; to extremes by the meane. Non nascimur senes; wee are not borne old men: but first an Infant, then a man, then old. We are conceived of immortall seed, borne of the Spirit, so goe on to perfection. There is first a seed, then a plant, then a tree. We get not at one jump into Heaven, nor at one stroke kill the enemy. A little faith doth not a little good at some times: as in the beginning of conversion, or in the storme of an afflicted conscience. Peter was strong, Ioh. 6.68. When he resolutely protested his in fallible adherence to Christ; Lord, to whom shall we goe? Thou hast the words of Eternall Life. Peter was weak, when he sate by the fire in the High Priests hall, and denied his Master: and when hee disswaded Christ from suffering for us;Matth. 16.22. Bee it farre from the Lord. But where God gives great meanes, he lookes for great measure: according to his portion of grace, he expects our proportion of goodnesse. It is enough for them that see only a glimmering of the Gospell, to be but dwarfes in bele fe: We have the Sunne-shine, and therefore must have growth; and bee higher by the head, as Saul; if not than all the children of Israell, yet than all the sonnes of Rome: whose faith is so hood winked with enforced ignorance, that they cannot see further than their popish Doctors will give them leave. Thus there may be degrees of faith; Adauge nobis fidem; Lord increase our faith.Rom. 14.1. Him that is weake in the faith, receive you. Endevour that your2 Cor. 10.15. faith be encreased. Grow from faith to faith; yea, from one measure of faith to another. Yet the least faith, (shield it from weaknesse of truth, though it have truth of weaknesse) is as precious to the beleevers soule; as Peters or Pauls faith was to themselves: for it layes hold upon Christ, and brings eternall salvation. In this similitude of faith, wee finde three Observations:
1. The Vniversality of Gods mercy without difference of persons; that admits all sorts of men without any acception or exception of sexe, state, nation or condition; into the same covenant of mercy, and precious object of faith, that the glorious Apostles had. Here the unspeakeable goodnesse of God is commended to our meditation: whereas he might in justice have left us in our superstitions and infidelitie: of his infinite goodnesse he hath called us to the same profession of the Gospell; and to a faith ejusdem pretii and praemii, with his owne choise servants:Act. 10.35. In every Nation he that feareth God, and worketh righteousnesse is accepted of him. Other lords cannot reward all their followers, as being poore and unable: or will not, as being base and illiberall. But our Lord is immense in Majestie, and propense in mercy: good in greatnesse, and great in goodnesse, of great goodnesse. Poore Bartimeus begging, rich Zacheus climbing, old Simeon in the Temple, young Iohn in the wombe: covetous Matthew at the receipt of custome, the loving Centurion
 building a Synagogue, the people watching under the Crosse, the theefe hanging on the Crosse; This day thou shalt be with me in Paradise. For,Ioh. 3.16. whosoever beleeveth on him shall not perish; etiamsi crucifixerunt; no not although they were of the number of his Crucifiers.
2. The Apostles humility and charitie: he acknowledgeth the poorest Saints to have like precious faith with himselfe. Many Miriams are proud of the Spirit, despising their poore brethren: Saint Peter matcheth them with himselfe. They are as deare in the Masters bloud, therefore as deare in the Servants love. Gal. 6.2. Beare ye one anothers burdens. In other buildings, one stone lies upon another, all upon the foundation: so let us support the weight one of another; and the foundation CHRIST, support us all! The pebble must not envie the marble, nor the marble despise the pebble: the pinne in the Temple serves for use, so well as the pinnacle.2 Cor. 11.25. The members should have the same care one for another: Christian shoulders should beare the weaknesse of others. The rich and the poore are piled together in Gods house: the burthen of the poore is beggery, the burthen of the rich his superfluous estate. Now if the poore lie upon the rich, and the rich be contented to sustaine the poore: here the rich hath his burthen lessened by giving,Aug. and the poore hath his burden eased by receiving.Gal. 6.1. If a brother be falne, do not you trample him downe, but help him up; relieve and restore such a one in the spirit of meekenesse. When thou hearest thy brother to have lapsed into some grievous fault, pitty him, pray for him, recollect him, saying, He fell yesterday, I may fall to day. As August. when he saw a poore miserable man, tooke occasion to admonish himselfe and the companie; Aut sumus, aut fuimus, vel possumus esse quod hic est: we have beene, are, or may be, as wretched as he.
3 This comforts our fainting hearts: there are many gusts and stormes, and flouds that attempt the overthrow of our faith: be our house founded on theMatth. 7.25 rock, it shall never be demolished. Sense of sinne may be often great, and more felt than grace; yet not to be more than grace. A man feeles the ach of his finger more sensibly, than the health of his whole body: yet he knowes that the ach of a finger is nothing so much as the health of the whole body. The Sunne under the clouds, is still a Sunne: the fire in embers still fire: the sap is shut up in the roote, and confined thither by the cold of winter; that it cannot shew it selfe in production of leaves and fruits, as in the spring; yet is there still life in the tree. So in the distressed heart, during the storme of affliction, there is still aliquid intus, some hidden grace; some sparke of fire in the smoking flaxe, which the Lord Iesus will not quench. Though thou be wounded with Gods owne arrowes, that seeme to drinke up thy bloud: although thy owne sinnes be presented to the eye of thy soule; though the Serpent (to increase thy terror) put forth his dismall countenance: yet canst thou beleeve? Take comfort, there is more health in the seed of the woman, than there can bee venome in the head of the serpent.
That have obtained the like precious faith: here is the meanes of this Equality, they have obtained it. Not by our own merits; there was no congruitie of nature to receive this precious treasure. Non nascimur, sed renascimur Christiani; wee are not borne, but new-borne Christians. It is indeed naturall to every one, like Simon Magus, to thinke himselfeActs 8.9. some great man; either the man, or somebody. Luther was wont to say, that every man by nature hath a Pope bred in his belly, too great an opinion of his owne worth: we are Narcissus-like, enamoured of our owne shadowes. Injustitiae fere fola causa justitia est: righteousnesse is almost the onely cause of unrighteousnesse: righteousnesse in opinion, of unrighteousnesse indeed: wee thinke our selves so just, that we make little reckoning of Christ, for want of whom we remaine unjust still. But the highest Mountebanke in his proffers, is the lowest Dwarfe in his merits. Not by our owne purchase: many have so obtained Lordships and Mannors; as the Captaine bought his Burgesse-ship,Act 22.28. with a great summe of money. Wert thou so glorious as an Angell, thy meat so good as Manna, thy
 garments richer than Aarons Ephod, and thy breath sweeter than the perfume of the Tabernacle; yet all this could not get thee faith, nor give thee title to the kingdome of heaven.Acts 8.20. Thy mony perish with thee, that thinkest the gifts of God may be bought with mony.
But we obtaine it by Gods mercie: forPhil. 1.29. it is given us for Christs sake to beleeve. Faith is the faire gift of God; Ipsum velle credere Deus operatur in homine. Not onely the grace of faith, but the very will of beleeving is Gods worke in us. If any aske, saith August. Cur illi ita suadeatur, ut persuadeatur; illi autem non ita: why this man is converted to beleeve, that man not convinced to beleeve. I answere with Saint Paul, Rom. 11.33. Oh the depth of the riches both of the wisedome and knowledge of God! Cui ista responsio displicet, quaerat doctiores; sed caveat ne inveniat praesumptiores. If any man dislike this answere, let him seeke better: but beware lest hee find worse.1 Cor. 15.10. By the grace of God I am that I am. Aug. Omne bonum nostrum vel ipse, vel ab ipso. All the good we have, is either God himselfe, or what comes from him. Bona mea, dona tua: ipsum minus est munus. All my goods, O Lord are thy gifts. Quisquis tibi enumerat merita sua, quid tibi enumerat nisi munera tua? He that shall reckon to thee his merits, doth no more but reckon thy mercies.
Have obtained; (...) Sortiti sunt; so the Originall imports; they have obtained it by lot. So it is said of Zachary. Luke 1.9. (...); Sortitus est munus faciendi suffimenti; his lot was to burne incense, etc. So, Col. 1.12. that we reade, He made us fit to be partakers of the Inheritance; ad verbum, (...); unto the part of the lot of the Saints in light. Not that we draw these blessings by a lotterie, or imaginary fortune; but by the ordination of God; for though the lot be cast into the lap, yet the whole disposition thereof is of the Lord. It is therefore called our lot, because the Lord hath destinated it to be our portion. Though the land of Israel were divided by lot, yet the Lord had decreed in himselfe, and told Ioshua, what lot and portion every tribe should have. There is a threefold lot belongs to the faithfull. 1 The lot of the Saints is the sufferings of the Saints.Psal. 125.3. The rod of the wicked shall not rest upon the lot of the righteous. It is their lot to have the rod, not the rod of the wicked: or if it salute them, it shall not dwell with them.2 Tim. 3 12. All that will live godly in Christ, shall suffer persecution: it is their inevitable lot to be chastised on earth, it is their lot to be saved in heaven. 2 The lot of the Saints is not onely that light and happinesse they have in this world. Psal. 16.6. The lot is falne to me in pleasant places, yea, I have a goodly heritage. When David sate at the sheepfold, the kingdome of Israel was given him by lot from God. But more specially Faith, Grace and Sanctification; which gives them just right and title to the Inheritance of glory. Thus heaven is their lot now, a lot drawne out of the bloudy side of Christ; though not in possession, yet in succession. They have the earnest of it: let them grow up to stature and perfection, and take it. The Inheritance is the eldest sonnes lot, even whiles he is a child. 3 Lastly, they have the lot of faith, that they may have the lot of salvation. Hell is the lot of the wicked:Esa. 17.14. Behold at evening tide trouble, and before the morning he is not: this is the portion of them that spoile us, and the lot of them that robbe us. Therefore it is said of Iudas, Acts 1. that he went in locum suum, to his owne place.Psal. 11.6. Vpon the wicked God shall raine snares, fire, and brimstone, and a horrible tempest; this shall be the portion of their cup. But the lot of the righteous is faith, and the end of their faith the salvation of their soules. God gives them heaven, not for any foreseene worthinesse in the receivers: for no worthinesse of our owne can make us our fathers heires. But for his owne mercie and favour in Christ, preparing heaven for us, and us for heaven. So that upon his decree it is allotted to us; and unlesse heaven could lose God, we cannot lose heaven.
Here then consider how the lotterie of Canaan may shadow out to us, that blessed land of promise whereof the other was a type. The allusion may be led on through three principall passages; the Preparation, the Qualification, the Possession.

For the Preparation: Canaan was not a new made Countrey, out of barren and unhabitable desarts; but was already furnished to their hands: Nature had enriched it with commodities, and Industry beautified it with buildings and maturities; which were not done by the Israelites.Deut. 6.11. They came to goodly Cities which they builded not: to houses full of all good things which they filled not: to Welles digged which they digged not: and to Vineyards which they planted not. So heaven was prepared of old; Mat. 25. Inherite the kingdome prepared for you from the foundation of the world. That glorious Citie whose wall was of Iasper, and the fabricke pure gold, the foundations of precious stones. Rev. 21. Was neither formed nor furnished by the Saints; butHeb. 11.10. the builder and maker was God. So Paul, 2 Cor. 5.1. it is the building of God, an house not made with hands. GOD made it for his chosen; and as the Canaanites were cast out, that the Israelites might enter; so the LORD hath throwne the devils out of heaven, that elect men might dwell there.
2. For the qualification: as none had right to Canaan but the children of Abraham according to flesh, so none have right to heaven but the children of Abraham according to faith. This qualification stands in our Captaine, and in our Combate. For the Captaine they had Ioshua, we have IESVS: though there were a Canaan, there would have beene no lot, without a Ioshua: though there bee a heaven, there would have been no roome for us in it without a Iesus. The lot of every Tribe was knowne to Ioshua, the portion of every Saint is purchased by IESVS.Iosh. 19.50. Ioshua had the Citie which he asked for himselfe: IESVS obtaines whatsoever he asketh for us. Psal. 2.8. Postula a me; Aske of mee, and I shall give thee; though thy demand be more than Herods offer, halfe my kingdome; though it be the Heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession. For the Combate; Canaan was given to Israel by promise, yet they could not enter ^ithout a combate: they fought many sore battels, before they were setled in a victorious rest. So must the kingdome of heaven suffer violence, before it afford residence: and we must be content to warre with greater Gyants than the Sonnes of Anak, even with Principalities and Powers, before we triumph. Let us beare the Country in our mindes, and wee shall finde courage in our hearts.Iosh. 14.13. Caleb dares fight with the Anakims, if Ioshua give him Hebron: and complaining Ephraim enlarge his territories, if Ioshua promise them the wood-countrey. Iosh. 17.18. If Dan complaine of tooIosh. 19.47 little roome, let him fight it out for more; let him conquer Leshem, and possesse it. Christians must not pine and repine, that others exceed them in graces; but buckle on the armes of faith; and with a reverent courage strive for more. Nor is it a good argument that wee share the lot of faith, if wee strive onely for our selves; Christians thus truly qualified seeke also the salvation of others. The Reubenites, Gadites, and halfe the Tribe of Manasseh had their lot allowed already; yet were they not suffered so to rest; butIosh. 1.14. to passe before their brethren armed, all the mighty men of valour, and to helpe them. Nor is it enough for Peter and Paul to comfort themselves in the security of their owne salvation; but they must labour the conversion and confirmation of their brethren. Thus are they qualified, to whom the lot of faith, and of eternall life by faith, is ordained. Heaven is not for every one, but for the Saints: would any man have a lot in Canaan, let him be sure he be a true Israelite. It is not the bare hope and probability of a little, that can give the soule the satisfaction of comfort. For a man to stand to the courtesie of his Minister, for all the knowledge which hee requires in heavenly blessings: had beene for an Israelite to take it upon trust of the Spyes, who were sent to view and report the goodnesse of the land; and never to enter it himselfe.
3. For the possession it selfe, no mortall eye hath seene it, nor eare hath heard it; blessed soules whose lot it shall be to enjoy it. But I leave this point to your meditation; for our Apostle speakes here of the preparing lot, not of the possessing lot. Let us get the lotterie of grace, and we shall be assured the lot of glory. But
 alas how slowly doe we goe about this holy businesse! Ioshua was faine to chide the seven tribes; Iosh. 18:2. for neglect of their Inheritance. How long are you slacke to goe to possesse the land, which the God of your fathers hath given you? we may be all thus justly reproved; how long deferre we to make sure our election, and to get the earnest of everlasting life?
Thus we have considered this precious Iewell of faith, and how we have obtained it: by no worthinesse of our owne, but by lot: that is, the free gift and disposion of God; who gives it, or denies it, according to his owne good pleasure. If he have given thee this lot of beleeving, the thanks be to him: if thou draw a blanke and doest not obtaine it, yet he hath done thee no wrong: who shall command that ind^pendent proprietary to give away his owne? That have obtained it: here is matter of correction, of direction. First, this corrects the errors of two sorts:
1. Such as have not obtained faith; who thinke that they may beleeve when they list: respecting only Dei facultatem and facilitatem, the sufficencie and indulgencie of GOD: not regarding the obduration of their owne hearts, and their indisposition to receive it. Recipitur quicquid ad modum recipientis: whatsoever is received, is received according to the measure and capablenes of the thing which receives. Stones and sand will not be leavened, but meale. There is matter in the rocke to build a house of; not forme and proportion till it bee hewed out. Those five foolish Virgins, Mat. 25. thought they might get oile at their pleasure: but because their lamps were out, themselves could not be let in. Many thinke wheresoever they lost their faith, they shall finde it on their death-bed. But Nemo sibi promittat, quod non promisit Evangelium: let no man promise himselfe that, which the Gospell doth not promise him. If they cannot finde it in the Church, they will hardly finde it in the chamber: if the ordinary meanes to beget faith have not wrought it, how shall it be taken when it is not offered? But saith Augustine, Fides in potestate est; faith is in a mans power: but that Father never meant that an infidell can beleeve when he list, but when God gives him that list, mans will is not compelled. As he addes, Cum vult quisque credit: when a mans will is to beleeve, he does beleeve: but whence hath he that will? the finger of GOD moves his will. Fides est voluntaria certitudo absentium, saith another: faith is a voluntary perswasion of absent things?Rom 9.16. But it is not of him that willeth, nor of him that runneth, but of GOD that sheweth mercy. God must give the will, act, effect and all. The Fathers never averred, that an unbeleever can make himselfe a beleever by his owne power: but when God hath given him the power of faith, he can then beleeve.Iohn 15.5. Without me you can doe nothing, saith Christ: not parum, very little: but nihil, nothing at all. The members must be set in the body, before they can execute any offices for the body: neither are they members, because they are working; but are therefore working, because they are members. The tree brings forth the fruit, the fruit doth not bring forth the tree. Papists in their Congruities, and Libertines in their Potentials, run too much upon a very base figure, (...), the cart before the horse; merit before mercy. Doe not thinke, To beleeve, so easie a matter: the death of Christ darkned the Sun, shooke the earth, clave the rockes, opened the graves, and raised the dead; yet did not put faith into the Iewes hearts. It was a great miracle, Deum nasci, for God to be borne of woman: a great miracle, Virginem parere, for a Virgin to beare a childe, and still to remaine a Virgin: but the greatest miracle of all is Fidem haec credere, for a mans faith to beleeve these things. Bernard makes this to be the most wonderfull mixture and composition of the three. First, Deus and Homo, God and man, a strange union; that hominem esse incipit, qui Deum esse non desinit; He should begin to be man, who is God without beginning, without ending: Divinity and Humanity in one individuall Person; this is very mysticall. Next, Mater and Virgo, a Mother and a Virgin: Quod Virgo esset quae peperit, and Mater esset quae Virgo remansit: That shee should be a Virgin still, which was now a Mother; that she should be a Mother, which remained a pure Virgin; this was singularly admirable: maternitie and virginitie at
 once in the same individuall person. Lastly Cor hominis and fides, mans heart and faith; a naturall understanding, and supernaturall objects mixed together. Fire and water would sooner be reconciled then these two, without the supernaturall combining worke of Gods spirit. This is the most wonderfull misture and mysterie. This Faith is no easy thing to obtaine. Potes a te deficere, sed teipsum reficere non potes: ille reficit; qui te fecit. Augustine. Thou maiest fall off, from thy selfe; not recover thy selfe: He onely that made thee, can restore thee. Faith is Gods gift; no man can obtaine it, if he detaine it.
2 Such as have obtained it, ne Superbiant, that they bee not proud of it.1 Cor. 4.7. What hast thou that thou didst not receive? now if thou didst receive it, why dost thou glory as if thou hadst not received it? Let not the most famous disdaine the meanest nor the meanest repine at the mightiest. Insultation and malice are enemies to grace and faith.Rom. 11.20. Be not high minded, but feare. Pride was the first sinne that ever was in the world, and it shall be the last. As other infirmities decrease in us, so pride doth encrease. Mille virtutibus affluens, propter arrogantiam amisit faelicitatem, saith Chrysost. on that Pharise. Luke 18.11. Though he abounded with many vertues, yet he lost all by his selfe-conceitednesse. God I thanke thee (for he was not a petitioner, but a proclaimer) I am not as other men are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as this Publicane. Yet he was all these; an Extortioner, for in relying on his owne merits, he did rob GOD of his glory, and extort that from him which hee will not give to another. Vnjust, in condemning the publican without due proofe; so being himselfe a guilty person worthy to be condemned, he usurpes the office of a Iudge, and censures another. An Adulterer, in being wedded to vaine glory, and enamoured of popular applause: leaving the humble and chast love he owes to God he runs a whoring after his owne proud inventions.Iam. 4.4. Saint Iames calls them Adulterers that embrace the friendship of the world. Thus he did verbis proferre virtutem,Ierom. and factis destruere veritatem: like a bad mill that keepes a great clacking, and grinds little. Howsoever all sins may be said to be in the devill secundum reatum, in respect of guiltinesse: yet only pride is in him secundum affectum, in respect of his desire: saith Thomas. His darling sin, his character is Pride. Hens use to cackle so soon as they have laid their egs, and by this meanes they are instantly taken from them. The proud man may doe some good workes, but by his clacking and boasting he looseth them. The pharisaicall Papists have haply laid some egges, but they so cackle them that they quite marre their market. Insolens faelix, infaelix. Poore men advanced, and growing proud, are like clouds drawne up on high by the Sun; and when they are there, they darken the Sunne that drew them up. God may say to them, as Sara spake to Abraham concerning Hagar; I have given thee my handmaid, and now I am despised in thine eyes. But it is certaine; they have least faith that thinke they have all faith. Men that make themselves so sure of heaven, that they will scarce change places with the departed Saints; may perhaps wish themselves one day in the poore Publicans case and place; Lord be mercifull to me a sinner.
Thus much for the reproofe of those two errors; one in the defect, the other in the excesse: neither whereof have indeed obtained faith: Now for direction to those that have obtained it: this twofold.
1 Learne to acknowledge the author Hast thou obtained that precious Iewell denyed to thousands, be the more thankefull. As Thales Milesius asked no other reward of his readers, but ubi mea legeris, me agnosce; Where thou readest me, acknowledge me So God requires of his creatures, that where they find the benefits, they thankefully acknowledge the Benefactor. God hath kept nothing to himselfe but his glory, and this he will not give to another: as Pharaoh gave all to Ioseph, only excepting the throne: yet in this glory we are too forward to be sharers. When the Babilonians heard the musicke, cornet, flute, harpe, etc. they fell downe, and worshipped the Idol. So men when they heare the musicke of their owne praises,Dan 3. Idolize themselves, and worship a golden calfe. The wife is bound to be chastly reserved
 to her owne husband; and not with a tempting dresse to invite adulterers. Vaine glory trickes us up, not for God our husband, but for strange lovers; he will acknowledge no such wife. Ioab sent messengers to David, that he should bring in his forces, and take Rabbah; his reason was,2 Sam. 12.28. lest I take the Citie and it be called after my name: not Ioab thy servant, but David the King must have this honour. So God cannot indure that his creature should divide the glory with himselfe; give him all willingly, or he will have all in despight of thee. Ascendat gratia tua, ut descendat gratia sua: let thy thankefull acknowledgement goe up, that his great bountie may come downe.
2 Learne to preserve what thou hast gotten.Revel. 2.15. That which you have already, hold fast till I come. This was Saint Pauls happinesse, that having finished his course, yet he had still2 Tim. 4.7. kept the faith. The losse of faith is a dangerous2 Tim. 1 19. shipwracke: if it be possible, save your vessells, save your goods, save your wares, save your bodies; but though you lose all, save your faiths, save your soules. Imagine thy selfe a vessell; the sea this world, thy fraight Faith: there is a man of warre against thee; the barke is Diffidence, the souldiours Atheisme, Heresie, Schisme, Prophanesse: the charged Cannons and ordinance are Pride, Lust, Hypocrisie, to which drunkennesse is the master gunner, and gives fire. The Arch-pyrate is the devill, who so violently assaults us, and bords us with his temptations, that often we are faine to blow up our deckes, lose some of our necessary appertenances; glad like the young man in the Gospell, Relicto syndone fugere, to save our selves, though we leave our case behind us. There be also Rockes of persecutions, and Gulfes of errors; horrible gulfes in the Sea of Rome, dangerous swallowes about Amsterdam. When opinion goes before us, it is a great question whether truth will follow us. Looke to thy faith. Perit navis, si pereat fides; shipwracke thy faith, and drowne thy soule. Cast Iudas out of the ship, and take IESUS in: Turbatur navis in qua Iudas, servatur navis in qua Iesus. That ship is troubled that harbours a Traitor: the ship is safe that hath in it the Saviour: now he hath CHRIST, that hath faith. If therefore by faith thou be freed from the bondage of Satan; take heed lest by laying downe this refuge thou be againe captived. Let not the world like a crafty theefe steale away thy faith: looke to your faith yee covetous, forsake not the word to embrace the world. Be not like Plaices, which have a blacke side so well as a white: when their turnes are once served by the white, they instantly, shew you the blacke. Though the faith of Christ be in their mouthes, the love of the world is in their hearts. Let no extremity of sorrowes or sufferings enervate thy faith: When a lewd malefactor being condemned to die with just Phocion, raild at the Iudge, the law, his enemies, and looked on death with terrour and amasednesse: he thus cheared him with encouragement: doest thou grudge to die with Phocion? O thou faint-hearted professor, dost thou grudge to die with Christ, or for Christ? keepe thy shield of faith, and thou shalt victoriously march with the Saints on earth; and triumphantly sing with the Angels in heaven. Faith obtained, faith retained, shall without faile advance thy soule to eternall glory.
Through the righteousnesse of God, and our Saviour Christ. Here is the ground of this meanes, the Iustice of our redeemer. Some read these words distinctim, by disjoyning them; Dei, and Salvatoris; Of God, and Of our Saviour. This reading may stand where Righteousnesse is referred to God, as to the cause efficient: and to Christ, as to the cause meritorious. Augustine admonisheth us of the Trinitie here and teacheth us to collect it from such places. Sub Dei nomine Pater, sub Salvatoris Filius, sub Pacis and Gratiaevoce Spiritus sanctus exprimitur: By the name of God he understands the Father, by Saviour the Sonne, by Grace and Peace the Holy Ghost. But with Saint Ambrose, they are better read Conjunctim: and this is plaine from the Greeke context, where all are contained under one article. Aquin thus: Of GOD, that is of CHRIST, Secundum Divinitatem effective: Of our SAVIOVR, that is of CHRIST, secundum Humanitatem meritorie. But I leave that as too curious
 and take the words to be construed onely copulatively: answerably to that of Paul;Tit. 2.13. Looking for the glorious appearing of the great God, and our Saviour Iesus Christ. Here can be no distinction of Persons thought on: for it is the Great God that appeares in judgement, but no Person of the Deitie properly appeares in judgement at the last day, but IESUS CHSRIST.Iohn 5.22. For the Father judgeth no man: but hath committed all judgement unto the Sonne: therefore CHRIST is there called the Great God. For the Mediator betwixt God and man, is perfect God and perfect man; and yet not two, but one CHRIST. One not by confusion of substance, but by unitie of Person, as Athanasius.
Here is then full testimony that CHRIST is God, against the Arrians. But when I reade that Fevardentius reports; how many of the Polonians have derogated from this eternall Deitie of Christ, and that from the writings of Calvin, and other Reformed Catholikes; I must sigh with Polycarpus! O bone Deus, in quae me tempora reservasti, ut ista audiam! Good God, what times doe I live in, to reade and heare such impious and impudent slanders! Let any indifferent man judge, whether they or we derogate more from our Saviour Christ: we in resting our whole salvation upon him, or they in joyning other Saviours with him. They say, that if God will beare halfe the charges in cooperation, we may merit our owne glory, fulfill the Law, have workes to spare for our neighbours: whereof Rome hath such store, that she can spare England some out of her super fluity, if we will pay for them. But that we thinke, as when one boasted how faire a she-slave he had bought for a pound, another answered that she was too deare of a groat: so if we should bestow our moneyes on such supererogatory stuffe, every peny-worth would be worse than other. We teach that our best actions are full of sinne, our satisfactions debts, that no merit can doe us good, but the merits of Iesus Christ. Whether of us more wrongs our Saviour? No, let them take their owne egge out of our nest, we never layed it, we will never hatch it.Rom 9.5. He is over all, God blessed for ever: Amen. He is the God of salvation, and he shall be found a God in judgement. Qui negarunt in carne mortali, confitebuntur in igne immortali. They that have denied it in their mortall flesh, shall acknowledge it in immortall fire. I cannot say logically, Quid sit, what he is; but Quis sit, who he is: there is no Logicke sufficient to expresse Christ. De lumine,Aug. non sine lumine: No man can speake of the Light, but by the light. The best apprehension of him is negatiue: he cannot lye, he cannot dye, he cannot deny himselfe. He is God of the Father, as a branch from the root, as fragance from the Pomander, as words from the soule, as light from the Sunne. Man of the Virgin, by over-shadowing of the Holy Ghost, who withall hath cast a shadow over this mystery. Man, not by taking mans person into his owne nature, but by taking mans nature into his owne Person. But in all this, Mallem ignorantiam humiliter confiteri, quam scientiam impudenter profiteri; I will rather humbly acknowledge my ignorance, than proudly professe my knowledge. Therefore, as the Philosopher sitting on the banke of a River, and observing it to ebbe and flow seven times a day; because he could not by Philosophie finde out the hidden cause, he threw himselfe headlong into it, with these words; Quoniam ego non capio te, tu capies me: Because I cannot conceive thee, doe thou receive me. So I offer my selfe in all humilitie to Christ, God and man, my blessed Saviour; Quoniam ego non capio te, capias me. O Lord I cannot comprehend thee, doe thou therefore comprehend me, for ever!
Through the righteousnesse, etc. Vpon this ground let me build five instructions, or conclusions which are naturally deduced from it.
1 All grace to our soules, all good to our bodies; all peace that may concerne this life or that to come, is derived to us through the righteousnesse of Christ. Whatsoever good descends from God to us, is granted through Christ; whatsoever good ascends from us to God, is accepted through Christ. We are elected in Christ, redeemed by Christ, ingraffed to Christ, saved for Christ. God gives to all Dona, gifts; but they are onely true comforts to those that enjoy them through Christ.
 David out of the great love he bore to Ionathan, which was passing the love of women, was also loving to Mephibosheth the sonne of Ionathan;2 Sam 9.7. he set him at his owne table, and restored him all the land of Saul his father. Mephibosheth was lame and decrepite, yet David loved him for Ionathans sake. Infinite is the love of God to his owne Sonne, therefore hee is called the Sonne of his love, Coloss. 1.13. In whom he is well pleased. We are lame and deformed, warped, wicked, wretched; there is nothing in us that hee should desire us: yet hee restores us all the lands our Father Adam lost, yea, and ten thousand times more than ever he was owner of; and will one day set us at his owne table, yea, in his very Throne, Revel. 3.21. and make us partakers of his glory: so did David to Mephibosheth for Ionathan his Fathers sake, so doth GOD to us for IESUS his Sonnes sake. Consider man in a foure-fold estate; Confectionis, as he was made; Infectionis, as he was marred; Refectionis, as he was repaired; Perfectionis, as hee shall be accomplished: and see how all mercy still came to us through CHRIST. First, GOD made man happie, because holy; without misery, because without iniquitie.Eccles. 7.29 This I have found, that God made man righteous, and in that righteousnesse he had the Image of God, Ephes. 4.24. If a glorious Heaven above him, a fruitfull Earth under him, command of the creatures below him, the guard of Angels about him, the peace of conscience within him: if all this could make him happie, he was not scanted. He was created thus through Christ:Col. 1.16. By him were all things created that are in heaven or earth, visible or invisible, etc. Secondly, man stood not thus long; hee fell from his holinesse, so from his happinesse; hee lost the favour of the Creator, the service of the creature; a curse fell upon him for his sinnes. Loe now, he lyes weltring in his owne gore, who shall heale him? God redeemes him through Christ;Iohn 3.16. So he loved the world, that he gave his onely begotten Sonne; he sent him to doe it. Behold him hanging, bleeding, dying upon the cursed Crosse to save us. Thirdly, a Redeemer is come, what is man the better for it, if he hath not power to beleeve on him? Faith he can have none, if it be not given him through Christ.Phil. 1.29. It is given to you in the behalfe of Christ to beleeve. Againe, Lord helpe; for Christ his sake grant us a third mercie; make us beleevers, or we are never the better; we had as good have no Saviour, as not have him our Saviour: and ours he cannot be, unlesse himselfe make us his. Lastly, for the state of perfection and immortall blessednesse,2 Tim. 4.8. it is through CHRIST. There is laid up for me, saith Paul, a Crowne of righteousnesse; and not for me onely, but for all those that love his appearing. Who shall give this to us! The righteous Iudge; and that is Iesus Christ. Thus all good comes to us through Christ.
Againe, all our good is accepted onely through the righteousnesse of Christ. Our very persons are accepted in the Beloved: Ephes. 1.6. if our persons, then our good actions. If we pray, he chargeth us to doe it, Nomine meo,Iohn 16.23. In my name; then we are sure to speed; God will give it you. August. in Psalm. 85. Orat pro nobis, or at in nobis, oratur a nobis. Hee prayeth for us, as our Advocate: he prayeth in us, by his holy Spirit: is prayed to of us, as ourEsay 9.6. Everlasting Father. Oramus ad illum, per illum, in illo: Wee pray unto him, wee pray by him, we pray in him.Iohn 14.6. I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life. Venitur per me, provenitur ad me, permanetur in me. I am the Way, you come by me: I am the Truth, you come unto me: I am the Life, you shall dwell for ever in mee. Hee is the Beginning of Salvation, therefore the Way: the midst of Salvation, therefore the Truth: the end of Salvation, therefore the Life; saith Ferus. Via incipientium, veritas proficientium, vita perfectorum. The way of them that begin, the truth of them that grow forward, and the life of them that are perfect. In matter of disputation with Atheists or Heretikes, concerning Gods Wisdome, Majesty, Power, etc. exercise all thy wit and industry, to convince the Adversary. But when thou commest into another schoole, to wrastle with the Devill, with the Law, with Sinne and Death, in the matter of thy Iustification; then fix thy eye upon no God, but the person of the God-head incarnate; Behold the
 Lambe of God, that takes away the sinne of the world. Gods seat is said to be compassed about with a Rain-bow, Revel. 4.3. The Rain-bow was a signe of his covenant made with man; here doth signifie his perpetuall mercy to us in Christ. If he should marke what is done amisse, who is able to stand? If he enter into judgement with us, no flesh living shall be justified. But here is our comfort; there is a Rain-bow about the Throne; he can looke no way upon his Church, but thorow the Rain-bow; through Iesus Christ. Hence it is, not to us a terrible Throne; but aHeb. 4.16. Throne of grace, so full of mercy, that wee may boldly come unto it. Though, vers. 5. out of the Throne proceed lightnings, and thundrings, and terrible voyces; though there be seven lampes of fire burning before it: yet all is well so long as there is a Rain-bow about it. Thus all good things come to us in Christ: that we may humbly acknowledge, and heartily sing with Paul;Rom. 11.36. Of him, and through him, and to him are all things: to whom be glory for ever. Amen.
2 The faith of a Christian is well grounded, upon the righteousnesse of Christ1 Cor. 3.11. For other foundation can no man lay, than that is laid, which is Iesus Christ. That house of faith only shall stand, that is built on thisMatth. 7.25. Rocke. Neither, the Raine that fals in whole showers of prosperity; nor the voluminous Flouds, that rore out persecutions; nor the adverse winds, that blow with the loudest violence of opposition; shall overthrow that house, because it is founded on a rocke.Matt. 16.18. Thou art Peter, and upon this Rocke (which thou hast acknowledged to be the Son of the living God) I will build my Church: and the gates of hell shall not prevaile against it. Though Stephen Gardiuer apostated did reade that Text with the Popes spectacles, in the dayes of Queen Mary; and made the Pope supreme founder of Faith. Yet formerly in the dayes of King Edward the sixth, he preached it otherwise, that the Rocke was only Christ. Non agnovit Petrum esse Petram, sed Petri Dominum. Domus Dei credendo sundatur, saith Augustine. The foundation of Gods house in mans heart, is Faith. First, place the foundation, then reare up the building; the Instruments of which edifice are the Word and Sacraments. Here is no place for Traditions of men, or Constitutions of Popes: the ground of faith is the righteousnesse of Christ, not our owne merits: if in thy garden any grace or good works spring over the wall, and saucily challenge to it selfe a prerogative of merit; deale with it as the Gardiner doth with superfluous branches, prune it off: or as Torquatus with his over-venturous sonne; cut it downe with the sword of the Spirit for daring beyond the commission. The Iustice of Christ is the sole compasse of faith: our adversaries oppose this both with pens and tongues, violently in the Schooles, invectively in the Pulpits: but come they to their death-beds, to argue it betweene God and their owne soules; then Grace and grace alone; mercy and only mercy; Iesus and none but Iesus. This their great Bel-weather is driven to confesse:De Iustis. lib 5. cap. 7. By reason of the uncertainty of our owne righteousnesse, and the danger of vain-glory, the safest course is Fiduciam totam in sola Dei misericordia and benignitate reponere; to put our whole trust and confidence in the onely goodnesse and mercy of God. But perhaps Bellarmine spake this as a ^ee^e Iesuite; and afterwards being made Papable, he was willing to retract and unsay it.
God threatens, Gen. 6.5. to destroy the World with a Floud, because the imaginations of mans heart were evill continually. And Gen. 8.21. God promiseth no more to curse the ground for mans Take; because the imaginations of mans heart are evill from his youth. The same reason that is alleaged why God will not spare the world; is also alleaged why he will spare the world. It serves to prove, that not mans merit, but Gods mercy is the cause why confusion is withholden.Malac. 3.6. I am the Lord, I change not: therefore ye sonnes of Iacob are not consumed. Let them trust in their owne workes, our soules beleeve on this ground, the righteousnesse of IESVS CHRIST. This is the Faith, and thus grounded, that our Church commends, that God requires: in this we live, in this, and for this, (if need be) let us die, that we may live for ever. Let the memorie of her be blessed, even that our Debora, whereof all true hearted English are glad to heare: Shee was truely the Defender of this true, ancient, Catholike,
 and Apostolike Faith: she reared up the Preaching of this faith, she maintained this faith, shee lived in this faith, in this faith shee died: applying to her owne soule the mercies of God through the righteousnesse of Iesus Christ.
Let this teach every soule humbly to cast himselfe downe at the feet of Christ, and to be beholding to him onely for his salvation. Our best works are but blankes, and when they come before him, shall blush for shame. Let us then goe out of our selves, and know that we are onely saved by the righteousnesse of our Lord Iesus.
3 We collect hence, that it is not Faith which properly saves us, but the righteousnesse of Christ whereon it is grounded.Ephes. 2.8. For by grace are ye saved through faith: by grace effectually, through faith instrumentally. The hand is said to nourish the body, not of it owne nature and vertue, but because it is an instrument to reach meat to it. It was the bloud of the Paschall Lambe, for which the destroying Angell passed over the Israelites houses; faith onely sprinkles the postes. We are not justified for the onely act and quality of beleeving: it is the Iustice of Iesus that justifies us, which faith apprehends. Faith brings the Creeple to the Beautiful gate of the Temple, Act 3. to the Word are promises of the Gospell; and there it is able to receive (though with a sicke hand, yet with an hand) the almes of grace, Christs merits and mercies. It was the brasen Serpent that healed, not the eye that looked on it; yet without a looking eye, there was no helpe to the wounded partie by the promised vertue.
4 Observe, that Faith had need of a good foundation, for it is an heavie and waightie building. All other vertues lye upon faith, as their Basis. Hope upon faith, for no man hopes for that which he not beleeves: Patientia filia Spei, Spes Fidei. As Patience is the daughter of Hope, so Hope is the daughter of Faith. Repentance lyes upon Faith; for how should contrition for sinne be admitted, if remission of sin were not beleeved. Charitie upon Faith; why should we part with our goods for Gods cause, if we beleeve not that God would with everlasting charitie embrace us? Faith beares a great waight: yet the righteousnesse of Christ beares that and all. Quanta vis fidei, quae tale sustentat pondus; quanta vis Christi quae talem sustentat fidem! How great is faith that is able to beare up such a burden: how much greater is Christ, that is able to beare up faith?
Our sinnes are of infinite number and pressure: Doth any man extenuate them with a selfe-flattering mitigation; thinke that hee hath but a few, and few shall not bring him to judgement? No, they are infinite in number, hainous in nature, swelling in measure: the sands of the sea, haires of our heads, starres of heaven, are sooner reckoned. No soule of it selfe is able to stand under them: the wicked shall one day finde them so heavie, that they will thinke rockes and mountaines farre lighter; crying to theRevel. 6.16. rockes, fall upon us; and to the mountaines, cover us. Now Faith takes all this burden upon her shoulders, she brings it to Christ, and he takes it upon his shoulders: being confident of his fidelitie, that it shall answer the invitation and promise of his mercy;Mat. 11.29. Come to mee all that are heavie laden, and I will give you rest.
Our miseries are many and mighty, dejecting us under the Load; we know not how to beare them. Wee bring this burden also, and lay t upon Faith, and Faith layes it upon Christ. Some are afflicted in reputation, i as Susanna; others in children, as Eli: some by enemies, as David; others by friends, as Ioseph: some in body, as Lazarus; others in goods, as Iob; others in liberty, as Iohn. In all extremities let us send a messenger to Christ for ease; faithfull Prayer. If Faith can but carry the burden to him, he will carry it for us, and from us for ever.
Our cares are many and mightie; too great a load for our selves to beare. Feare of what may come, expectation of what will come, desire of what will not come: no redresse of all these in our selves: what flesh and bloud can support this burden? None; therefore Faith takes Christs word, and layes all these doubts or sorrowes upon his righteousnesse. Vt qui invenit sollicitudinem in seculo, inveniat requiem in Domino.
 That whosoever hath found trouble in the world, may find rest in the Lord.
Our sicknesses, our paines, our departures are heavy; Sustulit Christus.Esa. 53.4. Christ hath borne our griefes, and carried our sorrowes. We have all erred like sheepe, and the LORD hath laid on Him the iniquity of us all. When death, that proud Champion; comes in his fearefullest shape to affront and affright us, faith hath recourse to the righteousnesse of CHRIST; and beseecheth him to helpe us with this burden; to ease the pangs, and sweeten the bitternesse of death, and hee doth it.
5 Lastly we inferre, that our salvation stands sure in the Lord, because it hath this ground, the Righteousnesse of Christ. God doth not trust us with our owne life, but hides it in his Sonne IESVS.Col. 3.3. Yee are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God. Otherwise, if it were in our owne hands, we should easily be tempted to sell it; as Adam did for an apple, and Esau for a messe of pottage. But Ponitur in tuto, quia reponitur in Christo: it cannot but be safe, which the LORD keepes. Happy soule, whose treasure is thus layed up; where no rust or moath can corrupt it, no theefe breake through to steale it. An English merchant that trades in Turky, does not build or plant in Turkey, but transports all for England. The Burgesses of heaven may admit some slight trafficke in this world, but they lay up all for their owne countrey. Quae nam est haec stultitia illic reponere, unde iturus es:Chrys. and illuc non praemittere, quo iturus es! what follie is this for a man, to hoord up his treasure there, where he is sure he must not continue: and not to convey it thither, where is continuance for ever? If earth should vanish and nature dissolve; yea if heaven passe away with a noise, and the elements melt with heate; ruat orcus, and ortus; I will looke to the righteousnesse of my Saviour Christ, and stand upright. Let all our enemies doe their worst, the devill tempt, the world afflict, sinne menace, death affright; yet faith shall vanquish all through the righteousnesse of Iesus Christ. He is righteous that hath promised:2 Thes. 1.6. it is a righteous thing with God, to recompence tribulation to them that trouble you: and to you who are troubled, rest; when the Lord Iesus shall be revealed from heaven with his mightie Angels. Let no man dare to call the righteousnesse of Christ into question: woe unto him that shall make God a lyar. Shall he say, whosoever beleeves, shall be saved, and shall we doubt? Shall wee annihilate his Crosse, evacuate his bloud, runne into the fire from whence we are ransomed, and die past hope? GOD forbid it, and the faith of our owne soules forbid it; there is assurance of salvation through the righteousnesse of Christ.




Ver. 2. Grace and peace be multiplied unto you, through the knowledge of God and of Iesus our Lord.

THe Person saluting, and the persons saluted are considered, the salutation it selfe followes; Grace and peace, etc. This forme of salutation is usuall with the Apostles, and usefull for us. Whereby they expresse the true exercise of their office, to bring Grace and Peace in their mouthes. In the salutation consider:
The
Matter, Grace and Peace.Measure, Be multiplied to you.Manner, through the knowledge of God, etc.
Grace and peace; this is the matter. It hath beene an ordinary custome in the Iewish, Pagan, and Christian world, to begin their letters with salutations: and in
 these to wish their friends, that they thought the best good. Some wished prosperity, others health and Iovisance, others summ'd up all in a contented minde. Some wrote, Cura ut bene valcas: others Cura ut bene vivas. One wisheth soundnesse to their bodies, another integritie to their lives. All those were farre short of that true blessednesse, which the Apostles saw to be in CHRIST IESUS: therefore Grace and Peace be to you; this Satius, and Sa^is: this was so good, there could be no better: this was so much, there need be no more. This is a short, but effectuall prayer frequently used in the Scriptures, and not seldome in our Liturgie. Such are Dominus vobiscum; the LORD bee with you, etc. Those over-devout and factious Pharises, that love long prayers, and short good deeds, call these short ejaculations, shreddings. But one well answers them, that these shreddings and lists are of more value, than their northerne broad-cloth that shrinkes in the wetting.
We are here taught the Christian use of salutings, blessings, and gratulations: such godly complements are not to be neglected. It is the brand of the Churches enemies.Psal 129.8. They that goe by say not, The blessing of the Lord be upon you, nor wee blesse you in the name of the LORD: therefore they are cursed;Verse ^. Let them all be confounded that hate Sion. Good men have ever used them: Boaz to the reapers,Ruth 2.4. The Lord be with you: and they answered him, The Lord blesse thee. A glorious Angell ^hus saluted Gideon.Iudge. 2.4. The Lord is with thee, thou mightie man of valour. An Archangell to a poore virgin;Luke 1.28. Haile thou that art highly favoured, the Lord is with thee; Blessed art thou among women. St Paul spends a whole Chap. in salutations; Romans ^he last. What people had not their owne formes of saluting: the Idumeans Dominus vobiscum: the Ethiopians Pax vobis: the Hebrewes Ave, the Romans Salve. Superiors must performe this dutie to inferiors. Inferiors in reverence to superiors, all in love one to another. There is a Generation of men that teach, it is unlawfull to salute men with good day, God be with you, or leave be to you. They will salute none with a good wish unlesse they know his businesse. As if every mans businesse required so little hast, as to tarry the leasure of their acquaintance. If all men should pledge them in their owne cup, they might passe their whole life without a God speed. They say, we cannot tell whether he goes, or about what: it may be he's going to the Taverne to be drunke. It's but a peradventure that he is going to bee drunke, but without all peradventure thou art not sober; that darest so rashly judge thy brother. It is a rule in law and love; every man is to be reputed honest till hee be disproved.1 Cor. 13.5. Charitie thinkes no evill. In Freesland there was a false Prophet, one George David, who called himselfe Gods nephew; and said, heaven was emptie, and that he was sent to chuse some to fill it. We have some Separatists such mad Prophets, that will elect and damne whom they please. But as themselves say, the Pope hath no authority to make Saints: so we say, they have no authority to make devils. As many of the Popes Saints are reprobates in hell: so many of their reprobates are Saints in heaven.
But they object, that Christ for Greeting taxed the Pharises;Matth. 23.7. They love greetings in the markets. I answere; hee taxed their ambition, not their gratulation, he blamed not their affection, but their affectation. It was the direct charge;Matth. 10.12 When yee come into an house, salute it. But Saint Iohn forbiddeth the Elect Lady, to give some men the good speed.Ioh. Epist. 2.11. For he that biddeth them God speed, is partaker of their deeds. The answere is easy, the Apostle spake, of some notorious apostates, and dangerous heretikes: now to salute such might induce some familiar conference, which he would not have the good Lady admit. So Cyprian, let there be no commerce with them; but simus ab illis tam separati, quam illi sunt ab Ecclesia profugi Receive them not to thy private house, that will not communicate with thee in Gods house. She might be weake and simple, they strong and subtle.2 Tim. 3.6. For there are some that creepe into houses, and lead captive silly women, laden with sinnes, and led away with diverse lusts: and then the best way is to shut them out of doores. But
 is every man an heretike, that wee should so blanch him? But they plead further; we know not every passenger to be a brother. The greater their pride, that thinke themselves too good to brother with them that are baptised into Iesus Christ. Charitie would presume all those, that are washed in the same Sacramentall water with our selves, to be our brothers. Indeed to declare them truly they thinke no man their brother, that holds with Ceremonie, decencie, and discipline. But Saint Paul tells them, that the true bond of unitie, is not one ceremonie, nor one policie, nor one discipline: butEph. 4.4. One God, one Faith, one Baptisme, etc. There is difference betweene another discipline, and another doctrine. But lastly they alledge, that in these short passages, men talke of God, but thinke not of him, and so take his name in vaine. Nay but is not this rather to take Gods name in vaine, to avouch so uncouth an error? why shouldest thou thinke, that men thinke not of God.1 Cor. 2.11. For who knoweth the things of man, save the spirit of man which is in him? yeeld that there is sometimes lesse intention in these short blessings, then in settled devotions; what then, shall we forbid men to pray, because their mindes are often wandring; or children to say grace, because they doe not perfectly understand? Certainly it is good to inure the mouth to gratious speeches. Thus Elisha dismissed Naaman, Goe in peace: though he did not approve his fact, yet he bids him farewell;2 King. 5.19. Goe in peace. If thou doest wish this good to an evill man; thou art never the worse, though he be never the better.Luke 10.6. First say, Peace be to this house: if the sonne of peace be there, your peace shall rest upon it: if not, it shall turne to you againe. So David prayed and mourned for his enemies; and though he could not be heard for them, he was heard for himselfe:Psal. 35.13 my prayer returned into mine owne bosome. If the saluted be going about some bad enterprise, yet our blessing hath more likely hood to reclaime the error of our brother, then to proclaime any error of our owne. If God be with him, his bad purpose will be diverted from the execution: our prayers shall not further, but hinder his intended wickednesse.
Wee are further taught here to use good formes in saluting; Grace and peace, gracious not grievous, holy not hollow, blessings not curses: not an execration instead of a benediction. There be idle, prophane, and unrellishing complements: either through Curiositie or Curialitie, Christian salutations are thought grosse. Instead of God be with you, I kisse your hand, I am your slave, etc. these are the elegancies of our times. Indeed there is one salutation left us, and frequent with us; good in it selfe, if it had the lucke to light into good mens mouthes; it is God save you. But as it hath beene Satyrically observed, these dayes are not altogether uncharitable: for whereas God chargeth men to love others as themselves, many love others better than themselves. You shall have a ruffian salute another with God save you Sir: but after some strange attestations, sweare away himselfe with God damne me Sir. So he wishes his friend saved, himselfe damned. How wretched is it, and unbecoming the tongue of a Christian, when a curse comes instead of a blessing? When a Master shall curse his servants; as if GODS curse could not come to his house, but through his owne lips. But when it comes to this, that parents curse their children, O fearefull! The child kneeles for a blessing, the father gives it a curse. If we wish the plague and such noisome diseases to them that live with us, how should we scape it our selves.
Let us alwayes therefore wish well to our friends; Grace, peace, and salvation: yea to our very enemies;Matth. 5.44. Blesse them that curse you. For if Grace comes, Quamvis antea mali Inimici, jam nec erunt mali nec inimici: though before they were evill enemies, now they shall be neither evill nor enemies. You see now the sweetnesse of the Apostles benediction: Origen thinkes no whit inferior to the blessings pronounced by the Patriarches: as the blessing of Noah upon Sem and Iaphet: Melchisedeks upon Abraham: Isaaks upon Iacob: because they blessed by the same Spirit. For Saint Peter might say with Saint Paul,1 Cor. 7.40. I thinke also that I have the Spirit of God. Onely it was not usuall in the old Testament to use this blessing of Grace: for the
 Law was given by Moses,Iohn 1. but Grace and Truth came by IESUS CHRIST.
Grace and Peace: this is the voice of the Ministers of the Gospell: so CHRIST directed them. Luke 10. Peace be to you. The Prophets began with vae, woe. Esa. 1. woe to a sinfull nation. Hos. 4. The Lord hath a controversie with the land. Amos 1. For three transgressions, and for foure, etc. But the Gospell begins,Luke 2.10. Feare. not, for I bring you tidings of great joy that shall be to all people.Rom. 8.15. Wee have not received the Spirit of bondage to feare againe, but the Spirit of adoption whereby we crie Abba Father. They come not with bitter violence, like those two hote Disciples, whom nothing could content but fire from heaven. But is there not a time to reprove, as well as to comfort? yes, there is a season when that still voice that came to Eliah,Esa 30 21. the voice that thou hearest behind thee; those low whisperings can doe no good. And then God is content, we should derive from his Throne thunderings, and lightnings, and louder sounds. Revel. 4.5. When Israel in Moses absence had turned-beasts, and calved an idolatrous image: Moses did not dance after their pipe, and laugh at their superstitious merriment: but with great zeale reproved their follie, and with indignation confounded their Idol.Zach. 1.11. Behold, the whole earth sitteth still, and is at rest:1 Cor. 10 7. the people sit downe to eate and drinke, and rise up to play. If this be the worlds state, wee should be false prophets to cry nothing but peace. If your lives proclaime warres against God, wee must denounce Gods warres against you. Wee would faine at everie Sermon say nothing, but Peace to this Audience, but our God sayes, There is no peace to the wicked. We would sing with the Angels, Peace on earth, and good will towards men:Psal. 137.4. But how shall we sing the Lords songs in a strange land? we have preached honour, and peace, and salvation, and an incorruptible crowne of glory; and were not regarded. What remaines then, but to preach fire from heaven, mists, and clouds, and darkenesse, and torments for dayes and nights, and eternall generations of yeares? We have sung, With thee O Lord is mercie, that thou mayest be feared: now we change our note, with thee is vengeance, that thou mayest be feared. If the spirit of gentlenesse can doe no good, a rodde must come. If the songs of Sion cannot mollifie, the thunders of Sinai must terrifie. A man is desperately sicke, another tells him of great riches, of Lordships and mannors, and faire purchases; alas this is an unseasonable speech: he answers, first Redde me sanum, then Fac divitem: first restore me to health, then talke to me of wealth: me^s soules are sicke of sinne, and at deaths doore; never tell them of heaven and an immortall kingdome, till they be first recovered from the jawes of hell, and delivered out of the snare of the devill: first humble them by the Law, then revive them with the Gospell Videamus Lacrymas, let us see your humiliation, your repentance; let us heare your grones, we will then give your comforts: we dare not apply the oile of consolation, til we have scowred your festered wounds with the sharpe wine of reprehension. When we behold your cheekes blubbered with teares, your hands beating your brests, your cries resounding at heaven-gates for mercie: then is the time to say Grace, and Peace unto you.
Grace. To omit the diverse acceptions of Grace, by it is generally meant, the receiving of the sinner into the Covenant of mercie, into Gods favour by Christ. It is our second Birth: our first was ex libidine Carnis, of the lust of the flesh: our second ex aqua and sanguine, of water and bloud by the holy Ghost. Thus are we changed into other men: as in the Resurrection we shall be the same and not the same; Caro eadem and non, the same in substance, not in qualitie. So in our first resurrection by Grace, a man is Idem and non Idem, the same and not the same: the same for constitution, not the same for disposition. For before our hearts were proud, now they are made humble: before covetous, now charitable: before set on worldly delights, now on the righteousnesse of Christ, and the invaluable riches of a good conscience.
Christian vertues are not naturall: a man is not more borne with grace in his soule, then with apparell on his backe.Rom. 3.10. There is none righteous, no not one. If there were, what need was there of a new creation? The Philosophers said that Nature
 had Igniculos and semina virtutum, the sparkes and seeds of vertue in it. But Saint Paul sayes, Novi quod in carne non est bonum:Rom. 7.18. I know that in me (that is, in my flesh) dwelleth no good thing: but if there bee any good in mee,1 Cor. 15.10. by the grace of God I am that I am. The Rhemists quarrell with Saint Paul, for calling concupiscence a sin, which he proves to be a breach of the last Commandement. Rom. 7.7. For I had not knowne Concupiscence, except the Law had said, Thou shalt not covet. They have in their Catechismes put out one of the former Precepts, and to make up againe the Decalogue, and number of Ten, they have cut the last Precept into twaine. There to serve their turnes, they make of the last Commandement, two; here to serve their turnes, they make of it, none. They are great patrons of Nature in their doctrines, and enemies of Grace: yet Nature is not so much beholding to them neither. For they take children from mothers, obedience of subjects from Kings; care of preservation from a mans selfe; hurry them into damageable, yea, damnable precipices; and dissolve all naturall combinations. Their Iupiter Capitolinus must drinke nothing but humane bloud. Yet they are all for Nature, as if they cared not for Grace.
There is Gratia gratis agens, a grace that workes freely, but not effectually; which may be had, and lost; and this is short of the Apostles wish. There is Gratia gratum faciens, a grace that makes him acceptable to God that hath it; this the Apostle wisheth, and it can never be lost. It is the living fire of the Spirit, that can never be quenched. Mittam Paracletum in aeternum:Iohn 14.16. I will send you a Comforter, that shall abide with you for ever. But how did the Grace of this Spirit abide in David and Peter, in the midst of those fearefull lapses; which might be called in respect of Manners, plaine apostacies? Spiritus concussus, non excussus: gratia mota, non amota: The grace was shaken in them, not shaken out of them: it was moved, not removed. There was Gratiae remissio, non amissio: A weakning, not annihilation of grace. This is that Grace, which makes our bodies the Temples of the Holy Ghost; whereas sinne renders them the Devils kitchens.
Grace; what need the Apostle wish this to them that already had it: for all they that have received the Gospell, have also received grace? To this wee answer diversely: 1. By Grace in these Apostolicall benedictions, Ambrose only understands the remission of sinnes: Tollet Donum animae, a certaine gift of the soule which makes men acceptable to God: but no gift of the soule can make it acceptable to God, but onely his favour in Christ. The Poets tooke Grace pro venustate, for a delectable beauty, sightlinesse, or trimnesse of behaviour. But Divinitie teacheth us, that it is the favour of God towards us in his Sonne IESUS;Rom. 5.1. By whom we have accesse into this Grace wherein we stand; that is, the favour of God. It is hisEphes. 1.6, 7. Grace, wherein he hath made us accepted in the Beloved. And we have redemption through his bloud, even the forgivenesse of sinnes, according to the riches of his Grace. In a word, Grace is Bifrons, like Iohn Baptist, it lookes two wayes, and is taken so especially. First, for Gods favour wherby we are made just: then for the Gifts of the Spirit, wherby we are made holy: that's the mother, these the daughters: that (...), these (...). Now then here is Grace taken in the effects: as Paul, Ephes. 6.24. Grace be with all them that love the Lord Iesus. Now all they that love the Lord Iesus, have the mother grace, that's the favour of God: therefore the Apostle wisheth the multiplication and confirmation of the daughters, the blessed effects of this favour. If any man object, What needs man more than the grace of God? I answer, the grace of God that justifies hath neither majus nor minus, admits no latitude, as being absolute and perfect in it selfe: for a man cannot be more than justified. But the grace of God that sanctifies, needs continuall encreasing: the Talents intrusted by the Lord to his servants, Matth. 25.15. are Graces given: the husbanding, trafficking, and thriving with those Talents, is the improvement of those graces. I hope there is no man hath so much grace in his opinion, that he will scorne or refuse anothers apprecation; The Grace of Iesus Christ be with thee.

This is one answer; that Grace may be very well wished to them that alreadie have it. But that distinction which Saint Paul himselfe implies, Rom. 6. betwixt being in grace, and being under grace; doth yet more contentfully satisfie. For as Augustine said; It is one thing to walke in the Law, another thing to walke under the Law: so it is one thing to be sub gratia, and another to be in gratia. To live under grace is opposed to the state of the Law:Rom. 6.14. Yee are not under the Law, but under Grace. To live in Grace is opposed to the state of Sinne. Vers. 2. How shall we that by grace are dead to sinne, live any longer therein? There are foure differences:
Some are
In Grace, but not under grace.Vnder Grace, but not in Grace.Neither in Grace, nor under Grace.Both in Grace, and under Grace.
1 Many Prophets and holy men of the first times lived in Grace, but not under Grace.Luke 11.24. They desired to see the day of Christ, and to heare such things as we have heard, and were not suffered, yet were they saved by faith in the redemption to come, and led their lives in the grace of Christ.
2 Many in our times live under Grace, but they live not in Grace: hearing the Gospell, and2 Cor. 6.1. receiving the Grace of God in vaine. They have normam gratiae in their heads, and formam gratiae in their dissembling professions, but not veritatem gratiae, the truth of grace in their hearts. They are in the light, but the light is not in them. They have accepted the shew, but denied the power of godlinesse: they say, they are Grac's, but grace is none of theirs.
3 The unbleeving Gentiles were neither in grace, nor under grace. Not in it, for they walked after their owne lusts. Not under it, forEphes. 2.12. they were without Christ, and strangers from the covenant of promise. The Sunne was not risen to them, they could not see it.
4 They that now beleeve are both under grace, and in it. Vnder it, as released a damnatione peccati, from the damning power of sinne; for no damnation to them that are in Christ.Rom. 6. In it, as delivered a dominione peccati, from the raigning power of sinne; that they no more obey it in the lusts thereof. The God of all mercy be blessed, that hath given us this grace; and may our thankfull hearts ever acknowledge it.Ephes. 2.19. For wee are no more strangers and forrenners, but Fellow-citizens with the Saints, and of the houshold of God. Christ now speakes to us by the mouth of his Ministers, Come servant, Intra in Domini gratiam; Enter into thy Masters Grace: one day he will speake by his owne mouth, Intra in Domini gloriam, Enter into thy Masters Glory.
Peace, is also diversly accepted: here I take it specially for the tranquillity of conscience; that which followes righteousnesse.Rom. 14.18. For the Kingdome of Heaven consists in righteousnesse, in peace, and joy of the Holy Ghost.Rom. 5.1. Being justified by faith, we have peace with God. In the latitude it may comprehend all those things that conduce to our well-being. It is a sweet nature; Pacem te poscimus omnes: who loves not peace? If any man hate peace; his nighbour-hood, his company, his breath, his very sight is offensive to men.Psal. 120.6. My soule hath too long dwelt with him, that hateth peace. If some particulars be divided, and lose their peace, the Generall mournes.Iudg 5.15. For the divisions of Reuben there were great thoughts of heart. Let it be the Epitaph of Antichrist, Discords common Incendiary, as of Pope Sixtus. Non potuit saevum vis ulla extinguere Sixtum: Audito tandem nomine Pacis, obit. No warre, no contention could kill Sixtus: but when he heard the name of Peace, he swooned and died. But let it be a Simeons song; Nunc dimittis in Pace. Lord, let thy servant depart in peace. There is Peace externall, Peace internall, Peace eternall. An outward peace of the world.Rom. 12.18. If it be possible, as much as lyeth in you, live peaceably with all men. An inward peace of the minde, consisting in the tranquilitie of well ordred affections, and in the conscience of a mans owne innocencie; mens sancta, pax sancita. An everlasting peace of God; when the Holy GhostIoh. 14.17. dwelleth with us, and in us. This comes not
 alone, but hath before it Iugum meum, Matth. 11. Take up my yoke, and you shall finde peace. And Crucem meam, take up my Crosse, and you shall have peace. And Luke 2.29. Servum meum, he must be my Servant: and Verbum meum, follow my Word: and then he shall have Pacem meam, my Peace. And so I come from considering this sweet paire of Graces asunder, to joyne them againe together, as I found them: whence derive we three observations:
1 It is not enough to wish grace to the soules of our friends, but also peace; that is, health to their bodies, and other temporall blessings? Nothing but Grace? Yes doubtlesse. Paul begins his second Epistle to the Corinthians with Grace and Peace: and ends it with a2 Cor. 13.11. Farewell; Valete Fratres. Which demonstration of love extends as farre as all manner of prosperity; for heaven or earth, for soule or body. Our Saviours Prayer was not onely for Grace, Thy kingdome come; but also for daily bread. Saint Iohn to his welbeloved Gains, wished above all things that he might prosper,Ioh. Epist. 3. vers. 2. and be in health, as his soule prospered. He that wisheth not well to his brothers body, never wished well to his soule. The good mans desire is for both; Vt sit mens sana in corpore sano: That there may dwell a sound soule in a sound body. And this not in a formall complement, but an inward heartinesse. For there are some thatPsal. 28.3. speake peace to their neighbours, but mischiefe is in their hearts. And Iudas had an Haile Master, so well as Gabriel an Haile Mary. We pray for you, onely doe you wish well to your selves: crosse not anothers prayers for your owne good.
2 The Apostle puts Grace before Peace: so Nature told us in the mouth of her great Secretary, Aristotle; that Iustice, is the elder sister to Peace. Agreement in evill is not love, but conspiracie: such men have onely Metum and noxam conscientiae pro foedere: The terrour and guilt of conscience for their combination. The Scrip^ure tels us, thatPsal. 85 10. Righteousnesse and Peace have kissed each other. Aug. Fiat justitia, and habebis pacem: Live righteously, and thou shalt have peace.Psal. 34.14. Depart from evill, doe good, seeke Peace, and pursue it: nay thou shalt not need to follow it, for it shall f^llow thee: Peace will come of it selfe to seeke Righteousnesse. On the contrary, where is no love of goodnesse, there can be no goodnesse of love. Wee aske our Watchman, as Iehoram did Iehu; Is it Peace? Hee must answer, Alas what peace,2 King. 9. when there is no grace? There is many a Dives dreaming of nothing but ease and peace in his life;Luke 12.19 Soule take thy rest, eat, drinke, and be merry. There is many a Balaam desiring nothing but peace in his death: but he must live in grace, that would die in peace. It is a vulgarisme; such a man died like a Lambe, though perhaps he lived like a Wolfe. As though Consumptions might not spend mens cholericke humours, Apoplexies stop the passages, which otherwise would not be fuller of paines than reluctations; as though palseyes might not take away speech, Lethargies dull, and Dropsies drowne the vitall spirits. There be many causes in Nature to make men die quietly, not sanctifiedly. Sisera after a draught of milke was no more sensible of Iaels hammer, than Holofernes after a tunne of wine was of Iudiths sword. But true Peace will not suppe, where Grace hath not broken her fast. Our peace below is a continuall warre against Satan: shall bee above, an eternall victory over Satan. Be diligent,2 Pet. 3.14. that you may be found of God in peace, without spot and blamelesse. You see the way to be found of God in peace; it is to be furnished with Grace, to be without spot and blamelesse.
3 The Apostle wisheth to us the best things, Grace and Peace. There be two Fiends that torment us, Sinne and a bad Conscience. Now Grace delivers from Sinne, and Peace doth quiet the Conscience. By these two mentioned, may all graces and blessings be Synecdochically understood: howsoever, where these are truly, the rest cannot be wanting Iehoshaphat gave all his children portions, and legacies, silver and gold: but he gave the kingdome to Iehoram: God gives the best to the best. Spirituall things from God in Christ are most to be desired of us, and they love us best that wish us these things. It is not pleasure our Apostle wished them; pleasures are like Iairus minstrels, musicke in a house of mourning: there is more
 need of Lachrymae and lamentations for our sinnes. Not securitie; for a wicked mans secure and untroubled minde is mare mortuum, like the dead sea; smooth and even at the top, but deepe and deadly in the bottome. Not honour and advancement; this builds up many like Babels Tower, that their end might be confusion. Not riches; they are often like Absolons haire, an ornament to hang himselfe: or an unruly Iade, that knocks out his masters braines, when he hath once cast him out of the saddle. No nor an outward pompe, and glorious pride of state and ceremonies: thus Rome hath lost the bloud of her heart to paint her garments. These outward things may swarme together like those Idolaters to the house of Baal, 2 King. 10. But if you aske, as Iehu did there, Is there not a servant of the Lord amongst them? Is there not one grace among all that rabble and throng? No, never a grace: then must all the rest perish, as the worshippers of Baal fell by the sword of Iehu. None of these things our Apostle wisheth; but that which truly makes happy, and brings with it enough of other comforts, Grace and Peace. This makes men equall to Angels, and the want thereof casts downe to devils. That which causeth a man to stand before Princes, is noble birth, honourable valour, abundant wealth, oraculous wisdome, eminent place and offices. But that which makes a man stand boldly before the Iudgement seat of God, is onely Grace and Peace, the free and eternall favour of the Deity in the merits of Iesus Christ. To conclude this; as we say we have grace, let us lead gracious lives: as we would have peace, let us decline unrighteousnesse which dissolves it. And then God shall fulfill in your hearts Saint Peters wish; the Grace of our Lord shall be with you; and the Peace of God which passeth all understanding, shall preserve your hearts and minds in Iesus Christ.
Be multiplied unto you. I come from the matter to the measure of his wish; the encrease and multiplication of these blessings. For the goods of this world the best point of Arithmeticke is Division: Beatius dare quam accipere, said our Lord Iesus. It is a better thing to give than to receive. But for heavenly and unperishing graces the best point is multiplication. As he that for worldly riches doth not divide whiles he lives, shall find an empty Quotient when he is dead. So he that for heavenly gifts doth not multiply in life, shall finde his Summa totalis in death; povertie, vanity, vacuity. Here observe two inferences.
1 That there is no plenary perfection in this life, for we must still be in multiplying our graces. Bern. Quomodo profitis, si jam tibi sufficis? Who cares to thrive, that thinkes hee hath sufficient? The highest Saint on earth, is but like the Arke of the Covenant; a Cubite and a halfe high: perfectly unperfect when he begins, unperfectly perfect when he ends.Luk. 17.10. When wee have done all that is commanded us, we are not onely confined to be, but also charged to call our selves, unprofitable servants. There was a sect of Puritans, that thought themselves so full of grace, that they refused one Petition in the Lords Prayer; Dimitte nobis debita nostra, Forgive us our trespasses. And Philip Nerius conceited himselfe so full of God, that he used to say, Recede a me Domine; Depart further from me Lord, for I am holy enough: perhaps he thought, if God should powre in more wine of Grace, it would burst the vessell; and that he was full before. He spake not with Peters intention, Discede, quia sum peccator; Depart from me, for I am a sinfull man: but out of a plethory of pride; Discede, quia sum sufficienter justus; Depart, for I am sufficiently righteous. Nor as Elias,1 King. 19.4. It is enough, take away my life from me, for I am no better than my Fathers: but, It is enough, take away thy hand from me, for I am better than all my fathers: cease thy bounty, stay thy hand from giving, I need no more. As Cain with his Major iniquitas, confessed his sinne greater than GOD could forgive: so this man with his Minor iniquitas, esteemed his sinne lesse than GOD need to consider. But as there is that maketh himselfe poore, yet hath much riches; so there is that maketh himselfe rich, yet is very poore. There is not a poorer wretch than Laodicea, that brag'd, sheRevel. 3.17. had need of nothing. They that thinke to overcome God with a thousand of their good workes, God will come against them
 with ten thousand of their sinnes; a huge armie: and one thousand sinnes will bea^ downe ten thousand good workes. Cant. 1.11. We will make thee borders of gold, with studs of silver. The worlds fashion is to gild silver with gold, and to put the best side outward: but the manner of the Saints is to overlay gold with silver, and to be like thePsal. 45.13. Kings daughter, most Glorious within. Moses had a glorious countenance, but he covered it with a veile: these have base and deformed mindes, yet boast a shining perfection.
2 That we seeke to multiply our grace and peace. Qui sat habet, nihil habet. Hee hath nothing, that thinkes hee hath enough. If Christ have healed thee of the palsey, he chargeth thee not to stand still, butMatth. 9.6 Take up thy bed, and walke. Wee must like the Israelites, every day gather Manna till the Sabbath comes; be multiplying graces untill our eternall Sabbath in heaven.Iohn 14.2. In my Fathers house are many mansions; thither must a Christian arrive, before he can sue out his Quietus est. Every thing now is either Vinculum or Vehiculum; a Chaine or a Chariot, an hinderance or a furtherance. O happie soule that can make vincula vehicula, his thwarters that crosse him, become his Porters to carry him, to the place of his rest. And can climbe up by the ragged rockes of afflictions, to the victorious garrison of heaven. Crescite and multiplicamini; as God said to the man and to the woman when hee put them into the world; encrease and multiply: so he blesseth his graces, when his holy Spirit sowes them in our hearts. Qui requiescit tempore laboris, laborabit tempore quietis. Hee that rests in the time of labour, shall labour in the time of rest. Let them both grow together, saith God, of the corne and tares, untill the harvest. Matth. 13. Now if the tares grow so fast for the fire, let the good corne grow faster for the barne. The vessels whereinto Christ miraculated wine, wereIohn 2.7 filled up to the brimme. The vessels of Gods grace, which by a greater miracle are made to hold a celestiall nature, must be full up to the brimme. It is said of Steven, that he wasAct. 7.55. full of the Holy Ghost: full? so was Christ onely. The Schoole answers, there is three degrees of fulnesse; Apta, AEqua, Cumulata. An apt or fit and meet fulnesse; as when a house is well furnished, we say it is full. An equall or measurable fulnesse, when it is even with the content of the receiver; so a vessell is full to the brimme. A cumulate or heaped fulnesse, when it overflowes the continent: such a fulnesse in Christ;Coloss. 2.9 in whom dwelleth all the fulnesse of the God-head bodily. This filled his humanity with fulnesse of grace, the oyle of gladnesse prae suciis; above all his fellowes, and for all his members: and ofIohn 1 16 his fulnesse have we all received, grace for grace. Ours then is Plenituao sufficientiae, his Superabundantiae; ours sufficient, his superabundant. Now this same Apt plenitude we may have in this life, but that Equall plenitude is onely to be expected in heaven.
Seeing this multiplying to fulnesse is required, let us not content our selves with a vacuitie, or with little more than will cover the bottome. There are some utterly emptie,Iude ver. 19. and void of the Spirit. Quantum est in rebus inane! What an emptinesse of grace is in many mens hearts! There are some that turne this grace into wantonnesse: as if God were bound to fill the vessell so fast as they emptie it; or to multiply their peace when they spend it in ryot. You shall see every where a fulnesse of iniquitie: a measure so heaped, and pressed, and thrust together, and yet running over: that Non habet ulterius quod eorum moribus addat Posteritas; No after generations can exceed them. Where is a vacuitie of grace, must needs bee a plenitude of sinne. Inopem me copia fecit, too much fulnesse keepes them emptie. They have hands full, eyes full, mouthes full, houses full, hearts full. Hands full of bloud, and bribes. Esay 1. Eyes full of adultery and covetice: mouthesRom. 3.14. full of cursing and bitternesse: houses full of spoiles: hearts full of impletie: they multiply sinnes like the sands; but diminish Graces. Two sorts he^e reprovable.
1 Temporizers, that never multiply, but stand at a stay; neither ebbe nor flow, but just standing water betweene Religion and prophanenesse. Neither
 hot nor cold, but luke-warme: heate and cold have their uses, but betweene both is good for nothing, but to trouble the stomacke. They goe about many things, but bring about nothing. Omnia pro tempore, nihil pro veritate, Optat. They are all for the Time, nothing for the Truth. Like a Toppe, that goes alwayes round, but never goes forward unlesse it bee whipt. Like a Mill-horse that runnes about in a circle all day, at night you take him out where you put him in. Or like a doore, that rides all day on the hinges, and keepes out, or lets in visitants; but it selfe is never the nearer home at night.Hos. 7.8. Ephraim is a cake not turned: their cake is dough, it will never serve for bread at GODS boord. One propounded to Athenaeus this riddle: How a man and no man, with a stone and no stone, should kill a bird and no bird, sitting on a tree and no tree? Hee resolved it; that the man was an Eunuch, the stone a Pumise, the bird a Bat, the tree a Fennell. The Temporizer expounds that riddle in himselfe; for he is a Christian and no Christian, like that man and no man: his courage is no courage like the Pumise, which is a stone and no stone: his profession is no profession, like that Bat, which is a bird and no bird: (wherefore let him cast away either his wings or his teeth, and so become either a bird or a beast) his conscience no conscience; like the Fennell, a tree and no tree. His whole religion is like adulterated Wine, some of the Bastards; when the guest askes the drawer what Wine it is, he presently replies; Sir, what would you have it to bee? his religion is the same you would have it. The Mustard hath the least seed, but growes up to the greatest tree: this man you would take to be the greatest tree, but his fruit is so small you can scarce see it. These time-servers love to prey upon novelties, as Atalanta on the golden apples, and lose the prize. Among the uncleane fowles forbidden; Levit. 11. one is the Sea-maw, which we call the Gull. Vncleane, saith one; Quia sicut ales volat, and sicut aquatile nat at: Because it flies like a fowle, and swimmes like a fish. Not unlike the Syriphian Frogge, Mthi terra lacusque. We have such fowles and uncleane Gulls; that flie in England with the wings of hypocrisie, and swimme in the sea of Rome with the sinnes of Idolatry. These be straglers, farre from hitting the marke of salvation. When Diogenes saw a bungling archer about to shoot, hee ranne as fast as hee could to the marke: the lookers on demanded the reason, he answered. I stand here to make sure worke that he may not hit mee: for this fellow never meanes to come neare the marke. It will be hard for him that observes the time, to preserve the truth.
2 Revolters, that doe not multiply, but substract; growing worse and worse; so farre from acquiring graces they had not, that they lose them they had. Like Nebuchadnezzars dreamed Image, the head might be of gold, but the feet was of clay and dirt; they have a muddie ending. In the Roman Indictions, the first yeare they payed gold as to the Crowne: the second yeare, silver for the souldiers pay: the third yeare brasse, for armour. So some have beene in persecution golden Saints, in peace silver professours, at last brasen or leaden worldlings. I have read of certaine trees, that on the Munday have beene growing in the Forrest, and before Sunday following, under saile on the sea. Neere to Calipolis there are by report, certaine trees, that shoot up apace, and grow in a short time to such height, as a man may from their tops see the Citie Ilium; and then they presently wither. These men spring fast at first, and seeme tall Cedars in profession: but when once they come to the sight of the Citie of God, then they waste away: not like the good tree, Psalm. 1. that brings forth his fruit in due season: but rather when the season comes wherein fruit is to be gathered, they elude the Masters expectation. Rome, that was once so famous for the Faith, yet apostated; How is that faithfull Citie become an harlot! It is a fearefull saying;Heb. 6.6. It is impossible for them who have beene made partakers of the Holy Ghost, etc. if they fall away, to be renewed againe by repentance. I suppose he meanes a morall impossibilitie; so great a difficultie, that setting aside the almightie power of the Spirit, they cannot be recovered.

Let us then be like the Sunne and the Moone; without retrogradations. There was an ordinance for the Israelites concerning their entry into Gods house:Ezek. 46.9. He that entreth into worship by the way of the North-gate, shall goe out by the way of the South-gate: he that entreth in by the way of the South-gate, shall goe out by the way of the North-gate: no man shall goe out the same way he came in. So the Wise-men were charged,Matth. 2.12. to depart into their owne Countrey, another way. Teaching us a streight course, to goe continually forward. It is but a Poeticall fiction, how Orpheus went to fetch his wife Euridice from hell; which was granted him on this condition, that he should not looke backe upon her, till he had brought her to heaven. But, Flexit amans oculos, and protinus illa relapsa est; he looked backe, and lost her. It is a Scripturall truth, that Lots wife for looking backe to her desired Sodome, was turned into a pillar of salt. Therefore, Remember that woman, saith CHRIST: that pillar of salt, ut te condiat; that it may season thee, saith Augustine. It is observable, Ephes. 6. That Paul describing the whole Armour of God, and numbring all the pieces; makes no mention of a backe curet for the Christian souldier. There's a helmet for the head, a corselet for the breast, a shield for the fore-parts; but no guard, no regard of the backe. It is a panoply, a compleat Armour, yet no defence for the backe. Teaching us that wee must never shew our backe in Gods warres: we must rather dye than fly; continuing faithfull to the end, not leaving the banner of Christ, till we have gotten the full victorie. When Bias fell into the hands of his enemies, his souldiers flying, and crying: What shall we doe? He answered with noble resolution; Tell ye the living, that I dye fighting: and I will tell the dead that ye did escape flying. When William the Conquerour landed his Army in Sussex: hee presently caused his shippes to be sunke, that there might remaine no hopes of running backe againe; they must stand to it. Let us all learne to multiply our graces: he that spends of the stocke and never encreaseth, shall come to beggery. Be not entised with every vanity, to forsake your first love. Intemporall lendings, you thinke it scarce enough to have the surplusage of ten in the hundred: in spirituall things you think it enough and enough againe to hold your owne. You lend one money, if he comes and tenders the principall without interest, you grudge at it: yet God lends you grace, and you come at last, with Domine ecce tuum; Lord, behold thine owne: You know the reward;Mat. 25.30. Cast that unprofitable servant into outer darknesse. No,Revel. 22.11 but let him that is righteous, be righteous still: and let him that is holy, be more holy. Let us goPsal. 84.7. from strength to strength, till we all appeare before God in Sion.
Through the knowledge of God, and of IESUS our Lord. I have done with the matter, and the measure; nor come to the manner. (...). Which intends notFevard in locum. simplicem cognitionem, sed super agnitionem, sive posteram cognitionem Dei: It is not a meere and simple knowledge, but an acknowledgement; a reflective and doubling knowledge. By (...) they understand such a knowledge of God, as was in the Philosophers, Poets, and Naturalists; Vi naturae congenita; acquired by the light of nature.Rom. 1.19. That which may be knowne of God, etc. But this (...) is such a knowledge, as comes by Gods word, which makes us wise to salvation. The word is accepted and read three waies. Ordinarily for knowledge: sometimes for acknowledgement. 1 Cor. 16.18. Acknowledge them that are such. Sometimes for knowing againe: there is knowledge Mentall, Sacramentall, Experimentall. The first is by the light of Nature; the second is by the power of Grace, the third by the practise of life, and continuall proving the favour of God: of this knowledge more largely hereafter: here only observe two things.
1 The meanes of multiplying grace and peace in our hearts is knowledge of God.Ioh 17.3. This is eternall life to know God, and whom he hath send, Iesus CHRIST.Psal. 9.10. They that know thy name; will put their trust in thee. The cause of sin and ruine is want of knowledge; Hos. 4.1. swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing abound, because there is no knowledge of God in the land. Therefore Christ shall

2 Thess. 1.8. come in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God. The want of the Sunne is the cause of darknesse, the privation of knowledge the position of all ungodlinesse.August. Bern. Though it be true, that Peccata scientium peccatis ignorantium praeponuntur; The knowing offender shall be scouraged with sharpest rods: yet multi ut liberius peccarent, libenter ignorant; many affect an ignorance not necessary, that they may sinne with the more securitie. Nondum scient? aliquando sentient. Will they not know? they shall feele.
2 There is something in grace and knowledge still wanting, that must be multiplied and increased: for we know but in part. Therefore a man should be often perusing and looking over his own evidence; as we review our assurances of worldly possessions; that he may be sure of the whole and every part of it: for it is dangerous to have any flaw or defect in our conveyance of salvation: which albeit it be ever sound on Gods part, is not so on ours. The fals of a regenerate man much darken his knowledge: therefore when we have sinned, it is not enough to renew our repentance, but we must rub over and polish our knowledge. Men may know much in their understandings by thinking of it; but we must double this knowledge in our affections and hearts, by feeling it. For there is no knowledge so comfortable, as the experimentall certainty of Gods favour. Mans heart is like a vessell, the meanes of conveying knowledge to it is like a pipe: the Spirit of God like the wheele that powres the water into the pipe, the Minister is the servant that opens the cocke. Now the reason why our knowledge is so small; is either because the cocke alwayes runnes not, or not in that measure, or rather because our vessels be stopped, or it runs out by leakage, or it runnes over, by reason of the former fulnesse; and repletion with the lusts of this world: mans heart is so full of crackes and flawes, that it cannot hold the water of life.
And of Iesus our Lord. There is no knowing of God with comfort, but through Iesus Christ.Matt 11.27. No man knoweth the Father but the Sonne, and hee to whomsoever the Sonne will reveale him. Otherwise wee may know him Fortem ultorem, a just and omnipotent avenger: in Christ onely misericordem Patrem,2 Cor. 1.3. the Father of mercies, and God of all comfort. No man can see mee, and live; saith God to Moses, Exod. 33.20. Woe to that man, who removing Christ will attempt to comprehend God in his Majestie. Without HimEccles. 1.18. he that encreaseth knowledge, encreaseth his owne sorrow, his owne torment.Coloss. 2.3. In him are hid all the treasures of wisdome, and knowledge. By the Sonne is the Father knowne:Iohn 14 7. If ye had knowne me, ye had knowne my Father also. Other religions begin at the highest, the Christian at the lowest; God manifested in the flesh. He that will climbe to heaven, must ascend by this ladder: begin therefore as Christ began; in the wombe of the Virgin, at the manger, then get up to the Crosse, and lastly mount up to the Crowne. Wouldest thou know God? runne first to the cradle, embrace the Infant; behold him sucking, growing, roaring, crying, dying: and thou shalt thus arise from knowing God in Christ by faith, to know him in himselfe by glory.
It is observeable, that our Apostle often gildeth his Epistle with the name of IESUS, and CHRIST. Twice in the first verse, once againe in the second, foure times after in the Chapter. He runs upon this note, as David did upon mercy, Psal. 136. Little difference; for no mercy but through IESUS, and IESUS is all mercy. It is the sweetest musike; Melos in aure, Iubilus in corde: Angelicall melodie in the eare, Evangelicall harmony in the heart. Saint Paul in his Epistles mentions the name of IESUS foure hundred and sixtie times, and upwards. Neither is this repetition onely of love, but of necessity: for it is impossible that grace and mercy should be to us,Bern. but by IESUS CHRIST. Si scribas, non placet nisi legam ibi Iesum, etc. If thou writest, I like not thy letters, unlesse I finde them beautified with IESUS: if thou conferrest, thy discourse is without rellish, if it bee without IESUS.Anselm. Mallem non esse, quam sine Iesu esse: I had rather not be at all, than be without IESUS. A reverend Father was so ravished with the sweetnesse, and transported
 with the zeale of this name, that hee professed; I had rather be out of heaven with CHRIST, than in heaven without Christ. But our heart is farre too narrow to comprehend this infinitely sweet Saviour, therefore I will end with that end of a divine sonnet; O CHRIST, I would faine receive thee; but
Now I want space, now grace: to ease all smart,Since my heart holds not thee, hold thou my heart.
Now as all grace and peace is from our LORD IESUS CHRIST; so let us ascribe all honour and glory to our Lord Iesus CHRIST; for ever and ever Amen.



Ver. 3. According as his divine power hath given unto us all things that pertaine to life and godlinesse, through the knowledge of him that hath called us to glory and vertue.

THe Connexion shall bee forborne a little, and give way to the distribution. The whole Verse may bee distinguished into two generalls; the Fountaine; wherein observe the
Hope of the Petitioner; According as he hath.Abilitie of the Giver; Divine power.Libertie of the Action; Hath given.Necessity of the Receivers; Vnto us.Vniversality of the Gift; All things that pertaine to life and godlinesse.
Cesterne; wherin observe the
Water of life; wherein consider
Who; God.What; Hath called.Whom; Vs.Whether; To glory and vertue.Pipe or Bucket to draw and derive all to us; Through the knowledge of him.
The whole being thus let fall into parts, let us proceed orderly to take up the first, and view it. This is the hope of the Petitioner; which with a remarkeable de pendance knits this Verse with the former; and begetteth this doctrine from the Coherence. The experience of former mercie, workes a perswasion of future mercie. The Apostle desired the multiplying of their grace and peace; and he grounds it on this hope, because the LORD hath already given them much. He hath begun, therefore he trusts that he will finish. There is no stronger argument of Gods infallible readinesse to grant our requests, than the experience of his former concessions. So David reasons.1 Sam. 17.37. The Lord that delivered me from the Lion and the Beare, will deliver me out of the hand of this Philistine. This is argumentum a priori, the voice of a strong faith, that perswades the conscience God will be gracious to him, because he hath beene gracious. The Prophet thus often comforted his soule:Ps^l. 4.1. Thou Oh God, hast inlarged me, when I was in distresse, therefore have mercie upon me, and heare my prayer. So Psalme 86.13. Thou hast delivered my soule from the lowest hell: therefore Verse 16. O turne unto me, and have mercie upon me. Let the Iustitiaries deduce arguments from their owne present merits, my soule from Gods former mercies. Thou, O Lord, madest me good, restoredst me when I was evill, therefore have mercie upon me miserable sinner, and give me thy salvation. Thus Paul grounded his assurance; because2 Tim. 4.17. the LORD had stood with him, and delivered him out of the Lions mouth; therefore the
 Lord shall deliver me still from every evill worke, and preserve me unto his heavenly kingdome. Hence was his Novi, I know whom I have beleeved. The Prophets distressed soule cryed;Psal. 77.7. Will the Lord cast off for ever? is his mercie cleane gone for ever? hath God forgotten to be gratious? No, he recollects himselfe, Ver. 10. with the memorie of precedent favours; I will remember the yeeres of the right hand of the most High; I will remember the workes of the Lord, and his wonders of old. Man useth to reason thus; I have beene good to such a one, therefore hee need not exact upon me, and over-burden my kindnesse. God thus; I have beene liberall, therefore I will be liberall; multa dedit, sed plura daturus. To him shall be given; because the good he hath, is but an earnest of Gods greater bountie. He takes up mans soule as a poore beggar at his doore, strips off her tattered ragges, gives her a sute out of her owne wardrobe, adornes her with rich Iewels, and then as if all this were too little, loves her still better and better; lastly marries her to his owne sonne, and so interests her to the inheritance of glory. You see the foundation of the Apostles prayer, the experience of Gods sweet nature; who multiplies his graces. Let not this point part with us, till it hath taught us two things: to pray faithfully, and to live thankfully.
1 Let us pray in confidence that God will heare us, because he hath heard us.Hebr. 4 16. Come we boldly to the throne of grace, that we may obtaine mercie. Gods facilitie in his wonted grants, gives us strong consolation. A noble Princesse asked a Courtier, when he would leave begging: he answered, when she left giving. God never ceaseth to give, let us never cease to begge. Who can goe with more courage to the King, than the man experienced of his goodnesse? But if we be so confident, how comes it to passe, that we sometimes faile of our sutes, and returne denied. I answer, the defect is in our selves; God is the same in bountie, but we are not the same in dutie. Wee aske either Mala, or Male; either bad things to a good purpose, or good things to a bad purpose.
Evill things, either evill in themselves, or to the petitioners: in themselves one calls Prayer Petitio decentium, a Request of convenient things. What a good father will not give, let a good sonne not aske;Matth. 7.9. not a serpent instead of a fish, nor a stone for bread. We must not begge a serpent, lest it should hurt our selves, nor a stone, lest we should hurt others. Non petitur in nomine Salvatoris, quod petitur contra rationem salutis. August. That is not requested in the name of our Saviour, that is requested against the rule of salvation. The Disciples asked many things, and had them: but when they askedLuke 9.54. fire from heaven, they had it not. If it be not fit f^r God to giv^, it is not fit for us to ask. The Lord heares ever Q^u^d finem, though not ever Quoad formam: audit ad sanitatem, if not ad voluntatem. If our will be not according to our weale, God denyeth the forme of our requests, and gives us the end: he withholdeth the worse, and affordeth the better.2 Cor. 12.8. Paul besought the Lord thrice that the thorne in the flesh might depart from him. God did not heare him in that particular, but heard him in the generall; my grace is sufficient for thee: my strength is made perfect in weakenesse. He was not quite delivered from the temptation in himselfe, but he was fortified with the sufficiencie of God. The man sicke of the burning fever cryes to his Physitian for drinke; he pitties him, but does not satisfie him: he gives him proper physicke, but not drinke. So God, saith Augustine, Non tribuit quod volumus, ut tribuat quod malimus: he does not give us what we would have, but what we should have. Perhaps he crosseth us in our affection, but blesseth us in our salvation. The yonger brother shall not have all his portion, lest hee runne to ryot: nor the gallant ever enjoy health, lest he be too proud. Saepe Deus facit opus quod non est suum, ut faciat opus quod est suum. Thus a man is afflicted, that he may be humbled and many sores are on the flesh, that fewer sins may be in the soule.
Or when we aske good things, but to an evill purpose. So the envious begges honour, that he may revenge himselfe on his enemies. Young men aske health, that
 they may be strong for licentiousnesse. Others require great places and offices, and to have somewhat to doe about the fire, that they may warme their owne fingers. As if a man should be ambitious of the Pretorship in the Citie; that so with mulcts amercements, warrants, and bribes, he may maintaine his familie, and never goe to his coffers for money. Some desire learning, that they may be factious: others riches, not to serve God, preserve the state, nor relieve the poore; but to grow fatt with idlenesse, and domineere over their neighbours.Iam. 4 2. Yee fight and warre, yet you have not, because you aske not. Aske not! alas we begge continually, yet cannot speed: the errour is not in the want of asking. Where is it then? ye aske and receive not, because you aske amisse. Ver. 3. you faile in your manner of requesting, therefore God doth not satisfie your desires. You aske and misse, because you aske amisse. No, we pray as earnestly, and with as devout affection as others, yet speed not. Look a little further into the Apostles words, and your owne hearts: yee aske, that you may consume it upon your lusts. Heres the reason, you begge good things to be wanton with them; silver and gold to give unto Baal: corne and wine to ryot. Perhaps you may faintly pray against that sinne, which you would bee loth to lose. This is to pray in jest; as Augustine speakes of his unconverted estate; that he desired God to coole the fire of his concupiscence; but orabat extingui, malebat expleri: his tongue besought an extinction, his heart desired a satisfaction; he had rather have it pleased, then expelled. He prayed indeed, but as if he were afraid lest God should heare him.
2 Seeing that God gives more where he hath given much, let us be thankefull: for how should God blesse us with that we have not, if we doe not blesse him for that we have. Let me be a little bold to enlarge this point of praising God: there is a six-fold manner of praising him; mentall, monumentall, chordall, cordiall, vocall and actuall.
There is a mentall praise, when we beare in our minds the favours of God;Psal. 77.11. I will remember the workes of the Lord. It was the wretchednesse of Israel to forget his wonders. They soonePsal. 106.13. forgat his workes. What can he remember, that forgets the mercies of God!
Monumentall, when wee erect trophies, pillars, and monuments, to continue the memorie of Gods deliverances.Psal. 102.18. This shall be written for the generation to come, and the people which shall be created, shall praise the Lord. Thus Abraham and Iacob reared diverse pillars, which were dumbe catechismes to the posterities unborne: answering the charge of God, and the practice of Israel;Psal. 78.4. Our fathers have told us, we will not hide them from our children, shewing to the generations to come, the praises of the Lord.
Cordall, I call that praise which is framed to God upon Instruments. Psalme last. Praise him with the sound of the Trumpet, praise him with the Psalterie and Harpe, praise him with stringed Instruments and Organs. For this cause, musicall Instruments are retained in our Churches; that they may elevate our drooping affections, to blesse GOD: Let all our musicke, like Davids harpe, resound his praises.
Cordiall praise, is that which enlivens all the rest, and comes out of a pure heart: not hypocritically for fashion, but sincerely for devotion. This is that forme of thankefulnesse God requires: if a man lookes into a pure fountaine, he shall see there a reflection of his owne image: in the pure heart God beholds an image of himselfe. If Caesar requires his owne image in his coine, shall not God expect his Image in thy soule! He loves little, that can tell how much he loves. Let all thy powers of body and soule doe their best to blesse God; but let thy heart exceed all; and what they want in expression, let that make up in affection.Psal. 103.1. Blesse the Lord all that is within me; all that is within me, and all that is without me; but especially that within me, blesse the Lord O my soule.
Vocall, let our lips praise him, and let not our tongues lie still. Sing to the
 Lord a new song; shew forth his loving kindnesse in the morning, and his faithfulnesse every night. Gods glory will make a good man speake, even when terror it selfe hath commanded silence. Luke 11.14. Our Saviour cast out a dumbe devill and when the devill was cast out, the dumbe spake, and the people wondred. Many are possessed with this dumbe devill: their mouthes open not to sound forth Gods praises: to heare one of them speake in CHRISTS cause, would make all the people wonder. I know that Satans children are talkative enough: there are gaping devils; like Demetrius, that thinke to carry it away, with Great is Diana of the Ephesians. For this cause I thinke, they were first called Rorers whom Christ may well conjure, as he did that devill. Marke 1.25. Hold thy peace, and come out. But Gregory answers; Hee that sinnes horribly, and confesseth not heartily; though he roares much, yet holds his peace. To heare blasphemers wound and teare the sweet and sacred name of CHRIST would make a dumbe man speake. Herodotus writes of Craesus his sonne, being borne dumbe, yet seeing his father endangered in a battell; on a suddaine cryed out, O spare him, he's the King. So when Gods glory is in question; what ^ dumbenesse, what a dumbenesse is it, not to say, O spare him, he's the Lord. The tongue that yeelds not this defence, is tyed by Satan, not loosed by God.
Actuall, is when our lives praise God.1 Pet. 2.12. Let your conversation be honest, that they beholding your good workes, may glorifie God in the day of visitation. So the master had taught the disciple, as the disciple taught us. Matth. 5.16. we, like blind Isaac, cannot see your hearts therefore we say, Let me feele thee my sonne. If your lives be rugged, like the hands of Esau; we will not trust your voyces for the voice of Iacob. Have you righteousnesse? seale it, and deliver it as your act and deed. Aug. Noli gloriari quia lingua benedicis, si vita maledicis. Never say you praise God with your words, when you dispraise him with your workes.Prov. 3.9. Honour the Lord with thy substance, this is substantiall honour. GOD gave Samuel to Anna, Anna gave Samuel back againe to God. Returne part of thy riches to him, that gave all to thee. David loved Mephibosheth for Ionathans sake: is Ionathan gone? yet wee have many Mephibosheths. The Lord disposeth his part of thy substance to his ministers to his poore members: hee encreaseth thy part, for shame doe not thou diminish his.
His Divine power: we come to the next circumstance; the Abilitie of the giver. Here is Power, yea Divine power; not onely Great, but Good. For mercie and Majesty must meet together in the donation of all things that pertaine to life and godlinesse.
It is Power: God is Almightie.Isal. 135.6. Whatsoever the LORD pleased, that did he in heaven, and in earth, and in the seas, and in all deepe place. But is there nothing that God cannot doe? yes, he cannot lie, he cannot die, he cannot denye himselfe. He is for potent, not for impotent workes. Aug. Dicitur omnipotens faciendo quod vult, non patiendo quod non vult. H s Almightinesse consists in doing what he will, not in suffering what he will not. The doing of some things were an argument of weakenesse, not o^ power. For herein is a remonstrance of our might; not that we have ablenesse to sinne, but to withstand sinne. Therefore, Augustine wisheth; Vt potestas non detur nisi contra vitium; that no man had any strength, but against wickednesse. Let every man desire such power; Vt potens sit in serpso, and miro modo adversus seipsum, pro seipso: that he may be strong in himselfe, and (after a strange manner) against himselfe, for his owne good. For a dominion over ones selfe is greater than the grand Seigniory of Turky. To bee strong to sinne is no credite for man; as it is no discredit for GOD that hee cannot sinne. Vae fortibus ad potandum. Esa. 5. woe to them that are strong to drinke. Dost thou pride thy selfe in this strength? thou shalt howle for that glory. This power is the greatest infirmitie. There are thatMica. 2.2. oppresse a man and his heritage, because it is in the power of their hand. This Potestas in malum, strength to sinne, is to be strong to
 goe to hell. Commonly to beasts of the greatest power, is given the lest immanitie, and to those of the greatest immanitie the least power. The oxe hath strength but tamenesse: the bee wildnesse, but weakenesse. Either they have power to hurt, and not will: or will to hurt, and not power. This is happy for us, but it would be more happy in respect of our sinnes, if God should take away from us, aut facultatem, aut voluntatem, either our will or our abilitie to doe mischiefe. They say, Lions doe not prey on yeelding things: that thou canst doe harme, and wilt not, is the praise of thy Innocence: that thou wouldest doe harme, and canst not, is the praise of Gods providence. Saul would kill David, and could not: David could kill Saul and would not. The two disciples would command fire from heaven, but could not: CHRIST could command fire from heaven, but would not. Posse and nolle nobile.
It is Divine power, as for the mightinesse, so for the mercifulnesse: his goodnesse doth sweetly temper his greatnesse. Not onely a power; but a good, gracious, divine power. He abideth faithfull,2 Tim. 2.13. He cannot denie himselfe. If we desire worldly wealth, he may deny us, for that is not himselfe. If we desire preferment, he may deny us, for that is not himselfe. If we desire revenge, he may deny us, for that is not himselfe. But if we desire Grace, goodnesse, sanctitie, mercie, he will not deny us, for that is himselfe; and he cannot deny himselfe.Psal 84.11. No good thing will he withhold from them that walke uprightly. Against this divine power there is no resistance: he is able to doe whatsoever he will, yea he is able to doe more than he will. Our God is in heaven,Psal. 115.3. he hath done whatsoever he pleased. He can doe more than ever hee was or will be pleased to doe. His divine power could have made many worlds, his divine will hath decreed but one. The passengers in mockerie bad CHRISTMatth. 27.40 come downe from the Crosse: he was able to descend, and let the worke of redemption alone, but he would not lose them to save himselfe, but rather lose himselfe to save them. The Father was able to have given him more than twelve legions of Angels for his rescue. Matth. 26.53. But hee would not, but rather delivered up his sonne to his enemies, to save his friends. So Iohn Baptist to the bragging Iewes, that pretended the father-hood of Abraham;Matth. 3.9. God is able of these stones to raise up children to Abraham. His power is without limits, as his will is without injustice. His power teacheth us to feare him; his Divine and gracious power to love him: both together make for our humilitie and comfort.
The knowledge of GODS Power will humble the proudest heart: was hee able to make thee of nothing; to bring thee backe to worse than nothing; how darest thou displease him?Hebr. 10.31. It is a fearefull thing to fall into the hands of the living GOD: yet there is no way to avoid it, but by falling into it; strive not to runne from him by wickednesse, but to runne to him by repentance.1 Pet. 5.6. Humble your selves under the mighty hand of God: it is a mighty hand, humble your selves under it, lest you be humbled by it. His power is so mighty, that it bootes not a man to strive with him, for he was never yet over-masterd. The wrath of a King is like messengers of death, and man quakes at his anger that can but kill the body: yet how little doe weMatth. 10.28 feare him that can destroy both body and soule in hell? Doe we provoke the Lord to anger? are we stronger than he? saith the Apostle, doe wee challenge him that can confound us? we are like to get little by such bargaines.Iob 10.34. Let him take away his rod from me, and let not his feare terrifie me; Then would I speake. As if Iob should say, there is no medling with him so long as his sword is by him. First Lord take away thy weapons, and then let us talke together. It might be said of Iove^, Si quoties peccent homines, sua fulmina mittat Iupiter, exiguo tempore inermis erit: if for every sinne of men he should send downe a thunderbolt, either Vulcans one-eyed Cyclops would be soone weary, or his flocke of thunder soone emptie. Mars ultor gal^am quoque perdidit, and res non potuit servare suas; Mars his sword might be wrung out of his hand, and himselfe disarm'd.Rom. 99. But who hath resisted the Lord? who hath entred the lists with this divine power, and not measured his length on the ground? It is time for the poore child to quake, when he sees his
 angry father come with the rodde. There is no strugling with it; the best way is to yeeld our selves, and be silent;Psal. 39.9. I was dumbe, and opened not my mouth, because thou didst it. God tells revolted Israel,Esa. 30.15. that in quietnesse they should be saved; not by fight, nor by flight. Aaron was sorry for his two perished sons; but when Moses told him that God would be glorified before all the people; Aaron held his peace.Levit. 10.3. Peter was accused by the Apostles, for going in to the Gentiles: but when hee made his defence, and rehearsed the matter from the beginning, Acts 11.4. proving that hee was directed to that course by a vision, Verse 18. They held their peace, and glorified GOD.
The knowledge of this Divine and giving power may comfort the most dejected heart: it gives us many consolations. 1. Concerning the salvation of others and our selves: how desperate so ever we judge their estates, by reason of their continuall habit of sinning, yet this divine power is able to convert them. No man can seeme to be further lost than the Iewes, who are cut off from CHRIST through infidelitie, Vpon whom the wrath of God is come to the uttermost, and a malice of 16 hundred yeares burning is not wasted in them: yet saith Paul, even they may be grafted into the Olive againe, if they abide not still in unbeleefe: and his reason is;Rom. 11.23. Because God is able to graffe them in againe. But alas, I have beene frozen many yeares in the dregs of worldly lusts, and I doe not find my heart yet thawed: I know this is a fearefull case for a man to lie so long under the tyrannie of the devill: yet despaire not, apply the meanes of thy deliverance, strive to extricate and unwind thy soule from this maze of destruction, breake thy heart with compunction for thy iniquities: this divine power is able to implant thee to the true vine, and make thee a member of Iesus CHRIST. Thou shalt feele theEph. 1.19.20. working of his mightie power; which he wrought in CHRIST, when he raised him up from the dead, and set him at his owne right hand in heaven. What was the power which he wrought in CHRIST? When malice had spent it selfe upon him on the Crosse, and insulting death began to triumph over him in the grave; even then this mightie power raised him up. Wee are as dead in sinne naturally, as any man in the grave corporally; can neither move hand nor foote: there was a power that raised him, there is a power that can revive us. All our care must be to find in our selves thePhil. 3.10. Power of his resurrection. 2. This comforts us in the midst of all afflictions; we are weake in our selves, unable to stand under the lightest crosse: but there is a Divine power that strengthens us. Though it doth not nullifie our so^rrowes, yet it doth fortifie our patience,Col. 11.11. we are strengthened with all might through his glorious power, unto all patience and long suffering with joy fulnesse. 3. This comforts us in prayer: there is no speeding prayer but that is made in faith, and it is no easy matter to pray in faith: now the foundation of our faith is this Divine power of CHRIST. Let us speake confidently with the Leper Matth. 8. LORD, if thou wilt thou canst make me cleane. After the wisedome of heaven had abridged all our necessities into six petitions; he binds up our faith with a reason, and bids us waite confidently, for the blessings craved heartily; For (or because) thine is the kingdome, the Power, and (to thee be) the glory for ever. 4. This comforts us against all oppositions, even those Principalities that wrastle against us; the assurance of this divine power. Non timeat Inimicum fortem, qui amicum habet fortiorem. Let not him feare a strong enemy against him, that hath a stronger friend with him. If God bee on our side who can bee against us? Let their force and malice strive which shall bee greater, we shall overcome them allRevel. 12.11. by the bloud of the Lambe.
1 Ioh. 4.4.Ye are of God, and have overcome them: whom? all the adversaries of your faith and manners. How? Because greater is he that is in you, that is Iesus, Christ by his divine power: than he that is in the world, that is, the malignant spirit of temptation.Psal. 23.4. Though I walke through the valley of the shadow of death; a place full of horror and amasednesse; yet will I not feare: why so? because thou O Lord art with me; thy rod and thy staffe doe comfort me. Lastly, let this hearten us to chearefull liberalitie; because whatsoever wee lacke or lose, there is a divine power able to requite,
 it. Thus Paul encourageth the Corinthians bountie; because2 Cor. 9.8. God is able to make all grace abound toward them, that they having all sufficiencie in all things, may abound to every good worke.
Hath given. I come from the Faculty of the Agent, to the Liberty of the Action: he Gives. He doth not set, nor let, nor sell, nor lend, but Give. The covetous Land-lord sets his tenements, the griping Vsurer lets his money, the wasting Prodigall sells his estate, the charitable Neighbour lends his goods; but the most liberall God Gives. Thus doth God, Satan, and man, dispose their things. Deus donat, Diabolus vendit, Homo retribuit, God gives, Satan sels, and man restores. God and Satan have two severall warehouses: we come to the Devils warehouse, looke on his wares, like them well, they have a faire glosse. The glosse of drunkennesse is good fellowship: the glosse of adultery is good affection: the glosse of covetousnesse is good husbandry: the glosse of murder is good courage: the glosse of sedition is good reformation: the glosse of treason is good religion. To make good this glosse, his shop hath two false lights; mans law, and mans example. First, humane lawes; so we shall never be able to prove sinne to be sinne, unlesse we have an act of Parliament for it. Next, humane examples; and by that reason we shall never prove sinne to bee sinne, till all great men become good men, and that will not be this two dayes. Well, men thus liking the warts, they come to the price; that's everlasting torment: deare, very deare! The Devill is no such franke chapman, to sell his commodities for nothing. No, did hee not offer Christ kingdomes upon free gift? Matth. 4.9. No, they had a price set on them; Si cadens adoraver is me; it must be a crouch of his knee, he must worship the Devill for it. He makes shew of Robin-Hoods peniworths, and may forbeare his debters untill death; but then layes an heavie execution on them, and condemnes them to an everlasting prison. Munera magna quidem praebet, sed praebet in hamo; he puts forth large baites, but there be damnable hookes hid in them. A worldling is beset with exigents, he complaines his wants, Satan promiseth ready help: Iudas shall have money in his purse, Gehezi new sutes to his backe, Nero a crowne on his head: but thus he possesseth their wretched hearts, from whence he is hardly ever untenanted.
In Gods warehouse we finde wisdome at the doore, crying for customers, Esay 55. Come ye to the waters, come buy wine and milke without money; yea, vers. 2. Bread and fatnesse. Let us see the wares. First is Water: water? alas a poore and plentifull commoditie: cheape enough; every chanell affords it. No, for first literally; water was of great use in Palestine, a drie Countrey. Poore Hagar with her little Boy, were almost lost with thirst: how did her heart leape, whenGen. 21.19. God opened her eyes, that she saw a Well of water? Isaac's heard-men strove with the heard-men of Cerar, about waters; therefore he called the name of the Well Esek, that is Contention. Israel mumured for water, and were plagued for it. Water hath a manifold use; it serves for drinke, for medicine, for washing, for purging, for boyling, for quenching, for fructifying. Water was held by some the beginning of all other things; Aqua, quasi A Qua omnia. It was esteemed a principall preserver of life, therefore called living, Gen. 26.19. Isaac's servants found a Well of Living water: it is translated, Springing; but the originall gives it, Living water. But it must bee here understood in a spirituall sense; so the Water that GOD gives is Grace.Esay 12.3. With joy shall yee draw Water out of the Wells of Salvation.Esay 44.3. I will powre Water upon him that is thirstie, (which hee expounds of Grace) I will powre my Spirit upon thy seed.Rev. 22.17. Whosoever is a-thirst, let him take the Water of life freely. Next is Wine; Is this so good? Vinum lac libidinis, Wine is the nourishment of lust; the Maniches called it, Fel Principis tenebrarum, the gall of the Prince of darknesse. No, Wine is good, hath manifold benefits: it helpes the stomacke, nourisheth the body, whets the wit, cherisheth the heart, and cheares the whole man. CHRISTS first miracle in Galile mentioned, was turning water into Wine: and the last thing he used in the Sacrament was Wine. It is said toIudg. 9.13. cheere God and man, Thirdly,
 Bread; this is called the Strength of mans life. It was a great curse God threatned to Israel; I will breake their staffe of bread. Lastly, Milke; the Tartarians were said to live with milke: Canaan is praised to flow with milke; therefore1 Pet. 2.2. Desire the sincere milke of the Word. Bread necessary for life, oyle for ornament, water for use, milke for nourishment, wine for delight. These are good wares; the water of Regeneration, the wine of Compunction, the bread of Life, the oyle of Gladnesse, the milke of the Gospell: Who would desire better purchase? Wee like them well, what's the price? Nothing: a very easie reckoning. The Lord Gives, and that better things for nothing, than Satan will sell us for our soules. Those thriftie men, that trie all shoppes for the cheapest penniworths, why refuse they those rich blessings which GOD gives for nothing, and pay such a hard price for vanitie and vexation? Men might pay nothing for the best of things; they doe pay the best of things for nothing. In vaine doth foolish man exchange good for evill, when he may exchange evill for good.
You perceive how God Gives, Satan sells; now see how man restores: for that bounteous hand which bestowes much on us, requires some restitution of us. Man should not sell, as Satan: hee cannot give, as God: but he ought to restore, that is his part: this hee may doe, this hee must doe. To whom? to God for his owne sake, to man for Gods sake. To God, what is that? Thankes.Psal. 116.12. Quid retribuam Domino? What shall I render to the Lord for all his benefits? I will magnifie, and blesse his Name. That is not Magnum facere, sed magnum significare: Not to make his Name great, but to declare it great.Psal. 66.2. Sing forth the honour of his Name: make his praise glorious. How can man make his praise glorious? by singing forth the honour of his Name. This is a plaine restitution, yet goes under the name of a contribution. So willing is God to accept mans dutie, that he takes it as his bountie. The Giver is more blessed than the Receiver: in all other things wee are the receivers, and he is the Giver: onely in thankfulnesse wee are the Givers, and he is the receiver. Respiration and Expiration are in their vicissitudes alike: wee can draw in aire no longer than wee send it out. If wee returne no grace, we receive no grace.
To man: and this in matters either of Equitie, or Charitie. Of Equitie:Luke 19.8. If I have taken any thing from any man by false accusation, I restore him foure fold.Neh. 5.10. This necessitie Nehemiah imposed on Israel: first by intreatie; I pray you let us leave off this Vsury. Next by command, Restore to them their lands and vineyards, and the moneyes of your exactions: then by an oath, hee tooke an Oath of them to performe this. Lastly, by a Sacramentall curse to the refusers, shaking the lappe of his garment; So God shake out every man from his house, that performeth not this promise: even thus shall hee be shaken out and emptied: and all the Congregation said, Amen. The very Barbarians abhorre the neglect of restitution: A great Ladie being a widow, called to her an English Merchant, trafficking in those parts, with whom shee knew her husband had some commerce, and asked him if there were nothing owing to him from her deceased Lord: hee after her much importunitie acknowledged what, and shewed the particulars. Shee tendred him satisfaction, yea (and after his many modest refusals, as being greatly benefited by the dead Barbarian) shee forced him to take of her hand the uttermost penny: saying thus; I would not have my husbands soule goe to seeke your soule in hell, to pay his debts. Here was a fire in a darke vault, great zeale in blinde ignorance: they saw by the candle-light of Nature. What Saint Augustine delivers for doctrinall Truth, Non remittitur peccatum nisi restituatur oblatum: Where is no restitution of things unjustly gotten, there sinnes shall never bee forgiven. Of Charitie; for even this is but a restitution: Give mee, saith GOD, of that I have given thee: De meo quaero, non de tuo; I aske not for thine, but for mine owne: Give and restore; Petimusque damusque vicissim; If wee doe not give almes according to our power, GOD will sue us of an
 action of Detinie. Quare non dedisti? meo jure, tua dispensatione, Matth. 25. Why did you not give things that were mine by right, yours only by use and dispensation; whereof you were not proprietaries and Lords, but accountant Stewards? Cyprian. Improbi dant multa propter cruciantem Diabolum, nos reddemus nihil propter salvantem Dominum? Reprobates will part with many things for a tormenting devill, and shall we restore nothing for our saving God? most men thinke when they give, that God and man is beholding to them: not so; Non tribuunt de proprio, sed retribuunt de alieno: They doe not give of their owne, but restore some of that GOD hath given them. For restoring they shall have recompence, for detaining vengeance.
I am fallen upon a point of Giving; therefore, me thinkes, I should not be niggardly in it. God give me a tongue to declare it, and give us all hearts to practise it. Two things it readily teacheth us:
1 How to judge of all wee have; as the LORDS gifts, not our owne merits. Bona mea, Dona tua, Domine. It is a wretched thing, Vti datis, tanquam innatis: To use those things that are added to us, as if they had beene bred in us.1 Cor. 4.7. What hast thou, that thou hast not received? If thou didst receive it, why doest thou glory, as if thou hadst not received it? GOD, saith Bernard, is the Author of merit; Qui and voluntatem applicat operi, and opus explicat voluntati: For hee both applieth the will to the worke, and disposeth the worke to the will. Thou doest good workes; so much as is good in them is not thine, but GODS. Man for these things, Magis Deo debitor est, quam Deus homini; is rather a debter to GOD, than GOD to man. Thou canst not so much as give GOD Gratias, Thankes; unlesse GOD first give thee Gratiam, the grace of thankfulnesse. Thou canst not be patient under his hand, except his hand give thee patience. Why doe wee boast then? Seeing that Quae non fecimus ipsi, vix ca nostra voco: Wee cannot call those deeds ours, which wee have not done our selves.1 Cor. 15.10. I laboured more abundantly than they all: yet not I, but the Grace of GOD which was with mee. Still if wee doe good, wee are beholding to GOD for it, not GOD to us.
2 To follow GODS example, in being evermore giving good things. Beneficence is munus regale, a royall office. It is a poore degree of comfort wherein many blesse themselves, to doe no ill: for Bonum in effectu, non in defectu: non virtus in non officiendo, sed in proficiendo: Goodnesse consists in the effect, not in the defect: nor is vertue glorious in being innocent from harme, but in being beneficiall for good. I wonder what hope the oppressour hath to bee saved; seeing hee doth not imitate GOD in giving, but the Devill in extorting? There are that give something to the poore, that they may take away more: Haec venatio, non donatio: This is not a charitable giving, but a subtill hunting. It is foenerare beneficium, to put a good turne to usury. But give; this is GODS precept, and must bee thy precedent. Yea, though thou have little, give of that little. GOD esteemes the little gift of a poore righteous man, above the great almes of a wicked rich man. And that for two reasons; Quia de justo, quia de parvo. First, because it is of that, is justly gotten: so Zacheus;Luke 19.8 Halfe my goods I give to the poore; and restore to them I have wronged fourefold. Observe his words; Do ex meis, reddo ex alienis: I restore other mens goods, but I give mine owne. Secondly, because hee gives of a little; as the poore Widow did her two Mites, even all her substance. When the Monkes complained of want, and that their revenewes fell too short for their maintenance; the Abbot replied, that two companions came once together, to sojourne in their Monastery; they were entertained: their names were Date, and Dabitur; Give, and It shall bee given you. Whilest these two lived amongst you, you all thrived: now you have thrust out Date, Give; and Dabitur, (it shall be given) will not stay behind.

Vnto us. I come from the bountie of the Giver, to the need of the receivers:
To us, that were
Worth nothing.Worthy of nothing.
To us, that had nothing; miserable beggers. And indeed what should be the object of mercy, but misery? Present thy selfe, O poore soule! Miserum ante misericordem; a miserable creature before a mercifull Creator. Say not with Laodicea, (...), but (...); not,Revel. 3.17. I have need of nothing; but, I have nothing. God doth not onely forgive us, because non solvendo, wee haveMatt. 18.25. nothing to pay: but hee gives us, because non habendo, wee have nothing to live on. There are three sorts of poore and miserable men: some sing and are miserable, some crie and are miserable; some curse and are miserable. As the Italian sayes; Thus goe a begging; the Germans singing, the Frenchmen weeping, the Spaniards cursing. Some are poore in the world, yet sing care away. When Augustus heard that a Gentleman in Rome, concealing his broken estate, died so farre in debt; hee sent to buy the pillow whereon hee slept. Hi non sunt solliciti ut solvant, sed ut debeant. They doe not take care how to come out of debt, but how to come into debt. Thus poore are many; yet they sing in Tavernes, and dance in Theaters; though wretched beggers in heavenly graces. As it is in this world for temporall things, so for the world to come in spirituall things; Cantant pauperes, lugent divites: poore men sing, and rich men crie. Who is so melancholy as the rich worldling? And who sings so merry a note, as hee that cannot change a grote? So they that have store of grace, mourne for want of it: and they that indeed want it, chant their abundance. Others are poore and crie: so did Esau, because hee could not recover theHeb. 12.17. Blessing, though hee sought it carefully with teares. These mad dogges bite the stone, without regard to him that threw it. Sorrow like a needle, runnes thorow their hearts, but hath no threed of faith in it, to sow them to IESUS CHRIST. Miseriores, non meliores: they are worse in the state of this world, yet not better in the state of Grace. If GOD touch a Pharaoh, hee will roare: you shall have him howle to his ending, not to his mending. The cloud of a corrupt heart, when it is squeased and crushed with adversitie, will haply powre downe some droppes: but to shed repentant teares in the middest of prosperitie; this is like raine in Sun-shine. Hee that mournes for the cause of his punishment, shall mourne but a while: hee that mournes onely for the punishment, and not for the cause, shall mourne for ever. Lastly, others curse and are miserable, as Iobs wife counselled him; Curse GOD, and die. This is a desperate povertie, when men defie him that should make them rich. They answer GOD, as Daniel did Belshazzar;Dan. 5.17. Keepe thy reward to thy selfe, and give thy gifts to another. They have a long festered ulcer; the Physitian offers to cure it: but they madly thrust their nailes into it; no, it shall not bee healed. Such was our estate by nature: some were poore and insensible, others sensible, but disconsolate; others sensible and desperate. Wee were all poore beggers, and had nothing, therefore had neede of a Giver.
To us, that deserved nothing: it is no wonder that GOD loved the Angels, for they obey him: that hee loved the irrationall and insensible creatures, for they doe not contradict him: but that hee should bee good to us, Neque capientibus, nec cupientibus; neither receiving, nor conceiving, nor desiring Grace: that had not onely a rebellion of will, but a will of rebellion; this was the wonder. This was not Dilectio quoniam, a love to us, because wee first loved him: but Dilectio etiamsi, a love to us, though we hated him. He loved us, because he loved us: in our creation when we could not, in our redemption, when we would not love him.
All things that pertaine to life and godlinesse. I come from the necessity of the receivers, to the Vniversalitie of the Gift. All things that, etc. This is that extent and
 latitude of his donation; who gives (...),Act. 7.25. to all life and breath, and all things. No silver in Benjamins sacke, till Ioseph put it in: no good in man till God infuse it. Worldlings ascribe things to the goodnesse of their skill, or greatnesse of their paines.Dan. 4.30. Is not this great Babylon, which I have built by the might of my power?Habac. 1 16. They sacrifice to their nets. But indeedIam. 1.17. every good and perfect gift comes from above, even from the Father of lights.Psal. 127.2. It is in vaine that you rise up early, and goe to bed late: for so he giveth his beloved sleepe. All that pertaine.
To life. Where wee may either by life understand our naturall life, together with all things that may preserve it. He put a soule to our flesh, gave birth to the childe, nourishment after birth; bread when wee were hungry, drinke when wee were thirstie, etc.Ier. 9.23. To the wise-man his wisdome, to the strong man his might, to the wealthy man his riches: wisdome, Bonum mentis, the good of the minde: strength Bonum corporis, the good of the body: riches Bona fortunae, the goods of fortune. He gives all, let us give him praise for all.1 Tim 6.17. He giveth all things richly to enjoy. This is a large field to survey, let your meditations supply the defect of my speech. Who cannot say,Psal. 22.9. Thou art hee that tooke mee out of the wombe; thou didst make mee hope when I was upon my mothers brests. And because vita is not onely Vivere, sed valere; not to live, but to live in health; therefore Iob calls God, the Preserver of men. Blesse him in all, for all, that gives all; hee gives us all things that pertaines to life, and reserves onely this Quit-rent. But by life, here I rather understand our spirituall life; whereby wee live to him, and in him, and whereby he lives in us.
To godlinesse; whatsoever conduceth to grace and glory. By his grace wee come to godlinesse, and by godlinesse to life. Hee provides not onely temporally for us, that we may live here; but eternally, that we may live for ever. The things hereto belonging are the graces and gifts of the Spirit: some thinke that these principall graces are but seven: because said, Revel. 4.5. There were seven lampes of fire burning before the Throne, which are the seven Spirits of God: prefigured by theZach. 3.9. Stone with seven eyes: by the seven Lampes of one Candle-sticke, Zach. 4.2. by the seven Hornes of one Lampe, Revel. 5.6. which are the seven Spirits of God. Some have numbred and deduced them from Esay 11.2. The Spirit of wisdome, of understanding, of counsell, of might, of knowledge, and of the feare of the Lord. But to make up the number, they put in The Spirit of Pietie; for it is not there expressed; there are but six according to our account: we may say of them, as of the seven Starres; Quas septem dicunt, sex tamen esse solent: Men say they are seven, but they are wont to be but six. But it is certaine, this seven-fold number is put for an infinite number; all graces that belongs to life and godlinesse.Psal. 84.11. No good thing will he withhold from them that walke uprightly. This is an immense fountaine; the Lord fill all the buckets of our hearts at this Spring: and give us capable soules, as he hath a liberall hand.
But now is there such a receit, and must there not be an Account? Yes,Luke 12.48. To whom much is given, of him shall bee much required. If there be Acceptio, there must follow Redditio: and that both in Quali, and in Quanto; in Portion, the same; or in proportion, something answerable to it. If the thing given be (...), much; the thing required is not (...), little: and this shall be exacted in obedience, or extorted in vengeance.Matt. 25.19. After a long time the Lord of the servants comes, and reckoneth with them, though it be long, yet at last to a reckoning. Whether the talent be hid in idlenesse, or wasted in riot; it shall be spoken. Give account of thy stewardship, for thou must be no longer steward. GOD is not like Pharaoh and his Taske-masters; that allow no straw, yet exact the full tale of brickes. Hee is unjustly taxed, to reape where he hath not sowen, and to gather where he hath not strewed, Matth. 25.24. No, but if he hath planted a Vineyard, and dressed it with carefull cost, hee lookes for Grapes. If GOD fill Ioshua's heart with his Spirit, hee will fill his hands with businesse. If Saint Paul hath abundant Grace, he must have abundant labours.
 Every gift is obligatory; and whatsoever benefits us, ipso facto binds us. Now what shali we answere for the interest, that have mispent the principall? Have wee received all, and shall wee account for nothing? yes, the bookes shall be opened, and there are set down all the particulars of our receits and expences. There is Item received Strength, and laid out oppression. Item received riches, and laid out Covetousnesse. Item received Health, and laid out riot and drunkennesse. Item received garments, laid out Pride. Item received Speech, laid out swearing and lying. Item received Sight, laid out lusting. Or perhaps your layings out are more. Item so many score pounds laid out in malice and suites at Law: so many hundreds in lusts and vanities: so many thousands in building great houses. Item to the poore in our will to be payed at our death. 40, shillings: to the Preacher for a funerall oration to commend us, halfe a Soveraigne. Will this Bill goe currant, when God comes to cast it up? no, if these accounts be not mended in this life, we shall never have our Quietus est in the life to come. Let us then be good in our office, and make our reckonings even: that it may be said to every one of us.Matth. 25.23. Well done good and faithfull servant, enter thou into the joy of thy LORD. Thus he that gives us all things that belong to temporall life and godlinesse on earth, will also give us all things that belong to eternall life and glory in heaven.
Through the knowledge of him that hath called us to glorie and vertue. Wee have considered the Fountaine, let us come now to the Conduit: the meanes or meritorious cause, through which all these precious gifts are bestowed on us. This everflowing, and overflowing Conduit is CHRIST;Col. 1.19. in whom dwells all fulnesse. Now for us, Quantum vas fidei capacis afferimus, tantum gratiae inundantis haurimus. The more capacious a vessell of faith wee bring, the greater measure of grace we shall receive. In this Conduit observe two generalls: the water of life, which is our effectuall calling to glorie and vertue: and the Pipe or Bucket to draw and derive it to us, the knowledge of Christ. In the former consider foure circumstances; the Mover, the motion, the moved and the terme: who, what, whom and whither.
1 Who hath called us, CHRIST: He only can call home sinners. Luk 19.10. Mat. 9.13. I came to call sinners to repentance; I, not Man, nor Angels. God onely can make filios Abrahami, ex lapidibus Iordani: can of stones raise up children to Abraham. He that could turne stones into bread, can turne a stony heart into that mercy to give bread. He that could fetch water from a rocke, can drawe teares from our flinty hearts. Man may imprint a conceit, God onely can worke a consent. The Preacher may unfold the mysteries of the Gospell, and effect a knowledge in the braine: but Cathedram habet in coelis qui corda docet; hee hath a pulpit in heaven, that preacheth to the conscience. To resigne our selves to the truth, here is the finger of God. You will say, it is easie to thinke; no, we cannot thinke a good thought of our selves. Thought is free; no, the thought is Gods bond-servant. It is easie to beleeve: no, forPhil. 1.29. faith is the faire gift of God. Yet, it is easie to will: no, it is He that worketh in us, both to will and to doe, at his good pleasure. Phil. 2.13. Mans will is a fugitive Onesimus, God must call home that runnagate, subdue that rebell. Yet when we have begun, it is easie to continue: no, perficit, qui efficit: He that begunne a good worke in us, will performe it. Phil. 1.6. IESVS is the Founder and the Finisher of our faith, Hebr. 12.2. But we can suffer for him at our pleasure: no, datur pati: it is given to us to suffer for his sake, Phil. 1.29.Ioh. 15.5. Without me ye can doe nothing; not parum, but nihil. But in him, and through him all things: I can doe all things through him that strengthens me, Phil. 4.13. In our selves wee are weake Captives,Rom. 8.37. in him more than Conquerors. But if yee consent and obey, you shall eate the good things of the land. Esa. 1.19. Yet is it neither of the willer, nor of the runner, but of God that shewes mercie. Rom. 9.Psal. 119.10. VVith my whole heart have I sought thee: Did he bend his owne heart to it? No, but praies, O let me not wander from thy Commandements.Verse 32. I will runne the way of thy precepts, but when? when thou shalt enlarge my heart. My Sonne, keepe
 thy heart: yet it is thePhil. 4.7. Peace of God that keeps the heart in CHRIST IESVS. Gods imperative inferres no potenciall, but an optative: Da quod jubes; Lord, give what thou biddest, and bid what thou wilt. Lex imperat, fides impetrat; the Law chargeth obedience, but faith obtaines forgivenesse. Turne us, good Lord; so shall we be turned. None comes to the Sonne, unlesse the Father draw him: and if the Father hath once given us into his hands, no devils in hell shall ever be able to pluck us out.
2 What is the Action; Hath Called. There was a time when Christ came personally to call;Matth. 20.1. Hee went out early in the morning to hire labourers into his Vineyard. He went out; liceat dicere, exiit a se, ut intret in te; imo ut te convertat in se. Pontan. He went out of himselfe, that hee might come into thee, that hee might convert thee into himselfe. He went out from his Majesty that is invisible, to his mercy that is manifested in his workes. Now he calleth at divers times, in divers places, and after divers manners.
At divers times; all houres of the day he is calling. Mat. 20. At the first houre, the third, the sixth, the ninth, the eleventh. In all ages of the World; before the Law he called Abel, Enoch, Noah, Abraham: under the Law, Moses, David, Esay, etc. Vnder the Gospell, Apostles, Martyrs, etc. and now us,1 Cor. 10.11. upon whom the ends of the world are come: this is Hora novissima, 1 Iohn 2.18. The eleventh houre at the least. He called some at the first houre; Samuel, Iohn Baptist, sanctifying them from the wombe. Others in the third houre, their youth: as young Daniel and Saint Iohn the Evangelist. Discipulum minimum Iesus amavit plurimum, Ieron. That little Disciple CHRIST greatly loved. Other, in the sixth houre; as Peter and Andrew: others in the eleventh, as Gamaleel, Ioseph of Arimathea. Some not onely at the last houre, but the last minute, as that one malefactor upon the Crosse. One so, that no man should despaire: but one so, that no man should presume. ThusRom. 10.21. All the day long he stretcheth forth his hand to call us: woe unto us, if none of these houres can reclaime us; for then the night followes, wherin is no more calling to grace, but to judgement.
In divers places; some from their ships, other from their shops. Peter and Andrew fishing on the sea, Matthew fishing on the land. It is a great matter to convert a mariner forth of his ship: but a greater wonder to convert a Publican forth of his shop. Some from the market, Matth. 20.3. some from the hedges, Luke 14.23. Paul in his furie. Acts 9.1. breathing out threatnings and slaughter: Henry 8. in his discontent: the Pope denies his just divorce, hereon he justly denies the Pope. Let none despaire; he can call Gallants at the Court, Ruffians at the Taverne, covetous merchants at their warehouses; yea he can call usurers at their bankes. But indeed these last he seldome does call; those baptised Iewes seldome repent. You have seene drunkards, theeves, and adulterers weepe at a Sermon; you never saw an usurer shed a teare.
After divers manners. First, by the preaching of the word; and herein he useth two bells to ring us to Church: the Trebble of mercie, and the Tenor of judgment.Revel. 4.5. Out of the Throne proceed lightnings, and thundrings, and voices. Lightnings that illuminate the darke aire of the world: thundrings, the menaces against corruption and vices; lastly, the sweet voices of comfort that preachethEsa. 61.2. libertie to captives, and proclaimes the acceptable yeare of the Lord. One said, our hearts are all of sinne, but our eares are all of mercie: he that will please us with a song, must set it to the tune of the Gospell: we can heare nothing but Pax vobis: and see nothing but Ecce Agnus: as if the Law were of no further use, like an old Almanacke out of date. But we know that Moses and Christ met upon the mount, Matth. 17. not the Law alone, nor the Gospell alone; but Moses and Christ, the Law and the Gospell are conjoyned. Next hee calls by his Iudgments: thus he heats our iron hearts in the fornace of afflictions: that nocumenta might bee documenta; mens sufferings their instructions. Quod leviter nocet, salubriter docet, that which makes the body
 smart, makes the soule wise. Doth God afflict us? he calls us to repentance; forRom. 5.3. Tribulation workes patience. Whilest we are thus exercised either De malis illatis; vel de bonis dilatis: with sorrowes inflicted, or with hopes delaied; God calls us home to himselfe. He often conveyes holinesse through the wounds of afflictions: the persecuted Church, Cant. 2.14. flies like a Dove to the clefts of the Rocke; nestles her selfe in the wounds of Iesus Christ. Trouble is a messenger, that speakes thus to us; make your peace with God. Thou cmo plainest that thou art afflicted on every side, groanest under thy burden, after many changed sides criest out of unremedied paine: alas, thou repentest not: trouble came on this message, to teach thee repentance: give the messenger his errand, and he'l be gone. Lastly, by mercies, thus we have him frequently calling; he sowes mercie upon us with a liberall hand now the patience and long suffering of God lead us to repentance. Romans 2.4. God spares the sinner, but let not the sinner spare his sinne. Wee have hard hearts, if the bloud of the Lambe cannot soften them: stony bowels, if so many mercies cannot melt us. What was Pharaohs greatest plague? not the murraine on his beasts, nor the haile on his fruits, nor the bloud in his waters, nor the blaines on his flesh, nor the first borne slaine in his families; but Durum cor, a hard heart. They write of a northerne fountain, that turnes all things it receives into stones: and a cholericke stomacke converts all meates into choler: so a hard heart turnes even Gods softest mercies into hardnesse.
Thus God calls; for Christ his sake let us goe.Cant. 2.8. It is the voice of my Beloved; Let us runne to him.Ioh. 7.37. In the last and great day of the feast, Iesus stood and Cryed, etc. stood up, ut conspiratur, that he might bee seene: cryed ut audiretur; that hee might be heard. He is audible in his word, visible in his Sacraments, in both hee calls. I stand at the dore and knocke. Revel. 3.20. Ostium est and ad ostium pulsat: he that is our dore of entrance, knockes at our dore for entrance. It is fit wee should knocke at his dore, not he at ours. But if he does knocke, let not him stand without,Cant. 5.2. till his head bee filled with dew, and his lockes with the drops of the night. He is In via veriteas, in veritat via, in utraque vita: He is the way in the truth, and the truth in the way, and in both the life. He calls, yet complaines,Ioh. 5.40. Ye will not come unto me that you might have life. Goe we then to him; Reficieris si accesseris, Deficieris si recesseris. Aug. Come to him and live, depart from him and perish. Let not Christ call in vaine, nor his Ministers say;Esa. 49.4. We have laboured in vanitie, and spent our strength for nought. Faith and repentance are two short lessons, yet Israel was fortie yeares before they could learne them. If God call upon us, and men will not answer: they shallProv. 1.28. call upon him when he will not answer. God shall say to the reprobates. Be it to you according to your deserts. To sin is to depart from God; thereforeMatth. 25 41. Depart from me: you loved cursing, therefore depart yee cursed: the fire of anger, of malice, of lust hath burned in your hearts, therefore depart into fire: you would have sinned everlastingly, therefore depart into everlasting fire: you have harkened to the devills temptations, you must feele the devils torments; into fire prepared for the devill and his Angels. Abuse not his calling, lest heHebr. 3.11. sweare in his wrath that thou shalt never enter into his rest. He send for us friendly, freely, frequently: let us make no excuses, lest he vowLuke 14.24. that none of those bidden guests shall taste of his supper. Many cry, O Lord why hast thou forsaken me? to whom he replies, o man why hast thou forsaken me! they say to the Almighty,Iob 21.14. depart from us, we will none of thy wayes: therefore God shall say to them,Matth. 7.23. depart from me yee that work iniquity. They that forget God calling on them in health, shall be rejected calling on him in sickenesse. The groaning reprobate shall say, Veni Domine ad solatium, come Lord to comfort: but God to him, veni improbe ad judicium, come sinner to judgement. Then as Aeneas for his lost wife Creusa, Nec quicquam ingeminans iterumque iterumque vocabis; thou doubling thy cryes, shalt call for him that will not heare. But to the faithfull and obedient shall be a sweet voiceMat. 25.34. Come for you desired to come; yee blessed, you loved blessing, and it shall be unto you, you
 have served, you shall raigne; Inherite the kingdome prepared for you.
Whom hath he called? Vs, us miserable sinners; that were deafe, and could  not heare him: Lame, and could not meet him: blind, and could not see him: dead, and could not answere him. Vs, farre enough off, without God, without hope in the world. It was not sufficient, that he payed himselfe our debt in the bloud of his owne Sonne; and made a glorious Treasurie of his inestimable merits; but he must also call us to the participation: otherwise Christ might have beene rich enough in merits, and God in mercies; and yet we still beggers.
To what? To glory and vertue: some read By glory and vertue, other To glory and vertue, (...), etc. The sense is good and receivable either way; a word or  two of them both.
If we take it, By glory and vertue, the summe is this, CHRISTS calling is so effectuall, when he joynes with the word of his grace, the grace of his word, that it shall worke without controle: it shall take virtuall and glorious effects. God had a purpose to call the Gentiles, there were barres against it.Matth. 10.5. Goe not into the way of the Gentiles:Matth. 15.26. it is not meete to take the childrens bread and cast it to dogges. Yet when those childrenActs. 13.46. put from them the Gospell, and judged themselves unworthy of everlasting life, it came to the Gentiles: God did effect it by glory and vertue. God promised, Romans 11.26. that all Israel shall be saved: there were obstacles enough against it: the bloud of Christ on their heads, they revile and curse him in their synagogues, they are wanderers on the face of the earth; yet they shall be brought to the fold, by glory and vertue. So it was with us, God had purposed the Gospell to England, sealed up many soules there to eternall redemption. Were there no impediments? Yes, Queene Mary made a stop, put out the light, smote the Shephards, scattered the sheepe, burnt the professors, leagu'd with the Spaniard, yeelded all to the Pope: all is now bung'd up in ignorance, the devill is jocund, mens perdition as cock-sure as he would wish it, saving only he must stay the time of their comming to hell. Yet shall there be no elusion of Gods will; even then the Patronesse of superstition died; Queen Elizabeth of blessed memorie was advanced into the throne, all the clouds of error were dispersed. God now lifts his Church out of her swoune, dilates his kingdome, to save our soules, our fathers before us, our children after us; which the mercie of God continue to us and ours, so long as the Sunne and Moone endure: all this by glory and vertue.
To glory and vertue, according to the common reading. How hath God already called us to glory and vertue? In two respects: quoad inchoationem in present being, quoad perfectionem in hope. First, for our present estate we must understand by Glory, the honour of being Christians: by vertue, the good life that becometh Christians: to both these we are called:
To glory; is there any glory in this world belonging to a Saint? any account of a man so mortified to temporall things are we not the refuse, and1 Cor. 1.13. off-scouring of all things? well, we have still a great glory by our calling, albeit carnall eyes cannot see it; or will not take notice of it. For if there were ignominie in thraldome, then is there glory in freedome.Gal. 5.1. Stand fast in the libertie, wherein IESUS CHRIST hath made you free. We are not borne free, but new borne free. It is great glory for us (naturally) slaves, to be made by CHRIST free-men: but greater glory to be made Kings, Revel. 1. So we that beleeve are truely noble, for brethren and sisters to CHRIST, and so of the bloud royall of God.Iohn 1.12. To as many as receive him, he gives right and priviledge to be the Sonnes of God. O happy Christians! Let others boast their Generation, we our Regeneration. This is the best ornament of bloud, the noblest part of the Scutchion, the fairest flower in the Gentlemans Ga^land. The youngest brother beares the armes of the eldest; so we of our elder brother CHRIST. Not my bloud, but my Christianitie makes me noble, said that noble martyr. Now this greatnesse is got by our littlenesse, the greatest glory comes by humility. Si gloriam cupis, gloriam despice: sic omnibus eris gloriosior, Chrys.
 If thou desirest glory, despise it: so thou shalt be most glorious.Wised. 5.4. The world hath the godly in derision, and a proverbe of reproch: count their life to be madnesse, and their end without honour:1 Cor. 4.13. as the filth of the world, and the off-scouring of all things. But Nemo miser alieno sensu, sed suo: no man is miserable because another so thinks him, but because he so feeles himselfe. But the Lord hath called us to glory: and made us sonnes to a King, Iohn 3.2. brothers to a King, Heb. 2.11. heires to a King, Rom. 8.17. yea even to the king of glory. He were a poore for, that would be ashamed of the alliance which the King should challenge of him: yea poore is even that king that is ashamed of the Sonne of God, offering his brotherhood. Despicit mundus, respicit Dominus: men are ashamed of thy kindred, the Lord Iesus hath called thee to glory.
To vertue, as well as to glory.1 Thes. 4.7. For God hath not called us to uncleanesse, but to holinesse. All things are yours; not to abuse with riot, but to use with moderation, and to enjoy with comfort, 1 Cor. 3.22. Because (by faith) yee are, and by obedience you are knowne to be Christs, and Christ is Gods.Tit. 2.12. The grace of God that brings salvation to us, teacheth us to live godly, righteously, and soberly: that is the vertue whereunto we are called; to despise the world, and please the Lord, Magnae virtutis est cum faelicitate Luctari: magnae faelicitatis est a faelicitate non vinci, Aug. Our vertue is to fight with vanitie; and our great happinesse not to be overcome of happinesse. Qui deficit sibi, ut adhaereat virtuti, amittit quod suum est, accipit quod aeternum est, Aug. Hee that denies himselfe and stickes to vertue; loseth his owne which he could not keepe, and getteth that happinesse which he cannot lose. Now CHRIST that calls us to vertue, gives it.Luke 8.46. Some body hath touched me, for I perceive that vertue is gone out of me. There is no vertue but it comes from him: the woman touched him, but it was not her finger, but her faith, that drew out that vertue. Nor was this vertue in his garments; for living they thronged him, dead they parted them, yet were never the better. So many now may tangere panem Domini, touch the bread of the LORD: yet not contingere panem Dominum, not touch that bread which is the Lord; because their faiths and their fingers goe not together. Thou art called to this vertue, come and take it: throng upon CHRIST for it, let nothing keepe thy faith backe,Luke 6.19. The whole multitude sought to touch him: for there went vertue out of him, and healed them all. If the glory of vertue doe not first enter into thee, thou shalt never enter into the vertue and triumph of glory.
Thus hath GOD already called us to glory and vertue, in respect of an inchoative fruition: hereafter we shall come to a perfect and plenary possession. The vertue there, is a pure white garment without spot: and the glory a golden crowne of eternity. Gods children have three suits of apparell; blacke, red, and white. Here we are either in blacke mourning, or in red persecuted; there wee shall be onely in white glorified.Revel. 7.9. A great multitude stood before the Lambe, in white robes, and palmes in their hands. White, is Symbolum innocentiae, laetitiae, beatitudinis; is the symbole of Innocency, of Ioyfulnesse, of blessednesse: of Innocency, because it is neither spotted nor died: of Ioyfulnesse, because opposed to blacke, which is the garbe of sorrow: of Blessednesse, because the state there is not subject to any change. It matters not what ragges we were below, so we may be clothed with that white above: we now mourne in blacke; but those teares shall worke a miracle through CHRIST, and change all our garments into white. Have vertue, if thou wouldest have glory: be wee here conformed to CHRISTS Image, and then he shallPhil. 3.21. change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like his glorious body, by that mighty working whereby he subdues all things to himselfe. For the Glory, it is unspeakeable: eye hath not seene, nor eare heard, nor have entred into the heart of man, the things which GOD hath prepared for them that love him, 1 Cor. 2.9. August. Oculus non vidit, quia non est color: nec auris audivit, quia non est sonus: nec illa, intravit in cor hominis, quia cor hominis intrabit in illam. The eye
 hath not seene it, because it is not colour: nor the eare heard it, because it is not sound: nor hath it entred into the heart of man, because the heart of man must enter into it. Enter thou into the joy of thy Lord: for it is too great to enter into thee. If we durst pray with Moses, Exod. 33.18. LORD, shew us thy glory: hee would answer, there is no man shall see mee, and live. Therefore Lord one day give it us: yes he will, for he hath called us to it. Ibi vacabimus and videbimus, videbimus and amabimus, amabimus and laudabimus, esse quod erit sine fine. There we shall rest and see, see and love, love and blesse, that glory which is and shall bee for ever. Quis alius noster finis, quam pervenire ad gloriam cujus nullus est finis? what else should we propose for our end, than that glory which shall have no end?
Thus I have brought your meditations up into heaven, and now you say, Bonum est esse hic; it is good being here, it is good leaving you there. Satis, enough and enough againe; Nunc dimittis in pace, it is high time to blesse you with a dismission, or dismisse you with a blessing: we have opened the Fountaine, but you know the Cocke is behind, that must derive the water of life to your hearts; Through the knowledge of Iesus Christ. I know this point is too ample for the small remnant of the fugitive time, and therefore a while I suspend it. And now you may say, the Sermon is done: and yet would to God you could say so truely, that it was done. But as a learned Divine observed out of Veri-dicus Christianus, the Christian Tell-troth. When a great Lady asked her servants, whether the Sermon were done or not; they answered, it was done: shee pleasantly replied; Dicta, non facta concio; it was spoken, it was not done. CHRIST hath called you to glory and vertue, to godlinesse here and salvation hereafter: if now your hearts come home to him in obedience, then the Sermon is done indeed. But if you cleave to the world; and care more to bring wealth to your purses, then CHRIST to your consciences; the Sermon is spoken, it is not done. It is spoken and done by the Preacher. God grant I may say, It is answered and done by the hearers. O how beautifull were it to behold! your growth and stature in grace confessing, and recompencing, the spirituall food which you have received.



Verse 4. Whereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious promises, that by these you might be partakers of the Divine nature, having escaped the corruption that is in the world through lust.

I Should come immediately to these words, but that in the former building there was a peece of timber left out now to be inserted. It was the knowledge of our Caller. Now this point of knowledge (to avoid multiplicity of discourse upo^ the same argument) may fitly be considered in the word of connexion, that knits the verses together; (...), whereby. But first I will let the words fall into parts by distribution. In the whole verse we may observe:

A
Conveiance, and herein the
Instruments, whereby.Materialls, Promises.Latitude of them for
Quantitie, Great.Quality, Precious.Forme, a deed of gift; Hath given.Inheritance, Partakers of the Divine nature. This is qualitative, and may be exemplified in a seven-fold relation; as
Servants of a Master.Subjects of a King.Sonnes of a Father.Fellowes of a Societie.Members of a Head.Branches of a Tree.Spouses of a Husband.Deliverance wherein consider the
Discoverie of danger, The corruption that is the world through lust.Recoverie from that danger, Ye have escaped it.
Whereby. Wee begin first with the Instrument, and so are fitly mette with the point which before escaped us. For this (whereby) stands like a Ianus, looking both to the matter past, and to come: the matter past was the knowledge of Christ, which was to this place reserved, that we might have good occasion to perpend the vertue of it. Whereby. The summe of the point is this; The true knowledge of CHRIST is the meanes, whereby are conveyed to us all the promises of mercie. One was of opinion, that a Philosopher excells an ordinary man, so much as an ordinary man excells a beast: but every true Christian excells a philosopher as much as a philosopher does a dunce. They scarce knew God in his creatures, we know God in his CHRIST. Ignoti nulla cupido; as we say, uncouth, unkiss'd: we must looke before we like, discerne before we can desire. Mine eyes have seenethy salvation, sayes old Simeon; therefore Nunc dimittis, now lest thy servant depart in peace, My corporall eyes have seene thy man-hood, my spirituall eyes have seene thy God-head; which is thy salvation: salutare suum, as giving it: and salutare meum, my salvation, as receiving it. Neither is this Salutare Singulare; but whosoever hath seene and knowen this salvation, by his eye of faith, will earnestly desire it: as Stephen saw the Lord Iesus at the right hand of God, therefore longed to come to him, video, venio.
There is no pleasure so sweet as knowledge, no knowledge so sweete as that of religion, no knowledge of religion so sweet as that of CHRIST: for thisIoh. 17.3. is eternall life to know God, and Iesus Christ whom he hath sent. There is no entring into heaven withoutMatth. 7.21. doing the will of God: there is no doing it without knowing it. If first ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them,Ioh. 13 17. Ignorance is not then the mother of devotion, but the grandmother of irreligion. Let us never thinke that God will accept our verdict at the barre, when we give it up with an Ignoramus. Let us therefore use the meanes to get knowledge. 1. Read the Scriptures, that's Gods will, there's knowledge, Iohn 5.39. 2. frequent the Temple, that's his house, there's knowledge.Psal. 37.17. I thought to know this, but it was too hard for me; Vntill I went into the Sanctuary of God, then I understood it. 3. Resort to the Communion, that's Gods maundie, there's knowledge: this1 Cor. 11.28. shewes the Lords death till he come. 4. Consult his Ministers, for the Priests lips preserve knowledge: there heare Gods oracle: yet after all this, glory not in thy knowledge.

Quamvis Sceva satis per te tibi consulis, and scis,
Disce docendus adhuc. Horat.

Hee that is proud of his knowledge, is a prodigie; for hee hath the gowt in the
 wrong end: others have it in their feete, he hath it in his pate. They that saw most of God, saw but his hinder parts: and in glory, when we shall see him face to face, it shall not be a Comprehensive, but apprehensive knowledge. It is not possible for men or Angels to know so much of God, as he knows of himself. Only the blessed Trinitie fully knows it selfe in the unitie of Deitie. We have now scientiam aptam a fit knowledge: then Scientiam adaequatam, a knowledge proportionate to our perfection.
But every man pleads his knowledge; let him then shew it in the effects. Scientia conscientiam dirigit, Conscientia scientiam perficit, knowledge directs conscience, conscience perfects knowledge. Abused knowledge will enhaunse judgement and punishment: for this, were the sinnes of the Iewes, caeteris paribus, greater than the sinnes of the Gentiles: because in Iury God was knowne, and his Name great in Israel; it was not so with other nations, neither had the Heathen the knowledge of his lawes. The sinnes of us Christians, other circumstances being matches, are greater than the sinnes of the Iewes, because our knowledge is more. They had but an Aspersion; line to line, here a little and there a little: we have an Effusion, Acts 2.17. I will powre out of my Spirit upon all flesh.Gal. 4.6. Now after you have knowne God, how turne you againe to those beggarly elements? will you sweare, that know you should not sweare? will you defraud, that know you should deale justly?Eph 4.20. Yee have not so learned CHRIST. If Barbaria wring her hands for knowing so little, beware least Christendome rend her heart, for knowing so much to so little purpose. Knowledge doth elevate or lift up the soule: but if it be abused, it shall give her the greater fall. Because the precipice is from on high, like starres that the red Dragons taile swoop'd from heaven; it shall fall like an Angell of light into utter darkenesse, validiora exempla, quam verba: deeds prove more than words: never tell me your science, shew to me the fruits of your good conscience. Albeit your words be never so lowd, if your workes be lewd: though you were sonnes of thunder; yet a cracke in the Instrument will spoile the sound; as Iupiters adulterie did even among children discredit his thunder. Our knowledge without holinesse is like Vriahs letters that contained his owne death, 2 Sam. 11. To such they are letters of bloud, commendations to Satan. As that servant in the Comedie; Egomet tabellas detuli, ut vincirer? Have I brought letters to bind my selfe? so these two, discoyned, commend a man to hell; Goe bind him hand and foote, and throw him into utter darkenesse. Sinne even in ignorance is a tallent of lead; but sinne in knowledge is a milstone to sinke a man to the lowest. Bona noscere, et mala facere; to know good, and doe ill, makes a mans owne mittimus to hell. Among arts the mathematickes are most commended, because they stand upon infallible demonstration, you thinke your selves good artists in Christianitie, and professe good knowledge in religion; let me see your mathematickes, some demonstration. Shew me thy faith by thy workes; there's a demonstration. Let your light so shine on earth, to the glory of your Father in heaven; there's a demonstration. Feed the hungry, releeve the poore, there's another demonstration. Give me this mathematicall part of divinitie, that consists in demonstration. Non in fictis, sed in factis: non in lectione sed in dilectione, Aug. This parcticall part is the object of mans eye: we cannot see the knowledge in your braines, but by the workes of your hands. You must doe, if you would be sure you know: and you must know if you would be sure of comfort.
Great and precious promises. From the Instrument we passe to the materialls conveighed; Promises. This is the conveighance of the Gospell, therefore it is called a covenant; Faedus promissionis; the covenant of promise. The law gave monaces; the Gospell gives promises. It was the condition of the law, Doe this and live: it is the Promise of the Gospell; Beleeve and thou shalt bee saved. Indeed they had promises under the law, but not by the law: for whatsoeuer was promised in the old Testament, belongs properly to the new. Lex imperat, fides impetrat: the law came by Moses, and by the Law death: Grace comes by IESVS, and by grace life, Cajetan sayes truely of the Law, that it does claudere sibi
 subditos sub peccato; praecipiendo, non adjuvando; That it shuts up all those are under it, under sinne; by commanding, but not by helping. But the Gospell brings mercy; Promittit, immittit; offert, affert; to our houses, to our hearts. Irenaeus, to some of his time that asked, Quid novi attulit Christus; What new thing Christ: brought with him into the world; answered, Illum cuncta renovasse; That he had made all things new,2 Cor. 5.17. Old things are passed away: behold, all things are become new. He fulfilled the old Prophecies by his new workes: ceased the old Sacrifices by his new Sacrifice: abolished the old Sacraments, those bloudy ones of Circumcision and Occision, by his new Sacraments: gave us a new Commandement, a new Testament: puts in the roome of old menaces, new Promises. And these new things are Virtute majora, utilitate meliora, actu faciliora, numero pauciora; For vertue greater, for profit better, for use easier, for number fewer. Our faith is more lightsome to beleeve in Christum missum; theirs, more obscure, in Christum promissum, Kilius.Gal. 3.21. But is the Law against the promises of God? God forbid. For if there had beene a Law given, etc. whereto then serveth the Law? yes, it hath a civill and a religious use: Civill, to restraine us from, and chastise us for sinnes: and for this cause it is honoured even of the Politicians of the world, who though they will not themselves beleeve the Gospell, yet would have other men observe the Law, for their owne peace and tranquilities sake Religious, for it is our Schoole-master to bring us to Christ, Galath. 3.24. Now the office of a Schoole-master is double, Dirigere, and corrigere: so the Law doth direct to good workes, and corrects for evill workes. Aret. It reveales sinne, that as in a glasse wee see our misery, and the penaltie due to transgression. It is a corrosive laid to an old sore, not to heale the sore, that's not the act of a corrosive; but to eat out the dead flesh, to make it alive and sensible, that so our wounds may be healed by the Gospell. Therefore is not the Law contrary to the Promise; Subordinata inter se non pugnant; Things that are subordinate one to another, have a mutuall offi e of serving, not of contrarying one the other. Ideo datur praeceptum, ut praecipientis quaeratur auxilium, Leo. Therefore is the Law given, that we finding our owne disabilitie to keepe it, might have recourse to the Law-giver; to the sufficiencie of Christ. For the Law so humbles a man with the griefe of sinne, and terrour of Iudgement, that it sends him packing to Christ,1 Iohn 2.2. If any man sinne, and the Law tells us, we have all sinned; wee have an Advocate with the Father, and this the Gospell shewes us, even Christ the Propitiation for our sinnes. It makes a man sing with David, Sweet, O Lord, is thy mercie. The Law may Exprimere peccatum, but it cannot Supprimere peccatum; expresse sinne, not suppresse sinne. For that were to invade the office of the Promise: the office of the Law is to kill, the office of the Promise to give life. Thus we have in the Gospell Promissum vitae, the Promise of life: the Lord give us faith to apprehend vitam Promissi, the life of the Promise through IESUS CHRIST.
Great and precious. Here is the latitude of these materials, in their quantity and quality. They are for quantity Great, exceeding great: for quality, Good, exceeding good, precious. Great, for they promise a thing no lesse than greatnesse it selfe; the love of GOD, an immense kingdome, the world invisible; in comparison of whose greatnesse this world it selfe is a Mole-hill: Precious, for if this temporall life bee held so precious, which wee know time must determine; how precious is that life which is equall with eternitie? If that life be so estimable, which is obnoxious to sin, and waited on with misery; in so much that all riches and jewels are rubbish in comparison of it.Iob 2 4. Skin for skin, yea, all that a man hath, will he give for his life; a truth from the father of lies: how precious is that life, where a man shall see nothing but what he loves, and love nothing but what he sees! The best way to exemplifie the Great Price of these Promises, is to instance in some particulars. Hereof the Word of Grace is abundant: but a man that would commend a Spring-water, needs not drinke up the whole fountaine, one or two draughts is sufficient. Take a taste from Math. 11.28. Come unto me all yee that labour, and are heavie laden, and
 I will give you rest: a great and precious promise; if we consider the Mover, the moved, and the motive. The Mover is Christ, Come unto me; not to the Mother, but to the Sonne; Non ad Dominam, sed ad Dominum, Not to our Lady, but to our Lord. Send not others, but come yourselves: come to no other but to me. The moved, all that labour and are heavie laden; that labour in your actions, are heavie laden in your passions, Ferus. That doe not carry sinnes like corke and feathers, lightly on your shoulders, but groane under the unsupportable weight, and send forth prayers mixed with teares for ease. Come, not on your feet, but your faith; not on your legs, but your lives. The motive, I will ease you, or give you rest. What; labour and grievous labour; a burden and an heavie burden; and yet I will ease you? a great and precious promise! The Physitian cannot say to his patient, I will cure thee: but thus farre, I will spare no invention of wit, no intention of will, no contention of power to helpe thee: onely the great Physitian of heaven can promise absolutely, I will ease thee.Psal. 55.22. Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and he will sustaine thee. Take another: Rom. 8.28. All things worke together for good, to them that love God. All things, not onely Gods good things, but even our evill things. Afflictions that are most bitter, shall make us better: the sharpest Rue shall bean herbe of grace. Yea, even our sinnes; for such is the goodnesse of God, that quod in poenam dedit, in salutem vertit; what at first he inflicted for a penaltie, he turnes to a mercy. Peccatum tristitiam peperit, tristitia peccatum conteret, Aug. Sinne first wrought sorrow, now godly sorrow shall kill sinne: the daughter shall destroy the mother: They shall worke, not like idle indifferents that doe neither good nor harme; but the first movers and makers hand sets them a working. Together; not singly and apart, lest their divided forces should drop and faint in their operation; but vis unita fortior; they shall (...), co-operate worke together, for the surer expedition of their intended businesse. Not in nocuum, to their hurt, as all things concurre to the wicked; for as the sea receives many fresh rivers, and sweet springs into it selfe, yet remaines salt and bitter still; so the ungodly are not made the better by Gods good blessings. Nor in neutrum, neither to their good nor harme; but to the glory of God, and the deare salvation of their soules. Here is a great and precious promise!
Now seeing these promises are such, let us affie them, and apply them: they deserve our faith and application.
For Affiance, if God so promise, let us trust him,Heb. 10.23. He is faithfull that hath promised: Woe to him that shall call Gods faithfulnesse into question. Yet there is a generation of men that object; what nothing but promises? Promissis dives quilibet esse potest: Every one can be rich in promising, though hee be poore and beggerly in performing. Who can live by promises? These must, with Thomas, feele, or they will not beleeve: they are led by sight and sense, not by faith: unlesse they have an ocular view, they care for no oraculous testimony, no miraculous power: here is nothing in hand, but nudum pactum, a bare and naked Promise. Thus stands the case with them; man hath a precious Iewell to sell, it is his Soule: God and the world come both to buy it. The world first steps in, and thrusts his bags into his hand, here is present possession. God comes and out-bids the world, for hee offers Grace, and Peace, and Glory: but withall hee craves day for the greater part of it, and gives nothing in hand but his Promise, his word, and some small earnest of the bargain. The worldling cries, a bird in hand is best, hugs his money that he hath: God he thinkes not so good a customer, he dares not trust him, perhaps he feares he will breake. Yet this same man will rather accept a reversion of some great Office or Estate, though expectant on the tedious transition of seven yeares, or on the expiration of anothers life, than in present a Summe of farre lessevalue. What folly is this, rather to take the idle vanities of this world in hand, than faithfully to wait upon Gods promise for the glory of heaven! O but we can satiate our selves with the profits and pleasures of this life, and yet take Gods word for the Kingdome of Heaven too. But I say, if a man, if a Minister, if a Prophet, if an Angell should tell you so, beleeve him
 not: for the Iudge of heaven and earth hath said otherwise. Ye cannot serve God and Mammon. Difficile est servare utrumque, impossibile est servire utrique. It will be very hard for a man to keepe both, it is impossible to serve both. The two Poles shall sooner meet, than the love of God, and the love of money. The very possession of the world is not halfe so sure as Gods promise.
For applying; seeing these promises are so precious, store thy heart with them: that which way soever the blow comes, Impavidum non improvisum feriat; it may assault thee without feare, not without foresight. Art thou molested with troubles? remember the promise;Ioh. 16.33. In the world thou shalt have tribulation: but bee of good cheare, I have overcome the world. AndPsal. 50.15. Call upon me in the day of trouble, I will heare thee, and thou shalt glorifie me. All daies are troublesome; Man is of few daies, and full of trouble. Iob 14.1. but some are worse than other. That aged Patriarch-told the King or Aegypt; few and evill have the daies of thy servant beene: he had many evill daies, but some worse; when he lost Rachel his wife, Ioseph his son. The Thames hath alwais in it water enough to drown a man, but somtimes it is more tempestuous and raging than at others. As all times have their incident trouble, so there is one maine day of trouble: Ierusalem is threatned her Day of visitation. What shall we doe when this day of trouble comes? remember the promise; Call upon mee, saith God; I will heare and deliver thee. Do thy friends leave thee? maist thou complain with David, my neighbours hide themselves, and my acquaintance stood afar off? Consider the Lords promise; Heb. 13.5. I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee. What was spoken toIohn. 1.5. Ioshua in particular, the Apostle interests every Christian in generall; the infallible promise of Gods inseparable presence. Art thou tempted? remember the promise; God will not suffer thee to be tempted above thy strength. If God remove not Pauls temptation, he will give him an equivalent helpe; my grace is sufficient for thee. Tentari sinet, superari non sinet. Doth the Law threaten thee with death for thy sins? remember the promise; there is no damnation to them that are in Christ Iesus, Rom. 8.1. Answer with Luther, Dominalex; Lady law thou comest not in season, I have nothing to doe with thee: thou art a bitter lady, but I have a sweet Lord. There is death in thy lookes, but there is salvation in the face of Iesus Christ: who is fairer than all the sons of men. The Law is all red, nothing but bloud, death, and fire in her lookes: Christ is white and red, of the purest complexion;Cant. 5.10. My beloved is white and ruddy, the chi fest often thousand. White in his owne innocency, ruddie with the sufferings for our sinnes. Such is thy mercy, oh blessed Saviour! let the Law doe her worst, be thou a true S. Christopher, and beare Christ in thy heart. In the Law is the menace of death, in Christ is the promise of life: we may say concerning any sinner, what Martha said of her Brother;Ioh. 11.21. Lord if thou hadst beene here, my brother had not died. Doest thou suffer affliction? remember the promise; if we suffer with Christ, we shall also be glorified with him, Rom. 8.17. The Saints are called from bleeding under the hand of persecution, to the marriage supper of the Lambe. Well may wee endure a bitter breakefast, even to bloud and death, considering that this supper of glory shall close up our stomacks. GOD makes his Church three meales, a breakfast, a dinner, and a supper. The breakfast was in the morning of the world, that's the Law, somewhat sharpe; though they had assurance of Christ to come. The dinner is in the worlds high-noon, that's the Gospell: here is good cheare the fat calfe killed, the Messiah slaine; yet like the Passeover, not eaten without sowre herbes; wee are faine to mingle our drinke with teares. The supper at night shall bee sweet, it is eternall glory: fitly called a Supper, because then begins rest for ever. After breakfast a man goes to his labour, so after dinner, but after supper to bed. The servants of GOD under the Law, the sonnes of GOD under the Gospell, must both labour, and worke out their salvation with feare and trembling: but at the Supper of glory workes cease.Rev. 14.13. Blessed are the dead that die in the LORD, for they rest from their labours. Lastly, doth the inevitable hand of death strike thee, must thou die? remember the promise; I am the
 resurrection and the life: whosoever beleeveth in me shall not die for ever,2 Cor. 9.8. Iohn. 11.26. Let mee aske thy conscience, as Christ there did; Beleevest thou this? If thy heart can answer; yea Lord, I beleeve, etc. Send forth thy soule with joy, thou hast a promise that Iesus Christ will receive it.1 Pet. 4.19. Commit your soule into the hands of a faithfull Creator in well doing. Here be great and precious promises; though thy memorie cannot retaine all that the Gospell proposeth, yet be sure to hold fast some: be not without some oile in thy lampe when the Bridegroome comes. Rich men that love themselves well, will have antidotes for sicknesse; their Cabinets stored with hot and precious waters against swounings and sudden qualmes. And lightly the poorest Cottager, though he cannot goe to the price of the better extractions, yet will at least have some Aqua-vitae in the house. Now if thy heart hold not such store of these most precious promises as the richer Saints; yet be sure to have at all times Saint Pauls Aqua-vitae ready, 1 Tim. 1.15. This is a true saying, and worthy of all acceptation; that Iesus Christ came into the world to save sinners. But doe thy best to fill the Cabinet of thy heart, thou shalt have need enough of all. Remember who hath promised:2 Cor. 1.20. All Gods promises are yea and Amen in Iesus Christ, may they be Yea and Amen in our beleeving hearts.
Are given to us. Here is the fourth circumstance of the Conveighance; the Forme of it, which is a deed of gift, Are given us. All worldly things are but lent us: our houses of stone wherein our bodies dwell, our houses of clay wherein our soules dwell, are but lent. Honors, treasures, pleasures, money, maintenance, but lent. We may say of them all, as hee said of his axe-head when it fell into the water:2 King. 6.5. Alas they are but borrowed. Onely spirituall graces are given: of those things there is onely a true donation, whereof there is a true possession. Worldly things are but a Tabernacle, a moveable; heaven is a mansion: whatsoever becomes of the former, if thou canst keepe the other, say Perdidi periturum, servavi aeternum; I have lost that I could not keepe, I have kept that I cannot loose. Happy Christians, though they have the least share of things lent, they have the greatest portion of things given. Nos nihil in terris, illi nihil in coelis: we have little on earth, they have lesse in heaven. GOD shall say to the wicked, I have lent thee an Office, give account of it, for thou must be no longer Steward. But to the faithfull,Ioh. 14.27. My peace I give to you, not as the world giveth: how gives the world? Dat aliqua, ut surripiat omnia: it gives a little, that it may take away all: but the Ioy that I give you, no man shall take from you, Ioh. 16.22. Whatsoever is freer than gift; it makes a new proprietary of the same things: such gifts are Gods (...), without repentance. He may repent that he made man, Gen. 6. that he made Saul King: but he never repents that he made a man repentant, or that he hath given him grace in Iesus Christ. But saith of him, as Isaac said of Iacob; I have blessed him, and he shall be blessed, Gen. 27.33. Here the Lords bounty requires of us some duty; this threefold.
1. Call upon the Giver, as the beggar frequents the gates of bounty; and that in faith,Iam. 1.6. Aske in faith, without wavering: for Desinat orare, qui non sperat exorare: let him spare to speake, that distrusts to speed. Faith is to GOD as Bethsheba was to Salomon; so in favour, that the1 Kin. 2.17. King will deny her nothing. And when thou movest this bounteous Giver, begge the best things, such as are well worth giving. When wee put to sea, wee pray for a good gale; when we have sowen, for a good spring; when we reape for faire weather: we may have all these, and yet bee cursed: let us intreat for grace, this will blesse all. God ^^es us no wrong in taking away our temporall things, for they are but lent us: Retrahit sua, non abstrahit nostra: hee takes backe his owne, he does not take away ours. It is an argument of love in the Father; when he takes away the childs knife, and gives to him a booke. We cry for riches, it is a knife to cut our fingers: GOD gives us a Bible the riches of veritie, not of vanity. Magnum magna decent: great workes become a great nature: let us not bee afraid to aske him a kingdome; for how unworthy so ever wee are of things so farre beyond us, yet he gives things worthy himselfe. When Alexander
 gave a whole Citie to one of his Favourites, he modestly replied; It was too great a fortune for a man of so meane condition. But the Monarch answered; Non quaero quid oporteat te accipere, sed quid deceat me tribuere. I examine not what is fit for thee to receive, but what is fit for me to give.
2 Be thankfull to this Giver; not onely for spirituall, but even for temporall things. It is not enough to take the whole loaves, but let us even gather up the fragments. Lay up in the Arke of thy memory, not onely the Pot of Manna, the Bread of life; but even Aarons Rod, the very scourge of correction, wherewith thou hast beene bettered. Blessed be the Lord, not onely Giving, but also Taking away; saith Iob. God that sees, there is no walking upon roses to heaven, puts his children into the way of discipline: and by the fire of correction, eats out the rust of corruption, Psal. 50.15. God sends trouble, then bids us call upon him; promiseth our deliverance: and lastly, the all he requires of us is to Glorifie him.Iam. 1.5. God giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not. Never upbraids? How then doth he condemne Israel by the Oxe and the Asse? Esay 1.3. How tell David of his favours to him, in deliverance from Saul,2 Sam. 12 8. and advancement to a Kingdome? I answer, God never upbraids, but when our ingratitude enforceth him. The widow of Zarephath to Elias; 1 King. 17.18. Art thou come to call my sinne to remembrance? But it is our unthankfulnesse, that calls our sinnes to remembrance. How is the faithfull Citie become an Harlot? God enquires not the means, but wonders at the matter. Vnthankfulnesse is such a fault, that men thinke it a vice, Angels a sacriledge, Divels a monster, God himselfe a wonder. Gratitude pleaseth him: of the Samaritan that gave him thankes, Christ tooke notice.Luke 17.18. Of the ten cleansed none were found to give glory to God, but the stranger. The Leper praiseth God, Christ praiseth the Leper: Mary Magdalen gave Christ an unction of thankfulnesse, he gave her an unction of a good name; a thing better than ointment; forEccles. 7.1. A good name is better than precious ointment. That wheresoever this Gospell should be preached, her worke should not be forgotten: Mat. 26.13. the whole world should ring of her. God gives all gratis, I meane in the adverbe, not in the noune; for they are not all thankfull persons that receive it. Some are not made better by Gods gifts, yea, many are made worse. Give Saul a Kingdome, and he will tyrannize: give Nabal good cheare, and he will be drunke: give Iudas an Apostleship, and he will sell his Master for money.
But if God gives all to us, let us give something to him. What shall I give him? Quid retributam Domino? non mea sed me; Not onely my goods, but my selfe. Say as that Widow might, I am poore and have nothing to give, but my two mites; my body and soule; take them, and take all. When thou commest to offer thy sacrifice of thankes; doe as Abraham was bidden; Occide unicum, charissimum peccatum: Slay (not thy dearest sonne, but) thy dearest sinne. If we give our soule to GOD; as Abraham did Isaac, he will restore our soule to us with joy, as he did Isaac to Abraham: and that, as he did there to him, so here to us, not without the promises of life. There are that thinke every thing too much that God receives: as Leonides a steward told Alexander, that he bestowed too much frankincense on his gods. When Mary gave IESUS that ointment, Iudas cries, Ad quid perditio haec? Why is this waste? he thought it lost. But hee that hath given himselfe to God, will not sticke at the rest. It is the Apostles argument of Gods liberality to us;Rom. 8.32. Hee that spared not his onely Sonne, but gave him for us, will not deny other things with him. So if thou have given him thy selfe, thou wilt never grudge him thy purse, or thy praise. It is a good desire of the soule, with that Father; Quicquid mihi vult dare Dominus, auferat totum and se mihi det; Whatsoever the Lord would give me, let him deny all and give me himselfe. So God requires of us,Mich. 6.6. not thousands of Rams, nor ten thousand rivers of oile; not the sonne of the body for the sinne of the soule: but man, give me thy selfe. This instar omnium, super omnia, in stead of all, above all. As Seneca writes of Aeschines a poore scholler, to his master Socrates: Dono tibi unum quod habeo, meipsum; I offer thee that one thing I onely have, my selfe. Others have given
 much to thee, but they have kept more to themselves: but no man gives more, than he that keepes nothing backe. Socrates kindly accepted and answered; I will take care, ut te meliorem tibi reddam quam accecepii: that I may restore thee to thy selfe better than I received thee. So GOD deales with us, his returne is better than our gift: wee give to him our selves sinfull and wretched, hee restores us to our selves gracious and blessed.
3. Be not proud, arrogate not that to thy selfe which is Gods gift. The Apostles restored a Creeple that was lame from his mothers wombe: but least any of Gods glory should cleave to their earthen fingers, they disclaime their owne power and holinesse, and give it to him that owes it, and will not give it to another;Acts 12.16. the name of IESUS CHRIST hath made this man strong. The blessed Virgin that was so full of grace, in se not a se; humbly acknowledged the fountaine: evenLuke 1.47. God her Saviour. The Papists trust in out Lady, but our Lady did trust in our LORD. And albeit she was sanctified to be the mother of her Maker; though so good a woman that, Non primam similem visa est, nec habere sequentem; though all generations call her blessed; yet saith the, Respexit humilitatem: The Lord regarded the lowlinesse of his handmaid. They may tell us, that she doth, Iure matris imperare, but indeed shee did Fide filiae impetrare: not command by the right of a mother, but obtaine by the faith of a daughter.Psal. 10.5.1. O praise the Lord! make known his deeds among the people: make knowne his workes, but to his glory: for some make knowne his deeds, but to their owne glory. Vaine-glory easily creepes in even through the cracke of our acknowledgement of Gods goodnesse towards us. One saies, such a Nobleman dranke to me, shooke me by the hand, discoursed with me: but hereby he insinuates to the hearers some worthinesse in himselfe, for which hee was so graced. So some in declaring GODS workes and favours to them, have a conceit of merit in themselves, deserving such respect. To meete with which pride, may seeme CHRISTS charge to the Leper. Marke 1.44. See thou tell it to no man. Which enjoyned silence was not to smother Gods glory, but to keepe him from vaine-glory.
Thus we have considered the Conveyance, in the
Intent, Whereby.Content, Promises.Extent, Great and Precious.Patent, Are given us.
Now if all this be not a sufficient assurance, then give me leave to speake according to your capacity in the Citie; and to adde-that it is signed, sealed, delivered, and bound with an oath, for your further confirmation. You are well acquainted with these words, with such deeds: I wish therefore, that as you know them in earthly things to your profit, so you may know them in heavenly things to your comfort.
They are signed, God hath put his hand to them in the Gospell. If a Noble man should send the gracious letters of preferment, and put his hand to them, thou wouldest credit it. If thy father taking a long journey, should first pen his owne will, wherein he did make thee his heire, and bequeath to thee all his substance; and set his hand to it; thou wouldest joyfully and confidently embrace it. This Patent is the Testament and will of Iesus Christ.Iohn 17.24. Father, I will that they whom thou hast given me, may be with me where I am. This he hath signed with his owne hand: for the Evangelists were but the pens, it was the hand of Christ himselfe.
2. But it is not enough to have a writing signed, doth the law require sealing? These promises are sealed to us: there are two broad Seales, the two Sacraments. Baptisme, whosoever beleeveth and is baptised, shall bee saved: there is one broad-seale. The Lords supper; whosoever eateth the flesh of Christ, and drinketh his bloud, shall not perish; there is another broad-seale. For the Sacraments are not only Signa, sed Signacula; not bare signes, but Seales, so Paul called CircumcisionRom. 4.11. a seale of the righteousnesse of faith. There is also a privy seale, Miracles; wrought in the
 first rising of the Sunne, but now in the glorious day of grace and knowledge, ceasing. Now we aske not for the privy seale of miracles; but the broad-seales of the Sacraments: herewith we are content, for by these instruments we receive Christ. Verbum audimus, motum sentimus, modum nescimus, praesentiam credimus, Durand. We heare the word, we feele the vertue, we know not the manner, but we beleeve the presence of IESUS CHRIST. The Romists abuse both these Seales: Gods broad-seale in corrupting the Sacraments, Gods privy seale in their false and lying miracles.
 Is not this yet enough, to be signed with his holy hand, and sealed with his Royall armes, except still it be delivered? These are delivered to us:Rom. 8.15. Ye have received the spirit of adoption. That you may be sure of this conveyance, it is put into your hands, into your hearts.
 If yet the Subscription of GODS hand, and affixion of his sale, and delivery into your possession, be not sufficient; Addidit and Iuramentum.Hebr. 6.17. GOD willing more abundantly to shew unto the heires of promise the immutability of his counsell, confirmed it by an oath. That by two unchangeable things, in which it was impossible for God to lye, we might have a strong consolation. In which two verses, that stand like two Turrets, there are eight fortifications; which all the powers of hell shall never be able to overthrow. He doth not say, but shew; there's demonstration; not sparingly, but Abundantly; Extention: To, not servants, but sonnes and Heires; if so, never to be disinherited; there's Adoption: Of Promise; not of mans birth or merit, but of Gods promise, who never yet brake his word: there's ratification. The Immutability of his counsell; ego Iehova non mutor: friends are unconstant, riches are unconstant, the world is unconstant, but I the Lord change not, Mal. 3.6. there's Determination. He interposed himselfe by an oath; wonderfull mercie, that the Creator should sweare to his creature! there's confirmation. These be two immutable things; therefore without alteration, In which it was impossible for God to lie: well may he deny sinners, but he cannot deny himselfe: there's impossibility of retraction. Now for the Corollary, or use of all these invincible arguments, it is our strong consolation: so strong a fortresse, that if we doe not betray it our selves, all the engines of hell shall never endanger it. How much are we beholding to God that he will sweare, but how little beholding is God to us, if we will not beleeve him when he sweares.
We see the stabilitie of these gracious Promises: which (to shut up the discourse with application) should not passe us without some profitable use. From the stability of GODS promises to us, let us learne to be constant in the performance of our promises to God, and to man.
1 To God: we have all made a promise to him in our baptisme; let not us forget that, lest God forget us. Did we then promise, and doe we now stagger? The true Christian is fixed on the poles of constancie, not carried on the wheeles of change. Let usCol. 1.23. continue in the Faith grounded and settled, and be not moved away from the hope of the Gospell. So grounded, that if an Angell from heaven should preach another Gospell, let him be accursed, Gal. 1.8. The inconstant professor is scarce a Christian, but like A grippa almost a Christian. His Religion lies in waite for the Parliament; neither ebbes nor flowes, but is just standing water, betwixt both. As a noune, he is onely adjective; as a verbe, he knowes no tense but the present. One part thinkes him theirs, the adverse theirs, he is with both, with neither; not an houre with himselfe. Hee might get to heaven, but for his halting; but hee knowes not what he should hold, he knowes not what he doth hold. Hee is sure to die, but not what religion to die in. He cannot tell whether is best to say his Pater noster in latine or in English and so leaves it unsaid. He that hath promised, and not performed, is in worse case then he that never promised. The fedifragous Christian speeds worse than the barbarous Infidell.
2 To man; promises are due debts. There might happily have beene no sinne in
 not promising, there is a sinne after promise in not performing. There is more alliance, than affiance in the world: Frater quasi fere alter, keepe thy word with him as with thy selfe. But how should he keepe touch with man, that breakes with God, with his owne soule! If this point seeme obscure, there are too many in this Cittie whose lives may comment upon it. Curant ut debeant, non ut solvant. They take care to owe, they thinke they ought not to pay. These are worse than the Prodigall; he lived on hisLuk. 15.12. owne portion; these like the unjust steward live on another mans portion. They beare the name and weare the livery, but have not the soules of Christians. A debter that can pay and will not, makes himselfe uncapable of pardon. Such men thinke to set all on CHRISTS score; and to say Dimitte nobis debita nostra, forgive us our debts, is sufficient: though they leave out the other part of the petition, As we forgive others. But God does not forgive spirituall debts where men have no care to pay temporall debts. Why but there is more vertue in the seed of the woman, than can be venome in the head of the Serpent; and repentance makes all reckonings even. ButGal. 6.7. be not deceived, God is not mocked. If they mocke him, he will mocke them:Psal. 2.4. he that sitteth in the heavens shall laugh, the Lord shal have them in derision: neither can there be repentance without restitution. A theefe takes away thy purse, askes thy pardon, sayes he is sorry for it, but keepes it still: thou saiest he does but mocke thee. If God could be coozened with trickes, how many politicke worldlings would goe to heaven, whose portion is in the in fernall depth.
Well, let us learne toEph 4.25. put away lying, and to speake every man truth to his neighbour, for we are members one of another. There is vetitum, a thing forbidden, Lie not: Iussum, a thing commanded, speake truth: argumentum, a reason for both, because we are members one of another. Let us be plaine in promising, honest in performing. There are some that have double tongues, and speake their promises in a doubtfull sense. Ambagious, equivocating termes; epicene and bastard phrases, as the devill gave his oracles; which must be true every way, certaine no way. They beguile mens plainesse, but in plaine truth they beguile their owne soules. For they that will over-reach others with the sinne of deceitfulnesse, shall be over-reached themselves with the deceitfulnesse of sinne. They sing the song of Curio, vincat utilitas; let gaine prevaile: they had rather be sinners than beggars. Thus according to Daniels prophecie, Prosternetur veritas, truth shall be cast downe: covetousnesse hath got the advantage of ground, andEsa. 59.14. Truth is falne in the streete. Thus these two wrastle on earth, and truth falls: but one day when they shall wrastle in heaven, Cupiditatem prosternet veritas, truth shall prevaile. Wine is strong, Princes are strong, Women are strong, but truth is stronger than all, 1 Esdr. 4.35.
But now where is this truth? I will tell you an apologue: foure friends parting enquired where they should find one another againe: the water, the fire, the wind, and truth. Fire said, you shall be sure to finde me in a flint stone: Water said, you shall be sure to find me in the roote of a bulrush: Wind said, you shall bee sure to find me amongst the leaves: but poore Truth could not appoint no certaine place of meeting: for Terras Astraea reliquit, no place for truth, what say you to Westminster Hall? indeed there is roome enough, but small roome for truth. What say you to the exchange? there be faire walkes, but they may exchange away truth. Where is she then, in your shops? that were strange to find truth in shops. Is she then in the Courts? we behold there alwayes Sedem veritatis, the seate of truth; but not alwayes veritatem sedentis, truth in him that supplies that place. Perhaps shee lurkes in the Colledges of the Iesuites: Oh no, when the truth offered to come thither, equivocation repeld her. She could never abide their maine Principles; Iura, perjura, secretum prodere noli: sweare and forsweare, rather than tell truth. Wha^ is she in Scrinio pectoris Papalis, in the Popes breast, that we should runne to Rome for her? no Antichrist cannot be a friend to truth. Is she not ferried over to Amsterdam? no, truth will never follow those that runne away from the Church. You
 would wonder to find her in a Courtier, in a Politician; whose element and position is, Qui nescit dissimulare, nescit vivere: he that knowes not how to dissemble, knowes not how to live. Or in a country mans budget, shut up with snaphance: no, you shall have as much deceit under russet, as under velvet, though a little more bungerly. No thankes to them, they would coozen as frequently, if they could doe it as cleanely, you would smile to find her in Pueris and Fatuis; in children and fooles: yet they say, children and foolestell truth. But if it be child-hood or follie to tell truth, I am sure we have but a few children, a few fooles. Or in a drunkard; yet they say, In vino veritas, drinke utters the truth. But take the Ale-bench without a malicious lie, or at least an officious lie; a very lie, or a merry lie, and make a Pew of it. Where then shall we find Truth? I hope in the Church, in the Pulpits: Oh God forbid else! yet often truth keepes only in the pulpit, and does not goe downe staires with the man; but staies there till his comming up againe. I hope in this scrutinie of truth you will not say, that I have favoured our selves: no, beloved, GOD give us hearts, to know that wee are all untrue, deceitfull upon the weights; and mindes, to seeke truth as precious treasure. Omnis homo mendax, God is true, every man a lyar. There is no certaine place to find truth, but in the word of God; there let us seeke her, there we shall find her. Now the God of Truth give us the truth of God, in the knowledge of Iesus Christ.
That by these you might be partakers of the Divine nature. Wee are come to the second generall part of the Verse; which we called the Inheritance, consisting in the participation of the Divine nature. And we may well call it so; for none can deceive us of it before we have it, nor deprive us of it, after we have it. It cannot be prevented;Luke. 12.32. Feare not little flocke, it is my Fathers will to give you a kingdome. Ab initio decretum, diu secretum, plenitudine temporis perceptum: determined from the beginning, concealed a while, possessed in due time: whatsoever our Lawyers distinguish between a free-hold in law, and a free-hold in deed; this is both. It is a free-hold in law, whereto even they have right, that have not yet possession. It is a free-hold in deed: on earth we have a purchase of the Inheritance, in heaven an Inheritance of the purchase.
That partakers, etc. Before I shew you the vine, let me cut up two brambles: one wherof the Maniches, the other the Familists, planted (by force) on this ground: there went but a paire of sheeres between them: that of the Maniches was a dreame, Nos ex traduce Dei ortos, that we came by traduction from the nature of God himselfe: and when this temporary life had runne the course; we should returne to the same ancient estate, and become a divine nature. They presupposed a commixion of Gods nature with ours; as if they were mell'd together like wine and water. This is a blasphemous heresie, to thinke there is Transfusio divinae essentiae in hominem, infinitae in circumscriptam: a transfusion of the divine being into man, as if Infinitenesse could be in a circumscriptible essence. A creature cannot be made of the essence of God, for it hath no parts, it is not divisible. The other is of some fanaticall spirits, who thinke we doe so passe into Gods nature, that our nature is quite swallowed up of his. So they take that place, 1 Cor. 15.28. that at the last God shall bee all in all. But certainely this delirement never came into the holy Apostles minds; that our naturall being should be lost in the essence of God: they meant not that we should lose our nature, but the corruption of our nature; and that by a sanctified renovation wee should bee made partakers of the Divine immortality and blessednesse. Thus we are made one with God, secundum modulum nostrum, according to the capablenesse of our nature. The Familists say, we are deified: so as GOD became man, man becomes God: Their owne words are, men are deified, and God hominified. These are new words, such as the ancient Fathers never taught nor thought. But those men thought it no treason to coin new words: and indeed it was necessary that they who would coine a new religion, should also coine new termes, new paradoxes. There were some held, that mans soule was part of Gods owne essence,
 Virgil, Divinae particula aurae. Indeed it is a breath of God, a worke of God, not a part of God.
Things may divers wayes participate others nature. Omnes species sub eodem genere participant essentiam generis: as Angell, devill, man, and beast partake the nature of a living creature. Omnia individua sub eadem specie participant essentiam specici: as Peter and Paul of a reasonable nature: Wolfe and Lambe of a Brute: Cedars and Briers of a vegetative. But to come neerer home, and to detaine you no longer in the suburbes or entrance.
Gods nature may be participated two wayes; Secundum qualitatem, secundum Aequalitatem. For equality, this Trium personarum solum, as Aquin. It is onely proper to the three persons of the blessed Trinity, and not communicable to any other. Our Saviour CHRIST partakes both the Divine nature, and the Humane. The Divine per essentiae Identitatem, by the Identitie of his essence. The Humane, assumendo hominem in Deum; by taking mans nature into God. Non desinit esse quod erat, sed incipit esse quod non erat. He did not cease to be what he was, but he began to be what he was not. And this assumption of mans nature to the divine, did not make it God: it did rarely beautifie it, not properly deifie it. For as hee was man hee had not the essence of the deitie in him, but he was in it. Yet did he so glorifie it, that all the Angels of GOD worship it.Hebr. 1.6. When hee bringeth in the first begotten into the world, he saith; let all the Angels of God worship him. Our neighbours of Rome tell us, that CHRIST was often worshipped as man: they urge these places, Matth. 2 11. Matth. 8.2. Matth. 9.18. Matth. 20.20. But here we doubt two things: first whether this was religious worship or civill. Next, if it were religious, whether their eye of faith saw not him God, so well as their eye of flesh saw him man. Indeed the flesh of CHRIST is to be adored for the union of the deitie, because they bee inseparable: but the Arrians worshipped CHRIST as a creature onely, not as GOD and man. Confitemur adorabilem in corpore, non secundum corpus. We adore him in his flesh, not according to his flesh: as the honour redounds to the King himselfe, that is done to the Crowne on his head. But I durst here conclude against the Papists; that if it be unlawfull to worship Christ as he is onely man, then much more unlawfull to worship his Image.
Thus we see how CHRIST who is God, partakes of our nature: now consider how we by Christ who is man, partake of the divine nature. Here the wicked begin to clap their wings, and boldly to inferre, that they partake Gods nature, because GOD partakes their nature. But if this were enough to save men, because Christ tooke our flesh, call Cain and Iudas out of hell, yea let hell it selfe be as imaginary as is Purgatory. A father hath tenne sonnes, nine of them are sicke: doe they all certainely recover because the tenth is sound? yet they come all from the loines of one father. All the house of Cis are not kings, because Saul is one. It is not enough that Christ comes neere thee in the flesh, unlesse thou come neere him in the spirit. Though there bee sappe in the vine, congruent and potentiall to bring forth fruit in the branches: yet doth not this vine communicate his sappe to Oakes and bryers, albeit these partake of the generall nature of wood. Yea after that the very branches of the vine are broken off and dead, the vine ministers to them no more sappe, though they retaine the vines species and nature. So that it is not our participation of Christs humane nature, that makes us happy; but of his divine: that partaking is by flesh, but this is by faith. It is probable that some were lost, who were even kinne to Christ in the flesh: yet it must needes be granted, that to partake of the same bloud, is a degree neerer, than to partake of the same nature. Matthew and Luke set downe Christs Genealogie; the one, his line royall, the other, his line naturall. But Christ himselfe sets downe another Genealogie, a new one a spirituall one:Luk. 8.21. my mother and my brethren are they which heare the word of God, and doe it. He affirmes these to be as neare to him in the faith, as his own mother in the flesh. And she was more blessed Percipiendo fidem, quam concipiendo carnem; in
 being the daughter, than in being the mother of Christ. The Iewes thought it a great priviledge to be Abrahams sonnes: yet one that called himselfe sonne of Abraham, fries in hell. The damned churle could say;Luk. 16.24. Father Abraham have mercy on me: the flesh was not made after the Image of God, but the spirit: therefore God is not called Pater corporum, the father of bodies; but Pater spirituum,Hebr. 12.9. the father of the spirits of all flesh, Iohn 3.6. That which is borne of the flesh is flesh: but that which is borne of the spirit is spirit. Esau was not blessed because hee was of Isacks flesh, but Iacob was blessed because he was of Isacks spirit Paul is said to travaile of the Galatians,Gal 4.19. Till Christ was formed in them. Thus men may partake of one nature in Christ and yet be cursed: but if of his divine nature, they are blessed.
This participation then must be onely qualitative: by nature we understand not substance, but quality: by grace in this world, and by glory in the world to come. This communication of the Divine nature to us, is by reparation of the divine image in us. This is cleared by the analogie of other respondent places, Hebr. 12.10. That we might be partakers of his holinesse: so that to partake of the divine nature, is to be holy as God is holy, Eph. 4.24. Put on the new man which after God is created in righteousnesse and the holinesse of truth. To be created after God, is to partake of Gods nature; and this consists in justice and holinesse, Rom. 8.29. God did predestinate us to to be conformed to the Image of his Son: the conformitie to Gods image, is the participating Gods nature. This was not wholly unseene to Plato, who said it was mans chiefest good, Deo fieri penitus conformem, to be made like to God. The sweetnesse of this benefit, and the multiplicity of comforts arising from it, I deferre a little further: and here proceed to exemplifie the relations, which may in some measure shadow out to us this partaking of the Divine nature. For it is in no-wise to be understood really, but by renovation. I propounded in the distribution seven respects, to exemplifie the benefit of this participation.
1 As servants of a Master; not meerely as creatures, so all men partake;Acts 17.28. Wee are also his off-spring. With outward things he maintaines all; the whole world almost these six thousand yeares at his owne proper cost and charges. He feedes ^he Ravens, and the young Lions seeke their meate at him. How few of the birds of the aire lie dead at thy feete for want of provision! But alas as the Cananite: old CHRIST; these like the Dogges eate onely the crummes; the faithfull have the fat morsells;Luk. 15.17. All our Fathers servants have bread enough. They are but servants, yet they have bread enough. Thus wee partake with God in being his servants, wherein indeed consists true libertie.1 Cor. 7.22. For he that is called in the Lord, being a servant, is the Lords freeman.Esa. 41.8. Thou Israel art my Servant the seed of Abraham my fr^end, Vers. 9. Thou art my friend I have chosen thee. And this is a sure participation where can bee no rejection. But how doe GODS servants partake of these divine things? In five respects; in Liverie, Libertie, Dignitie, Cognisance, Recompence. For their Liverie, it is the profession of the Gospell; that same New man, Col. 3.10. restored to the Creators Image. For their liberty, Gal. 5.1. Stand fast in the libertie wherewith Christ hath made us free. For their dignitie, Ioh. 12.26. If any man serve me, him will my Father honour. It is more credite to be a Porter of Gods gate, than to command in the presence chamber of a King, Psal. 84.10. I had rather be a doore keeper in the house of my GOD, etc. For their cognisance, it is both visible and invisible, visible in their Charitie, Iohn 13.35. By this shall all men know that yee are my Disciples. Invisible, as being sealed in their foreheads with the marke of the living God, Revel. 7.3. For their recompence: the world saies,Mal. 3.14. It is in vaine to serve God: but they shall be mine saith the Lord, in that day when I make up my Iewells: of so high a value as his speciall treasure, Ver. 17. God does not, as great men commonly doe with their servants; give them countenance, and let them shift for themselves. Hee gives not onely protection, but provision: not only countenance, but maintenance. Well done good and faithfull servant, enter into the joy of thy Lord.

This is the sweet: but not common to all. For all shall not have Servorum omina the rewards of servants; that have Servorum nomina, the name of servants. God hath many servants, but little service in the world. We doe so trust and thrust his work one upon another, that still it is not done: they say, many hands make light worke but is usually seene, that many hands make sligh t worke. Gods holy name is blasphemed, the hearer saies, let the Magistrate looke to it: the Magistrate saies, let the Minister reprove it: the Minister saies, let the hearer reforme it: the company saies, let the offender himselfe answer it: the offender saies, Curet nemo, let no man mind it. The sea breakes in, all the borders contend whose right it is to mend the damme: but whilest they all strive much, and doe nothing, the sea breakes further in upon them, and drownes the whole countrey. A Gentle-man having but one servant, thought him over-burdened with worke, and therefore tooke another to helpe him: now he had two, and one of them so trusted to the others observance that they were often both missing, and the worke was not done. Then he chose another, he had three; and was then worse served than before. Therefore he told his friend; when I had one servant, I had a servant: when I had two, I had but halfe a one: now I have three, I have never a one. GOD hath so many titular servants, that when his businesse comes to bee done, not one of them can be found.
2 As subjects of a Prince, and thus we partake with the King of heaven in many benefits. We have Defensionem legis, the tuition of his Law; through a blessed Advocate.1 Ioh. 2.1. If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Iesus Christ the righteous. We are faine to sue in forma pauperis, therfore the great Iudge of heaven hath appointed us a Counsellor to plead our cause; Iesus Christ, we have Tutelam Imperii, the safe-guard of the Empire; not onely the protection of the King, from which the wicked as out-lawes are secluded: but also the keeping of Angels, to whomPsal. 91 11. He hath given a charge over us, to keepe us in all his wayes. So neerly we participate of his Divine things, that wee have his owne guard royall to attend us. I know, that Christ is king over all the world. The Lord raigneth, let the people tremble. This kingdome is materiall and formall. The materiall are his subjects, and these are both elect and reprobate: for all are under his kingdome, sed diverso affectu, diverso effectu; with a different desire with a different event. The will of the King fit de malis, fit a bonis; is done by the obedient, upon the rebellious. The forme of his government is Herile in illos, Paternum in istos; to the wicked, the rule of a Lord over his slaves; to the faithfull, the rule of a father over his sonnes. Accordingly he hath a double Scepter; there is Virga Consolationis, the Rod of consolation, Psal. 23.4. Thy rod doth comfort me. And Virga confusionis, the rod of confusion, Psal. 2.9. Thou shalt breake them with a rod of iron. Christs kingdome is eternall;Luke 1.33. he shall raigne over the house of Iacob for ever, and of his kingdome there shall be no end. And this not onely Formaliter, in respect of the king: but also Materialiter, in respect of the subjects: for they1 King. 10.8. shall stand continually before him, as the Queene of the South blessed Salomon. In the Persian army were ten thousand souldiers called Athanatoi, immortall: not indeed because they died not, but because that number was supplied, and continually made up. As a Divine handling a point of usurie concerning a hundred sheepe lent to a neighbour, with a certaine rate or rent to bee paid yearely for them, and the stocke still at the yeares end to be made good; wittily called these Immortall sheep, for they never died to the owner, though to the borrower they all miscaried. But Christ saies not as Laban did to Iacob;Gen. 31.39. if any sheepe die, thou shalt make them up de tuo, of thine owne: thou shalt beare the losse of it, of thy hand I will require it. But rather like David, saves his sheepe from the Beare and Lion, the world and the devill. As himselfe when he died, suffered not a bone of his owne to be broken, and another put in place: so his subjects shall have no change:Ioh. 17.12. those thou hast given mee, I have kept, and none of them is lost. Here shall bee no Interregnum, not Multi Principes; nor is it enough to say, Vivat Rex; but oh king, live for ever Thine is the kingdome, power and glory for ever and ever. A King he is, yet hee were
 but a poore king, if he had no subjects: but they shall reigne with him a thousand yeares, Revel. 20.6. that is, for ever. For if every day in heaven be as a thousand yeares, what is a thousand yeares of such dayes but Eternitie?
He is our King, to make us blessed by his kingdome. Augustus, that day hee had done no good to his subjects, in releeving their wants, said to his friends at night; Hodie non regnavi; I have not beene a King to day. It was proverb'd of Aurelianus, that he was a good Physician, but he gave too bitter medicines. Iulian used to stampe a Bull on his coine, whereupon the Antiochians inferred, that he purposed to goare the world to death. The brests of some Kings have beene stuffed with a thunder-cloud, their vapours alwayes venting to the worlds terrour. But wee may say of our supreme King Christ, as (in due measure) of his Servant our royall Soveraigne: if at least we may compare the peace of a Prince with the Prince of peace: as he is the fairest blossome that ever budded out of the white and red Rosary: so he hath brought together red and white; Christ hath reconciled Iustice and mercy; anger red as bloud, and compassion white as snow. He hath turned; our scarlet sins into white wooll: and this by making himselfe ruddy in passion that was ever so white in innocencie.Cant. 5.10. My Beloved is white and ruddy, the chiefest often thousand. Thus we partake the blessings of his Divine Nature in being his subjects: let the heathen serve their tyrants, the Turkes their Mahomet, the Romists their Pope, worldlings their lusts: Thou O Iesus Christ be our King for ever.
3 As sonnes of a Father, thus we partake many things of the Divine Nature. 1. Children have from their fathers on earth Generation, we from our Father in heaven Regeneration;Galath. 4.5. We receive the adoption of sonnes. We are not naturall sonnes; so is Christ onely: but naturalized, as I may say, made his owne by adoption and grace.2 Cor. 6.18. I will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my sonnes and daughters. 2. We have nutrition, and that both naturall and supernaturall. Esay 1. I have nourished and brought up children. He gives bread to nourish, not stones to choake: Beneficia, non veneficia; Fishes not Serpents, Matth. 7. Thirdly, we have Education: earthly parents bring up their children to their owne customes: Rachel, though she would goe with her husband Iacob; yet would not leave her Fathers gods behind herIohn 4 20. Our fathers worshiped in this mountaine; therefore so may we. That which comes by tradition, is held inheritance. Videtur licitum, quicquid est consuetum: That which is patronised by usualnesse, slips into the opinion of lawfulnesse. Thus many children are made Papists by the mothers side: and she is so her selfe, for no other reason but because her Grandame was so. Thus materna sectantes, paterna perdunt: whiles they follow the counsell of their mother on earth, they lose the blessing of their Father in heaven. But God brings up all his children after his owne law: they are in a strange land, yet live after the lawes of their owne Countrey, their conversation is in heaven.
God deales with us, as Bernard observes, Isaac did with his sonne Iacob, Gen. 27. First, vers. 21. Tangit manu approbationis; Come neere that I may feele thee my son. Then vers. 26. Osculatur instinctu inspirationis; Come neere that I may kisse thee my sonne. Cant. 1. Let him kisse mee with the kisses of his lips; that is, with his Spirit; for the Holy Ghost is Osculum Patris, the kisse of God the Father. Then vers. 27. Benedicit, he blesseth him; gives him a progresse of grace, and that irrevocable; hee shall be blessed. Lastly, he gives consolation, and full confidence, that we boldly cry,Galath. 4.6. Abba, Father. This duplication, Father, Father, is patheticall and mysticall. Patheticall; and so it insinuates our Certaintie; we are sure that God is our Father: And our Fervency, that we be importunate, not taking a denial at out Fathers hands. So Martyr. Mysticall, as Aug. Paul in using an Hebrew word and a Greeke, signifies that there is no differenceRom. 10.12. betweene Iew and Grecian; for the same Lord over all is rich unto all that call upon him.Hebr. 4.16. Every Christian in the world may go boldly unto the Throne of Grace. It is for a Saul to say, Pray for me: but he that is Gods son, dares goe himselfe without sending others: let no terrours keep us from our Father. Ibo ad patrem,Luke 15.18. I will arise and goe to my Father. To such a commer Christ will communicate
 good things; Daughter, be of good comfort, Matth. 9.22. Daughter, a word of great familiaritie: Be of good comfort, a word of great security.Ioh. 20.17. I ascend unto my Father, and your Father. To his Father? what's this to us? Yea, also to your Father. Aug. He doth not say, I ascend ad Patrem nostrum, to our Father; but to My Father, and Your Father: Aliter meum, aliter vestrum: meum natura, vestrum gratia. He is in one respect my Father, in another yours; mine by nature, yours by grace.
Infinite good things we partake, if we be sonnes; but all lies in the assurance of this filialitie. When God gives a man sanctitie, he seemes to say;Psal. 2.7. Thou art my Sonne, this day I have begotten thee: when man apostates; Thou art not my son, this day have I lost thee. What say you to the covetous worldling? Is he the sonne of God, that is not charitable to the sonnes of God? King Richard the holy warriour, having taken a Bishop in the field in Coat-armour, was requested by the Pope to release him; Dimitte mihi filium: Send me my son. The King sends not the Bishop, but his Coat-armour to the Pope, with this question; An haec esset filii sui tunica; Is this thy sons Coat? alluding to that of Iacobs sonnes, when they had sold their brother Ioseph, and dipped his garment in Goats-bloud;Gen. 37.32. This we have found, know now whether it be thy sons coat. The Pope being ashamed, returned his answer; Nec hanc esse filii sui tunicam; That this was not the Coat of any son of his. Gods sonnes are knowne by their coat, that is, Charity. Satan layes hold on the covetous oppressour, and makes him his captive: if God should now say, Dimitte mihi filium; deliver me my son: he would straight shew God the oppressours coat; his Injustice and Extortion, Haeccine filii tui tunica; is this thy sons Coat? No, Gods children weare no such kind of garments, let him either strip off such robes, or perish with them. Let others be ambitious of great and glorious parentages; only, Lord, make us thy sons and daughters in Iesus Christ.
4 As Fellowes, in due measure, with God himselfe, 1 Ioh. 1.3. Truely our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Iesus Christ. We may have a societie with man, this is requisite, for we are all of one mould: but to God, what all fellowes? Yes, we have a fellowship with God; such is his mercy, not our merits. The proud Gallant scornes the poore Mechanicke; what, are you my fellow? Yet, Mors sceptra ligonibus aequat, Death takes away difference betweene King and begger, tumbles both the knight and the pawn into one bag. Wel, let the world despise us, it is enough the Lord doth not disdaine our fellowship.2 Cor. 13.14. The grace of the Lord Iesus Christ, and the love of God, and the Fellowship of the holy Ghost, be with you all. Diverse sorts of fellowships.
Consortes, such as partake a mutuall lot, as fellow-merchants in their adventures. We have thus a fellowship with God. If we rejoyce, he joyes in us, with us, makes us indeed rejoyce in him. For Christ rejoyceth in the Christian, whensoever the Christian rejoyceth in Christ. That repenting sonne was not more glad that he had found his father, than the father was glad hee had found his sonne, Luke 15. If wee suffer, hee suffers with us. Saul, thou persecutest me, saith Christ. Patitur in nobis, qui passus est pro nobis: Hee that did once suffer for us, doth still suffer in us. The Vsurer oppressing thee, takes away the goods of Christ; and shall be called to a strict account. There is Consortium, the word by most translations here used.
Contubernales, Chamber-fellowes, such as lodge together,Cant. 7.11. Come my beloved, let us lodge in the Villages. Where the chamber is a sanctified heart, the bed a pure faith, the pillow is the peace of conscience, the curtains like Salomons, Azure, Purple, and Scarlet. AZure or skie-colour, noting our heavenly conversation; Purple, our zeale to Gods glory: Scarlet, our charity; so Love is praised to have a threed of Scarlet in her lips. Thus now God is thy chamber-fellow, and inhabites thy holy conscience: and hereafter thou shalt dwell together with him in everlasting rest.
Conviatores, fellowes in a journey, and thus we have CHRISTS company.Luk. 24.15. Whilest they walked and talked, Iesus himselfe drew neere, and went with them. They that will walke to Christ, shall have Christ walke with them. He is the Truth, the
 Way, and the Life: they that faithfully seeke viam vitae, the way of life, shall find vitam viae, the life of the way. The Papists have great Pilgrimages to Shrines, Christ doth not travell with them: he hath no fellowship with them, that gives his honour to blockes and stones. Let my soule on the holy feet of faith and obedience, travell toward Ierusalem; then Christ will say, Vade mecum, thou shalt have my company. The good Christian cannot in any Countrey travell alone, he is sure of the fellowship of his Saviour.
Collocutores, such as conferre together; so we partake with GOD in a sweet and familiar discourse,Esay 1.18. Come now and let us reason together, saith the Lord. Tell mee your griefes, saith CHRIST. Are you pained at the heart with true compunction for your sinnes? I will heale the broken-hearted. Are you smitten with vexations? I will binde up your wounds. Thus it is our part,Agnoscere, to acknowledge: his mercie, Ignoscere, to forgive. Wee speake to him by our prayers, he speakes to us by his comforts. We powre our grievances into his bosome, hee powres his graces into our bosome. Many cannot heare Christ speaking comfort to them; no marvell, for they speake not for comfort to him. Strangenesse doth lose acquaintance. We never came humble petitioners for grace to the Mercy-seat, but we sped: if the Lord hath at some one time beene extraordinarily bountifull to us, shall we dis-wont our selves from his presence, be proud of our owne stocke, as if we needed him not? This is the way to lose him, and all comfort with him. God loves to have us talke with him: if we forget to pray for good, why should not hee forget to doe us good?
Convivae, such as feast together; thus we partake with God,Revel. 3.20. If any man open unto me, I will come in and suppe with him, and he shall suppe with me. Here is a mutuall supper; the Confession of sinnes, that's our cheare: the Remission of sinnes, that's Christs cheare. We give him meat and drinke, he gives us meat and drinke. Our dishes are all Sallets, Lilies, and fruits. My beloved is gone downe into his Garden, to the beds of spices, to feed in the Gardens, and to gather Lilies, Cant. 6.2. the fruits of our righteousnesse. Our drinke is penitent teares, though they be sharpe to us, they are sweet to him. The teares of penitent sinners is the wine of Angels, sayes a Father: yea, wine for the Lord himselfe: not a teare falls, but he catcheth it in his owne bottell: if we feast Christ, give him this drinke. Let thy heart be a vine-grape, sorrow the wine-presse, crush out this liquor, the Lord loves it. His meat to us is his owne Flesh, his drinke, his Bloud: the bread of heaven, and the wine of blessednesse. Who so eateth my flesh, and drinketh my bloud, hath eternall life, Ioh. 6.54. The Temple is his banketting-house, or wine-celler; He brought me to the banketting-house, Cant. 2.4. There he broacheth to us the sweet wines of his Gospell and Sacraments. Here is another fellowship, and so are wee fellow-commoners with Iesus Christ. Indeed all the good cheare is his: alas, what have we of our owne to make such a guest welcome! He may safely discommend our provision: let us not say, as some doe to their guests; welcome, but here is no good cheare for you, when secretly in their hearts they thinke there can be no better. Christ loves not so proud a minde when the tongue sayes, Nihil est, it it nothing: and the heart thinkes, Nimium est, it is too much. But plainely acknowledge thy povertie: if thou have any grace to feast him with, thanke him for bringing it, and say in this truely, that he is come to his owne cost. Yet thus he is pleased to feed on his owne provision, and to call it thine. He feeds on ours, Cant. 5.1. I have eaten honey, and drunke milke: we feed on his; Eat O friends, drinke abundantly O beloved: drinke liberally of it, for it is a Cup of saving health to all nations.
Convoti, sworne brothers: men, not brothers by nature of bloud, are made so by vow of love. Here is another fellowship, Christ hath vowed himselfe thy brother.Hebr. 2.11. Both he that sanctifieth, and they who are sanctified, are all of one: for which cause he is not ashamed to call them Brethren. Thou hast vowed thy selfe to Christ in Baptisme, keepe thy vow, make good thy fellowship, ne sis foedifragas, lest thou
 be a vow-breaker. Thy sinne is no lesse than perjury, if thou become his enemie, to whom thou art a sworne brother.
Thus we partake of the Divine Nature (with all reverence be it spoken) as Fellowes. But not to deny the King his Supremacie; Socii sumus in gaudio, not in solio: in loco regni, non in modo regnandi; We are fellowes with Christ in his joy, reserving the Throne to himselfe. Yet hee is pleased to promise us a confession with him in his Throne: To him that overcommeth, I will grant to sit with me in my Throne, Revel. 3.21. We have a partnership with him in the place of his Kingdome, not in equality of raigning. The King sets a subject at his owne table: yet must this subject still acknowledge his Soveraigne. Though we be co-heires, let Christ be the elder brother. Though we be made sicut Angeli, like to the Angels; yet not sicut Dominus Angelorum, not like to the Lord of Angels.
The wicked know not, care nor for this fellowship: they doe not like so divine company: they cannot be merry if God be by. Alas! none know the sweetnesse of this partnership, but the partners.Revel. 2.17. It is a new name, which no man knoweth but he that hath it. But he that hath it is truely merry, and keepes Hilary terme all his life. In thy presence is the fulnesse of joy, and at thy right-hand are pleasures for evermore, Psalm. 16.11. GODS company doth not onely make us glad, but makes us good. Seneca said, that one speciall meanes to stay us from vice, was to thinke some grave men were in our company. Semper eos tecum, quos verearis, habe. But we have not only men and Angels, but even GOD looking on us, and associatingus. Peter swore like a Ruffian, and forswore like a Renegate, till CHRIST looked on him, and then he wept. There be divers fellowships in the world.
There is a generation of men, that lavish their estates; as wee say, fling the house out at the windowes; that call themselves Good-fellowes. But they cannot bee Boni sodales, that are mali homines; Good-fellowes and evill men are incompetible. They are like Simeon and Levi, sworne brothers, but fratres in malum, brethren in evill. Perhaps they have more societie than honest men, but not so good societie. Bryers and thornes twine more together than good plants. God is not in this fellowship; you shall meet him at the Church, not at the Ale-house. But Satan puts in for a part: sometimes one drunkard playes the devill with another; in stabbing, or over-loading with drinke: but if there be not alwayes a personate devill, there is alwayes a personall devill; Satan himselfe stands by. In this fellowship, Riot is the host, Drunkennesse the guest, Swearing keepes the reckoning* Lust holds the doore, and Beggery payes the shot.
There is another fellowship, a mysticall one, a mischievous one; the Societie of Iesuites: yet they write themselves, Ex Societate Iesu; Of the fellowship of Iesus. What, no meaner? Would not Peter, nor Paul, nor Francis serve? No, none worthy of these mens company but Iesus. I perswade my selfe, he will give them little thankes for their familiarity. But doe they not rather derive their names a contrario? Iesuites, not because fellowes, but enemies to IESUS. As the Romans tooke names from their Conquests: Scipio Affricanus, because he conquered Affrica. Call him not Israel, but Iezreel: call them not Iesuites, but Iebusites But Peter is the deputie of Iesus, and they are factours of Peter: indeed they uphold the chaire of their imaginary Peter, and blow up other states with Salt-peter. But sure Iesus was never a fellow-digger in their vaults, nor an Enginier in their fire-workes.
Well, thus CHRIST to the faithfull vouchsafes his fellowship: hee is theCant. 2 1. Rose of Sharon, and the Lily of the valleyes: not a Garden-flower enclosed, but hee growes in the field; his company is easily had, if our faith invites him. If thou wilt be concors, of one heart; thou shalt be consors, of one fellowship with him. Let thy will and obedience agree with his Commandements; and then his sweet presence shall accompany thy conscience for ever. Complaine not though other men blanch thee, so long as thou hast the fellowship of Iesus Christ.
5 As members of a Head, and thus we neerely partake of the Divine Nature.

1 Cor. 12 27. Now yee are the body of Christ, and members in particular. Christ is the head, the Church is the body, the faithfull are the members. What doth the head impart to the body? 1. Sense: he gives us eyes, we see not the mysteries of salvation without him; Lord enlighten mine eyes. Eares; we may heare Evangelium vitae, the Gospell of life; but not vitam Evangelii, the life of the Gospell without him. Lord, open mine eares. Taste; for we may have the Cup of blessing held to our mouth, and yet cannot taste the sweets of grace without him: Lord, make mee to rellish thy heavenly gift. Feeling; mans braine is said to have no feeling in it selfe, yet to give feeling to all parts. But Christ hath a feeling of our infirmities, and gives us a feeling of our owne. Mortui non est sentire; We are naturally dead, and cannot feele our misery: it is Christ our head, that gives the life of sense, and the sense of life. 2. Intellectum; the head is the seat of understanding; wee can have no comfortable knowledge of God but by Christ;Iohn 14.8. Lord shew us the Father, and it sufficeth us: Doe thou shew us, we can see nothing but by thy light. This is the true light, that lighteth every man that commeth into the world, Ioh. 1.9. Hence it is, that no member can be ignorant, because he is joyned to the Head. Though they cannot scire universa, know so much as the Head: yet they shall scire necessaria, know so much as shall make them blessed. 3. Motum; Christ our Head gives us motion.Iohn 12.32. When I am lifted up from the earth, I will draw all men to me. If the Head be gone before, the members must needs follow after. We have Movere, from God by nature, Act. 17.28. but movere in bonum, to move to that which is good, from God to Christ. 4. Lastly, Vitam, life it selfe;Ephes. 5.30. for we are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones. There is a quarrell betweene Philosophers and Physitians, about the principall seat of life; whether it be in the heart or in the head. But in Divinitie the case is cleere, for all our life is from our Head. I live, yet not I, but Christ liveth in me: and the life which I live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the Sonne of God, Gal. 2.20. Vbi amat, ibi animat; Our breath is in our bodies, the life of our soules is in heaven. Ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God, Col. 3.3. Corpore ambulantes in terris, corde habitantes in coelis, Anselm. Our bodies move on earth, our hearts dwell in heaven.
Let us be sure we are members of Christ, then sure that we are partakers of the Divine Nature. Who is sure of that? Not the Adulterer; for1 Cor. 6.15. he takes the members of Christ, and makes them the members of an Harlot; hee hath lost the ligaments of purity. Not the Oppressour; he hath lost the ligaments of charity: for he that is not a good member of the Common-wealth, is not a true member of Christ. And if the Vsurer can prove himselfe a good member of his Countrey, I will yeeld he may be a member of the Church. Not the Drunkard; he hath lost the ligaments of sobriety: our heavenly Head hath no staggering members. It will be very hard for a man to reele into heaven. Not the Contentious; for he hath lost the ligaments of concord, and brokenEphes 4.3. the Vnity of the Spirit, which is in the bond of peace. That Religion that is derived from Christ, preserves unity with Christians. He that will not keepe the peace of God, shall not be kept by the God of peace. Not the furious Striker; who if he receives verbae, words; returnes verbera, wounds: he is no member of Christ, for one member doth not strike another. Not the Repiner; for the eye sayes not to the hand, I have no need of thee, 1 Cor. 12.21. The foot will not invade the office of the eare, nor the armes of the lips. The Magistrate will not administer the Sacraments, nor the Minister bench it. Not the Swearer; for he is no member that strikes the head. If we be members, the passion of others will worke compassion in us.
Iohn 15.6 As branches of a Vine, and so wee partake of the Divine Nature. I am the true vine, saith Christ: a true Vine indeed: For, 1. He was set on a blessed ground, the wombe of the Virgin, whom all generations shall call blessed, Luke 1.42. In this Fruit all nations are blessed. 2. He was cut and pruned, wounded for our transgressions; till there ran out the life with bloud, that was to us the bloud of life. 3. He was dunged, soiled with the filthy excrements of the Iewes: his mouth prayes for
 them, their mouthes spit on him. 4. He was digged, his side opened with a speare, his hands and feete with nailes; Foderunt manus; Psal. 22.17. They digged my hands and my feete. 5. As the vine is fastened to some wood or wall: so was Christ fixed to his Crosse, till death and hell had done their worst. Yet there is still life in him, and he spreads this life to his branches, farre and wide.Psal. 80.11. Sending out his boughs unto the sea; and his branches unto the river. We are all naturally drie stickes, fit for nothing but the fire: but being engraffed into him, there is the living sappe of grace derived to us. As the branch cannot beare fruite of it selfe, except it abide in the vine; no more can yee, except yee abide in me, Ioh. 15.4. This saith Saint August. Corda instruit humilium, or a obstruit superborum: comforts the poore Publican, confounds the proud Pharise. Qui viret in foliis, venit a radicibus humor.
Thus also we are partakers: there is a threefold divine union. 1. Essentiall, so God the Father is one with the Sonne and the Holy Ghost. 2. Personall, so Gods sonne is united to humane nature. 3. Mysticall, so the faithfull are united to Christ.1 Cor. 6.17. He that is joyned to the Lord is one spirit. This is infinite comfort: wee cannot want Grace and felicity, unlesse Iesus Christ should want it. Whatsoever the Divine nature hath communicable to man, wee participate by being branches of this vine. Perhaps hee doth cut us till we weepe and bleed;Ioh. 15.2. he purgeth us, but to doe good purpose, that we might bring forth more grapes: for we are most fruitful under the Crosse. Such is the pietie of our heavenly father to us; that even his anger proceeds from mercie: he scourgeth the flesh, that the spirit maybe saved in the day of Iesus Christ, 1 Cor. 5.5. yea Lord, cut us even till we weepe and bleed, so we may partake thy joy and glory in heaven.
7 As spouses of one husband, Christ: this is a neere partaking.Ephes. 5.31. A man shall be joyned to his wife, and they two shall be one flesh. The husband and the wife are one flesh, the beleever and Christ are one spirit. This is an ineffable mysterie, my heart feeles it, no tongue can expresse it. Here all language is lost, and admiration seales up every lip: we may drowsily heare it, and coldly be affected with it; but let me say, principalities and, powers, nature and reason, men and Angels stand amazed at it. But what doe we thus partake of the Divine nature, by this marriage to Christ. 1 We have Oscula, his kisses; and this is arrha fidei and amoris, the earnest of love and faithfulnesse (...) a kisse, of (...) to love: whom God kisseth, he loveth: as the Father wel-comed his returning sonne, he fell on his necke and kissed him, Luke 15.20. No token of affection more lively, more lovely than a kisse. 2. Amplexum, his embracings. His left hand is under my head, and his right hand doth embrace mee, Cant. 15.20. God is said to have a right hand and a left, Pro. 3.16. with Riches and Honours, which are the gifts of his left hand, he lifts up my dejected head: with eternall life, which is the gift of his right hand, he embraceth my sides for ever.Psal. 32.10. Who so puts his trust in the Lord, mercie embraceth him on every side. 3. Concubitum, we sleepe with him;Cant. 1.16. our Bed is greene. Make ready his bed, if thou wouldest have his company, sweepe the chamber of thy heart from all the dusts of evill thoughts, and annoyance of lusts: give him fine linnen, Innocencie of spirit: a pillow of Charity, a covering of obedience to keep him warme; and let the down bed of thy faith be prepared; then he will lodge with thee. 4. He gives his spouse a Iointure or portion. As in the solemnising of a marriage on earth, the husband saies to his wife; with all my worldly goods, I thee endow: so Christ endowes us with his riches of glory.Cant. 2.16. My beloved is mine and I am his. Blessed exchange! he is ours, wee are his: yea all ours are made his, all his is made ours. We brought him a portion of wickednesse, of wretchednesse; the fee-simple of sin, death and hell: he bore all those torments, and so tooke them that hee tooke them away. Hee brings us another manner of Iointure or endowment; justification, sanctification, freedome, grace and peace on earth, glory and joy in heaven. Here's a blessed wedding: in our marriages we have these requirable things; the Bride-groome, the Bride, the Father to give the bride, the Priest to tie the knot, the witnesses, and the wedding ring. Here the bride-groome
 is Christ, the bride the Church, the giver God the Father, (who gives this poore beggar woman, mans soule to be married to this rich man, this Prince? God himselfe.) The Priest that makes the knot is the Holy Ghost, he is the sealer of this union: the witnesses are Angels, the wedding ring is our faith. Dost thou plead, thy soule is married to CHRIST? shew mee thy wedding ring, looke well to thy faith.
The best way to reconcile two disagreeing families or enemie kingdomes, is to make a marriage betweene them: for the uniting of blouds ends all quarrels. We were all adversaries to GOD, and hee was ready to fight against us with eternall death, how should peace bee made but by a marriage! So Hamor perswaded the Shechemites:Gen. 34.21. let us take their daughters to us for wives, and give them our daughters; so shall we have peace. Loe, the king of heaven gives his onely sonne to mortall mans daughter, that is his soule; and though she were a miserable beggar, jointures her in his own kingdom. Be not then married to the world, its a mishapen stigmaticke: not to lust, its a blacke and Leprous witch: not to the devill, he is a foule and ugly monster: runne not a whoring after riches, pleasures, and wantonesses, remember thy chast love to thy one and owne husband.2 Cor. 11.2. I have espoused you to one husband, that I might present you a pure virgin to CHRIST. Abhorre bigamie, lest he divorce thee: have one husband; the bed brookes no rivalls. Raise thy affections above a common pitch, and let thy soule beare her selfe as the spouse of the great King. It is a wonderfull joy that a man hath with the wife of his youth: uxori non redditur aequivolens: but it is a greater joy in being spouses to Christ; the faithfull soule knowes onely the sweetnesse of his embraces. But the greatest of all is to be married to him in heaven;Revel. 19.9. Blessed are they that are called to the marriage supper of the Lambe. Onely that marriage is the merry age, where shall bee joy, great joy, eternall joy. Our musicke shall be the Quire of heaven, and our banket everlasting glory.
I have beene over prolixe in this point of partaking the Divine nature: but it is tedious onely to those that have no right in this participation. Let mee excuse my selfe; my tongue followed my heart, and I could not but speake what was try comfort to feele. It hath given sweet content to my owne spirit, God grant it may give no lesse consolation to others. This participation is not a transfusion of the divine essence or nature into us; but a communication of the manifold blessings wrought out by Christ. Of nothing, we have being, of being worse than nothing, we are restored to Gods Image; formed with reason above the creature, and reformed with Grace above reason: now immortall in our soules, hereafter to be immortall in our bodies. What honour, what glory is this, that a man of dust, a worme creeping out of the mud; audeat erectos ad sydera tollere vultus; should looke up unto heaven, and call the omnipotent God his Father! How gratious is this promise, how glorious this participation! Let not the blind judgements of the world trouble us: we beleeve and know, know and feele, feele and joy that we are partakers of the divine nature. We might here inferre withContr. Arrian orat 2. Athanasius, that Christ is the same substance and nature with the Father; because they that are partakers of the Sonne, are also partakers of the divine nature. He saies further,Epist. ad S. rap. that the beginning of this partaking, is by the consignation of the holy spirit in our baptisme.De si le ad Grat lib. 1. cap. 9. Ambrose refells the Arrians, from this scripture, who condemne the voice of substance and nature in divine things: as if Christ could be the sonne of God, and not the substance of God. But if the name of substance or nature trouble them, let this text satisfie then.De spir. sanc. lib. 1. cap 2. He addes, who can deny the Holy Ghost to be equall with the Father or the Sonne, when as it is his worke whereby we get a participation of the divine nature.Cyril. Ie. os. Catech. 4. Mystag. Cyril saies, that the faithfull communicant in receiving the Sacrament, is made partaker of the divine nature.Ser. 1. de nat. Dom. Leo from hence takes occasion to exhort us to pietie and holy life: remember whose thou art, the member of Christ, and temple of the blessed Spirit: Noli tantum habitatorem pravis actibus de te effugare;
 doe not drive away so sweet an inhabitant by thy sins, and againe subject thy selfe to the devills servitude. To the same purpose speakes Cyrillus Alex. lib. 4. in Levit. And Origen in Levit. Homil. 4. All of them striving to shew us, that we by faith partake of Christs flesh, by his flesh of his soule, by both of his spirit, by all of his Deitie.
Thus you have seene the conveiance, and the Inheritance. In the one was verbum Promissionis, a word of promise: in the other verbum promotionis, a word of preferment. Now all these priviledges we partake as we are true Christians. Plato said, he was beholding to nature for three things: first, that she had made him Hominem non Brutum; a man, not a beast: next, that she had made him virum, non faeminam; a man, not a woman: for mulier quasi mollior, or mollis aer: but vires in viris, vera sedes virum, sexus solet esse virorum. Lastly, that she had made him Graecum, non Barbarum; a Greeke not a Barbarian. Well, in all these preferments he acknowledged himselfe but beholding to nature: and for all these we so well as he, are beholding to the God of nature. But there is a fourth thing, for which as he to Greece, so we must bee thankfull to Grace: that wee are not onely men and not beasts, Greekes, that is knowing, and not ignorants; or Philosophers, and not fooles: but yet infinitely more, that we are Christians, and not Infidells. By this onely we partake of the Divine nature; onely glory in this.Ier. 9 13. Let not the wise man glory in his wisedome, nor the mightie man in his strength, nor the wealthy man in his riches: but let him that glorieth, glory in this, that hee understandeth and knoweth me, saith the Lord. Nothing is more worthy thy pride, than that which will make thee most humble if thou hast it; that thou art a Christian. When an Ambassador told Henry the fourth, that magnificent King of France, concerning the King of Spaines ample dominions: first saith he, he is King of Spaine: is he so, saith Henry? and I am King of France. But saith the other, he is King of Portugall; and I am King of France; saith Henry. He is King of Naples; and I am King of France. He is King of Sicilie, and I am King of France. He is King of Nova Hispanla; and I am King of France. He is King of the West-Indies; and still, I am King France; Hee thought the kingdomes of France equivalent to all these. To what purpose is all this? yes, if thou apply it rightly. Another hath great learning and wit; well I am a Christian. Such a one hath great honours; I am a Christian. Another hath abundance of riches; I am a Christian. That man hath large dominions; well I have more in heaven, I am a Christian. He is of the bloud royall, partakes the nature of kings; yet I partake of the nature divine, am of the bloud royall of IESUS CHRIST, I am a Christian. Let them glory in their great and honourable relations, it shall content our soules that we partake of thy Divine nature, Oh IESUS CHRIST!
Having escaped the corruption that is in the world through lust. This is the third maine point, our deliverance. It hath the last place in the words, not so in effect with us: we must first escape this corruption, before we can come to that divine participation. As you have seene what you are, Partakers of the nature of God: so now see what you were, soild with the corruption of lusts,1 Cor. 6.11. Such were yee, but you are washed, etc. In this deliverance we considered two generall parts; a discoverie, and a recoverie: a discoverie of great danger, a recoverie from that danger. The danger discovered was the corruption of lust: the deliverance is specified, an Escaping. In the danger or wretched estate wherein they naturally stood, consider. 1. The Infection, corruption of lust. 2. The Dispersion, through the world. For the Infection, conceive in it two things. 1. Tumorem, the Corruption. 2. Humorem, the lust. The one that is bred, the other whereby it is fed. In all we shall find, that the greatnesse of the danger commends the greatnesse of our deliverance.
Corruption; this is the Tumour; morbus epidemicus, an universall disease. All flesh hath corrupted their waies. This monster is not coagulated all at once: but Gradatim spargere vires; Prorsus and ex multis unum coalescere morbum. Stone after stone,
 Babel is builded: sticke after sticke, the burning pile is made up: from the confluence of many diseases, ariseth death.
First, it gets into the thoughts; that theGen. 6.5. Imaginations of the heart are evill. This we thinke little danger; but when it hath got the Citadell, it commands all the sconces, and forts, and guards. The Heart is a Castle, the outward senses are the gates, when it hath got into the castle. The watchmen were to blame, that let the enemy in. Turpius ejicitur, quam non admittitur hospes. These be Partus mentis, Primogeniti Aegypti: if thou canst not hinder the conception of sinne, but it must be borne: yet like the midwives of Aegypt, dispatch it betimes, lest it dispatch thee.Iam. 1.15. For lust when it hath conceived, bringeth forth sinne: and sinne when it is finished, bringeth forth death. Spare not the little Babylonians, lest they one day grow great enough to vanquish Israel. Kill the young wolves, and secure thy flocke: destroy the brood of the viper; let it never come to this, I would I had prevented it. Sin is easily committed in act, if admitted in thought. Labour first to purge thy heart from this corruption: let not thy vaine thoughts lodge within thee, Ieremie 4.14. Iob, though he were well perswaded of his children, in respect of their outward demeanour, yet he doubted their hearts, Iob 1.5. It may be my sonnes have sinned, and cursed God in their hearts.Prov. 4.23. Keepe thy heart with all diligence: the hands and feete must be well guarded and regarded, but especially looke to thy heart. Let thy thoughts examine thy thoughts: thy conscience must not only extend to deeds and words, but even to secret thoughts. They that are accustomed to evill thoughts, can seldome bring forth good words, never good deeds. As the corne is, so will the flowre be: if the meale be bad, the fault is not in the milstones that grownd it, but in the miller that put in such base corne. All thy senses and members are but the milstones, the heart is the miller: if thy words and workes be ill meale, thanke the miller thy heart for such corrupt thoughts. As the wood is, so will the fire be: if it be wet and stinking wood, look for an unsavoury and unwholesome fire: if the wood be sweet and drie, it will perfume the roome with a sweet and pleasant aire. Such fewell as you lay on your thoughts, such fire shall you have in your actions. There is a knowledge projected, which onely lookes upon outward things: and even beasts doe in some measure participate this with men. There is a knowledge reflected, that inwardly beholds a mans selfe. Many men know many things, but they know not themselves. Mans knowledge should not be a gadding harlot, whose feete cannot keepe within doores: but a good housewife to stay at home. When Dinah would bee rambling abroad, to see fashions, and to observe the Ladies of the land; she was defloured by Shechem:Gen. 34. if our affections be noctivagant, night-walkers, they will easily come home quicke with child.
Next, this corruption gets into the senses. It passeth through the eye, Ier. 9.21. Death is come up into our windowes, and is entred into our palaces, to cut off the children from without, and the young men in the streets. Mors per fenestras; it hath terrible effects: it invades the Palaces, the secret chambers of the heart: abscindit pueros, it cuts off the little masculine vertues of the soule: yea even the young men the graces that begin to get strength in us. Al this death coms in at the window, that is the eye. Cur aliquid vidi, cur noxia lumina feci? Mine eye hath betraied my soule. Epiphanius gives an apt morall reason, why in the old law when a dead corps passed by any house, they were commanded to shut their doores and windowes. When opus mortuum, a work of death, abhorred sin, is proposed; shut both the doores, your mouthes; and the windowes, your eyes. It is said that Iudiths pantofles ravished Holofernes eyes, Iud. 16.9. Her sandales tooke him: what good men tread under their feere, that wicked men are seduced by. Therefore saies Salomon,Prov. 22.31. Looke not on the colour of the wine, when it moveth it selfe aright: be not tempted with the colour or dancing of it in the cup. Nimium ne crede colori. That sense is accessary to the sinne; that opens the doore, and lets the theefe come in. Iniquity is the theefe, the eye is the gate: therefore saies Iob; Pepigi foedus cum oculis. I have made a covenant with mine
 eyes. Adulterie is such an ugly monster, that it could never enter the citie of the heart, unlesse it did first corrupt the watch. Adverte oculos;Psal. 119.37. Lord turne away mine eyes from beholding vanitie. The eare is another passage; through that doore Satan often sends in his errand. Vae mihi quia audivi; woe is me because I have heard, that which made me either angry or guiltie. Keepe him our, and be safe: stop thine eares to his charmes, so shall he not touch thy heart. But he cries to the porter, let me but come in, I will desire no more: doe but give him the hearing, it is sufficient to take thy soule.
It staies not wholly in the senses, but gets also into the tongue; and this must needes babble the corruption. Democritus called speech the Image of life: and another used to say; Loquere ut te videam; speake, that I may know what thou an. Totum spiritum suum profert stultus;Prov. 29.11. the foole uttereth all his mind. As wise men carry their mouthes in their hearts: so fooles carry their hearts in th ir mouthes. Fooles first speake, and then deliberate, they bluster out their follies. A wicked man beares his words in his mouth, as a dogge doth an arrow in his ribbes; never rests till it be drawne out. He is pregnant of slander or blasphemie; and either he must bee delivered, or hee will burst. Ex ore tuo, saith God; O evill servant, out of thy owne mouth I will judge thee; God doth judge, and man may ghesse. Diogenes said, you will chuse men to service before you heare them speake; yet will not buy an earthen pot before you trye it by the sound. A bell may have a cracke, and you cannot see it; but take the clapper, and strike it, you shall soone perceive it is flawed. The damosell told Peter, sure thou art of Galile, for thy speech bewrayeth thee. Many lappe the water. Curvatis genibus; none but a right Gileadite can without lisping pronounce Shibboleth.
Lastly, you shall finde it in the hands too, and there it exceeds it selfe: in the heart it is but corruption, in the hands it is eruption. Ex ungue leonem; you may know a covetous Wolfe by his pawes. A troubled fountaine sends forth unpure streames: an evill heart hath a most evill hand. If the hand grope for a bribe, as Felix did of Paul; there is a most unjust heart. If the hand scramble for wealth,Acts 29. there is a covetous heart. If the hand be still striking and stabbing, there is a bloudy heart. The actions of the hands are so many characters, whereby we may spell the meaning of the heart. Manus loquuntur, the hands speake a man. What a man does, I am sure he thinkes, not evermore what he saies. Sauls tongue could say, Prastiti mandatum, 1 Sam. 15. Blessed be thou of the Lord, I have performed the commandement of the Lord. But Samuel heard the language of his hands; What meanes then the bleating of the Sheepe, and lowing of the Oxen in mine erres? Verse 14. Corruptio, quae reponitur cordibus, exponitur manibus. The corruption that is secreted in the heart, is declared by the hand. The deafe man would thinke the aire quiet, but he that heares it thunder, knowes it is troubled. Many looke faire and skie-coloured in their profession; but Fulminant operibus, they thunder in their workes.Mic. 2.1. They imagine mischeefe, and practise it, because it is in the power of their hand. They have breath as sweete as Sirens, but their deeds leave a stinke behind them.
Now swell all these corruptions into one impostumated head; and here is not onely the corruption of the world, but a world of corruption. As the Prophet calls Ierusalem and Samaria, not only sinners but sinnes:Micah 1. Or as Lucan speakes of a wonuded body; Totum est pro vulnere corpus; the whole body was as one wound. A land over-flowne with sea is said to be all sea. So a heart over runne with sinne, is all sinne. That is land still, and this is a heart still: but by reason of this deluge we say, that is all sea, this is all sinne. And this corruption is so pleasing to the wicked, that they thinke it health it selfe. Men take such delight in this bestialitie, that as Pliny reports, Grillus being transformed to a hogge, would not endure to be turned to a man againe. When God offers the drunkard to make him sober, no he thankes him, he is better as he is. Doth he undertake to let out the usurers corruption by charitie? no, he had rather bean usurer still.

Diverse uses are to be made of this proposition; which are generally two-fold; concerning others, concerning our selves. Concerning others, that we flie the persons in whom this corruption rages; as being willing to avoid the plague, we doe balke the house wherein the infection dwells, miserable follie! we hate the plague which may kill our bodies, wee love the plague which may spill our soules. The condition of sinne is better than the condition of sickenesse.Nazian. For if a man lie sicke in the streets, others are daintie and shunne him, walking a loofe. But let a rich man be an adulterer, a swearer, an usurer; we close with him: yet only of these we have a charge, De non tangendo, not to accompany them. Which of these corruptions, in your owne soules, doe you thinke the worst? To see this corruption, the Lord give us eyes, to let out this corruption, pricke our hearts, and from this corruption, save our soules.
Concerning our selves; Levius ignorare morbum, quam remedium: better not know our disease, than no meanes to cure it. For this purpose, something must be done upon us, something by us. The thing to be done to us, which may properly get out this naturall corruption, is Salting. For salt doth not onely preserve from corruption, but also eate out corruption. It hath diverse effects, fit to shadow out the worke of the spirit on us for this purpose. First it preserves from corruption and rottennesse: the Egyptians used to wrap their dead bodies in salt. All are corrupted, subject to rottennesse, and need salting: the Ministers of the Gospell are theMatth. 5.13. salt of the earth. It is not enough to have Sales, quirkes of wit, but Salem, soundnesse of doctrine. They that preach not only Nove, after a new method; but Nova, new things; swell your braines, but leave your hearts emptie, they doe not salt you. That is good salt, which keepes your soules from stinking before God. Secondly it is searching, and goes to the quicke: there must be acrimonie in salt, else it is not good. Doe we cut, and fret, and trouble you: remember we are salt; Quo acrius, eo melius. Indeed a man may over powder, and there is discretion in salting. There are some that have had too much salt, till they are ready to throw the Church out at the windowes: the name of a Bishop frights them, a surplisse makes them runne: they feare a crosse worse than the devill does. These are over-powdred, but with ill salt; they are corrupted must be new salted. There is no medicine profitable, but it is sharpe: our acrimonie is good, though there by we endanger the losse of your loves. This should not make you fret at us, but at your owne sinnes.2 Cor. 7.9. I rejoyce, not that yee were made sory but that you sorrowed to repentance. Si haec audientes doleatis, if you heare these things sorowing, give me thankes for it, saith Chrysostome. Shew your selves gratos non gravatos. The Preachers reproofe is like salt, it may bite: but better sharpe corrosives, than festering wounds. I am most loved, where I am most salted, Bernard. At last you will say with David:1 Sam. 25 32 Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, that God of all grace; that hath sent thee to meete me this day; with thy admonition. Blessed be thy advice, the doctrine thou hast preached: and Blessed be thou which hast kept me this day from shedding bloud: even a benediction upon thy person, that hast beene the Instrument of preventing my sinne, by thy salting. There is nothing more against the graine of our affections at first: but when by this meanes wee shall find our selves preserved to heaven, where no corruption shall enter, for this salting we shall thank the Lord. Lastly, falt gives a tast or rellish to another thing. Nunquid insulsum sine sale edi potest? Iob 6.6. Can that which is unsavoury be eaten without salt? Corruption shall not inherite incorruption, 1 Cor. 15.10. Without this salt there is no taste in us. Vnsavoury meate is called foolish meate. Vt sapiant fatuae fabrorum prandia betae, Martial. Lib. 13. Ep. 13. One manner of Gods entring into covenant, was called Foedera salis, Numb. 18.19. the covenant of salt, for the perpetuitie of it. So were the sacrificers seasoned in the old Law, Levit. 2.13. so must every soule be rellished in thr Gospell; Marke 9.49. Every one shall be salted with fire. In that was Foedera salis, in this Sal foederis: there was the covenant of salt, here is the salt of the covenant. Love them best, that salt you most: had you rather
 stinke than be salted, and so presented a service to God. The Sermon may delight us, but not better us, that hath no salt in it. Nulla est in tanto corpore mica salis. Catull If thou yet find no good by thy Pastor, yet love him Spe futuri, in hope of the good hee may doe thee.
Thus to get out this corruption we see what is to be done on us: now what is to be done by us? Two things; a vision of it, and a Provision against it.
First, we must endevour to see it: Physicians say, if the disease be once knowne, the cure is halfe done. If we could see corruption in the true forme, we would loath it. But as the conjured devill appeares not to the necromancer in hideous and frightfull shapes, but in some familiar representation: so vice shewes it selfe in formes most delectable to flesh and bloud. If halfe so much were knowne to man, as God knowes, wee would hang downe our heads for shame. Mans heart is beyond all Geomerrie;Ier. 17.9. Deceitfull above all things, and desperately wicked; who can know it? No man can measure it, but he only that spannes the heavens; Lthe Lord search the heart. It is a little peece of flesh, it will scarce give a kite her breakfast, yet fills the whole world with corruption. Therefore learne to see this corruption: sinne in it selfe is not to be seene; therefore behold it in concretis: the Tyrant like a Lion, the Fraudulent like a Foxe, the lustfull a Goate, the drunkard a Hog, the oppressor a Wolfe, the traitor a devill.
If we would see any thing, it is requisite that the object be rightly placed; not behind us, not besides us. Not behind us, there we cannot see it. Wee hang other mens faults at the pummell of the saddle, put our owne in the cloakebagge behind us. Like Barbars that trimme all men but themselves. Not besides us; if thou wouldest plainly behold an object on this side of the roome, thou must goe on the other side. Wouldest thou see the corruption of pride? thou canst never doe it so long as thou art proud, thou standest on the same side. Goe on the contrary side, that is to Humility, then thou shalt: chold Pride in her gawdy and ridiculous colours. Wouldest thou see the corrup^ion of adulterie? thou canst not so long as thou art an adulterer; the harlot is on the same side with thee: goe over the way to chastitie, and there see the harlot in her proper and foule deformitie. Desirest thou to contemplate the sordid corruption of drunkennesse: thou canst never doe it so long as thou art drunken; thou and thy cups are both of one side: goe and stand in opposito, to sobrietie; then thou shalt see a bleare eye, a reeling foote, a stammering tongue; thou wilt abhorre it. Wouldest thou grow into dislike of usurie? never so long as thou art an usurer; goe on the other side, to Charitie; then see a covetous heart, an oppressing hand, an unquiet conscience. It is impossible to discerne the tetricall and horrid countenance of sinne, so long as thou sidest with it: set thy selfe against it by repentance, and thy dislike will be greater, than ever was thy love.
Next when thou hast discovered it, strive to expell it: this is not done by nature: for nature, according to the temperature of bodies, encreaseth this corruption. The Italians have a proverbe: If little men were patient, if great men were valiant, and red men were loyall; all the world would be equall. The same causes in nature that concurre to such a constitution, concurre to such a corruption. Therefore they say; from a white Spaniard, a blacke German, and a red Italian, Libera nos domine, good Lord deliver us. And we in England confesse much trust or danger in men, according to their complexions. To a red man read thy read: with a browne man breake thy bread: from a pale man still remove: from a blacke man keepe thy love. But this is onely according to nature: for grace can alter nature, and purge out this originall corruption. When an Astrologer told a Cardinall, to what misfortunes he was borne: he answered, but I am new borne: and the good of my second birth hath crossed the bad of my first. Humours cannot be durable, because their prime matter is capable of so many formes and changes: but Graces having their roote in the Deitie, must needs be eternall, as is their author. Strive then to cast out nature by grace, corruption by CHRIST. Doe not keepe it in, but cast
 it out: a wicked man may restraine evill, as doe the godly: but here is the difference; that man keepes in corruption, this kils corruption; onely to refraine evill is to be evill still.Esther 3.6. Haman was angry for want of Mordecay's reverence, yet he smothered the fire of his wrath, which nothing but the last drop of every Iewes bloud could extinguish. The good man doth not onely checke it, but choake it. If he cannot Ejicere, yet so he will Dejicere peccatum, modo non noceat, modo non placeat. If he cannot nullifie it, he will mortifie it; that this corruption shall never hurt him, shall never please him. And when he hath gotten this upper hand of it, he never loseth it: for if it be forborne, it will returne. Corruption is like a candle new put out, it is soone lighted againe: if Satan but blow upon it, the owne heat enflames it. Let us therefore alwayes be tilling the paradise of our soules with good workes, that God may delight to walke there. 8. Will Christ himselfe become Ianitor cordis, he will be as ready to be the doore-keeper of our house, to keepe out our enemies; as David was willing to be the doore-keeper of Gods house, to let in his friends. It is onely the Lord, who with the sweet breath and perfume of his holy Spirit, doth cleanse the aire of our hearts from this corruption. We see our dutie, to cast it out: now let me adde two circumstances; when, and whence.
First, when we must cast it forth, and that; 1. Whilest corruption is young. Kill the enemie whiles he is young; ut virtus ejus elidatur in semine; that he may leave no posterity to hurt thee, Hieron. Sinne long customed, is hardly conquered; Acta confirmant voluntatem, tam in malo quam in bono; Frequent actions constitute an habite, whether in good or ill. Hee that hath done well once, shall more easily doe it the next time. He that hath done evill once, shall more hardly resist it at the next assault. There are mala innata, and mala inseminata; evils that naturally grow in us, and evils that we sow in our selves. Whatsoever growes of it owne accord, let us strive to kill; but sow none. Contere caput serpentis, suppresse the beginnings of evill. Sin is like a Nettle, the older it is, the hardlyer killed. Well hath our Church ordered that preparative every Morning-prayer; To day if yee will heare his voyce, harden not your hearts. 2. Whilest weare young: for Corruption growes the older the stronger, and man the older the weaker. Iuvenis, admittis socium; Senex, habebis dominum; Whom thou being young entertainest for thy play-fellow, when thou art old thou shalt finde thy Master. Our Saviour began the worke of our salvation whilest hee was very young. The very first day, that great Prince was Courted in a Stable: he shed some bloud in his Circumcision when he was but eight dayes old. And is it too early for us being young, to worke up our owne salvation? Shall Satan have the Rose-buds, and God onely the stalke? Satan the veines full of bloud, bones full of marrow, God a carcase? We vowed in our Baptisme, all the dayes of our life to his service; for shame let us not, Ananias-like, keepe backe part of the price.Mal. 1.8. If ye offer the blinde for sacrifice, is it not evill? if the lame and sicke, is it not evill? The governour of your bodies will none of it, will the Governour of your soules accept it? Serve God in old-age? a sweet peece of service! If God come in youth, and finde no fruit, beware the fig-trees curse; Never fruit grow on thee hereafter. The sealing of a bond without a time set, makes the debt presently due. God doth not bid the drunkard abstaine when he can drinke no more: nor the Vsurer leave oppressing when his bagges be full. To leave sinne, when sinne leaves us, will never passe for true repentance.
Next, whence we must cast it forth; out of the heart. For as in generation, so in regeneration, Cor primum vivit, Life begins at the heart. Now to cast it quite out from thence, that no dregges remaine, this is not possible on earth; but the strength and principalitie of it. As when many birds are caught in a net, if a Pelican or some great fowle can breake the net, and get out; all the little birds follow. So cast out the grand-corruption, that is most predominant; as Lust in the Adulterer, Covetousnesse in the Worldling, Pride in the haughtie; then all the inferiour will follow. As if the master be dead, all the servants will attend the funerall. If it cannot
 wholly bee now buried, it shall bee one day: GOD suffers sinne in his chosen till the last, that then they may have a full triumph. When the five Kings were hid in a cave at Makkedah,Ioshua 10. Ioshua charged the souldiers to pursue their enemies and consume them: for the Kings he brought them out at evening, and then made his men of warre set their feet on the neckes of them. So at evening you shall set your triumphant feet on the neckes of these tyrants, having first captivated them, and slaine your enemies with the sword of mortification. Yea,Rom. 16.20 GOD shall shortly tread Satan himselfe under your seete, and give you a full victorie in CHRIST.
Lust; we perceive the tumour that is bred, now look upon the humour whereby it is fed: Lust, Concupiscence in it selfe, as it is a facultie of the soule, and gift of God, is not sinne; but may be the hand of vertue, or the instrument whereby shee workes. Keepe her at home, and set her on worke, to light the candle, and sweepe the house; let her be under the correction of grace, and she may prove a chaste Virgin, fit to meet the Bride-groome at his comming. Lust is in it selfe, as they write of the Planet Mercury in the Horoscope of mans nativitie; if it be joyned with a good Planet, it makes it better; if with a bad one, it makes it worse. There is a Lusting of the Spirit;Gal. 5.17. for the Spirit lusteth against the flesh. But it is most commonly taken in the worse sense, and so two wayes; Strictly, and largely, or in the full scope.
Strictly, it is taken for the sinne of uncleannesse; which albeit God hath in so many places threatned to confound; yet that filthinesse hath the Bawdes; Whores are not without their patrons. Such are first Libertines, and they will have Scripture for it. Hosea was commanded by GOD to take a wife of Whoredomes, Hos. 1.2. Som answer, this was Fictum non factum, a figure, not a fact; not an historie, but a mystery. That God would cast off his old wife, the Church of the Iewes for their Whoredomes, and choose a new one, even a wife of Fornications, the Church of the Gentiles:Ephes. 5.27. that hee might sanctifie it, and present it to himselfe a glorious Church. So the not beleeving wife is sanctified by the husband, 1 Cor. 7.14. But grant it an history, yet was not the Prophet to be blamed, that Ex impudica meretrice castam fecerit uxorem; of an impious strumpet he made a chast wife; but rather they that of chaste wives make impudent strumpets; which is the condition of those times. Howsoever, to the Prophet this act was commanded, to all us, the like is forbidden.
The other defenders of incontinencie are the Papists; and that not onely with arguments, but with authoritie. Their common plea is, that in hot countreyes they are necessary evils: but by their leave Israel was a hotter climate than Italy; yetDeut. 23.17. There shall be no whore of the daughters of Israel. But they cite Augustine, Aufer meretrices and turbarveris omnia libidinibus: take away whores, and ware your wives; that were the way to make stewes of your owne houses. This might Augustine say, but Saint Augustine never said it. Such a gallant he might be in his unruly youth: but after that same Tolle and lege, when hee lighted upon that Text, Rom. 13.13. no more chambering and wantonnesse now, but he put on the LORD IESUS, and disclaimed the lusts of the flesh. He confesses; Indeed I did once begge of God the gift of continencie; but to tell truth, I desired that he should not heare me;Conses. l. 8. c 7. malebam expleri, quam extingui: I had rather it might then be satisfied, than mortified. But we justly abandon that remedie, that is worse than the disease. As an Emperour said of the meanes prescribed him to cure his Leprosie, which was the bloud of Infants; Mallem semper aegrotare, quam tali remedio convalescere; I had rather be sicke still, than be recovered by such a medicine. Thus they that put away honest wives, and goe to harlots; deale as wisely, as he that cuts off his owne legs, to goe upon crutches. Causa patrocinio non bona pejor erit.
This Lust is a sinne hardly subdued: old Lot, whom all the fire that consumed Sodome could not touch, yet uritur igne suo; he was enflamed with his owne heat. Ambrose saith of Sampson; Strangulavit Leonem, non suffocavit libidinem: Hee
 could choake a Lion, not his lust. Another of Hercules; Lenam non potuit, potuit superare Leaenam; Quem sera non valuit vincere, vicit Hera; Hee found the Lionesse weaker than the Bawd, and no beast so savage as his Whore. Lust is an hellish fire, whose fewell is fulnesse of bread and idlenesse, evill words the sparkes, infamie the smoake, pollution the ashes, the end hell. For this sinne GOD rained fire and brimstone upon Sodome; Gehennam misit e coelo, Hee sent downe Hell out of Heaven, Salvian. The delight is short, a minute determines it; the torment is everlasting, no worlds of ages shall end it. Plutarch writes of Lysimachus, who being besieged, himselfe and all his people readie to perish by thirst, gave up the keyes of his Citie to the enemie for one cuppe of cold water; when he had tasted this cold comfort, he cryed out, O that far so short a pleasure, of a King, I should be made a slave! So Brevis est voluptas fornicationis, perpetua est poena fornicatoris, Hieron. The pleasure of adultery is short, the punishment of the adulterer is everlasting. Consider this lust in the bodie, as a pot boyling on the fire: it may be two wayes cooled.
First, by taking away the fewell: uncleannesse is the daughter of surfet. Saturitati, tanquam matri, omnes ascribuntur libidines; That Harlot breeds bastards, and layes them at the Rioters doore; the soule stands charged to answer what the bodie does. When the mouth is made a tunnell, the throat a wine-pipe, and the belly a barrell, wantonnesse bien venu, Rom. 13.13. After gluttony and drunkennesse, followes chambering and wantonnesse. Gregory observes, that Coquorum princeps, the chiefe of the Cookes, which was Nebucaradan, first overthrew the walls of Ierusalem, and first put fire to the Temple. By the chiefe of the Cookes, he understands Gluttony; by the wals, our senses; by the Temple, our heart: Riot gives the first overthrow to all these.
Secondly, the pot is cooled by powring cold water into it: onely abundance of sorrowfull teares can put out this unruly fire. The Amalekites had spoiled Ziklag,1 Sam. 30. and taken their wives and their children prisoners: which when David and his people found, they wept till they could weepe no more. David asked counsell of the LORD, and upon his direction followed them, and smote them from the twilight till the evening of the next morrow. So there escaped none, save foure hundred young men that fled upon Camels. Conceive Lusts to bee these Amalekites, they spoile our Ziklag, sacke our Citie, captivate our wives and children, our Senses and affections: now let us cast cold water into this pot, weepe till wee can weepe no more; lament we day and night. Then let us pursue these brutish Amalekites, so shall wee overcome our untamed lusts, and smite them from the twilight of our youth, to the evening of our old-age. Some young men may escape, some vaine words and uncleane thoughts may remaine in us: but for the old Amalekites, grosse and foule faults, wee shall conquer them. So recover wee our wives and daughters, our affections so deare to us: and they that were the prisoners and drudges to Lust, shall now doe good service to GOD.Ier. 23.10. The Land is full of adulterers, and because of oathes it mourneth. Shall the Land mourne for the Inhabitants, and not the Inhabitants mourne for their sinnes? Wee have preventions, lawfull marriages. The Garamantes of Lybia have all their women common; wicked Infidels! No marriage, no chastitie; we have marriage, but not chastity. Intolerabilius peccatum, ubi tale remedium. The more unsufferable their impiety, that have such a remedy. Though we cannot quench this fire, we will weep upon it; we will mourne for these lusts. Let the offenders use this remedy, and by Gods assistance they shall get the victory.Psal. 74.13. Thou breakest the heads of the Dragons in the waters. The heads of the Dragon are broken in the waters, great lusts are drowned in a floud of teares.Exod. 32. Moses in zealous indignation did drown Israels sin: he drowns the Idoll, lest the Idoll should drowne the people: as the Philosopher did with his wealth; mergam te, ne mergar a te; so beat your lustfull affections to dust, drown them in your teares, and let your soules drinke those teares, as the Prophet sayes, My teares
 have been my drink day and night. These shall so blot Satans accusation and bill of complaint against us; that the Court of heaven will not reade it. There was an hand-writing against us, but it was ingraven in brasse; no Aqua-fortis of our teares could eat out that: onely Christs bloud did expunge it, Col. 2.14. The Devill still puts up new declarations and quarrels against us, but they are written (as it were) in paper; if we weepe on them, we shall easily blot them out. Antipater wrote to Alexander a long Epistle, containing accusations of his mother Olympias; to whom Alexander shortly replied; Alas, doth not Antipater know, that Vna matris lacryma multas delebit literas? That one teare of a mother will wash out many letters of an accuser? So one teare of the childe of God, shall obliterate all the indictments of the Devill. Thus penitently, Peccata dolere, est peccata delere: for God esteemes sinne in deed repented, as if it had never beene indeed committed. Weepe therefore here, that thou mayest not weepe hereafter. One remorsefull teare shed on earth, is better than whole buckets in hell. Weepe here, and weepe never; weepe there, and weepe for ever.Psal. 126.5. They that sow in teares, shall reape in joy.
All this while we have considered Lusts in the narrowest bounds; as a particular effect of that grand beldame Concupiscence. But Lust is of a greater latitude, and is not onely to be taken for the desire of fleshly company, but for the whole generall corruption of our nature, prone to all sinne.1 Iohn 2.16. There is in the world the Lust of the flesh, the Lust of the eyes, and the pride of life: therefore it is called Concupiscentia mundi; the lust of the world. Saint Iohn divides the world into three parts, and gives lust two of them there: all in the next verse; The world passeth away, and the lusts thereof. Whatsoever is in the unregenerate will of man, that is Lust.Gal. 5.19. The workes of the Flesh are manifest; that is, of Lust, it is all one. When they are conjoyned, as Lusts of the Flesh; then flesh is as the mother, and lusts the daughters: when they are found in severall places, know they are but diverse names of one and the same thing. Paul in reckoning them up, mentions many, and concludes more; with And such like. He sayes first they are so manifest that he need not, and last so manifold that he cannot reckon them all up. Now if Saint Paul numbring the sinnes of his times, was faine to breake off his catalogue with an and caetera; how shall wee in these dayes deliver up a true inventory of them? Alas, we have now those sinnes, to which they then wanted names. Theirs were Serpents, ours are dragons: the first were evill, but the last are worst of all. The consummation of times and sinnes are met together upon us. The world, like that Image, had a head of gold, there was some puritie: his shoulders of silver, there the metall declines: his armes of brasse, baser still: his legges of iron, yet more rustie; but now come to his feet, they are all of clay; nothing but earth, earth. And as commonly in a diseased bodie, all the humours fall downe into the legges or feet, and make an issue there. So the corruption of all ages hath slided downe into the present, as into the feet, and there Lust hath made an issue, to the annoyance of all the world.
This Lust is a friendly Iudas within us, a familiar devill: She is indeed the mother of all wickednesse; yeeld the father-hood to the Devill, Lust will challenge the mother-hood to her selfe,Iames 1.15. When Lust hath conceived, it bringeth forth Sinne: and Sin when it is finished, bringeth forth Death. Saint Iames seemes to speake of a wombe; Lust conceives: of a Birth, it bringeth forth: of a Growth, it is finished: of a Death, it lastly kills, brings forth death. The Psalmist describes the bringing her to bed, Psalm. 7.14. First, she conceives mischiefe, and growes quicke with childe. Then, she Travels with iniquitie; there's her labour. Lastly, shee brings it forth, there's her delivery. The Prophet gives her a quicker dispatch;Esay 59.4. Shee conceiveth mischiefe and bringeth forth iniquitie. Shee doth but conceive, and presently bringeth forth. Let mee take leave to follow this significant allegorie. We have found out the mother of sinne, Lust; but can she be with childe without an husband, or one instead of an husband! sinne must have a father, so well as a mother: though it bee an illegitimate bastard, it must have a father. You all know the
 Father of sinne, that's the devill. We have now a father and a mother: the father begets, and the mother conceives: shee is bigge with child: but how shall she doe for a midwife? she cannot be delivered of her burden without a midwife. There is one ready at her call, that's consent. We have now a father, a mother, a midwife: suppose the child is begotten, conceived and borne; how shall we doe now for a nurse? it will otherwise die for want of keeping. Lust is some great Lady, and scornes to nurse her owne children. There is a nurse provided too, and that is, Custome. Here are all things too fit and ready for the production of this monster. The devill is the father, Lust the mother, consent the midwife, and custome the nurse: if consent bring it forth, custome will bring it up. When sinne was first brought forth into the world in that first humane person that ever sinned, Eve, this was the proceeding. Concupiscence the mother kept company with the devill the father, and hee suggested to her his seed, that was temptation. Presenting a faire fruit to her eye, and disswading from confidence in the truth of Gods charge: upon this seed shee begins to conceive, Gen. 3.6. She saw it pleasant to the sight, and desirable to make one wise. After this conception in the thoughts, she knew not how to be delivered but by consent: she did take and eate. Now the child is borne, lest it should perish for want of keeping, Lust puts it forth to nurse. Dame Custome takes it to keeping, and promiseth to bring it up. And she hath beene so good as her word; so nurse it, and nourisht it, that it is now past a tender stripling: Paul calls it an old man, Eph. 4.22. Put off the old man; above 5000 yeeres old, and yet it is not only alive, but lively and lusty to this day.
First, for the father of sinne, whom all confesse to be the devill,Ioh. 8.44. When hee speaketh a lie, he speaketh of his owne: for he is a lyar, and the father of it. CHRIST calls him the father of lies, not of lyars, for all men are lyars. Now as Omne mendacium est peccatum, every lie is a sinne; so some have observed that Omne peccatum est mendacium, every sin is a lie: because it is done against the truth. If so, then he that is the father of all lies, is the father of all sins. And by a lie he engendred all sinnes. GOD had said, In the day thou eatest thereof thou shaltGen. 2.17. surely dye: Eve first, receiving Satans seed, reporting this, corrupts it; and saies onely, yee shall not touch it,Gen. 3.3. Lest yee dye. Satan saies peremptorily, yee shall not die. So Gods plaine affirmation, ye shall die; was first turned to a dubitation, lest yee die: at last, to an impudent negation, ye shall not die. Deus affirmat, mulier dubitat, diabolus negat, Bern. God affirmes it, the woman doubts it, the devill denies it. Thus he is the father of sinne. In the devill there be some good things: Substantia, immortalitas, fides, aliquando veritas. Substance, for he is good as a creature, not as a devill God made him an Angell, he made himselfe a devill. Deus non odit peccatum causa diaboli, sed diabolum causa peccati. God does not hate sin for the devils sake, but he hates the devill for sinnes sake. Immortality; for he is a spirit and cannot die. Faith,Iam. 2.19. the Devills beleeve and tremble. Truth; for they confessed Iesus to be the sonne of the living God. But these two last are enforced, not voluntary. His whole purpose is to beget sinne, and by sinne to beget death. God made not death, Wisedome 1. how then came it into the world? It entred by sin: how entred sin? by the malice of the devill. This Satan workes in a double spight.
In a spight to man; because he is Gods Image: he cannot hurt God, therefore have at his Image. Besides; man is to be advanced to that heaven, from which he is hurled downe for ever. If therefore hee possibly can, he will plucke him to hell where himselfe must be for ever. Thus Satan gave life to sinne, that gave death to all the world. In a spight to Christ; for Christ and Satan were never friends. The Lion of Iudah, and the Lion of this world, were never at peace. The devill doth what he can to bruise CHRISTS heele, in hurting his members; and CHRIST hath throughly burst his head. In CHRISTS birth Satan set hard to kill him by Herod, in the wildernesse he tempted him, he never rested till he had brought him to the Crosse: he had him then where he would. But as the devill came to destroy
 CHRIST, so CHRIST came to destroy the divell, t For this purpose was the Sonne of God manifested, that he might destroy the workes of the devill. But as Christ resisted him when his living body was on the pinacle of the temple: so he overcame him when his dead temple hung on the pinacle of the Crosse. Scaliger writes, that the Cameleon when he spies a Serpent shading under a tree, gets up and lets downe a little threed, not unlike a spiders, breathd out of his mouth: at the end whereof their hangs a little drop as cleare as christall, which falling on the serpents head kills him. So Christ mounted on the tree of his Crosse, sends downe from his side a threed of bloud, that fell on the old serpents head, and for ever slew him. Now if thou wouldest prevent this generation, infatuate the father of sinne, disable the devill. Allow him no bed of fornication in any member of thy body, or corner of thy soule. Would he beget adulterie in thee? afford him not the bed of an uncleane thought. Would he beget revenge? afford him not the bed of anger. Would he beget usurie? allow him not the bed of covetousnesse. Tolle concubitum, debarre this copulation, prevent this conception and thou shalt never have that bastard laid at thy doores.
We have had much adoe with the father of sinne, we shall yet be more troubled with the mother. I could not bee blamed for accusing him, that accuseth all the world: neither must I be partiall to the Beldam, lust. An old decrepite woman, growing on a pace to sixe thousand yeeres, and yet shee is not past children. This lustfull mother is ready to conceive, as that devillish father is forward to beget.Ovid. Pugnabit primo fortassis, and (Improbe) dicet: Pugnando vinci se tamen illa volet: she wrastles with a desire to be overcome. I will consider how this is done in some particulars;
An offence is done you, the devill comes, and joyning with concupiscence, suggests the adulterous seed of anger: lust, the mother conceives malice, she travells with the pleasure of revenge, she growes bigge with conspiracie, and at the last, shee brings forth murder.
There is beauty in a woman, Gods admirable workemanship, rich colours upon a peece of clay. By some wanton looke, lascivious speech, or light behaviour, the devill suggests the seeds of unchastitie. Lust conceives desire, shee travells with expectance of opportunitie, growes bigge with immodestie, at last, brings forth adulterie.
In another, the devill suggests the seed of Pride; Lust conceives it by thinking on honour, she travells in the imagination of high places: how great things shee might doe, how bravely quit her enemies, if preferred to some dignitie: he growes bigge with an office, and at last brings forth scorne and tyrannie: now still she runs upon Pompey's motto. Semper ego cupio praecellere, and esse supremus.
Satan suggests the seed of discontent: Lust conceives a child, like Ice, it begets the mother againe. Wine begets lust, and lust begets a desire of wine. Bacchus and Venus are neere neighbours; only voluptuousnesse hath a house betweene them.
This is the mother, and thus prone to the forbidden bed: what shall we doe? because we know the dishonestie of the father, let us be sure to keepe in the mother; restraine Lust, and so sue a divorce betwixt the devill and concupiscence. The only way is to put enmitie betweene the seed of the serpent, and the seed of the woman: that though the devill be never so busy in suggesting, yet concupiscence may be kept from conceiving. There are two good herbes to make this woman barren, Agnus Castus and Lettuce; Prayer and fasting. If this kind of devill have adulterated with Lust, he goes not out but by prayer and fasting. It is fasting spittle that must kill this serpent. If this take not effect, present to thy mind a spirituall crucifixe, memoriam crucifixi, the remembrance of him that died on the Crosse for thee. Thinke thou doest see Iesus comming toward thee; his head crowned with thornes, his hands, his feet, his side, his heart bloudy; his eyes full of teares. Behold him:


 adulterie sits not in those eyes: those feet were not made to please Herod with a measure: those armes were wonted to no wanton embraces; but to embrace the crosse with patience, our soules with comfort. For thee, Lust, for thee have I died; thou onely didst murder mee: doe not make these wounds bleed a-fresh: open not my side againe, to let forth new streames of bloud: pull mee not from my throne in heaven to the grave againe. Wouldest thou keepe lust from the adulterous companie ot Satan? set in the view of thy conscience, IESVS CHRIST crucified.
The next is the midwife, Consent: well might the child be conceived by suggestion, but without consent it could never be borne. The devill suggests into Absaloms heart pride, his lust conceives a crowne, Consent of will is his midwife, and delivers him of treason. The devill suggests into Demas, gaine; his lust conceives heapes of mony, ease, the pleasure of the world: Consent of will is his midwife, and delivers him of apostacie. Satan comes to a young beginner, one newly set up for himselfe, and suggests the sweetnesse of being rich: lust conceives all wayes of gaine and propounds being one day an Alderman: Consent of will playes the midwife, and brings forth fraud and lying. If thou wouldest prevent the birth of sinne, deny lust her midwife, Consent.Prov. 1.10. My sonne, if sinners entise thee, Consent thou not. Could artisans and women master great difficulties and tu non poteris? saith Augustine to himselfe. It is no easy atchievement: It was as great a miracle that Ioseph in the armes of his mistresse should not burne with lust; as it was for those three Saints to walke in the fiery fornace without scorching, Luther. If lust will yeeld, and sinne must be bred, yet be sure to locke up the midwife; that it may be an abortive brood, stiffied in the wombe, still-borne. He was a great Prince, that on the difficultie of his Queens deliverie; when the midwife put him to the choice, whether the mother or the sonne should be saved, seeing one of them must on necessitie be lost: the king answered, save the fruite, though the tree fall; preserve the sonne, albeit you lose the mother. But in this case doe the contrary; save the mother and let the child perish: kill sinne, and preserve nature alive. Thou art tempted, consent not; allow no midwife, and the child shall never bee borne. Wee have all lust about us; a veryRom. 7.24. body of death: the father is ready, the mother is willing; keepe away the midwife; that though sinne be done upon us, we may have this comfort, we consented not.
The last is the Nurse, Custome: this feeds, sustaines, and brings up the bastard. Though it be borne, it could not batten, thrive, and grow to stature, but by sucking on the brests of Custome. The curse that the Cretians used against th ir enemies, was not fire on their houses, nor a sword at their hearts: but that which in time would bring on greater woes; ut mala consuetudine delectentur; that they might be delighted with an ill custome.Psal. 7.5. If I have done this, if there be iniquity in my hands, etc. Then let the enemy persecute my soule, and take it: yea let, him tread downe my life upon the earth, and lay mine honour in the dust. Hugo Cardin. on those words of the Psalme comments thus. Let him persecute my soule, by suggestion: take it by consent; tread downe my life by action; and lay mine honour in the dust by custome. This is not onely a grave to bury the soule in, but a stone rolled to the mouth of it, to keepe it downe. Sinne but now borne, Iniquitas est; matura, natura fit: when it is ripe, it becomes a nature. Desinit esse remedio locus, ubi quae fuerunt vitia, mores sunt. The disease is incurable, when vices are made manners. Incipit esse licitum, quod solet esse publicum. Custome is not onely another nurture, but another nature. Lawyers say, Quod est consuetum, praesumitur esse iustum. That which is done by many, is at length thought lawfull in any. Take an Apologue: foure things meeting, boasted their comparative strength; the Oke, a Stone, Wine, and Custome. The oke stood stoutly to it, but a blast of wind came and made it bow; the axe felled it quite downe. Great is the strength of stones, yet continuall drops weare them; Gutta cavat lapidem: a hammer breakes them
 to peeces. Wine overthrowes Giants and strong men, Senators and wise men; and quid non pocula possunt? yet sleepe overcomes wine. But Custome invicta manet, remaines unconquered. Many would not endure IESUS CHRIST, because he came to breake their customes. The Masters of the Pythonesse, Acts 16.21. objected this against Paul and Silas; that they did teach customes not lawfull for them to receive. For this cause was the up-roare in Ephesus; the coppy-hold of Diana was touched: and the towne clarke had no meanes to appease the tumult, and deliver the Apostles; but by saying,Act. 19.37. These men are no blasphemers of your goddesse; they come not to breake your customes. Tell a Papist, that his two meales fast makes the third a glutton, he defies you for a breaker of his customes. Tell a country man that it is unlawfull to keepe his towne-wake on the Sunday; he hates you as a Puritan, that comes to breake his Custome. It is Custome that hath undone our Church: when the Pastor comes to demand his tithes; he is answered, as the man of Romney-marsh did his Minister from Scripture; Custome to whom Custome. But the Minister well replied; The Churches of God have no such custome. This is the nurse Custome: and so you have all foure; the father, the mother, the midwife, the nurse. And here is the generation of that monster, sin: borne from the wombe of that concupiscence, which my Text calls Lust.
Now God hath given us meanes to conquer all these. The father is Satan,Pet. 5 9. Whom resist stedfast in the faith. Faith in the Lambe shall put this roaring Lion to flight. They overcame him by the bloud of the Lambe, Revel. 12.11. For the mother, overcome her by mortification,Col. 3.5. Mortifie your members which are on the earth: not onely lay her a sleepe, but lay her dead. The midwife is Consent; disable her, by resolution not to obey her in the lust of the flesh,Rom. 6 12. Let not sinne raigne in your mortall body. He saies not, let not sinne tyrannize: but let it not raigne. Be not sin's voluntaries: if you bee onely pressed against your wills; it is not you that offend, but sinne that dwelleth in you. The devill will suggest, and concupiscence will admit, but take away the midwife, consent not. There will be Sensus, let there not be Consensus. When the faire Lucrece was ravished by Tarquin, Augustine observes; Duo fuerunt, and unus adulterium admisit: there were two persons, and but one adulterer: a conjunction of bodies, but a distraction of minds. A regenerate mans case is like that of Lucrece; sinne is rather done on him, than of him. But lastly, let us all confesse, that the father hath begot, and the mother conceived, and the midwife brought forth sinne in us: we have gone too farre in this birth: yet in the feare of the Lord let us not put it to nurse; not accustome our selves to it: but breake off sinne by repentance; otherwise, Lust when it is finished, brings forth death.
That is in the world: we have seene the infection, let us now looke upon the Dispersion; Through the world. The world is taken two wayes; for the frame and constitution of the world: and for the men and Inhabitants of the world. Now this corruption extends it selfe to both: the content hath corrupted the continent: mens sins have infected the world, as the plague in persons infect the very walls of the house. The latter acception is here strictly meant: yet let us see this corruption in both.
First, for the men of the world; for this is rather corruptio morum quam elementorum: a depravation of manners, rather than of elements.Ioh. 12.31. The Prince of this world shall be cast out. Not the Prince of the great world, for that is God; but of the little world, evill man: the wicked are his vassalls, because they are sinnes vessells. The devill is called theEph. 2.2. Prince of the power of the aire, the spirit that worketh in the children of disobedience.Ioh. 1.19. Christ was in the world, and the world knew him not. What world knew not CHRIST? The heavens knew him, for the sunne was eclipsed at his death, and that in Plenilunio: the earth knew him, for it shooke and quaked with feare: the stones knew him, for they rent and cleave in sunder The world that knew him nor, was man; not substantia, but Incola mundi. Vnumquidque
 illud est quod amat: every thing is that which it loves: so the wicked are the world, because they affect the world. But if the world be ever taken in the worse sense, how then is it said; Sic dilexit mundum; So God loved the world? when Donatus opposed that, 1 Iohn 5.19. Positus est in maligno; the whole world lieth in wickednesse: Augustine answers him with, 1 Iohn 2.2. Christ is the propitiation, not for our sins only, but for the sins of the whole world. And2 Cor. 5.19. God was in Christ reconciling the world to himselfe. Here Qui bene distinguit, bene docet: a distinction shall make all cleare. Where world is taken in an evill sense, it is meant of evill men, where in good sense, of good men. Where in a generall sense of all men. The godly are called the world, but medulla mundi, the marrow of the world: when this marrow decaies, the world will perish.Psal. 12.1. Helpe Lord, for the godly man ceaseth: and the faithfull faile among the children of men. If the godly be diminished, now helpe Lord. Chrysostome saies, many things are spoken De agro, that shall not be fulfilled but in horreo. Distingue tempora, and concurrent scripta. But the wicked are properly called the world: for though they be reasonable men, and have soules from heaven; yet they are corrupted by and corrupting the earth There is a river in Spaine full of fishes; but those fishes are corrupt and unwholesome, by reason the river runnes three or foure leagues under the ground: so the wicked though they had some sparkes of naturall goodnesse, yet by running through the earth, they become lothsome,Phil. 3.18. Many walke, that are enemies to the Crosse of Christ: if many in Pauls time, more now. For Satan who was then bound, is now loosed againe out of prison: andRevel. 12.12. hath great wrath, because he knowes he hath but a short time. So tetricall and horrible is this, that a man would thinke the whole world were turned devill. Therefore pray we with David;Psal. 17.14. From men of the world, good Lord deliver us.
Secondly, the world in the very frame and substance of it is thus corrupted; all in vanitie. A man that would tast the saltnesse of marine waters, needs not drinke up all the sea: it is enough for me to give you a tast of this world. In the creation of every daies worke, God saw that it was good: but in the sixth day, having done all; Erant valde bona: viewing all in the harmonie, They were very good. The things of the world were made good for man, but he made them evill to himselfe: so that now the whole creature groaneth under this corruption, Ro. 8. So it labours, as if it desired release, and rest: so it is corrupted that it must perish. Communis mundo superest rogus.2 Pet 3.10. The heavens shall passe away with a great noise, etc. Non minus certum, quia dilatum: the differring doth not discredit the certaintie. If the world it selfe be so perishable, what think you of all the pompe and vanities of it? Corrupta sunt, and corrumpentia: they are corrupt themselves, and corrupting others.1 Ioh. 2.15. Love not the world: what is this world? The Apostle expounds it to be lust of the flesh, lust of the eyes, and pride of life. Beatus qui explicatur, miser qui implicatur. Blessed is the man that is delivered out of them, wretched is he that is wrapped in them.
There's only one way left, not to admit
The worlds corruption; to be none of it.
Now shall I wrappe up both these worlds into one bundle, and teach you how to loath it? This you will doe by considering the villanie, miserie, Inconstancie, Insufficiencie of it.
The villanie; The world shall hate you, saith Christ. Then Christ hath not told us truly, or the world will use us hardly. As Tertullian observes on Nerva's epistle to Plinie: hee would not have Christians sought for, quasi Innocentes, as if hee confessed them innocent: yet being found he would have them punished, quasi reos, as if he professed them guilty. Good men commonly find as much favour of the world, as vitellius shewed Iulius the. Senator: when the Emperor Commodus commanded hee should bee slaine with the sword; vitellius in favour did beat him to death with cudgells. Plead what they can for their owne innocence, the Wolfe will answer the Lambe; Indeed thy cause is better than mine, but my teeth are better
 than thine, I will devoure thee. There are not wanting, that like Fimbria of Rome, who meeting a Citizen that he hated, in the street, gave him a deadly thrust into the body with his sword: and the next day entred an action against him, that he had received but part of his blade into his body, and not all, as he meant it. Sic nocet innocuo nocuus: what can the Lambe expect else of the butcher? Indeed sometimes the world useth a man, as Ierome notes, the Praetor handled a souldier, to make him renounce CHRIST. First he imprisons him in his owne house, allowes him a chamber well furnished, soft lodging, daintie cheare, wine, musicke, all delights. When this course would not take, (yet Lord, how many are thus tempted to leave their Saviour!) then he casts him into a darke dungeon, loades him with irons, starves him with the hungry allowance of huskes and puddle-water. When nothing would doe, he burnes him. If the devill cannot winne men to hell as hee seemes an Angell of light, hee will strive to accomplish it as hee is a spirit of terror; if not transformed to another shape, then deformed in his owne shape.
The Miserie: so soone as CHRIST was baptised, and the Spirit descended on him, presently Satan had a-bout with him. No sooner doe we give our names to CHRIST, and receive the holy spirit, but instantly the devill rages and roares against our poore soules with might and malice. If we begin to please God, we displease the world: if God be our friend, that will be our enemie,2 Cor. 7.5. when wee were come into Macedonia, our flesh had no rest, but we were troubled on every side: without were fightings, within were feares. When we once put our endeavours to godlinesse, expect no quiet. Nunquam bella bonis, nunquam dissidia cessant: Et quocum certet, mens pia semper habet, Prosp. Say we then with David; Oh God my heart is ready. Paratum ad sublimia, paratum ad humilia: paratum ad prospera, paratum ad adversa, paratum ad universa. Ready for good things, ready for evill things, ready for high things, ready for low things, ready for all things, Bernard. 1 Sam. 6. The king of Bethshemesh might low after their calves at home, yet they kept one path, and turned neither to the right hand nor to left. So although wee mourne for parting from our temporary delights; yet let us keepe the way of truth, that will bring us to the end of our faiths, the salvation of our soules. Scrape not then on the dunghill of this earth for pearles, where nothing will thrive but toad-stooles.Ioh. 16.33. In me you have peace, in the world you shall have tribulation: leave me to affect our owne miserie.
The Inconstancie: at most we can get but the figure or fashion of this world, and Figura transit, the fashion of it perisheth, Ier. 17.11. The Partrich may sitte on egges, and hatch them: but then (because they are none of her owne) the true mother calls them, and they flieaway. The worldling is this brood-goose, hatcheth chickens, gathers riches: but when God calls them, they runne away from him, and leave him a foole.Luke 12.20. Thou foole, this night shall they fetch away thy soule from thee, then whose shall these things be? Swallowes will not build in houses ready to fall: yet we more unwise, build our nests in this perishing world. Sea-passengers have written, that about the Teneriffe there be certaine Ilands, called the flitting Ilands: they are often seene, but when men come neere them, they flitte away. The world it selfe is such, a flitting Iland: to day thou thinkest it Tuum, thine; tomorrow it shall not find thee Suum, his: thou art quickly gone from that, or that from thee. Solvet amicititas mors ingratissima vestras. O blessed place, where peace hath no change!
The Insufficiencie; it can never content us. They that have most, crave most: the richest usurers are the poorest beggars.Eccl. 5.10. He that loveth silver shall not be satisfied with silver. As the poore man cryes, Quid faciam, quia non habeo, what shall I doe because I have nothing? so the covetous cryes as fast, Quid faciam, quia habeo, what shall I do because I have so much?Luke 12.17. What shall I doe because I have no roome to bestow my fruits? But whats this? have we any hope to cast out worldlynesse? No: indeed
 your judgements here can make no resistance, but your affections cannot bee brought to it. Most men desire Esaus blessing, the fatnesse of the earth: they care, not for Iacobs, yet hee went away with the Covenant. Cains outlawed stocke were yet excellent in worldly things; Iabal in cattell, Iubal in musicke, Tubal in brasse and iron; they were the fathers of those professions. What worldly thing is there, but some reprobates have had it? For beauty, Absalom was very faire; and the daughters of men by beauty ensnared the sons of God, Gen. 6.2. For strength, Goliah was very potent; for swiftnesse, Hazael was a swift runner; for wealth, Nabal was very rich; for honour, Saul was a King: In man one dramme of grace, from God one drop of mercy, had beene better than all these.Revel. 12.1. There appeared a woman clothed with the Sunne, and the moone under her feet, and upon her head a crowne of twelve Starres. The Sunne is Christ, the twelve Starres the twelve Apostles, the Moone is the world, and that is under the Churches feet. We that have the earnest of the Spirit, and the first-fruits of salvation, while we are awake, know and acknowledge this to be the best of all. Yet if a little rest of quiet, or ease of health, or luggage of wealth be missing, we mutter as if God had done nothing for us, and are often readie to leave, the musicke of Sion, and to runne backe to the world. Strabo hath a tale of a Musician, that had got together many delighted hearers, whom with sweet charmes he held by the eares; they praised his musicke, he was well pleased with their company. On a sudden the market-bell rung, away they ranne all, and stayed not so much as to give him thankes: onely one somewhat deafe stayed behinde. The Musician heartily thanked him that he would tarry with him, when all the rest went away at the ringing of the market-bell: why, but hath the market-bell rung indeed, sayes he? Yes, quoth the Musician; away trudges he too. You can apply it. Preach wee never so well against worldlinesse, when the charmes and chimes of the world ring, it is hard to keepe your mindes from running. O how difficult is it to conquer this world? yet faith can doe it,1 Iohn 5.4. This is the victory that overcommeth the world, even our faith. Every true Christian is greater than William the Conquerour, greater than Alexander the Great, greater than Pompey the Great, greater than the great Turke. For they conquered in many yeares but a few parts of the world; but the Beleever in one houre with one act onely, subdues the whole world, with all things in the world. Terra fremat, regna alta crepent, ruat ortus and orcus; Si modo firma fides, nulla ruina nocet; Art thou a Christian? hast thou vanquished the world, that vanquisheth all the wicked? Blesse God for this conquest: the King of Spaines over-running the Indies was nothing to it. Merchants would give much ^o know a short cut to those remote places of trafficke, without passing straites, or fetching bouts: the shortest cut to the riches of the whole world is by their contempt. Here is a short description of the worlds vanity, by reason of this corruption: but what can he expect that speakes against the world? When Christ himselfe came to disswade men from the world, hee had ill lucke in that point. Hee might preach;Luke 16.9. Make to your selves friends of the Mammon of unrighteousnesse: and vers. 13. You cannot serve GOD and Mammon. But when the Pharisies that were covetous, heard all these things, they derided him, vers. 14. he had but a flout for his labour. But let those that have hope of heaven, cease to love this world: and know that if Christ make us to deny this world, hee will give us a better; wee shall be no losers by him, he vouchsafes us the kingdome of heaven.^ Cor. 15.19. For if in this life onely we had hope in Christ, wee of all men were most miserable. Take this corrupted world that like it; let that glorious world be ours.
Having escaped the corruption. We have considered the Infection, and the Dispersion, and therein the Discovery: now one word of the Recovery, wee have Escaped it. I call this a Deliverance; for we have Escaped; not by our owne power, but by his grace that hath delivered us.Psal. 12 4.7. Our soule is Escaped as a bird out of the snare of the fowlers; the snare is broken and we are Escaped. The snare of the fowlers were the lime-twigs of this world: our soule was caught in them by the feathers,
 our affections: now indeed we are Escaped, but the Lord delivered us. Wee that were once taken captives of Satan at his will, are now freed. There is a foure-fold manner of freeing captives: 1. By manumission, a voluntary making free of a bond-servant: so we are escaped from the service of Satan into the glorious libertie of the sonnes of God.Iohn 8.36. If the Sonne shall make you free, you shall be free indeed. 2. By Commutation, we were prisoners by sinne to Death. God therefore made a change with Death: Take thou my Sonne prisoner, give mee my servants free. Death and Hell were forced to exchange: So they killed Christ, and we escaped. 3. By price; when a ransome is paid: now Christ1 Tim. 2.6. gave himselfe a ransome for all: no silver or gold could serve; but the1 Pet. 1.19. Precious bloud of that immaculate Lambe. We are bought with bloud, and this is the bloud of God. So Tertullian, Sanguis Christi non redemisset ecclesiam, nisi fuisset sanguis Dei; No bloud could have saved us, but the bloud of him that was God. Here was mercy, great mercy: Christ to have mercy upon us, had no mercy upon himselfe: the price is payed, and wee are escaped. 4. By violence; thou hast plucked my feet out of the snare, when they were too hard for mee: with a strong hand and out-stretched arme, God hath delivered us out of this Aegypt. As David delivered his sheepe from the Lion, so the LORD hath delivered us, 2 Tim. 4.17. Ejecit daemonia; CHRIST did cast out devils: like Alexander, he stood not to untie the knot, but hee cut it. By all these wayes wee are escaped, may our thankfull hearts give praise to our Deliverer Iesus Christ.
But did GOD all this for us, and shall we doe nothing for him, for our selves? Alas, wee shall then soone againe be entangled with the Corruption of this world. Here wee learne the due and true use of Faith and Repentance; Faith to lay hold on the bloud of CHRIST, to cleanse our soules from this Corruption of lust and Repentance by true remorsefull teares to purge our selves continually. Nulla dies sine maculis, nulla dies sine lacrymis; No day is without sinnes, let no day passe without sorrowes. These showers shall kill the weeds of lusts, and spring up the herbes of graces. When he over-waters earth, there follows temporall plentie: when earth waters heaven, there followes spirituall plentie. Let mee now give you the picture of Repentance; which I desire not to be set up in your houses, but to be laid up in your hearts.
Shee is a Virgin faire and lovely, but sorrow seemes to doe violence to her beautie; yet indeed increaseth it. You shall ever see her sitting in the dust, her knees bowing, her hands wringing, her eyes weeping, her lips praying, her heart beating, her lungs panting. Shee comes not before GOD with a full belly, and meat betweene her teeth, but her soule isPsal. 35.13. humbled with fasting. Shee is not gorgeously attired, Sack-cloth is her garment. Not that shee thinkes these outward formes will content GOD, but onely are moeroris Insignia, the remonstrances of pure sorrow within. And indeed at that time no worldly joy will downe; onely pardon and mercy in IESUS CHRIST. Shee hangs the Word of GOD as a Iewell at her eare, and tyes the yoke of CHRIST as a chaine about her necke. Her brest is sore with the strokes of her owne penitent hands, which are alwayes lifted up toward heaven, or beating her owne bosome. Sorrow turnes her lumina into flumina, frontem in fontem; her eyes into fountaines of teares. The ground is her bed; shee eats the bread of affliction, and drinkes the water of anguish. Her knees are hardned with continuall praying, her voice hoarce with calling to heaven: and when shee cannot speake, shee delivers her minde in groanes. There is not a teare falls from her, but an Angell holds a bottell to catch it. The windowes of all her Senses bee shut against vanitie: shee bids Charitie stand the Porter at her gates, and shee gives the poore bread, even while her selfe is fasting. Shee would wash CHRISTS feete with more teares than Mary Magdalen* and if her estate could reach it, give him a costlier unction. Shee thinkes every mans sinnes lesse than her owne; every mans good deedes more. Her
 compunctions are unspeakable, knowne onely to God and her selfe, and to no creature else. She wisheth not onely men, but beasts, trees, and stones to mourne with her. She thinkes that no Sunne should shine, because she takes no pleasure in it: that the Lilies should be clothed in blacke, because shee is so apparelled: that ths Infant should draw no brest, nor the beast take food, like the Ninivites; because shee hath no appetite. She hath vowed to give GOD no rest, till he have compassion upon her, and seale to her feeling the forgivenesse of all her sinnes. Now Mercie comes downe like a white and glorious Angell, and lights on her bosome. The message which Mercy brings from the King of Heaven is this; I have heard thy prayers and seene thy teares. The HOLY GHOST comes with an hand-kerchiefe of comfort to drie her eyes. Lastly, shee is lifted up to heaven, where Angels and Cherubims sing her tunes of eternall joy: and GOD bids Immortality set her in a Throne of glory.





Verse 5.

And besides this, giving all diligence, adde to your faith vertue; and to vertue, knowledge, etc.


THe former part of the Chapter is spent in comforting: Now hee comes to exhorting. A father does not onely promise his son, I will make thee mine heire: but withall imposeth on him some duties, by performance whereof, he may assure himselfe of Inheritance. If we should speake nothing to men Instructively, or reprehensively, but all comfortably; it were the next way to send them comfortably to ruine. Sat Deus; at nobis quaedam facienda reliquit; It is not fit that Heaven should take all the paines to bring Earth to it; Earth must doe somewhat to bring it selfe to heaven. Gods bountifulnesse is beyond our thankfulnesse: yet thankfulnesse is not enough, there is matter of labour and Diligence in it. He that lies in a darke pit, will yet offer his hand to him that will helpe him up. Ieremie did put the cords under his owne armes, thatIer. 38.12. Ebed-melech let downe to draw him out of the dungeon. If the Lord of a Manour have given thee a tree, thou wilt be at the charges to cut it downe and carry it home. He that workes first in thy conversion, hath in wisdome made thee a second. Thou seest Gods bounty; Now looke to thine owne dutie.
This is taught us by the
Qualitie, Diligence.Quantitie, All diligence.
Give diligence: Here first for the Qualitie. There is no matter wherein we hope for good in the event, accomplished without Diligence in the act. He that expects a royaltie in Heaven, must admit a service on earth. The good man is weary of doing nothing, for nothing is so laborious as Idlenesse. Bernard calls it a dull numnesse of the soule, which neglects to begin, or is weary to prosecute any good worke. Deny Sloth not only continuance, but countenance. Quanto magis occupatum Diabolus invenit, tanto minus occupat. Satans imployment is prevented, when he findes thee well imployed before he comes. Thomas Becket, no good man, in no good cause, when he was admonished to be lesse stirring in State-matters; answered, that he sate at the sterne, and therefore ought not to sleepe. This is a Christians case, Is
 the world tempting, the Devill attempting, my flesh betraying, and shall I sleepe? Doe I steere the helme of my owne vessell, wherein my soule is the passenger, and my hope of blessednesse the fraught; and would you have me to sleepe? Iacob complaines, that theGen. 31.40. sleepe departed from his eyes: so carefull was he to make his reckoning even with his master. I am sure we have a greater charge, greater Master, greater account, and yet we sleepe. Lepidus lyes in Harvest under the coole shade, Vtinam hoc esset laborare; I would this were to take paines: so someAmos 6.4. stretch themselves upon their Ivory-beds; and invite their curious morsels with rich wines: and O that this were the way to heaven! Augustus hearing that a Roman farre in debt, slept quietly during his life: sent after his death to buy his pillow. It is a strange pillow whereon some slumber, that owe so much to GOD and man. When the Oyster gapes, the Crab throwes into her a little stone, which hinders her from shutting againe, and so he devoures her. Satan watcheth our idle gaping, throwes in his bait; lust or drunkennesse, and so preyes upon us. It is observeable, that albeit the Romans were so idle, as to make Idlenesse a god; yet they allowed not Illi ignavo numini Templum intra urbem; That idle Idoll had not a Temple within the City, but without the walls. It grieves me to thinke that our Suburbs abound with so many worshippers of this lazie Devill: yet I still pray that none may be within the wals. Let us deale with Idlenesse and wantonnesse, as Philip of Macedon did with two such persons; cause alterum fugere, alterum fugare; the one to drive the other out of our coasts. The old world snorted when the great showre came: Sodome slept, but her damnation slept not. It was Gogs presumption,Ezck. 38.11. I will goe to the land of unwalled Villages, I will goe to them that are at rest. So Satan presumes to set on the sluggish as an undefenced city, Otia pulvinar Satanae; the Devill shoots in a slug, and hits none so soon as the sluggish. The unjust Steward out of office, fore-casts,Luke 16.3. I cannot dig, and to beg I am ashamed. We have those can dig, yet are not ashamed to beg. Many one sayes not Fodere nescio, but Fodere nolo. It is mercy to give them three thing; correction, work, and meat. A generous spirit is of Maximinus disposition; Quo major sum, eo magis laboro; and quo magis laboro, eo major sum. Our gallants would not endure that father,Matth. 21.28. that should charge his eldest son to worke in the vineyard. Iacob got the blessing, but it was under the name of Esau, which signifies working, Ambr. Wee must have the hands of Esau, if we looke for the blessing of Iacob. There are three markes and helpes of Diligence; Vigilance, Carefulnesse, Love.
Vigilancie: a serious project, which we can hardly drive to our desired Issue, takes sleepe from our eyes. The best plot is to be saved, to appease Gods anger, to get remission of our sins: yet we are supini and sopiti, fast asleepe, though this be undone. Christ said unto Peter,Marke 14.37. Simon, sleepest thou? Is Iudas waking, the Pharisies walking, the souldiers banding, the devils urging, the Sonne of man betraying, the great worke of redemption accomplishing; and Sleepest thou? So is Satan provoking, thy flesh ready to yeeld the fort, sinne at the doore, and Iudgement not farre off, and sleepest thou O Christian? When Abraham received the wofullest charge, that was ever given to father, concerning his onely sonne; heGen. 22.3. rose early to doe it. On the weeke-dayes every man riseth early to his trade; on the Lords day, when the businesse of their soules is specially in hand, men usually sleepe their fills.
Carefulnesse, Eccles. 5.1. Keepe thy foot when thou goest to the house of GOD. Thou hast a foot, walkest with that foot, even to the Temple; but looke to it. Res est solliciti plena timoris amor: If thou lovest GOD, thou wilt be fearefull to offend him, carefull to please him. Gideon smote the host of Zebah, and Zalmunna, andIudg. 8.13. returned from the battell before the Sunne was up. Satan findes us carelesse, smites us in the night of ignorance, and carries us away captives before wee perceive it. The World sayes to a man, as the Priests and Elders did to the Souldiours; here is store of money,Matt. 28.14. Wee will secure you: Money is able to make thousands secure. But, Magna securitas, maxima tempestas. The Spies of Dan returning, told them that the people of Laish dwelt secure, quiet and carelesse: so they
 tooke them, so they smote them, and burnt the Citie with fire, Iudg. 18.7. No man perfectly knowes his owne heart: you thinke all well, this may be not assurance, but securenesse. Invadunt urbem somno vinoque sepultam; When they shall say,1 Thess. 5.3. Peace and safety, then commeth on them sudden destruction. Every man thinkes ill of his sinnes, but perhaps he thinkes too well of his good workes: the servants of God mistrust their owne righteousnesse.
Love: this Diligence must fetch the life from affection, and be moved with the love of vertue. They are most, whom feare correcteth from evill, they are best, whom love directeth to good, August. Wee refuse the daintie morsels of a churles table, because wee have them not with love. GOD r^gardeth not the mammockes of our sacrifices, the scraps of our perfunctory obedience, when the awe and law of man brings us thither; not the love of GOD. Constraint makes a thing easie in it owne nature, to become toilesome; love makes a difficult thing easie. He that is banished his native Countrey, thinkes every steppe tedious: let his owne will call him forth, his travell is pleasant; else men would nor crosse the seas to see fashions. There was a man so well affected to his owne Citie, that in fiftie yeeres hee never went a league out of it; as if like a fish he must needs die, if taken out of his owne element. Not long after his lucke was to commit an offence; whereof being convicted, and liable to severe punishment; the favouring Iudge, intending to mitigate it, because this was his first errour; confined him on the paine of death to the limits of that Citie. Now what was to his opinion formerly a delight, becomes a bondage and vexation; nothing in the Citie pleaseth him, all his desire is to gad abroad. How many miles can we ride and runne in a day to see one beast pursue another! The unevennesse of the way, the uncertaintie of the weather troubles us not, because we have a love to the sport. If the charge of a Superiour commands us to measure over so many miles, we soone complaine of wearinesse. The Sabbath findes many in the fields, walking to the neighbour Villages, for wanton delights. If they were commanded to travell so farre to Church, and to serve God, they would say with Ieroboam, it was too long a journey. All negligence in good things is from the want of love.
Well, God requires our diligence; Vult and non vult piger, Bed. He would have honour, but no labour: Delectant praemia cum promittuntur, deterrent certamina cum praemittuntur; The promises delight them, the combates affright them. O foolish man! thousand thousands stand about thee, and dost thou presume to sleepe? Bern. Mallem mihi esse male quam molliter, Sen. I had rather be sicke than slothfull: by that, the minde is stirred up, by this, effeminated. I use, saith that Philosopher, short sleepe; it is enough for me to have forborne watching. Aliquando me dormire scio, aliquando suspicor; Sometimes I know I sleepe, sometimes I suspect it.
But enough of Diligence, unlesse wee were taught also rightly to dispose it. For there be many that weary themselves for very vanitie. Even Israel would goe backe to Aegypt for the Garlicke and Onions: Things, saith Gregory, that provoke teares in them that eat them. Manna makes the heart merry; but they must have Garlicke; as if they were weary of joy, and desired againe teares and sorrow.Psal. 19.8. The Statutes of the Lord are right, rejoycing the heart. But Contemnunt habere unde spiritualiter gaudeant, and desideranter appetunt unde carnaliter gemant. Men confesse this world troublesome, yet love their owne vexation, above the Peace of GOD, which passeth all understanding. Our mindes are so scattered among these visible things, that wee forget how the state stands within us. Like him that lookes to the out-side of his house, loames, washes, paints it, while the rotten timber drops downe within. While men hunt after the worlds venison with Esau, they are in danger to lose their Fathers blessing.
I have given three helpes of Diligence; let mee yet adde a fourth, Studie; so some here translate (...), what good worke can be done without studie? Indeed the maine is confessed:2 Tim. 2.15. Studie to shew thy selfe approved unto God. But we thinke inferiour
 offices need no such studious diligence: what easier thing is there than to keep the peace? yet the Apostle sayes, Studie to be quiet. Mans nature is so apt to revenge, that it is no easie matter to be peaceable, Sayes the Philosopher, Te studeto, studie thy selfe. What is easilier knowne than a mans selfe? No, sayes Iob, Non novi animam meam, I know not mine owne soule. Mans selfe is a good booke to study:Psal. 139.14. I am fearefully and wonderfully made. Reade this booke in Folio, in thy prosperity: reade it in Quarto, abridged by calamitie: reade it in Octavo, made lesse by penury: reade it in Decimo-sexto, made contemptible by ignominie: reade it in Nihilo, made nothing of this world by death. The Lawyer will not answer a declaration without studie; or he builds more on his fortune and favour, than on his wit and fidelitie. The Poet can tell the Gallant that buyes Love-sonnets; I studie for your pleasure. The Advocate studies his pleading, or talkes idle. When a vaine-glorious Oratour asked his friend, How liked you my speech? and preventing the answer which he expected applausive; beleeve mee sayes hee, I did it on the sudden, without studie: so I beleeve sayes the other, for it did not savour of the Studie. For us, what dare wee doe without studie? Perhaps you thinke not so; but that wee come with the same preparation to speake, that you come to heare. So we might all be acaccused bee accursed, for doing Gods businesse negligently. You thinke, because it is easie for you to come to Church when the Bell hath tolled an houre, it is as easie for us on a nights warning to preach. If there be any thing in the world that bewrayes this Cities ignorance, this is it: I will tell you a paradox: I call it so because few will beleeve it, but it is true. It is more difficult to heare well, than to speake well. To heare, say you? I can heare the gravest Bishop in the Land, and never studie for the matter: But I say, if thou wilt bee so good a hearer as hee is a Preacher, thou must studie for it more than hee. Good reason: hee goes along with the meditations conceived in his owne brest; thou must goe along with his speech; hee followes himselfe, thou must follow him. It is easier for a Hare to runne her owne course, than for an Hound steppe by steppe to hunt her out. Our SAVIOUR sayes, Take heed how you heare: there is a certaine art or cunning in well hearing. In a certaine Countrey, every man was to plead his owne cause: he was allowed an Advocate to put his minde in good termes, but himselfe delivers it. One had his turne thus fitted, payed the Lawyer, tooke the copie, liked it admirably, studied it by heart. But after often reviewing it, he fell into dislike of it, and return'd it backe with his Non placet. The Lawyer asked him the reason why he now disliked that, which at first he so applauded: why sayes he, now I have read it often over, and finde the weaknesses; at once reading it seemed very good. And, quoth he, shall the Iudges heare it above once? Let this touch upon the infirmity of common hearers.
Beloved, you cannot heare well without studying how to heare; doe not thinke wee can preach well without it. Indeed there bee enthusiasticall Preachers, that runne away with a Sermon, as horses with an emptie cart: you are not worth your eares, if they cannot distingush. But to conclude, if no great worke can be done without studie, then surely not the salvation of body and soule without it. It is well, if with any study we may have it. When an Astrologer told Agrippina, that Nero her sonne should be Emperour; but first he must untie a knot by art, that was tied by nature: he meant, that he must artificially dissemble himselfe honest, though hee were naturally a villaine. Shee answered, hee shall untie any knot to have an Empire. It is enough for us that wee may have the Kingdome of Heaven, though wee untie a knot by the art of Grace, that was bound by the corruption of Nature. Wee are borne uncleane, have made our selves guiltie; given to lust, avarice, pride; there's Natures knot: let us untie this by grace;1 Cor. 6.11. Such were yee, but yee are washed, but yee are sanctified; and the Kingdome of Heaven shall bee ours. To this let us give all studie: some Astronomers have beaten their braines with much studie, to finde out the space betwixt Earth and Heaven:
 and have given it up for above three hundred thousand miles. How great was their studie? how uncertaine their account? how vaine the fruit? know it is a great way, not a journey over to France, or to India; studie how to get thither. For this wee study to preach, for this study you to heare, let us all study to practice; and when we have given all Diligence, still LORD be mercifull to us.
Give diligence; not a pragmaticall businesse in others affaires; but rectifie thy diligence, confining it principally to thy selfe. Dresse thine owne garden, lest it be over-runne with weeds, Sen. I know not with whom I had rather have thee be, than with thy selfe. Vbicunque sum, mecum sum: rebus enim humanis me non trado, sed commodo; I lend my selfe to other mens occasions, I give my selfe to mine owne. We may say to Worldlings, as CHRIST to Martha, you are troubled about many things; but one thing is needfull, minde that. They thinke when they have gotten store of riches, they shall then sleepe in quiet; no then is least quiet of all. The rich man resolves when hee hath filled his barnes; then Soule rest; no, then Soule come to Iudgement, to everlasting unrest; Luke 12.Psal. 127.2. It is in vaine, men rise up early, and goe to bed late, and eat the bread of sorrowes: for upon better conditions God giveth his beloved sleepe. Pyrrhus boasted to his friend Cineas, that he would invade Italy, and hoped to atchieve it: Cineas asked him, Sir, what will you doe then? Then we will attempt Sicily, and so at last get Carthage and all Affrica. And what then Sir? Then saith Pyrrus, we will rest and be merry. Alas, saith Cineas, may we not doe so now, and save all this trouble? Then Otium, I will take mine ease? No, then minus otii, least ease of all: for besides hazard of bloud in getting, there will be continuall trouble in keeping. Non minor ille labor, quam quaerere, parta tueri. Eutrop^lus in the Poet, to one that asked how he might be revenged on his enemie; gave this counsell; Facito divitem, make him rich; so lay on him Sarcinam curarum, a burden of cares. The rich Land-lord envied his poore tenant, because he heard him sing every day at his labour, that had scarce bread for his family; while himselfe wanting nothings was full of discontent. One advised him to convey cunningly into his Cottage a bagge of money; he did so. The tenant finding this masse, so great in his imagination, left off his singing, and fell to carking and vexing how to encrease it. Crescentem sequitur cura pecuntam; The Land-lord fetcheth backe his money, the tenant is as merry as ever he was. God is our Land-lord, while we his poore tenants have but little, we are content with a little: but if riches encrease, cares encrease with them; and till our Land-lord take backe his burden, we have no ease. We may say of worldly wealth, whatEccles. 1.18. Salomon of worldly knowledge; he that addes it, addes sorrow with it. Diogenes laid himselfe to sleepe in his cell, and his purse by him; a theefe spies it, and watches till he was asleepe. About mid-night when he thought himselfe, he ventures to steale it. To whom the subtill Cynicke; Tolle infaelix, ut facias utrosque dormire; Take it wretch, so we shall both sleepe. Thou couldst not sleepe till thou hadst it, nor I till I lost it. The very Camell is glad to be eased of his burden: When Aesop with the rest of his fellow-slaves were put to carry burdens to a Citie; one chose to beare this merchandize, another that, every one had his choice, and Aesop chose to carry the victuals. Every one laught at this, that he being the weakest, had elected the heaviest burden. Away they went together; and after some miles they went to breakfast, his burden was the lighter by that. Then to dinner, it was lighter still: then to supper, now it was easie: the next day they had eaten up all his burden, and he went emptie to the Citie, whither they being loaden could not reach. Let the covetous chuse gold for his burden, the proud rich garments, the ambitious mountaines of honour, every worldly his severall luggage; let my choice be that of Saint Paul, If I have food and rayment, therewith to be content; I shall goe the lighter to heaven.
All diligence: here's the quantitie, all: and that for two reasons:
1 The working up of salvation is no easy labour; thereto is requirable All diligence. Talis diligentia respicit tantam rem, tanta res requirit talem diligentiam.
 Such a diligence respects so great an object, and such an object requires so great a diligence. Refuse no labour for such a reward, Ieron. The best things are the hardliest come by. Qui cupit optatam, etc. he must be frozen with cold, and sweltred with heate, that accomplishes so great a worke. This equitie must needs be granted, that if we cannot attaine to worldly trash without labour, then much lesse to heaven without all diligence.Matth. 11.12 The kingdome of heaven suffers violence: but rest alone, trie if you can extort this by force. Spare no invention of witte, no intention of will, no contention of strength about it. If you will needs use violence, oppression, extortion, here violate, here oppresse, here extort: wrastle for this though with Iacob you lame your limbes; get it though you lose your lives. When Dionysius saw what heapes of wealth his sonne had hoorded up in his closet; hee asked him what he meant to let it lie there, and not to make friends with it to get him the kingdome after his decease? O fili non est in te animus regni capax, Son thou hast not a spirit capable of a kingdome. So knowing a rich mans piles of bags and whole countries of revennues; and finding no workes of pietie, none of charitie; we may justly tell him; Non est in te animus regni coelorum capax: he hath not a soule capable of thy kingdome of heaven. In heaven there isRevel. 3.18. gold tried in the fire. Will we adventure our estates, our lives; to find out new lands where may be gold: and spend no diligence for that where we are sure is gold, and such as cannot perish? In all other things the difficultie of obtaining whets thy mind, and spurres the actions forward: only for heaven which we confesse best of all, we use labour least of all. It is a hard taske, therefore give all diligence.
2 God requires Totum hominis,Eccl. 12.13. the whole duty of man; that is Gods due. What nothing left for this world? yes, moderate providence; the saving of soules hinders not provision for bodies; but furthers and blesseth it. First seeke the kingdome of heaven, then these things shall be added to you, Matth. 6. other things shall come into the bargain Paul calls them Adjectanea, CHRIST Adjectiva; there is no substance in them. Sequere tu Christum, caetera sequentur te. Follow thou Christ, the rest shall follow thee. The world saies; Insequeris? fugio: fugis? insequor. Dost thou follow me? I will flie thee: dost thou flie me? I will follow thee. Besides there is a masse of corruption in us, all diligence is little enough to expell that. A tyrant boasted that he had turned a great streame in two daies: yet quoth the Philosopher, but you have been turning an other streame this twoscore yeeres, and yet have not done it; your owne evill disposition.
A Christian is like a common wealth; Grace is the Queene, religious thoughts the subjects, lusts the rebells: these warre against the Queene1 Pet 2.11. fight against the soule. If they grow to a head, they will make a mutine in our hearts: our best policie is to keepe them bare and low: though we cannot take away velle, their will; yet let us prevent them of Posse nocere, power to hurt us. To this let us give all diligence, and the Lord give a blessing to that diligence.
Besides this, adde, etc. Thus much for the addiction, now to the addition. Wherein we find a concession, an accession, that he requires; Adde. You have done something, yet there is a Praeterea, a Besides. Profectionem agnosco, Perfectionem requiro: I yeeld a beginning, I aske a proceeding. Sit not downe with your Satis. knowledge you have, and faith you have; yet there's an Adhaec, Besides these.Hebr. 6.1. Leaving the principles, let us goe on to perfection. Nihil praesumitur actum, dum superest aliquid ad agendum. We cannot say, that worke is finished, whereof any part remaines to bee done. None were fit to fight the battels of God, but they that lapped water out of their hands; (like the dogges of Nilus for feare of the Crocodyles) still going forward, Iudg. 7.5. As God himselfe is said to drinke, De torrente in via; of the brooke in the way, Psal. 110.7. this man lifts up his head, and goes on. Christ hath sprinkled all the way betweene heaven and earth with his bloud, and hath made it aHeb. 10.20. living way: like good hounds, let us trace him by the foote, and runneCant. 1.4^ after him in the smell of his garments; not resting till we rest with our Master.
 Thou hast done many good workes, assurest thy selfe of some growth; yet forget that is behind, and reach forth unto the things before, Phil. 9.13. Non sufficit Christum sequi, sed c^nsequi: there is still a besides.Psal. 8 4.7. They goe from strength to strength, till every one appeare before God in Sion. When thy soule hath tasted some crummes that fall from thy masters table, some drop of bloud that ranne from thy Lords side; yet still thinke of a Praeterea, somewhat besides. Beda observes on Num. 33.29. They went from Mithcah, and pitched in Hashmonah: that Mithcah signifies sweetnesse, and Hashmonah swiftnesse. Mithcah and Hashmonah, sweetnesse and swiftnesse must be joyned together. They that in Mithcah have tasted of the Lord sweetnesse, will remove to Hashmonah, come toward him with swiftnesse.
When the young man asked CHRIST, what he should doe to be saved, he pointed him to the law,Mat. 19.17. keepe the commandements. But he replied; All these have I kept from my youth up: what lacke I yet? Verse 20. yes, there is a Praeterea, a besides he never dreamt of; If thou wilt be perfect, sell all thou hast and give to the poore. This last besides almost put him beside himselfe. In naturall things we still covet a Praeter. If we have witte, we covet more witte: we will seeke to be more wise than we can be, though we bee found lesse wise than we should be. But in worldly things our desires have an everlasting Praeterea. Hath Ahab a kingdome? yet Naboths vineyard is another Praeterea. Hath he bought the Mannor, he must have the poore mans cottage besides.2 Sam. 12.2. The rich man had exceeding many flockes and heards, the poore nothing but one only Lambe; well this one Lambe is his Praeterea, he must have it. Hath another put out the hundred to usurie? yet there's a besides, when the ten pounds come in for interest, out with that too.2 Kings 4 6. The widdow had filled all her vessells with oyle, yet she calls for another vessell, theres a Praeter still. The rich man, Luke 12. had his barnes full before; but now hee must enlarge them according to his desires; there's another Praeterea: besides, all this he must have more. O the insatiate desire of this world! but for heavenly things, a small scantling serves us. I beleeve that CHRIST died for me, I am sory for my sinnes, I hope to be saved; heres enough, no Praeterea now, no besides is thought on. Nothing satisfies us for this world, we are quickely glutted with Iesus Christ.
Besides this. GOD that hath done enough for us; leaves us somewhat-to doe for our selves. Hee hath given us all things that pertaine to life and godlinesse, Verse 3. enriched us with great and precious promises, made us partakers of the Divine nature, Ver. 4. there's Opus meum; Gods worke. But besides this adde to your faith vertue: there's Opustuum, thy worke.1 Ioh. 1 7. The bloud of Christ clenseth us from all sinne; yet he that haih this hope, purgeth himselfe, 1 Iohn 3.3. there's thy Praeterea. Behold, I stand at the doore and knocke: if any man will open to me, I will come in, etc. Revel. 3.20. God knockes, thou must open, that he may enter: doe thou open, that's thy part: God will enter, thats his part. David calls God his Helper: now as Saint Augustine observes; adjuvari non dicitur, qui nihil sponte conatur: he is not said to be helped, that never concurred with his endevour. Beza in loc. Non Trunci aut stipites sumus, we are not blockes and stones: and withall he inferres upon, 1 Cor. 3.9. we are labourers together with God: that wee doe Gratiae primae (...): and hee that denies it, denies the efficacie of the first grace.
This we affirme without feare of falling into the Popish doctrine of free-will too. Three things concurre in a sinners conversion; the word of God perswading, the spirit of God prevailing, and the will of man consenting. Thou art created without thy selfe, not sanctified without thy selfe. The father begot the child without the childs will: then it had none, for it was not: but he cannot bring this child to any art against his will. I will not disput Gods power; he can, but he will not save us against our wills. Some Romists strongly build their paper-house of freewill on such places: but a man may smile to read how bitterly they oppose us in the frontispice, and how consentingly they jumpe with us in the conclusion. Castifica
 teipsum, saies Fevardentius, there is free will: yet he concludes, Castificas te non de te, sed de illo qui habitat in te; there's no free will.Hebr. 12.13. Make straite steps to your feete, and turne you to me, saith the Lord: therefore can they turne themselves? Here they cry out lowder than oyster women in the streets, victorie, victorie: but they sing their owne (...), put the crowne on their owne heads. But whats the conquest? they have gotten what we never denied. They prove here freedome of our will to adde to our owne endevours: right, so say we to too: but they forget that God had made us first partakers of the divine nature:Ioh. 8.36. now if the sunne make us free, we shall be free indeed. Acta fit activa voluntas. Did Saint Peter write this to wicked men, or to Saints? If they would prove that unregenerate men can will their owne conversion by nature of themselves, it were worth their prize and praise: otherwise they have taken great paines for a thing not denied them. As I have heard of that wise man, who chalenged his neighbour for impounding that very horse, which himselfe at the same time was riding on.
Indeed God chargeth us with a Praeterea; yet saith CHRIST,Ioh. 15.5. without mee yee can doe nothing. Bonum debet esse ex integra causa; and that is only Gods grace. But we are not allowed to be idle, Psal. 132.11. God hath sworne in truth unto David; of the fruit of thy body will I set upon thy throne: there is Gods covenant. If thy children will keepe my testimonie: there is our condition. Lex data ut gratia quaereretur: Evangelium datum ut lex impleretur. The law is given that we might have recourse to the. Gospell: the Gospell is given that wee might be enabled to performe the Law. God is the principall Agent, but thou hast thy Besides. Implore his aide, put to thy owne endevours. Qui instat praecepto, praecurrit auxilio. Confidence of salvation, doth not contradict warinesse of conversation. He that is most sure of heaven, is yet afraid to doe that may deserve hell. Adde the oile of thy diligence to the kindled Lamp of Gods grace, thy oile doth not enlighten the Lamp, but feeds it. Frustra oramus, pro quibus non laboramus, Augu. In vaine we pray for that blessing, which our endeavours never seeke. The Philosopher wanting shooes, and the King giving him leather; yet he thought it not enough unlesse the King would also put them to making. God is so beholding to some, that he must doe all for them, if he will have them. But when he hath called thee to the truth, that might have suffred thee to die in ignorance and infidelitie, thou hast thy Besides. Bee not so much thy owne enemie, as to frustrate GODS mercie by thy sluggishnesse. Lose not, through want of some labour to amend thy life, the hope of eternall blessednesse.
Adde: we are falne upon a point of Arithmeticke; a speciall good point if it be confined to good things. Of the foure maine parts; Addition, Subtraction, Multiplication, and Division; the world embraceth three, and casts out a fourth, for worldly things: so GOD commands three of them, and casts out a fourth, for heavenly things. The world barres division, and God forbids subtraction. Give me leave to follow this metaphor so farre, as it may give light to my present intention. Let us first see the worlds arithmeticke, then Gods.
Addition, especiall of sinne to sinne is a frequent point. Herod had done many foule mischeefes; yet he had his addition;Luk. 3.20. Hee added yet this above all, that he had shut up Iohn in prison: yea afterwards he slew him in the prison, Marke 6.17. To Incest he added tyrannie; to tyrannie murder. That other Herod had such an addition:Act. 12.2. He kissed Iames; and because he saw it pleased the Iewes, he proceeded further, to take Peter also. Many such additions; toHos. 4.2. swearing they adde Lying, to lying killing, to killing stealing, to that adulterie; untill bloud toucheth bloud. Their reward shall be proportioned: because their (added) sins for length reach up to heaven; therefore GOD shall double unto them double according to their workes.Revel. 18.5, 6.
Multiplication goes beyond addition, Esa. 56.12. To morrow shall be as this day, and much more abundant, Eccl. 7.17. Be not over much wicked. In youth men sow those cursed seeds in the ground of their hearts, in age they reape a multiplied
 croppe. Let usurie be a demonstration of this point: the usurer saies to his monies, as God said once to his creatures; Encrease and multiplie. A monstrous and unnaturall brood: other cattell and plants have their appointed seasons to engender and bring forth: mony brings forth to day, and begins a new travell to morrow. Yea, the young brood brought forth to day, begins it selfe to beare to morrow. Other creatures the sooner they begin to beare the sooner they leave off: usurious monies begin betimes, and multiplie without end. It is an unhappy point of arithmeticke multiplication by usurie, and shall be punished, as God threatned Eve;Gen. 3.16. I will multiply sorrowes. But vae accumulanti non sua; woe to him that multiplies that which is not his, Hab. 2.6.Amo. 2.6. For three transgressions of Israel and for foure, I will not turne away the punishment thereof. Vpon him that will multiplie his sinnes, God will multiplie his plagues.
Subtraction is another point of the worlds practise.Mic. 2.2. They covet houses and fields, and take them away by violence. Iesabel was cunning in this point against innocent Naboth; she took away his living and life too. How could so many flantit in their caroches, but that they live by subtraction? the tenth and right of the Church maintaines it. O the pittie of God and man! that maintenance should be taken from the poore Minister who wants bread, and bee given to feed the unsatiate guts of pride and luxurie. If a robber takes a purse, he dies for it: but let others subtract from the poore their commons, from labourers their wages, from the Church her endowments; and this Arithmeticke passes. This made Socrates laugh, to see little theeves riding in carts to the galhouse; and great theeves in coaches to condemne them. Minuta puniuntur, magna in triumphis feruntur. A poore sea-captaine being brought before Alexander for pyracie; thus confessed his fault. Indeed I am a pyrate because I robbed some few fisher-men in a cockeboate: but if I had scowred the seas as thou hast done, and spoiled all the world, with a Navy, with an army; I had beene no pyrate, I had beene an Emperour. The malefactor could say, I die for a few trifles of petty theeverie: but if I had robbed the poore by giving their bread to dogges; or the Church by Simonie and detaining her tenths; or the commonwealth by ingrossings, inhauncings; I might have beene a Iustice of peace or an Alderman. Thus as in a throng, a dwarfe comes to be lifted up above the shoulders of the tallest, and made a laughing stocke, that kept least a doe: so in the crowd of this world, the least sins are exposed to the sharpest censures. Well, if any man will practise subtraction against the poore, God will use it against him, and take his name out of the booke of life. Si in ignem mittitur qui rem non dedit propriam, ubi mittendus qui invasit alienam? Augu. If hee bee damned that gives not his owne, what shall become of him that takes away another mans? IfIam. 2.13. Iudgement without mercie shall be to him that shewes no mercie; where shall subtraction and rapine appeare? Psal. 109.11. Let the extortioner catch all that he hath, and let the strangers spoile his labour. There is one subtraction; his estate, Vetse 13. let his posteritie be cut off, and in the generation following let his name be blotted out. There's another subtraction; his memorie, Verse 12. let there be none to extend mercie unto him, neither any to favour his fatherlesse children. There's another subtraction; a deniall of all pitie to him and his, Verse 7. Let his prayer become sinne: there's another substraction; no audience from heaven, Verse 8. Let another take his office, there's a substraction of his place. Let his dayes be few, there's a substraction of his life, Psal. 69.28. Let him be blotted out of the booke of the living, and not be written with the righteous; there's the last, the subtraction of his soule. This is a fearefull arithmeticke: if the wicked adde sins, God will adde plagues.Psal. 69 27. Adde iniquitie unto their iniquity, and let them not come into thy righteousnesse, Rev. 22.18. God shall adde unto them the plagues written in the book. If they subtract from others their rights, God shall subtract from them his mercies.
Now let us come to GODS Arithmeticke, and this principally consists in addition.Matth. 5.41. Whosoever shall compell thee to goe a mile, goe with him twaine. To
 give every man his owne is but equity, but the addition of charity makes blessed. I was hungry, and ye gave me meate, etc. Mat. 25. Come ye blessed, etc. To remission adde restitution, to restitution charity, to charity, piety. How oft saies Peter, shall I for give my brother? till seven times? yea saith Christ, and more: to seven times, adde seventy times. We must all give an account; blessed are they that can bring in this bill of reckonings; Addition of good to good. Let us not be weary in well doing, Gal. 6.9. there is our bill of reckoning.Eccl. 12.13. Feare God and keepe his commandements, for this is the whole duty of man: there is our totall summe. Now as Addition teacheth us to adde grace to grace: so there is a multiplication required, to encrease the effects of those graces, in a multiplicity of good workes. Non aucta scientia cessat: knowledge not improved will be impaired. Hast thou faith, but no stronger than many yeeres agoe? Is not thy zeale more fervent, thy charity more compassionate, thy humility brought lower?Mat. 25.20. Lord, thou deliveredst me five talents: behold! I have gained besides them, five talents moe. To him that hath shall be given: but from him that hath not, shall be taken away that he seemed to have. If here bee no usurie, we shall lose the principall. God is a father that loves to have his children thrive: he gives them a stocke, and lookes they should not be unthrifts: if they doe well, they shall have the whole inheritance. As in generation, so in regeneration, we must be growing up to a full stature in Christ, Eph. 4.13. As a traveller passeth from towne to towne till hee come to his Inne: so the Christian from vertue to vertue, till hee comes to heaven. God hath sowne some good seeds in our hearts, let us manure the ground with repentance, and mature the fruits by obedience, that they may grow up kindly, to his honour and glory.
Now because I am moved to move your charity at this time; let me be bold to teach you another point of GODS Arithmeticke; it is Division.Eccl. 11.2. Give a portion to seven, and also to eight. Geometricall division is Iustice; to give every one his owne. There is an arithmeticall division, Charity; to give somewhat to all that want: not all to one, this is no division: but some to all, this is to divide well. Da omni petenti, non omnia petenti, Aug. He that will not divide while he lives, shall finde an empty quotient when he is dead. The bread of the poore is like the way of the rich; he that hords it from him is a man of bloud. We find meanes of Division, but they are not good. Vpon the least quarrell we divide all among the Lawyers: the Common-pleas and the Chancery drinks up the poores portion. Among Ruffians a word and a blow; among civill men a word and a writte. I heare the proud neighbour speake of his equall; goe to, I have a hundred pound to spend with him; I heare him not speake of the poore begger, I have a hundred pence to give him. Even the Lawyers themselves count you mad: I have heard that a Lawyer dying bequeathed all his goods to Bedlam: saying, among mad-men I got it, and let mad-men spend it, Luk 12.13. There were two covetous brethren strove for the Inheritance, they strove not who should be most charitable. There are that divide a part to Tailors for strange disguises, a part to panders for their female damnations, a part to corrupt officers that sell truth for bribes; and if they have any left divide it among their children; but I finde no portion left for the children of GOD.
What men charitably divide, they shall onely finde: of all, what I gave, that I have. This division is not losse but gaine: it is sent before to bee kept safe in the best coffer.Eccl. 11.1. The bread cast upon the waters, shall bee found againe after many daies. The truly rich man is not discerned by his plate, nor bagges, nor wardrobe; but bounty: not by multiplication but by division. Other men possesse riches as sicke men fevers which indeed rather possesse them. Good almes are like Ambassadours, sent liegers abroad to secure the rest at home. We have many of Saint Iames's Almoners, Iames 2.16. God blesse you; but they blesse you without a crosse: would I were able to helpe you; able! herein they wish well to themselves onely. As the Tenant said to his Land-lord; would I could give you this farme? what then said the Land-lord? you should never have it, quoth the Tenant. They
 wish themselves Facultatem non voluntatem; money not mercy. The poore may say to them as the begger said to the Bishop: if such wishes were worth a halfepeny they would not be so liberall. Well, divide it thy selfe, or it shall be done for thee. Accumulationem dissipatio sequitur: the father could not be more cunning at the rake, than the sonne will be at the pitchforke. The moneys that were formerly chested like cag'd birds, will wing it merrily when he sets them a flying. c He begetteth a sonne, and there is nothing in his hand: if at least they be not gone before hee comes at them, Luk. 12.20. Thou foole, then whose shall these things be? yea, whose shalt thou thy selfe be? and that is the harder question. f When he dieth hee shall carry nothing away: but death comes and there's a Division indeed. Read Iames 5.2. The moth shall divide his cloth, the rust his gold: this is not all; the world shall divide his goods, infamie his name, the earth his body, terror his conscience, and hell his uncharitable soule. Wilt thou not divide, O worldling? thou shalt be divided. Your twenty in the hundred will not beleeve this, but a hundred to twenty hee shall feele this. But let us divide our goods by charity, and Christ will gather up our soules in mercy.
It followes; Adde to your faith, etc. The motives are done, come wee to the materials. Here be eight in number, all excellent in nature. Vnder this number of eight (though I put no divinity in numbers) the Scripture hath often commended to us the graces of God. So Colos. 3.12. The induments we must put on, are eight: first is the linings, bowels of mercies; next kindnesse, etc. Paul does not there begin with faitk, but he ends with Charity, as our Apostle here. So Phil. 4.8. hee commends to us gracious qualities by the number of eight. Whatsoever things are true, etc. To both these gradations he propounds the same eminent corollary. Col. 3.15. The peace of God, and the God of peace, bee with you. Ezek. 40.41. There were eight tables whereon they slew their sacrifices: upon these eight tables we must slay our sinnes, that wee may make our soules acceptable sacrifices to God. Ezek. 40.31. The ascent to the Temple had eight steps: by these eight degrees we must clime up to heaven, or not come thither. There were but eight soules saved in Noahs arke: without these eight graces no soule shall be saved: Our SAVIOUR CHRIST prescribed eight steps for our ascending to blessednesse, Mat. 5. his Apostle hath delivered the same number. Eight beatitudes, beatus numerus. It were no impossible thing to finde our SAVIOURS text in his Apostles glosse. Christ begins with Poorenesse in spirit, Peter with Faith: this sees it selfe poore, and therefore apprehends Christs riches. 2. Christ commends mourning, and Peter, Knowledge: now hee that knowes his sinnes will mourne for them. 3 Christ praiseth Meekenesse, Peter Temperance: it is no hard thing to finde meekenesse in temperance; which is a vertue neither to distemper a mans selfe, nor to disturbe others. 4. Christ blesseth the desire of Righteousnesse, Peter of Vertue; which is a rule to live righteously: Christ magnifieth Mercy, Peter Charity: and who are charitable but the mercifull? 6. Christ perswades to Purenesse in heart, Peter to Godlinesse, and godlinesse makes the heart pure. As it is true charity esse misericordem, to be mercifull: so it is true piety esse mundicordem, to be pure in heart. 7. Christ exhorts to Peace-making, Peter to Brotherly kindnesse; and who can distinguish betweene Peace-makers, and those that are Brotherly-kinde? As Abraham said to Lot, let us not strive, for we are Brethren. Lastly, Christ encourageth to suffer Persecution for righteousnesse sake, and Peter Patience: nowRom. 5 3. Tribulation worketh patience.
Conceive all this a glorious house, the building up of a Christian. Let Faith stand for the foundation: Vertue for the wals: Knowledge the windowes, that let in the light of Gods truth to illuminate it. Let Temperance be the morter, that keeps off the violence of wind and weather; for temperance diverts corruption. Be Patience the pinnes and staies that hold together the frame; for patience will not be moved. Let godlinesse be the perfect forme or module of it, that the structure may mocke the rage and resistance of hell. Set Brotherly kindnesse for the lodging chambers,
 built to entertaine friends. Charitie is the roofe, as Saint Augustine: saies of Gods house in mans heart; Diligendo persicitur. Thus as God brought Moses to the mount, to the top of Pisgah: and shewed him the land of Canaan, Deutronomy 34.1. So I have brought your meditations to the top of the mount, and shewed you the fruitfull valley standing thicke with the graces of God. Now to the first materiall.
Adde to your faith vertue. Faith is the first, and I have drunke deepely to you in this cup before: yet I would have you sicke of an holy ebrietie, and still to thirst for this drinke, Cant. 5.1. Bibite and inebriamini, drinke abundantly of this cup. To your faith, I cannot omit foure things naturally arising out of the words. 1. The necessitie. 2. The singularity. 3. The proprietie. 4. The societie of Faith.
First, the necessitie of Faith: our Apostle to build his house of Christianitie, laies this the foundation. That would be a poore house that hath no foundation: the hope of too many, is a castle in the aire, that wants the foundation of faith. Philosophy laies her ground in reason, Devinitie in faith: the first voice of a Christian is, I beleeve, Ille apud Deum plus habet loci, qui plus attulit, non argumenti, sed fidei. He^ hath most respect with GOD, not that is wisest in reason, but strongest in faith. Now the necessitie of faith appeares in three respects; Ratione Dei, Diaboli, tui.
In respect of God;Hebr. 11.6 For without faith it is impossible to please God. Every mans desire should be to please God, without faith it is impossible to doe it.Rom. 10.14. How shall they call on him in whom they have not beleeved? It was faith that made Abraham titled Gods friend. He that thrusts into Gods presence without faith shall be examined; Quomodo intrasti; friend, how camest thou in hether? Beleeve and welcome;Matth. 8.13. As thou beleevest, so be it done unto thee.
In respect of the devill: he is a roaring Lion, we have no meanes to resist him but by being stedfast in the faith, 1 Pet. 5.9. He is too strong for thee if thou meetest him with thy vertue, or with thy good workes; for he will object sins enough to outwaigh them, Solon cannot meet him with his justice, nor Salomon with his wisedome; every poore sinner can overcome him with his faith. ThisEph. 6.16. quencheth all the fiery darts of the wicked. Temperance is a good buckler, that he shall not wound thy body: honestie a good buckler, that he shall not wound thy name: patience, that he shall not disturbe thy mind; but if thou want faith, he will for all these wound thy soule. This is an invincible shield against an implacable enemie.
In respect of thy selfe: thou art ignorant, there is no understanding of GOD but by saith, Esa. 1. The vulgar reads; Nisi credideritis non intelligetis; unlesse yee beleeve, yee shall not understand. Quomodo capitur Trinitas, how the Trinitie may be comprehended in understanding, thou askest well: quomodo creditur Trinitas, how the Trinitie may be beleeved in faith, thou askest not wel. Ideo bene creditur, quia cito non capitur, Augu. It is therefore to be beleeved, because it cannot be understood. Thou art originally co^rupt, naturally hatefull to God: nothing canst thou doe to please him, till thy selfe be first made pleasing to him. The doer is not acceptable for the deed, but the deed is acceptable for the doer. Hadst thou all the succeeding graces, and not this foundation of faith; whereby thy person is made accepted in the Beloved; when thou art judged, thou couldst not be saved. Nature may doe works to glorifie our selves, faith doth workes to glorifie God. We are not justified by the workes of the Law, but by Grace, say we. But are not the workes of the Law, the workes of grace? yes, every good worke of the Law is a worke of grace; as every sin is a breach of the Law. Grace and the Law are not thus opposed, but grace and nature. In the roote of a tree appeares no beautie, no shew of leaves or fruits: yet Quicquid in arbore pulchritudinis est ex illa procedit: what beauty so ever is visible in the tree proceeds from the roote. So in the humility of faith wee find small lustre, no pleasure discernable to the eye of man: yet whatsoever lustre or grace fulnesse shines in our workes, is derived from that roote. Thus Faith is the Queene that
 shall speed: let Ahasuerus be never so angry, to his Esther he will hold out his golden scepter. To this faith God allowes entrance;Heb. 10.22. Let us draw neere with a true heart in full assurance of faith. As Adoniah to Bethshabe,1 King. 2.13 I know the king will deny thee nothing. The Eunuch to Philip, Acts 8.38. See here is water, what hinders me to be baptised. Beleevest thou? yes; then nothing hinders. Vpon the knowledge of my faith, I aske, what hinders me to be loved, what hinders me to be blessed, what hinders me to be saved? now as Philip to the Eunuch, so CHRIST answers us; Nothing, Fiat tibi secundum fidem tuam: be it unto thee according to thy faith. Looke wee a little further into the necessitie of Faith: it is taken two wayes in the Scriptures; either Objectively or Actively. Objectively or materially, Pro veritate fidei, for the truth of faith. Actively or Formally, Pro vita fidei, for the act of fai^h, which is the life of faith. For the object to bee beleeved, and the act of beleeving.
The object or doctrine of faith is that, which GOD by his Prophets and Apostles hath delivered; or what is naturally and by good consequence deduced from this, or reduced to this. For inference and connexion of Scripture is Scripture, as the roote of a tree is the tree though it be hid in the ground. But to deliver rules of faith, no writing hath power but the Scripture: therefore none may speake authoritatively of the doctrines of faith since the Apostles: mens assertions have no power to oblige the conscience. What the Scripture forbids, flie it: what it affirmes, beleeve it: what it reproves, mend it: what it commands, doe it.Gal. 6.16. And as many as walke after this rule, Peace be on them and mercy, and upon the Israel of God. There are some things Libere credenda; some conceive them this way, others that way: Vnusquisque abundat sensu suo. Some things are Pie credenda; as that of Mary lived and died a virgin, albeit it be not there expressed: for who durst touch that vessell which God had sanctified to beare his owne sonne? Others are necessario credenda, all things revealed in holy writ, be they plaine and easie, or darke and mysticall. All I say, in praeparatione mentis, in the readinesse and intention of the mind, when we shall come to understand them: as the mysterie of the Trinitie, CHRISTS incarnation without sin, etc. Though we cannot conceive, we must beleeve. Now there is a difference of things objected Fidei salvificae, to our saving faith. Primaria credendi, such are the Articles of faith: Secunda credendi, whatsoever thereof is necessarily inferred. The want of this faith excludes from heaven; yet the having of it without further degree doth not bring all thither. Athanasius doth not say, whosoever doth beleeve this shall be saved: but whosoever doth not beleeve this shall be damned.
Therefore there is no binding mens faith to that the Scripture averres not. The Papists doe bind to things. 1. Citra fundamentum, besides the foundation; as Traditions, untemperd morter dawbed on the walls of truth to hide it. 2. Circa fundamentum, to things about the foundation, such as endanger it: as deniall of Scripture to Lay-men. This is a wretched sin, to obtrude for matter of faith, that it is not lawfull to read the Scriptures which are the rule of faith. 3. Contra fundamentum, to things against the foundation; as the sacrifice of the masse, distinction of mortall and veniall sinnes, Iustification by workes, etc. What is against that which is necessarily to be beleeved to salvation, is against the foundation. But it is necessary to trust in CHRISTS bloud and merits onely because there isActs 4.12. no other name given under heaven whereby we may be saved. Therefore to trust in others, to let Angels or men share part of our faiths, is against the foundation. Indeed they boast, that they onely hold the foundation: butGal. 5.2. I Paul say unto you, that if yee be circumcised, Christ shall profite you nothing. If you joyne your owne merits with Christs merits, he shall profite you nothing. Thus for the matter of faith.
As we see the necessitie of faith, in respect of the doctrine to be beleeved; so see the necessitie of it, in respect of the act of beleeving. The Schoolemen in defining this faith, are defective. First, they forget the name of CHRIST, who is the speciall object of faith: that light which makes the eyes of faith to see. Secondly, they leave out Fiduciam, Confidence or affiance; an immediate effect or act of faith. For

Heb. 10.19. we have boldnesse to enter into the Holiest. Thirdly, they make it a speculation, not a practise; but Fides in agendo est, Faith is operative and busie, in applying Christ, in lifting up the soule to Christ, in abhorring that many offend Christ, in doing that may please Christ. Quo itur? whither goe we? to God. Qua itur? how goe we? by Christ. Quo pede? on what foot? on our faith; for faith is still walking. There be three acts of faith concerning Christ, Prehending, Apprehending, Comprehending of Christ. Prehending of him is by knowledge; we know him a Saviour: this is the first step, but not farre enough, to heaven: the wicked know, the devils have this faith. Apprehending of him, by appropriation of his merits: wee know him our Saviour; my Lord, and my God. Comprehending of him is a full possession in the heart. The other often doubts; such a faith had Peter, when hee cried out sinking,Matt. 14.30. Lord save me. While he beleeved, he trode the sea safely: when he doubted he began to sinke. When weEphes. 3.12. comprehend with all Saints, and know the love of Christ that passeth knowledge; this is the fulnesse of faith, Tit. 1.1. According to the saith of Gods elect: there is a faith of the Elect, therefore the reprobates may have a faith by themselves. Their beleefe is in the Elect, but the beleefe of the Elect is not in them. They may have fidem veram, a true faith; but not fidem salvificam, a saving faith. This is of necessitie to heaven; and as it depends upon Christ, so it is given by the Spirit of Christ. Our Apostle sayes before, Sortiti sunt fidem, they obtained it by lot. Iacob prophecied the division of Canaan, yet was it done by lot. Faith is not gotten by wit or diligence, but by Gods lot, that is, Gods gift. If this lot be thine, thou hast drawne well, and shalt never looke blanke. The abridgement of all godlinesse, or sanctitie in the root of sanctitie, that's, this Faith. Now seeing (necessarily) we cannot be saved without it, in all our hearts good Lord plant it.
Secondly, we are to consider the Singularity: the Apostle sayes not Faiths, but Faith. He writes to many, but he speakes of no pluralitie of faiths,Ephes. 4.5. One Lord, one Faith. One ratione objecti, which is Christ; not one ratione subjecti; for every beleever hath his owne faith But his meaning is that all true beleevers have one and the same faith: vestra fides, your faith. There is but one faith in the Church, as but one Church in the faith. Vna fides specie, non una numero; One faith in nature, not one in number. We may say of faiths, as of faces: Facies non omnibus una; Non diversa tamen; One light, many rayes: one fountaine, many streams: one tree, many branches. The Church is a Pomgranate, that hath many kernels: an eare of Wheat, that hath many graines. Every man hath his owne faith, yet all have but one faith. Paul speaks of some that have erred from the faith; and of others reprobate concerning the faith;1 Tim. 6.10. 2 Tim. 3.8. that have prevaricated from that faith which the Church in unity professeth:Ti^ 1.13. Wherefore rebuke them sharply, that they may be sound in the faith. Mans body, as Physitians say, is subject to two thousand diseases: the eye to two hundred: but faith, which is the soules eye, is subject to more. There be so many errours concerning the Faith, that they are not to be numbred. Almost so many Sects as Cities, so many Creeds as heads. Christ sayes, when he shall come to Iudgement, that he shall scaree finde faith on the earth: but if he come now, he shall finde too many faiths. Majorem inveniet quam velit esse fidem; I pray God the pluralitie of faiths among many, hath not brought a nullity of faith in the most. So our Saviours prophecie will still be true; Inveniat inter tot fides nullam fidem: among so many false faiths he shall scarce finde any true faith. Not so much need to pray now with the Apostles, Adauge no bis fidem, Lord increase our faith; but Diminue nobis fides, Lord decrease our faiths. Lessen the number of our false faiths, increase the measure of our true faith. Wee know how some beleeve this yeare, we know not how they will beleeve next yeare. Incerta fides, certa infidelitas; Where beleefe is uncertaine, unbeleefe is certaine. The vanity of some men, the curiositie of many men, the inconstancie of all men, make many faiths. As the Levite served his ravished Concubine, Iudg. 19.29. he divided her into twelue peeces, and sent her into all the coasts of Israel* so poore Faith hath beene cut into twelve thousand peeces, and scattered all over the world.

The Papists exclaime so farre as the world is Christened, that the varietie of faiths sprung from us. Ex uno Luthero multae fides; Out of one Luther came many faiths: as out of the belly of the Trojan horse, an armie of souldiers. They call us Novangelicos, new-Gospellers; and Quinti Evangelii professores; Protestants of a fifth Gospell. All their malice is to black and grime the face of our Church: which still, maugre all their spight, lookes faire in the eye of her Husband Iesus Christ. All their aspersions and calumnies are but rubbish to scoure us, and make us Gods brighter vessels. A fifth Gospell, say yee? No, remember your owne booke, which the monkes of Paris wrote, and called it Evangelium Aeternum, the Everlasting Gospell: there was a fifth Gospell. But the want of our union with the Pope, or unity with our selves, doth not disprove the truth of our faith. Sicut Dei una Ierusalem, sic Diaboli una Babylon, August. As Ierusalem is at one, so Babylon is at one; the children of hell are at peace. Satan divides not his kingdome; one crow will not pecke out another crowes eyes. Omnis unitas non est veritas, omnis dissensio non est falsitas. As every union is not truth, so every dissention is not falshood. Melius est dissidium pietatis, quam pax iniquitatis; Better are the troubles and differences of righteousnesse, than the peace of wickednesse. Non est veritas unitatis, ubi non est unitas veritatis; There is no truth of unity, without unity of truth. Agreement in evill is not unitie, but conspiracie. Indeed our neighbours of Rome are subtill, their quarrels are not in the streets, all their jarres keepe within doores. The Inquisition keepes Papists in the unitie of heresie; Yet some of them secretly know their owne errours, their owne distractions. Ludovicus Vives writes of a great one among them, perswaded to goe to one of their conventicles; who answered, Come, Eamus ad communes errores, quia sic vultis: Let us goe to the common errours, seeing you will have it so. Where was their union in the time of their Anti-popes; when there were three at once? which was the Head? Was it a body without a head? or a body with three heads? The one were defective, the other monstrous. What was the unitie of their faith, when their heads were condemned heretikes? some of them sacrificers to devils? Yea, even now they agree not in the Faith. The Dominicans abridge mans free-will, the Iesuites contradict this: this quarrell fils the world with bookes. The truth is, there are more differences of faith in the Romish religion, than in all the world besides.Doct. Hall, the Peace of Rome. A reverend Divine of ours hath collected from Bellarmines owne pen, many hundred differences among them; yet these men boast their unitie of Faith. But as no unity is so strong as that Fidei, of faith: so no dissention so violent as that fideum, of different faiths. Faith is a whet-stone that gives edge to the instruments of warre.
The Papists on the left hand: Their Divines conclude that none of us can be saved; one heaven cannot hold the Pope and Calvin. Some of ours say so of them: if Rome be Babylon, then all that have the marke of the Beast, must burne in hell. So plainely, Revel. 19.20. They instance in many particulars, wherein the Roman Church doth rase the foundation. Therefore they say, Babylon will be served, as shee wished to Ierusalem, Psal. 137. She cried of that Citie, Rase it, Rase it, even to the foundation: her reward shall be proportionate; her little ones shall be dashed against the stones. But this may be too farre on both sides; a Fever of zeale.
Schismaticks on the right hand; for faith suffers, as Christ suffered, in the midst of her enemies. Fides laceratur utrinque; These invent a new Faith, a new Church. As the heathen made a peece of wood a god, and then adored it: so these set up a new creed of their owne forging, and then worship it. If it be appealed, they cry lowder than the Ephesians for their Diana, with such a noise; Great is Diana of the Ephesians. If they live among us, we ought to compell them to unity. A woman not contracted, must not be forced to marry, because she is free; but if she be willingly contracted, and afterward dislike, she may be justly forced by the Law. These are contracted to the Church, therefore may bee justly compelled;Luke 14.23. Compell them to come in, that my house may be full. But can Faith be constrained? Nil minus est fidei
 quam fidem cogere, Tertul. It is against the nature of Faith to be compelled; Probitate coacta, Gloria nulla venit. How then? Quid jam nisi vota supersunt? There is no helpe left but our prayers: let us desire that as at first, Vniversa terra erat unius linguae, the whole world was of one language; so that it were now, unius fidei, all of one faith. Let us beseech Dominum fidei, to send us Dominam fidem: pray our Lord of Faith, to send us our Lady Faith. That every one may have faith in his owne heart; and all our faith may be one in Iesus Christ.
The third point is the Proprietie; Your faith. The faith of all is one, as it reflects on our Saviour Christ: yet every soule that will goe to heaven, must have a particular faith in it selfe. All of us beleeve one thing, yet the act of thy faith cannot save my soule; it must be my owne faith. No man can be saved by a common faith in any religion. Vna fides cum reliquis Sanctis, tamen propria fides cujusque Sancti. For the substance, it hath a community with the rest of the Saints: for the availeablenesse, it hath a proprietie to every beleever. One bird cannot flie to heaven with another birds wings. Now it is called Your faith two wayes, Ex aequitate juris, ex proprietate usus. By the right and interest you have in it, and by your proper use of it.
1 Your faith, because you haue a right and interest to this faith. As Saint Iude calls it theIude verse 3. Common salvation, so it may be called the Common faith. If no Christian be excepted from the right of salvation by Christ, then none is excepted from the right of faith in Christ. The faith that God delivered to the Saints, is Your faith: take your handfull out of this sheafe, your portion is in this common stocke. It is Aeque pretiosa fides, saith our Apostle, vers, 1. Like precious faith: not appropriated to Peter or Paul only, the rest secluded; but common to all the Saints. Qui se excipit, se decipit: qui alium excipit, Christo injuriam facit. He that excepts himselfe, deceives himselfe: he that excepts others, doth wrong to Christ. There is a woe to such;Mat 23.13. Woe to you Scribes and Pharisies, hypocrites, for ye shut up the kingdome of heaven against men. They have a bridge over the gulfe, whereby themselves are escaped; and then take it way lest it should helpe others. ButLuke 22.32. When thou art recovered, strengthen thy brethren. Shew others the mercy thou hast tasted: teach them to escape damnation by that way thou hast escaped it. So David, Psal. 66.16. Come and heare all ye that feare God, and I will declare what he hath done for my soule. Woe to them that engrosse faith, that enclose Gods Commons, that make that severall and peculiar, which the Lord hath laid open, and made common. Thus the Pharisie despised the poore Publican; yet went home lesse justified. The Pharisies reproched them;Iohn 7.40. Have any of The Rulers beleeved on him? But this people who knoweth not the Law, are cursed: but themselves were more cursed. Shut not the doore of heaven against thy brother, lest God shut it against thine owne soule, 1 Cor. 12.29. Divers gifts are appropriated to divers men; but faith is general to al the elect. There is a part of the body for seeing, a part for hearing, a part for smelling, a part for tasting, a part for walking, a part for speaking; but all are Feeling. The eye feeles, the eare feeles, the tongue feeles, etc. Faith is like that sense of feeling, common to all. All are not seeing parts, nor all hearing parts, nor all smelling parts; but all are feeling parts. Are all Apostles? are all Prophets? are all Teachers? are all workers of miracles? Others may have particular graces, faith is a common grace to all. It is a devillish malice to grudge another man faith. When one wished that none might goe to heaven, but himselfe, his wife, and his daughter, another replied, it were farre better that none might goe to hell, but thy selfe, thy wife, and thy daughter.
2 Your faith, because every one must have a proper and peculiar use of faith. Thou canst not see CHRIST with anothers eyes, nor walke to heaven on anothers feet. Get true faith of thine owne, though little, let it be true. If it cannot be so great as the best, let it be so precious as the best; a little peece of gold is so good gold as a great peece, excepting the quantity. Keep thy faith, though thouGal. 6.17. beare about in thy body the markes of the Lord Iesus. Where-soever thou art maimed, let thy faith be sound. If a man receive a wound, he is glad it is not to death, if he have sicknes, that it
 is not mortall. So keepe faith, and keepe life: lose not thy faith, and thou shalt never lose Christ.
The fourth and last point is the Societie. To your faith; To, implies some accession. Faith is a great Queene; it is base to let her goe without a Court and a trainePsal. 45.14. The Queene shall be brought to the King in rayment of needle-worke: The Virgins that be her companions shall follow her. The virgins are Vertue, Temperance, etc. Nuda fides, nulla fides: Let us not be Solifidians, as the Papists call us, lest we be Nullifidians, as they are. Faith is of Rebecca's humour; Give me children, or else I die. Languescit fides fine bonis operibus, malis operibus moritur. The want of good workes makes Faith sicke, evill workes kill her out-right. Good deeds are such things, that no man is saved for them, nor without them. Thou hast need of thy faith, or thou canst not be saved; Christ hath need of thy workes, or hee will not save thee. Not that he needs them for himselfe, Psal. 16.2. My goodnesse, O Lord, extendeth not to thee: but for his children, ver. 3. But to the Saints that are in the earth. So that in this respect, Matth. 20.3. Loose the Asse and the Colt, for the Lord hath need of them: unbinde your covetous desires, be free in the workes of mercy; for the Lord hath need of them. You aske, why should I part with my goods, seeing my faith serves my turne, and is sufficient to save my soule? Yes, but the Lord hath need of them. Vse for himselfe, because need for his; and what you lay out to these little ones, he takes it to himselfe, he will pay you againe. Thus Faith, like that Queene of the South, comes not alone to Salomon; she brings her traine after her. Faith is this Queene; let Repentance be her Vsher to goe before her; and good workes the Court that follow her: so let her come to the King of Mercy, the Presence-chamber of Iesus Christ.
To your faith vertue.] We have laid the foundation, and are now come to the walls of this spirituall house. It were a foolish cost of a foundation without walls; then said in dirision, This man began to build. Vertue, this is a speciall materiall. It is fit, ordiri a definitione, to begin with the definition: but we must first see what is the vertue here meant, before we can define it. Ieremie sayes that Vertue in the Scripture is sometimes taken for the great power of God; as the Prophet speakes, Virtutes Domini nunciabit in Insulis: And Psal. 46. he is called Dominus virtutum. The Philosopher called Vertue, Bene vivendi formam and normam; the rule or method of living well. Psscator understands Vertue here Iustitiam erga proximum, righteousnesse towards others, where-after they that live are called good men. In a word, Vertue is taken in a double signification. 1. In the Latitude; so for all graces and good endowments; as Philip. 4.8. Whatsoever things are true. etc. if time be any vertue, any praise. Thus understood here, it is but the Genus to all these succeeding graces; Knowledge, Temperance, etc. all are Vertues. 2. In a restrained sense, it intends some speciall habite, directing a man to lead a good life, Tit. 2.12. soberly, ratione tui, righteously, ratione proximi, godly, ratione Domini. First therefore we will consider Vertue in the copious acception; and so we may deduce this generall doctrine.
Faith without vertue can neither make a man good in himselfe, nor just before the Lord. Faith, non otiosa, sed officiosa; it must have vertue with it. God requires grapes of the Vine, (implanted to Christ by Faith) in fidei nostrae testimonium: not for his owne diet, but in testimony of our faith. If faith have ingraffed us into the Vine, we must be bearing branches. And though we shall not be rewarded Propter opera, for our workes; yet secundum opera,Revel. 2.23. according to our workes: Vertue must wait at the heeles of Faith. There is a great sea of difference betweene the Papists and us, about good workes; which, God knowes, are scant and cold among us all. We both agree that they are to be done; both our doctrines perswade to wel-doing; but when they talke of merit in them, here we part company: they travelling to heaven by their workes, we by our faith; which of us speed best, rests in the conclusion to prove. They cavill that wee hold not good workes necessary; wee hold them as necessary as they, but in another kinde of necessitie. They in a necessitie of prioritie,
 we in a necessitie of posterioritie. They in Demonstratione a causa, we in Demonstratione a signo. They Vt merita, we ut debita. They to bind God to us, we as already bound to God. They to make him our debter, we in acknowledgement of a debt due to him: even our almes is not a gift, but a debt. Therefore it is said, that no man hath a right in his owne, but onely the use and disposition. As the wealth of the seven plentifull yeares, supplied the want of the seven barren: so the wealth of the rich is given to supply the necessitie of the poore. Tua superflua, aliorum necessaria. Our almes brings not God accountant to us, but helpes us in our account to God. The Papists hold them necessary, Tanquam a servis merce nariis; they looke for wages for them: we Tanquam a filiis ingenuis, as of children disposed according to the nature of our father.
But if we be onely justified by faith, why are we rewarded according to workes? workes are of two sorts; Intrinseca or Infusa; such as God workes in us: these are here vertues, Theologicall or morall; as Patience, etc. Extrinseca or Acquisita; these we draw out of the former, or rather God out of us. The former are as the principall, these the interest. Now God doth not so much call us to account for that he gives us, but for the employment and encrease of it that should bee made to his use. Therefore he that buried his talent, was condemned, though he had it. The other were rewarded, not because they had their talents, but because they had imployed them, and gained by them. One came with Domine, ecce tuum; yet he was answered with, Cast that unprofitable servant into utter darkenesse. But the other, Lord behold, thy five talents have gotten five moe? then; Euge bone, well done good and faithfull servant; Enter thou into the joy of thy Lord. God calls him faithfull; because he used his Faith to the producing of good workes. So Matth. 25. not according to the internall habite of vertues or vices; but according to the workes proceeding from them, is the reward bestowed. Christ saies not, you have beleeved, but you have done; come ye blessed.
Two things fall necessarily here to be observed; The Invaliditie of merite in our vertuous workes; The necessitie and commoditie of these vertuous workes in themselves. Here is faith preceeding and workes proceeding. Antecedit fides justificandum, Opera sequuntur justificatum.
1 The insufficiencie of our vertues and their effects, which are good workes; to merite or to justifie our soules before God. It is a silly illation of the Romists; that because we must adde to our faith vertue, etc. therefore faith cannot alone justifie We doe not commend a solitary faith, you see her required company. The eye alone of all parts of the body doth see; but the eye that is alone, or separated from the body, doth not see. We pronounce that to be no justifying faith which is without vertue and workes. But that faith qualified with workes, doth notwithstanding justifie without workes; this we maintaine against men and Angels. We separate not faith and workes in Iustiticato, sed in justificando: not in the person justified, but in the act of justifying. In fire though light and heat cannot be divided the one from the other; yet the one may be considered without the other. But how shall Saint Paul and Saint Iames be reconciled; the one saying, we are justified by faith; the other, by workes? Is the spirit of unitie and truth divided? No; the one speakes of a Iustice of justification, the other of a Iustice of testification. The one acquits before God, the other approves before man. The one is without us, lent: the other within us, inherent: the one we receive, the other we returne. Paul like a Doctor in the Schooles reading, Iames as a Pastor in the Pulpit preaching. The one establishing a reall faith, the other confuting a verball faith. Piscator doth thus cleare it: he saies that Saint Paul and Saint Iames did handle two diverse questions. Paul; Quod fides justificat: Iames; Qualis fides justificat. The one, that faith doth justifie: the other, what kind of faith doth justifie. The one properly teaching Iustification, the other sanctification.
Vertue as a servant followes Faith her Mistresse, but when she comes to answer
 the Iustice of God, vertue runnes behind the doore, with a Lord be mercifull to me a sinner: and so leaves the burden on faiths shoulder, which onely answers it in the bloud of IESUS CHRIST. Faith is like Rachel, and vertue her maid Bilhah: though Bilhah supplie the defects of Rachel, yet still let her remember that Rachel is her Mistresse. CHRIST is our husband, and we his spouse: now it is fit the Bridegroome should be alone with the bride in the secret chamber; all the servants and attendants being shut forth: but when the doore is opened, and the Bridegroome commeth into the waiting-roome, then let all the servants and hand-maides attend: then enter vertue, temperance, etc. Extra causam justificationis opera satis laudari non possunt: ad causam hujus admitti non debent. Out of the point of Iustificati-workes cannot be sufficiently commended: into the cause of Iustification, they must not be admitted. David had a great army of souldiers at his backe, yet he slew Goliah alone; had none to helpe him. Faith alone conquers Satan, but it hath an host of seconds with it. Faith like Iohn that beloved Disciple, leanes on CHRISTS breast; good workes with Peter follow CHRIST. The story of Iudith proceeding with Holofernes may be here entertained for a fit similitude. Bethulia is in danger of Holofernes,Iud. 13. the terror of the East; as we of the Iustice of God. Iudiths undertakes for the safetie of the Bethulians, faith for the safetie of Christians. All Bethulia being too weake to encounter him, as all our obedience is too little to answer God. Iudith goes accompanied with her hand-maid, faith with vertue. The hand-maid waits on Iudeth all the way: yet in the act of deliuerance Iudith is alone, and her hand-maid attends without the doore. Vertue is ever waiting upon faith; but in the mightie act of deliverance she dares not come in, but lets faith alone with the whole businesse. It is she that goes to the throne of grace with confidence, and obtaines mercie through the mediation of her sweet Saviour Christ.
2 The necessitie of vertuous actions. The law though it have no power to condemne us, hath power to command us. Lex datur ut gratiae quaereretur, Evangelium ut lex impleretur. The law sendes us to Christ to be saved, and Christ sends us back againe to the law to learne obedience. The former is plaine;Gal. 3.24. The Law is our Schoole-Master to bring us to Christ, that we might be justified by faith. The other is as manifest:Matth. 19.17 If thou wilt enter into life, keepe the commandements, Tit. 2.11. The grace of God that bringeth salvation to all men, hath appeared. There is the grace of God, and salvation with it: whither doth it send us? To the deniall of ungodlinesse and worldly lusts, that we should live soberly, etc. He that beleeves will keep the commandements. Now the keeping of the Law is two-fold; legall, evangelicall. Legall; so Adam might have kept it, so Christ did. Evangelicall, Christs righteousnesse imputed to us: he kept it for us, and we strive to keepe it in him. That is trueGal. 5.6. faith, which worketh by love. A man is a perfect Christian inwardly through faith before God, who hath no need of our workes; outwardly before men by his workes; for our faith profits them nothing. We call a painted man aequivoce, a man: some painters are so skilfull in casting their colours, and can paint a fire so lively, that at the first blush you would thinke it to be a fire indeed. But trie it by the effects, hold your hand to it, to feele some warmth, it is but a cold boord or blocke. Many can thus lively paint their faith with the colours of profession: that God is their God; and though few be saved, they are sure to be of the number; excellent fire! But let the poore come neere to be warmed with works of mercie; or others looke for the light of vertue; there's neither light nor heat in it; a meere painted fire. A Pigmaleons blocke; faced only like faith. But the Gospel that gives salvation, chargeth us with the lawes obedience. Esther being brought up in her young yeares under Mordecai; though shee was afterwards married to king Ahasuerus, and an Imperiall crowne of gold set on her head; yet was still obedient to Mordecai, as before.Esth. 2.20. She did the commandement of Mordecai, like as when she was brought up with him. When he charged her to speake to the king, albeit with hazard of life; she obeyed; if I perish, I perish. We were under the rudiments of the Law, as she under Mordecai: now we are freed by
 the Gospell, married to the great king IESUS CHRIST; crowned with his grace, enriched with the royall apparell of his righteousnesse: yet still we must be obedient to the Law, as Queene Esther to Mordecai. Epaminondas gave his souldiers leave to feast and sleepe, while himselfe walked and watched about the armie. Christ will not deale so with us; but rather as Abimelech said to his souldiers;Iudg. 9.48. what you see me doe, doe yee so likewise. Though in Iustification, Fiat ubi secundum fidem tuam; be it unto thee according to thy faith: yet in salvation; Reddetur unicuique secundum opera sua; every man shall be rewarded according to his workes.Matth. 5.8. Blessed are the pure in heart for they shall see God. They must lead vertuous lives on earih, that ever expect in heaven to see the Lord IESUS.
All this while we have considered vertue in the larger acception; comprehensive of all the rest. Strictly Saint Augustine defines it to be nothing else, but Diligere diligendum; to love that is to be loved. Thus it hath a sweet reference to all the graces following. Id diligere, Scientia est, etc. To love this is knowledge; not to be seduced from it by allurements, is Temperance: not to be removed from it by calamitie, is Patience: to doe this for Gods cause, is Godlinesse: to communicate it to others, is brotherly kindnesse: to dilate it to all men, is Charity. Ambrose knowledge seekes vertue, Temperance finds it, Patience suffers for it, Godlinesse possesseth it, Charitie communicates it. These are so linked together with a golden chaine of harmonie; like the Tabernacles curtaines of blew silke; that pull one, pull all. Hath any man vertue? he must have knowledge: In nesciente non est virtutis habitus: the ignorant are not capable of the habite of vertue. If there be knowledge, temperance will follow: for follie is the mother of Surfet, and digges the own grave with the teeth: but abstinence is the daughter of wisedome. If Temperance, then surely there will be Patience: Temperantia injuriam non facit, Tolerantia patitur. Temperance doth no wrong, Patience suffers it. He that abhorres to hurt others, will much lesse hurt himselfe. If Patience, there must needs be Pietie; for the1 Pet. 2.19. Thanke-worthy patience is that, which for conscience toward God, endureth wrongfull griefe. If we be content to suffer evill for God, surely we will doe for God. If Godlinesse goe before, fraternall kindnesse will follow after. For no man can love the invisible God, and hate his visible brother, If kindnesse to our brother in CHRIST; then Charitie to all. A heathen will be kind to his friends, a christian must be charitable to his enemies. This is a golden chaine: the wicked have a chaine,Psal 73.6. their pride compasseth them about as a Chaine: Funas peccatorum, the cords or chaine of their sinnes; one end whereof reaches to hell. But this chaine is tied to heaven by the one end thereof; fasten the other end to thy conscience, it shall draw thee up thither.
The Papists say, Images are the bookes of Idiots, but the Prophet calls them Teachers of lies: and all know that they are occasions of sinne. Let me give you a Picture without the offence; behold an Image without sinne. It is of Vertue: you shall not sooner see the medalls but you will straite know the face. Conceive her a virgin Intemeratae pudicitiae, of an unspotted chastitie; faire, yet never courted with a lascivious language. She hath a face white as is heaven mixed with some lovely red; White with her owne innocence, ruddy with blushing at others naughtinesse. Of her Saviours complexion;Cant. 5.10. My beloved is white and ruddy. She hath a brow cleare as Chrystall, wherein God hath written Sapientia, Wisedome. This is her courage; she may be affronted, she cannot be affrighted. She hath eyes that never sent out a wanton looke: those casements were never opened to let in vanitie. She is not poring with them on the earth; but Nititur erectos ad sydera tollere vultus; directs them to heaven where they shall one day see her desire, even the glory of GOD,Cant. 5.10. Thou hast ravished my heart, my spouse, with one of thine eyes. The LORD loves those eyes. She hath lippes like a threed of scarlet, and her speech is comely, Cant. 4.3. She hath the tongue of Angels; when she speakes, she ministers grace to the hearers. She discourseth the language of Canaan most perfectly: and never opens but the first aire she breaths, eccho's with the praise of her maker. Her eares are like the
 Sanctum Sanctorum of the Temple; none but the high Priest must enter there. They are stopd to the songs of any Siren, open to the mournings of any poore. What gracious words she receives in at those doores, she sends them like Iewells to bee laid up in the Cabinet of her heart. She hath two hands; one of equity, another of of charitie, none for injurie. She gives every one his due for Iustices sake, some more than their due for mercies sake. She gives, forgives, does that to others which she expects at the hands of CHRIST. She hath bowells of mercie; the members of Christ are as deare to her, as her most inward and vitall parts. Shee feeds them, as considering what it were to have empty bowells her selfe. Her knees were never stiffened with pride: she can easily bow them to give her Superior homage: but throwes them downe at the foot-stoole of her maker: yet still her heart is lower, and she never riseth without a pardon. Her feet are still travelling the waies of pietie, and running the race of salvation. She knowes this life is a journey, and no time to stand still, therefore she is shod for the purpose, with the Preparation of the Gospell of peace: she never rests, till she is gotten within the thresholds of heaven. She hath a white silken garment, the snow of Lebanon is blacke to it: not woven out of the bowells of wormes, but out of the side of her Saviour. She is clothed all over with his righteousnesse, which makes her beautifull in the sight of her maker. She is girt with the Girdle of Truth: and sinnes not, not because she cannot, but because she will not. For virtus non est non posse peccare, sed nolle; Augu. She hath a Crowne promised, blessednesse: her Redeemer, even the King of heaven, did bequeath it her in his will, and she shall weare it in eternall glory, And let every soule, that knowes and loves her on earth, or hopes to enjoy her reward in heaven, call her Blessed.
To your vertue, knowledge. Vertue without knowledge were like a beautifull damosell blind: or a faire house that hath not a window in it, vertue is like a pearle in the shell; there must be knowledge to breake the shell, or we cannot come at the pearle. Ignorance is dangerous: Non repugnant, qui impugnari se nesciunt. Thus the divell carries many to hell, as falconers carry their hooded hawkes,Grego. without baiting. Quis non senserit illum miserabilem, qui se nunquam sensit miserum? There is no wretchednesse so pitiable, as that which is not knowne to the sufferer. Qui Dominum nesciunt, a Domino nesciuntur: If men will not know God, God will not know them. Scire Dei, est approbare; nescire, reprobare. Therefore he sendes away the wicked with a Nescio vos, I know you not: but Novit qui sui sunt;2 Tim. 2.19. the Lord knowes them that are his, Hos. 8.4. They have made Princes, and I knew it not: that is, I did not approve of it: wilt thou not know? thou shalt not be acknowledg^d.
The worke of regeneration begins at illumination. The first thing that sunke in our first parents, was knowledge: now where the wound began, there must begin the medicine. Thou seest in a tree buds, leaves, flowers, and fruits and barke and pith: yet all these are but the juyce diversely digested and sent forth. So here in a Christian, Faith, Vertue, Temperance, Patience, Charitie, Godlinesse: yet all these are out the knowledge of Christ diversly concorded: knowledge is lux virtutis.
The Papists indeed magnifie Ignorance: good reason, for Ignorance magnifies them. Our way to heaven is knowledge, perhaps they have a way by themselves. Like Owles, they keepe a whooting in the darke, but are blind in the broad day; never aske them poore soules, as Philip the Eunuch; understandest thou what thou readest? but doest thou read at all? No, we may not be suffered to reade. It will be very hard for a man to stumble over the threshold of heaven, or to goe blindfold to salvation.
Concupiscence though ever sinfull, yet could not bring forth sinne without the consent of reason: and this would never consent so long as the eyes were open. For sinne is a thing so ugly and deformed, and so like the father the devill; that it is unreasonable for a mans soule to yeeld to it. Hence Paul calls sinne a worke of darkenesse: for Satan doth hide it from us in the Birth, and would hide it from us in the
 Growth, onely on our death-bed and anguish of soule, he shewes it us in the Fruite. In this sense, that may rightly be understood, Nemo sciens peccat; that no man sinnes knowingly, at the very instant of the committing. Though he have the habite of knowledge in the generall, yet hath he lost it in the particular. As we say of the Coward; There is feare in his heart, even while he feareth not; in regard of the habite. And the slave hath an habituall service upon him, even when he sleepes: he serves though he takes his ease. There may be the habite of knowledge in the mind, yet not the use of it in some speciall act. The devill to utter his damned commodities, dealeth as some trades-men about their bad wares; puts out the true lights, and sets up false lights in their stead. In the time of Superstition he put out verbum Praedicatum, the word preached; that man did scarce know sinne in generall. In these dayes of profanesse, he puts out verbum applicatum, the word applied, that few consider what sinne is in practice. So that now, he that comming from the mount as Moses; and hearing the worlds confused noise; would thinke it the noise of warre; conquering or conquered: but being among them, he findes it the noise of joy and dancing, revelling and roaring. Not because men doe not know these sins in generall: but they will not know them in these particular facts. Lust like a thick smoke dimmes the eye of knowledge.
Now the meanes to prevent this wickednesse, is to keepe open the eye of knowledge. This is done both by the doctrine of Truth in generall: and the application thereof in speciall. The generall knowledge of truth is more easy; for which of us is ignorant what sinne is knowledge while she walkes in generalls, is in her owne Iurisdiction: sense and affection hath nothing to doe with her; but she may freely give her sentence. Loe then she dares calls usurie, usurie; and not a moderate improvement of mony: Pride, pride; and not handsomenesse: Covetousnesse by the owne name, and nor thirstinesse. But when shee descends to particulars, wherein all actions doe consist and disputeth whether this or that speciall act be sinne or not; here sense and aff ction put in for a part, chalenges an interest, and oversway. And as it is in an ill pick'd (or as we say) pack'd Iury; whereof there is one wise man, another honest man, five knaves and five fooles: the greater part over-rules the better part, these ten over-beare those two. The five senses, and as many Affections, are the knaves and the fooles; Science is the wise man, Conscience the honest: now neither Science the wise, nor Conscience the honest, can be heard, nor give in their verdict; but all goes with the mad senses and franticke affections.
Here we see the use of Preachers, who may speake freely, and helpe us to retaine the truth in particular. Admonition is called by the Greekes (...); as it were a restoring or putting of the minde in order. When the understanding is (as it were) besides it selfe, and out of joynt; transported with some suddaine passion, or prevented by an evill custome, this repaires it. So Paul delivers the use of it, Eph. 4.12. (...); the putting againe in joynt of luxate members. This continuall publicke Preaching is necessary; as a Taper set on the table to give light to all in the house. If this light wast it selfe, what hurt does it to thee? yea if it goe out in the owne stench, yet it lightens thee so long as it lasts. But thou saiest; Consilium mihi non det, qui sibi non dat: let not me take counsell of him, that gives none to himselfe. Yet he might build an Arke for Noah, that was himselfe drowned in the floud: he may light thee to heaven, though himselfe goe darkling to another place. Woe to him if he doe not preach: if he doe preach, take thy portion. Quod bene dicit, tuum est; quod male vivit, suum est. But if he preach not, thou mayst perish. Where if you had good eyes and thankfull hearts, you would see and acknowledge how God hath blessed you more than the Romanists. The devill was fained to send a letter of commendations to the Popish Clergie. Amongst many other things he thanks them for their ignorance; but especially for their silence. For setling our estate wee require a learned Lawyer; for our sicke body a learned Physitian: and for the soule that is most precious, shal we not desire a learned Divine? In law thou canst but hazard thy
 estate; in Physicke thou venturest but a mortall life: but here thou mayest lose thy soule. The body dies, the Physitian is payed: let the state be lost, thy Lawyer hath his Fees before. But if the Minister save thy soule, yet he is not regarded, not rewarded: if he lose it by wilfull negligence, he hath lost himselfe. Thus requisite are Preachers to give the light of Knowledge. But yet if in this night of sinne we will doe any profitable worke, wee must either our selves have a particular light of our owne in our hands; or if we cannot, we must get another to hold the candle to us, that wee may see the deformitie of sinne; lest Knowledge being blinded, and Lust leading the way, we both fall into the pit of destruction. Iohn the Baptist was Christs Harbenger, and went before him, that is the glory of heaven. Knowledge is like Iohn, that shining Lampe, without that, we cannot finde the way to the glory of heaven, nor be brought to CHRIST. Thus in generall; now let us further observe five conclusions.
1 That by Knowledge is here meant an insight into heavenly things. Indeed Augustine distinguisheth betweene Knowledge and Wisdome; Ad Sapientiam pertinet aeternarum rerum cognitio intellectualis: ad scientiam temporalium rerum cognitio naturalis: Wisdome, saith he, is an intellectuall apprehension of eternall things: Knowledge a naturall apprehension of temporall things. But there is no true Knowledge, but that which can make the knowers blessed. Christian wisdome seemes the worlds folly, Greg. What is more foolish than mentem verbis ostendere, to declare a mans meaning in his words? to blesse them that curse us? Mala libentius ferre quam sacere, to suffer rather, than to doe evill? not to resist our oppressours? Yet this is Christs commended wisdome; and he that is Sapientia Patris, the wisdome of the Father, shall one day crowne it: Yet there may be a holy knowledge in th^se lower things. O would to God thou wert wise, and wouldest understand and know the last things! Vt Saperes quae Dei sunt, intelligeres quae mundi sunt, praevideres quae inferni sunt, Bern. That thou wert wise in the things of God, wouldst understand the vanities of this world, and fore-see the torments of hell. Profecto Inferna horreres, superna appeteres, quae ad manum sunt contemneres. Thou wouldest abhorre the plagues of hell, desire the joyes of heaven, despise the temptations of earth. The great affection we beare to the world, shewes that we know it not.
2 The Apostles earnest exhortation to Knowledge, Intimates that naturally we want it. Aristotle compares our wits at the beginning to a faire table, whereon is nothing written, but it is apt to receive all formes and figures. But he is deceived, for it is a darke vault, wherin is no light of Grace, and no more of the light of Nature than the little sparke or snuffe affords.1 Cor. 2.14. The naturall man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God. By nature he is subject to two enemies of knowledge, Ignorance, and Errour. By Ignorance we know not things necessary, by Errour wee know them falsely. Ignorance is a privation, Errour a positive obliquitie. All ignorance cannot be helped, all errours cannot be escaped. From ignorance comes vice, from errour Heresie. Many striving to expell ignorance, fall into errour: as an Empiricke to cure one disease, causeth a worse; so quenching thirst with a draught of poison. Some are tantae fatuitatis, so deepely possessed with folly, that they scarce differ from beasts.August. Hence we see that Knowledge is not easily had; Veritas in profundo latet. In the West-Indies, they that by digging, follow the veines of gold, runne under high mountaines and stony rockes, many miles: yet the interest of Oare sufficiently defrayeth the expences of labour. But knowledge is attained not without greater difficultie: for the soule in the body, as a prisoner in a dungeon, takes in nothing but thorow the grate; sees onely thorow windowes and cloudy spectacles.1 Cor. 3.19. The wisdome of the world is foolishnesse with God. Therefore the first way to Knowledge is, Scire quod nescias, to know thine owne ignorance. Qui se diligit stultum, non proficiet ad sapientiam: nec fiet quisque qualis esse cupit, nisi oderit qualis est, August. Hee that doates on his owne folly hath no hope of wisdome; nor can a man become what he would be, unlesse he hates being what he is. They can never come to true wisdome,
 whom the opinion of their owne false wisdome deceiveth. Let no man deceive himselfe, 1 Cor. 3.18. If any man among you seemeth to be wise, let him become a foole that he may be wise. Confesse thy Ignorance, this is the way to get knowledge.
3 That Knowledge is not the cause of sin, but Ignorance: for Vertue is begotten and nourished by Knowledge. Scientia praecedit virtutis cultum, Chrysost. Knowledge must goe before vertue: for man desires not that he knowes not: Et malum nisi cognitum non timetur; Vnknowne evill is not feared. Indeed there may be a disjunction of these two in respect of their morall parts. So there may be Virtus sine scientia, and Scientia sine virtute. The Heathen had vertue without knowledge, and wee have knowledge without vertue. But as theirs was not true vertue, absente sapientia, without knowledge; so, nor is ours true knowledge, absente virtute, without vertue. There may be a servant that knowes his masters will, and doth it not. And this shall ggravate his wretchednesse; Scire quod sequi debeat, and nolle sequi quod sciat;Isidor. To know that he should follow, and not to follow what he doth know. The Sunne does not heat all men to whom it shines; nor doth knowledge, when it hath taught men, Quid sit faciendum, What is to be done; Continuo accendit ad faciendum, presently inflame or enable them to the doing of it. Aliud est divitias scire, aliud possidere: nec facit divitem cognitio, sed possessio; It is one thing to know where riches are, another thing to be master of them. It is not the knowledge, but the possession of them, that makes rich. But to say that knowledge is a spurre to wickednesse; is all one as if a father training up his sonne to be an archer; another should tell him that by ayming most fairely, he should misse most foulely. No certainely; there is no Vertue can batten or thrive, but that which suckes on the brests of Knowledge.
4 Seeing we must joyne with our Faith Knowledge, it is manifest that an ignorant faith is no faith. The Papists stand hard for their implicite faith; it is enough they say. Their proofe is Matth. 8.26. Why are ye fearefull, O ye of little faith! As if there were no difference betwixt Exiguam and Implicitam fidem; between a little faith, and an implicite faith: betweene a little man and a great Elephant: the little one is a man, and the great one is a beast: Betweene a little Starre, and a great cloud: that is true light, this is very darknesse: that turnes to water, this remaines fire still. A little faith with knowledge is true and saving: a great presumption with ignorance is damning. A small tree is better than a great shadow: that may beare fruit, this is nothing. A Iuggler could never shew more trickes, than they with this involved faith: they are very like; for these also cast a mist before mens eyes, and juggle away their soules, when the Devill comes with his firy darts, their shield of faith is so wrap'd up that they cannot finde it. It is like ware in a Pedlers-packe, mislaid; hee hath it, but he knowes not where it is. It is truly called Fides carbonaria, the Colliers faith: the Devill catechiseth him; how doest thou beleeve? I beleeve as the Church beleeves. How beleeves the Church? as I beleeve: this man was saved, say they; but for all that, I doe not thinke that the Devill and the Collier so soone parted. Sure if he had no better weapons, Satan would have another bowt with him, and such a one as would cost him his soule. Beleeve as the Church beleeves, we aske you no more: this and the signe of the Crosse is sufficient: O the multitude of soules they thus beguile! But adde to your faith Knowledge: Fides nescia is fides nulla:Psal. 9.10. They that know thy name, will trust in thee. They that know not what they should beleeve, cannot beleeve to their owne comfort.
5 Lastly, this Knowledge must be added to Vertue also. The Romists love all blind graces: they commend Caecam fidem, caecam obedientiam; A blind faith, a blind obedience, a blind devotion, whose mother is ignorance. But the Apostle bids us adde Knowledge to these: and Vertue it selfe, lustre it with what glosse of obedience and devotion they can, I say not, Pede claudicat uno, goes halting toward heaven: but Oculis orbatur utrisque; is like a sicled Dove, it would mount to heaven, and hovers upward; but strikes at a tree, and fals; if it want knowledge to direct it. But why should I say, Vertue without Knowledge is blind, when indeed it is not at all. A man may doe
 Bonum, good, and not know it: but not Bene well; true vertue is not without knowledge. But as some doe ill, and yet thinke it good: so others doe good, and yet thinke it ill. For the former,Iohn 16.2. Whosoever killeth you, will thinke that he doth God service. For the latter, Iosephs mistresse meant him a shrewd turne in betraying him to prison, which was Iosephs step to promotion. Or as the theefe wounded a passenger, and intended to kill him, yet with his stroke cut and let out an ulcer, whereof he was ready to die: neither of these can be called vertue. For good and well must in all actions meet: wicked is not much worse than undiscreet. Knowledge without Vertue, makes a mans Mittimus to hell.Iohn 9.41. If ye were blinde, you should have no sin: but now you say, we see, therefore your sin remaineth. Like the woman, Luke 15.8. that hath a Candle in her hand: but as the Romish vulgar did reade it, in stead of Domum everrit, Domum evertit: so these, in stead of sweeping the house, pull it quite downe. So much light abused on earth, so much darknesse inflicted in hell. Vertue without Knowledge, is either likeRevel. 3.17. Laodicea, proud, and knowes not whereof; or mad, and knowes not what to doe. I conclude, Ioh. 9.6. Christ made a medicine for the blinde mans eyes, of his owne spittle, and the earths clay. The first, signifying the knowledge of Christ by his Word, that comes out of his mouth: the other, the knowledge of our selves, who being made of earth, doe naturally favour of nothing but clay. Now of both these materials Christ made one lumpe, tempering them together: so both these knowledges must be so mell'd together, that they be not severed. To have the Clay, knowledge of our selves; without the Spittle, knowledge of Christ; were to cast us downe to desperation. To have the Spittle, knowledge of Christ; without the Clay, knowledge of our selves, and our owne unworthinesse, would puffe us up with presumption. Both doe well together, that we may know our owne selves in our selves wretched; yet in the grace and comforts of God, everlastingly blessed.
Will you now take a short character of the knowing man? Hee desires to know all things, but first himselfe; lest having acquaintance in every place, he should die a stranger to his owne heart. And in himselfe, nor so much his strength as his weaknesse. To know our owne vertues makes us proud; our owne vices humbleth us. Both his eyes are never at once from home: one keepes house, while the other goes abroad for intelligence. He is blind in no mans cause, but best sighted in his owne. He confines himselfe to the circle of his owne affaires, and thrusts not his finger into needlesse fires. His hearts desire is to know God; and he knowes there is no better way to know him, than through Iesus Christ. Herein consists his happinesse, for so he makes sure-worke for his soule. It is the best, and therefore first regarded; and he never rests til his faith be built on assurance, that God hath pardoned his sins, and given him a place in heaven. The world he so far seekes to know, that he may abhor it. He sees the falsenesse of it, and therefore learnes to trust himselfe ever, others so far as not to be damaged by their disappointment. He knowes this to be a short and miserable life, and therefore studies the way to a blessed and eternall one. That this world shal perish, therefore is loth to perish with it. That money may make a man richer, not better; and therefore chuseth rather to sleep with a good conscience, than a full purse. He had rather the world should account him a foole, than God: therefore desires no more wealth than an honest man may beare away. He knows this worlds delight consists of crotchets and short songs, whose burden is sorrow: only heaven hath the best musicke, where glorious Angels and Saints sing for ever to the Lord of Hosts. He knowes his owne ignorance, endevours to science; and for what he cannot apprehend, he begs wisdom of God; not of every thing, but only of so much as may make him blessed. He knows how to make his passions, like good servants, to stand in a diligent attendance, ready at the command of Reason, of Religion. If any of them forgetting their duty, be miscarried to rebell; he first conceales the mutiny, then suppresseth it. He wil not see every wrong done him, knowing he hath done more to his Maker. After continuall acquaintance with the Scriptures, and humble familiaritie with the Holy Ghost; he knowes the way to heaven perfectly, and runs apace till he gets into the armes of his Saviour.






Verse 6.

And to Knowledge, Temperance.


THis grace of Temperance may be here diversely understood:
1 For such a discretion as may season all these graces: so taken it is, Sal omnium virtutum, the salt of every vertue. Devotion without discretion, is like an hastie servant that runnes away without his errand. Profession of Faith without Temperance, is turned into hypocrisie, or such a preposterous zeale; that is, like fire not on the harth to warme, but in the top of the chimney, to set the house on a flame: Vertue without it is folly: Virtus cum indiscrete tenetur, amittitur:Gregor. cum discrete intermittitur, plus tenetur; A man may so indiscreetly hold Vertue, as to lose it: another may so discreetly forbeare medling, that he doth more firmely hold it. Patience without discretion wrongs a good cause: a man must beare his owne injuries patiently, but not GODS nor the Churches. Moses egit causam populi ad Deum precibus and lacrymis, causam Dei adversus populum gladio and vindictis; Moses pleaded the peoples cause to GOD with prayers and teares; but GODS cause against the people with sword and vengeance. Godlinesse without Temperance, is Devotion out of the wits. Gregory observes on the vision of the foure Cherubins, Ezek. 1.10. That the first proportion of those creatures faces, was vultus hominis, the countenance of a man, which saith hee did Rationem denotare; signifie discretion or this temperance. See them allegorized: the Iust man by mortification of the flesh becomes a Calfe ready to be sacrificed: by fortitude in his spirituall warre, fi^ Leo vincens, he is a conquering Lion: by contemplation of the celestiall glory, Aquila triumphans, he is a triumphant Eagle: Per rationem Temperantiae homo exemplaris;Greg. in Ezek. By reason of his Temperance, he is an exemplary Man. Brotherly kindnesse with out Temperance, is brotherly dotage. So kindnesse runnes into crueltie: thou feedest thy friends sensuall appetite, flatterest him in his lusts, concealest his faults, followest his humours; all in kindnesse: this is to spill his soule in kindnesse. Charitie lastly, without Temperance, is Prodigalitie: it gives Expansa manu, sed caeco oculo, with an open hand, and shut eye; and so a man may for his charity goe to the Devill, when in stead of Gods friends, he rewards his enemies. Thus hath Temperance relation to all these graces.
2 For such a Discretion as may moderate Knowledge; and qualifie that heat to which it is addicted.1 Cor. 8.1. Knowledge puffeth up. Some men so bluster on their knowledge, that they hold all the world dunces besides themselves. There is somewhat of poison in it, without the Corrective of Temperance. Hence comes singularity of opinions; Some conceit themselves so wise, that all the sober and peaceable spirits of the Land are meere fooles to them. Poore soules! Who does not pitie their blind madnesse? One cries, Secreta mea mihi; My mysteries be to my selfe: another replies, St^ltitia tua tibi; thy foolishnesse be to thy selfe: the former is the Schismaticke, the other the Libertine. An indifferent man might decide; Nec uni, nec alteri, sed dividatur: let not all the folly be to one, nor all to other, but let them both part it betwixt them. One is so wise that hee cares for no Preacher at all; another wills that such a factious one shall teach him, and no body else. Whether is the madder of the two; hee that will altogether fast, or hee that will feed on nothing but bones? Modus rei tribuit decorem, ordo modum, discretio ordinem.Bernard. The grace of an action is the Manner, the grace of the Manner is Order, the grace of the Order is Discretion. Temperance is not so much a vertue it selfe; as Quaedam moderatrix and auriga virtutum; as a Marshall or Moderatour of
 vertues. It is not enough to doe a good worke; Nisi illud suo loco, modo, tempore feceris; unlesse the due place, fit manner, and convenient time, be observed. If not in the right place, it is as a man lights a taper, and puts it beside the candle-sticke. If not after the right manner, it is as one that is gone a good part of his travell; but must come backe againe, because he hath mistaken his way. If not in due time, it is like him that would never water his garden, but when it rained. If not to the right person, it is like a man that forgetfully salutes his friend ever by the wrong name. If nor to the right end, it is like Iulian, that never was bountifull, or did a man a good turne, but to damne his soule.
3 It is taken for such a moderation of the minde, whereby we so demeane our selves, as neither to surfet on fulnesse, nor to despaire on want. Not that the most temperate man can so master his passions, but that at sometimes hee may over-joy his content, or over-grieve his trouble. When the most equall weights are first put into the evenest balances, there is a little swaying on both sides, and appearance of some inequalitie: yet after a little motion they settle themselves in a just poise. This Temperance is a steddy and habituall firmenesse, that hath no criticall sins. The franticke, though he be sober eleven moones, if he rage one, cannot avoid the imputation of madnesse. When there is no disturbance, to be quiet, is not worth God-a-mercy. The husband told his wife, that he had one ill quality; hee was given to be angrie without cause: she wittily replied, that she would keepe him from that fault, for she would give him cause enough. It is the folly of some that they will be offended without cause, to whom the world promises that they shall have causes enow.Iohn 16.33. In the world ye shall have tribulation; when this cause of disquiet comes, then to be resolved and peacefull, this is Temperance. The balances that are most ill matched in their unsteddy motions, yet come to an equalitie, but stay not at it. The perverse worldling may restraine his passion; yea, may be so well compos'd, that ordinary things shall not stirre him; but when a new and unlooked for crosse comes, then hee is out of Temper, hath lost Temperance. Like a Fencer, that stands upon his usuall wards and postures, and playes well in his schoole: but abroad he meetes with a new tricke, a blow that quite puts him from the rules of his art, and so is beaten with shame. Indeed the best mans Temperance may faile in one particular act, but this doth not take away the habite from him.
This Temperance must guide our conversation.Rom. 12.1. Gods Sacrifice and Service must be Reasonable. Cum fervor discretionem erigit, and discretio fervorem dirigit, Bern. Let Zeale inflame Temperance, and Temperance qualifie Zeale. Nimia remissio nutritiva criminum, nimia districtio parricida virtutum. Too much remissenesse nourisheth vices, too much strictnesse killeth vertues. Without this moderation, Feare passeth into Despaire, Griefe into Bitternesse, Love into Flattery, Hope into Presumption, Ioy into Dissolutenes, Anger into Fury: The want of Temperance in stead of cherishing, destroyes: like the Idolater so rap'd with the faire Image of the Goddesse, that comming to kisse it, he bit it. It altogether over-does.Eccle. 7.16. Be not righteous over-much, neither make thy selfe over-wise. Qui plus posse putat sua quam natura ministrat: Posse suum superans, se minus esse potest. But enough of this kinde of Temperance; men are not so hot that we need to coole them; but rather so cold that we had need to heat them. Few among us are so over-zealous to out-run Christ, it is well if yet we will follow Christ. We need not so much adde temper to your zeale, as zeale to your temper; and wish you so much of both, as may bring you to salvation.
4 Lastly, Temperance is taken for a moderate use of outward things; and comprehends in it Abstinence, (...): when wee eat no more, drinke no more, goe no braver, than naturall equitie and morall decencie requires. Now if the first degree to Vertue be vitium fugere, to avoid the contrary; behold the beautie of this faire grace, by viewing the blacknesse of the opposite sinne, Intemperance. Generally it extends it selfe to all immoderations; but especially it is appropriated to foure. There is Intemperance: 1. In Lust, so it is called Incontinence.
 2. In apparell, so it is called Pride. 3. In meats, so it is called Gluttony. 4. In drinkes, so it is called Drunkennesse. All which are but the effects of Intemperance.
First, Incontinence: to this Intemperance all are naturally prone, but in a different sort. Some quite expell and mortifie this desire by grace: for he that is1 Cor. 6.17. One spirit with Christ, will scorne to be one flesh with an Harlot. The virginitie of the bodie may be lost, and yet the soule preserve her maiden-head.Revel. 14.4. These are they which were not defiled with women, for they are virgins. This is not intended against marriage, there is no defilement in that. Marriage is honourable among all men, and the bed undefiled, Hebr. 13.4. Our Adversaries call it a Sacrament; what, and a defilement too? Doe they use to make Sacraments of pollutions? They might be married, yet not defiled with women; neither with carnall nor spirituall harlotrie, nor with adultery nor idolatrie; and so remaine spirituall virgins. Others there are that keepe in this corruption by civill modestie; they will not expresse it, yet have it. Many heathens could thus suppresse their corruption, not mortifie it. Their Intemperance is to them like a mad-brain'd wife to a sober man; he lockes her up, and goes abroad without trouble; but when he comes home he is wearied with her scolding. Others there are that care not to let their Intemperance burst out, but they want opportunity: now the theefe cannot rob till he come at a bootie. So the sinne is in them, even while they forbeare the act, and they are intemperate persons. There is a sort that shame not the eruption of this sinne, without respect (I say not of conscience, but) of credite: Quorum luxuriae meretrix non sufficit omnis; That in the lust ofIer. 5.8. fed horses neigh after women. The meanes to avoid this Intemperance, is:
1 By subduing the body to the soule;1 Cor. 9.27. I keepe under my body, and bring it into subjection. The bodie is that part, which is against the LORD. The body will begge, but let a shamelesse begger have a shamelesse deniall. When the bodie does what the good soule dictates, there is a breathing Saint: when the soule consents to the bodies appetite, there is a blinde man led by his dogge. Because the Serpents head had led the way so long, now the repining taile would needs lead; but then the whole ranne into mischiefe. When lust undertakes to guide a man, and reason is faine to follow, there is a precipice to destruction.
2 By debarring the flesh all lust-provoking meats and drinkes. It is wretched to have this noysome fire, wicked to feed it with fewell. Sodome found that Fulnesse of bread was the mother of unnaturall filthinesse. High diet is adulteries nurse: Raro vidi continentem, quem non vidi abstinentem, August. You shall seldome see a man continent, that is not abstinent. The heat is taken at a Taverne, that is, laid at a brothel-house. Abstaine then, for it is fasting-spettle that must kill this tetter. He that will ever be running for fewell, never meant to put out the fire.
3 By avoiding beautifull temptations.1 Cor. 6.18. Flee fornication: Resist other sinnes, flee this. Stand not to trie thy strength, but runne away. Parthus tutus ab hoste suga est. Ioseph stood not to bandie termes, and dispute with his mistresse, but fled from her. If thou wilt endure conference with an Harlot, she will conquer. Like Vlisses, stop thine eares, her charmes shall not take thee. Many have runne out of their wits for women, 1 Esdr. 4.26. Satan having conquered the woman, never came at the man, but left the woman to doe that; hee thought shee would be devill enough to tempt man. Salomon with all his wisdome, Sampson with all his strength, were thus master'd. One overcame a Lion, yet a Lionesse overcame him. The other could finde out the Harlot from the true mother; yet a Harlot found out him, and made him forget his Maker.Numb. 25.1. The people began to commit whoredome with the daughters of Moab. The daughters of Moab, light by nature, for they were begot in Incest. Lots daughter lay with her owne father while hee was drunke, and called her sonne Moab; which signifies, The sonne of her father. Impudent strumpet, not to bee ashamed of so foule and horrible a fact! Thus they were light, and that by nature; they had it by kinde, it cost them nothing. Even the sonnes of GOD were
 tempted to folly by the daughters of men, Gen. 6. A woman faire is mans snare: think them thy she-devils, sent and taught to seduce and spill thy soule. Meretrix quo pulchrior, eo perniciosior, Aug. A Harlot the more beautifull, the more banefull. Rara concordia formae and pudicitiae; It is rare to see a woman chast that's poore and faire. Stat quaevis quavis meretrix mercabilis arte. Bring gold enough, a little cunning shall serve for whoredome; the Devill makes his high-wayes easie. Perhaps all doe not sell their bodies, that sell their soules; some sinne, but set no price on it. I am perswaded that no one Inducement so soone turnes women to Popery, as their Indulgence to this sinne. Venialia dicunt, sed vaenalia sunt; If God would afford pardons on the Popes rates, this sinne would be infinite. But non sic respondetur Domino: His Iustice will not be so answered.
4 By meditating on the punishment. If in the act of thy lust thou couldst see into the darke doores of hell, and behold the adulterers and their harlots embracing flames, quenchlesse flames; howling, and shreeking, and cursing their glasses, their tires, their Bawds, their Panders; bound to eternity of insufferable horrours: this would coole thy heat. For lustfull kisses, kissing of fire; for soft beds, beds of despaire; for wanton songs, gnawing their tongues; for heating delicates, everlasting famishment; for silken curtens, to wish aRevel. 6.16. Rocke for their pillow, and a Mountaine for their coverlet: this, O this would slacken thine intemperance. What men thinke most pleasing, is most plaguing; to have their lusts granted:Psal. 81.12. So I gave them up unto their owne hearts lust. They desired it, they had it; this was the greatest plague. Thinke thou seest beyond thy beauty old-age, beyond old-agd sicknesse, beyond sicknesse death, beyond death Iudgement, beyond Iudgement hell, beyond that no limits of time or torments, but all easelesse, endlesse. Thou criest, God be mercifull to me; but be also mercifull to thy selfe: weepe for thy sinnes, and beseech God to mortifie thy lusts by the death of Christ.
2 The second kinde of Intemperance is in Apparell, Pride, Pride? why there is no such sin, all is but fashion. Indeed Pride hath lost it selfe in the name of Fashion. This was wont to be called the womans sinne:Esay 3.16. The daughters of Sion were hautie, etc. there is Pride and her wardrobe. But now it is a question whether the women keepe their Charter still: the men have endevoured to be as proud as they; not that the other are excusable: innumerable are their boxes, and powders, and paintings; how they dawbe their mud-walls with Apothecaries morter! It is a signe that they love a vizzard better than a face.Act. 23.3. God shall smite thee, thou painted wall: painting is for walls, not for faces. If Natures defects and furrowes cannot be filled up with these colours, yet art shall supply all with rich attires. As that Painter should have drawne Venus very beautifull: but when his cunning failed in her face, he drew her in exceeding rich apparell: Pulchram non potuit, divitem pinxit; Because he could not make her faire, he made her rich. They die their haires too; but this seemes to be no new fashion. For Cyprian writes of it in his time: Foeminae crines suos inficiunt malo praesagio: capillos enim sibi flammineos auspicari non metuunt. They got a flame-coloured haire, an ill presage; it is not safe comming so neere to that colour. They spend more time betwixt the combe and the glasse, than betwixt their family and the Church. They metamorphose their heads, as if they were ashamed of the head of Gods making, proud of the Tire-womans. Sometimes one tire is halfe the husbands rent-day. This is the monstrousnesse of our pride;Ier. 5 31. and what shall we doe in the end thereof? Iesabel was the daughter of a King, the wife of a King, the mother of a King, yet her painted face and proud heart threw her out at the window, and she was trampled under horses feet. But Iehu would bury her; no, the dogs had done it to his hand. O the greatnesse of our lands Intemperance this way! we have learned all things of our neighbours but this, to be proud good-cheape. Hospitalitie and noble attendance is changed into a vessell that runnes on foure wheeles: It is a fashion to build great houses, as the Estriches lay egges; and then to leave them. When the poore come thither for releefe, there's none but Dawes to chatter to them; the Lord
 or the Knight is at London; their Mercers and taylors share the poores due. Great men gather up their wealth and their credite neerer about them, than in former times. Then it consisted in good house keeping and many servants: now in two or three trunkes of apparell and a boy to brush them. Many follow Absolons fashion, to carry a forrest of haire on thier heads: as if that were their grace, which God hath forbidden as ungracious. CHRIST saies, the body is more worth than rayment: but some strive to make their rayments more worth than their bodies: like birds of paradise; their feathers are better than their carcases. To pull downe, if it were possible, the height of this pride, consider.
1 Thy beginning; remember the rocke from whence thou wert hewen.Psal. 78.71. From following the ewes great with young, he brought him to feed Iacob his people: David was not ashamed of his beginning. Say thou art borne noble; yet art thou not made de meliore luto, of any finer clay or mettall than the meanest. We have all one common mother: and the proudest dust once dead, shall putrifie and stinke for all his perfumes so soone as the poorest. Though all have not vestem communem, yet all have Cutem communem.
2 Thy progresse: what can thy brave rags better thee? a golden bridle makes not the better horse. If thy coate be made of wooll, the sheepe wore it before thee: if of silke, the silly worme may pull downe thy pride. The bowells of wormes hath clothed thee, and thou shalt feed the bowells of wormes. Because thou flourishest with the flags of vanity; thou thinkest it is thy selfe, like the flie on the coach wheele, that makes so glorious a dust: so let Heliogabalus boast of his silken halters.
3 Whatsoever the out side be, looke to the linings. Mens cujusque is est quisque. The body is more worth than the rayment; therefore the soule is more worth than the body; for the body is but the rayment of the soule. Why despisest thou thy poore brother? I have more lands: haply, and more sinnes. I have braver apparell: a neat out-side, and a sluttish inside. I am fairer; perhaps in face, and fouler in heart. Thou art rich in the poore commodities of this world: and poore in the rich commodities of the other: peacocke looke downe to thy feete.
4 There is onely one garment worth having and saving.Rom. 13.14. Put you on the Lord Iesus Christ: this is Stola prima,Luk. 15.22. the best robe. The Papists buy the beggarly righteousnesse of sory Saints, and neglect this. We have worne our owne innocence to rags, let us put on Christs. Though our garment of inherent righteousnesse be very thinne; yet if it be lined with Christs imputed righteousnesse, it shall keepe us warme: if embroydered with his, it shall make us acceptable to God. If we love a silken garment woven out of the bowells of a worme: how much more should we love the garment woven out of the bowells of Iesus Christ! Thus hath God allowed to some a great measure of honour, a great measure of riches, a great measure of prosperitie; but to none one dramme of pride.
The third kind of Intemperance is in meates; in making those things Detrimenta corporis, injuries to the body; which God ordained to be Nutrimenta corporis, conservatives of the body. Good meate which is the creature of God, is offered to the art of the Cooke, who makes worke for the mouth, which makes worke for the stomacke, which makes worke for surfet, which makes worke for death, which makes worke for the devill. A sinne so genuine and naturall to this nation; that pride is not more proper to Spaine, nor lust to France, nor drunkennesse to Germanie, than gluttonie is to England. For methods sake, let me deswade you from it, by considering the manner, the measure, the matter, the Effects, the End of it.
1 For the manner, this is meerely circumstantiall, and may thus bee expressed. Too soone: too late, too daintily: too fast, too much, Is gluttonie Too sooneEccl. 10.16. Woe unto thee Oh Land, When thy Princes eat in the morning: but blessed art thou Oh Land, When thy Princes eate in due season, for strength and not for drunkennesse.Esa. 5.11. Woe unto them that rise up early in the morning to follow ryot. Their mattins
 is their Iunkets, and their morning sacrifice is offered to their belly. Too late, such are midnight revells: Nullum tempus occurrit ventri: Intemperance makes no difference of times. Too daintily; above the estate: and herein the poore may fault as soone as the rich; Tam late, if not Tam laute. Indeed men have Talem dentem, Qualem mentem. Every one hath an Eves sweet-tooth in his head, that longs for forbidden things. Too fast, that is with voracitie; we call it Caninum appetitum.Esa. 56.11. Greedy dogges that can never have enough. Too much: Qui minus tradit corpori quam debet corpori, civem necat: Qui plus tradit corpori quam debet corpori, hostem nutrit. He that allowes his body lesse than he owes it, kills his friend: he that allowes his body more than hee owes it, frankes his enemie. Give it Quantum sufficiat naturae, not Quantum place atgulae. The wise man wil distinguish betweene his body and the lust of his body: his allowance therefore shall bee such as may preserve nature, not please intemperance.
2. For the measure; it is an insatiate desire of delicacies. So the rich man said;Luk. 12.19. Soule eate, for thou hast, etc. not only body eate, but soule eate, and satiate thy selfe. The belly is no troublesome creditor; it is contented with a little: si das quod debes, non quod potes, Sen. If thou givest it what it should have, not what thou canst give. It is not the constitution of nature, but the concupiscence of lust, that longs for abundance. This invented sawces; Non tam condimenta, quam blandimenta. Here is a studie to be sicke, when men are cunning in gluttonie. Vt saturitas transeat in esuriem, natura mutatur in artem. This made Philoxenus wish his neck so long as a Cranes; to prolong the sweetnesse of his meates. This is not Necessitatem supplere, sed aviditatem explere. Such are to bee reckoned in the number of living creatures, not of men, Seneca.Phil. 3.19. They make their belly their god: for that they like best, and love most, is their god. The heathen had a god of drunkennesse, but I never read that they had any of gluttonie. To make the belly a deitie; how base is this Idolatry! yet Hugo thus describes their luxurious worship. The belly is their god, the kitchin their Temple, their lungs the organ-pipes, the Altar their table, the cookes are their priests, flesh rosted, boiled, or broiled, their sacrifices, and their Incense, the odour of their sawces. But this sacrifice is to the divell; whose belly is filled with the froth of luxurious gluttons; in stead of graces, sawces: in stead of praising God, belching blasphemies. They have these vertues our Apostle speakes of, but in a strange way They have knowledge; which dish best pleaseth their appetite. Patience; to sit foure houres at one meale. Fortitude; to encounter with an Oxe ready prepared. Peace; till they have filled their stomachs. Yea faith, hope, and charitie too; their faith warmes in their kitchin, their hope lies in their messe, and their love boyles in their kettle. This is the measure of gluttonie, which indeed cannot be measured. All is to satiate curiositie; to fill more than the belly, even their eye. But as too much raine drownes the fields, which moderate showres would make fruitfull: so this plethorie of diet instead of conserving nature, confounds it.
3 For the matter, it is great feasting. Ierome wrote to Eustachius in the desart; If I did eate any thing boyled, Luxuria fuit; so great was his temperance, All our art is too little to please our palates: we have piles of dishes to make barricadoes against the appetite. Feasts indeed have their just allowance: our Saviour himselfe honoured a great feast, with his presence and miracle, Iohn 2. But they must not be unseasonable. as to feast whence need to fast; when God calls to mourning, then to revell, Amos 6. GOD threatens plagues, they fall to dances; therefore Verse 7. the banket of these joviall fellowes shall be removed. Not excessive: Nabal the churie made a feast like a King; you know a churles feast. He feeds his familie with the mouldie remnants a moneth after. Not profane, such was Belshazzars, when the temple was ransack'd to furnish his cupbord of plate. Nehemiah read the Law of God every day of the feast: if men did thinke of that Law, they would not make God and Belial meet at one boord; Ioseph and Mary went up to Ierusalem to the great feast with Iesus, but there they left Iesus, Luke 2. Twelve yeares they could
 keepe him, yet at a feast they lost him. Beda saies; the men went in one companie; the women in another: the children sometimes with the father, sometimes with the mother: betwixt them both CHRIST was lost: so easily is CHRIST lost at a feast. It is observable, Verse 46. that in the Temple they found him: they lost him at a feast, but they found him againe in the Church. The end of such feasts is commonly the beginning of a fray. Vpon the Sodomites feasting, heaven rained downe fire and brimstone. Vpon Iobs children feasting the house fell downe. Against Belshazzar feasting, the finger on the wall wrote characters of destruction. What Dives hath dined, the divell takes away. If gluttonie be the founder, Satan is the confounder. The host provides meate for the belly, the guest a belly for the meate: death destroyes them both.1 Cor. 6.13. Meats for the belly, and the belly for meats: but God shall destroy both it and them. Paul saies, Phil. 3.19. that their end is damnation. It is heavy, that their end is damnation; but it is worse, that their damnation is without end. Let us evermore suspect these riotous meetings; among them thatIud. ver. 12. Feed themselves without feare. It is written of good Iob, that he feared his children at a feast.Iob 1.5. It may be that my sonnes have sinned, and cursed God in their hearts. Let us be like the deere, who are ever most fearefull at their best feeding. Beware lest Indulgentia gulae, be Suffocatio gratiae; be jealous of a great feast. But I shall hold you too long at a feast, unlesse my cheare were better: I therefore passe to
4 The effects; which are manifold and manifest. The throates pleasure did shut up Paradise, sold the Birthright, beheaded the Baptists; and it was the chiefe of the Cookes; Nehuzaradan that first set fire to the Temple, and rased the Citie. These effects are, 1. Crassitudo, grossenesse; which takes away agititie to any good worke: which makes a man move like a Tunne upon two pottle pots. Caesar said he mistrusted not Anthony and Dolabella for any practises, because they were fat: but Casca and Cassius, leane hollow fellowes; who did thinke too much. The other are the devills cramm'd fowles; like Esops hen, too fat to lay. Indeed what need they travell farre, whose felicitie is at home? placing Paradise in their throats, and heaven in their guts. 2. Macilencie of grace: for as it puts fatnesse into their bodies, so leanenesse into their soules. God fatted the Israelites with quailes, but withallPsal. 106.15. sent leannesse into their soules. The flesh is blowne up, the spirit doth languish. They are worse than (...), for (...): they put a plurisie into their blouds, and an apoplexie into their soules. 3. Consumption of their estates: for it is regius morbus, a costly disease: it makes way for either a writ or a mittimns. Gula gurges, their patrimony runs through their throate. Man that is the Lord of all creatures, hath the least mouth of all creatures: malum non imitari quod sumus. When Temperance that just steward is put out of his office, all runnes to decay and ruine: if satietie goe before, beggarie will follow after. 4. Sickenesse to their bodies: they wrap up diseases in their full morsells, as pills in pap. Men desire strength of bodie, and length of daies: sed prohibent grandes patinae. Gluttonie was alwayes a friend to Aesculapius. But for the throats indulgence, Paracelsus for all his Mercurie had died a beggar. Aches and ay-mee's are incident to intemperate houses: Gowtes, plurises, dropsies, etc. Quae nisi divitibus nequeunt contingere mensis, Horat. Wee complaine the shortnesse of our lives, yet take the only course to make them shorter.
5. Lastly, the end is rottennesse and death: why dost thou feed that flesh so fat, that must feed the wormes? The daintiest of flying, swimming, or running creatures nostris sepeliuntur ventribus; are buried in our bowels. Seneca. Quaeris car tam subito morimur? ex mortibus vivimus. Dost thou aske why wee die so soone? wee live upon deaths. The best dyet shall leave thee Putidum and putridum cadaver. The finest food shall make no better dust. When moderation it selfe cannot avoid dying, how thinkest thou to prop up thy tabernacle wiht surfet? lay hold on Temperance: the Physician saies, nothing is better for the body than temperance: the Lawyer saies, nothing is better for the estate than temperance: the Philosopher saies, nothing is better for the wittes than temperance: the Divine saies, nothing is
 better for the soule than temperance. It is good for the body, good for the brain good for the estate, good for the soule: readily therefore admit temperance. For further helpe against Intemperance, take these foure considerations.
First that abstinence is mans rising, as Intemperance was his fall. We that have lapsed from the joyes of Paradise by meate, let us recover it againe so well as we can by abstinence, Gregorie. I speake not here for fasting onely; though that have the due use, the due place. It hath a time and place in the midst of sorrow: for Repentance comes not before God with a full belly, and meat between the teeth. The use of it, is to prepare the soule for goodnesse, not to merite by it. The Papists hold it not Tanquam adminiculum, as a helpe of pietie; but an immediate part of Gods worship; to be satisfactory. But I commend in abstinence three rules. 1. That it be not too much, for it is better to abstaine every day a little, than some daies wholly. They are moderate showers that make the ground fruitfull. And easy shaking rootes the young plant faster; an hard shaking roots it up. 2. Remember the poore in your abstinence.Esa. 58.3. Wherefore have we fasted, and thou seest it not? complaine the hypocrites: God answers, because in your fasts yee exact your debts; you shew no mercie to the poore Iejunium quod te affligit, alterum laetificet. Let the abstinence that makes thee looke pale, beget bloud in anothers cheekes: let thy fast be the poores feast, Am. 6.4. They eate the Lambes out of the flocke, and the calves out of the stall: that's sometime bad enough, but Verse 6. they forget the affliction of Ioseph; that's worse; this enhaunceth their damnation. Your tables abound with dishes, their bowels sound like shawmes: take away here, and bestow it there. Bate a messe at thy table, and send it to the poores table. Nehemiah allowed some libertie to the rich, so it were joyned with liberalitie to the pooreNeh 8 10. Goe your way, eate the fat, and drinke the sweet: but be sure to send portions to them, for whom nothing is prepared. Thinke it is CHRIST that hungers, while thou riotest. Godfrey of Boloigne would not bee Crowned with Gold in that place, where his Master had beene Crowned with thornes. Doe not thou pamper thy selfe, when CHRIST starves. CHRIST is hungry, and he must satisfie you: It is CHRIST that begs of you, and he must give you: it is Christ that lies at your gates, and he must let you into the gates of heaven. Advocatus pauperum, qui Iudex divitum. True feasts of charitie are not only Convivia, but Sacrificia; withHeb. 13.16. such sacrifices God is well pleased. 3. Abstaine from all sinne; Commendatio Iejunii, emendatio vitae: the praise and crowne of abstinence is amendment of life. When you fasted and mourned, did yet at all fast unto me, even to me, saith the Lord? Zech. 7.5.
2 Consider, it is Gods blessing that makes fat, and not meat.Matth. 4.4. Man lives not by bread, but by the word of God. Daniel lookes as faire with his pulse, as the rest with their liberall portions of the kings meate. If Gods blessing be separated from those edible materialls, they yeeld no nourishment. He that could turne stones into bread, can turne bread into stones: and make wine infatuate, not exhilarate. He can rot the graine in the clods, blast it in the eare, wither it in the blade, consume it in the barne: yea when it hath past the flaile, the mill, the oven; he can make it gall in the palate, in the stomach poison. He can either give thee meate and no stomach, or stomach and no meate. Be temperate then, and blesse God; for every creature is1 Tim. 4.5. sanctified by the word of God, and prayer. Passe not by his blessings with shut eyes, as not glorifying the creator, nor looke on them with doting eyes, as too admiring the creature. Commend moderate meate to thy selfe, and thy selfe to the blessing of God.
3 Consider, that if it be so wicked to devoure meates gluttonously, what is it to devoure men? toMic. 2.2. swallow up a man and his house, even a man and his heritage? Such devourers were the Pharises; and under the colour of long prayers. These are monstrous Epicures: the poore mans bread is hisIob 31.39. life; and he that takes it from him is vir sanguinum, a bloudy man. The usurer keepes a slender dyet, but his stomach holds abundance of morgages, forfeitures, and is oppressed with such
 oppressions. He hath swallowed downe riches, but he shal vomit them up againe: God shall cast them out of his belly, Iob 20.15. God shall one day say to such men; Reddite quod devorastis; restore what you have devoured. When the Chirurgian opens the Epicures dead body, he findes undigested crudities: when God shall unrip the oppressors dead conscience, there will be found five or sixe impropriated Churches, there a depopulated towne, there thousands of acres of decayed tillage; there the lands of Orphants, and the dowries of widowes. Multi in hac vita manducant, quod postea apud Inferos digerunt. They devoure that on earth, which they shall digest in hell.
4 Lastly if thou wilt ryot, let me shew thee a banket,Cant. 2.4. He brought me to his banketing house, and his banner over me was love: Eate O friends, etc. Ioh. 6.58. This is that bread which came downe from heaven: he that eateth of it, shall never die. This is Panis verus, though not Panis merus. As he is both the Physician, and the medicine in respect of his bloud: so he is both the Pastor, and the food in respect of his body. He feeds his Lambes, not on his grounds, but on his wounds. All men eate Panem Domini, the bread of God: the Saints Panem Dominum, the bread that is God himselfe. They that have ransacked sea and land, for rarities, never found such a daintie. Here satiate, here be intemperate: thinke your soules can never feast enough on this dish: with this onely immoderation GOD will never bee angry.Matth. 5 6. Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousnesse: for they shall be satisfied. CHRIST is vita qua vivimus, and vita quam vivimus: the life whereby wee live, for in him wee live, move, and have our being, Acts 17.28. And the life which we live; Now live not I, but CHRIST liveth in me, Gal. 2.20. Let Epicures boast their delicacies, this be the food of our soules.
I come to the last kind of Intemperance: and this in drinkes, we call it drunkennesse. My theme is still Temperance: wherein I confesse, that as Physicians comming to their patients, often catch some of their diseases: so you may say, that I fall into the vice I reprove, and that against excesse, I speake excessively. But it is a sin, I durst not lightly or slightly passe over: a disease the whole world is sicke of, and I would also put in my Ingredient to cure it. All drunkennesse is not with wine,Esa. 29.9. They are drunken, but not with wine: they stagger, but not with strong drinke. There is a threefold ebrietie. 1. Of wine; Eph. 5.18. Be not drunke with wine wherein is excesse. 2. Of forgetfulnesse, Esa. 29.10. God hath powred on them the spirit of deepe slumber. 3. Of lust to sinne, Esa. 28.7. They have erred through wine: which I take there not so much to be intended against this corporall, as that spirituall drunkennesse: for it is said, They were in vision, and stumble in judgement. I am not to deale with that drie drunkennesse; but onely with the first, and haply the worst.
Man hath a threefold appetite: Naturall, which is common with plants: this insensibly covets nourishment. Animall, common with beasts: this sensibly desires needfull nourishment. Rationall, proper to man: this reasonably desires fit and proper nourishment. All these appetites desire drinke: without which the spirits naturall, vitall, animall, would consume the firmamentall heate; that would wast up the primogeniall humiditie; and so the sparke of life would burne out; as the Lampe is extinct without supply of oile. The veines sucke the stomach drie of moisture; hence comes emptinesse; upon that sense of that defect; upon that, the desire of repletion; and this is Thirst. Drinke is the good creature of God, whether it be wine, etc. It serveth Alimentally for the bodies strength,1 Tim. 5.23. Drinke no longer water but use a little wine for thy stomachs sake, and thine often infirmities. Physically, to refresh body and mind.Pro. 31.6. Give strong drinke to him that is ready to perish: and wine unto those that be of heavy hearts. Vinum moderate sumptum, medicamentum: plus justo, venenum, Augu. moderate wine is physicall; immoderate, banefull. Iucunditati, non ebrietati creatum est. It is made for pleasure, not for fulnesse. It is givenPsal. 104.15. to make glad the heart of man. Civilly, for shew of honest gladnesse, and maintenance of amitie. So our Saviour supplied the want of wine at a wedding, Ioh. 2. Nehemiah bids
 the people at their feast; to eate the fat, and to drinke the sweet, Neh. 8.10. It was ill done of Lycurgus to cut downe all the vines: and false of Mahomet, to say that in every grape there is a devill. Onely in temperance makes the sinne, abuseth the creature, offends the Creator: onely against this bends my discourse. Herein for method, I desire onely to consider two things; the damme and the Littour. Yet first before I shew what brood this monstrous mother brings forth, consider how she is bred her selfe.
Drunkennesse is produced from the concurrence of many causes. The maine is an inordinate desire of drinke: the originall of all vices is from our selves: there is a harlot within, which commits all these whoredomes a broad; concupiscence. Not he that drinkes wine, but he that inordinately loves wine, is the drunkard.2 Pet. 2.13. They count it a pleasure to ryot in the day time. Their soule danceth in the cup, and their eye delights in the colour of the wine, Prov. 25.31. now Vbi amor, ibi oculus. Their life is the life of frogs; like flies, suctu vivunt; they live by sucking. As it was said of Bonosus, Non ut vivant, sed ut bibant nati: they are not borne to live, but to drink. They drinke not for necessitie, but luxurie; not for societie, but for satietie: indeed not for their friends sake, but for the drinkes sake. He is not so much a drunkard, qui de improviso cadit, that is overtaken unawares: as he that loves and frequents it, though he carry it away more strongly. Not he qui potu vincitur, sed qui potibus vincitur, that is tied to his cups. Therefore, Esa. 5.22. Vae fortibus ad potandam; woe to them that are strong to drinke: a strong body without strong grace, is stronger to sinne; Fortior in viribus, fortior in vitiis. Thus the strongest is the weakest; strong to commit sinne, weake to resist sinne. They drinke not once against drynesse, nor a second time against sadnesse, but continually for madnesse. This love of drinke is the Beldam, there are also other concomitances. Evill company;Esa. 56.12. Come, I will fetch wine, and we will fill our selves with strong drinke. They will urge a man with (...): but God dischargeth such men our societie. 1 Cor. 5.11. And healths; Accusationis causa est, per adjuratum Caesarem non frequentius bibisse, Ieron. He that will not be drunke for the King, is no friend to the king. Here is a professing from the bottome of his heart, to the bottome of the cup, that such a great mans health shall be pledged, perhaps it must be done on the knees; rank idolatrie! wherein men make gods of others, beasts of themselves. For this purpose they have their she-saints, their mistresses, sometimes little better than strumpets. Here's the little difference betwixt a Papist and a drunkard: the one hath his will worship, the other his wine-worship. It was a noble answer of a Prince, when one told him how deepe a health hee had pledged for him; Doe not, saith he, drinke my health, but pray for it.
Looke now upon the damme, drunkennesse. Aquinas disputing whither drunkennesse be a sin or not, objects that no vice is opposed to it: as to temeritie cowardice, to prodigalitie avarice; therefore it is no sinne, but he answers, that there is a vice opposed to it, though it wants a name, because it is so unusuall: as the forbearing of all sustenance. It is questioned also whether a sicke man may drinke medicinally for his health, and be drunke with it: but we may affirme, that there is no medicinall cup to the body, that is poisonfull to the conscience. It is folly to thinke, that the cause of many sicknesses, should be physicke for one: or that the endangering the soule can be good physicke for the body: no good physician will prescribe it, no divine will allow it: say with Constantine; Mallem semper aegrotare, quam tali remedio convalescere. It is better to be still afflicted with our disease, than bee recovered by such a medicine. This vice is the plying of the pot: Nocturno torpere mero, torpere diurno. Mantuan the poet, Eccl. 9. rehearseth the drunkards seven draughts.
Funde iterum: potare semel, gustare: SecundusCalluit os potus: calefacta refrigerat oraTertius: arma siti, bellumque indicere QuartusAggreditur: quintus pugnat: victoria Sexti est:Septimus (Oenophili senis haec doctrina) triumphat. The first draught doth but taste the wine: the second washeth the mouth: the third cooleth it: the fourth threatens war against thirst: the fifth fights with it: the sixth overcomes it: the seventh triumphs over it. All this is taught by Oenophilus, a lover of wine, an old drunkard; this is the drunkards doctrine. Let us heare the Philosopher somewhat more sober and stayed. Aristotle makes seven degrees of it: 1. Necessitie, a man must drinke. 2. Commoditie, man should drinke. 3. Pleasure, he may drinke. 4. Fulnesse, he may not drinke. 5. Satietie, and that is bad. 6. Ebrietie, and that is worse. 7. Madnesse, and that is worst of all. Here be the deadly draughts, to which drunkennesse runnes headlong. Fertur equis auriga, nec audit currus habenas. The sea knowes his bounds, but not the deluge of drunkennesse. We see the Damme, let us looke upon the Littour or effects; which are many and hideous.
1 It makes roome for the Devill: all sinnes breake in at the losse of the Sconce or Capitoll; Reason: thence the enemie commands the whole Towne. The eyes are wanton, the tongue blaspheming, the hands stabbing: all mischiefes. Invadunt urbem somno vinoque sepultum. So were the Trojans conquered: and for this cause, I thinke, ever since, drunkards are called true Trojans. It is a mare mortuum, no fish can live there, no vertue thrive here. It is the root of all evils, the rot of all goodnesse: The Devill could find no restMatt. 12.43. in drie places: he loves the low countries, the wet ground; moorish and marish soules. The great Behemoth loveth theIob 49.21. Fennes. Of all reasonlesse creatures, he chose the drunken Hogs, Marke 5.
2 It overturnes the estate: The drunkard shall come to poverty, Prov. 23.21. He consumes more in a day, than he earnes in a weeke. Hee lyes open to others plots, and hath no rule of his owne spirit, but is a Citie without wals, Prov. 25.28. He is his owne theefe, he needs no other oppressours, for he is a caterpillar to himselfe. He railes on cormorants, yet devoures himselfe. He throwes his house out of the windowes, it is fit his house should throw him out of the doores.
3 It poisons the tongue; swearing and lying are the ordinary effects of it: The drunkards made songs upon David. It thinkes it selfe a Caesar, and fals a taxing all the world: Quicquid in corde sobrii, in lingua ebrii, Fulgent. O but In vino veritas: it is false, for no mans good name is spared. If he be multa bibens, he is sure Plurima dicens: he often utters that in a moment, whereof hee is driven to repent all his life. Arcanum demens detegit ebrietas: A drunken inveigher against King Pyrrhus, being brought to his answer for those criminations, said; We spake all that is objected, and would have spoke more if the wine had not failed us. Such a one will speake of God most, when he thinkes of God least: but the mouth inured to blasphemous or scurrilous speeches, is no fit trumpet of Gods praises.
4 It intoxicates all reason. Bacchus was called Liber pater; but his sonnes are not Liberi, Free-men, but slaves; bound to sleepe.Esay 28.7. They are out of the way with strong drinke: they are either out of the way, or reeling in the way.Eccles. 19.2. Wine and women will make men of understanding to fall away: Apostatare facit sapientes. We keepe our doores shut against theeves: yet let in this theefe that is worse. O that a man should voluntarily let a theefe in at his mouth, to steale away his wits! Young Cyrus refusing to drinke wine, gave this reason to his grand-father Astiages; I tooke it to be poison; for I have seene it spoile men of wit and sense. Alexander that overcame all, was overcome by wine, Aug. If the bodie chide the foot for stumbling and hurting it, the foot may lay the fault in the head for not guiding it.1 Cor. 10. The people sate downe to eat and drinke, and rose up to play. Wee have them that sit downe to drinke, till they cannot rise to play: they must sleepe as they lye. Sine timore, non sine periculo: they are asProv. 23.34. he that lyeth downe in the midst of the sea, or sleepeth on the top of a mast.
5 It enervates the strength: Vinum ab implendo venas, Isidor. In stead of filling them with bloud, it drownes them. It brings rotten teeth, stinking breaths, trembling hands, running eyes, gowts and dropsies. All these are the waiters on
 drunkennesse: all strive which shal bring a man soonest and lothsomest to the grave. He is gone in his standing, gone in his understanding, gone in strength to helpe him selfe: we commonly say of the drunkard, he is gone. Cum absorbet vinum, absorbetur a vino, August. If his belly be made a tombe of drinke, drinke will make his body a sepulcher of his soule. Crebro ebrii cito senescunt; It is somewhat, that it alters the complexion: Vino forma perit, vino corrumpitur aetas. But worse, that it dissolves the constitution: for how should his firmamentall lampe burne, that is ever drowning it in deluges of ryot!
6 It is the bawd to incontinence, Rom. 13.13. After Drunkennesse followes chambering and wantonnesse. Pro ordine membrorum, ordo vitiorum, Hieron. Ambrose sayes of Lust; that it is fuelled with junkets, enkindled with wine, inflamed with drunkennesse. It is Fomes libidinis: Vina parant animos veneri, Ovid Nunquam ebrium putabo castum, Hieron. I will never beleeve the drunkard to be chast. Drunken Lot became incestuous Lot: hence sprang the Moabites and Ammonites, those mortall, almost immortall enemies to the Church. Whom the vices of Sodome could not taint, Lust infected. Vritur ebrius flammis mulierum, quem sobrium sulphurea flamma non attigerat, Origen. The flames that destroyed Sodome, hurt him not; his owne fire scorched him. In this sense it may be said; Vinum lac libidinis.
7 It is an Incendiary to quarrels and homicides. Bacchus ad arma vocat. Drunken Alexander killed Clitus, for whom sober Alexander would have killed himselfe. The Danes and Norwayes once purposing for England, fell drunke on shipbord, and so slash'd one another, that there was the end of their voyage. We often heare of such ryotous meetings, that In praelio trudit inermes; Some dropping dead in the middest of their sinnes. Be they never so protesting their kindnesse; yet Tutius est ebriis abstinuisse locis: They may bee kinde at first, will bee cruell at last. Drunkards kisse when they meet, and kill when they part; Haec faceret non sobrius unquam.
8 Lastly, besides all other plagues, it is a woe to it selfe.Prov. 23.29. Who hath woe? who hath sorrow? who hath contentions? who hath wounds without cause? The merry madnesse of an houre, is payed with the afflictions of a tedious age. Woe to them, saith the Prophet, Esay 5.11. Woe to the crowne of pride, to the drunkards of Ephraim, Esay 28.1. Cum infunditur, grave; cum turbat stomachum, gravius: cum refunditur, gravissimum: When the carowser powers in his wine, it troubles him; and he would give somewhat to avoid it: when it offends the stomacke, it troubles him worse: when it comes up againe, it troubles him worst of all. One Fornerius writes of a Monke at Prage, who having heard at shrift the confession of drunkards, wondred at it, and for experiment would needs trie his braine with this sin; so accordingly stole himselfe drunke. Now after the vexation of three sicke dayes, to all that confessed that sinne, hee enjoyned no other penance but this; Goe and be drunke againe. Sure his meaning was like Seneca's; Sceleris in scelere supplicium; It is a torment and affliction to it selfe. You see the Damme and her littour, learne we now to avoid it, because we are men, because we are citizens, because we are Christians.
Because we are men: while the wine is in thy hand, thou art a man; when it is in thy head, thou art become a beast. The drunkard cries to his fellow; Doe mee treason: but the drinke answers, I will leave thee no reason; scarce so much as a beast, for they will drinke no more than they need. Diogenes being urged to drinke immoderately, cast the drinke on the ground; being reproved for that losse, he answered, If I had drunke it, non solum liquorem, sed meipsum perderem; I had lost both the drinke, and my selfe.
Because we are citizens, and therefore should lead civill lives: drunkennesse is an uncivill exorbitance. It was a good Persian law;Esther 1.8. That no man was compelled but every one did according to his owne pleasure. Here was no compulsion, but it was left arbitrary, Vt bibat arbitrio pocula quisque suo. It were somewhat if but so much moderation were observed at our feasts: Vt qui inebriari abhorret, in compulsus discederet
 incompulsus discederet. Wee fault in those very Ethnicke observances; and thinke it a discourtesie not to be intemperate for company.
Because we are Christians,1 Tim. 5 11. Thou, O man of God, fly these things. The grace of God that brings salvation, teacheth us to live soberly, Tit. 2.12. Wee are children of the Day, let us cast off that worke of darknesse, Rom. 13. The Rechabites forbore wine in awe of their earthly Father, Ierem. 35. And shall not we forbeare drunkennesse in awe of our heavenly Father? Yes, lest that curse fall on us, thatPsal. 69.22. our table be made a snare before us: yea lest we be not admitted into the kingdome of God, Gal. 5.21.Luke 21.34. Let not your hearts be over-charged with surfetting and drunkennesse, and so that day come upon you unawares: drinke every draught, as if it were thy last draught. The poore woman would appeale from drunken King Philip to sober King Philip; so will any man from a drunken Christian to a sober Heathen.
Thus in some poore measure I have described this monster of Intemperance. A sin so odious, that it is abhorred of God, despised of Angels, derided of men, pleasing only to devils, Aug. Yet have we small hope to subdue it; for it is insensible:Prov. 23.35 They have beaten me, and I felt it not. Bernard calls it a grosse Devill; he that is possessed with it, fals into the fire, and into the water, gnasheth and fometh, Matth. 17.16. Now as all the Disciples could not cast out that Devill; so nor all the Preachers this. It is an habit hardly put off. When a Gentleman heard that his son was given to dicing, he answered, the want of money will make him leave it. After he heard that he was given to whoring; yet saith he, marriage or old-age will allay that fury. But when he heard that he was given to drunkennesse, he was hopelesse; for he knew that sin would encrease with yeares. A gamester will hold so long as his purse lasts, an adulterer so long as his loynes last, but a drunkard so long as his lungs and life last. A Philosopher once chancing into a company of drunkards, where a Musician ruled the lascivious riot; presently charged him to change his harmony into a Dorion. By this means he so wrought them, and brought them to sobriety; that casting away their garlands, they were ashamed of all they had done. But our drunkards have not the patience to heare such musicke. Saul was vexed with an evill spirit, but Davids Harpe expelled him. O that we knew that Instrument or lesson, which could worke such a reformation! We would double and treble that note, which might effectuate such a cure. But the drunkards noise is louder than the Preachers voice: the sound of the pot drownes all reprehension.




Verse 6.

To your Temperance adde Patience.


PAtience is that vertue, Quae mallet mala non committendo ferre, quam non ferendo committere, August. Which had rather suffer evill and doe none, than doe evill and suffer none. It hath these degrees; It does not wrong; it receives it, not with stupiditie but sense: it does not vex him that offers to vex it: it returnes not wound for wound: it does not hate the offender: it loves him: it does good unto him: it intreats God for him, Chrysost. For Patience consists not onely in bearing injuries, but in forgiving the injurers.
But why doth the Apostle next to Temperance annex Patience? Quos delitiae non emolliunt, saepe injuriae frangunt. Temptations of pleasure move not in many, whom the sense of injuries enrageth. Men may refraine from hurting others or themselves; therein is Temperance: but others will hurt them, to beare this with a quiet minde is Patience. A Christian may live without doing wrong, not without receiving
 wrong. Objectum malitiae est non malus. The Wolfe will not worry a Wolfe, so long as there is a lambe in the field. This vertue is better understood than practised: like Cassandra, better knowne than trusted. Therefore admitting that you understand it, I will apply my selfe to the affections, that you may embrace it. This let me endevour by leading you thorow certaine graduall considerations.
1 That it is the condition of mankind to suffer. When thou considerest thy selfe, there is presented to thee a man, a naked man, a poore man, and a miserable man, Bern. Luges hominem, erubescis nudum, contemnis pauperem, doles miserum, lacrymas miserabilem; Thou mournest thy mortality, blushest at thy nakednesse, despisest thy poverty, weepest for thy misery. Now, quod ferendum est, feras; what thou must beare, beare patiently.
2 That miseries are not onely incident to men, but more proper to Christian men,2 Tim. 3.12. All that will live godly in Christ, shall suffer persecution. This was Christs prognostication; In the world you shall have sorrow, Ioh 16. This the Apostles prediction; Through many tribulations you must enter the kingdome of heaven, Act. 14. What Saint was ever crowned before he had combated? Ierom. Search the whole Bible over; Et quem legisti in coelis triumphantem, quem non legisti prius in terris tolerantem? But it is said;Act. 9.31. The Churches had rest thorow-out all Iudea, etc. And there was peace in the dayes of Salomon; peace in the dayes of Constantine; peace in the milken times of Queene Elizabeth; and yet still greater peace under the reigne of our present Soveraigne, that King of peace. Yet though we be freed from publike oppressions inflicted by Magistrates, not from private molestations. In the most Halcyon dayes we finde bitternesse: Sine miseria vixisse miserrimum est. If there be not an Esau, there will be an Ishmael: if the hand of mischiefe cannot reach us, yet Penetrabunt spicula linguae; The arrowes of slander and contumely will sticke in our ribs. All men are necessitated to miseries, that bend their course toward the kingdome of heaven, Aug. Hence it is that S. Paul gives a peece of armour to the feet.Ephes. 6.15. Let your feet be shod with the preparation of the Gospell of peace. Our feet are naturally tender: if they be bare, clods, flints, thornes will gall them. Our affections, if they be not shod with Patience, will be so pricked with crosses, that we shall be weary of our journey to heaven. It is no unusual stratagem in warre, to stick the way full of thorns, and ends of pikes, to wound and dis-ranke the adversary. So the Devill besets our way of peace, that we had need of leg-harnesse, Patience. Though all parts be armed, yet if the feet be naked, Satan will wound us there: as Achilles was wounded in the heele, when all other places of him were invulnerable. Thus was Iob armed, Iam. 5.11. S. Iohn speaking of great warre, and greater victory, concludes;Rev. 14.12. Here is the patience of the Saints. Therefore Paul expresly, Hebr. 10.36. Yee have need of patience, that etc.
3 That all afflictions come by a supreme providence, therefore be patient.Iob 2.10. Shall we receive good at the hand of God, and not evill? What ever be the Instruments, hee lookes to the high Agent; Deus abstulit; The Lord hath given, and the Lord hath taken away; Blessed be the Name of the Lord. So David,Psal. 39.10. Remove thy stroke from me; I am consumed by the blow of thine hand. Whatsoever is the weapon, it is thy blow. So he snibbed the sons of Zerviah, concerning the blaspheming of Shimei; it may be the Lord hath said to him, Curse David, 2 Sam. 16.10. Deus jussit. So our Saviour told Pilate,Ioh. 19.11. Thou couldest have no power at all against me, except it were given thee from above. GODS providence is mater necessitatis, the mother of necessitie: now Patience makes a vertue of this necessitie. Other creatures modestly and silently obey, and shall man vex himselfe with impatience? Quicquid Superi voluere, peractum est; To wrastle with Fate, is to provoke Fate to wrastle with us; and then who falls? Who is hee that saith, and it commeth to passe, when the LORD commandeth it not? Lam. 3.37. Murmure not my sonne, thy Father did it. Wee strike at God, and hee sayes to us, as Caesar said to Brutus; Is it thou my son? Well may he strike us, and let us only say, Tu Pater, it is Thou my Father, and be silent.Psal. 50.21. These things hast thou done, and I kept silence, saith the Lord. Wicked men strike the just
 God, and he holds his peace: the just God strikes wicked men, and they murmure.
4 Thinke thy crosses meant for thy blessings: punishments are good for none but the Patient, to them onely they are signes of favour. David not onely concludes thus;Psal. 40.11. By this I know thou favourest me, because mine enemie triumphs not over mee: but also thus; Because thou hast afflicted me, therefore I know thou lovest me. If ye be without chastisement, then are ye bastards, and not sonnes, Hebr. 12.8. This only frees us from bastardie; or rather secures us, for indeed Adoption frees us. Whom God smites not, he loves not, Aug. Let the Christian understand; God his Physitian, tribulation his physicke: being afflicted under the medicine, thou criest, Non audit medicus ad voluntatem, sed ad sanitatem; The Physitian heares thee not according to thy will but thy weale. Thou canst not endure thy maladie, and wilt thou not be patient of the remedie? Let it not be true of us, that Nec mala nostra, nec remedia ferre possumus. A man is sicke of a Pleurisie, the Physitian lets him bloud, he is content with it: the arme shall smart, to ease the heart. The covetous man hath a Pleurisie of riches; God lets him bleed by poverty: let him be patient, it is a course to save his soule. These are not in vindictam, sed in medicinam: Pereat voluptas carnis, ne amittatur eternitas salutis.1 Cor. 11.32 When we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, that wee should not be condemned with the world. We speake for the flesh, as Abraham did for Ishmael; O that Ishmael might live in thy sight! No, God takes away Ishmael, and gives Isaac: He withdrawes the pleasure of the flesh, and gives delight to the soule. God threatens not to punish the wicked: I call it a threatning, for promises come from mercy, but that is a grievous punishment.Esay 1.5. Why should you be stricken any more? Let me have none of that mercy! Art thou afflicted, why complainest thou? that which thou sufferest, is not thy damnation, but thy castigation. Refuse not the rod, as thou wouldst embrace the inheritance, Nec attendas quam poenam habeas in flagello, sed quem locum in Testamento. Regard not so much what portion thou hast in the punishment, as what interest thou hast in the Covenant. Hee that knowes hee shall raigne in heaven, will patiently suffer upon earth.
6 That all crosses are deserved, and come not upon us against equity. Equity, I say, considered in respect of God, not in respect of men: they come from a just Author, though from an unjust instrument. Thy sinnes have procured it:Ier. 4.18. Thy way and thy doings have procured these things unto thee: Nulla homini noceret adversitas, si nulla dominetur iniquitas; No misery had afflicted us, if no sinne had first infected us. Wherefore doth a living man complaine, a man for the punishment of his sinnes? Lam. 3.39. That man may well suffer patiently, that knowes he suffers justly. David felt the spight of his enemies, Psa 38. yet he acknowledgeth his sin the cause; ver. 18. I will declare mine iniquity, I will be sory for my sin.1 Pet. 2.20. For what glory is it, if when ye be buffetted for your faults, ye shall take it patiently? But if when ye doe well, and suffer for it, ye take it patiently, this is acceptable with God. But a man is often punished for that he never did? I answer, in that act for which he suffers, he may be innocent; yet in others, guilty. David could cleare his innocencie in respect of Saul, not in respect of God. For Saul,Psal. 7.3. Lord, if I have done this, if there be iniquitie in my hands. But for God; If thou shouldest marke iniquitie, Lord who shall stand? Psal. 130.3. Let them be evill, be sure thou suffer either for, or (at least) with a good conscience. For he refuseth to be an Abel, whom the malice of Cain doth not exercise, Greg. Rosa quae redolet, crescit cum spina quae pungit; The sweet Rose growes among sharpe thornes:Cant. 2.2. As the Lily among the thornes, so is my love among the daughters.
Therefore overcome evill with good, Rom. 12.21. Be so farre from snatching Gods weapons out of his hand, that thou rather master unkindnesse with kindnesse. This Saint Paul makes to be the worke of Patience; See that none render evill for evill, 1 Thess. 5.15. We thinke it ignominie and cowardice, to put up the lye without a stabbe, a wrong without a challenge. But Salomon sayes, (to whose wisedome all wise men will subscribe) that It is the glory of a man to passe by an offence. It is more honour, Injuriam tacendo ferre, quam respondendo superare, Gregor. Satius
 and tutius injurias perferre, quam inferre aut referre. The greatest magnanimitie is Patience. Yet, O into what infortunate times are we fallen, when every wrong must be answered with bloud! How hath the Devil bewitched us to glory in our shame! That the wretchedest and basest cowardice should ruffle it out in the garbe of valour! Yet if the gravest Bishop in the Land doe preach this, our impatient gallants will not beleeve it. Indeed how should they credit man, who will not be perswaded by God himselfe! O yet that our teares could wash off the guilt from mens soules, as easily as we can convince them by arguments! we would then with Ieremie, wish our heads fountaines, and our eyes spouts; to cleanse our Land from the bloud thus shed, and the brave opinion of shedding it. Apud Christianos non qui patitur, sed qui facit injuriam, miser est, Hieron. Among Christians he is onely the wretched man that does wrong, not hee that suffers. It is a great vertue not to hurt him that hath hurt thee; Magna gloria, si cui potuisti nocere, parcas, Hugo. This was in those dayes truely noble; now nothing but revenge. Iob is counted a foole, and David a coward. With them it was valour, Audire noxia, and respondere placita; To blesse those that cursed them: we thinke that Degeneres animos patientia arguit; that patience is an argument of basenesse. What is the difference? There was the faith and patience of the Saints: here is the infidelitie and impatience of sinners. Let such men know:
1 That God shall condemne them for invading his office; for vengeance is His: and that they call courage, he shall judge outrage. Then it will be but a poore plea, to say such an one wronged mee: who gave thee leave to quit thy selfe? Is not God able to punish? Thou art cruell, and wilt carve too deepe: let God alone he is mercifull and just.
2 To what purpose are Magistrates, if every man may be his owne judge? Thou mayest complaine to the deputie, not with thine owne hands punish the injury.Act. 19 38. If a man have matter against another, the Law is open, and there are deputies; let them implead one another. Sic certent causae, ut non certent pectora; Let mens causes fight a while, that their soules may be in peace for ever. There is utterly a fault among you, that ye goe to law one with another, 1 Cor. 6.7. That is a fault: but some so abuse the Law, that Quae datur in conpensationem injuriae, vertitur in injuriam: That which should redresse wrong and mischiefe, is perverted to be the greatest wrong and mischiefe. Whom their hands dare not strike with blowes, their purses shall vex with suits. We may say of such Citizens, as it was of some Popes; they are not Vrbani, but Turbani.
3 Remember that the LORD IESUS shed his bloud to make thee friends with GOD, and wilt not thou be friends with thy brother? Cannot the bloud of CHRIST, that bought a whole Church, of GOD, buy the forgivenesse of one wrong at thy hands? Take heed, lest for not shewing mercy, thou finde no mercy.
4 GOD is patient towards thee, though he be provoked every day. Ad Patientiam vocat, qui patientia est; He invites us to be patient, that is, Patience it selfe. Sustine tu,August. sustinet Deus; Doe thou beare with others, God beares with thee. Is there a Too much, which thou canst suffer for so patient a Lord? How wouldest thou endure wounds for him, that canst not endure words for him? A man reviles thee, thou art impatient: how wouldst thou afford thy ashes to CHRIST, and write Patience with thine owne bloud?
5 The examples of the very Heathen may put such impatient Christians to the blush. When that Tarentine was angry with his faulty servant; Sumpsissem inquit supplicium, nisi tibi iratus essem: I had striken thee, had I not beene angrie. He had rather Impunitum dimittere, quam per iram plus justo punire. Xenophon, to one that railed on him, replied; Didicisti tu maledicere, ego maledicta contemnere; thou hast learned to reproch, and I to contemne thy reproches. When Metellus inveighed against Tacitus in the Senate, he answered; It is easie to finde fault with him that is not willing to reply. Potentia tua, non Patientia mea, accusanda est; The blame lyes on your malice, not on my patience. When one tould Diogenes, Vituperant te multi; many




 despise thee; he returnes; So wise men must suffer of fooles. Lingua illum meliorem esse indicat, quem carpit. The same envious tongue that would speake a man worse, doth indeed confesse him better: for the object of entire is goodnesse. Another being reproved by his friend, because he did not correct his provoking servant answered, Quia alium, quem potius castigarem, inveni: because I have found one I have more reason to correct, that is, my selfe. Thus for moralitie they excellently commended this vertue: we have the seale of God put upon it,Eph. 6.15. Be shod with the preparation of the Gospell of peace. Nothing but the Gospell of peace can give true patience. Theirs was an opinion to stupifie mens senses: Minus im patienter, non minus infaeliciter ferre: but the knowledge of peace in heaven is the soule of patience. Hereby we have a resolution that nothing shall hurt us: for sinne is the sting of all troubles; pull out the sting, and deride the malice of the serpent. Sinne makes our burden heavy: take away that, all is tolerable. Sinne turnes the grave into a darke dungeon; which remitted, is a perfumed bed of quiet rest. Sinne shewes the Devill horrible, God a severe Iudge: let the Gospell remove that, God is thy Father, the devill his and thy slave. Therefore the Prophet well annexeth Blessednesse to the Remission of sinnes.Psal 32.1. Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven. And our Saviour saies to the man sicke of the Palsey;Matth. 9.2. Be of good cheare; for thy sinnes be forgiven thee, yea more, we are resolved that all things shall worke together to our good: All things, then even our sinnes. Not that sinne is good in it selfe: but as Bernard; Miro quodam modo etiam ipsum peccatum justo in Iustitiam operatur. The miraculous hand of God disposeth our very unrighteousnesse, to helpe us to righteousnesse. And that first in respect of God, manifesting and magnifying his mercie in forgiving it: where sinne abounded, grace did much more abound, Rom. 5.20. And in respect of our selves; working in us a sorrow of repentance, not to be sorrowed; an humilitie to be honoured, a faith to be crowned. Humiliores efficimur and cautiores, Bern. Thus God casts us into the fire, not to be consumed as drosse, but refined as gold. That at last we may resolve, not only to die in the Lord, but for the LORD IESUS.
6 Consider that all sufferings shall have an end. The rod lies now on the godly, but it is not in the right place, ubi manendum est At last CHRIST shall lay it where it shall abide even on the wicked, there it must rest for ever.Psal. 125.3. The rod of the wicked shall not rest upon the lot of the righteous, lest the righteous put forth their hands unto iniquity. So Abraham told Dives of an exchange: before Lazarus had sorrow, thou hadst pleasure: now therefore you have changed turnes, and places; he is comforted and thou art tormented, Luk. 16. To the godly ease shal come; Patientia filia Spei. Hope is the Mother of patience. The Wise man rejoyced to find the Star, the woman to find her peece of silver, our Lady rejoyced to find our Lord: Christ alwaies returnes with encrease of joy. The righteous is delivered out of trouble: and the wicked commeth in his stead, Prov. 11.8. Here is the vicissitude.Prov. 21.18. The wicked shall bee a ransome for the righteous, and the transgressor for the upright. Here is the redemption or ransome; miserie like a Vulture, must have some body to prey upon; the world destines the, righteous to it, and for a while they suffer: but God ordaines the unrighteous to it, and they must suffer for ever. GOD shall speake to sorrow, deliver me my servant, let that man goe whom thou now afflictest; and take this reprobate in his stead, torment him for ever, Hebr. 10.36. Yee have need of patience; why should we be patient? Because yee have so short a time to suffer, Verse 37. Yet a little while, and he that comes, will come, and will not tarry. Why, what shall he doe when he is come?Ioh. 16.22. I will see you againe, and your heart shall rejoyce; and your joy shall no man take from you. The Lambe shall lead them to the fountaine of living waters; and God shall wipe away all teares from their eyes, Revel 7.17. But how are we sure of this? Because it is a righteous thing with God, to recompence tribulation to them that trouble you: and to you who are troubled, rest with us,2 Thes. 1.8. when the Lord Iesus shall be revealed from heaven with his mightie Angels. Iacob served seven yeares patiently for his wife
 Rachel; and shall not we serve longer for our deare husband Iesus? Love suffers all things, 1 Cor. 13. he loves not the Lord, that will not suffer for him. Omnia passus amor, nec se vult dicere passum.Iam 5.7. Be patient therefore unto the comming of the Lord: lift up your heads, for your redemption draweth neere, Luke 21.28. If these meditations could sinke and soke into our hearts, they would be mollified with patience. It is truely said concerning the wicked; Breve est quod delectat, aeternum quod cruciat: their pleasure is short, their paine everlasting. The contrary is as true concerning the faithfull: Breve est quod cruciat, aeternum quod delectat: their paine is short, their joy eternall.Prov. 10.28. The hope of the righteous shall be gladnesse: but the expectation of the wicked shall perish. Vpon Shimei's execration, David thus comforted himselfe; It may be the Lord will looke on mine affliction, and will requite good for his cursing this day, 2 Sam. 16.12. David suffered much of Saul, before he wore the promised Crowne: no matter what wee suffer on earth, so wee may be crowned in heaven.
Lastly, consider that CHRIST our LORD suffered all patiently for us: that Lambe was dumbe before the fleecers and Butchers. Such Lambes must wee bee, that have neither hornes to dash nor nailes to teare, nor teeth to bite, nor flight to escape; but patiently to submit our selves to the will of our shepheard. Such Lambes were the Martyrs; their persecutors were more weary feriendo, with striking; than they Ferendo, with suffering. But none ever suffered like the Lord Iesus: Iustus pro iujustis, ab injustis, 1 Pet. 2.21. He is not onely our Redeemer, but our example he taught us both in his doing, and in his dying.Luke 24.26. Ought not Christ first to have suffered these things, and to enter into his glory? As hee was Vnctus oleo laetitiae prae sociis, so oleo tristtiae prae caeteris. As hee was annointed with the oile of gladnesse above his fellowes so first with the oile of sadnesse above his fellowes. Indeed the Deitie suffered not, yet hee that is GOD suffered. Deitas in Dolente, though not in Dolore. Now all this is to teach us patience, Hebrewes 12 2. Let us looke unto Iesus the founder and finisher of our faith; who endured the crosse and despised the shame, and is now set downe at the right hand of the throne of God: therefore Let us runne with patience unto the race that is set before us. By death Christ came to us, by death let us not grudge to goe to Christ.
Patience you see, is an excellent vertue; you have heard many commendations of it: if it had no other, this were enough to praise it, that it easeth our griefes. Many cannot away with other graces; because voluptatem prohibent, voluntatem cohibent; they curbe the will, and abridge delight, and impose hard things to the flesh. They cannot away with Charitie, because it takes out of the purse: nor with Abstinence, because it restrains the appetite: nor with Himilitie, because it abates pride: nor with Chastity, because it debars lust. But me thinks each man should love Patience, because it easeth his paines, and mitigates his sorrowes. Naturall men care no more for vertue, than that cruell Iudge did for equity: yes if they knew a vertue that would ease their burdens, and qualifie their griefes, they would love it. Me thinkes, even wicked men should use this vertue, and make much of it: though for no other purpose than Pharaoh used Moses; to remove the Iudgements. Our proverbe hath it; Of sufferance comes ease: let us be patient then, if but for our owne benefits.





VERSE 6.

And to patience, Godlinesse.


BEfore we come to the definition of Godlinesse, let us conceive some reasons of this connection, and immediate adding of Pietie to patience.
1 Because the pillar of patience is godlinesse; it cannot stand without it,




 it is firme being upheld by it. For true Patience cannot befall a reprobate; (stupiditie may as to Nabal) not by an absolute impossibilitie, but by the indisposition of his heart to receive it: as a sparke of fire falling upon water, ice, or snow, presently goes out: which fasting on wood or such combustible matter, kindles and burnes. The food whereupon true patience lives, is faith in the Gospell of peace. Saul was a morall man, yea a zealous man, while he was Saul, and Gamaliels scholler but when he was made a Christian, he was called Paul; he was not a Paul before. So Patience in Ethnikes is not rightly named: as Silvius when he was chosen Pope said; Aeneam rejicite, recipite Pium: forget Aeneas, and accept me your Pius. So to suffer before conversion, was but stupiditie in quiet: now mutato homine, mutato nomine, the persons being changed, change also the name; call it Patience.
2 Because Godlinesse teacheth a man patience: it is the Imitation of God and our God is patient. Now if we feele this mercie from God, let us shew it to them that are his. He that will not tolerate man, tolerari a Domino se facit indignum; makes himselfe unworthy to be borne with of God. Deus habet in manu vindictam, mavult in usu patientiam. God hath in his hand vengeance, in his heart patience. We pray for pardon as we give pardon: we would be loth to have our owne lips condemne us.
3 Because patience will doe the soule no good with godlinesse: the glory and comfort of all suffering, is gods cause. Neither is the reward given for suffering, but for suffering well.1 Pet. 2.19. This is thanke-worthy, if for conscience toward God, wee endure griefe. Tribulations are the markes of CHRIST; but then they must be borne for CHRIST: herein Paul delighted himselfe;2 Cor. 12.10. I take pleasure in reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, in distresses, for Christs sake. Thus being prouder of his iron fetters, than a bragging Courtier of his golden chaine. The departures of the Saints are not Mortes, sed Immortalitates. If Iulian so honoured his souldiers dying in the warres; celebri potius laude, quam luctu: how much more shall CHRIST honour his! Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints, Psal. 116.15. such as undergoe in Christs cause Christs Crosse. No death is comfortable, nisi in Domino, vel pro Domino: and that mans life is well bestowed in suffering death, when to Patience is added Godlinesse. Our life is the Lords by many deare titles: therefore not too good for him when he requires it. Thou art a depositary, to whose trust is committed a precious Iewell: perhaps thou hast much adoe to keepe it from the subtilties of tempters, and violence of attempters: yea hast a corrupt desire, unthriftily to spend it upon profits or pleasures, surfets and vanities: and thou never art in true quiet, till he that delivered this Iewell, thy life to thee, doth reassume it. But then thou must tarry till he calls for it: for God refuseth the soule that comes to him before he sends for it. When the Indians, to avoid the Spanish slaverie, grew to a practise of killing themselves: the Spaniards dissembled a killing of themselves also: threatning upon their meeting in another world to afflict them there more than before. Indeed, if the troubles and anguishes of this world so despaire thee, that thou castest away thy owne life: those very same in a farre heavier measure shall find thee out in the other. Miseriam non effugis, sed adauges. There is no comfort in suffering death, except Godlinesse blesse our patience. Aelian writes that among the Grecians there was a Law, that if a sick man drank wine without the advice of his Physician; though he saved his life by it, he should be put to death for it; because he did that was not permitted him. Bitter then must be their punishment, that take not wine but poison: that precipitate their lives into certaine destruction: having no command from God, that he requires it; no promise that he will reward it. Our Saviour teacheth us, being persecuted in one Citie, to flie into another: if we wilfully runne into unnecessary death; he will say who required this at your hands? who bad you runne from England to Rome for poison; and from Rome backe againe to England with treason? you may have Patience, but here's no Godlinesse. The good sheepe knowes the voice of his Shepheard, and staies for his call. Those glorious
 Martyrs that now have a permanent triumph in heaven, were not so madly prodigall of their blouds, as to throw them away without a warrant. They that possesse this Lawrell, washed their garments, not in their owne blouds onely: so they might have beene still red and stained: but in the bloud of the Lambe, that changes them into white.Revel. 7.15. Therefore they are before the throne of God, and he that sitted on the throne shall dwell among them. That sinfull Mary wasted and bathed herselfe, not in her owne bloud but in her teares: saith Chrysostome. And of Saint Peter he askes this question; when he had denied his Master; Nunquid sanguinem fudit? did he shed out his owne bloud? No, but his teares, and so washed away his sinnes. We are not sent into this world to suffer, but to doe, and when wee doe suffer, to adde to Persecution Patience, to Patience Godlinesse. The way to triumph in secular armes, was not to be slaine in the battell, but to keepe their station. In the Romane warlicke discipline; Ius legionis facile; Non sequi, non fugere: this was the rule; not to follow desperately, nor to flie basely. So it is in our Christian battell; not to invite danger, not to shrinke from it. Indeed God betimes in the world called for this bleeding witnesse: hee sealed his acceptation of Abels sacrifice, by accepting Abel for a sacrifice; who before all example, first dedicated Martyrdome, Chrysost. And as soone as CHRIST came into the world, after the receiving of the wise mens oblations; he would immediately be glorified with that hecatombe of Innocents. But to offer this without Gods asking, shall bring but a poore reward. For while pietie is not preserved, the Crowne of patience is lost.1 Pet 4.19. Wherefore let them that suffer according to the will of God, commit the keeping of their soules to him in wel-doing, as unto a faithfull Creator. Put not Pietie from thy Patience, thy wounds shall be healed, and thy soule rewarded.
4 Because patience without Godlinesse, when it receives injurie of man, may doe more injurie to God. Let us write the wrongs to our selves in the dust, to forget them; that is Patience: the wrongs we have done to God in marble; to remember them; that is Godlinesse. To beare meekely with thy persecutors, is commendable patience: to be silent at Gods dishonour, is condemnable basenesse. It is no lesse than treason; thy silence makes thee guilty. Thou pleadest thy selfe to be the sonne of God: he is a very bad sonne, that can heare his righteous Father blasphemed with patience. Cursed is that Patience, that hinders a man from Godlinesse. CHRIST is thy brother, he bought thee with his bloud, thou art his coheire: canst thou behold him gored with new wounds, and hold thy peace? Thou beleevest not; for then thou wouldest speake: as the Psalme hath it: I beleeved and therefore I spake: no defending of faith, no faith. The Inhabitants of Meroz tooke not part with Gods enemies, yet were they cursed for not taking part with friends, Iudge. 5.23. Indifference in Gods cause is damnable: not to oppose them, that oppose God, is to be his enemy. How easily are we moved at our owne injuries? how patient at Gods? Let our owne credits or riches bee troubled, we rage like Lions let Gods honour be questioned, we are as tame as Lambes. If the aspersion of scandall lights upon our names, there is suite upon suite, from Court to Court; all to beggar the raiser of it. Let the Lords dreadfull Name be blasphemed, we are so far from spending a penny, that we will not speake a syllable. Like Ionah, we are more moved for the losse of a gourd, than for all Niniveh. Moses can brooke Miriam despising him, and goe away silent, because himselfe onely was interessed, Numb. 12. But when the people had Idolatrizd, he brake the sacred Tables in passion, burned the Calfe, scattered the dust on the waters, and in detestation of their wickednesse made them drinke it. We have patience enough, but pietie is thrust out of doores. Such infortunate and apostate times are we falne into, that to uphold Gods honour is held uncivill tartneste: such men are sawcy, and such sawce is too sharp for proud and vicious stomachs: this dissolves the knot of friendship. Let it; Ideo misit Deus bonam separationem, ut malam rumperet Conjunctionem: better a holy discord, than a profane concord. Care not for that mirth, which must grieve the Holy Ghost:
 disclaime that peace, which must be at warre with Christ. If they refuse thee, thou knowest who will receive thee, Ioh. 9.35. When they had excommunicated him, CHRIST welcomed him. Feare not them that kill the body, etc. It is worse losing the Lords favour, than thy Land-lords: better part from thy cottage in earth; than thy Inheritance in heaven.
Necessary therefore is the accession of Pietie to Patience. It is an abhorred sin to temporize: when a Chaplaine must measure his speech by his Lords humour, the truth of the Lord of hosts is abused. Against oppression he dares not speake, because it is his Lords fault; not against Pride, because it is his Ladies: not against riot, because it is his young Masters. He must not meddle with the ulcers that sticke on his great ones conscience: hell will take that patience. Let them be ashamed of Christ, that care not for his being ashamed of them. For us, let us plead Gods cause, for his sake that pleads our cause in heaven.
Godlinesse is taken by the Philosophers in a threefold relation. For Religion towards God, which they held a devout adoration of their Idols. For religion towards their country: when any died for their country, they were said Pie mori. For religion towards their parents: so Aeneas was called Pius: and for this they gave those additionall names of Pii. Our Apostle meant it not in this latitude: it must here import some particular grace, as appeares by the ranke. Yet let us a litttle consider it in the larger acception. So it is such a gracious habite, as prefers Gods glory before all things, and refers all things to it.
For the former, Godlinesse aimes immediately at the Lords honour, Matth. 8.21. There was one following Christ, but hearing of his Fathers death, he first desire leave to bury him: perhaps he gaped for an executorship, or meant at least to thrust in for an administration. No saith CHRIST; let the dead bury their dead: thou hast a living father, (let the dead goe) that can give thee a better inheritance. But to bury ones Father is Godlinesse: yes, but saith Ierome; Pietatis genus est, impium esse pro Domino: to neglect our very Parents when God requires it, is pietie. Himselfe testifies; he that loves father or mother better than me, is not worthy of me. This falls heavy on some: the voluptuous loves his wife better,Luk. 14.20. I have married a wife, and therefore I cannot come. Vxori plus datur quam Christo: the uxorious husband obeyes his wives precepts, sooner than Gods. The covetous parent loves his child better than the Lord: oppressing Gods children to enrich his owne. So his young ones be warme in the nest, let CHRIST shake with cold. Love the Lord, and love thy children, or friends: but if necessitie enforce the losse of one; In suos odium, est pietas in Deum, Hieron: whatsoever thou losest, lose not the Lord Iesus.Luk. 9.61. Another said, Lord I will follow thee, but let me first goe bid them fare-well that are at home, as if any friend were to stand in competition with CHRIST. But we have alwaies somewhat to do when we should follow him: as Elisha said to Eliah; let me first kisse my father and my mother; then will I follow thee, 1 King. 19.20. Vriah was so earnest of fighting the Lords battell; that he would not goe downe to his house, nor sleepe with his beautifull wife. Such a zeale, as prefers Gods service before all other things, that is godlinesse.
For the other; it referres all to Gods honour: in all things that it does, speakes, or suffers, it declares a purpose of heart to glorifie the Lord. All things and actions are Ordinabilia ad deum: deus finis, all else ad finem: what should man desire more than to serve that God who preserves him?1 Cor. 10.31. Whatsoever yee doe, doe all to the glory of God. This is the end of our creation, the beginning of our salvation, the perfection of our happinesse. Hast thou wisedome? referre it to the glory of thy maker: otherwise like the Moone, when thou art lightest to the world thou art darkest to heaven. Hast thou strength? use it to resist Satan, to conquer (nor another, but) thy selfe. Vae fortibus ad peccandum; woe be to them that are strong to sinne. Hast thou old age? let thy life grow white with thy haires: lest thou be Satur Dierum, full of dayes and fuller of sinnes. Hast thou honour? imploy it to honour him that
 hath honoured thee. Hast thou authoritie? draw not this sword in thy private wrongs, let it not bee sheathed in the Injuries of the Gospell. Hast thou riches? spend them upon Godlinesse; Pro Pietate sumptum facere, lucrum est. Say not with Iudas, Why is this wast? but with David;2 Sam. 24.24. I will not offer to the LORD of the which costs mee nothing. To this generall Pietie there are two enemies, Profanenesse and Hypocrisie.
Profanenesse: there are two characters of a man truely Pious; understanding and will: the one in his Science, the other in his Conscience: commonly this vice bewitcheth them both. As thou dost see thy owne face in thy heart, so others doe see thy heart in thy face. If a drunkard dare number his ebrieties: the lascivious, how often he hath beene at the house of sinne; who can blanch this ungodlinesse! But indeed wicked men have more boldnesse to appeare ill, than the godly have to appeare good,Esa. 59.15. For he that departeth from evill, maketh himselfe a prey; or as the originall imports, is accounted mad. Any man that carries his face toward Sion, is held an hypocrite: he that is ashamed to doe ill, shall be ashamed for his good. This is not a graine of ungodlinesse, but ungodlinesse in graine. Can you lament your losses on the seas, the wracke of goods in your ships; and not the shipwracke of a good conscience in your shops? The spider never builds, but where are flies: Satan never placeth his nest, but where is store of these ungodly lusts. Let them banish profanenesse, that ever expect the comforts of pietie.
Hypocrisie;Ioh. 6.70. Have not I chosen you twelve and one of you is a devill? I, not another; emphatically, I, (...), the very Wisedome of GOD. Chosen, not entertained offering your service, nor admitted as sutors, but Chosen. You, not the refuse people out of the high waies, nor the great Personages of the Land; but you, whom I have elected to propagate my Gospell, how many? Twelve; a little number: Christs is the least Colledge. Yet one of you is a devill; lay these particulars together, and summe up a hypocrite. The congregation of hypocrites shall be desolate, Iob 15.34. The hypocrite is like Hose's dough-bak'd Cake, Hosea. 7.8. Only hott on the visible side. Seeing the fire of GODS Altar, the zeale of the Temple cannot heate them, they are reserved to bee baked throughly in the Oven of hell.
Endevour then to store thy heart with Godlinesse: for worldly things, say as he did of Eloquence: Si adsit, non sperno: si absit, non desidero: if they be present, I will use them, it they be absent, I doe misse them. Sequere tu Pietatem, caetera sequentur te: follow thou Godlinesse, other things shall follow thee.Matth 6.33. First seeke the kingdom of God and his righteousnesse, then shall all these things be added to you. While a man hunts after his owne shadow, his backe is upon the sunne, and still his shadow is unovertaken before him: let him turne his face to the sunne, and travell toward it; his shadow shall follow him. The profits and delights of this world are but a shadow, while a man hunts after them his backe is upon Iesus Christ, that Sun of righteousnesse; and he can never overtake them: if he could, yet they are but a shadow. Set thy face and thy faith toward Christ, all these shadowes shall waite upon thee. A Painter had drawne Iove's picture, Iuno's, and another mans that was his friend. That friend cheapned the other two, and last of all, his owne. Nay, saies the Painter, buy the other two, and take the last into the bargaine. Be sure of Godlinesse; riches, honours, and pleasures; all those counterfeits of true happinesse, shall come into the bargaine.
Our discourse hath thus farre dwelt on godlinesse in the latitude. In a stricter acception, I find it especially consisting in two things; Adoration and Imitation of GOD.
Adoration of the true God in a right manner, is Godlinesse. Nature hath written in every heart, that a Superior power is to be worshipped; though it could not declare, Cui debitum; what power that was which might challenge it. Out of this Ignorance sprung that multitude of imaginarie gods; which Saint Paul calls

1 Cor. 12.2. Dumbe Idols. Now he that is dumbe, is also commonly deafe: they could neither speake nor heare, Psal. 115.5. They have mouthes, and speake not: they haue eares, and heare not. To avoid this sin, God gave an expresse Law; Thou shalt have no other Gods but me. Which negative precept especially forbids foure things. 1. The having no God at all, as the Atheists;Psal. 14.1. The foole sayes in his heart, There is no God. 2. The having strange gods, and not the true; as had the Gentiles: gods according to the number of their Cities: every twinkling starre was held a deity; yea, many so grosse and base gods, that there were not worse creatures in the world, except themselves. 3. The having strange gods with the true, as had the Samaritans; They feared the Lord, and served their own gods, 2 Kin. 17.33. they sware by the Lord, and they sware by Malcham, Zeph. 1.5. They chuse new gods; then was war in the gates. 4. The having the true God, but not a-right, according to his will and Word, as Heretikes. For this is the maine difference betweene Heresie and Idolatry, that serves the true God with a false worship, this serves false gods with a true worship: Both hatefull.
Now seeing the principall part of our Pietie stands in the due and true worship of God, it is Satans maine stratagem to subduce it. If it were possible, he would have it himselfe, and draw us A Cultu dei debito, ad cultum suimet indebitum. He is proud still: amisit celsitatem gloriae, non superbiae; He hath lost the height of his happinesse, not the height of his pride. He would be a god, though a hellish god: a Prince, though it be a prince of darknesse. Good Angels refuse to be worshipped; when Iohn fell at the Angels feet to worship him; he said to him,Rev. 19.10. See thou doe it not.
But evill Angels desire it: to this the Devill perswaded Christ; to fall downe and worship him; he durst be so bold with the Sonne of God himselfe. Devillish impudence! to request him that is worshipped of the Angels of light, to worship an angell of darknesse. But Christ soone choaked him; Get thee hence, Satan; for it is written, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him onely shalt thou serve, Mat. 4.10. But howsoever he cannot bring men to worship himselfe immediately, yet he effects this often mediately. If Israel will but make a golden Calfe, the Devill findes his owne worship in that: If a Papist bowes to his crucifix, even here finds himselfe honoured. Albeit they say, we give the Image no worship, think it no god: no more did the Israelites thinke that Calfe their deliverer out of Aegypt; yet was this a cursed sinne. They say, they worship God before the crucifix; but God rejecting that worship, it stayes in the crucifix. Such another policie had the devill to wound Israel; when he presented to them the whores of Moab, Numb. 25. Was only Adultery his aime? No, but Idolatry also. They have beguiled you in the matter of Peor, and the matter of Cozbi, ver. 18. The matter of Peor was wrought by the matter of Cozbi;Hos. 9.10. They went to Baal-peor, and separated themselves to that shame. They joyned themselves to Baal-peor, and did eat the sacrifices of the dead, Psal. 106.28. Baal was the Moabitish Idoll, Peor a mountain: there they worshipped, and feasted, and ate the offerings of the dead. Not of dead men, but of Idols, which are dead things: for God is (...), the living God. But could Satan effectuate this Idolatry in such a people? We reade, Numb. 24. Balaam itching after Balaks gold, hereon he practises, and shifts ground; as gamesters doe their standings for better lucke; and would faine curse; but spight of his teeth he blesseth. Now he sees, there is no way to make God forsake his people, unlesse they were first brought to forsake him. Therefore it is likely that upon Balaams advice, the daughters of Moab and Midian were brought before the Israelites; light houswives, dancing, frisking, and flaring; their carriage promising tractablenes enough, if the other would come on: so were they tempted to wantonnesse with those profest strumpets, and by that means to offer up to Baal-peor. This was the devils trick to effect that Art, by fraud, wch he could not Marte, by open war. Let me a little encrease your detestation of idolatrous worship, that you may more sincerely worship God.
1 It is a pleasing sin, therefore more pernicious: few that love it, can be brought to acknowledge it. A Turke beleeves nothing lesse, than his Alcoran to be Idolatry. A Monke at his Masse is so farre from thinking himselfe an Idolater, that hee calls
 himselfe a Spirituall man. Though nothing be more reproved in Gods Word, and punished in his workes, than Idolatry; yet there is in corrupt nature a strange proclivitie to it. The Prophet calls Idols,Esay 44 9. Delectable things: Their delectable, or desirable things shall not profit them. The Idolater is like a woman inflamed with love toward some proper young man: her affection is so set, that forgetting all modestie, shee sends for him, and brings him to the bed of love:Ezek. 23.8. Neither left shee her whoredomes brought from Aegypt: for in her youth they lay with her, and they bruised the brests of her virginitie, and powred their whoredome upon her. Such a whore is the Church of Antichrist, Revel. 17. Whose doctrine like the wine of fornications, goes downe merrily, to the intoxication and poison of soules. Onely the Gospell hath brought this Land a remedie, no other than the bloud of Christ to purge it.
2 It is an impudent sin, and goes to the furthest line of condemnation. It stickes not to take Gods blessings with the left-hand, and gives them away to his enemies with the right. So the Israelites received of God Manna, food from heaven; and then sacrificed it to Idols. For it is likely that in the Desart they had no better cheare to feast the Devill with, than Manna and water: their beasts being hardly sufficient to maintaine their daily sacrifice to the Lord. God gave them Iewels from the Aegyptians, as wages for their service; they melt them to make a Calfe. Yea, Children, that are the chiefe Inheritance on earth;Psal. 127.5. Happie is the man that hath his quiver full of them: they shall not be ashamed, when they speake with their enemies in the gates: children, the divided peeces of themselves; so deare, that Rachel mourn for them, and would not be comforted, because they were not: even these they sacrifices to Moloch:Psal. 106 37. Yea, they sacrificed their sonnes and their daughters unto devils; and shed innocent bloud of their sons and daughters, whom they sacrificed unto the Idols of Canaan: and the Land was polluted with bloud. But, what will ye doe in the end thereof? Ier. 5.31. What? Therefore was the wrath of the Lord kindled against his people; insomuch that he abhorred his owne inheritance, Psal. 106.40. Ephraim is joyned to Idols, let him alone, Hos. 4.7. Let him alone? O fearefull: when God takes away correction, damnation enters the doores. Sin shal now be the wages of sin, that death and destruction may be the wages of both:Hos. 8.11. Because Ephraim hath made many altars to sin, altars shall be unto him to sinne. This is fearefull; therefore I conelude this point, as Saint Iohn doth his first Epistle; Babes, keepe your selves from Idols: Yea, Lord keepe us all from them by the grace of thy Spirit.
You see the danger of will-worship, let this containe us in the true adoration of God. Worship is two-fold; Civill or Religious. Civill, to men, in respect of their degrees in the Church, Common-wealth, or private family. In regard of Age, give reverence to the gray-head: of gifts, so Elisha reverenced Eliah: of place; in Church: so Ministers are to reverence their Bishops: in Common-wealth, so subjects must give reverence to Magistrates: in private family, so children owe reverence to their parents, servants to their masters. To God only is due religious worship: they write that to the King of Benin the people give such reverence, that we scarce give more to God. They fall flat on the ground before him, covering their faces, and depart without turning their backes. But to all men give Summa, sed Sua: to God only religious worship; who is so jealous of his honour that he will not give it to another. Be yee never so great, stoope to the Lord: honour him that hath honoured you: it is no discredite to your worships to worship God. Christ stooped low for our sakes;Philip 2.7. He made himselfe of no reputation, but tooke upon him the forme of a servant, and was made in the likenesse of men. What the Barbarians dreamed of Paul and Barnabas, Act. 14.11. Dii descenderunt similitudine hominum; The gods are come downe to us in the likenesse of men. We found true in Christ; God is come downe among us in the likenesse of man; Yea, indeed, a true man. GOD said once, Gen. 3.22. in derision of our folly; Behold! the man is become as one of us. But wee may say truely, GOD is become as one of us. Hee that was so low, is now and was ever the most High: Let us adore that blessed IESUS. The LORD saith, when he bringeth in the
 first begotten into the world;Hebr. 1.6. Let all the Angels of God worship him. Doe the blessed Angels of heaven, and shall not men on earth worship him? I speake not onely of a corporall adoration, though that also be due.Philip. 2. At the Name of IESUS should every knee bow, of things in heaven, in earth, and under the earth. Neither doe I thinke the bowing of knee, at the Name of IESUS, to be a fruitlesse but harmelesse ceremonie. As for their exception, that the bowing more at this, than at other Names of GOD, may breed an errour of advancing the Sonne above the Father and Holy Spirit. Wee answer, that the truth of the Sonnes equalitie with the Father and the Spirit, is a mysterie so hard for mortall wits to apprehend; that of all errours, that which may give them the most honour, is lesse to be feared. Bellarmine observes, that most Heretickes have denied the Son, none ever denied the Father to be God. But why not bow we as well at the name of Christ? if any name bee greater than other, it seemes to be Christ: for he is called Domini Christus, Luk. 2.26. The Lords Christ. Bernard answers; Of all names given to him, still IESUS is the sweetest. Other are names of Majestie, this of Mercy: the Word of God, the Sonne of God, the Christ of God; all titles of glory; IESUS, of Grace and Redemption. The contemptible name, which Pilate so scoffed at; IESUS of Nazareth, is so preached and praised; that against all Infidels it hath gotten the preheminence above every name. The condemning then of this honour due to IESUS, is rather an argument of spite, than an evidence of the Spirit; as it hath beene said truely. To this Name all shall bow: in heaven, Angels and glorified Spirits: on earth, Men: under the earth, those that bee now dead: for all shall appeare before his Tribunall with bended knees. Perhaps by under the earth, are meant even devils and damned spirits: though they bow not spontaneae genua; yet they shall give an extorted adoration. Glorious Angels, blessed Spirits, and good Men, have a voluntary geniculation: but the wicked on earth, and fiends in hell, shall be forced to it against their wils. So was Iudas; I have sinned in betraying the innocent bloud. So Iulian; Thou hast over come, O Galilean! So the devils; What have we to doe with thee, Iesus thou Son of God? Matth. 8.29. That evill spirit said; Iesus I know, Act. 19.15. for even the devils beleeve and tremble. Wicked men now trample his bloud, but shall one day submissively acknowledge his Dominion; Lord, when saw we thee hungry, etc. Matth. 25. But this extorted Confession shall be to their Confusion; Depart ye cursed. Thus as every knee should bow, so every knee shall bow; if not out of faith, yet out of feare.Esay 45.23. I have sworne by my selfe: the word is gone out of my mouth in righteousnesse, and shall not returne; that unto me every knee shall bow, Rom 14.11. He is God, and shall be worshipped.
This I thought good to urge, because as if we had beene taught to be proud, there is little reverence among us: I am ashamed to speak it; many sit in the Church as at a Theater: their hands are too idle to uncover their heads, their knees too stiffe to bow to Christ. Even to the Gospell, which must save them, or they shall never be saved, their regard is little better than contempt. For shame of men, and Angels, where is our reverence? Doe you come hither to give God a blessing, or to take it? Will a Petitioner sue to a Peere with a covered head, or an unmoved knee?Levit. 19.30. Yee shall reverence my Sanctuary, I am the Lord. If the Law chalenged such reverence, what doth the Gospell? If the bloud of goats had such respect, what requires the Lambe of God, the bloud of our Lord Iesus? What is this, but to give the sacrifice of fooles? Eccl. 5.1. God will dwell with him, that trembleth at his Word, Esay 66.2. Wee tremble like mountaines; yea, the mountaines quake at Gods presence, saith the Psalmist: wee are not moved. But as for mee, I will come into thy house in the multitude of thy mercies;Psal. 5.7. and in thy feare will I worship toward thy holy Temple O for one dramme of this reverence! But indeed it is in vaine to bend the knees, with unbended soules: it is a poore worship, to move our hats, not our hearts. But hee doth best, that expresseth before men his zeale by his reverence, and commends before GOD his reverence by his zeale. It is fabled, that when Iuno on a day had proclaimed a great reward to him that brought her the best present;
 there came in a Physitian, a Poet, a Merchant, a Philosopher, and a Begger. The Physitian presented a hidden secret of nature; a prescript able to make an old man young againe. The Poet an Encomiasticke Ode of her bird, the Peacocke. The Merchant, a rare hollow Iewell to hang at her eare. The Philosopher, a booke of strange mysteries. The poore quaking Begger, onely a bended knee, saying, I have nothing worth acceptance; Accipe meipsum, Take my selfe. Some come hither with prescripts of their owne; they have receits enow already, they care for no more. Other like the Poet, come to admire Peacocks, the gawdie Popinjayes, and fashionists of the time, blustring in their painted feathers. Other like the Merchant, present Iewels; but they are hollow: come with criticall or hypocriticall humours: like Carpes, to bite the net, and wound the Fisher; not to be taken. Some like the Philosopher, bring a booke with them; which they reade without minding the Preacher, saying, they finde more learning there, than he can teach them. But blessed are the poore in spirit; that like the Begger, give themselves to God. Iuno gave the reward to him, God gives the blessing to these.Luke 1.53. He hath filled the hungry with good things, but the rich hee hath sent empty away. A reverent heart shall carry away the comfort: Godlinesse in the humble dust of Adoration, shall be lifted up by the hand of mercy.
Imitation of God followes: for what else is godlinesse, but to be like God? We were all made after his Image; that was lost: now our regeneration is nothing else but the repairing of that Image.Ephes 5.1. Be yee therefore followers of God, as deare children. True children will imitate their parents: if we doe not follow God, we are bastards. Follow thy Father, as Ascanius did Aeneas, though non passibus aequis. It is written, Be ye holy, for I am holy, 1 Pet. 1.16. By nature a Noah may beget a Cham; Abraham an Ishmael: but in grace, the most Holy begets no children but Saints.1 Ioh. 2.6. He that saith he abideth in him, ought himselfe to walk even as he walked. He is no member that walks a contrary way to his head. If Iesus goe unto the Mount to pray, and Iudas to the Pharisies to betray, he is no Apostle, but an Apostate. This is my way, saith Christ, the light of Truth: if you will goe by darknesse, because your deeds are evill; wee shall never meet, till we meet in judgement.Luke 6.36. Be you mercifull, for your Father in heaven is mercifull. God loves mercy; they that love it not, are not Godly. I wonder what hope; oppressours of their poore tenants; Vsurers with their forfeitures; contentious men with their Law-vexations; the malicious with their injuries, can have? The Father of mercies hath no children but the mercifull. Iudgement mercilesse shall be to him that shewes no mercy, Iam. 2.13. The poore man that hath smarted with their crueltie, may taste the sweets of Gods mercy: Wretched they! this cup shall never touch their lips. Have mercie on mee, sayes the poore wretch to his living oppressours; no. Have mercy on me, saith the dying oppressour to God: No, Goe ye cursed; you had no mercy on others, there is no mercy for your selves. If thou seen a man unmercifull, be bold to say he is ungodly.
Thus Pietie consists in the imitation of God: Pii nomen non meruit, qui Dei exemplum non coluit. Indeed this name is often usurped, seldome justified. There are some things, wherein it is no Godlinesse to ambigate a likenesse to God. Contend not to be like him in the Arme of his power, for this Nebuchadnezzer lost his kingdome: nor in the finger of his miracles, for this Simon Magus was cast downe, and broke his necke: nor in the face of his Majestie, for this Lucifer was throwne out of heaven: nor in the Braine of his wisdome, for this Adam was driven out of Paradise. But in the bowels of his mercy; according to this wee shall be everlastingly rewarded. Never did, or shall, Man or Angell offend, in coveting to be like God in meeknesse, in goodnesse, in charity, in mercy. Imitate his Morals, not his Miracles.
To conclude, let me set this marke upon Godlinesse: Prove your selves Content and I will assure you Godly. Godlinesse with contentment is great gaine, 1 Tim. 6.6. The Apostle seeing such universall labour for small gaine, thought to winne men with great gaine. But what is that? Godlinesse? Here's a paradox will hardly be received: he had need of good Logicke, for this is a hard position. The whole world
 thinkes gaine to be godlinesse, and doth Paul say Gcdlinesse is gaine? Michaiah had not so many opponents, foure hundred to one, 1 King. 22. He shall have merchant with his adventures, Land-lord with his fines, Patron with his Simonies, Vsurer with his obligations, Lawyer with his cases; all striving to confute this, crying out for gaine, as the Ephesians for their Goddesse; Great is Diana of the Ephesians. IndeedMatt 19.11. all men cannot, and many men will not, receive this saying. You will not beleeve it, though it be told you, Habac. 1.5. This saying may, like the Lord, Psal. 14.2. Looke downe from heaven, to see if any will regard it: None, no not one. It may goe from Court to City, from City to Country, and scarce one of a thousand will yeeld to it. But as the Bride was decked for her Beloved, Psal. 45. in garments of needle-work, and a vesture of wrought gold, with jewels and ornaments: So God trimmes up Piety, sweet and beauteous in her-selfe, with rich endowments of honour, pleasure, peace, and happinesse; as it were Letters of Commendations, that all might love her. No worldly gaine can satisfie mans heart: Israel murmured as much when they had Manna, as when they had it not: and rich men are as troubled with that they possesse, as poore men for that they want. Iacob gave Reuben a bless;ing, but added, Thou shalt not be excellent, Gen. 49. So God gives the worldling riches, but sayes, Thou shalt not be safisfied. But when Piety commeth, Content followes it: you found small peace in the world, you shall have great peace in conscience. When Christ brought salvation to Zaccheus, his minde altered: before he did nothing but scrape, now hee was all for giving. This was not the first day that he seemed rich to others, but this was the first day hee seemed rich to himselfe. Riches bring contention, Godlinesse brings contentation. Gaine hath often hurt the getters, Piety is profitable to all men. Wealth comes, and a man is not pleased: honour comes, and yet he is not pleased: the lusts of the flesh are fulfilled, and yet he is not pleased: but when Godlines comes, his cup is full:Psal. 16.6. The lines aye fallen unto me in pleasant places, I have a goodly heritage. As Philip said, Lord, shew us the Father, and it sufficeth, Ioh. 14.7. So Lord, give us Godlinesse, and it sufficeth. What the rich man falsely usurped, this certainely affordeth; Soule rest, sat habes, thou hast enough.Ioh. 8.36. If the Sonne make you free, yee shall be free indeed: If Godlinesse make you rich, ye shall never be poore.






Verse 7.

To Godlinesse Brotherly Kindnesse.


FOr better method of proceeding in the description of this next Grace, let me guide my discourse and your attention through these five particulars. The Connection, Definition, Distinction, Conclusion, Application.
First, for Connection and Dependance, we must consider the reasons why the  Apostle joyns immediatly to godlinesse, Brotherly kindnesse. We have three reasons.
1 Because Brotherly kindnesse is the daughter of Godlinesse. He that loves God for his owne sake, will love his brother for Gods sake.Ioh. 21.17. Peter lovest thou mee? feed my lambes. What you have done to these little ones, yee have done to me, Mat. 25. Ille bene agit quae justa sunt, qui novit prius servare quae pia sunt, Greg. He may best be good to his brother, that hath first learned to be good to his Father. Rivus charitatis ducitur de fonte pietatis. The river of charity springs from the fountaine of piety.
2 Because Brotherly kindnesse is the moderatour of Godlinesse. Some mens piety runnes an impetuous pace; so fast that it forgets to salute their brother by the way. Those two Disciples were so hot for Christ, that they would needs have fire from heaven upon their brethren. As Iudas would have hindred Maries piety by shew
 of Charity: so the Pharisies overthrew Charity with the shewes of Pietie,Mat. 23.14. They devour widowes houses, and for a pretence make long prayer. God loves not such madde zeale, that so fixeth the eyes on heaven, that it despiseth to looke on their poore brother on earth. Indeed when such an opposition meets us, that either wee must forsake Christ, or our brother; then himselfe teacheth us to leave all, and so follow him. But when there is no such necessity, God is often contented to depart from his owne right, that we may succour our brother. Go learne what that meaneth; I will have mercy and not sacrifice, Matth. 9.13. Mercifull workes to thy brother, are Pro sacrificiis, Heb. 13.16. and Prae sacrificiis, Hos. 6.6. God will forgive the omission of piety, upon good cause of fraternall charity. He will spare the wife from Church to comfort her sicke husband; the mother, to releeve her distressed childe. We have those will runne so fast to a Sermon, that they will not stay to give a poore orphant a penny. The true Catholike hath a catholike care: and sets not the two Tables at variance; both which looke to Gods obedience, as the two Cherubins to the Mercy-seat. I know there is a Great Commandement, and another (but) like unto it, Mat. 22.38. But let not sacrifice turne mercy out of doores, as Sara did Hagar: nor the flames of Zeale consume the moisture of Charitie, as the fire from heaven drunke up the water at Eliahs sacrifice. Godlinesse workes by brotherly kindnesse, Gal. 5.6. No man must looke so high, that he over-looke his brother, Esay 58.3. You fast and mourne, and I regard it not, saith the Lord; because ye exact upon the poore: Pietatem hanc ego nolo; Charitie is the Kings high-way to heaven: Zeale like Cushi runs apace, but love like Ahimaaz, gets first to the King, because it runnes by the way of the plaine, 2 Sam. 18.23. Only that Godly man which is kinde to his brother, comes with best speed to his Maker.
3 Because Godlinesse is proved by brotherly kindnesse; this is our demonstration that we love GOD. With one and the same Charitie we love both GOD and our brother: the difference is in the degrees and respects; God for himselfe, others for him, and in him. There is nothing more easie than to ostent the love of GOD; but the lacke of charitie, is the conviction of hypocrisie, 1 Cor. 13.1. There bee many donations of the Spirit: Though I spake with tongues of men: so many tongues as that divine Poet wrote of Queene Elizabeth:

That Rome, Rhine, Rhone, Greece, Spaine, and Italy;
Plead all for right in her nativity.

Yea, of Angels, Si quae sint Angelorum linguae, Ieron. If at least the Angels have any language. Yet if we have not charitie, we are as sounding Brasse or a tinkling Cymball. Like Balaams Asse, that spake to better her master, not her selfe. Or the Sermon-bell that rings others to Church, while it selfe still hangs in the steeple, and heares nothing. Though we had the gift of prophecie; so Balaam, Saul, Caiaphas prophecied; yet wanting Charity; the first loved gold more than God: the second, his lusts more than his obedience: the last condemned IESUS CHRIST. Though we had all knowledge, yet wanting Charity; wee might like the Pharisies, open the doore for others, and not goe in our selves. Without Charity we are nothing; nothing In esse Gratiae, how great soever In esse Naturae, Aquin. Yea, though we gave our bodies to be burned; though we not onely speake but suffer; not doe, but die. Of all sufferings death is the most terrible, of all deaths, Burning. Now Si tradidero, If I give; not by compulsion, but of mine owne accord; as it is said of CHRIST; Tradidit seipsum, Ephes. 5.2. Hee gave himselfe. Si tradidero corpus, If I give my Body: not onely suffer losse of goods, and that is much;Heb. 10.34. To take joyfully the spoiling of our goods: but calamities in our bodie; as the father of lies spake truely in this: Skinne for skinne, yea, all that a man hath, will hee give for his life, Iob 2.4. Si tradidero corpus Meum, if I give My body: not my childes bodie, as Abraham offered Isaac's, not onely flesh of my flesh, but flesh that is my Flesh. Si tradidero morti; If I give my body to Death, not onely to paine and passion. Yea, not to a naturall death, this law must passe upon all men; but to a violent death. Lastly, to a death so violent,
 that there is not a greater torment; to be rosted and consumed in the fire; to be burned. Here be many acts of patience, of Pietie; yet if we hate our brother, all is lost. Therefore Stephen, when he died for godlinesse, forgot not brotherly kindnesse.Act. 7.60. Lord lay not this sinne to their charge. As if the want of this would discredit the cause, or endanger the reward. So did other Martyrs, fetching this example from the Head: Father forgive them, for they know not what they doe, Luk. 23.34. Thus necessary is this connexion:1 Ioh. 2.9. he that saith he is in the light, and hateth his brother, is in darkenesse still. If there could be a godlinesse destitute of this, it should never bee welcome to Christ.
Secondly, for the definition of this Philadelphia; It is a love to the faithfull; to  such as professe the same faith with us, and by that faith are adopted heires to the same God, through the brother-hood of the same CHRIST. It is distinguished from charitie by the nearentsse and dearenesse. By nearenesse, I meane not locall, but mysticall: Charitie hath a great latitude, and is like the heaven that covers all: brotherly kindnesse like the sunne that shines upon the one halfe at one. The firmament sends influence to more than the sunne, but the sunne comes nearer to that object it blesseth, than the firmament. By dearenesse, for the bond of nature is not so strong as the bond of Grace. Our creation hath made us friends, and given us amitie: our Redemption hath made us brethren, and given us unitie, Gal. 3.28. We are all on in Iesus Christ. Therefore though we are formerly bound, to doe good to all; yet here by a new bond, especially to them that are of the houshold of faith. Be good to every man, more good to a Christian, most good to a faithfull christian; for thou art tied to him in the bond of the nearest fraternitie.
Consider then here the ground of this Brother-hood, which is the bond of Adoption. Which if it have power to bind God to man, and man to God; then much more to bind man to man. Religion is a binder, Evangelium colligit: the Gospell hath a combining power, to gather into one fold all the sheepe of CHRIST, wandring on the mountaines of the broad earth. Friendship is a great uniter; it knowes no other language but Tuus sum totus; I am wholly thine. It is ready to exclude those possessives, Meum and Tuum, from being any parts of speech, and to drowne all proprietie. Marriage is a great uniter, stronger than friendship, by Gods ordinance: it knowes no other method but composition. Among Pagans it brought two into one lawfull bed: the bride could challenge on her wedding day of the bridegroome; Vbi tu Caius, ego Caia; where you are master, I must be mistresse. Among Christians it goes further; not onely to bring two into one house, but two into one flesh. As God by creation made two of one, so againe by marriage he made one of two. But the principall attractive, congregating, and combining power in the world, to draw together heaven and earth, sea and land, East and West, Iewes and Gentiles; and to make one of two, of ten, of thousands, of all, is the Gospell; the bond of our Christian covenant; which makes us all one in the LORD IESUS. Thus we are compact under the governement of one Lord, tied by the bond of one faith, washed from our sinnes by one layer, nourished by the milke of one Gospell, feasted at the supper of one and the same Lambe, assumed by one and the same spirit, to the Inheritance of one and the same kingdome, and shall bee brought all to one and the same salvation.
In the third place we come to the distinction: there are three sorts of Brethren;  by Race, Place, and Grace.
By Race; and: that either by Birth: such as have the same parents; so Iacob and Esau were brethren. Or by bloud; so Abraham and Lot were called brethren, Gen. 13.8. So our blessed Saviour was said to have brethren and sisters, Mark. 6.3. Mary his mother was a pure virgin, as well as after his birth, as before his conception. Hebridius the hereticke abusing that Text, Matth. 1.25. He knew her not, till she had brought forth her first borne son: held that Mary had more children because Christ was called her first borne. But so, Hebr. 1.6. He is called Primogenitus Patris,
 the first begotten sonne of the Father: yet, Ioh. 3.16. he is Vnigenitus Patris, the oney begotten sonne of his father. So he is called the first borne of his mother, not that she had: any child after him, but because she had none before him. This word [Vntill] onely doth negatively exclude the time past, no wayes affirmatively insinuate the time to come. So Matth. 28.20. I am with you alway, even Till the end of the world: he doth not meane to leave us then, but to bee with us for ever Act. 3.21. The heaven must receive Christ, untill the times of restitution of all things: what no longer? yes, and after that restoring also, 2 Sam. 6.23. Michal had no child untill the day of her death; and it is certaine that she had none afterward. Therefore Iames and Ioses, Iuda and Simon, were Christs brethren Cognatione, by kindred, Gen. 29.15. Laban said unto Iacob; because thou art my brother, etc. Laban was his Master, his Vnkle, his Father, yet he also calls him brother. This is one kind of fraternitie.
By Place, such as are of the same nation, Deut. 17.15. Thou shalt chuse a king from among thy brethren, that is of thy owne nation; not a stranger, Deut. 23.20. unto a stranger thou maiest lend upon usurie, but not unto thy brother, Rom. 9.3. I could wish my selfe separated from Christ, for my brethen, my kinsemen according to the flesh. So all Englishmen are brethren; all in nation, not all in affection. For some of them were so brotherly kind, that they would have powder'd us: and they have left their spawne behind them; that if their power were answerable to their will, they would, in kindnesse, cut all our throates.
By Grace; and this is either common or speciall, that is spirituall; by generation or regeneration. In the former respect all men are brethren:Act. 17.26. God hath made of one bloud all nations of men. We are brothers by the mothers side, they call it the surer side: all our bodies are from the wombe of one earth, returneable to the bowels of one earth. Brothers by the fathers side; all our soules are from heaven, inspired by the breath of one Creator. In the latter respect, wee are all brethren in Christ. By creation wee have a brother-hood with the creatures; so Iob calls the wormes his sisters, Iob 17.14. By renovation we have a brother-hood with the Angels.
 You see the kinds of this Fraternitie; let us now come to the fourth point of the method; to draw some conclusions from it. Here consider two things, the necessitie and the practise; wherefore wee must have it, and wherein it consisteth.
The necessitie is great: our Apostle would not have given it a roome among these principall graces, if he had not found it, Et in se dignum, and aplerisque dedignatum; worthy in it selfe, andyet generally neglected. It is worthy in it selfe: that vertue which is ranked with Godlinesse, must needs be honourable. Here behold Gods great goodnesse and mercie; who doth not only provide for his owne glory, but mans good. A man would thinke, so long as he is served by godlinesse, what should he care whether we serve one another with kindnesse? yes; he esteemes no man his servant, that is not his brothers friend: if we be not kind to our brethren, he values not our kindnesse to him. David would little respect the peace-offers of the Ammonites, who had so villanously intreated his servants, 2 Sam. 10. God abhorrs the Israelites chalenge of his paternitie, when they had beaten his servants that demanded his rent, and slew his son. Our Faith, knowledge, temperance, patience, concerne our selves: our Vertue and Pietie, God: onely these two last. Brotherly love and Charitie, hath he put in for men. See his goodnesse: of eight he hath given foure to thy selfe, allowed two for thy brother, and hath reserved but two immediately for himselfe, that owes all. Now albeit this grace be worthy in it selfe, yet we are apt to neglect it: therefore our Apostle in his two Epistles urgeth it foure severall times, 1 Pet. 1.22. Chap. 2.17. Love the brother-hood. Chap. 3.8. Love as brethren; and lastly here in my Text. Saint Paul in his writings thrice, Romans. 12.10. Bekindly affectioned one to another with brotherly love, 1 Thes. 4.9. Hebr. 13.1. Let brotherly
 love continue. Diverse of the fathers in their severall Apologies highly commended this vertue. This inculcating doth insinuate both the precious nccessitie, and the common disestimation of it. All ages have complained the want of it The Poet wrote long since; Fratrum quoque gratia rara est. The Prophet;Ier. 9.4. Take yee heed every one of his neighbour, and trust yee not in a brother: for every brother will utterly supplant, Ier. 12.6. Even thy brethren, and the house of thy father, have dealt treacherously with thee. Our Saviour; The brother shall betray the brother to death, Mark. 13.12. The Apostle; 1 Cor. 6.8. you doe wrong, and defraud, and that your brethren, Gal. 2.4. He tells them of false brethren, privily comming, etc. He reckoneth it as none of the least exigents he was driven to, to be in perill of false brethren, 2 Cor. 11.26. now what is so frequently taught, at last let it be learned.
Let us come now to the practise, wherein this Philadelphia consisteth; and this we must consider negatively and positively; in non officiendo, in proficiendo. First, what it forbids and debarres, as opposites to it, and murderers of it.
First, contentious litigation, 1 Cor. 6.6. Their is utterly a fault amongst you, that brother goeth to Law with brother. How unnaturall is it, for one hand to strike another. Hath CHRIST made thee friends with God, and wilt thou not be friends with thy brother? Non erit tibi concordia cum Christo, si sit discordia cum christiano. So Abraham intreated Lot;Gen. 13.8. let there be no strife betweene us for we are brethren. So Moses endeavoured to pacifie the two Hebrews, Act. 6.28. Sirs, why doe yee wrong one to another, for yee are brethren? Art thou a christian, and seekest to undoe thy brother? It's one of the Abominations, which Gods very Soule hateth, Prov. 6.19. But the more busy such devilish engines and Incendiaries are to separate us, the more constantly let us hold together.
Secondly, an inveterate hatred; which is a most degenerate passion; to hate the son of a mans owne mother? As Iosephs brethren hated him, because his father loved him, Gen. 37.4. a fault that cost them deare afterwards. God loves all his children, wilt thou hate him that God loves? My delight is in the Saints, saith that royall Prophet, Psal. 16.3. Let all brother haters know their wretchednesse; he that hateth his brother is in darkenesse. That is miserable enough, to live in darkenesse,1 Ioh. 2.11. hellish darkenesse: but this is not all; for he lives in death, 1 Iohn 3.15. whosoever hateth his brother, is a murtherer: and a murtherer cannot enter into the kingdome of heaven. So that, whosoever hates another, condemneth himselfe: and is lost in a voluntary bloud-guiltinesse.
Thirdly, even anger it selfe is a traitor to this vertue: for as hatred is a long anger, so anger is a short hatred malice is nothing else but inveterate wrath.Matth. 5.22. The causles anger is in danger of Iudgement. A cholerick disposition is no excuse: for as every man is either a foole or a physician: so every Christian is either a mad-man or a Divine: a mad-man, if he gives his passion the raines, a Divine if he qualifies it. When a railing fellow reviled Pericles all day, and night in the same tune followed him home to his gate: he all this while not returning a word, now commanded one of his servants with a toarch to light the brawler home to his house. Thus did an Ethnicke: therefore if a brother offende upon ignorance, neglect it: if upon infirmitie, forget it: if upon malice, forbeare it: upon what tearmes so ever, forgive it, as thou wouldest be forgiven of God.
Fourthly, oppression is a horrible breach of this Fraternitie.1 Thes. 4.6. Let no man over-reach or oppresse his brother. Even the Iew that might take usurie of a heathen, might not take it of his brother. Thus our usurers common distinction is taken away: for all Christians are brethren, and I thinke they deale not with Infidells. Vnlesse they helpe themselves thus, that they may take usurie of Christians because themselves are none.
Lastly, a proud dedignation and contempt of their brethren.Psal. 50.20. Thou sittest and speakest against thy brother, thou slanderest thine owne mothers sonne. So the Church complaines, Cant. 1.6. My mothers children were angry with me. Wilt thou despise
 him that is CHRISTS brother? Is he vile in their eyes whom the Lord Iesus bought so deare? Wee all grow up together a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fulnesse of CHRIST, Eph. 4.13. The poorest soule of this brother-hood must concurre to make up the perfection of CHRIST. Comfort thy selfe thou faithfull spirit: they blush at thy acquaintance, scorne thy companie: but the Lord thinkes himselfe not perfect without thee.
Thus privatively, now positively. This brotherly kindnesse is shewed in reprehending those we love. Non minima pars dilectionis, reprehendere delictum.Levit. 19.17. Thou shalt rebuke thy brother, and not suffer sinne upon him; thou shalt not hate him in thine heart. So that not to rebuke him, is to hate him. Non fratri irascitur, qui peccato fratris irascitur, Aug. He is not angry with his brother, that is angry with the sinne of his brother. Hate not virum but vitium. The best brotherly love is to the soule: love to his body is but the body of love: the soule of love is the love of his soule. Why did David so mourne for Absalom, wishing to have died for him; but in love to his soule? Now much of this love stands in a mild reproofe: so let us live brothers on earth, that wee may for ever live together brothers in heaven; and bee so kind as to helpe forward one anothers salvation. There are many other offices of this brotherly love, but they are no strangers to you; it is enough to have named them. Such as helping their poore estates: for1 Ioh. 3.17. the love of God is not in him, that hath, and refuseth to give to him that hath not. All are for the brother-hood, but few for their brothers good. Praying for them; this the very first words of the LORDS prayer teacheth us; Our Father; not my father, but our: we desire others should fare as well as our selves. Some only pray for themselves and their families; as the Athenians offered sacrifice for none but themselves, and their neighbours of Chios. But we have all one father; and therefore he that speakes must plead the cause of the rest of his brethren. I pray not for these alone, saith Christ, but for all them, etc. Ioh. 17.20. Pray we for others, others for us, as Christ doth pray for us all.
I come to the last point, that is the application; let this Philadelphia dwell ever among us. There be diverse brother-hoods.
The Papists have their fraternities, yea their paternities, their maternities, and their sister-hoods. Iesuites will not be called Fratres, but Patres; holy fathers. But in meane time they neglect their owne fathers, they must not know them, nor call them so. They say to him that enters their order; Quid tibi cum patre? what hast thou to doe with thy father? thou hast no father but the Pope Quid tibi cum matre? what hast thou to doe with thy mother? Thou hast no mother but the Church of Rome. Quid tibi cum fratribus? what to doe with thy brethren. Thou hast no brethren but these of the same order; or haply the Fryers, etc. Quid tibi cum sororibus? what hast thou to doe with thy sisters? these now are onely the Nunnes. Here's a brother-hood.
The Schismatickes have a brother-hood, and they hold themselves the onely pure brethren in Christ: but they have ill lucke in it, for no body else holds them so. It seemes they dwell by neighbours that have little cause to love them, who are thus faine to commend themselves. They are so brotherly kind, that they turne charitie quite out of dores. They will feed at your tables, though they will not brother with you; and they have scripture for it; that Elias refused not the meate brought by an uncleane raven. But if all rich men (for those burres sticke to no others) were of my mind, such pure, proud, factious and scornefull brethren should goe seeke their dinners. Albeit they take us for Ravens, I am sure they are no Eliah's. You shall never come to tast their dishes; and they have Scripture for it, Not to communicate, not to drinke with them that are not their brethren; (they meane) at home, and at their owne cost. He that cannot raile against Church governement, is not a guest for their tables. Every morsell they cut, they wish it were a bishopricke. Here is a brother-hood, but it is a bad one, a mad one. These are Nigri
 fratres, that love to foote and grime the face of their mother. They are so linked to the fraternitie, that let another man fall into their hands, there is no mercie to be expected. Forfeitures fall to them by providence; and it is the mans unworthinesse for which they undoe him. Impudent wretches, that dare father their wickednesse upon Gods allowance! But they that thus despise the brother-hood of Christians, shall be found no brothers to CHRIST.
Libertines and profane persons have a brother-hood too: but commonly it is an ale-house brother-hood, and their kindred comes in by the pot. And this is no wonder, for bryars and thornes embrace and twine more together than good plants. Saint Peter saies, love brotherly fellowship: but these two, brother-hood and fellowship have ill lucke, they are continually seeking one another, but they seldome meete. For most men are either brothers and not companions, or companions and not brothers. Schismatickes are all for the brother-hood, and nothing for societie: Libertines are all for societie, and nothing for brother-hood. Neither of these doe well asunder, happily well both together.
I might touch upon diverse other brother-hoods brothers of the Rosy-Crosse, Brothers of the Reconciliation, brothers of the Elixar, chiming, cheating, rather couzens than brothers, more foolish than Popish, and more knavish than either. But let them be buried in oblivion, whose very names make a stinke.
If all these have their brotherhoods, let not us Christians bee behind them. We have all one father, Mat. 23.9. Call no man father, for one is your Father in heaven. All one motherGal. 4.26. Ierusalem above is the mother of us all. All one elder brotherRom. 8.29. Who is the first borne among many brethren. For our Fathers sake, for our mothers sake, for our brothers sake, for our owne sake, let us hold together as brethren I cannot say with Paul,1 Thes. 4.9. Touching brotherly love, yee need not that I write unto you: for yee your selves are taught of God to love one another. There is two much need, there was never more Saint Iohn, Revel. 3.7. mentions a whole Church, called Philadelphia, brotherly-love Saint Augustine thought it a fit name for all christendome: for how farre so ever beleevers are dispersed, they are all brethren. All are brethren, but wee that live together in one countrey, are twins. It is therefore a most fit name for England and the Lord make England Philadelphiam; that every one of us may love another, and Iesus Christ may love us all.
To brotherly kindnesse, Charitie.] Wee are now gotten to the roofe of this spirituall house, Charitie. This is the highest round of the ladder: there be eight steps, this is the uppermost; as nearest to heaven. It hath a further extent than Philadelphia; that is onely to brethren in the same faith, this is to all, even to our enemies, Matth. 5.44. All men love their friends, but Christians love their enemies, Tertullian. Beatus qui amat te, and amicum in te, and inimicum propter te. Aug. It is greater than faith, and hope, 1 Cor. 13. Faith shall bring in vision, vision shall thrust out faith: Hope shall lead in possession, possession shall cast forth hope.Col. 3.14. Above all things put on Charitie: here are three particulars; the Action, put on: the Affection, the robe of Charitie: the preheminence; Above all. We find a preheminence, if we read Super haec omnia, above all: a necessitie, if we read Ad haec omnia, To these all. Put it on, as either clothes for covering, or armour for desending. It is a good armour against Satans temptations to sinne, or accusations for sinne. Of all men, seldome is any great sinne fastened on the charitable: how should he speed ill, that hath so many prayers! It is a good covering, Iob professes that he had warmed the poore with the fleece of his sheepe, Iob 31.20. That charitie which keepes the poore receivers body warme, keepes the givers soule warmer. Whether it consists in donando, or in condonando: in bearing and forbearing, in case of wrong: in beneficence and giving, in case of need. Put it on:Eccl. 20.30. wisedome and treasures hidden are unprofitable; this must not be hidden as a night-gowne, or closset-robe, but worne: Yea, keepe it on; it must not be a loose garment, soone on and soone off. Charitie, some thinke, is a vesture that will quickly be worne out; therefore they seldome weare it, unlesse it be on high daies, and then they give a little to a collection. But it should
 be rather like the Israelites clothes in the desart, lasting fortie yeeres. If this grace be wanting, all the former are lost: brotherly love is not, Godlinesse vanisheth, there is no place for Patience, temperance is worthlesse, knowledge is obscured, all Vertue pineth away.Methode. Oh that now your hearts, like those two disciples going to Emaus, had this doctrine of Charitie, burning within you. Here for methods sake consider we the motives to it, and the materialls of it. The motives are deduced from the necessitie, the dignitie, the commoditie, the danger of neglecting it. The necessitie must be considered in respect of God, of our selves.
The necessitie of it in respect of God, appeares by his charging us with it, both in the Law and in the Gospell, Levit. 19.18. Iohn 13.34. But how then does CHRIST calls it a New Commandement. It is answered; vetus ratione veritatis, novum ratione usus. It is old in regard of the truth, new in regard of the use. Papists thinke it too new; they will be brotherly kind to their owne tribe; love none but those that love them. They affect some new things, dethroning of Princes, etc. but not this. Sectaries thinke it too old, they will none of charitie: they love no old thing, but Adams old sinne of disobedience. Poore charitie cannot find a bosome to rest in; it is too new for some, and too old for others. Paul bids us put it on; but some thinke it too costly a garment, and will not become them. The Poet hath a fable, that an old man travelling with his little sonne, and having but one beast betweene them; the father did ride and the child went a foote: then the people exclaimed and said he was an unkind father, who being of able limbes would take his ease and put his tender forme to trudge by him. Hereon he set up his sonne, and went a foote himselfe: then they called him kind dotard, that would let a young boy ride, while his aged father travelled by him. Hearing this, he got up with his sonne, they did both ride: now the people railed on him for an unmercifull man to his beast; saying, they might ride by turnes. Then they lighted both, and would neither ride; now the people began to laugh at them, that both would lead an empty beast, and goe on foote themselves. Lastly when hee saw that nothing could please them, he went and drowned his beast; and loe, now he was derided most of all. This is Charities lucke: the old man tells the young that he ought to be charitable, because he is comming into the world, and hath his fortunes before him. The young man, tells the old, that he ought to bee charitable, because hee is going out of the world; that hee may well spare his clothes that is going to bed. The father and sonne conclude, that if they should both be givers, this were the way to over-load charitie; to make others rich, and themselves beggars. When neither of them gives, but leave charitie emptie, the world curses them for miserable wretches. Lastly, they consent to drowne poore charitie in the gulfe of couetousnesse: and make open profession to the world, that they will not be troubled with such a vertue. Because thou canst not content all men, wilt thou refuse to please God?
The necessitie of it followes, in respect of thy selfe. Things of greatest use should bee of greatest estimation. Thou wouldest know if thou breathest Christian; the signe of it is thy Charitie. This is the pulse of Faith; Saint Iames his demonstration:Iam. 2.18. Shew me thy faith by thy workes. This is the best testification of thy love to God, saith Saint Iohn. True religion must be considered both Quoad extra, and Quoad intra: so it is defined, Iam. 1.27. Pure religion and undefiled before God is this, to visite the fatherlesse and widdowes in their afflictions, and to keepe himselfe unspotted from the world. Here is a description of it; Quid in se, quale in alios. In it selfe it is Religion, a binding qualitie; and hath three proofes: by nature, it is Pure: by qualitie, undefiled: by object, Before God. Now Quoad extra, for the effects; these are two: Innocencie in our selves, Charitie towards others; releeving the widdow and Orphant. Religion is not only contemplative; but the greater part of it, like the Mathematickes, is in demonstration. There can be no assurance to thy soule, that thou art in GODS favour without Charitie. Indeed faith is the life of a Christian; but the breath whereby he is knowne to live, is Charitie,1 Cor. 13.3. Though I bestow all my goods to feed the poore, and have not charitie, it profiteth me not nothing. But may there
 be a giving away of our goods to the poore, without charity? Yes; observe in those words five degrees: 1. Si impertiam, it is a good mans part to lend, Psal 37.26. He is mercifull and lendeth: but here though I give; wheras most men open their hands only to take: give, and give freely without expectation of repayment. 2. My own, not anothers: for many will cut large shivers of anothers loafe: but my goods, Eccles. 11.1. Cast thy bread on the waters. 3. All my goods; not a little superfluitie, not a competent portion, no nor yet a great summe; but all, Mat. 19.21. Behold, we have left all, and followed thee. 4. Not to the rich, but to the poore, such as have need, with a discreet election of objects for bounty, Esay 58.7 Breake thy bread to the hungry. 5. To feed the poore, not to feast them; not superfluously, but necessarily. Yet a man may doe all this out of ostentation, curious ambition, or idle prodigality; and not from the internall habite of charity, which is a gracious love to Christ and his members: and the Hoc aliquid, hoc multum, hoc totum nihil est: This somwhat, this much, this all, is nothing at all with God. Thus necessary is Charity, without which Aut non habentur caetera, aut frustra habentur omnia; A man hath nothing in substance, or all things without comfort. A certaine King of Northumberland in that great controversie about Easter; some alleaging for Peter, others for Iohn; bethought himselfe that Peter was the Porter of heaven-gate; therefore resolved to take that side, saying, he would make the Porter his friend, that when he came thither he might be sure to get in. Whatsoever he dreamt of Peter, doe thou by Charity make Christ thy friend: he is Ianua vitae, the doore of everlasting life; he must let thee in, or there is no entrance for thee. Yea make him thy friend, for hee is the Lord of the kingdome. Thus also are the poore madeLuke 16.9. thy friends, ready to receive thee into everlasting habitations.
The Dignity followes. It is munus regale; yea, opus divinum* a royall office, a divine  practise. Mercy or charity is the sole worke communicable to man with God. The Lord is content to acknowledge himselfe the charitable mans debtor; He hath lent to the Lord, and he will pay him againe, Prov. 19.17. But still this payment is not deserved of man, but conferred of God. It must needs be an excellent thing, that brings God to an acknowledgement. There is an Vsury in the world much applauded, more defended, most of all practised; the very shame of Christendome. It was a shame for a Galatian to be a circumcised Christian: it is more shame for a Christian to be a baptized Iew. It is a Iewish sinne, send it backe to the owners: we trafficke many things, it were a blessed ship that could quite transport Vsury. I will tell you of a lawfull Vsury, (not that the world runs mad upon, but rather runs from) a practise that needs no patron to defend it, it will reward and protect it selfe. Foenerare, non fratri, sed Domino: hae enim usurae regnum, illae gehennam praparant, Chrys. Put forth thy goods for usury to God, not to thy brother: that Vsury shall bring thee a kingdome of peace; the other shall procure thee a place in torment. Below perhaps thou contentest thy selfe with ten in the hundred, above thou shalt have an hundred for one. Now if it be true, thatProv. 22.7. the borrower is a servant to the lender; then by lending to him, in charitie to his, after a sort we have a hand upon God himselfe. And this is the dignitie of charity, the great acceptation with God: so Christ honours it, Matth. 25. Come yee blessed etc. excellent grace, that is so gracious with Christ!
The Commodity of it followes; It secureth all, it encreaseth all, it blesseth all. It  secureth all; like an Ambassador by lying Lieger abroad, it makes all safe at home. It deriveth from the poore this prayer; God blesse your store: it deriveth from God this blessing,Psal. 132.15. I will abundantly blesse thy provision. It encreaseth all: it makes friends; praying friends; as they beg of thee, so they beg of God for thee. For a benefactor is a petty creator: thou givest a penny, it is his patrimony. Their devotions are sent up to heaven for thy blessing: and as the Bishop told Monica weeping for her seduced son; Fieri non potest, ut filius istarum Lacrimarum pereat: It cannot be that the son of those teares should ever perish. So be comforted in thy charity. Fieri non potest ut filius istarum precum pereat; It cannot be, that they for whom are sent up so many praiers, should ever perish; it leaves behind thee an everlasting memory; living thou art honoured, dead well reported; Hee hath given to the poore,Psal. 112.9. his righteousnesse endureth
 for ever. Thus Charity, sayes Chrysostome, is Ars quaestuosissima, the most gainfull art; it is a field sowen, the crop is thine.2 Cor.9.7. He that sowes bountifully, shall reape bountifully: How bountifully? Christ answers; a measure heapen, and shaken, and prest together, yet running over. It blesseth all: a maine act of piety in the Law was Sacrifice, a maine act of piety in the Gospell is Charity. This is an Evangelicall Sacrifice, with which God is pleased, Heb. 13.16. Now the poore are the altar whereon wee must offer this sacrifice. Charity sanctifies all: Give, and all shall be cleane to you: you shall have new bags, which wax not old, new garments, which shall never be worne out, new gold, which cannot be rusted, Luke 12.33. God is loth thou shouldest lose thy wealth, therefore bids thee trust him with it: Non erit remotius, sed certius; It shal not be further from thee, but surer to thee: The Omnipotent shall keepe it for thee that art impotent: no theefe can breake into heaven, to steale it from thee: it is out of the reach of the most mercilesse oppressour. Thou sayest, I trust in Christ to be saved: now darest thou trust him with that precious jewell, thy soule; and not with thy base worldly trash?
 Lastly, the danger of neglecting Charity, is the Curse; Goe yee cursed, you did not releeve me, Mat. 25. If thou being rich wilt not give to the poore, he that is the most Rich will give nothing to thee. Hee that stoppeth his eares at the crie of the poore, shall crie himselfe and not be heard, Prov. 21.13. Shouldest thou not have had compassion on thy fellow servant, as I had pitie on thee? Matth. 18.33. There is judgement mercilesse to the unmercifull, Iam. 2.13. If any man thinke the omission of this dutie to be too severely judged; Chrysostome answers, that as it is a kind of homicide to take away from the poore; and he that doth it is vir sanguinum, a man of bloud. So not to give to the poore is little lesse: for two wayes is a lamp put forth; either by blowing it out, or by not powring oyle into it. He that can save, and will not, kils: so that the very want of charity is murther. This danger will be found great, Matth. 25. they are not arraigned for want of justice, nor for want of wisdome, nor for want of temperance; but for want of Charitie. Now when a scholler is to be opposed for his degree, and but one question to be asked him; if hee knew it before, hee would perfectly study that. We know that one question will then be asked us; it is concerning our Charitie; let us study that throughly, that we may answer it well before the Iudgement-seat of Iesus Christ.
I come from the Motives, to the Materials, wherein this externall and practicall part of Charity consists. They are these; who, what, to whom, whereof, and how.
 Who must give charitably: it seemes this charge belongs onely to the rich.1 Tim. 6.17. Charge them that are rich in this world, etc. There is none simply rich, but God. Crassus thought himselfe not rich, till all Rome was poore to him: yea unlesse Ex fructibus, he could maintaine an armie of fortie thousand men, out of the very revenues and surplusage of his estate. But as Nemo miser nisi comparatus; So none is properly rich, but in regard of the poore. Some thinke they are called Divitiae Iniquitatis, quasi Inequalitatis; The riches of Iniquity, that is, of Inequality: some have more, some lesse: let them that have most, give most; let them that have little, give of that little. A rich Pharisie may give abundantly, but the poore widow must cast in her two mites. A man may be, not Dives in seculo, yet dives in Domino.Luke 12.21. So he is that layeth up treasure for himselfe, and is not rich towards God: Whereas other may be rich in good workes, 1 Tim. 6.18. If there be a willing minde, it is accepted according to that a man hath, not according to that he hath not, 2 Cor. 8.12. Therefore the labouring-man is not priviledg'd from this dutie;Ephes. 4.28. Let him labour with his hands, that he may give to him that needeth. Though he may plead, that wife and children are bills of expences; yet Luke 3.11. Let him that hath two coats, impart to him that hath none: Not one out of a whole wardrobe, but one of two. If thou have little, be not afraid to give according to that little, Tob. 4.8. Thy family shall not want, but be kept warme with the blessing.
What must be given, not words, but deeds: a charitable heart hath a helpfull hand. The good mans charity should dwell, as it is said of the Dutch-mans wit, at his
 finger-ends. They for exquisite workes, we for mercifull workes. To good deeds onely stands open the gates of Heaven.
To whom extends our charitie; this munificent part of it to the poore. Wee  favour and feast those who are recommended to us by their owne greatnesse: Who feasts those that are recommended by CHRIST?Luke 14.14. When thou makest a feast, call the poore, lame, blinde; and thou shalt be blessed, for they cannot recompence thee: but God will, at the resurrection of the just. To doe good to them that doe good to us, Luke 6.33 Such kindnesse a man may take up in the streets of Turkie. But how if they be vagrants and lewd persons? yet be charitable to them, for these reasons: 1. It is better one unworthy creature should receive, than ten worthy should misse. The gracelesnesse of some beggers is too true, but many make this a generall excuse to spare their purses. Thy owne conscience in this is thy best guide. 2. Thy reward is not lost, though thy gift be fallen like good seed upon bad ground. Thy harvest is not in the man, but in Christ; not on earth, but in heaven. As our Saviour said, Luke 10.6. When ye come to an house, say, Peace be to this house. If the Son of Peace be there, your peace shall rest upon it: If not, it shall turne to you againe. So if the poore man be good, thy almes shall doe him good: if not, thy charity shall turne to thee againe. Howsoever the man be evill, yet the Lord is good. The unworthinesse of the receiver, takes not away the reward of the giver.Psal. 35.13. When they were sicke, I humbled my soule with fasting; and my prayer returned into mine owne bosome. I prayed for them, I was heard for my selfe. If thy charitie doe them no good, it shall doe thee good. 3. Dutie bindes us to give obedience to evill Princes, in conscience of GODS ordinance. And as an evill subject serves GOD for his Princes sake, so a good subject serves his Prince for GODS sake. Thus obedience is given, if not Principi, yet Principatui; If not to the Person, yet to the Office. So because GOD commends and commands charitie, wee must give though to evill men: Do homini, non moribus: Wee give to the man, nor to the manners. Hee is a man, his Maker will requite mee: hee is a Christian, I know where to fetch my reward.
Whereof must we give, not evill gotten things, but our owne. Quod dedistis,  dicitis; non quod abstulistis. Quaerit Deus dona, non spolia, Ambros. You talke of what you have given, not what you have taken away: GOD requires gifts, not spoiles. As the Iewes bought a burying place for strangers with the bloud of CHRIST: so many build Hospitals for children with their fathers bones. Thus one laughes that receives, but another weepes that loses: And perhaps his imprecations that is impoverished, will come sooner to Gods eares, than his apprecations that is releeued. I would not have one poore mans just curse, for many poore mens good prayers.Iames 5.4. The cryes of the poore against their oppressours, enter into the eares of the Lord of Sabbath. This crie comes from the more sensible soule; not alwayes from the spirit of bitternesse, but from the bitternesse of spirit. When the oppressour hath built his Almes-house, and hopes by their perfunctory devotions to bee admitted to heaven; the curses of the undone wretches knocke him downe to Hell.
Lastly, how we must give, and this may be considered in five circumstances. 
1 Cheerefully; As thou hast gotten, give with a cheerefull eye, Eccles. 35.10. A good countenance refresheth the poore mans minde, as well as the almes doth his body. Those liquours of oyle or wine that powre out themselves, and drop of their owne accord and maturitie from their native places, are better than they that are pressed, and squeased out by violence. Give without pressing; the LORD loves a cheerefull giver. This is Duplex eleemosyna; and quia damus, and quia hilariter damus:Chrysost. The good is doubled by cheerefulnesse.
2 Discreetly, not with confusion. Quod quotidic fit, moderate fiat, Sen. Give so to day, that thou mayest give to morrow. Confine not thy charity to the twelve dayes. The charitable man keepes Christmas all the yeere; gives so at once,
 that hee may give still: as wee sow the furrow, not by the bushell, but by the handfull,
3 With a right intendment; not for thy glory, but for Gods glory, Chrys. The Pharisaicall giver, Dat sibi, non Domino; gives to himselfe, not to God: hee aimes at his owne praise: what reward can he looke for? Let him pay himselfe.
4 Opportunely: for Quantum morae addis, tantum dono detrahis, Sen. The more delay in giving, the lesse honour in the gift. It is an uncharitable charity, when men will give nothing to the poore, but what they cannot make use of themselves. The mouldinesse gives their bread, the Fly gives their meate, the Moth gives their garments. CHRIST hath not their Superflua, sed reproba: though it be course, let it be wholesome; know thy best things come from Christ.
5 Lastly, before thou give thy goods to the poore, give thy selfe to God. No mans workes can please God, unlesse the person of the worker be first acceptable to him.August. So Cain offered to God Suae non se, his goods not himselfe. Non tua des, and teipsum detineas: doe not afford thy riches, and with-hold thy selfe. Ananias kept backe part of the portion, he had better have given nothing. He could never finde in his heart to bestow his estate on the poore, that denyes to consecrate himselfe to CHRIST. Some pretend that they have given themselves to GOD, but they will not part with any thing of their estates: but the Devill confutes them, Iob 2.4. Thy riches are nothing to thy selfe: spare one, spare both. By charity, give part of thy wealth to the poore, by faith, give thy whole selfe to Christ.
Applicat.Now shall I live to eat the labours of mine owne hands, to see this Sermon performed? I will not flatter you with the worlds age, as man doth himselfe with his: but say, it is old, exceeding old, white haires are upon it. Why? Charitie is cold.Hos. 9.14.Give them, O Lord; what wilt thou give? Give them drie brests and a miscarrying wombe. Wee have drie brests, there is no milke of charitie in them: and a barren or miscarrying wombe, not able to bring forth the comfortable issue of good workes. Charitie is a new commandement, and most men thinke it a new fashion. The Iesuites say we have translated Charitie out of our Bibles: but this is their old figure of lying; we finde it frequently in our Bibles: I would to God neither wee nor they had translated it out of our hearts. The Romist have a Shee-Saint, called Saint Charitie: they beg for her, and get faire Ditions and Additions of patrimonies to her Temple, or rather indeed to themselves. Let me begge for Sancta Charitas, no woman but a divine and heavenly grace, and that not more for her selfes-sake, than for your owne soules. We build great houses, but not for Charitie: many build as Vacia did, a corner for himselfe, desolate places where they may Latere,Seneca. not Vivere. Great men convey their charitie out of the Countrey, in a Caroch up to the Citie: and here contrive it into three or foure inhospitable roomes. Perhaps they keepe solemnely their owne birth-dayes, like Herod: but at Christs Birth-day they are gotten aside. They honour their owne memories, whose lives are not worth a smile: but not his without whom they had better never beene borne. Rapit aula, rapit alea: Yea, with some the chimney of Charitie is made a moveable, and carried in their pockets. Charitie is dead, yet let us mourne for her, though it were us Rachel did for her children, not to be comforted because shee is not. And albeit shee never returne, let us give her a Fare-well; Vale Charitas, Fare-well sweet Charitie. Though wee never see thee againe on earth, wee shall one day meet thee in heaven, and finde thee in the bosome of Iesus Christ.






VERSE 8.

For if these things be in you, and abound, they make you that ye shall neither be barren nor unfruitfull, in the knowledge of our Lord Iesus Christ.


OVr Apostle hath led us from vertue to vertue, as one directs a traveller from rowne to towne, till he comes to the desired Citie,Psal. 84.7. They goe on from strength to strength, till every one of them appeareth before God in Sion. H hath shewed us a golden chaine, the first linke whereof is Faith, and the last is Charitie. Now we say that we have them all: have you? then know that If they be in you, and abound, they shall keepe you from unfruitfulnesse in your profession. To prove Sanctimonium cordis, being Testimonium operis: let your outward life witnesse your inward grace.
Me thinks, I find in this verse three mysticall members of a Christian: his Heart, his Hand, and his Head. 1. If these things be in you and abound; there is his Heart. 2. They make you that yee shall not be barren nor unfruitfull: there is his Hand. 3. In the knowledge of our Lord IESUS CHRIST: there is his Head. His Head conceives CHRIST, his Heart containes CHRIST, his Hand brings forth CHRIST. 1. His Head, like Mary, coneeives the knowledge of devotion; being illuminated by the Holy Ghost. 2. His Heart travells in birth of it, growing in grace, and growing in spirit, till he be delivered. 3. His Hand, that is his life; like a mid-wife, helpes him to bring forth that blessed issue. His Head is enlightned, his Heart is enlarged, his Hand is enlivened.
If these things be in you and abound. I will not Martyr the Text, but begin as the Apostle begins, with the Heart. Wherein I coneeive foure particulars; the seed, the ground, the sowing, and the growing. 1. The seed, (...), these things. 2. The ground, (...), In you. 3. The sowing, which makes them (...), to Be in you. 4. The growing, (...): so in you that they abound and thrive. First, for the seed, and herein observe two things.
First, we make choise of our seed, and allow it good; or else expect no good harvest. He that sowes cockle, lookes not for wheate: of tares cast into the ground, we think it impossible to find barly.Gal. 6.7. Whatsoever a man sowes, that shall he also reape. Who can wonder to see him reape a curse, that hath sowen a curse! Thus it often commeth to passe, that the matter of sinne is read in the punishment; as the croppe is a remonstrance of the seed. Doth Adam sow the seed of ambition, aspiring above a man? he is brought so low as to be beholding to the beasts for apparell; there's the croppe. Caine would not offer Abel a reasting place on earth, therefore the earth shall allow him none. Rehoboam would make his finger heavier than his fathers loynes: therefore his loynes shall be made lighter than his fathers finger. Samuel hewing Agag in peeces, shewed him the harvest of his owne seed:1 Sam. 15.33. As thy sword hath made woman chidlesse, so shall thy mother be childlesse among women. If Gehasi will take Naamans iniquity he shall take Naamans leprosie, King. 22.38. The dogges licked up Ahabs bloud; why? Ahab had so served Nabaoth, Hos. 4.12. You have gone a whoring from your God; therefore, Ver. 13. Your daughters shall commit whoredome, and your spouses adulterie.Ier. 5.19. When they shall say, wherefore doth the Lord
 these things unto us? they shall be answered; as in their owne land they did worship deos non suos, strange Gods: so they shall worship their owne God in terra non sua, in a strange land. Whosoever sowes evill seeds, either in Quali or in Quanto shall reape evill fruites.
Therefore the seed must be these things: let us sow holinesse of life, that wee may reape the life of holinesse. It is Gods mercie that every sinne is not Benoni, the death of the mother; that the seed of lust does not burne up the ground: that earthinesse does not like a grave bury the soule: drunkennesse like a deluge, drowne the spirits; and Epicurisme like an infected aire, choake the vitall breath. It is a wonder that the very element of Gods fight not against him, whose sinnes fight against the maker of elements. Paul tells us, 1 Cor. 15. that wee must all die, and all rise againe: and compares us to seed sowen in the spring that is reaped in the harvest. If therefore thou wouldestf reape a glorious body, sow a gracious body. These things.
Secondly, we must have These, All these; not one or two but all. It is not enough to have faith, and leave out vertue; not knowledge without temperance, nor pietie without charitie. If thy journey be eight miles, and thou give over at the second or third; thou wilt fall short of heaven. Many will be contented with some, but few will embrace all. Men deale with God, as for their Tythes, so for their lives,Gal. 6.6. Let him that is taught communicate to his Teacher, in all his goods. (...)? In all? nay put out (In omnibus) this In all, and we will compound with you, Deut. 5.33. You shall walke in all the waies of the Lord. In all? nay put out this same (All) and we will consent to you. There are few that say;Iosh. 1.16. All that thou commandest us, we will doe. Vende omnia, Sell all thou hast, and give to the poore; this the world thinkes most unreasonable. He that hath not all saving graces in some measure, hath none in any measure. The Romists are so slaved to their superiours, that they will doe all they are commanded by them. As a desperate Roman said of Catiline; whatsoever he bids me, I will doe. But saies another, how if he should bid thee fire the Capitol? he answers, Catiline will not bid it; but if he should, I will doe it. So they must doe all the Pope chargeth them: but how if he bids them fire the Senate, blow up the Parliament? they secretly reply, he will not command it; but if he should we will doe it. They give not this obedience to God: he chargeth them not to touch his anointed ones; against this they have their exceptives. But against the Popes mandamus, there is no question, no exception, and from it lies no appeale. How insatiable mans desires are of this world! give Alexander kingdome after kingdome, he will not rest till he have all. If a covetous man had all the houses; if a Citie given him, hee would rifle for the goods in them: if hee had all the Gold and Iewells, hee would also require the garments: if hee had the Citie, hee would also challenge the suburbes: yea, All could not satisfie him. But how little grace contents us; one or two, as Ioash stroke the earth but thrice. 2 King. 13.18. wee take insatiably of earth, very moderately of heaven; as if we were afraid to have too much grace, and that it would but trouble us.
In you. Wee see the qualitie of the seed, now let us consider the nature of the ground. Mans heart is the ground for Gods seed: holy seed requires holy ground. This seed is cast in by the eare:August. for Nisi prius Deus fuerit in aure, non erit in ore, non in corde: unlesse God first come in by the eare, he will not be in the mouth, nor in the heart. But if it stay in the eare, and goe no further, it will not fructifie, Math. 13. The eare is like a pipe, made to convey water, not to containe it. The heart is that home where it should dwell: as Mary laid up CHRISTS sayings in her heart. But as corde mobili nihil mobilius: so corde nobili nihil nobilius: an inconstant heart is the basest of things, a faithfull heart the noblest. Every heart is not fit ground for this seed: therefore (seeing I am falne upon the metaphore) be pleased to consider how this ground is prepared: and to speake in the phrase of husbandrie; it must be fallowed, stirred, and laid up, before it be sowed.
It must be fallowed: the word preached is the plough to breake it up. It is broken
 up by the Law, sowed by the Gospell: break it up by Moses; sow it by IESUS. There is by nature growne over every heart a thicke and hard crust: the menace of judgements must breake this rough and tough mould. To this purpose, there is an Information by doctrine, and a reformation by discipline. There are some tender hearted; as David was snibb'd with a word, Peter with a looke. Some are quickly corrected; soft hearted children that weepe at the least chiding. Others are harder, like nettles; if you touch them gently, they will sting you. Therefore if the golden scepter cannot winne them; the yron scepter must breake them. But as we plough upon the fallowes, so we must cautelously take heed of plowing where the harrow hath gone before, so faith the Prophet; Breake up the fallow ground; the unbroken heart: but spare the already broken spirit. In you, in your selves: some can plow furrowes on others backes: so doe persecuters on the Church.Psal. 129 3. The plowers plowed upon my backe: they made long their furrowes. The slanderers harrow mens good names, Psal. 50.20. They sit and speake against their brethren, and slander their owne mothers sonnes. Vsurers harrow the estates of the poore; yea harrow and grind their very faces. Arrant and arrogant hypocrites harrow and furrow their neighbours simplicitie: but the Pharisie is no fit husband-man to plow up the Publican. But plow thy selfe, find some corner of thy heart to breake up still. Satan is founderd, and cannot walke upon rugged ground. The fallowed or or broken heart hee cannot abide; but God respects it.Psal. 51.17. A broken and contrite heart, O God, thou wilt not despise.
It must be stirred. Our backwardnesse requires continuall provocations. To bee good is a thing hardly gotten, quickly forgotten. The art of bringing mens hearts to God, hath many passages, takes many courses, tries many experiments: as indeed there are many sorts of servants. A Land-lord had summoned his tenants to doe him some service: yet being done, and they all present, the steward demands, which of them came for love, and which for mony. They that came gratis for love, were feasted in the Parlar, they that came for reward had courser fare in the Hall. One amongst the rest would chuse neither of these places, but walkes by himselfe. The steward asked him his motive of comming, whether, for love or mony; that his placce might be assigned accordingly. He replied; I come for neither love nor money, but for plaine feare, and therefore I chuse a place by my selfe. Thus some approch to God for reward, as Saul loved him for his kingdome. Some for love, as Mary that brought CHRIST a precious unction because she loved. him. Others for feare, Ahab was humbled under feare of the vengeance. Now all our endeavour is to plant in mens hearts the love of God; that they might say with Peter; Lord thou knowest that I love thee. But this is effected, sometimes by promise of reward, that they may be led by profit, Esa. 1.19. If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eate the good of the Land, Rom. 2.20. There is glory, honour, and peace, to every man that worketh good. Sometimes by threatnings, that they may be wonne by feare, Rom. 2.9. Tribulation and anguish upon every soule that doth evill, Hebr. 12.29. Our God is a consuming fire. Now though perfect love cast out servile feare; as Saint Iohn speaketh: yet filiall feare brings in perfect love, There is mercie with thee O Lord, that thou mayest be feared. It hath beene said of base feare; Degeneres animos timor arguit; that it is an argument of a base and cowardly spirit. But of this feare it is true; Regeneres animos timor arguit; that it is the argument of a regenerate and gracious spirit. He never loved God, that feares him not. With some of these the heart must be continually stirred.
It must be layed up, that is the husband-mans next course. Now the heart is laied up by faith: when a man beleeves, he is then fitted to receive any seed of goodnesse. As the Eunuch said;Act. 8.36. I beleeve, what hinders me to be baptised? So I beleeve, what hinders me to be loved, what hinders me to be blessed, what hinders mee to bee saved? Not; be it to thee according to thy faith. Humilitie, patience, charitie, are now sowen with fortunate successe: faith hath layed up the heart, Cor paratum,
 saies David: speake Lord, for my eare is open; sow Lord, for my heart is ready. Paratum ad prospera; ad adversa, ad diversa, ad universa. If adversitie comes, sow any heart with patience: if thou take back the goods which thou once gavest me, sow it with contentednesse: if prosperitie comes, sow it with thankefulnesse: if sinne, sow it with penitence: against Satans temptings, sow it with pietie: against all malicious courses, sow it with charitie. As waxe to receive the impression of a seale, so the heart is softned and tempered to receive the Image of GOD. Blessed is the ground, which the Lord hath enclosed for his owne garden.
Be in you: this is the sowing; GOD must first prepare the ground, and then sow his seed in it. It is he that unlockes the heart, to entertaine these graces. There are sixe keyes whereby things are opened or shut, that GOD hath intrusted into the hands of no other, Angell or Seraphin. The key of raine, Deut. 28.12. The Lord opens the heaven to give raine to the Land in his season. The key of food, Psal. 104.28. Thou openest thy hand, and they are filled with good. The key of the wombe, Psal. 113.9. Hee maketh the barren woman to bee a joyfull mother of children. The key of the Grave, Revel. 1.18. I have the keys of hell and of death. The key of the mouth, Psal. 51.15. O Lord open thou my lips. The key of the heart, Act. 16.14. The Lord opened the heart of Lydia. In all theseRev. 3.7. he openeth, and no man shutteth: he shutteth, and no man openeth. Now when hee hath thus opened and prepared the heart, he sowes in it this spirituall seed. Graces like good herbes, will not grow of themselves: vices like weeds, need no sowing. Man is no more borne with vertues in his soule than with apparell on his backe. It is not generation, but regeneration that sowes this seed. The seed is good, the sower is God, Gal. 5.22. Indeed there bee ministeriall deputies; so Paul plants, and Apollo waters, but still God gives the encrease. This takes away from our best workes all possibilitie of merit. A meritorious worke must be Ex proprio, and Ex indebito. First, it must be our owne: but every good gift is from the Father of lights, Iam. 1. Omne bonum nostrum, vel ipse, vel ab ipso. Secondly, it must be beyond our dutie and debt: but alas, having done our best, we are unprofitable servants. Heaven is indeed often called a Reward; not factive, but pactive; of covenant, not of merite: God gives it us, not because we have earned it, but because he hath promised it. Iustitia nec vestra, nec vera: woe to us if we had no more comfort than we deserve, Matth. 20. The last received, as the first, every man a peny. Not because they wrought harder, that came in later: as Paul that came in after the rest, yet abounded in labours above them all. But to shew that God respects not Quantum but ex quanto; the love, more than the worke. And that the reward is not of merite, but of mercie: for if it were of merite, he should have begun at the first: if it be of mercie, he may begin where he will. Thus he gives all grace to us, that we may give all glory to him.
In you, not about you, not on you, but in you. Not behind you, as Libertines that cast Gods lawes behind their backes.Psal. 50.16. They runne so fast to the Samaria of riot, that they leave Ierusalem behind them. As CHRIST said to Peter, get thee behind me: so these to goodnesse, keepe behind me, I love not to see thy face. Not before you, as worldlings that send religion afore them to threescore, but never overtake it. It keepes before them indeed, but the length of Gracious-streete; and they like Salomons foole never come neerer it than the Stockes. Moses saw Canaan before him, and desired it: these see it, and desire it not; they like the world better. Not about you; as profane persons in holy places; inter sanctos non sancte; live in the midst of vertues without vertue. That proverbe is too often justified; neerer to Church, further from God. It seemes to be taken from the Iewes; who having the greatest light, had the darkest life: the neerer they were to the Sanctuary, the further from sanctitie. Such a man may say, Inopem me copia fecit: like foolish Indians, that have store of Gold, and trucke it away for rattles. An emptie vessell bung'd up close, though you throw it into the midst of the sea, will receive no water.
 The Monastery is a place of devotion, the Monke is in the Monastery: yet perhaps the Monastery it selfe, as soone as devotion, may enter into the monke. A man may be in a holy place, yet if holinesse be not in his heart, it is not where it should be. Ismael was an unbeleever in the house of Faith, the family of Abraham. Not on you, as hypocrites; that have a shew of sanctity on them, but no substance of sanctity in them. Outwardly lambes, there is innocence on them: inwardly Wolves, there's no innocence in them. Hypocrites cover their spotted hides with the Lions skinne of Iudah, Sanctimony; so they beguile their brethren. They are alwayes proudest, that have the least cause. The utmost ambition of Iohn the Baptist, was but to untie Christs shooe: of that other Iohn, the beloved Disciple, but to leane on his brest: but Iudas the traytour will dippe with him in the dish, yea kisse his sacred lips. But there was never holinesse without humblenesse. Dyers can set on their colours the fairest glosses with Logwood, but they will not hold; when a showre comes, the glosse is gone. The glosse of profession without sinceritie will off in a storme; we must be dyed in graine to hold, and have these graces in us. The parts of ostentation are like loose corne, which the fowles pecke up. As Ierome said of the Scripture, so I may say of godlinesse: It is not In superficie and verborum foliis, sed in medulla cordis: not read in superficiall leaves and letters, but in the marrow and substance of the heart. An Hypocrites profession is in Folio, but his sincerity is so abridged, that it is contained in Decimo-sexto; nothing in the world to speake of.
But In you; what indeed hath a Christian to enjoy, but that which is in him? He may use the world, and that's without him; but he enjoyes the Lord, and he's within him, 1 Ioh. 4.16. Hast thou Christ? then he is within thee:2 Cor. 13.5. Iesus Christ is in you; or you are reprobates. Hast thou the Spirit? He is within thee, 1 Cor. 3.16. Know yee not, that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you? Hast thou peace or joy? Rom. 14.17. they are within thee; little without. Have yee the Kingdome of Heaven? Christ sayes, it is within you. The heaven that is on earth, is within us; though the heaven that is in heaven, be too great to enter into us. Therefore is it said; Enter thou into the joy of thy Lord: for it is too immense to enter into thee. Yet so much as thou art capable of, shall be within thee. Many presume there is much goodnesse within them, but through their owne blindnesse they are deceived. One writes of a widow, that being thicke-sighted sent for a Physitian to cure her: he promised her good sight, she him, good money. He comes and applies medicines, binding them over her eyes: and still as hee departs, hee carries away with him some of her best goods. Thus hee continues her paine, till he had robbed her house of all her substance. At last the cure being done, he demands his covenanted pay: but she looking about her house, replied that he had not cured her: For whereas before shee could see some goods of her owne, now she could see none: before she was thick-sighted, now poore-blinde. It is so with us; while we were dim-sighted, we imagined many goods of grace in us: but now being truely inlightned, wee confesse our selves poore: and hence fall on our knees to the Father of mercies, to supply us with his saving graces.
And abound:] this is the Growing; (...). After the ground is prepared, and the seed injected, by the Spirit of Grace fructifying is expected: they must encrease, multiply and abound. Where two things are necessarily implied:
First, these things must be in us, before they can abound,Iohn 14.21. He that hath my Commandements, and keepeth them, saith Christ, we must first have them, before wee can keepe them. Therefore auditors in hearing Sermons, should bring intention. It is ordinary with many, to commend the Lecture to others eares, but few commend it to their owne hearts. It is morally true, what the Christian tell-troth relates: A servant comming from Church, praiseth the Sermon to his master; he askes him, what was the Text: nay quoth the servant, it was begun before I came in: what then was his conclusion? he answered, I came out before it was done. But what said hee in the midst? Indeed I was asleep in the midst. Many crowd to get into the Church,
 but make no roome for the Sermon to get into them. Open thy heart so well as thine eare: if this seed be not sowen there, it will never abound with fruits to everlasting life. You come not to a banket to looke on, but to eat: hither God calls, but then Eat O my friends, Cant. 5. they are sullen guests that depart away hungry. Ezakiel was bidden to eate the roule, Chap. 3. You may taste of the heavenly gift, Hebr. 6. and feele no sweetnesse; but eat it downe, and it will be pleasant. Worldly things we seek to swallow downe: therefore Christ cals the riches of the Pharisies; (...), things within them:Iob 20.15. hee hath swallowed downe riches. But in stead of nourishment they have taken a vomit. The adulterer layes lust next to his heart; the covetous layes usury, the malicious hatred next his heart.Psal. 5.9. Their inward part is very wickednesse. But for spirituall things some Out-house serves; as Christ himselfe could be allowed no roome in the Inne; the stable is held sufficient. But doe you afford better things better places; let them be in you. Not onely in your bookes: (and yet if these things were in the worldlings bookes, hee would burne his study) nor onely in your heads; for some have much science, little conscience. Not in your mouthes onely, for many have Gravitatem in sermonibus, pravitatem in moribus; an ill course of life, with a good discourse of language. But in your hearts, a holy closet fit for such heavenly Iewels. Be sure first you have them, then next that you have encreased them.
Secondly, it is not enough to have them, but to have them in abundance. The heart is but a little peece of ground, yet hath roome enough in it for many seeds. God calls for this encrease, 2 Cor. 9.8. Rom. 15.13. Ephes. 4.15. Vera virtus tempore non clauditur, semper justior esse contendit, Bern. true vertue is not temporall, but is still ambitious of improving it selfe. The Spouse of Christ must have many jewels, Cant. 1.10. A jewell at the eare, attention to the Word: a jewell at the foot, Humilitie: a jewell on the for-head, Modesty: a jewell on the hand, Charity: a jewel on the head, Constancie: a jewell on the heart, Fidelity. He that hath a good number of these jewels, shall be admitted into the number of Gods jewels:Mal. 3.17. They shall be mine in that day, when I make up my jewels. Take the whole armour of God, Ephes. 6. one peece will not secure us; we know not which way the blow will come. If wee have onely Brest-plate, the blow may light on the head: if onely the Helmet of salvation, it may light on the brest. Therefore take the shield of faith, that covers and defends all. Mars was called Gradivus: every Christian souldiour should be gradivus; goe to heaven by degrees.
For our bodies, no care can adde to their stature, Matth. 6. But we may adde to our spirituall stature, Ephes. 4.13 growing up to the measure of the stature of the fulnesse of Christ: for Gods family admits no dwarfes. The rich man growes easily richer, the good man easily better. Rivers at the first head may be covered with a bushell, which after a few miles fill large channels. A drop of true grace workes it selfe toIoh. 7.38. Rivers of living water. So is it said of our Saviour, Luke 13.32. The third day I shall be perfected: Perfection it selfe growes to perfection; and shall not we that are imperfect strive toward it? In my Fathers house there are many mansions: not in the wildernesse,Ioh. 14.2. not in Horeb, not on the Mount, where Peter would build Tabernacles, nor in any part of this life; but in heaven: therefore still labour to grow and abound, till you come thither. If a man cast a stone into the water, circle begets circle; so one true grace will beget many. We reckon of a Physitian that hath abundance of medicines; a Lawyer that hath abundance of trickes, an Vsurer that hath abundance of moneyes, a Merchant that hath abundance of wares: we affect abundance in all perishable things: O then let us abundantly love grace, that Christ may abundantly love us.
They make you, that yee shall neither be barren nor unfruitfull. I come from the Christians Heart to his Hand; wherein wee perceive the efficacie of Grace: Shall make you. Not perswade, nor intreat, nor move, nor allure, but make you fruitfull, by a lively and strenuous operation. If Patience be in you, it will make you overcome
 injuries. If temperance, it will make you abhorre ryot. If Faith, it will make you beleeve above sense. If Charitie make you beneficiall to the poore. Evill may shew the good they have not, but good men cannot hide the good they have. It is like fire within us, it will make us speake Psal. 39.3. So powerfull, that it can neither be suppressed nor expressed. This seed shall proferre fructum; one blessing is the father of another; therefore Christen every blessing Ioseph, upon Rachels faith and argument;Gen. 30.24. God will adde to me another sonne.
Here is a kind of certaintie in this ((...)) constitution: as sinne will make a man fruitfull in naughtinesse, so pietie in holinesse. As there is a relation betwixt this life and the next, by an unchangeable ordinance of God. Mischiefe in this world, miserie in the world to come: no repentance here, no salvation there: a devill on earth, no Saint in heaven. But holinesse in the seed, shall have happinesse in the harvest: if the course bee gracious, the end shall be glorious.Eph. 6.8. Whatsoever good thing any man doth, the same shall hee receive of the Lord. So there is a relation in this life betwixt the disposition and the actions. If the heart be full of lust, the tongue will be a trumpet of impudence, the eyes windowes of temptation, the gestures so many remonstrances of ready prostitution: all the wheeles being like apt enginers, employed on the wills businesse. If avarice sit in the heart, like an Epicure to feast on gold; oppression shall be the purveyer to provide it, Brokage the Cater to fetch it in, Vsurie the Cooke to dresse it, and destruction the stomach to digest it. What evill seed is within, will appeare without. And so if grace have Existentiam, a being: it will have apparentiam, a manifestation. Hath David Hope? he will wnite for a kingdome in the extremitie of persecution. Hath Abraham faith? he will not deny to God, his onely son. Hath Iob patience? he will brooke all crosses with an unmoved quietnesse. Hath Daniel temperance? he will not bee enticed with the Kings dainties. Hath Ioseph chastitie? he will never come neere his mistresses chamber. Hath Paul fortitude? he dares fight with beasts at Ephesus. Hath Stephen a faithfull resolution? he will be content to die for CHRIST, and be rained to death with a showre of stones. Needs must that vertue be fruitfull that is stirring, and needs must that be stirring that is living, and needs must that be living that is quickned by Iesus Christ.
Neither barren nor unfruitfull: here is a double effect; expressed negatively, but implying an affirmative or positive consequent; Pregnancie and fertilitie. (...). For if those privatives, barrennesse and unfruitfulnesse bee taken away; there will necessarily follow a position of those contrary habits. It may bee they both signifie one thing, I am sure they intend both one sense. Yet I will take leave to resolve, them into a double metaphore; Pregnancie ot the wombe, fertilitie to the ground.
Not barren; the barren wombe hath ever beene held a curse and a reproch. So Iohns mother insinuates:Luk. 1.25. The Lord hath looked on me, to take away my reproch among men. When Rachel bore Ioseph, she said, God hath taken away my reproch, Gen. 30.23. Whether carnall barrennesse be a curse or not, I am sure spirituall is no lesse.Hos. 9.14. Give them, O Lord: what wilt thou give? give them a miscarrying wombe and dry brests. When God gives salvation, he is said to take away barrennesse. Sing O barren, thou that didst not beare, Esa. 54.1. Now only GOD can open both the wombes; of Rachels flesh, and of Lydias heart, Gen. 30.22. Act. 16.14. If the Lord propagate Abrahams carnall seed, much more his spirituall;Ioh. 1.13. who are borne, not of bloud, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. It is often observable in the scripture, that the children of women long barren proved most famous and excellent. Of Sara, Isaac, from whose loines such multitudes were deduced. Of Rachel, Ioseph, that wonder of men and Angels. Of Anna Samuel, that great Prophet and Priest of the Lord. Of Elizabeth, Iohn. the Baptist; of whom the Lord himselfe testifies;Matth. 11.11. Among them that are borne of women, there hath not risen a greater. So these Saints that have beene begotten of spirituall barrennesse, and converted
 from a sinfull life wherein they were habituated; have proved most notable instruments of Gods glory. As Mary Magdalen that was dispossest of seven divells, was so honoured as to preach the first Sermon of CHRISTS resurrection, and to have her memorie propagated with the glorious Gospell, Matth. 26.13. Zacheus, a Publican, an extorting Publican, a rich extortioner; yet how gracious was hee to CHRIST, yea how gracious was CHRIST to him! Luk. 19. Paul borne out of due time, 1 Cor. 15. yet outstripped the rest; and was in labours more abundant than they all, ver. 10. Thus ultimi have beene optimi, as the last grapes make the sweetst wine. When GOD opens the barren wombe, hee brings forth the excellentest children to CHRIST.Matth. 19.30 Many that are first, shall be last, and the last shall be first. The last of all prove not the least of all, yea often the best of all.
Now to take away barrennesse from the spirituall wombe, there is required this proceeding: by preparation, by conception, by pregnancie and by birth.
First, the wombe must be prepared: for barrennesse is upon all soules by nature. Therefore let us desire of God, as Rachel begged of Leah:Gen. 30.14. give me, I pray thee, of thy sonnes mandrakes. Little Reuben had gathered sweet flowers in the field: Rachel hath a mind to them: Epiphanius thinkes, to helpe her barrennesse. Pererius observes out of Avicen, that the seed of it doth purge Locum conceptionis. Some have taken those mandrakes for Lilies, and some for Violets: but certainly they were amiable flowers, such as they wont to strew on the bridall beds. Beseech we the Lord to strow the beds of our hearts with such mandrakes, Cant. 7.13. The mandrakes give a smell: those holy seeds of grace will take away our barrennesse, and prepare our soules for a holy conception. Yea CHRIST must interceed for us, as Isaac intreated for Rebecca, because shee was barren: and the Lord will bee intreated of him, Gen. 25.21.
In the second place followes conception, and this is by illumination and sanctified knowledge. Ignorant Papists gloriously boast their famous progenie of good workes: but can a woman bring forth before she hath conceived? Such a progenie were a prodigie. Therefore first,Psal. 86.11. Teach me thy way O Lord, and then I will walke in thy truth. And Psal. 119.27. First, make me to understand the way of thy precepts: so shall I talke of thy wondrous workes. If they were examined as Philip questioned the Eunuch, Act. 8. Vnderstandest thou what thou readest? their negative answer would declare their soule not to be with child of grace. Thou maiest have a swelling, as the Pharisie, (Luke 18. I am not as other men, etc.) imagine thy selfe pregnant, pro^ide thee a midwife, that's ostentation, to deliver thee; and Gossips, flatterers, to witnesse for thee: but all is but a Timpanie: when death, that infallible midwife comes; thou art delivered of nothing but wind, vaineglory. CHRIST calls himselfe the Way, the Truth, and the Life. He that by understanding conceives not the way cannot in heart beare the truth, shall not in successe bring forth everlasting life. You shall have a Pharisaicall Benefactor call together his GossipsMatth. 6.2. with a trumpet in the Synagogue, as if he would ring them to Church with a Saints-bell; to behold what? his deliverie: of what? of almes. Almes? very well; let us have some more such travails: nay, all is but some windy exhalation. Perhaps he hath got in some desperate forfeiture, and now he will glase a Church window with it; and that's all. Spectatum admissi risum teneatis?
Thirdly, after conception appeares pregnancie, Grace is borne in the heart by faith and is sensibly felt. If therefore thou hast conceived it, thou shalt feele it move in thy soule: as Iohn sprung in the wombe of his mother at the salutation of Mary, Luk. 1.41. The pregnant woman hath many qualmes; the soule in this plight feeles many pangs; and is in Rebecca's case, when theGen. 25.22. twinne-brothers struggled together within her. If Esau had beene there alone, there had beene no contention: but when she hath also conceived a Iacob, that is Spirit; Esau the flesh will oppugne it. Nature can agree with it selfe, but not with grace.Gal. 5.17. The flesh lusteth against the spirit, and
 the spirit lusteth against the flesh: and these are contrary the one to the other. No soule beares grace without sorrow, and compunction of heart for her sins.Ioh. 16.21 A woman when she is in travaile hath sorrow. Mans first and second birth begins in crying, Iohn 3.3. Except a man be borne againe, he cannot see the kingdome of God. Except a man be once borne, he never can see the light on earth: except he be twice borne, he never can see the light of heaven. There is Dolor in utroque partu, but here's the difference: after the sorrow of the first birth, comes more sorrow: after the sorrow of the second, comes eternall joy, Gal. 4.19. My little children, of whom I travaile in birth againe, till CHRIST be formed in you. Dolet Pater ministerialis, etc. Thy spirituall father hath paine in begetting, thy spirituall mother in bearing, and dost thou the child borne expect indolencie and immunitie from sorrow? yea all plead conception, I aske you for your pangs: when stood your eyes full of teares, your hearts painting with grones, your prayers beating at heaven gates with importunities? Shew your maternos nixus: mothers have timores, ante partum, dolores, in partu, languores post partum; feares before their deliverie, sorrowes in their deliverie, languishments after their deliverie. Mary Magdalens soule had no sooner conceived grace but she wept, and washed Christs feete with her teares.
Lastly, comes the production or bringing forth, which is done by active obedience. Conception is Gratia infusa, Pregnancie is Gratia diffusa, bringing forth is Gratia effusa. Dost thou presume in thy soule the conception and pregnaneie of grace, and yet leadest a profane, covetous, or dissolute life? Thou sai'st no; I have thy word to the contrary: but thy life saies yea, I have not thy worke to the contrary: whether thou say, No or yea, God and thy owne heart knowes the contrary. Shall we say with the Prophet; It is brought to the birth, and there is no power to bring foorth? No, though it be often so with the body, it is never so with the soule: if the heart have conceived, it will bring forth. The penitent malefactor on the Crosse no sooner had his barrennesse taken away, but presently he brought forth fruit: hee condemneth himselfe, reproveth the other, justifieth CHRIST, glorifieth God. Store of good children are not naturally borne on the suddaine: butEsa. 66.9. shall I bring to the birth, and not cause to bring forth, saith the Lord? Saving grace hath more validitie than nature he that gives strength to conceive, denies not strength to bring forth: that soule shallPsal. 113.9. be a joyfull mother of many children. Yea God can give Partum sine dolore, birth without paine, Esa. 66.7. Before shee travailed, shee brought forth: before her paine came, she was delivered of a man child. We read of Cornelius his good workes, we read not of his teares, Act. 10. Indeed this is a great wonder, Esa. 66.8. Who hath heard such a thing? who hath seene such things? shall the earth be made to bring forth in one day, or shall a nation be borne at once? for as soone as Syon travelled, shee brought forth her children. Nor eare hath heard, nor eye hath seene the like: yet God is the worker of such miracles. That a soule which hath long beene barren, shall in one day bee set a teeming, and produce gracious fruit to CHRIST.
But where not be our Births! Leah in her old age groweth barren, and ceaseth to bring forth children to her husband CHRIST. Our Saviour delighteth himselfe with his Rachel, the Church triumphant in heaven, now almost compleate. Leah the Church militant ceaseth to beare, and will so continue; except she give her sonnes mandrakes for her husbands companie, Gen. 30. for sake her worldly pleasures wherewith she is surfeted. I confesse, these are breeding daies: and as we say, that the meanes of begetting hath more encreased mankind, than the end: so there bee spirituall births enough, but they are bastards: our sonnes are our sinnes. As one writes of the Popish Clergie; who refuse a lawfull wife, to abuse an unlawfull harlot: Deus in ira abstulit filios Diabolus in nequitia dedit nepotes. God in his just anger tooke away their children, the devill in his wickednesse hath given them bastards. So also are we barren soules to produce Natos, lawfull children, good workes: plentifull to produce Nothos, unlawfull fruites, wicked sinnes. Legitimate workes are few, illegitimate many. The Romans had their Nothia. Legacies and inheritances
 given to their bastards: so we dedicate and bequeath all our desires, and delights, and meanes, to our iniquities.Iames 1.15. Then when lust hath conceived, it bringeth forth sinne: and sinne, when it is finished, bringeth forth death. Lust when it hath conceived, [there is the Conception of sinne] bringeth forth sinne, [there is the Birth of it.] Sinne when it is finished, [there is the Growth of it] bringeth forth death, [there is the End of it.] It hath a father, a mother, a mid-wife, a nurse. The Devill by suggesting, begets sinne as the father: Lust, by imagining, conceives sinne as the mother: Consent, by agreeing, brings it forth as the mid-wife: Custome, by indulgence, brings it up as the nurse. Here is now no barrennesse! The Devill was never more busie to beget sin: Concupiscence never more pregnant to conceive it: Consent never more readie to act it: Custome never more strong to continue it. Such a brood you have, Psalm: 7.14. There is longing, conception, birth. Such another, Iob 15.35. They conceive mischiefe, bring forth vanitie, and their belly prepareth deceit. Here is a quicke dispatch; they are no sooner delivered, but their belly prepares deceit; to it againe incontinently. These are monstrous births; it is pitie that they are not abortive, and never suffered to see the light. Such a mother may curse the fruit of her owne wombe.
You see we are not barren: but better no light than that which burnes us: better no children than bastards. Let us never give life to that, which gives death to us. Leah said of Reuben, This sonne shall comfort me: Wee may say of our iniquitie, This sinne will afflict me. Many soules are pregnant, but they bring not forth a son of grace, but a daughter of the flesh: it is a daughter, not a sonne. The Iewes have often beene deluded in expectation of their Messias: among the rest I have heard this story reported for one. A Christian was exceedingly in love with a Iewes daughter; who also so over-affected him, that though shee might not marry him, yet suffered her selfe to be begot with childe by him. This being perceived, according to their law she must be put to death for it. Her betrothed lover desiring to save her, addrest himselfe like a shining Angell, and taking the benefit of the Moone, called to them in a shrill voice, to spare her: affirming that she was with childe of the Messias. This was easily credited, her fault acquitted, her life spared. Now when the time of her delivery approched, the expectant Iewes swarmed thither in multitudes. Delivered she was, but to their mockery and shame, not of a sonne, but of a daughter. At nine moneths end, that virgin-Iewesse was brought to bed of a Florentine daughter. After such a manner many timpanous spirits in the world doe travaile; but when the childe is borne, it is not a Sonne of the Spirit, but a daughter of Concupiscence. Parturiunt montes, excurrit ridiculus mus.
If this be the progenie, barrennesse is rather blessednesse: God make us all barren of sinnes, but fruitfull of graces, pregnant of salvation: that we may conceive, beare, and bring forth Christ. Indeed he had but one carnall mother, but many spirituall.Matt. 12.50. He that doth my Fathers will, is my mother. Indeed this is a conception which the world never conceived; but it is true from the mouth of Truth it selfe. Doest thou beleeve and obey? thou art Christs mother. When a woman said, Luk. 11.27. Blessed is the wombe that bare thee, and the paps which thou hast sucked: hee answered; Yea, thou sayest true, she is blessed indeed, and all generations shall call her blessed. But I will tell thee who are rather blessed; They that heare the Word of God and keepe it. Mary her selfe was Beatior percipiendo fidem, quam concipiendo carnem Christi, Aug. She was more blessed in receiving the faith of Christ, than in conceiving the flesh of Christ. Otherwise he might have beene her Sonne, and not her Saviour.
Not unfruitfull. Fruitfulnesse is that inseparable effect, which GOD expects from every tree planted in his Garden. Is Sion his ground? it must bee fruitfull, Esay 5. Is the man of Iudah his plant? he must be fruitfull? Is the Church his Vineyard? He goes thither to gather fruits. The effect of sanctified knowledge, is fruits, Phil. 1.11. Art thou the Spouse of Christ? thou art fruitfull, Rom. 7.4. We are married to Christ, that we should bring forth fruit unto God. Hast thou the Spirit? it
 appeares in the fruits, Gal. 5.22. The fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, etc. Hath a man knowne Christ? it is seene in the fruits, Luke 6.44. For every tree is knowne by his owne fruit. Good workes are compared to fruits, for two speciall resemblances; Odour and Taste.
For Odour, God is pleased with the smell of our graces.Gen. 27.27. See, the smell of my Son is as the smell of a field, which the Lord hath blessed, Cant. 7.13. The Mandrakes give a pleasant smell. Not that our good workes smell fragrantly of themselves, but in the merits of Christ, Cant. 1.3. The virgin soules espoused to Christ, get their husbands flowers: his perfumes make them sweet.Psal. 45.8. All thy garments smell of Myrrhe, Aloes, and Cassia. Thy Garments: our clothes hide but a rotten carcase, perhaps a rotten conscience: Christs garments are truly sweet. Thy garments: our best righteousnesse is lothsome rags, Esay 64.6. All thine, thy justice, thy mercy, thy grace, thy satisfaction, thy obedience: All; there is not a hem of thy vesture, but if it be touched with the hand of faith, is healing and saving. They smell of Myrrhe, Aloes, and Cassia: they are confortative, Psal. 94.19. In the midst of my sorrowes thy comforts delight my soule. Purgative; Heb. 9.14. they cleanse our consciences. Sanative; 1 Pet. 2.24. By his stripes we are healed. In his merits our Mandrakes give a pleasant smell. Now that this sweet Odour may be in our workes, we must be sure to take out the sent of Adam, the ill savour of our native corruption. Our prayers arePsal. 141.2. as Incense, and the lifting up of our hands, as an evening sacrifice: Yet, Non speciosa laus in ore peccatoris; Praise is not seemly in the mouth of a sinner. It is like Sampsons honey out of the mouth of a dead beast. if you walke contrary to me,Levit. 26.31. I will not smell the savour of your sweet Odours But if it be sanctified, it is an odour of a sweet smell, a sacrifice well pleasing to God, Phil. 4.18. If charitie toward some, be separated from equity towards others; That sacrifice of almes is mingled with bloud; as Pilate served those, whose bloud he mingled with the bloud of their sacrifices, Luke 13. The forme of a worke is the life of it: and God may say, as the Poet did to the harsh repeater of his verses; Quem recitas meus est, etc. The good matter is mine, the corrupt manner is thine.
For Taste, some fruits have a sweet smell, but a bitter rellish. The actions of the Pharisies smelt well, but when they came to bee tasted, they were Rue and Worme-wood. The Gospell calls for rellishable fruits; not such as impietie produceth, Rom. 6.21. What fruit had you then in those things, whereof you are not ashamed? But vers. 22. fruits unto holinesse, the end whereof is everlasting life. It is not enough to avoid barrennesse, but to manifest fruitfulnesse, 1 Pet. 3.11. To eschew evill, that is the first lesson of Christianitie, but not all: to doe good, is the perfection, 2 Tim. 2.19. Let every one that calls on the name of the Lord, depart from iniquitie: that is one step, but not high enough: we must also doe the will of our Father. The forbearance of sinne doth but bring Christ unto our doores; it is fruitfulnesse in good, that settles him in our hearts.
In the knowledge of our LORD IESUS CHRIST. It is saving knowledge that takes away barrennesse, and makes us fruitfull in the workes of obedience.1 Cor. 9.7. Who planteth a vineyard, and eateth not of the fruit thereof? Wee expect this of the earth that hath only nature: and shall not God expect it of us, who have sense to governe nature, reason to governe sense, grace to governe reason, IESUS CHRIST to governe all? The knowledge of our blessed Saviour is sweet and publicke: now after this confessed sweetnesse, how bitter would that question bee, if I should dispute whether this knowledge bee truely in us or not? Wee say, wee know him: but1 Iohn 2.3. Hereby we know that we know him, if we keepe his Commandements. And now the question growes bitterer and bitterer; from Worme-wood to Gall. Let us appeale from mens lippes to their lives: hee that obeyes him not, knowes him not, 1 Cor. 2.8. If the Princes of this world had knowne, they would not have crucified the LORD of Glory. If wee know him, wee will not againe crucifie our blessed Saviour; and take upon us their office, whom wee so condemne; Iudas his to betray him, Pilates to condemne him, the souldiers to crucifie him, Heb. 10.29.
 If he that despised Moses Law, died without mercy; what punishment is he worthy of, that treads under foot the Sonne of God? Prophane Christians are worse than the Iewes: they threw CHRIST downe, but did not tread upon him: these tread under feete that sacred bloud. When the Iew wounded him, out came bloud: when the Gentile wounded him, out came bloud and water: when the Christian shall wound him, out will come bloud and fire. Paul calls Christ That Rocke: when Moses smote the rocke, out came water: if we strike it, out will come bloudie water: not to purge us, but to judge us; at that day when we shall see him whom wee have pierced. We attaine that now by the Spirit of the Gospell, which we could not by the letter of the Law. The Apostle calls that a killing letter; so it was mortua, dead: and mortifera, deadly: for sinne was by the Law, and death by sinne. But if faith doe not give us Christ, we are still under the Law; and if our obedience doe not testifie our faith, the Law was not more deadly than is the Gospell to us: for it enhaunceth our condemnation, Matth. 21.44. Christ calls himselfe That Stone: we may be built on it, we may be spilt by it, according to our usage of it.
Circumstances of a sinne give aggravation to it; Non quod dissimilis res sit, sed persona; The action is varied according to the person. We expect better things of well-promising professours, than of impudent and prostituted libertines. Shall an Officer that reformes the Tap-house, be himselfe found in a Brothell-house? Were it not strange that the Witch should tell the Iuggler, he hath a bad conscience? Or that the Hypocrite should raile at the Player? Or the Vsurer challenge the theefe? Or the Lay-Parson with his sacrilegious Impropriation, blame the poore Vicar for looking narrowly to his poore remnants? It is all one as if he that hath taken away my house, should finde fault with me for putting on my cloake. The dissolute shall speed better than the hypocrite; and lukewarmenesse is more offensive to Gods stomacke than frost-coldnesse. The Thistle in the forrest shall not fare so ill, as the barren Fig-tree in the vine-yard. Therefore,Hos. 4.15. though Israel hath played the harlot, let not Iudah transgresse. The offering brought with unhallowed hands, is worse than none at all. Sole and Sale nihil utilius; Nothing more usefull than Ligh^ and Salt. Yet for the Light, Matth. 6.23. If it be darknesse, how great is that darkenesse! And for Salt, Matth. 5.13. If it have lost the savour, wherewith shall it be salted? Though men be never so profound in knowledge, if they be prophane in conversation, their Salt is lost. Salt keepes other things from putrefaction, but if it be putrefied it selfe, what should season it? A sweet singer delights us all: but Quis medebitur cantatori a serpente percusso? If a Serpent hath stung him, who shall recover his voyce? If the eye be out, what shall looke to the eye? The Manna kept, and not spent, rotted: good gifts smothered will come to nothing. Sampson lost his strength in Dalila's lap, the strength of grace is lost in idlenesse. If Ierusalem forget her first love, presently her right-hand forgets her cunning, Matth. 5.13. There are three things observable in the infatuated Salt. 1. The difficultie to be recovered, Wherewith shall it be salted? 2. The unprofitablenesse; It is good for nothing. 3. The contempt and scorne, It is cast out and trodden under foot of men. Neither is the unprofitable Minister only this unsavoury salt; though Christ directed that speech to his Apostles. If they be tenebrosae lucernae, darke lanternes; if any fault be in those lights, the whole Parish is full of snuffers: But also even every professour of godlinesse, that hath denied the power thereof, 2 Tim. 3.5.
Such an one like lost salt, is good for nothing. For, Ad nihilum valet, quod non valet ad finem suum; That is good for nothing, that is, not good for the end and purpose why it was made. If a knife be not good to cut, we say it is good for nothing: yet it may be put to some other use. If a plough be not good to breake the ground, we say it is good for nothing; yet it may stoppe a gappe. If a hound be not good to hunt, wee say he is good for nothing; yet he may in the night give warning of a theefe. But if a Professour bee not good for honestie, hee is indeed good for nothing. Corruptio optimi pessima: The dead body of a man is more offensive than the
 carcase of a beast. Putrified flowers stinke worse than weeds. A surfet of bread (though it be the staffe of life) is the most dangerous surfet.Ezek. 15.3. Sonne of man, what is the Vine? Shall the wood thereof be taken to doe any worke? or will men take a pinne of it to hang any vessell on? The Vine fruitlesse, is of all trees most uselesse. Though it be compared to divers noble and worthy things: the Tribe of Iudah is called a Vine, Esay 5. The good woman a Vine, Psal. 128.3. Vxor tua sicut vitis abundans; Thy wife shall be as a fruitfull Vine. The best man a Vine, Iohn 15.1. Ego sum vitis: though it be the Vine that cheareth the heart of God and man, Iudg. 9.13. Yet if this Vine be fruitlesse, it is good for nothing, not so much as to make a pinne to hang a hat on. Oakes and Cedars are good for building, Poplars for pales, very bushes for hedging, doted wood for firing: but the fruitlesse Vine is good for nothing.
It is observable that the refuse of other things have their uses. Sowre wine will make vineger; old rags paper; lees are for Dyers; soile and rubbish is good to fat the ground; pot-sheards and broken tiles to mend high-wayes; yea, they offer to sell combing of haires; Ladies and Gentle-women know, if they be good for any purpose. But the fruitlesse Vine, the savourlesse salt, the lightlesse lampe, the gracelesse Christian, is good for nothing. Let all yeeld to him, if he be fruitfull; let him yeeld to all, if he be barren. The daughter of Sion would never have beene so notorious a harlot, had she not beene first so rare a virgin. Iulian had beene lesse damned, had he never beene a Christian.
Consider the fearefulnesse of their judgement, Iohn 15.2. and 6. where you finde seven degrees of their fall: 1. They beare no fruit, this is their first step to hell. 2. Bearing no fruit, They are cut away from the Vine: Insition is blessed, but Abscission most wretched.Luke 13 7. Cut it downe, why cumbreth it the ground? To be excommucated from IESUS CHRIST, is most accursed. 3. Being cut from the Vine, They are cast out of the Vineyard: The prayers of the Church are not heard for them, nor are they suffered toEsay 66.11. sucke on the brests of her consolation. 4. Being cast out of the vineyard, they wither: needs must that branch wither, that receives no life of sap from him, that gives the sap of life unto all. 5. Being withered, they are bound into fagots, like the Tares into bundles, Matth. 13.30. Not all knit into one, but many severall fagots. An adulterer with his adulteresse make one fagot. A drunkard with his pot-companion, another fagot. A Seminary with a traytour, another fagot. The Extortioner and his Broker, another fagot. The Whore-master and his Pandar, another fagot. All shall not be punished in the same degree, albeit in the same torment. 6. Being thus fagotted and coupled together, They are cast into the fire; the most terrible of all tortures. 7. Lastly, being cast into the fire, they burne and frie in those quenchlesse flames, Marke 9.48. Where the worme dieth not, and the fire is not quenched. In comparison whereof, our earthly fire is no more than if it were but painted. They are ever frying, never dying: in universall and eternall anguish. Vniversall upon every part of bodie and soule. For the bodie, Matth. 22.13. They are bound hand and foote, and crowded into a prison of outer darkenesse: like brickes in a firy furnace, not able to wrinch; having not so much as a chinke where any coole winde may enter in to refresh them. Their seeing, affrighted with ugly Devils and darkenesse: their hearing, with hideous outcries: their smelling, with the odious stenches of the filthy bodies under torture: their taste, with a raging thirst: (begging one droppe of ungranted water, Luke 16.24.) and a ravening hunger, biting their tongues for anguish: their feeling, afflicted with insufferable torments,Rev. 19.20. In a lake of fire burning with brimstone. And now if the paine of the bodie bee but as it were the bodie of paine; the soule of torment is the torment of the soule. The phantasie distracted with horride imaginations, like a melancholy mans frightfull dreames, Wisd. 17.3. Being horribly astonished with strange apparitions; sad visions appearing to them with heavie countenances. The will is vexed, that it must have the will in nothing. The
 memorie with a fixed recordation of passed things; what it once enjoyed, what it now suffereth, and what it must suffer for ever. It can thinke of nothing to administer comfort: that it was once happy more afflicts it. Now as the reprobates commit two evills, Ierem. 2.13. forsaking the fountaine of living waters, and fall to the broken cisternes of their owne digging: as there is in sinne an aversion from the Creator, and a conversion to the creature: so there is in punishment; for aversion, Paena damni, the punishment of losse, a privation of all blessed comforts; for conversion to the creature, Paena sensus, a punishment of sense, a position of all possible plagues. This is manifest by the rejection, Matth. 25.41. Depart from me; from me your Redeemer, from me that made my selfe man for your sakes, from mee that received such wounds for your remedie, from me that invited you with pardon, but you would none. Therefore depart from Me, from my friendship, from my protection, from my presence, from my Paradise, from my kingdome, from my sight: and from all those that goe with me, Quires of glorious Angels, communion of blessed Saints: this is the privation. Into everlasting fire, theres the postion: a fearefull place! God grant we may never know more of it than by hearesay. I have beene content to urge the danger of unfruitfulnesse, that you may prevent it: as Nineveh overthrew the message of her overthrow by her repentance: her sinnes were destroyed and her selfe stood. So may our provision of those torments in thought, be the prevention of them in sense! Saepe Deus minatur quod faciat, ut non faciat quod minatur. God, in his mercie, threatens before he punish; that hee may not punish as he threatens. What David said of his enemies,Psal. 55.15. Let them goe downe quicke into hell; wee may in another sense wish to our selves, our best friends. Descend we every day into hell by meditation, that at the last day we may not descend thither by condemnation. Let us often goe to hell while we live, that we may not come thither when we are dead. Recollect we our selves, and become fruitfull trees; that when GOD transplants us from this nursery, hee may set us in his owne glorious garden. The fruits of the earth spring, bud, grow greene, grow ripe, and then wither: but the fruits of the spirit shall never decay. If they have filled GODS vineyard on earth, they shall flourish in his Eden of heaven for ever.
In the knowledge of our Lord Iesus Christ. The object of our knowledge here is our blessed Saviour comfortably described to us in foure Attributes. 1. Our. 2. LORD. 3. IESUS. 4. CHRIST. Vt Dominus potest, ut Iesus vult, ut Christus facit, ut noster debet. As he is LORD hee can, as hee is IESUS will, as hee is Christ hee doth, as hee is Our he should, save us. Lord, ecce potestatem, consider his mightinesse. Iesus, ecce suavitatem, consider his sweetnesse. CHRIST, ecce voluntatem, consider his willingnesse. Our, ecce bonitatem, consider his goodnesse that gives us interest in himselfe, and vouchsafes us to chalenge his mercie. Lord, ratione Dominionis, in regard of his Dominion,Psal. 99.1. The Lord raigneth let the people tremble: he sitteth betweene the Cherubins, let the earth be moved. Iesus, ratione salutis, in regard of his salvation;Psal. 68.20. He that is our God is the God of our salvation; who came into the world to save sinners. Christ, ratione Promissionis, in regard of the promise. God did promise him, and the Iewes expected him under the name of Christ, Ioh. 7.26. Doe the rulers know indeed that this is the very Christ? ver. 41. This is the Christ. Our, ratione appropinquationis, in regard of his appropriating himselfe unto us, not taking on him the nature of Angels, but the seed of Abraham, Hebr. 2.16. He tooke our flesh, that we might take of his spirit; and thus gave us an interest in himselfe. Our Advocate, 1 Ioh. 2. Wee have an Advocate with the Father, Iesus Christ the righteous: Our LORD, Our IESUS, Our CHRIST. Againe Iesus in facto, Noster in pacto. Lord in his power, his workes declare him to be the Lord; who doth what he will in heaven, in earth, in the sea, and in all deepe places, Psal. 135.6. The same workes that the father doth, doth the sonne also. Iesus in being made; hee that is the LORD the Creator, was made Iesus a creature, Gal. 4.4. made of a woman, Ioh. 1.14. The word was made flesh. Verbum, quid potentius? Caro,
 quid impotentius? factum, quid mirabilus? The word, what more powerfull? Flesh what more feeble? Made, what more wonderfull? Christ, in being sacrificed and crucified for us: broken for our transgressions, 1 Cor. 11.24. Take, eate, this is my body which is broken for you. The Israelites did eate Agnum assum, a Lambe rosted: we Agnum passum, the Lambe of God crucified. He was broken for us: breaking is taken from an alteration of the good estate of the body. So it is said, age breakes a man. Moses was 120. yeares old when he died, yet was not his naturall force broken, Deut. 34.7. It was recorded as a matter of admiration, Psal. 38.8. I am feeble and sore broken: sorrow breakes a man. Our Saviour though he was young, and of a most excellent constitution, yet was thus broken. Nec color nec decor in eo; no forme or comelinesse in him; why because he was Vir dolorum; a man of sorrowes, Esa. 53. But what is age, sicknesse, and sorrow, to the hand of God? The Lord did breake him, Iob 13.25. Wilt thou breake a leafe driven to and fro? As a Lyon,Esa. 38.13. so will hee breake all my bones, Psal. 51.8. make me to heare of joy and gladnesse; that the bones which thou hast broken may rejoyce. Christ was broken in all parts of his flesh, his head with thornes, his backe with scourges, his hands and feete with nailes, his side with a speare: onely (that the scripture might be fulfilled) not a bone of him was broken. Our in respect of the covenant, Novum faedus, Hebr. 8.10. Ero Deus vester, I will be your God, and you shall be my people. Infinite mercie; theLuk. 2.26. Lords Christ. is become our Iesus.
The summe of the Instruction is to teach us how to know our Saviour; as Lord as Iesus, as Christ, as Our LORD IESUS CHRIST. He is LORD, let us know his Majestie: Iesus, let us know his mercie: Christ, know his Office: Ours, know our owne interest in him.
LORD, in this title consider his power: know him Hominem verum, but not Hominem merum, Rom. 9.5. He is of Israel concerning the flesh, but also over all, God blessed for ever, Amen. Col. 1.2. Grace from the Lord Iesus; from him as God, as the Fountaine of Grace, 2 Pet. 1.1. Grace and Peace Through the Lord Iesus; through him as mediator, as the Conduct-pipe to derive it to us. LORD, this title is given him to distinguish and declare his power: as in waightie Proclamations Kings set downe their names with their titles. So Exod. 34.6. The Lord, the Lord God, mercifull, gratious, etc. Whatsoever the father did to us, Christ did also, to prove him, LORD. Did the father create us? so doth the sonne, Col. 1.16. By him were all things made; by him, that is there called the Image of the invisible God, and first borne of every creature. Doth the father uphold the world by his providence? so doth the sonne, Hebr. 1.3. He upholdeth all things by the word of his power. Doth the father regenerate us? so doth the sonne, Col. 2.13. Doth the father raise the dead? so doth the sonne, Ioh. 5.21. As the Father quickeneth them, so the Sonne quickneth whom he will. Therefore is the sonne called Pater aeternitatis, Esa. 9.6. The everlasting Father. Deus tantus in filio, quantus in seipso. God is as Almightie in his Sonne, as he is in himselfe. This is a mysterie; Praesumptio inquirere, pietas credere, aeterna vita cognoscere. To search too farre into it, is presumption: to beleeve it, is godlinesse: to know it, is everlasting blessednesse.
IESUS, in this contemplate his mercy, Mat. 1.21. He hath not name for no cause: the Angel gives the For: Thou shalt call his name IESUS; For he shall save his people from their sinnes. IESUS is his name, and salvation is with him.Matth. 1.21. He that truely knowes this IESUS, knowes him both God and man, one Person, our Saviour. The word IESUS hath but three terminations among the Latines; IESUS, IESU, IESUM. Take the three last letters, and they make SVM, I Am, the incommunicable name of God. Therefore as the Apostle did in their Epistles, so let us in our hearts, evermore joyne IESUS with God the Father. 1. BecauseIoh. 5.23. he that honoureth not the Sonne, honoureth not the Father: he that dishonours one Person of the Trinitie, dishonours all. 2. Because all good from God to us is by IESUS: for otherwise we may have riches, and honours, and worldly possessions;
 but not have them as mercies. No man comfortably knoweth God but by Iesus: there is no fafe venturing on that infinite Iustice, without mercie at the right hand of it.
CHRIST, in this, meditate on his office, and the purpose of his comming, which was to redeeme us.Ioh 3.17. For God sent not his Son to condemne the world, but that the world through him might bee saved, Ioh. 12.47. I came not to judge the world, but to save the world. For this end he was appointed and annointed, Luk. 4.18. The Lord hath annointed me to heale the broken hearted, etc. Now let not Gods purpose be frustrated: Deus misit quem promisit: doe thou entertaine him into a pure heart. When Martha told her sister Mary secretly; The Lord is come;Ioh 11.29. shee as soone as she heard it, arose quickly, and came unto him. The Messias, the Christ, the Redeemer is come; that blessed high Priest that offer'd up himselfe an expiatory sacrifice for us; now arise, let us goe and meete him.
Our Lord Iesus Christ, in this observe his performance, and free donation of himselfe to us. He is not only The Lord, and the Iesus, and The Christ, but Ours. Whatsoever he did or suffered, was for us, Dan. 9.26. The Messiah shall be cut off; but not for himselfe: not for devills, not for Angels, not for himselfe: for whom then? for us men and for our salvation; the lost sheepe, the sinners, the rebells, Esa. 9.6. To us a sonne is given, Luk. 2.11. To us a Saviour is borne. This Our, is a possessive: in knowing him a Lord, there is feare: in knowing him a Iesus, there is comfort: in knowing him a Christ, there is hope: in knowing him Ours, there is assurance.
Our; God loves these appropriations of mercie, if they bee of the breed of Faith. So hee taught us to pray, Our Father: not by an epithite; Holy Father, Righteous Father, Omnipotent Father; but by a pronoune, Our Father. Yea hee admits every particular hand of faith, to take his owne handfull out of this sheafe, and to turne Nostrum in Meum, Our into Mine. Though he be the God of all, yet Paul saies; My God, Phil. 4.19. My God shall shall supply all your need. Though he be Lord of all, yet saith Thomas, My Lord, Ioh. 20.28. Though he be the Saviour of all his people, yet saith Mary, My Saviour, Luk. 1.47. My soule rejoyceth in GOD My Saviour. Though he be the Father of the spirits, of all flesh; yet hee chargeth a faithfull soule, Ier. 3.19. Thou shalt call me, My Father. If God say unto thy soule, I am thy salvation; why maiest not thou say to him, Thou art my God? The Romists challenge us of over-boldnesse, and peremptory arrogance, to say My God, as if wee did ingrosse Christ; but indeed, they ingrosse him, that confine him to Rome. But why? because the franticke Merchant stands on the Key, and cries, All the shippes are mine: may not therefore a sober merchant stand there, and say, This shippe is mine? Is there no Iesus to be had unlesse wee fetch him from Rome? The Lord commands this voice of faith, Hos. 8.2. Israel shall crie unto me, My God, Psal. 118.28. Thou art my God, and I will praise thee. Non est praesumptio dicentis, ubi est authoritas jubentis. There is no presumption in the speaker, where there is authoritie of the commander.
But now that we may assure him Ours, let us assure our selves his. Marce, ut ameris, ama. The best demonstration of our possession of him, is to find his possession of us.Can. 2.16. My beloved is mine, and I am his: wouldest thou know the certaintie of this marriage, and uniting of thy soule to Christ? when there is doubt made concerning a marriage, we search the Register, and take out a certificate or testimonie under the Curates hand; and that satisfies the Court. So here goe to the Register, thy Heart: there it is recorded, if it be at all, under the hand of the Holy Ghost: for, Rom. 8.16. The Spirit witnesseth with our spirit, that we are the sonnes of God: exhibite this in the Court of thy conscience, and all the doubtes are cleared. Are thy affections knitte to Christ? art thou where thou lovest, rather than where thou livest? is the desire of thy soule with God? this is a blessed fruition!Cant. 1.13. A bundle of myrrhe is my well beloved unto me, hee shall lie all night betwixt my brests: let him lodge in thy
 heart for ever. When thou art thus ravished with him, hee will be also ravished with thee, Cant. 4.9. Thou hast ravished my heart, my sister: thou hast ravished my heart.
The Instruction is cleared to our faith, how we ought to know our Saviour; as Lord, as Iesus, as Christ, as Ours. Now for our affections, let us make some use of it, and so conclude with application. For use, the true knowledge of Christ according to these foure termes, meetes with foure temptations. 1. Lord, meetes with our pride. Si sis sub Domino, quare abuteris ministerio? If thou be under a supreme Lord, why dost thou insult and dominere as if thou wert no servant. 2. Iesus, meets with our despaire. Nil desperandum Christo duce, and auspice Iesu. Who can despaire that knowes he hath this Iesus for a Saviour. 3. CHRIST, meetes with our disregard and neglect of his hests: if hee bee the Holy one of GOD, let us reverence him. 4. Our, meetes with our covetousnesse and worldly affections: let us not flie from that which is ours, and flie after that which is none of ours.
LORD. Art thou provoked to pride and presumption? humble thy selfe, there is a Lord above thee. When the Apostles strove about matter of superioritie, Christ rebuked them, Luk. 22.31. And the Lord said to Simon, etc. He is not (there as in other places) called Iesus, but Dominus, The Lord. But why was his speech direed to Simon? because he was most likely to be too confident, having most audacitie, and being the chiefe speaker. The greatest gifts most endanger a man to pride. A father loves all his children well, but is most tender to the sickest childe: perhaps Peter was most sicke of this disease; I am sure his usurping successors are incurable. Humble thy haughtie mind, there is a Lord above thee: and such a Lord, as resisteth the proud, and giveth grace to the humble, 1 Pet. 5.6. Pharaoh cries, Quis est Dominus, who is the Lord? who? even he that drowned Pharaoh in the red sea. The slave durst not boast himselfe, if he were sure that his Lord heard him. When a great Prelate durst write, Ego and Rex meus; I and my King: the King subscribed in act; Ego and servus meus, I and my slave: and quickly tooke downe the maine mast of his ambition. To question the Titles of Kings, hath ever beene held treason: why then dare any presumptuous spirit oppose the word of this LORD? No, Dic verbum Domino, Matthew 8.8. Say the word, O Lord, and my servant shall be healed.
Iesus. Art thou tempted to despaire? Iesus is a name, in quo nemini desperandum, in which a faithfull soule vanquisheth desperation. Despaire is a sinne that never knew Iesus. The drowning man would never sinke, if he knew and felt an infallible stay in his hand. Desperation is like that beast, Dan. 7.7. that had no name given it. There were three specified, a Lion, a Beare, a Leopard: but the fourth hath no denomination. To those foure terrible beasts are likened foure hainous sins: Presumption to the Lion, Persecution, to the Beare, Oppression, to the Leopard: and to the namelesse fourth, desperation. The Lion, presumption hath beene conquered, in Mary Magdalen. The Beare, persecution subdued, in Paul. The Leopard, oppression tamed, in Zaccheus. But desperation without distinguishing the kind; is dreadfull and terrible, and exceedingly strong: it had great yron teeth, it devoured and brake in peeces, and it had tenne hornes. It hath hornes enow to push at God with blasphemie, at man with injurie, at the owne soule with distrust of mercie. Other sinnes are fearefull enough and have the rage of Lions and Beares and Leopards, to make mans soule miserable. But the finall ruine never to be recovered while there stands a seate of justice in heaven, is desperation. Well, yet before any man fall into this gulfe, let him looke up and know IESUS, Ioh. 1.19. Behold that Lambe of God, that takes away the sins of the world. Behold the Lamb of GOD, yee that are Lions to your own soules! hath his death put sense into rockes and stones, and can it not perswade you? Is the bloud of Iesus shed for you, and will you in an impatient fury throw your owne bloud into the aire with Iulian, or spill it on the ground with Saul, or sacrifice it on a tree with Iudas? Shall he open heaven, and will yee shut it! He pull you
 out of the fire, and you runne into it againe? He drunke to you in a cup of Passion, and you should pledge him in a cup of salvation; singing with that melodious Prophet, Psal. 116.13. I will take the cup of salvation, and blesse the Name of the Lord. Will you then take a cup of death and despaire, blaspheme his name, evacuate his merits, tread his blood under your feete, and dye past hope? God forbid it; and the prayers of your lips, the teares of your eyes, the grones of your hearts, and the hope of your soules heartily forbid it. No man can despaire, that truly knowes our good Lord Iesus.
CHRIST. Is not the great benefit of redemption yet throughly apprehended of thy soule? art thou tempted to distrust or disregard a worke of such infinite price? Behold him, he is The Christ, the expectation of the Iewes, the consolation of the Gentiles, the salvation of all.Luk. 2.32. A light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of thy people Israel. The creation by Gods hand, was magnum opus, a great worke; but the Redemption by CHRISTS death a greater worke. In the Creation hee made man like himselfe: in the Redemption he made himselfe like man. Granat. Illic participes nos fecit bonorum suorum: hic particeps est factus malorum nostrorum. There he made us partakers of his good, here he makes himself partaker of our evill. There he only Spake the word: here Dixit magna, fecit mira, pertulit dira: passus est dura verba, duriora verbera: hee did not onely speake words, but suffered wounds: hee wrought wonders, he endured thunders; what heaven, earth, and hell, could inflict upon him. There man was made in the Image of God, here God is made in the Image of man. The creation was a worke of his finger, Psal. 8.3. When I consider the heavens, the worke of thy fingers. Redemption a worke of his arme, Psal. 98.1. His holy arme hath gotten him the victory: yea it was a worke of his heart; even that bled to death to accomplish it. Now if it be true what the schoole speakes: Bonum Gratiae unius majus est quam bonum naturae totius universi, Aquin. If the saving of one soule be greater than the making of the whole world; and the goodnesse of Grace doth so far transcend the goodnesse of nature. Then be thankefull to God for his Creation, but much more blesse him for his CHRIST. Si totum me debeo pro me facto, quid jam addam pro me refecto? Bern. If I owe my whole selfe for my creation, what have I left to pay for my Redeemer? I will serve thee O Lord, because thou hast given me my selfe: but much more honour thee because thou hast given me thy Sonne Christ.
Our. Are we led aside with worldly affections, and a having covetousnesse? know, nothing is Ours but IESUS CHRIST.1 Cor. 2.2. I determined not to know any thing among you, but Iesus Christ, and him crucified. This was that blessed Apostles resolution. Love him above all: nil contra eum, nil supra eum, nil sicut eum, nil praeter eum, nisi quod propter eum. Affect nothing against him, nothing above him, nothing like him, nothing besides him, but what onely for him. Behold, saith Peter, we have left all and followed thee, Matth. 19.27. they lost nothing by it, Ver. 28. When I sit on my throne, ye shall sit on thrones with me. If CHRIST, be ours, all is ours, 1 Cor. 3.22. All things are yours; whether Apostles, or the world, or life, or death, or things present, or things to come. All are yours, and ye are Christs, and Christ is Gods. In this heavenly conveyance, there is. 1. The Tenure, of great Latitude; All things. 2. The Tenants, of great happinesse, Ours. 3. The Heire, of great excellencie, CHRIST. 4. The Land-lord, of great majestie, God. It is said of the wicked, Ion. 2.8. that they forsake their owne mercie. Their owne, as proper to them, more certaine than the skinne to their flesh, if they would have kept it: but as Christ said to the Iewes, Noluistis, you would not. Qui relinquit suum, ut arripiat alienum: retinebit nec alienum, nec suum. He that forsakes his owne to snatch away anothers, shall neither keepe anothers nor his owne. See what you doe yee covetous: you leave your owne CHRIST, for the world that is not yours; the substance for the shadow: and you shall lose both shadow and substance. Ours: this is the encouragement of faith and obedience: why doe wee so labour to bee his, but because
 wee are sure hee is ours? every man loves his owne; let us never forsake our owne Iesus.
You see now the use of this fourefold knowledge of our Saviour. Quosdam sua confidentia fert ad praesumptionem; agnoscant Dominum. Quosdam sua diffidentia fert ad desperationem; agnoscant Iesum. Quosdam sua temeritas fert ad dedignationem; agnoscant Christum. Quosdam sua cupiditas fert ad tergiversationem; agnoscant Nostrum. Some mens pride lifts them up to presumption; let them acknowledge him a Lord. Some mens distrust casts them downe to desperation; let them acknowledge him a IESUS. Some mens carelesnesse lulls them in securitie; let them acknowledge him a CHRIST. Some mens covetousnesse drives them to apostacie; let them acknowledge him ours. Consider him Lord, and be not proud: consider him IESUS, and be not desperate: consider him CHRIST, and be not dissolute: consider him ours, and be not runegates. Thou hast made thy selfe ours, make us all Thine, O deare Saviour of the world.
Now for application, to bring all yet neerer home to our consciences? Hee is LORD, give him obedience. Hee is IESUS, and requires our Hope. Hee is CHRIST, and requires our Faith. Hee is Ours, and requires our Charitie.
Lord: this challengeth our obedient service, Hunc audite, Matth. 17.5. Heare him, Act. 3.22. He is that great Prophet of the Lord, whom we are bound to heare in all things. Sweare not: who commanded it? The Lord, Matth. 5.34. Bee not angry unjustly: who forbad it? The Lord, Ver 22. Be mercifull who imposed it? The Lord, Luk. 6. Who obeyes this Lord? now this Lord forgive us.Mal. 1.6. If I be a Lord, where is my feare? He may aske indeed, where is it? and who can answere him with a demonstration? The Lion Roares, but who trembles? Qui non timebunt in verbis, dolebunt in verberibus. Hee that will notEsa. 66.2. tremble at his words, shall feele his wounds. But if hee bee our LORD to governe us, hee will not bee our IESUS to save us.
IESUS: this requires our Hope: for in whom is our hope but in Iesus. When we are exercised with worldly troubles, with great molestation, we labour to extricate our selves, and faintly say, wee hope in Iesus: but concerning heaven, wee all hope well enough for that. Yet when death comes with his offer to helpe us thither, where is our hope? alas amazement hath mated it. We are like little children, that all the day complaine, and yet when the medicine is brought them at night, they are not sicke. Or like those that runne all the weeke up and downe the house, crying out of the paine of their teeth: and at last seeing the Barbar come to pull them out, presently feele no more torment. Or as tender bodies in a pricking pleurisie, call and cannot stay for a Surgion: and yet when they see him whetting his Launcer to helpe them, plucke in their armes, and hide them in the bed. The true reason hereof is want of hope: but he that knowes his Iesus, is comforted in hope.1 Cor. 15.19. If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most miserable. For this life and for ever, repose we our hope in Him.
CHRIST: this terme exacteth our faith: knowest thou Christ? thou wilt trust him.Psal. 9.10. They that know thy Name, will put their trust in thee. Knowledge of Christ, and faith in Christ, are inseparable. I know whom I have beleeved, 2 Tim. 1.12. My faith is not built upon ignorance, I know him well. Indeed though salvation belong to all men, yet all men doe not belong to salvation. None pertaine to it, but such as take benefit by it: and none take benefit by it, (no more than they did by the brasen serpent) but they that fixe the eye of their faith upon it. Hee is Christ, the Lords annointed, sent for that end, to save us: how great an injustice is this, not to trust to our salvation on him, that was from all eternitie appointed for that purpose.
Ours: therefore let us give him our love: the knowledge of a proprietie chalengeth an earnest affection. The good sonne loves his owne parent, the brother
 loves the sonne of his mother: the chast wife loves her owne husband. Christ is our Father, our Brother, our Husband: ours, let us love him. Whom have I in heaven but thee, and on earth, none besides thee? Let me lose all, so I may reserve thee. A Philosopher could thus comfort himselfe when the Tyrant threatned him: I will take away thy house; yet thou canst not take away my peace. I will break up thy Schoole; yet I shall keepe whole my peaee. I will confiscate all thy goods: yet there is no premunire against my peace. I will banish thee thy Countrey: yet I shall carry my peace with me: for the wise mans home is wheresoever he is wise. So let the world ta^e from us our riches, yet we have Christ: let it take from us our friends, yet we have Christ: let it take from us our libertie, yet we have Christ: let it take from us our wives and children, deare comforts; yet we have Christ: let it take from us our life, yet we have Christ; that is, to us both in life and death an advantage. When David said to Mephibosheth; Thou and Ziba divide the Land: he answered; Yea, let him take all, seeing my Lord the King is come home in peace, 2 Sam. 19.30. Thus let the world take all, so we may enjoy Iesus Christ.
Conclusion.The summe and heart of the Text concernes the fruitfulnesse of our knowledge of Iesus Christ. What Nation ever had the knowledge of him more abundantly propagated? I may say to you, as Christ said to his Apostles: Blessed are your eyes, for they see: Blessed are your eares, for they heare: but I cannot say, Blessed are your feet, for they walke; blessed are your hands, for they worke: blessed are your hearts, for they embrace. Our eyes and eares doe their office, all the fault is in our hearts: now the Lord open our hearts. We have knowledge, and it costs us nothing: bestow but the gathering of your Manna, and it is yours. Aarons bells give you musike by day; as your City-waits by night: musike in the streets, whereof they partake, that pay nothing for it.Hebr. 8.11. A man needs not say to his brother, Know the Lord: for all shall know me, from the least to the greatest. Our knowledge is universall, or at least should be universall, for God hath not scanted the meanes, Act. 2.17. God hath powred out his Spirit upon all flesh: our sonnes and our daughters prophecie, our young men see visions, and our old men dreame dreames. They see visions, and tell you the visions they see. Your wise-men desire not, like deepe streames, to run silent to themselves; but in a sweet murmure sing you the songs of Sion. We have knowledge, and need not travell for it:Amos 8.12. you wander not from sea to sea, nor runne from North to East, to seeke the Word of God. To runne to Rome for accomplishment of knowledge, is to goe into an infected house, to fetch out a rich sute: or to put the finger into a firy crucible to take out the gold. What travell our young Gallants for? to heare newes: Tully said he could better heare the newes of Rome at Antium, than at Rome. Paris cannot tell more newes of France, nor Madrid of Spaine, than your Exchange in London, of both. I am sure that England stands as neere to heaven as Italy: and the good tidings of Sion is here safer and sooner, and sounder learned. It is then for knowledge: they that crosse the seas to fill their braines with knowledge, travell Northward for heat, and seeke the candle that they carry in their hand.
The Cimerians that live in perpetuall darknesse, though they deny a Sunne, are not condemned of impietie, but of ignorance. But Anaxagoras, that saw the Sunne, and denied it, is condemned not of ignorance, but of impietie. How great is our condemnation, if we know the light, and yet choose darknesse? Ioh. 3.19. Former times were like Leah, bleare-eyed, but fruitfull: ours like Rachel, faire, but barren. Wee give so generall acclamation to the Gospell, and the salvation by it, that we forget to observe the Law. As upon some solemne Festivall, the bells in all steeples are rung, but then the Clockes are tyed up: there is a great untun'd confusion and clangour, but no man knowes how the time passeth away. So in this universall allowance of Libertie by the Gospell, (which indeed rejoyceth our hearts, had wee the grace of sober usage) the Clockes that tell us how our time passeth, Truth and Conscience, which shew the bounded use, and decent forme of things, are tyed up and
 cannot be heard. Nay, there is rather a generall acclamation to licentiousnesse, than true liberty, Act. 19.34. All with one voice for two houres together cried out, Great is Diana of the Ephesians. They cry so lowd for their Diana's gaine, that Paul the Preacher cannot be heard; he must be put to silence. Moses and Ioshua heard a noise;Exod. 32.18. It is not the voice of them that shout for mastery, nor of them that cry for being overcome: but I heare the noise of them that sing. You would thinke it the Praising of God, no it was the blessing of an Idol, Cant. 2.12. The flowers appeare on the earth, the time of the singing of birds is come, and the voice of the Turtle is heard in our Land. Peace and Prosperitie are our Flowers, and we sing like birds; but Non audita est vox Turturis, the voice of the Turtle is not heard among us. All are merry, but who mournes for the abominations of Israel? All this while the Lord is angry, and would destroy us,Psal. 106.23. as he once threatned Israel; had not Moses then, did not IESUS now, stand in the Breach for us.
Alas! where is our fruitfulnesse? we so confidently hope for our salvation by faith, that there is little honestie or true dealing amongst men. We have either left Faith naked, as Idolatry stripped the Israelites, Exod. 32.25. or cut off halfe her garments, as Hanun served Davids Ambassadours, 2 Sam. 10. left her a rag of perfunctory service at Church, but cut off obedience as superfluous. Or if we have left her any covering, it is such as Iohn Baptist wore, a coat of Camels haire, some refuse and cheape out-side; and a Leatherne-girdle, a string of hypocrisie to hold it together: her food is Locusts, meere speculation; and Wilde-honey, only table-talke. Some onely care, Quid faciunt, non quid credunt; What they doe, not what they beleeve; they are Natures Moralists. Others care only, Quid credunt, non quid faciunt; What they beleeve, not what they doe; and these are most frequent. We all plead our selves, by faith to be Christs sheepe, but where is our wooll? In a good sheepe we require not onely flesh to feed on, but also wooll to keepe warme. In a Christian we require, not onely faith for himselfe to live on; but also good workes, a fleece of charitie to warme others. You shall have a Country-man professe conscience, but he dares not wish Iobs wish, Iob 31.38. If my land cry against me, or the furrowes thereof complaine: let thistles grow in stead of Wheat, and cockle in stead of Barley. You shall have a Courtier professe integritie: but if he should say with Iob, vers. 26. If I beheld the Sunne when it shined, or the Moone walking in brightnesse: or if my mouth hath kissed my hand; this were to deny the God that is above: sinne enough to decourt him. You shall have a Citizen professe charitie, but dares he say with Iob? vers. 19. If I have seene the poore without covering, and have not clothed him: if I have lift up my hand against the fatherlesse: Then let mine arme fall from my shoulder, and bee broken from the channel-bone. If all should make such wishes, and have them granted, I feare the whole City would be an Hospitall. It is no great wonder to see aPsal. 107.34. Fruitfull Land turned into barrennesse: but it is a miracle of mercy to see Dry ground turned into water-springs: to see our barren lives made fruitfull of good workes. He only that can turne stones into bread, can turne our stony hearts into that mercy to give bread, Psal 148. Praise the Lord mountaines and all hils, fruitful trees and Cedars. I make no question but fruitfull trees will praise him; but Cedars and mountaines? Yes, if stout Cedars bee bowed to obedience, and proud mountaines to humility; they shall praise him. Yea, vers. 7. Dragons and all deepes: The very Dragons of our oppressions being turned to mercies, shall praise him. The Dragons and Estriches, the beasts of the field shall honour me, Esay 43.20. The deepes, even the deepes of our stratagems being turned to simplicity and innocencie, shall honour the Lord.1 Tim. 6.14. Saul did not more speake against Christ, than Paul speakes for Christ. Thus we that were drie stickes by nature, fit for nothing but the fire, may be made fruitfull trees by grace, to keepe his commandement without spot unrebukeable, untill the appearing of our Lord Iesus Christ. Which he worke in us, who is the blessed, and only Potentate, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords: who onely hath immortality, dwelling in the light which no man can approach unto: To whom be honour and power everlasting. Amen.




VERSE 9. But he that lacketh these things, is blinde, and cannot see farre off, and hath forgotten that he was purged from his old sinnes.

YOV have seene their honour and happinesse, that beautifie their faith with good workes: that as by the one GOD justifies them, so by the other they may glorifie GOD. Behold now their miserable ^estate, that boast of a naked and leane faith: Hee that lacketh these things is blinde, etc. But, the Apostle dis-j^ynes them from fruitfull professours, by a word of Exception or separation; But. Whom doth hee reject? Cui haec non adsunt, The man that Lackes these things. What if hee wants one or two of those graces? They may come in time: but if hee lacke These, All these. In what state is hee? Blinde; his eyes bee not like the Eagles, but the Moles. Is hee starke blinde? No, perhaps hee may see, quae ante pedes sunt, things fast by him; but not Farre off: he wants the Optickes, to see so farre as Heaven. How is hee proved to be thus thicke-sighted? Because hee hath forgotten. Why, they that are blinde, have commonly the best memories? This is true indeed, concerning secular objects, the naturall things of this world: but wilfull spirituall Cecitie is punished with Oblivion. But there is a good Forgetfulnesse, Philip. 3.13. I forget those things that are behinde: Nay, but this man hath forgotten his owne purgation, how hee hath beene formerly cleansed: as the Swine when shee runnes to the mudde, forgets that shee came out of the cleare streames. Wherein consisted that purgation? Hee was washed from sinne, the most sordid pollution and feculencie. What, from all sinnes? No, but from his old sinnes: for he commits new ones that bring him to the speedier damnation. Now as Saint Augustine calls Psalm. 41. Scripturam pauperis, the poore mans Scripture, and 1 Tim. 6. Scripturam divitis, the rich mans Scripture: and Luke 18.11. the proud mans Scripture: and the booke of Iob, the afflicted mans Scripture: so this Text may be called Scriptura coeci, the blinde mans Scripture. Who is described by his
Penury, He lacketh these things.Cecitie; He is blinde and cannot see afarre off.Apostacie; Hath forgotten, etc.
The Summe is: whosoever shall trust his salvation upon a starved faith, and not order his life by the pre-mentioned rules, erres in darkenesse, and holds not that way which the light of the Gospell hath directed him. Hee that hath the true knowledge of Christ will bee fruitfull, verse 8. Hee that is unfruitfull, vainely presumeth the knowledge of Christ, vers. 9. So from the connection of both these verses, we finde that true knowledge must precede sanctitie of life. He that hath not these things is Blinde: and hee that cannot see well, cannot walke well, 1 Iohn 2.4. Yee obey not, why? because yee know not, 1 Ioh. 3.6. Whosoever sinneth, hath not seene him, nor knowne him. You sin, why? because you know not, 2 Tim. 3.6. Why are they laden with sinnes, and led away with divers lusts? Because they know not the truth, Ephes. 4.18. Why are they strangers from the life of God? Because their understanding is darkned. The Romanists pretend, that they will helpe men to heaven by ignorance,Matth. 23.13. and by ignorance they shut them out. They keepe the keyes, and neither enter
 in themselves, nor admit others. Every Christian in his Baptisme hath taken presse-money of Christ, to be his souldier, and to serve him in the field of this world, against his and our enemies: now he will fight poorely without weapons: he must have Gladium verbi, and Clypeum fidei; the Sword of the Spirit, and the Shield of Faith. And he must have these in his owne hand: for he shall be smitten in his owne person, therefore should resist in his owne person: now shall he be content to beare the blowes, and let another weare the sword? But, say they, there are many hard things in Gods Word, past common reach: true, and many easie enough, within their reach: there is milke for weake stomackes, and strong meat for abler digestions: there are fords for Lambes, and depths for Elephants. In the most champian places, some mysteries are as hillockes, higher than the rest: in the steepest hill there is some footing, whereby wee may come to that height, to discover the Land of Canaan.
But, say they, this takes away the glory of the Church, when every man may controll his Teacher. Nay, rather let them know the truth, that they may avoid such as teach against the truth. Because some have beene seduced; shall all be deprived? Then away with Preaching, for it is the savour of death unto many: away with the Sacraments, for some eat CHRISTS flesh to choake them: away with CHRIST himselfe, for hee is theLuke 2.34. fall of many in Israel: and a Stone to crush their bones to perdition. Then let the Lambe cast off his fleece, because the Lion hath worne it: Because some quarrell in the armie, therefore let no souldier have a sword. Then put out the candle, lest it burne the house. But, say they, put not knives into the hands of children: but the Scripture admits no such comparison: we rather put good swords into the hands of men. Discharge us of the Lords service; or it is against the law of armes to take away our weapons. Indeed there is cause to commend the policie of their Clergie, but not the honestie. For how should they have sold their bad wares, unlesse they had first put out the peoples eyes! As theeves first out with the light, that they may rifle the house more safely in the darke. Otherwise the merchandize of Masses could not so easily have beene vented abroad, but would have lien rotting upon their hands at home; if men were suffered to bring the light of truth into their pack-houses. But, say they, we have kept it from hogges and dogges; yea, and from sheepe and lambes too. Besides, all that have some uncleannesse in their lives, are not to be reputed hogges and dogges: this is their mercy, but the mercy of GOD is more. They have a contrary spirit to CHRIST: for he often preached in the knowne hearing of dogges, the Scribes and Pharisies: and would doe so, rather than the children should want their bread. But, said they, some by searching the Scripture diligently, have erred shamefully. This is as good a reason, as if one training up a childe to be an Archer, should give him this principle and rule; that by aiming at the marke most fairely, he should misse most foulely. No, Iohn 5.39. Search that you may not erre: not, be content to erre, rather than search. But now at last being ashamed of this, and convinced by common equitie, that the truth is not wholly to be with-held; they have published a part of it, the New-Testament, with their Rhemish Commentary: Not, say they, upon any absolute necessitie, but to avoid corruptions by reading other translations. They found the people would no longer be made such fooles, as when that universall mist was over the face of the earth: therefore they gratifie them with a parcell of it. But as the peoples curses before ranne thorow their eares into their soules, for ingrossing into their hands the graine of life: so their curses follow them still, for selling them such musty and mildewed corne. Their wickednesse is no lesse now in poysoning them, than it was before in starving them. How blessed are we that freely enjoy that Gospell, which can take away blindnesse, and give us the saving knowledge of IESUS CHRIST!
But.] Here is the Diversitie; this dis-joynes these blinde and barren professours from the former, by a manifest opposition. As the future life shall put an everlasting
 difference betweene the elect and the reprobate, Matth. 25.46. the one going to eternall paine, the other to eternall peace. Here they are scarce distinguished; but then there shall be aLuke ^6.26. great gulfe fixed betweene them. So even on earth the Scripture dis-joynes them with a But. The adversaries of Stephen gnasted on him with their teeth, Act. 7.55. But he himselfe was full of the HOLY GHOST: Stephen was under them for outward condition, but farre above them for inward consolation. The waves may fome against the rocke, and exercise their vaine malice, but the Rocke is unmoveable, Psal. 1.6. The LORD knoweth the way of the righteous: But the way of the ungodly shall perish, Psalm. 32.10. Many forrowes shall be to the wicked: But hee that trusteth in the LORD, mercie shall compasse him, Psal. 5.11. Destroy thou the wicked: But let all those that trust in thee, rejoyce. There was darknesse in Aegypt, but light in Goshen. The Tares are suffered to grow up with the Wheat; but in the harvest they shall be severed. Slay utterly old and young;Matth. 13. But come not neere them that have the marke, Ezek. 9.6. In the tenth of the Proverbs, the first foureteene verses, have their medium distinguished with this But. Indeed most of them are but paires of crosse and thwart sentences, manifesting the contrariety of good to evill: 1. This is both in regard of a former ordination, Rom. 9.13. Iacob have I loved; But Esau have I hated. SomeIude verse 4. are of old ordained to condemnation, others to life. 2. And in regard of a present disposition, for the faithfull love the things above, the wicked dote upon terrestriall objects. The Saints would but lodge in Samaria, their faces are toward Ierusalem: the ungodly doe but lodge for a night in Ierusalem, their faces, their hearts are toward Samaria. 3. And in regard of their future condition; the wicked are brought to a destructive end in a moment, Psal. 73. But marke the upright man, and behold the just; for the end of that man is peace. This is a secret and unseene distinction; there is little difference in outward shew: vessells of dishonour have often the most credite; whereas the vessells of honour, elected to shine as stars in heaven for ever, are here sullied and kept under. Yet there is an invisible difference; But betweene them. Among men where all reputation is measured by the acre; melior qui ditior; we enter rich men into our bookes, but refuse to trust the poore. But God in his booke records Lazarus, and forgets the Rich-mans name.
He that lacketh these things. It is a received maxime, that God and Nature hath wrought nothing in vaine: no part or facultie of the body can be well spared. Thou hast two eyes, two eares, two hands, two feet; thou canst spare none of them. Man hath five senses, if he lose any of them, the very want will tell him the worth of the habite. The father that should sell one of his children, to buy bread for the rest, and redeeme them from famine; lookes over them all, and at last concludes he can part with none. What part of thy selfe after much study couldst thou lose? yet a man may lacke some, and be saved too, Marke 9. with losse of a hand, foot, an eye, he may enter into heaven. But what speake I of our members; we are loth to spare the superfluities of this world: those same Adjectiva, as Christ calls them; Adjectanea, as Paul sayes. Our very delights have their set vicissitudes, and not one is omitted for feare of b eaking the ranke. Covetous worldlings will hardly spare the poore some of their fire to warme them, some of their water to drinke, some of their ground to lodge on; though it were no more hurt to them, than the lighting of a candle at their torch. We can lacke nothing for this world; but for heaven, O the mercy of GOD! Quantum est in rebus inane! Wee can quietly lacke things that conduce to our eternall peace. What is the reason? Superna in fastidio, terreas in desiderio. Ignoti nulla cupido: A man never misseth what hee cares not for. If a man Lacke riches,Psal. 4.7. 2 King. 4.13. he complaines; Who will shew us any good? If he Lacke honour, hee is glad to heare a friend in the Court say to him, as Elisha to the Shunamite; wouldest thou bee spoken for to the King, or to the Captaine of the Host? Few would answer with the Shunamite; I live among mine owne people; I had rather dwell at home. If hee Lackes children, hee is readie to say with that
 Patriarch, Genes. 15.2. What wilt thou give, seeing I goe childelesse? If an Ahab have a whole Manour, yet he lackes Naboths Vineyard; that very nooke disfigures his Lordship. If Haman have Ahasuerus favour, yet he lackes Mordecai's knee and cappe; and is angry that other men thinkes him not so good as he thinkes himselfe. Though Ioab have renowne with David, yet a word of disgrace from Abner troubles his stomacke: he can neither swallow it downe, nor vomit it up. Because another is not his friend, he resolves to be his owne enemie. Let the Engrossers barnes and granaries be never so full of corne, yet if he lackes price for it in the market answerable to his desire, hee is readie to hang himselfe; and be epitaph'd on as that Pope; Vixit lupus, moritur canis. He that desires much, wants as much as he that hath nothing. The drunkard is as drie as the sweating traveller. The Apostles said, Silver and gold have we none, Act. 3.6. The Devill sayes; All these are mine, Luke 4.6. And the Rich-man, I have much goods laid up for many yeares, Luke 12 19. Now take thy choice; whether had'st thou rather lacke with those Saints, or abound with these Devils? Say with Paul, Philip. 4.19. My GOD shall supply all my need: And as Abraham answered Isaac, complaining for a sacrifice; GOD will provide. LORD, thou art my portion: and hee is too covetous that IESUS CHRIST cannot satisfie, Psalm. 23.1. The LORD is my Shepheard, I therefore can lacke nothing. A man may lacke outward things, yet come never the later to heaven; yea, the sooner, the surer: but woe to him that lackes these things. This is the want now least feared, and this shall be the want most lamented, Matth. 6.33. First seeke the kingdome of heaven, then other things shall come in due place and time. Sequere tu pietatem, te caetera squentur pium. Follow thou righteousnesse, the rest shall follow thee. There was a young man that thought well of himselfe, Matth. 19.20. All these have I kept: What lacke I yet? What? it is answered, vers. 21. If thou wilt be perfect, give all to the poore: it is better lacke all the rest, than lacke Charitie. Terrene opulencie is a meere titular thing: as Petrus Blesensis wrote to Innocentius, Bishop of Rome, concerning an Ecclesiasticall dignitie in England; Draco non habens vnde possit vivere, nisi a vento; A preferment standing upon naked and pure supposals. But grace is solide and reall; for theProv. 10.22. Blessing of God maketh rich, and he addeth no sorrow with it.
Pray then to him that is onely able to supply these wants; as Paul, 2 Cor. 12.8. For this I besought the Lord thrice. What then? Si ter pulsanti nemo respondet, abito? If after thrice praying, wee feele no full concession: shall wee give over? No, pray still, and GOD will answer; My grace is sufficient for thee.2 Cor. 12.9. What is wanting in our endevours, GOD shall make up with his sufficient mercies. Wee have need to sacrifice: Doe wee lacke fewell? the LORD supplies us with penitence and patience, faith and love. Yet we lacke fire: hee gives us Zeale, an immortall fire from heaven. Yet lacke we an altar? he gives us a pure heart. Is there yet wanting a sacrifice? Immola teipsum; offer up thy selfe.Psal. 145.19. Hee will fulfill the desire of them that feare him. The Lions doe lacke, and suffer hunger: but they that feare the LORD, shallPsal. 34.10. not lacke any good thing. Then Domine, tolle omnia, and da mihi teipsum: Lord take away the rest, and give mee thy selfe. If wee can hold Christ, No good thing shall be with-holden from us. Whatsoever we lacke,Psal. 84.12. let us not Lacke these things.
Is Blinde.] We come from the Penury and want, to the Cecitie or Blindnesse, wherein his understanding suffers. Blindnesse is nothing else but a privation of sight; so ignorance is a destitution of knowledge. The Schoole makes three sorts of this spirituall Blindnesse. 1. Ignorance negative, that is, Purae negationis, or nescientia. The not knowing of impertinent things is tolerable: as wee need not know how oft wee have breathed, etc. To this knowledge wee are not obliged. 2. Ignorance privative, which is Merae and simplicis Privationis; and carentia scientiae debitae inesse. This is considered in necessary things, and concerning our selves. And is Non tam peccatum, quam supplicium: miseria potius quam transgressio;
 It is not so much our sinne, as our punishment for sinne: an affliction as much as a transgression. 3. Ignorance corruptive; which is perversae dispositionis; a refractary and desperate aversenesse from knowledge: the other was morbus mentis, this is morsus serpentis. This is wretched, for a man to be ignorant of his owne ignorance: Laodiceas disease, Revel. 3.17. to be blind as not to know her owne blindnesse. Such an eye is not darke, in the concrete; but darkenesse it selfe in the abstract. Now if the light be darkenesse, how great is that darkenesse! Matth. 6.23. It is both a sinne and a punishment, a sinne, Matth. 15.14. Esa. 56.10. a punishment, Deut. 28.28. Esa. 59.10. Blind are we all by nature; like the man that sate by the way side begging, Luk. 18.35. sitting by the way, not seeing the way: begging but hee knowes not of whom. Now there is also a contracted blindnesse, an affected ignorance: and there are diverse causes, as of the corporall, so of the spirituall cecitie.
By abundance of rheume the eyes are harmed: so factious singularitie is a hot scalding rheume to bleare the eye of the soule. Qui sapere voluut ultra rationem, insipere solent ultra moderationem. Wee have many such rheumaticke spirits, that will goe a new way, or no way. They care not for Noahs Arke, the Church: but climbe up to a mountaine apart, a private conventicle by themselves. They are blind, and see not the danger of the Floud.
By a violent blow, or such accidentall hurt. The eye is tender, and therefore hath two lids to defend it. Non patitur ludum, fama, fides, oculus. The devill blinds this intellectuall eye by a suddaine blow given to the soule, 2 Cor. 4.4. The God of this world have blinded their eyes that they beleeve no. How is this? Rom. 1. by filling them with vaine imaginations and turpitudes? lusts darken the mind.
By dust throwne into them: the dust of this world makes many blind. They digge like moles into the earth and there lose the sight of heaven. Gifts blind the wise. Such men may sit on benches, be taken into councells, have their eyes of policie quicke as Eagles; and yet be blind. Perhaps they have the proud scorne of the Pharisies;Ioh. 9.40. Are we blind also? To whom it is answered; If yee were blind, ye should have no sinne: but now yee say, wee see; therefore your sinne remaineth. These that have so much knowledge to heape up wealth, who dares call them fooles for heaven. Hee that dares justifie it, Luk. 12.20. Thou foole; this night shall thy soule be taken from thee. Hee could see to fill his barnes but not to get salvation. The devill labours to keepe men blind during the presumption of their lives: and only opens their eyes in the desperation that waites on their deaths: like the Syrians, whose2 King. 6 20. eyes were never opened till they were in the midst of their enemies. Oculos, quos culpa clausit, paena aperit. Sinne shuts up mens eyes, but punishment opens them. For he that will be Caecus in peccato, blind when he sins; shall be made Sapiens in supplicio, wise when he suffers.
The summe is this; he that lackes Grace, lackes knowledge: Qui malus est moribus, caecus est oculis. They that wander in by-pathes declare themselves ignorant of the right way: so if a man be lewd in his manners, we conclude him blind for the way of salvation, Rom. 3.16. If their workes be full of cursednesse, murder, and destruction, we inferre; The way of peace they have not knowne. O the infinite number of blind soules? if all that be ungodly, live in darkenesse, how few of this world have eyes! or if they that have, they see not, Esa. 43.8. Bring forth the blind people, that have eyes. Every one indeed is ready to taxe anothers ignorance, not his owne. If two blind men rush one upon another in the way either complaines of others blindnesse; neither of his owne. O that this blindnesse were a little removed, that by a selfe-inspection we might see our owne hearts. If the sinner would look into that secret cloisture, how would the spectacle amaze him! Hee should find a will more warped than a bow: affections more perverse than an unbroken dromodary: a soule bleeding with unstanched wounds, a chamber full of fiends; one holding downe the reason, another dulling the memorie, a third tempting the will, a fourth fearing the conscience. Thus they possesse the Citadell, his heart; possessing they vexe it, vexing they laugh
 at it, laughing they destroy it, and after destruction they torment it. How lies the poore ravished soule panting under these adulterers; slaved in the chaines of a most miserable bondage; where the bread of life, and bloud of CHRIST is kept from her: beholding with Ruth her deare children, her affections, faculties, and addictions to good, butchered before her eyes; expecting the fatall houre, when her selfe must be haled to the great tribunall, and receive her eternall doome Let us all therefore now look inward; be not longer blind at home, strangers to our owne bosomes. Now he that opened the eyes of Paul, open ours; and rescue our soule from destructions, our darling from the Lions;Psal. 35.17. and our selves from the houre and power of darkenesse.
And cannot see a farre off. The originall is (...), Lusciosus, thicke-eyed. It signifies Pati affectum (...), and that is derived quasi (...): claudereoculos non penitus, sed parumper. Some translate it, Connivere oculis, to winke, Prov. 6.13. he winketh with his eyes. Others thus; Oculos aperire non valens; one that cannot open his eyes. But to take it, as wee here read it; one that cannot see a farre off. Now to the former word, (...), this seemes to be subjected per quandam correctionem: he is blind, aut si non prorsus caecus, caecutit tamen instar lusciosi. It is a voluntary darkning the eye to heavenly things. Lusciosus is such a one as sees a little at the day dawning, worse after the sunne rising, never a whit after the sunne setting.
A farre off. What are those things a farre off, that he cannot see? Hee sees the Sunne, the Moone, the Starres; and these are a farre off So doe the beasts, and some of them more clearely. What, is it meant of a physicall remotenesse; that he cannot see In ultima naturae, into the deepe secrets of nature; not perceive how to derive benefites a fonte, from the fountaine head? If he would have bread, does he not know to deduce it by a naturall course? As first to till his ground, then to sow his seed, then to reape and carry it into his barne: and when he hath it there, to bring it under the Flaile, the Fanne, the Mill, the Oven, and so to perfect it into bread. If he would have cloath, and not to goe to the shop for it; knowes hee not to sheare his sheepe, to spinne his wooll, to weave, full, and colour it, and to fit it to his owne wearing? Or, is it meant of terrene objects, distanced off by a locall interjection. Why hee hath then a perspective glasse, to represent a remote thing, as it were at his foote. Or some opticke instruments, to stand on a Tower and read a booke lying in the streets. Or some politicke eyes, that by intelligence he may know in his chamber, the state affaires of forraine kingdomes. Or demoniacke eyes, whereby he can see in a glasse things as farre as Iudia; by a cunning delusion. So Saul was perswaded that he saw Samuel; who indeed was as farre off him as heaven from earth. What, is it then meant for a searching into the secret purposes and fetches of men?Ier. 17.9. But the heart of man is deceitfull above all things, and desperately wicked; who can know it? The worlds principall studie is to keepe their meanings a farre off, as the Foxe preyes furthest from home. The Labyrinth had a way out, but mans heart is more intricate, and fuller of windings than Meander. You may travell with a man as far as the Indies, and yet still find the way into his heart a farther Iourney. These things are farre off, but we must looke further: not to the things beneath, but to them above, Ioh. 8.23.
Those remote things which this man cannot see, are such as bee separated from humane sense; whereof flesh and bloud was never an eye witnesse. For we walke by faith, not by sight, 2 Cor. 5.7.1 Cor. 2.14. The naturall man receiveth not the things of the spirit, neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned. He may see Carnalia mundi, quia praesto sunt; the sensuall things of this world, for they are at hand but not Magnalia Dei, quia procul sunt; not the great mysteries of Godlinesse, for they are farre off. But doth not the Gospell bring heaven neere us? and doth not CHRIST say Matth. 12.28. The kingdome of God is come unto you? Yes, it may be neere to men, and yet men farre from it. Indeed the Saints that were once by
 nature farre off, are made nigh to him by the bloud of Christ, Eph. 2.13. But unbeleevers, and impenitents are farre off still.
Heavenly things are farre off from carnall sense: hee that will beleeve no more than he sees, shall be for ever blind. The best things are Invisible to humane eyes: Invisiblis Deus, Heb. 11.27. Moses saw him who is invisible. Invisibilis Lux, 1 Tim. 6.16. God dwelleth in the Light, which no man hath seene, nor can see. Invisibilis Christus, Iohn 14.19. Yet a little while, and the world seeth me no more. It was a great miracle that dying Stephen should see him at the right hand of his Father: and so wonderfull a vision to Iohn, to behold him in that glorious majestie, that he fell dead at his feete,Ioh. 3.8. Revel 1.17. Rom. 1.20. Invisibilis Spiritus, like the wind, the sound wherof we heare but see not whence it commeth, nor whither it goeth. Invisibilis potestas, His Power and God-head are called the Invisible things of God. Invisibile Regnum, Ioh. 3.3. Except a man be borne againe, he cannot see the kingdome of God. The best eyes see but in a riddle, 1 Cor. 13.12. We see now through a glasse darkely. Here faith supplies all defects; For fides est credere quod non vides,Augu. cujus merces erit videre quod credis. It is the office of faith to beleeve that we doe not see, and it shall be the reward of faith to see that wee doe beleeve, Iohn 20.29. Blessed are they, that have not seene, and yet have beleeved.
These are the remote objects: in every pious thing there is somewhat affare off, to humane eyes. In devotion or worship of God, the prostration of the body is seene,1 Sam. 1.13. not the humilitie of the soule. Eli could see Hanna's lips pay their tributes to God, he did not see the zeale of her heart: but she spake in her heart, and Eli thought she was drunke. In the sacrament, bread and wine are seene of reprobate eyes, but there is an invisible thing farre off to them; the body and bloud of CHRIST, that nourisheth the soule to everlasting life in the Gospell, how neere is the historie, how farre off the mysterie! In the word preached, the world perceives, Sonum, non sensum, the audible sound, not the profitable sense. As an ignorant man sees the painted Images of vertues; he saies they are goodly pictures, but he knowes not what they meane; the morall is farre off from his apprehension. As little children, who looke upon the babies in a booke, regard not the matter therein contained. Concerning a Christian, the world can see his house well furnish'd, his grounds well stock'd, his barnes well filled, his purse well money'd, if these things be: but the joy of his spirit, the peace of his conscience, the grace of his heart; these are things afarre off from the world. The peace and prosperitie that accompanies the Church, they delight to see and tast; that every man may sit under his owne figtree, and drink the milke of his owne flocke: but the remission of sins, the effusion of grace, the Communion of Saints, the possession of comforts; those spirituall priviledges, more glorious than the States of kingdomes, are invisible and too farre off.2 Cor. 4.18. Let us not looke at the things that are seene, but at the things that are not seene: for the things that are seene, are temporall: but the things that are not seene, are eternall.
O that your eyes could looke a little beyond the earth: there are two severall countreys afarre off: they lie beyond the Poles; yet undiscovered, farther than the Glasse of the Scripture presents to the eyes of faith. The Countreyes are Heaven and Hell: there are two waies to them, which be neere and Visible, Pietie and Profanesse. There are two doores to passe, before men arrive to either of them; Death and Iudgement. Many thinke these farre off, Amo. 6.3. They put farre away the evill day: and say,Ezck. 12.27. The vision that he seeth is for many daies to come, and he prophecieth of the times that are far off. Men oppresse, ryot, lust, blaspheme, as if the Iudgement were farre off: as that malefactor being ask'd by whom he would be tried, answered deridingly, By CHRIST and his twelve Apostles: it was replied, that they were in heaven: no hast, quoth he, I am content to tarry till they come. But the End of all things is at hand, 1 Peter 4.7. And let them read and tremble, Revelations 22.12. Behold, I come quickely, and my reward is with mee. Serior esse solet vindicta severior.
If you could see so farre off as Hell below: if the smoky gates of that bottomlesse pit were opened to give you but a glimpse of the damned spirits under torture;
 those flames, those shriekes, those feares and horrors; that palpable darkenesse mixed with unquenchable fire: the reprobates ever boiling, never consumed: ever dying, never dead: ever crying never pitied. Where the covetous Churle, that would not give a bitte of bread, begges as fast for a drop of water: yet if rivers should runne into his mouth, what were it to quench those rivers of brimstone that inflame it? where there is no intermission of complaints, no breathing from paine; after millions of sorrowfull yeares, no possibilitie of comfort. If the stroke of a temporall miserie be so smart, that often death is wished to ease it; what is the full violl of Gods wrath? If the racke of a gowt, convulsion, or strappado be so cruell, what is everlasting torment? If this sight so farre off might be admitted us, how would we weepe and bleed for our sinnes, how uncessantly pray for pardon, how rectifie our crooked and cursed steps; that we might never come to such a place, as to see Abraham afarre off? Luk. 16.23.Luk. 19.42. O that we knew these things in this our day: but alas, they are hid from most mens eyes. If mens fore-sight were but halfe so sharpe as is their sense, that would be their greatest feare, which is now their cheefest pleasure. Let Dives come out of hell to his former riches, the sensible world shall admire his charitie. Let Iudas be ransomed out of hell, he will no more betray. Let Esau find that favour, he will never againe sell his Birthright. Nabal then would no longer be a churle, nor Achitophel a false counsellor, nor Ahab a bloudy tyrant, nor Cain fratricide. There is not a peece of a line in the Scripture, which speakes of that lake of fire and brimstone, but by a hundred thousand parts it importeth more than it expresseth. Beleeve that you cannot see, lest you feele that you would not beleeve.
If you could see so farre off as heaven above, or might be admitted to looke into that glorious house! Kings use not to dwell in cottages of clay, but in royall Courts fit for their Majestie: what is then the Court of the King of Kings! This world seemes glorious, such a Carbuncle as the sun to lustre it, stars far more precious then Chrysolites, a pavement checkerd over with various colours, adorned with innumerable delights: now if God hath provided such an habitation for his enemies; what a one is that he hath ordained for himselfe, and his friends? Earthly Princes have dwelt in Cedar and Ivorie: but the palace of the highest hath a wall of Iasper,Revel. 21. a building of gold, a foundation of precious stones, and gates of pearle. We see now but the pavement of it: O how goodly is it stucke full of lights, more sparkling then diamonds? Did the Centurion say, Non sum dignus, ut tu, etc. Matth. 8.8. I am not worthy that thou shouldest come under my roofe: and yet CHRIST was than but in his humbled estate? Doe thou say, Non sum dignus ut ego; I am not worthy to enter into thy shining and glorious house. It was said, he that hath beene once at Ormus, will never love his own countrey againe. He that hath had a glimpse of heaven, how poorely will he thinke of this earth, which many lose their owne soules to purchase? LORD, lift up our eyes to see thus farre: let the scales of earthly affections quite fall off; carry us up to thy glory. Thou that didst lay clay upon the blind mans eyes, and so open them: take away this clay of earthlinesse from our eyes, whereby they are shut. Cast into us the beames of that celestiall glory: and because we cannot yet ascend to that, let that come downe upon us. Ravish our eyes with thy owne beautie, that like Eagles, we may disdaine all objects but the sunne. Thou that hast prepared heaven for our soules, prepare also our soules for heaven, Act. 17.27. Thou art not farre from every one of us: thou art neare to us, bring us also neare to thee O God, shew us thy selfe, and we shall love thee: let us see thee, O blessed IESUS, now with the eyes of grace, and hereafter with the vision of perfect glory.
And hath forgotten that he was purged from his old sinnes. We see the curse that lies upon his understanding; he is blind: now for that lies upon his memorie; hee hath forgotten. To pull the words a sunder, were to martyr the sense: they must be considered Sensu composito, in composition. As they are, they describe a wicked
 Apostate: lyet separate them, and all signifie good. There is a forgetfulnesse, this may be good, (as to forget a wrong:) there is a purging, this may be better: there is a purging from sinnes, this may be best of all: but put them together; he hath forgotten that he was purged from his sinnes; there is the miserie. The earth, water, and man, are all safe while they keepe Loca sua, their owne proper places, but when the water overwhelmed the earth, there was evill to man: the mixture and confusion spoiles all. Good simples are often marred in the compounding, a good sentence lost in the mispointing. So here, purgation, and purgation from sinnes, and purgation from sinnes by the bloud of CHRIST; all lost by the ingratitude of forgetfulnesse. This same (he hath forgotten) is the confusion of all the rest. It is said of Achitophel,2 Sam. 17.23. that seeing his counsell neglected, hee sadled his Asse, and rose; hee prepared himselfe for a returne; that was well: hee gate him home to his house that was better: he put his houshold in order, that was best of all: but when he hanged himselfe, and became his owne executioner, preventing the mercie of David, the mercie of God; this was the bane of all. If after purging from old sinnes, this man had preserved the mercie in memorie, and answered it in pietie, he had beene happy. But he gets new corruption, and forgets his former purgation: therefore God forgets his righteousnesse, and takes him away in his wickednesse, Ezek. 18.24. In the sin that he hath sinned, he dies.
Forgotten; the originall is ad verbum, (...), ut qui oblivionem ceperit: one that did voluntarily attract forgetfulnesse to himselfe: the author of his owne mischiefe; courting his owne destruction: forgetfulnesse did not so much take him, as he did take forgetfulnesse. The Poets wrote of Lethe, a certaine Stygian river; that whosoever dranke of it, forgot presently all passed things. He wilfully ingurgitates this Lethean drinke, and calls in oblivion to lodge in his heart. The ungodly as if they were impatient at the delay of their owne vengeance, hasten to have their1 Tim. 5.24. sins goe before unto judgement. They scarce stay the devills leasure to tempt them, therefore doe it themselves. They tarry not till oblivion and ingratitude be offered to them, but they snatch it like revenous stomachs, that will not endure till their meate bee dressed. This forwardnesse is expressed, Prov. 1.16. Their feete runne to evill, Mic. 2.1. They rise early to put it in practise, Esa. 5.18. They draw it on with cords and cartropes. They doe not accept it as being offered, but extort it as being prohibited. This saves the divell a labour,Prov. 21.10. when men call iniquity to themselves. The soule of the wicked desireth evill: if it comes not, they will fetch it, flie to it: but they had better have crept like snailes. For mischiefe comes soone enough, there is no need to seeke it: it is more easily found, than avoided, Iam. 4.7. Resist the divell, and he will flie from you. Give to God obedience, to the Prince allegiance, to our Superior reverence, to the weake assistance; onely to the devill and sinne resistance, Eph. 4.27. Give not place to the devill: for the divell hath no place but where it is given him. I like not that Iesuites humilitie, that sitting in a chaire, and seeing the divell approch, rose up to give him his seate; because he said, he was more worthy of it than himselfe. But Give him no place, saith Saint Paul: admit no conference with him. He was a foole that went up and downe the earth to find Senectutem, old age: which, if he sate still at home, would be sure to find him. Sin will come fast enough; let us not hunt it, nor snatch it: but rather strive to resist it, to expell it.
The points I am to speake of are foure: there is
The corruption of the heart Sinnes.The danger of that coruption Old sinnes.The deliverie from that danger Purged.The unthankefulnesse for that deliverie Forgotten. The greatnesse of his Miserie, (Sinne Inveterate) commends the goodnesse of Gods mercie (that had Purged him) and condemnes the vilenesse of his ingratitude (that hath Forgotten it.) There is. 1. a Sicknesse. 2. a Lightning. 3. before death
 Old sinne was a lingring sicknesse: Purging, that is his lightning: but Forgetfulnesse of it, is his death.
First, for the corruption, Sinne: this is the most sordid feculencie in the world. Lazarus lay full of sores at the rich mans gate, yet was he not so foule and noisome as the rich man himselfe within dores. Death takes away the bodies filthinesse; and CHRIST shall change our vile body, that it maybe like his owne glorious body, but he that dies in his sinnes, shall find his sinnes ever living in himselfe. Blessed is hee whose sins die before his body: death can doe that man no harme, though it rot his flesh to dust. The traveller that is persued by a Lion, throwes off his cloke, and runnes nimbly into his house, from the window whereof he beholds the Lion tearing his garment, but rejoyceth that himselfe is safe. Death can but teare thy coate, and bloudy it, as Iosephs was, but they selfe art safe. There are many things we loath which are not detestable; as our brothers Leprosie, etc. but that which is indeed most odious, is held most delectable. We shunne sickenesse with hate, we follow wickednesse with joy. Which consideration caused Nazianzen to say, that Melior est conditio vitii, quam morbi: Sinne is in a better condition than sicknesse. For at a Lazarous, Leprous, diseased man, we stop our nostrills, and turne away our eyes; yet here is Gods Image. But to a Prodigall drunkard, a rich usurer, a proud courtier, we insinuate our selves: yet onely for these we have a charge, De non tangendo; and there is the Image of the divell. A man will not enter the house where he knowes the plague is, for feare of infection: yet hee will venture on the place where GOD is blasphemed, and never prepend the danger, saying with Abraham, surely the feare of God is not in this place; Saint Iohn would not tarry in the bath where Cerinthus was:Gen. 20.1.1. there is no pestilence so deadly a sinne. What a blessed turne is it then to bee purged from sinne? Psal. 51.2. Wash me throughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sinne. The breaking of his bones, the sorenesse of his flesh, he complained of; but nothing so troubled him as his sinnes. Therefore there is no such comfort as the remission of sinnes: David intitleth the 32. Psalme his Learning; Maschil, or Giving instruction. Why, what great learning is in it? Yes, the remission of sins ver. 1. Blessed is the man whose sinne is forgiven: there is no learning more sweet and blessed. For this CHRIST taught us to pray continually; Forgive us our sinnes. The Lords prayer in that one petition teacheth, Nos esse quotidianos peccatores,Luther. and ut tota vita sit paenitentia; that we are daily sinners, and that our whole life should be nothing else, but a Lent to prepare our selves against the Sabaoth of our rest, and the Easter of our Resurrection. The Creed teacheth us to beleeve the Remission of our sinnes;Esa. 44.22. and that God will blot out all our transgressions. Yea, that they are so remitted, as if they never had beene committed. The Lambe of God takes them away. Dimittendo quae facta sunt, and adjuvando ne fiant, and perducendo,Lambor. ad vitam ubi omnino fieri non possunt: by pardoning sinnes past, and preventing sinnes to come, and bringing us to that place where sinne can be no more: o blessed place where is no sinne! Coelum est,Ambros. ubi cessat culpa. Heaven begins, where sinne ends. We cannot be so quit of it yet: it is well, saith Luther, if as God told Rebecca; Major serviet minori: the elder shall serve the younger. Our enemies are older, our sinnes greater than we, yet they shall serve for our good: for they must needs be comprehended within that universal and indefinite number of All things, that shall worke together to our best, Ro. 8.28. Thus if we could see the irkesome filthinesse of our sinnes, we would thinke our Purging the greatest happinesse. As David of his enemies, so let us comfort our selves concerning our sins, Psal. 118.12. Though they compasse us about like bees, yet in the Name of our Lord Iesus we shall destroy them.
Secondly, consider further the danger of this corruption; Old sinnes. That we translate, A veteribus peccatis; (...); must be thus supplied; (...) a peccatis jam olim commissis; from sinnes that he hath done of old. This aggravates the danger of corruption; for an old ulcer is hardly cured. Long nurture is another nature. When a certaine man had brought his possessed sonne to
 the Disciples, and they could not cure him; he comes to Christ himselfe: and he demands,Marke 9.21. How long is it agoe since this came unto him? The father answers, Of a childe; therefore, Sipossis aliquid; If thou canst doe any thing, pitie us, and helpe us. A disease bred from a childe is hardly cured; a sinne of long continuance hardly purged, Psal. 129.2. They have afflicted me from my youth up, yet they have not prevailed against me. If sinne have infected us from our youth up, it is a great wonder that it prevailes not still against us. The Physitian comming to his patient, enquires Decubitum, the time when he tooke his Layre; if he have beene long infected, it poseth his skill, Ioh. 9.1. There was a man blinde from his birth: but if so long blinde, none can cure him but CHRIST, vers. 32. It was never heard since the world stood, that any man save CHRIST,Iohn 6. opened the eyes of one borne blinde. The same Physitian found a patient sicke of an infirmitie eight and thirty yeares: he comes to him with a Visne sanari, Wilt thou be made whole? Alas, he despaires it: yet Christ performed it; Rise, take up thy bed, and walke.
Old sinnes. How farre must we looke backe to finde out this antiquitie. First, as farre as the time of their perpetration; old sinnes, because done long agoe, in the wildernesse of youth, Psal. 25.7. Remember not the sinnes of my youth, Iob 13.26. Thou writest bitter things against me, when thou makest me to possesse the sins of my youth. Youth hath a hotter aptitude and proclivitie to sinne: their bloud is sooner stirred to choler, their heat to lust, their strength to intemperance. Nequitiae cursus celerior quam aetatis: their sinnes out-run their yeares: and they are discerned to be the children of Adam, before their faces have discovered their sexes. Therefore it was the Wise-mans counsel;Eccles. 12.1. Remember thy Creator in the dayes of thy youth: And S. Paul charged Timothy,2 Tim. 2.22. to flie youthfull lusts. The new earthen pots will retaine the savour of their first seasoning, Prov. 22.6. Season their youth with the feare of God, as Obadiah said,1 King. 18.12. I feare the Lord from my youth. As Timothy knew the Scriptures from a childe, 2 Tim. 3.15. Quae fuerunt inania juventutis gaudia, haec sunt acerba senectutis gravamina. The vanities of youth, prove the vexations of age, and if there be any grace in us; that is now matter of repentance, which was then matter of jovisance. It is enough to terrifie the soule, the respection into old sinnes.
Yet let us looke a little further backe, to finde this age of sinne: even as farre as the originall, from whence comes all the copie of imitation. Be they never so new in act, they are old in example, Psal. 106.6. Peccavimus cum patribus nostris; We have sinned with our fathers. God tells them, they had rebelled of old, Act. 7.51. As your fathers did, so doe yee. Antiquitie is no infallible argument of goodnesse: though Tertullian sayes, Perfectiora quae prima; the first things were the best things: And Quo minus ab ortu aberant, the lesse they distanced from the Beginning, the purer they were; but he must be understood onely of holy customes. For Iniquitie can plead antiquitie: hee that commits a new act of murther, finds it old in the example of Cain: drunkennesse may be fetched from Noah; contempt of parents from Ham; womens lightnesse from the daughters of Lot. There is no sinne but hath white haires upon it; and valde senescit, is exceeding old.
But let us looke farther backe yet, even to Adam; there is the age of sinne. This is that Saint Paul calls the Old man: it is almost as old as the root, but older than all the branches. Therefore our restitution by Christ to Grace, is called the New-man. There is a relation, or rather an opposition, betweene the Old-man and the New, 1 Cor. 15.22. As in Adam all die, so in Christ shall all be made alive. The first Adam was made a Living soule, the last Adam was made a Quickning Spirit. Therefore he that makes all things new (Rev. 21.5. Ecce, nova facto omnia) can also make us new.1 Cor. 15.49. That as we have borne the image of the earthy, so we may beare the Image of the heavenly.Coloss. 3.10. Adam was made in Gods Image, but he begate a sonne in his owne image, not in Gods. The corruption of our nature is the image of the old Adam; the renovation of our mindes is the Image of the New. Therefore, Put off the Old-man, and cast it away;Marke 14.51. as Ioseph forsooke his coat rather than his faith: or as the young man, that
 Relicto syndone aufugit, left his linnen garment and fled. For, Melius perit tunica quam anima; Better lose generation, than regeneration; better part with thy old corruption, than misse thy new hope of salvation.
Of Old things, some are pleasant, some unprofitable, some pernicious. Pleasant, is an old friend, Proverb. 23.10. Thy old friend and thy Fathers friend forsake not: A good old servant, an old monument of honour, old truth, theIerem. 6.16. old way, unprofitable; an old tree past bearing, an old house past inhabiting, an old ship in danger of sinking, an old garment past mending, an old ill custome past curing. Pernicious; such is Satan, that old Serpent, Revel. 20. Old sinne, Nah. 2.11. The old Lion devoures terribly, an old dogge bites sore, that old Serpent stings deadly, 2 Esdr. 5.53. A woman when shee is old, brings not forth so goodly children, as in her youth: shee ceaseth teeming. But Concupiscence, the older shee growes, the stronger she is to beare the children of unrighteousnesse. The world is old and weake, man old and sicke, sinne old and more infecting, the Devill old and more prevailing. The only way to evade their danger, is to become new; to talke with new tongues, Marke 16.17. and walke in new wayes, Matth. 2.12. then shall we have new names, Revel. 2.17. put on new garments, and have a portion in the new Ierusalem.
That hee was purged from his old sinnes.] Wee have considered the corruption and inveteratenesse of sinne; now observe what measure of mercie was extended to him in the delivery from it; Hee was purged. This place seemes not so easie at the first blush, as upon better search it will appeare diffcult. Hee was purged, yet he is granted an ungodly person: Now how can a reprobate be said to be purged from his sinnes? For this is a sure ground; Deus remittit omnia peccata, vel nulla: If God remit some sinnes, he retaines none: if no sinne be remitted, that man is not purged. If hee bee purged, how can he forget it? If he have forgotten it, how was he purged?
Some understand it thus; that this purging is meant by the shedding of CHRISTS bloud, whereby the whole world is purged, Iohn 1.29. But that all men are purged by CHRISTS bloud, is neither a true position in it selfe, nor a true exposition of this place. The bloud of Christ onely purgeth his Church, Ephes. 5.26. And there are none admitted to stand before the Throne, but such as have washed their roabes, and made them white in the bloud of the Lambe.Revel. 7.14. If any soule be thus washed, he shall never be confounded. If this man were thus purged, how could he forget it? God was in Christ reconciling the world to himselfe.2 Cor. 5.19. Yet no man thinkes that the whole world shall goe to heaven; for then were hell mad to no purpose. So God loved the world, that hee gave his Sonne;1 Iohn 5.19. yet the whole world lies in wickednesse. Thus it is cleare; Expiation was offered for the world, and offered to the world; but those that are blessed by it, be separated from the world, Ioh. 15.19. I have chosen you out of the world. Salvation may be said to belong to many, that belong not to salvation. Now the reprobate forgets, that a purgation was made for him, by the shedding of the Messiah's bloud, which is a wretched thing, to forget so great a ransome?
Goe to the Garden, and there behold thy Saviour groaning under the weight of sin, heavie enough to have pressed to death millions of Angels, legions of men, the whole world; sweating drops of bloud, as if he were cast into the furnace of Gods wrath that melted him. Behold him offring that mouth, which spake as never man or Angell spake, to a traitor to kisse. Quod Iudas vendidit, and Iudaeus emit; What the traitour sold, and the murtherer bought, thou hast obtained: he is thine, not the Iewes that purchased him: now hast thou gotten him, and yet forgotten him? That which tickles thy heart with laughter, made the heart of thy Saviour bleed; and hast thou forgotten it? His soule was pressed to death with the sinnes wee never shrinke at: his eyes wept teares of bloud, ours flow with teares of laughter: hee felt those torments wee cannot conceive: wee cannot understand what hee did stand under. Were wee so foule, that nothing but his bloud could
 purge us, and doe wee forget that purging? Doe we forget that crie, whereat heaven and earth, men and Angels, stood amazed, My GOD, my GOD, why hast thou forsaken mee? The very senselesse creatures did not forget it: the heavens were hung with blacke, the Sunne did hide his face like a chiefe mourner, and durst not behold his Passion. Now, Solus homo non compatitur, pro quo solo Christus patitur? For man alone was all this passion, yet in man alone is least compassion. I know thou condemnest Iudas, and that worthily; who sold CHRIST a man, there was murther: CHRIST his Master, there was treason: CHRIST his Maker, there was sacriledge. Murther is a crying sinne, Treason a roaring sinne, Sacriledge a thundring sinne.
Thou condemnest the Iewes for buying him: they bought him not to possesse as their owne; they should so have made the best purchase in th world, to have bought Him that bought them. But they bought him to sell him againe, as Simon Magus would have bought the HOLY GHOST; given money for him, to have got money by him.Prov. 23.23. Buy the Truth, and sell it not. They bought him to binde, abuse, mocke, spit on, scourge, crucifie him. Thou condemnest these; and shall not these, and the GOD of all condemne thee, if thou use thy SAVIOUR after the same manner? They crucified Iesum humilitatum, Christ in his mortalitie: thou crucifiest Iesum glorificatum, Christ in his immortalitie. Thy sinne is, and thy judgement shall be greater; because thy knowledge, and his glory is more.
Hath he suffered all this to purge us, and will we not yet let him alone? Shall we not suffer the Sonne of God to be at rest in his heaven? Shall wee blaspheme and sweare him quite over, open his wounds with our oathes, give him new potions of gall with our drunkennesse, pierce him againe with our oppressions, defile him againe with our lusts, runne him into the heart with our homicides; and still forget all this? Take wee heed, for he feeles it, and therefore does not forget it: the lewd Christian may come to see him, even whom himselfe hath pierced. Doe we offer violence to that glorified SAVIOUR; and with a presumptuous hand lifted up to the heaven, pull him downe from his Throne to his Crosse? Is it not enough that hee died once for us? Are those paines so light, so slight, and have wee so soone forgotten them, that every day wee should redouble them? Is this the recompence of those infinite torments? In vaine thy tongue cries Hosanna, when thy hand crucifies him. How darest thou receive the Sacrament with that hand, that is so imbrued in his blood whom thou receivest! Hee that sells that for a little pleasure, which CHRIST bought with so much paine; Stultum reputat Christum mercatorem; Thinkes CHRIST but a foolish buyer, and that hee had a hard peny-worth: but indeed Stultum se praebet venditorem; he proves him a foolish seller; and with Esau, will repent his bargaine.
Now hath Christ done so much to purge us, and can we forget it? Can such a benefit die in our memories? No, Toto nobis figatur in corde, qui totus pro nobis fixus in cruce, August. Let every redeemed heart, remember his Redeemer. Forget not the Passion of thy Saviour, O my soule: but Totus sit fixus in me, qui totus est crucifixus pro me; Let him be wholly fastned in me, that was wholly fastned to the Crosse for me.
Some understand by this Purging, true Regeneration: in this Exposition the Romanists are confident and peremptorie. But so taken, it is mistaken: for if hee were regenerate, hee could never forget it. Vpon this collection they build, that a man may fall away from grace, and that without distinction, even totally and finally. Here they crie Vicimus, wee have conquered; the Calvinians are confuted, confounded: but this trumpet might bee blowne with a straw. Their Logicke is too hastie; they force theit conclusion to ride post. As in their Indulgences and Pardons they move men to presumption: so in this they drive them to desperation; any way serves their turnes to deceive. If this their position were true, they must needs be false, Ioh. 13.1. Whom he loves, he loves to the end: and
 that Rom. 8.38. Nothing can separate us from the love of God in Christ: And Heb. 13.8. then were Iesus Christ not the Same, yesterday; and to day, and for ever. But the Spirit of Adoption is an everlasting Spirit: and Gods mercy, like his Majestie, endures for ever: and the gifts of grace are without repentance: God will never retract them, for he is no changeling. I the Lord change not. Man is unconstant,Malac. 3.6. riches are unconstant, honour is inconstant, friends are inconstant, a wife is inconstant, the world is inconstant: onely Ego Iehovah non mutor; I the Lord change not. Hee doth not to day love dearely, and to morrow hate deadly; but whom he blesseth,Gen. 27.33.shall be blessed. CHRIST will not quench the smoking flax, but inflame the least sparke of grace. Fides concussa, non excussa: the light may bee eclipsed, not extinguished. But they object, Matth. 18.32. I forgave thee all the debt: yet vers. 34. he cast him into prison, till he should pay all that was due unto him: The debt remitted, is againe required. I answer, that the scope of that parable is to shew, that God will no otherwise forgive us, then we forgive others. For certainly if a man be once acquitted, hee can never for that debt be damned. Gods covenant depends not on our obedience, but our obedience depends on Gods covenant. Wee are not therefore loved, because we are holy: but we are therefore holy, because we are loved. If this purging had beene absolute Regeneration, it could never be forgotten: for all the promises of God are Yea and Amen in Iesus Christ.
Some expound it thus; he was purged, that is, hee thought himselfe purged: hee was onely cleane in his owne opinion. So CHRIST calls the Pharisies Iust, because they justified themselves, Luke 15.7.Luke 15.7. This opinionative purging easily revolteth to prophanenesse: hee that never had but the case of a sheepe, may very well be a Wolfe. They slumber, and suppose themselves good Christians: their faith is but a dreame, their hope but a dreame, their charitie but a dreame, their obedience but a dreame, their whole religion but a dreame; and so their assurance of salvation is but a dreame. They have regeneration in conceit, repentance and righteousnesse in conceit, they serve GOD well in conceit, doe the workes of pietie and charitie in conceit, and they shall goe to heaven onely in conceit. Get better assurance than onely to thinke thy selfe good: pure and naked supposalls bring no man to eternall life.
Others; as Luther, referre this Purging to Baptisme: which exposition may carry a probable and profitable sense. This Saint Paul calls the Laver of Regeneration; but Metanimice; hee meanes the signe or seale of it. Our purgation by CHRISTS bloud is not onely granted to us in the Charter of the Gospell, but also confirmed in the Sacramentall Seales. In the old Testament there was Circumcision, contra peccati reatum: and Occision, or the Passeover, contra peccati poenam; as the Schoole speaketh.
Answerable to these we have Baptisme and the LORDS Supper: now it is the generall consent of the Fathers, that in the most compleat Baptisme sinne is not so taken away, Quod non sit, sed quod non obsit: non quoad actum, sed quoad reatum; Sinne is still within the faithfull, but it shall not be destructive to them in whom it is. Indeed if wee consider the inward baptisme of the Spirit with the outward, there is a true purging. The laver of regeneration cleanseth from the guilt of all sinnes, quae vel humana traxit nativitas, vel contraxit iniquitas, August. So Lactantius sings of the baptised Infant: Candidus egreditur nitidis exercitus undis: Atque vetus vitium purgat in amne novo. Aquinas sayes, this Sacrament is a Commemoration, a Demonstration, a Prognostication: a Commemoration of Christs Death, that is past: a Demonstration of CHRISTS grace, that is present: a Prognostication of CHRISTS Glory, that is to come. Thus can the GOD of Power effect his will by weake meanes: as the aspersion of bloud on the doores without, shall save the effusion of bloud in the house within.Exod. 12. Naaman must wash in Iordan, the blinde in Siloam, the lame in Bethesda, wee in the sacred Font. As none entred the Sanctuarie, but they first washed in the
 golden laver: so ordinarily none enter the Church, but they are first washed in this holy fountaine.
Now to this, outward Baptisme is necessary, necessitate conditionata, with a conditionall necessitie: inward, necessitate absoluta; with an absolute necessitie. Baptisme purgeth not,Pareus. Vt pharmacum, aut opus expiatorium, sed ut Sacramentum, foederis obsignatorium; It healeth not as a medicine, by it owne inherent vertue; but as a seale of his mercy, by whose grace we are saved. Not necessitate medii, sed mandati; the necessarinesse of it is derived from the Commandement of GOD. A man may have it, and yet bee lost: as Magus had Sacramentum virtutis, but not virtutem Sacramenti; the Sacrament of grace, but not the grace of the Sacrament. Another may want it, and yet bee saved: as that penitent malefactour was never washed in Iordan, yet received into Paradise. Sacraments then save not, Efficienter, sed efficaciter; not necessarily, but ordinarily. Vnde tanta vis aquae, ut dum corpus lavet, cor abluat? non quod dicitur, sed quod creditur, August. Whence hath the water such vertue, that washing the bodie, it should purge the soule? Not because it is so said, or, so sprinkled; but because it is so beleeved. It is not therefore enough to have Sacramentum fidei, but Fidem Sacramenti; Not to have the Sacrament of faith, but the faith of the Sacrament. Hee that beleeves, and is baptised, shall bee saved. Hee that is thus baptised, is truely purged: and as upon CHRIST being baptised, the HOLY GHOST descended: so the Spirit, which once moved on the face of the waters, shall worke with the water upon his soule. And as there came a voice to CHRIST from heaven; This is my beloved Sonne, in whom I am well pleased: So doth GOD the Father secretly spake to the baptized Infant; Thou art my beloved childe; with whom (though before I was angry) I am now well pleased. Before thou wast a childe of wrath, an heire of perdition: but nowPsal. 2.7. thou art my sonne, this day have I begotten thee.
If this wicked man had beene so purged, hee could never have forgotten it. But hee had onely Baptismum Fluminis, non Flaminis; The Baptisme of water, not of the Spirit. And is not this a miserable and damnatorie sinne, to forget a mans Baptisme? Not to remember that his name is Christian? It is pitie that ever the water of Baptisme was spilt upon his face. Wert thou borne in sinne, non prius natus quam damnatus; A stranger to the life of GOD? And loe, then did thy parents bring thee to the sacred Font; and when thou couldest not answer for thy selfe, was not GOD pleased to take sureties for thee, witnesses of thy future obedience? Did the Church open her bosome to receive thee to her Mother-hood, GOD to his Father-hood, CHRIST to his Brother-hood, Angels to their guard and societie, all the Elect to their prayers and charitie; and canst thou forget all this? Wilt thou disclaime Christians, despise the Angels, deny thy Brother, defie thy Mother, reject thy Father, and runne a course c^osse to pietie and eternall life? Shall not, at that great day, men forsake thee, devils accuse thee, Angels repudiate thee, the Church be ashamed of thee, thy Father disinherite thee, yea, even thy Brother now become thy Iudge, the LORD IESUS condemne thee? What can save thee, if thou forget thou wert a purged Christian?
Beloved, thinke of the end of your washing; it was that you should no more foule your selves, Acts 22.16. Bee baptized, and wash away your sinne, calling on the Name of the LORD. The Eunuch being baptized, became a Saint: Descendit Ethnicus, resurgit Christianus: Hee went downe into the water a Heathen, hee came up a Christian. The cruell Gaolor, baptised, became a zealous professour. Baptisme is in poenitentiam, Matth. 3. to amendment of life. Therefore say with the Spouse, Cant. 5.3. I have washed my feet, how shall I defile them? Forget not that Sacramentall vow made to God, in the presence of men and Angels. Did it flie up to heaven, and does it not stay there to testifie against thee? Thou vowed'st
 thy selfe a souldier, not a neuter: to fight for the Lord, not to stand still and looke on; much lesse to fight against him: for Cursed is hee that takes not the Lords part.Iudg. 5.23. Thou must fight: thou doest fight; but against whom? not against the world, thy owne lust, the power of Satan; but against thy brethren. Vpon every slight occasion we must to Law: like Cockes of the game; that fight neither pro patria, nor pro domo: so wee contend not pro cure, jure, thure; not for the title of inheritance, not for the right of the poore, nor for the cause of Religion: but Quia alter alteri cedere non vult; but because one will not yeeld to another. Turbulent Lawyers are the abettors that set them on; the Cock-pit is Westminster-Hall; and when they have pecked out one anothers eyes, they pull their feathers. Is this to fight the LORDS battell? No, it is to bee on the Dragons side. Doe wee warre against the world? No, wee fight not like Alexander, to subdue it to our selves, but to subdue our selves to it. Runne thorow the shoppes of this Citie, and you may know by their weapons; false measures, false ballances, false lights, false tongues; what they fight for. O the mercie of GOD! Have wee forgot our names? Is there no memory of our Christianitie left? Wee had but some prints and reliques of it at first; and may we now say, as of Ierusalem; Etiam periere ruinae? Is there no ruine nor stone left, to tell a mans selfe; This building was a Christian? It is reported of Orbilius, a Grammarian, that hee forgot not onely the letters of his booke, but even his owne name. We forget both the prints and letters of the Gospell, and withall our owne names; that wee are Christians. As GOD said to that evill servant; Ex ore tuo te judico;Luke 19.22. Out of thine owne mouth I will judge thee: So he will speake to this Apostate, Ex nomine te damno; By thine owne name will I condemne thee: Thou namest thy selfe Christian, yet shamest the profession. Now the Spirit of God purge us from this forgetfulnesse, and grant us never to forget our purging. Let us never forget such a benefit, that we may never be forgotten by the Author of it.
He hath forgotten that hee was purged. Here is his unthankfulnesse for this deliverance. What, blinde, and forgotten too? How comes this to passe? Blindnesse should ever have the best memory: what is taken from one sense, is divided among the rest. The eare retaines what it is intrusted with, the better; when the eye wants occasion to direct it. The memorie is like a cage, the eare is the doore of it, the eye the window: good doctrines are put like birds in at the doore, and flie out againe by setting open the window. Indeed the defect of corporall sight hath often mended the memorie; but it is not so for spirituall, Mark. 8.18. Having eyes, see yee not? and doe yee not remember? They neither saw, nor remembred. A carnall heart is blinde to conceive, readie to forget, 2 Timoth. 3.7. Ever learning, never able to come to the knowledge of the truth: slow to get, apt to forget. As Nescitis, know you not, was a word often used by Saint Paul: so, Doe you not remember, was frequent from our SAVIOUR CHRIST, 2 Tim. 1.13. Hold fast the forme of sound words; that good thing which was committed to thee, keepe. An auditour should not bee like the spunge, that holds all water both good and bad: nor like the sieve, that holds no water, neither good nor bad: nor like the boulter, that keepes in the course branne, and throwes out the fine flowre: but like the scrie, that keepes in the good seed, and casteth out the dust and unprofitable darnell. One said of our Countrey, that it had faire houses, but bad chimneyes, because they have so little smoke of hospitalitie: so we have excellent eares, but bad memories: quick conceptions, brittle retentions: not a Nation under heaven heares so many good Sermons; not a Nation under heaven sooner forgets them. Many arts are taught among us, of quicke reading, of short writing; where by brachigraphicall characters they will take a Sermon verbatim. But there is one art, I would some good body would teach it us; it is the art of memory. That as Sermons are taken word for word in our papers; so they might be written sense for sense in our hearts

Now if my power were answerable to my will, I would teach you this art. Posse mihi Is tribuat qui mihi velle dedit. To dispose this discourse of memorie into some method, lest it be confounded in that should teach it. The object of memorie specified in the Text, is double; the estate of sinne wherein we lay polluted, and the estate of cleansing wherein we stood recovered. So that the point is here confined to sinnes or good workes. For our sinnes, let us first learne how to remember them, and then how we may forget them.
First, for their remembrance; Chrysostome saies, nothing more helpes us forward in a good course, than the frequent recognition of our sinnes. David specially intitleth the 38. Psal. a memorandum. A Psalme of David to bring to remembrance. Vpon good reason saith Euthymius, because he made it when he called his sinnes to remembrance. Cum commissa olim a se delicta memoria repeteret, Ver. 4. My iniquities, etc. Paul thus remembers his former sinfulnesse of life;1 Tim. 1.13.I was a blesphemer, etc. and so he became more zealous to save sinners than before hee had beene furious to kill the godly. Quod fecit Saulus, patitur Paulus: of a violent persecutor, he became a valiant sufferer. Our sins are innumerable,Psal. 19.12. who can tell how oft he offendeth. Thou remembrest not the sins of one day, how great a masse have many dayes made up!Ier. 44.9. too great a bottome for one houres sorrow to ravell out. Have you forgotten the wickednesse of your fathers, and your owne wickednesse that you are not humbled even unto this day? If we forget our sinnes, God will remember them. The wicked man would put out the eye of knowledge, and stupefie the memory of infinite comprehension:Psal. 10.11. Psal. 5^.21. He saies in his heart, God hath forgotten. But, These things hast thou done, and I kept silence: therefore thou thoughtest that I was altogether such a one as thy selfe: but I will reprove thee, and set them in order before thine eyes. The forborne debter may forget, but the forbearing Creditor remembers: every parcell is set downe in his booke. Ahab had forgot Nabaoths bloud, but God remembers it. Ioab had forgot the murder of Abner and Amasa; but David chargeth Salomon to remember it:1 King. 2.6. Let not his hoary head goe downe to the grave in peace. But if we remember our sinnes in the day of repentance, God will forget them in the day of vengeance. He will answere as Cato to him that stroke him in the Bath, and afterwards submitted himselfe to his mercie; Non memini me percussum; I doe not remember that I was smitten. Ananias pleaded against Paul, Act. 9.13. Lord remember how much evill he hath done to thy Saints: but the Lord answers, Oblitus sum, he is my chosen vessell.Act. 17.30. The times of this ignorance God winked at, but now he commandeth all men every where to repent. Repent then, and all shall be forgotten. At what time soever, what sinner soever, shall turne from what sinne soever, heartily; I will put all his wickednesse out of my remembrance: the Lord wil forget it, Heb. 8.12. I will be mercifull to them, and their sinnes I will remember no more. But it is the Holy Ghost,Ioh. 14.26.that brings all things to our remembrance. Now this holy spirit of memorie, teach us thus to remember our sinnes: that we may thinke of them with penitent sorrow, and God forget them to our eternall joy.
There is a way also for us to forget them: as we remember them to repentance, so we must forget them in respect of continuance. Otherwise the memorie of them doth not reduce us to life, but forward us to death. This is to fetch poison out of a dunghill formerly cast forth. He that remembers his sinnes in sorrow, falls like Abraham, forward on his face to God: he that remembers them to practise, falls like the Iewes, backward from IESUS CHRIST. If thou be on the mountaine, have no love to looke backe to Sodome. If thou bee in the Arke, flie not backe to the world, as the Raven did. If thou be set on for Canaan, forget the fleshpots of Aegypt. If marching against Midian, forget stooping to the waters of Harod. Iudg. 7. Mark. 13.15. If on the house top, forget that is below thee: Luk. 9.62. If thy hand be put to the plow, forget that is behind thee. Themistocles desired rather to learne the art of forgetfulnesse, than of memorie. Philosophy is an art of remembring, Divinity includes in it an art of forgetting. The first lesson that Socrates taught his Scholers,
 was Reminiscere, Remember: for he thought that knowledge was nothing else but a calling to remembrance of those things the mind knew, ere it knew the body. But the first lesson that Christ teacheth his Schollers, is Obliviscere; Forget, Psal. 45.10. Forget thine owne people, Matth. 4.17. Repent, 1 Pet. 3.11. First, eschew evill
They which dye cloth, doe not immediately change one contrary into another; but first turne white into an azure, then make it a puke, etc. so we can never hold colour, or have our integrity died in graine, but by mediate degrees. Nisi dediscimus bene, quod dicimus non bene, Lirinens. What we did ill get, we must well forget: and happily unlearne what we did unhappily learne. They that worke in waxe, cannot forme a new impression, but by defacing the old: till Satans image be extinguished, CHRISTS cannot be imprinted in us. We must forget the wildernesse, that wee may dwell in Canaan. Faith is that faire Helen, which drinkes to us in a cup of Nepenthe, and saies;Revel. 21.4. There shall be no more sorrow; for vetera transierunt, the former things are passed away. The hearty draught of the living fountaine, shall make a man not to remember the daies of his life; because God answereth him in the joy of his heart. The Scripture is full of this language, Esa. 43.18. Remember not the former things, neither consider the things of old. There are some dissolute persons, that laugh at the memoriall of their sinnes: shall they not weepe teares of bloud for those smiles? Woe bee to them that thus laugh, for they shall weepe. When they are past committing,Luk. 6.25. they applaud themselves in recounting, in reporting their aspersions of fraud, bloud, or lust:Phil. 3.19. they glory in their shame. They remember that on earth laughing, which they must remember in hell howling. This is a cursed commemoration; when an old man shall glory in his former whoredomes, boast his homicides; yea perhaps (if it be possible) make himselfe worse than ever he was. Some men lie to save their credits; and that is as if one should wipe his mouth on his sleeve to spare his napkin. But this man tells lies to encrease his discredit; and to fill up the measure of his torments. As if his damnation could not otherwise be heavy enough, his tongue shall make up the waight which his hands failed to accomplish. Here is a damnable remembrance of sinne; not by penitence to cleanse the soule, but by impudence, more to foule it, Psal. 52.1. why boastest thou thy selfe in mischiefe.
No, but if thou hast had a fluxe of malice, as that woman a fluxe of bloud,Marke 5. 12. yeeres; now being cured, forget that bloudinesse. If thou hast beene depressed with worldlinesse, as another woman with a spirit of infirmitie, 18. yeeres. Now being rectified, forget that crrokednesse. Though blind from thy birth, as the man,Luk. 13. Ioh. 9. now having thine eyes opened, forget thy former cecitie. Though formerly deafe and dumbe, upon CHRISTS Ephata, forget those orbities.Mark. 7.32. Though thy charitie were dryed up, like that mans withered hand, Matthew 12.10. yet now upon the restitution of it, forget all drynesse and niggardice.Act. 14.8. Though thou wert a creeple from the wombe, yet now being recovered, forget all limping and halting with God. Though buried in the grave foure daies, yet now being revived, forget all deadnesse in sinne. Though before tormented with seven divells, as Mary Magdalen; yet being dispossessed, forget the devill and all his workes. Forget Babylon, but remember Ierusalem, Psal. 137.5. If I forget thee, O Ierusalem; If I doe not remember thee; let both my hand and mouth miscarry, and forget their offices. Forget thy old sinfull life;Psal. 45.11. So shall the King greately desire thy beauty. Forget not the mercies of God, lest God forget to doe you good: but forget all the injuries of men: write the wrongs in their dust, and cover all offences done to you with a mantle of charitie. The Summe of all is; remember your sinnes to repent of them, forget to practise them: that God may forget them in judgement, and remember you in mercie and salvation.
This be the method of memorie in respect of sin; now for the workes of grace; I doe not meane such as GOD hath wrought in us, but such as our selves by his grace have done. There is a rule how they may be remembred, and how they must be forgotten.

Our vertues and good workes may be after some manner remembred. Quam immensa est laetitia de recordatione transactae virtutis!Bern. Rom. 14.17.Our conscience is exceedingly comforted by the memorie of our zealousnesse to serve God. The kingdome of God consists in righteousnesse, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost. Now, if there be knowledge of righteousnesse, then certainly there will bee peace of conscience; and these cannot bee without joy of the Holy Ghost. Iob hath a whole Chapter of these holy remembrances. Chapter 31. If I have walked, etc. and hee concludes; My heart shall not condemne me for my dayes. So sicke Hezekiah cheared himselfe.Esa. 38.3. Lord, remember how I have walked before thee with a perfect heart. So Obadiah after a sort justified himselfe to Elias, 1 King. 18.13. Diddest thou not heare, how I saved the Prophets of the LORD from Iesabel? The purpose of this repitition, is not to boast merits, but to seeke mercies. Neither must this line of remembred goodnesse be there cut off, but extended forth still: like a man that counts his miles past, but yet goes on his journey. Hee that is holy, let him bee holy still, Revelations 22.11. The further men fetch their careere backward to take their runne; the further they leape forward when they have runne. So a sober recognition of our former obedience, remembring what peace of conscience wee had in that service, encourageth our future constancie. There are some who looking to this Record, find their owne names blanke. What, no good deeds yes, but they have lost their memories: they cannot call to mind where, or when, or how they performed them. Like the drunkard who sought all the Innes in the towne for his horse, when indeed he came thither on foote. These men may blame their bad memories, but the fault is in their bad hands and hearts. Some have their good deeds written upon Hospitall walls; perhaps lest God should forget them. But we will charitably construe it; that they were recorded there rather by the gratitude of the receivers, then by the popular desire of the contributers. Howsoever, it is somewhat that they have good deeds to remember. But too many have none at all: will you blame their memories? no, God amend their lives.
In another course, our good workes are to be forgotten, and not mentioned: let them be remembred to enliven our obedience, and comfort our conscience: but rather than we should arrogate merite by them, oblivion take them. He that in pride remembers his vertues, hath indeed no vertues to remember; because he wants the mother vertue of all, humility. Here is one difference betweene good and evill men: both remember vertues; Pii aliorum, impii suas: good men remember the vertues of others, evill men their owne. They thinke on others vertues as ensamples to imitate, these on their owne as miracles to wonder at. The way to have God remember them, is for our selves to forget them. Abraham was content to offer up Isaac, but then he forgets it, therefore God remembers it, Gen. 22.16. Because thou hast done this thing: there is the generall: what thing? the particular followes, And hast not withheld; not thy servant, but Thy sonne: and not onely thy sonne, but thy onely sonne; therefore in blessing, I will blesse thee. Mary shewed to CHRIST great kindnesse; but when she had done, she thought it not worth remembrance: therfore CHRIST repeats it,Luk. 7.44. and amplifies it from point to point. Simon, thou gavest me neither water to my feete, nor kisse to my mouth, nor oile to my head; but shee hath washed me with teares, kissed with her lips, and anointed my very feete.
Who dare boast himselfe to God! If in a brave theomachy, thy memorie produceth a thousand good workes, Gods memorie will bring forth tenne thousand of thy sinnes, to knocke thee downe. Therefore let us cast downe our most flourishingMatth. 21.8. branches, and our most gloriousRevel. 4.10. Crownes at the feete of CHRIST. If Senacherib have conquered kingdomes,Dan. 4.30. you shall heare him cracke it, Esa. 37.13. Where is the king of Hamach, etc. If Nebuchadnezzar have built a stately palace, hee must bragge of it; Is not this great Babylon, I have built for the honour of my majestie? David himselfe could not be content with the multitude of his people, but he must needs number them, 2 Samuel 24.2. If Hezekiah have rich treasures, hee must
 needs shew them, 2 Kin. 20.13. victorious Sampson must glory in his conquests, Iudg. 15.16. With the jaw of an asse have I slaine a thousand men. But for us, though we give almes, let us sound no trumpets, Matth. 6.2. though we fast twice a weeke, let us makeLuke 18.12.no words of it. God best likes of those good workes, that be covered under the fleece of humble silence. So the Lord that seeth in secret, will reward openly, Matth. 6.4. Humilitas animi, sublimitas Christiani. The christians glory is his humility. Saint Paul was in nothing behind the very chiefest Apostles;Leo. yet hee accounts himselfe nothing, 2 Cor. 12.11. I laboured more aboundantly than they all, 1 Cor. 15.10. yet he forgets it. I speake with tongues more than you all.1 Cor. 14.18. I speake wisdome among you that are perfect, 1 Cor. 2.6. I fought with beasts at Ephesus after the manner of men, 1 Cor. 15.32. yea he cals all the former sufferings, things without: hee had a thing within that troubled him;2 Cor. 11.28.The care of all the Churches. He was rapt up to the third heaven, and perfected his knowledge among the Angels. Yet he esteemes, hoc aliquid, hoc magnum, hoc mirum, hoc totum, nihil; He forgets all this in regard of merit, as if it were nothing. Whereas we, if wee have done one thing well, or at one time well, thinke we have done enough. Orpheus going to hell to fetch out his wife Euridice, had her granted him on this condition, that he should not turne backe to looke upon her till he had brought her forth. But being forward a good way, in an excessive love, Flexit amans oculos, and protinus illa relapsa est: he looked backe and so lost both her sight and her selfe: but perhaps when he considered better of the matter; he was willing to be rid of her. This fiction is not without the morrall, if we have any vertue, though it be as deere as a wife unto us, let us not dote on it with a selfe-loving admiration; lest by too much looking, and too well liking, we lose it* let us not be too memorious of our good workes; it is enough that God will not forget them.Matt. 26.13. This deed shall be told for a memoriall of her. We had better have one written in heaven, than a thousand in earth: whosoever forgets them, the comfort is, they shall be remembred of Christ.
The summe of all is this; unthankfulnesse is even forgetfull. This is the first degree of apostacie.Psal. 78.11.42They forgate his workes, and remembred not his hand, nor the day when he delivered them from their enemies. Nathan taxed David with this forgetfulnesse, 2 Sam. 12.8. How much hath God done for thee, yet hast thou forgotten it, and despised his Commandement? So Pharaohs officer forgate Ioseph, when he came to his preferment.2 Chron. 24.22. Ioash the King remembred not the kindnesse of Iehojada, but slew his sonne. Hath God delivered, purged, blessed us, and can we forget it?Deut. 8.14. Beware lest thou lift up thine heart, and forget the Lord. David would not suffer the blessings of God to lye in tenebris, unseene of men, unremembred of his owne heart, but he proclaimes them, Psal. 66.16. Come all yee that feare the Lord, and I will tell you what he hath done for my soule. Let others write the kindnesses of their friends, I will relate to you the mercies of my God, Psal. 40.10. and 71.15. Of all faculties of the soule, the memory is most delicate, tender and brittle, and soonest decayeth: and of all objects of memroy, Primum senescit beneficium, a benefit soonest growes old. Yet it is an easie worke of memory, to thinke on him that made us: here is no over-charging it with numerous objects; to remember onely one thing, the mercy of thy God. It is no weakening to thy body, no decay to thy store, no emptying to thy purse; O then be thankfull! And yet all thy riches, thy fatlings, thy first fruits, thy best oblations are not so acceptable: it is more welcome than the Bullocke that hath horne and hoofe, Psal. 77.9. Hath God forgotten to be gracious? He hath then left his old wont: No, David had forgotten the richnesse of his mercy; therefore hee recollects himselfe, vers. 10. This is mine infirmitie; but I will remember the yeeres of the right hand of the most High. Not the moments, nor the houres, nor dayes of a few short afflictions; that his left-hand hath dealt to me: but the yeeres of his right hand; those long, large, and boundlesse mercies wherewith he hath comforted me.1 Sam. 12.9. When they forgate the Lord, he sold them into the hand of Sisera, and to the Philistims- They that forget the Lord, shall be delivered into the hand of Sisera, Captaine of
 the enemies host, that is, Satan; or to the Philistims, the Lusts of the Flesh; or to Moab, that's the world.Psal. 50.22. Consider this yee that forget God: though you forget your owne countrey, and your fathers house: though you forget the wife of your bosome, and the fruite of your owne loynes: though you forget to eate your bread, and take your sleepe: yet remember your sanctification, forget not that you were purged by the bloud of CHRIST. If you have treasures and Iemmes, you desire a Cabinet to put them in: I have shewed you a Cabinet for all the Iewells of grace you have gathered, the memorie. If you have received any good, there preserve it. Paul tells the Hebrewes, Hebr. 12.5. You have forgotten the exhortation: let it never bee said of you, that yee have forgotten the exhortation spoken to you.
Forgotten that he was purged. There remaines yet one degree more of application and amplification of this point. Consider we the price of our Pargation, and we shall more willingly part from our corruption. If the bloud of Gods sonne was spil^ and spent to discharge us of sinne; how odious should sinne appeare to us! Oh let no sinne be held so deare as to be retained, when God retained not his dearest sonne for us. When Abraham offered up Isaac, God said; I see thou lovest me: but when God offered up his sonne for us, (that were, not as God to Abraham, a friendly Creator, but) enemie creatures, we may well say; LORD, we see that thou lovest us. Abrahams offering Isaac was a grievous tryall; both for the matter and the manner: that Talis, Talem, Taliter. 1. That the sacrificer should be a father. It is contranaturall and execrable for a sonne to slay his father; to give death to him, that gave him life. Herodotus writes of some that held it unpossible for a sonne to kill his father. A great law-giver made no Law for it, as a thing never to be done. If any were suspected or accused for it, they would conclude that either he had not done it, or that he was a bastard; they could not be perswaded that any sonne would commit parricide. But now it is more strange for a father to slay his sonne: for love more descends than ascends. Wee have read of young ones that killed their owne damme, we never read of a damme that killed her owne young ones. But here Isaac is doomed to die, not by the hand of an enemie, not by a stranger, not by an executioner, not by a murderer; but by a father; a mild, gentle, holy, loving father. O utinam tantummodo moriturus, non patris manu moriturus! Abraham might say, Oh that it were only his destinie to die, and not to die by the hand of his father. 2. That the sacrifice should be his sonne, his Isaac, his joy: not onely his sonne, but his only sonne. Not one of many; yet Iacob cannot spare one of twelve, he weepes for Ioseph, he is grieved to part with Benjamin. Yea, that it must be that sonne, from whom the Messiah was to come; the hope of salvation to himselfe, and all the ends of the earth. 3. That hee must die after such a manner: a sacrifice to GOD, who delights not in the bloud of men: and this himselfe not standing by, but with his owne hand. Since he must die, o that aliena manu, non propria; that another hand might doe it, and the father not see it! Si fleres filium mortuum, quid si jussus occidere? doest thou lament thy sonne dying, what wouldest thou doe if thy selfe were commanded to kill him? God remembers this faithfull service with an oath. By my selfe have I sworne, that I will blesse thee for it. Sure he was loth his tender sonne to kill:Gen. 22.16. but much more loth to breake his fathers will.
But now to what purpose is all this? Yes, Abraham puts us in mind of God the Father, Isaac was a type of CHRIST: either gives up his only sonne, but with great difference: Abrahams dutie was but a shadow of Gods bountie. 1. Abraham at Gods command was bound to doe it, as a creature to his maker; but who could command God? Children are commanded by parents, their parents by magistrates, those magistrates by Princes, those Princes by God, God himselfe by none. 2. Abraham did this for a loving friend, God did it for hating enemies, Rom. 5.10. When we were enemies, he reconciled us by the death of his Sonne. 3. Abraham tradidi filium moriturum, Deus filium immortalem morti. Abraham offered a mortall son sure
 to die, God offered an Immortall sonne to death indeed. The one must have died though his father should never kill him: the other could never have died, unlesse the father had delivered him to death. Besides, he that was mortall scaped, he that was immortall died.
Now wherefore did God all this? to purge us from sinne. Sic filium crucifixit, ut peccatum occideret: so he killed his sonne, that he might kill our sinne: he was crucified that iniquity might be mortified. Ponder them, and waigh the reasons why our Saviour died: Sampson suffered his heire, his strength, to bee lost for Dalila: CHRIST suffered himselfe to be betrayed and murdered for us. Iacob endured foureteene yeeres service for Rachel. CHRIST above thirtie yeeres passion for us. Rachel was faire, therefore Iacob loved her: wee were foule and polluted, yet CHRIST loved us. Tollere peccatum mundi, intermisit gloriam caeli: he did descend from his owne royaltie, to deliver us from miserie. Diverse Kings have left their regall seates for a monasterie: CHRIST forsooke heaven for earth, a crowne of joyes for a crowne of thornes. Exemplum sine exemplo! Many refuse heaven for earths sake, because they know not those supernall joyes; CHRIST knew heaven, for it was his owne. All this for sin: fie filthy sin, that any soule should hereafter love thee! for this cause turne from iniquity to righteousnesse: doe thou for GODS sake not spare thy dearest sinne; when GOD for thy sake did not spare his dearest Sonne. Fall not backe to wickednesse and pollution; remember thou art purged by Iesus Christ.



VERSE 10. Wherefore, the rather, brethren, give diligence to make your calling and election sure: for if yee doe these things, yee shall never fall.

THe scope of this verse is perswasive and hortatory: wherein the Apostle labours to reduce Christianitie to practise; That as men have a plentifull hope of salvation, so they may shew a liberall argument of sanctification. For every one that hath this hope purgeth himselfe. 1 Ioh. 3.3. And he that is freed from damnation walkes after the spirit, Ro. 8.1. Neither can there be a sound testimonie of conscience, that we are in Gods favour; if it be not joyned with the integrity of life. That which from everlasting stood sure in heaven by Gods decree of election, this make sure to your selves on earth by your conversion from evill, and conversation in goodnesse. As God hath his Statutum est, so must you have your Probatum est. CHRIST hath bequeathed to all beleevers a legacie of glory, intitle your selves to it by your faith and holinesse; make your election sure. It was ever sure in GODS prescience, now make it sure to your owne conscience. Which when you have done, be stablished in your hearts; Yee shall never fall. He that hath a grant from the King under the broad-seale, and hath also interessed and strengthned himselfe in this grant Robore Legis, and hath approved himselfe Coram facie Iudicis; wants now nothing but possession, which the Sheriffe cannot deny him. So the Christian having both these made sure to him, when death shall manumitte him, the Angels shall bring
 him to the Inheritance, and the gate of glory shall give open way, the Porter not being Peter, but the LORD IESUS himselfe. A man in your Citie is to be made free by his fathers copy: you demand proofe that hee is such a mans sonne: hee proves it by testimonie, you cannot deny his freedome. The Father of heaven makes all Christians free by CHRISTS copy, Ioh. 8.36. If the Sonne make you free, shall you not be free indeed? Thou commest and demandest thy freedome: where is thy testimonie that thou art such a fathers son? here, my faith and some measure of obedience. Christ will answere, Matth. 25.21. Well done thou good and faithfull servant: enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.
Wherefore the rather brethren, etc. The whole Verse may bee distributed into:
An Exhortation; be diligent to make your election sure.An Confirmation; If yee doe ye shall never fall.
The Exhortation containes in it:
An Induction; Brethren, be diligent.An Instruction; Make your calling certaine.
In the former there is a word:
Of Connection; Wherefore.Of Affection; Brethren.Of Direction; Give diligence.Of Election; Rather, to this than other things.
In the other is considerable:
The Matter expressed; Make your calling and election sure.The Manner implied; How it may be made sure.
The Confirmation offers to be considered by:
A Qualification; If yee doe these things.A Ratification; You shall never fall.
The first branch of the first particular of the first generall, is the word of connection;Wherefore. Wherefore. This word inferres a consequence on the premisses, or is a reason of the precedent speech. The Apostle had formerly discovered the danger of such as forget their owne purging. But there are many that forget not that they were purged by the redemption of Christ, but remember it too much: and from this derive encouragement of a licencious life, quitting themselves from all sinnes by his passion. But Non sic didicistis Christum, Eph. 4.20. You have not so-learned Iesus Christ. Was your first lesson Christs Crosse, and did you so conster it, Rom. 6.1. Shall we continue in sinne, that grace may abound? He that thus spells Christ, hath but small literature of religion.Ioh. 5.14. Thou art made whole: sin no more lest a worse thing come unto thee. Here is a Cure, a Dyet, and a Danger. Thou art made whole, there's the cure. Sinne no more, there's the dyet. Lest a worse thing come unto thee, there's the danger. Let every one that calls on the name of the Lord Iesus, depart from iniquity, 2 Tim. 2.19. Art thou a Christian? Sit illi dominatio, a qu^ denominatio: acknowledge him thy Lord, of whom thou hast thy name and title: doe not usurpe that name unlesse thou lead an answerable life. Otherwise though thou carry a while the name of a Christian: thou wilt find at last the reward of an Infidell. If yee call God, Father; passe the time of your sojourning here in feare, 1 Pet. 1.17. Shall we acknowledge a Father, and deny him honour? The end of our conversion, is to amend our conversation: and that word which sounds peace and joy and remission of sins; leaves this lesson behind it; Sinne no more. As upon a generall pardon granted at a Royall Parliament, the prisons are emptied; yet the prisoners and malefactors have three memorable words spoken to them; Exite, gaudete, Cavete; Goe forth, rejoyce in your libertie, but beware lest your sins bring you backe againe. He that drawes arguments of presumption and ryot from CHRISTS death and passion; hath not perhaps forgotten his Saviour, but remembers him to the improvement of his owne damnation.

Brethren. This is a word of relation, betwixt the persons to whom, and the persons from whom, this admonition is sent. This declares in the Apostle two vertues; his Humilitie, and his holy Policie: both attribute to us some dignitie, and require from us some dutie.
For his Humilitie; he prefers not himselfe to the rest of Gods Saints, but cals them all Brethren. How contemptibly would hee judge of the Popes arrogated Primacie! What sacrilegious pride would be take it, to be called Pater omnium, the Father of all men; which is incommunicably proper to GOD himselfe? Indeed GOD bestowed upon Abraham this title;Rom. 4.11. to be called The Father of all them that beleeve. But this was Paternitas exempli, non causae; A father-hood of example onely. Hee might be a Father in respect of generation to the Iewes; hee can bee Father in respect of regeneration to none. Himselfe was the sonne of Faith, though called the Father of beleevers. But Esay 63.16. Doubtlesse, O LORD, thou art our Father, though Abraham bee ignorant of us. And this our title, to the Father-hood of GOD, and brother-hood of Christians, is through CHRIST: who is both Pater noster, and Frater noster; Our Father, Hebr. 2.13. Here am I, and the children which thou hast given mee. Our Brother, Hebr. 2.11. He is not ashamed to call us brethren. See here then, the different Spirit of Saint Peter and the Pope: one calls himselfe the Brother, the other the Father of the Saints. Indeed the Pastor may call his people, Children; and Paul calls Timothy his sonne, when he commends himselfe to him, 1 Tim. 1. Vnto Timothy my owne sonne in the faith: when he commends him to others, he calls him Brother, Hebr. 13.23. Our brother Timothy is set at libertie. But, saith our Saviour; Call no man father; for one is your Father in heaven.Matth. 23 9. Christ doth not there forbid naturall, civill, morall relations. Not naturall; Iacob may call Isaac Father. Not civill; the servants of Naaman spake unto him; My Father.2 King. 5.13. Not morall; as Elisha said to ascending Eliah; My Father, my Father, 2 King. 2.12. Things that are subordinate one to another, doe not oppose one another: we have one Father in heaven, yet may have many ministeriall fathers upon earth: but none in that sense that GOD is our Father. Pater Ecclesiae, the Father of the Church, the Pope cannot bee called without wrong to GOD. This title he chalengeth in Saint Peters right; but Saint Peter himselfe thinkes it wrong. CHRIST, say they, meant to turne over his right to Peter; as if he were to be his onely heire; Vpon this rocke I will build my Church. But the Church had a foundation from the beginning of the world; I hope Peter was not it. Hee calls us Brethren, to shew that he had but the priviledge of a brother, and did no otherwise than all the rest; beare the armes of the elder; he gives them all equall priviledge. The Old Testament began in fraternitie; Moses and Aaron: so doth the New; Peter and Andrew, Iames and Iohn, Simon and Iude, Philip and Bartholomew are also taken to bee brethren: so among the twelve Apostles, to be foure paire of brethren. Ex aequo fundavit Ecclesiam. And as CHRIST tooke them from an humble condition of estate, so hee gave them an humble opinion of themselves. For condition; he tooke no Gymnosophists from Indy, nor Philosophers from Athens, nor Orators from Rome, nor Rabbi's from Ierusalem; but men of no learning. When hee purposed to bring downe the proud hearts of men; Non per oratorem quasivit piscatorem, sed per piscatorem lucravit Imperatorem; He did not chuse Orators to perswade Fishers; but Fishers to convert Emperours For disposition; though they were dignified to be Apostles, yet they remaine still humble Brethren to the poorest. Non principandi superbiam, sed providendi vigilantiam tenent; They had not a lust of Soveraigntie, but a zeale of charitie. If therefore Peter had any Primacie, it was non dignitatis, sed ordinis; not of honour, but of order. Howsoever as Matthias for succeeding Iudas the Traytour, was never the worse: so the Pope for succeeding Peter the Saint, is never the better.
For his Policie; he desires to win their soules,Brethren. and therefore insinuates himselfe into their loves. Wee beginne our letters to men of honour with, Honourable: to
 kindred, with titles of Affinity: to friends, with termes of Amity: the Apostles with the best band, Brethren; beloved in the best Beloved, Iesus Christ. The phrase of [Brother] begins almost to be worne out: whether through Curiositie, or Curialitie, such Christian salutations are thought too grosse. But the Apostles wonted to let in their holy counsell by the sweetnesse of their affection. Notwithstanding their Apostolicall authoritie, and beauty of graces; yet they tooke all courses to insinuate and worke into their hearers hearts. Even when they came with a rod, yet was it not without the Spirit of meeknesse. In reproving of sinnes, they did it without passion, not without compassion. You may therefore well pardon us, if with points of Humanity, we illustrate points of Divinity: if according to your capacities, from earthly things we reason to heavenly.Matth. 7.11. So did our Saviour; If yee being evill parents, can give good gifts to your children; how much more shall your heavenly Father give good things to you? Philosophers were enemies to the Gospell; give us leave to confute them with their owne reasons; to cut off Goliahs head with his owne sword. All this while we give to secular learning praise, but no more than it deserves. It is a learned ignorance; yet if we can make it, like Balaam's Asse, speake to purpose; you have no wrong. In all our courses we seeke, non vestra, sed vos, not yours, but your selves: we love your soules, let your soules accept of our loves. If you will answer God in obedience, you answer us in the desire of our hearts.
Brethren: this title ascribes to the people some dignity; that by faith in Christ they become Brethren to the very Apostles, and have the fraternity of the heavenly Saints. Alliance to Princes is held a noble happinesse: but let us blesse him that hath by the cement of his bloud, allied us to those glorious and triumphant Saints in heaven. Be thou never so poore, if a true beleever; Peter and Paul, yea, IESUS CHRIST himselfe is thy Brother.
Againe, this terme is not without some requirable dutie. Is the Minister thy Brother? heare him. If God had spoken only by Angels, or by some raised from the dead, or by himselfe in thunder; this had beene terrour: but by thy Brother; this is the sweetnesse of familiar mercy. The Lord doth raise up unto us Prophets of our owne brethren, Act. 3.22. But take heed lest Gods gentlenesse be abused by thy contempt: it is the Word of thy Iudge and Maker, though in ore fratris, in the mouth of thy brother. I know that worldly greatnesse doth easily runne into this scorne; what, shall such a poore man reprove me? Yes, Ier. 1.10. I have set thee over nations and kingdomes, Act. 9.15. I have chosen him to beare my Name before Gentiles and Kings. Revel. 10.11. Thou shall prophesie before people, and nations, and Kings. If thou be the Shepheard, suffer none to pollute the fountaine whereof the sheepe should drinke. I know that the poorer sort are presumptuous enough, but they want teeth and hornes: The sonnes of Zerviah are too hard for us. If our conscience and the salvation of our soules lay not upon it, it were better for us to hold our peace. I speake not onely concerning the paines: if a man knew the burthen, it would take away his stomacke. Hierome on those words of Paul, 1 Tim. 3.7. He that desires the office of a Bishop, etc. Alas, who doth not desire it? But to be a Bishop, was then the first step to persecution: if it were stil so, to be prick'd for death, few would so much affect it. But I speake concerning the opposition of malice, rather than the imposition of labour; herein consists our sorrow and trouble. The shepheard having a lambe stollen out of his flocke, vowed to God if he could finde the theefe, to sacrifice a Ram to him. But when in the pursuite he found a Lion preying on it, he made a new vow; that if God would deliver him from the Lion, he would not onely content himselfe with the losse of his lambe, but also s^crifice a Bull to him. If a sheepe be endangered, we vow sacrifice of thankfulnesse, if we may recover it: but seeking the lost lambe, we meet with a Lion, some great Tyrant, that hath perverted him to feed his owne humour, and sensuall lust: we are now faine to returne without our lambe, and glad to escape the Lion. The sicke man lothes the cuppe wherein the potion was brought him, though it qualified the malignancie of his disease: so many for private
 quarrels hate the vessell, the Minister, though he brings them the water of life. It is Satans master-peece, or speciall tricke; to put jarre betwixt the Pastor and the people. Our feet should be beautifull, and we doe what we can to gaine your affections, to draw you on with sweet allurements to everlasting peace: yet still, as the Prophet speakes, there are some that will contend with the Priests. You give the Physitian leave to tell the disease of your bodies: the Lawyer to shew you any flaw in your estates: your horse-keeper shall tell you the surfets of your horse: your huntsman the surrances of your dogges: onely wee must dissemble, and conceale from you the sicknesse of your soules. We will not doe it; we will pray for you, and honour you, and love you: but your sinnes we will reprove, and what God hath bidden us, that we will speake. And for you that come hither, to fetch seeds of lust from the Temple, to seeke out the Devill in Gods house, as if you could not finde him in the places of prostitution: you that come hither to detract and tra^^ce, and thinke to enhaunce your credits of learning and wit by disgracing the Preacher: you come not as Brothers and Saints, but as enemies and worse. If there be any such present, my admonition is well spent: if none at all, it is well and happily (...).
Give diligence. Studete, Satagite, (...). Terrene profits, though tanto non digna labore, come not without diligence. Doth a man reape without sowing? The Apostle sayes, Ephes. 4.28. Give to him that needeth:Coloss. 3.14. and Above all things put on charitie: yet he sayes withall; He that labours not, let him not eat. Doth he here put off that charitie, which he bids us put on? No, indulget viro, non vitio: he would have us favour the person, not the fault: and releeve Egentes, such as want; but withall Agentes, such as worke. The Philosophers thought the world was immortall and eternall; for otherwise, say they, God were idle, and should have had nothing to doe before the creation. They knew not the divine contemplation of his owne Essence in three Persons; they considered not that incomprehensible delight; nor that infinite businesse of rest, and rest of businesse, that he had in himselfe. They were deceived in that, but not in this; that Idlenesse is not incident to God. How much lesse should it be in man, his servant; that begs of this God his daily bread? Vntill we come to the threshold of heaven, there is no rest of travell: but then we shal rest from our labours. The idle person may seeme to be Gods outlawry:Revel. 14.13. slothfulnesse is a Remora that stickes to our sides, and hinders the Barke from the voyage of blisse. God built his Temple on a Threshing-floore: there must be labour in that place, though after a different manner. As Christ did not wholly put his Apostles out of their trade: Non mutatur piscatio, sed intentio; He made them still fishers, but of soules.
It is a true maxime in Philosophie, Art and Nature bring forth nothing suddenly: and is it not so in Divinity? Doth any man thinke, that hath lived all his yeeres prophane, to be made at his last houre a Saint? Never tell us, that one malefactour sped so; for then we tell you, that one Asse did speake: yet never was Asse or Oxe heard speake since: Gratia semet sumpta, ne sit semper prasumpta; Grace that is presumed, may be missed. You have not wealth from the clods without digging, and would you have blessing from the clouds without working? The labour of our bodies for this world, was but a curse; the labour of our soules for heaven, is a blessing. We may ignorantly give our bread to the slothfull: God hath too much knowledge to give salvation upon such termes. If the righteous scarcely be saved, where shal the ungodly appeare? He that gives all diligence to enter into heaven,1 Pet. 4.18. findes great difficulty; but he shall get in: but he that lies sleeping in his sins, must tarry without. The foolish Virgins knocke at the doore, but were denied entrance, Matt. 25.12. Would you needs sleepe? sleepe your last. When Iupiter, in the Fable, had invited all living creatures to a banket, the Tortoice came at the taking up of the table; whereat hee storming, the Tortoice excused himselfe, that his house troubled him: hereupon angry Iove adjudged him for ever to keepe in his shell. So when God calls, we have an house that hinders us; some lower, domesticall, and earthly content; beware lest all our happinesse be confined thither.

Give diligence. This exhortation, presupposeth no proper strength of our owne to doe this; for it is Gods worke in us. Augustine sayes, Sometimes I would have done this or that good thing; and I had will, but I wanted power: and againe I had power, but then I wanted will: either voluntas or facultas were missing. Will and Power, like the Sunne and Clouds, would faine meet: the Clouds strive to come to the Sunne, but they are too weake and soluble, and melting: the Sunne would embrace the clouds, and call them neere to himselfe; but then his beames are so hot, that they disperse them: these two could never meet till they were brought together by the wind. So our Will to goodnesse, and our Power of performance, cannot meet, till they be brought together by the Spirit, that holy Wind which blowes where it listeth.Ioh. 3.8. The wheele runnes round, not because it is made round, but because it is moved round. In the Commandement, perceive what thou oughtest to have: in Sinne, perceive what thou hast not: in faith and prayer, perceive where it is to be had which thou desirest, August. Psal. 119.32. I will runne the way of thy Precepts, when thou hast set my heart at libertie. By nature our feet are tyed with the fetters of corruption, we cannot runne. Wilt thou runne with thy feet, before thou have eyes? Or with thy eyes and feet, without thy heart? Or with thy heart, before God hath freed it? Canst thou runne the way, without the way, which is Iesus Christ? We know whither our Diligence must runne for helpe: intreat Christ to intreat his Father: for he is delighted with his prayer, and requires it of him. Postula a me, Psal. 2.8. Desire of me, and I will give thee. It was but hyperbolicall in Trajan, it is true in our God: Citius esse desinit, quam benefacere: Hee can assoone cease to be, as to be good to his. Gods hand was never shut from gigiving, if mans mouth be not shut from asking. Misery is the best orator for mercie:Psal. 50. God loves to be sollicited; Call upon me in the day of trouble, I will deliver thee. He that inviteth all to come in mercy, will receive all that doe come in justice. Yet cannot our petitionary Diligence deserve this: it is obtained not Prece, sed Pretio; by the precious bloud and merits of Christ.
Rather, (...), Potius. Let not the goodnesse of God, which without your desert hath chosen and called you to the profession of CHRIST, forgiving and purging your former sinnes, make you idle and carelesse. But rather strive to answer this mercie in your faithfull conversation: lest you fall into that pit of destruction, from whence by his death he hath redeemed you. Ambite benefactis Dei; let your obedience concent in a sweet harmonie with Gods mercies, that you may be capable of his promises; and not cut off like withered and fruitlesse branches. The rather. He doth seeme to encourage this endevour, A Beneficio, a Periculo, a Praemio: Partly by the Benefit, partly by the Danger, and partly by the Reward. The first whereof incites our gratitude, the next our feare, the last our hope. 1. The rather, because you have received such a benefit, as cleansing from sinne by CHRISTS bloud. O what sinne should be so deare to us, as Gods onely Sonne was to him! 2. The rather; for feare lest a recidivation overthrow all your happinesse. As Demas lost himselfe, by loving this present world, 2 Tim. 4.10. Seven worse spirits may make a re-entrie, when upon the expulsion of one there is found a vacui^^e. Lots wife had as good have dwelt in Sodome still, as to looke backe after her deliverance, Ezek. 18.24. If the righteous turne away from his righteousnesse; in the sinne that he hath sinned, he shall die. A man hath beene dangerously sicke, is now something recovered* if by misgovernment he fall into a relapse, he exasperates the disease. The first sicknesse of the bodie feeds upon ill humours, the relapse on the vitall spirits. For a wound halfe cured, to come to a new incision, is more paineful than ever. It would grieve a traveller, got halfe-way forward his journey, losing all that, to returne, and begin againe, Gal. 3.3. Are ye so foolish, that having begun in the Spirit, ye will be made perfect by the flesh? No, rather give all diligence to continue: and call upon God for perseverance; who alone can keep us from the griping pawes, and grinding jawes of that roaring Lion. It is said, Zach. 4.9. that the hands of Zer^^b^^
 did lay the foundation of the house: and his hand shall also finish it. So it is God that begins the good worke in us, and God that accomplisheth it. Indeed hee chargeth us to give diligence, Psal. 68.28. Thy God hath commanded thy strength: but hee may command and goe without, unlesse himselfe effectuate it, as it followes; Strengthen, O God, that which thou hast wrought for us. I know that Gods elect may for a time lose some good meanes, and some great measure of grace; many have fallen foulely, and fully, none finally. It is onely Gods mercy that up-holds us; giving us grace prevenient, subsequent, co-operant; grace before grace; grace after grace. It is not of our selves, that we persevere to the end, and in the end; but1 Pet. 1.5. but we are kept by the power of God unto salvation. 3. The rather, in respect of the reward: thus shall you be sure that you are written in heaven, never to be blotted out. There is no assurance in this world like it: wert thou sure to enjoy more kingdomes than ever the devill shewed Christ; to be more healthfull than Moses, to live longer than Methushalem: yet this is the end; Misero dormire sepulchro, to lye hidden in the silent dust. Plot and project what you can; the best plot of all is salvation; and the best assurance, to live with Iesus Christ for ever.
To make your calling and election sure.] Wee have done with the Induction, and are now come to the Instruction: and herein first to the matter expressed; the making sure of our election and calling. Which we will first looke upon; Quoad ordinem, then quoad cardinem, if I may so speake: first what is their order, then what is their dependance. For the Order, the Apostle puts Vocation in the former place, which yet in proprietie is the latter. For Election is before all time, Vocation in time, 2 Tim. 1.9. His purpose was toward us in Christ Iesus, before the world began. Calling comes afterward, 2 Cor. 6.2. This is the accepted time, now is the day of salvation. But this is a right forme and method of speech; Vt subjiciatur quod praeponderat; To set that last, which is worthiest and waightiest. Besides we passe by things nearer, to things more remote; first, we must looke to our Calling, and by our calling come to assurance of our Election. For Dependance, we must know that our calling depends upon our Election.
The determinate counsell of God doth not take away second meanes, but disposeth those passages into order. These two, Election and Vocation, are like Iacobs Ladder, whereupon the Saints ascend like Angels to God: Election is the top, Vocation the foot. Iacob wrastled with the Angell at the foot of the Ladder, wee must not be so proud as to wrastle with him at the top. To the height of Election there is no climbing, unlesse we begin at Calling, which is the lowest round. To say, If I be saved, I am saved; without further care, is the Devils divinitie. There is no certaintie in that: looke to thy Calling, thus it is made sure. Otherwise to presume, is to pull downe the Ladder, and thinke to jumpe into heaven: never had man yet such lucke. Frustra creditur, quod nunquam conceditur; If Magus offer to flie up to heaven, there is a Spirit to cast him downe head-long. When our Saviour was on the pinacle, Satan thought with a Scriptum est, to breake his necke, Matth. 4.6. It is written, Hee shall give his Angels charge concerning thee, etc. But hee left out a materiall point; In omnibus viis tuis; In all thy wayes. That the people might know him to bee the Messias, hee perswades him to shew them an unwarrantable miracle, to cast himselfe downe in a bravery: but that was none of his wayes: hee might descend by the stayres without such a precipice. This cunning hee still practiseth on his members: hee sets them upon the high pinacle of Predestination, and perswades them there to a desperate precipitation; with If I am elected, I am elected, etc. But this is none of GODS wayes, or prescribed meanes, whereby wee may be acquainted with our owne election. Hosea 2.21. I will heare the heavens, and they shall heare the earth, and the earth shall heare the corne, wine, and oyle; and they shall heare Iezreel. There is a course and order for fruitfulnesse. So Election in heaven calls to Vocation on earth; Vocation calls for corne, wine, oyle; that is, the fruits of a good life; and these
 tell our hearts with comfort, that we are elected. God workes by Christ, Christ by his word, his Word by his Spirit, the Spirit certifieth our hearts, our hearts stand fast by faith, faith layes hold upon Christ, and now backe againe, Christ presents us to God.
There are six ascents to heaven, as there were to Salomons Throne. The first and lowest is Vocation, Iohn 6.44. No man can come to me, except my Father draw him. The second is Repentance; when God hath called the heart from sinne, it melts into teares, and is smitten with a holy remorse. The next is Faith, which beleeves the pardon of repented sinnes, and the adoption through Christ to peace. The Fourth is the Testimony of the Holy Ghost, Rom. 8.16. The Spirit beareth witnesse with our spirit, that we are the children of God. Albeit this Spirit workes before, and begetteth the former graces; yet now it is especially felt. The next is Peace of conscience; all the clamours of sinne, and terrours of the Law, being quieted:Rom. 5.1. Being justified by faith, we have peace with God. The last is Good workes, the fruits of a sanctified obedience, and effects of the former graces, which concurre to the making up of this Assurance. Thus here is, as in some great Princes Court; first the Gate, that is Vocation: then secondly, we must come to the Fountaine; Repentance, to be baptized in our penitent teares. Then thirdly, to the Common-hall; Faith, which gives us entrance to the Throne of Grace. Fourthly, we come to the Kings speciall Favourite, his bosome counseller, the Holy Ghost. Fifthly, to the Presence Chamber, Peace and Securitie of soule. Lastly, having passed all these, we come to the Glorious Chaire of Estate, the Presentiall Majestie of IESUS CHRIST: thus by degrees we enter the doores of joy.
We know there is a Sunne in heaven, yet we cannot see what matter it is made of, but perceive it onely by the beames, light, and heat. Election is a Sunne, the eyes of Eagles cannot see it; yet we may finde it in the heat of Vocation, in the light of Illumination, in the beames of good workes. It is a principle in reason; a perfect action is not received at first but imperfectly; an habite is not gotten at the first; salvation is not wrought on a sudden. The path of the just is as shining light,Prov. 4.18.That shineth more and more unto the perfect day. Saint Paul considers the chaine of our Salvation, depending on foure linkes,Rom. 8.30. Election, Vocation, Iustification, Glorification: the first whereof hath no beginning, the last no ending. Here is the kindnesse of a Father, that singles out some speciall children, to whom he beares greatest affection, and intends most good; and in this consists Election. In good time he declares his affection, and makes his love manifest to them; there is Vocation. Then he conformes them to his owne Image, gives them place in Court, the honour of children, the earnest of his Spirit, in token of Assurance: there is Iustification. Lastly, he bids them enter into their fathers joy, makes them co-heires with his eldest Sonne in the possession of blisse; there is Glorification. God hath chosen us before the world, created us with the world, called us from the world, justified us in the world, and he will save us in the world to come. He that chose us when we were not, and called us when we were naught; and hath justified us being sinners, will glorifie us being Saints. The Husband-man of heaven chuseth out a plot of ground at his owne pleasure; there is Election: he sowes this with the immortall seed, by his Word; there's Vocation: hee waters it with the dew of Hermon, the graces of his Spirit; there is Sanctification: when it is ripe, he reapes it from the earth, and carries it into the Barne of heaven; there is Salvation.
The head of Nilus cannot be found, they say; but many sweet springs issuing from it are well knowne. The head of our Election is too high and secret to be found; yet we may taste the springs, our Calling, Holinesse, Iustification and Vpright life: and he that runs along by the banke of these rivers, shall be brought at last to that fountaine head, even the place and Booke wherein his owne Name stands written. Ioseph may be a fit type to us of our spirituall deliverance. Consider him sold into Aegypt, not without the determinate counsell of God;Gen. 45.5. who preordained this to good: God
 did send me before you to preserve life. Here is the difference; the brethren sold Ioseph, we sold our selves. Consider us thus sold unto sinne and death; God had a purpose to redeeme us; there is election. Ioseph was delivered out of prison, and we ransomed out of the house of bondage; there was Redemption. Iosephs cause was made knowne, and himselfe acquitted, We could not be found innocent in our selves,Psal. 1^5.^ but were acquitted in Christ; wherin consists our justification. Lastly, Ioseph was clothed in glorious apparel, and adorned with golden chains, and made to ride in the second Chariot of Aegypt, So our last step is to be advanced to high honour, even the glory of the celestiall Court, Such honour have all his Saints.Psal. 149.9. The creation of the world is a shadow of the regeneration of a Christian. First, there was an earth without forme, void; and a darkenesse upon the face of the deepe. Predestination is this great deepe, which cannot be discovered or discerned. There the light was separated from the darkenesse; here knowledge is separated from ignorance in the soule; there is Calling. Then was the Sun created; so here the bright beames of grace are diffused into our hearts, which fill us with spirituall joy; there is sanctification. Lastly, Adam was created after the Image of God, and placed in Paradise: so the new man is conformed to the Image of CHRIST, and shall be reposed in the Paradise of everlasting glory.
1 But if election stand wholy and onely in the will of God;  and that purpose be so long since and irrecoverably past; then cannot I alter it. Therefore if I be elected to salvation, howsoever I live, I cannot frustrate it: and if I be appointed to confusion, what care soever I take, I cannot prevent it. A divelish speech, not to be uttered with mouth, nor harboured in heart! God is not the cause of thy condemnation, but thy selfe, Wis. 1.13. God made not death, neither hath he pleasure in the destruction of the living. Bis interimitur, qui suis armis interimitur. No, the surest way to the Sea, is to take a river by the hand. If a man would know whether the Sun shine or not, he need not climbe up to the skie; for he may behold the beames on earth. So wouldest thou know whether thy name be written in heaven, never assay to get the view of Gods owne book, thou shalt find the beames of that grace in thy selfe Consecrate thy eares to hearing, thy tongue to praying; thy hand to working, thy heart to desiring, thy body and soule to obeying; this is the course to make it sure. Yet are not these the efficient causes that make it to bee decreed, but the meanes that make it certaine to thy selfe. So Ambrose; Neque merito suo qui salvantur, etc. Not by the merits of them that are saved, nor by their worthinesse by whom they are called; but this is done only by the mercie of God in Iesus Christ.
It is a true rule; God that hath predestinated the meanes, hath not left out the end: Vno proposito utrumque: with one and the same purpose hee determined them both. Though man lives not by bread only, yet he that will not eate, shall not live.Matth. 4.4. There was a sonne that held his desperate opinion, to the great griefe of his parents: one day hee came to his father to borrow a horse, saying that hee must be at Rome by such an houre. The father replied, if you must be there, you shall be there though you stirre never a foot. Whereby he convinced him, that if he could not get to Rome without a horse, how should he get to heaven without motion? There is another story of an Italian, so opinionated of Predestination; If I be elected, I shall be saved; if rejected, I shall not be recovered. He received a dangerous wound, and sent to the Chirurgion to help him. The Chirurgion being made acquainted with his impious assertion, told him; It shall be needlesse for me to use any meanes for you: for if your time be not come, you shall escape without medicine: if it bee come, medicine cannot restore you. The Patient smarting with griefe, and seriously pondering the Chirurgions speech; that God sends no helpe without meanes; penitently recanted his error, humbly submitted himselfe to meanes, and so was cured of body and soule at once.
The Rhemists object; We beleeve our salvation sure, therefore it is madnesse in us to pray for it. For were it not madnesse to begge the creation of the world, which we know to be past already? Yea, it were madnesse not to pray for salvation:
 for the creation we know our owne election we know not but by our assiduall prayers for the assurance of it. If we neglect this dutie, we lose all certaintie. Ad Deum omnes ire volunt post Deum pauci. All men would come to the glory of God, but few will follow after the grace of God. Beatus vult homo esse, etiam non sic vivendo ut possit esse.August. Men would come to happinesse, even by running that course which directly leads to wretchednesse. Hee must be a Saint, that will injoy the communion of Saints. If thou wilt be saved with those that are saved, thou must be sanctified with those that are sanctified. Take thy Iourney by holinesse, if thou wilt come to happinesse. Keepe the coast of faith, if thou desire to arrive at the Holy Land.
2 But this makes a man slothfull in Gods service, the certaintie of his owne election. What need the heire take so much paines, that is borne to the Inheritance; as the hired servant? Nay, but rather this spurres him up to an extraordinary carefulnesse saith; as the Apostle saith; The rather give diligence. Doth God tell me; I shall never know mine owne election without pietie of life; then if I neglect pietie I make my selfe uncapable of assurance. I am sicke, I faine would know of the Physician whether I should live or die: he tells me, that if I refraine such unwholsome diet, and take such a prescribed course, I shall live.
If Eve flie to the forbidden fruit, she is sure to die for it. My father hath determined that I shall be his heire: he will not tell me so much in expresse termes, yet gives me a signe how I shall know it, by-observing him with obedience. So God elects some men to be his heires, this purpose he conceales in his owne bosome: yet allowes them certaine signes and remonstrances whereby they may apprehend it; as faith in CHRIST, obedience to the Gospell, etc. If wee obey his will, and prove those effects of Election in our consciences; we make that sure to our selves, which was sure before in his decree through Iesus Christ.
3 But suppose a vicious person assumes, or rather presumes; I am sure of my election? Indeed there cannot a greater honour be done to God, than giving confidence to his promise. But what? demonstration of ungodlnesse, and evidence of salvation, found together at once? This holds like a sicke mans dreame. The wicked mans tongue may say this; but there is a bird within sings another note; the Conscience. It is impossible for an ill liver, to retaine any sure hope of his Election. The hypocrite is divided, and lives not together: his tongue walkes Gracious streete, but his heart is a Pest-house. His profession is like White Chappell; but his conscience is as foule as the common Sewer. His talke gives him rich in grace; but marke what gold comes out of his coffer; none but slip-coine; light or counterfeit mettall. He is just as sure of heaven, as a galley-slave is of the Empire of Turkey.
4 But now alas, saith the humbled soule; my godlinesse is so small, that I even despaire of assurance. Be comfortest; strive against thy corruptions, and by the spirit of Iesus Christ, thou shalt overcome Paul was sanctified man; yet he complaines, Rom. 7.15. What I would, that doe I not: but what I hate, that I doe. O wretched man that I am who shall deliver me from the body of this death? Albeit he groaned under the weight of his infirmities, and felt the buffets of Satan; yet he knew that nothing could seperate him from the love of God in Christ, Rom. 8.39. Thou canst velle bonum, will that which is good; then heare God speake comfort, 2 Cor. 8.12. If there be first a willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man hath, and not according to that he hath not. Indeed where there is want of grace, content in that want, love of that content, indulgence to all these; there is neither ornament nor sanctification, nor argument of salvation. But doest thou feele thy wants; hath that feeling bred sorrow? that sorrow desire? that desire prayer? that prayer encreased faith? faith shall bring downe mercie. In thee there is the sense of infirmitie, in the other is the infirmitie of sense. The feeling of sin doth not annihilate the assurance of salvation. Wee feele the ach of a finger more sensibly than the health of the whole body; yet is the health of the whole body farre more than the ach of a finger. Sanctification is it selfe, though joyned with some imperfection. Hee that
 desired helpe for his unbeleefe, was accepted for his faith. Thus Ahijah answered Ieroboams wife concerning her sicke son. 1 King. 14.13. He onely of Ieroboam shall come to the grave, because in him there is found some good thing toward the Lord. Some good thing, some grace, though it be no great measure, shall be accepted. God regards not so much the Quantitie, as the quality: not how much, but how true. Though our Saviour did chide his Apostles for their little faith, yet he never rejected them that had any at all. Indeed if a man be not best at last, h^ was never truely good: therefore encrease the oile in thy lampe, and then be sure to enter into the Bride chamber of Iesus Christ.
5 But if one man may know himselfe elected, why may not another know himselfe reprobated? Resp. No, for God hath prescribed rules for the one, not for the other. Diverse Saints knew themselves written in the booke of life, no man ever knew himselfe rased out. But did not Cain know this, when God set a Marke upon him? I doe not thinke on the one side with Iosephus, that this marke was a token that God was appeased by Cains sacrifice, and for gave the punishment of his fratricide* that is frivolous. Neither doe I thinke on the other side, that this was a signe to himselfe of his eternall damnation. But only a marke of Gods evident curse for this life; to deterre others from such bloudy attempts. I know that despaire is ever ready to judge it selfe reprobated: but this is to requite Gods mercie to thee, with unmercifulnesse to thy selfe. Turne over thy booke of his revealed will; if thou canst find thy name there written reprobate, beleeve it: but beleeve it not til then He hath shewed thee how to assure thy selfe of heaven; he never told thee that thou art doomed to hell. Though his Iustice be equall to his mercie, yet he is pleased to magnifie his mercie over all his workes. We are commanded to beleeve, 1 Ioh. 3.23. This is his Commandement, that we should beleeve on the Name of Iesus Christ. Now to beleeve, it not only to put affiance in him, but to trust that we are justified by him: if we be justified, we shall be glorified: if we be glorified, certainely we are elected: for Election is the foundation of all the rest. And this faith is not left arbitrary to our choise, but wee are commanded to have it. Wee are bound to beleeve our Adoption, if our adoption, then our Election: for the elect are predestinate to the adoption of children.
God knowes those that are his, yea and he makes them to know it. Satan knows not who are his, nor can themselves otherwise than conjecturally know it. The Iudgement of a reprobate belongs not to man, but upon speciall revelation. So David in the 69. and 109. Psalmes, prayes not only against their sinnes, which we may doe: but also against their persons, which we may not doe. So Paul against Alexander the coppersmith:2 Tim. 4 14. The Lord reward him according to his workes. And Saint Iohn seemes to allow the Church such a judgement;1 Ioh. 5.16. there is a sin unto death; I doe not say that he shall pray for it. And Paul, 1 Cor. 16.22. If any man love not the Lord Iesus, Anathema Maranatha. And the Primitive Church with one consent prayed against Iulian the Apostate. But this is to be done exceeding rarely; for who knowes them that sinne unto death? And never absolutely; for they may repent, and turne to the love of Iesus Christ. There is no prescribing to Gods infinite merrie: it is true indeed, that the Scriptures threaten damnation to continued sinne; yet the Gospell promiseth mercie to repentance. God often saves inter pontem and fontem; and turnes ravening Wolves into mild and gentle Lambes.
To conclude; in Election we behold God the Father in chusing: in vocation, God the sonne teaching: in Iustification, God the Holy Ghost sealing: in salvation, the whole Deitie crowning. God chuseth of his love, CHRIST calleth by his word, the spirit seales by his grace: nowithe fruite of all this; of Gods love chusing, of Christs word calling, of the spirits grace sanctifying; is our eternall glory and blessednesse in heaven. In Election God bestowes on us his love, in Calling he grants the blessing of his word, in Iustifying he communicates to us the sweetnesse of his spirit; in Glorifying he doth wholly give us himselfe. We see fa^re with our bodies
 eye, sense: further with the minds eye, Reason; furthest with the soules eye, Faith. The Rationall eye doth not so farre exceed the sensuall, as the spirituall exceeds the rationall. Calling illuminates the mind with knowledge; Sanctifying seales up the heart with spirituall comfort: salvation crownes all, even the soule with immortall blisse. This gradation of assurance is sweetly contracted by Saint Paul, Rom. 8.30. Whom he did predestinate, them he hath also called: whom he hath called, them also he justified: and whom he justified, them also he glorified. Wherein the Fathers have found the foure causes of our salvation. In predestination the efficient cause, which is Gods love. In calling the materiall cause, which is Christs death, delivered in his word that doth call us. In Iustifying there is the formall cause, a lively faith. In glorifying there is the finall cause, that is everlasting life. Paradise had foure rivers that watred the earth: these foure springs come from the Eden of heaven, and ru^^e through the earth: and howsoever neglected by many, they make glad the Citie of God. So Bernard sweetly. Conceditur in Praedestinatione, promittitur in vocatione est ^^^^tur in Iustificatione, percipitur in Glorificatione. Eternall life is granted to us in Election promised in our Vocation, sealed in our Iustification, possessed in our Glorification* Conclude then faithfully to thy owne soule; I beleeve, therefore I am justified* I am justified, therefore I am sanctified: I am sanctified, therefore I am called: I am called, therefore I am elected: I am elected, therefore I shall be saved. O settled comfort of joy, which tenne thousand divells shall never make void! So I leave you to th^^, which can never leave you; the certaintie of this comfort.
These questions being resolved the Doctrinall points that follow are two: first, that our election may be assured: secondly, how it may be assured.
First, that it may be made sure: there is a Rule, Nemo tenetur ad impossibile: no man is bound to an impossible thing: the Apostle would never set us about th^^ worke, which could not be done. It were uncharitable tyrannie to impose that taske, whereof there is no possibility of performance, The ground of this assertion is the stability of Gods purpose, Rom. 9.11. That the purpose of God according to election might stand. But how then is it said, Revel. 3.11. Hold that fast which thou hast, that no man take thy Crowne.Augu. Now saith, Augustine; Si alius possit accipere, tu potes perdere. If another may take it, thou maiest lose it. The answer is easy; the Crowne of outward profession may be lost; but the Crowne of eternal Election stands unmoveable, to whomsoever it is decreed. The1 Sam. 25.29. Soule that is bound up in the bundle of life with the Lord, cannot be lost. To say the elect may fall away, and be damned, is a comfortlesse doctrine, Luk. 10.20. Rejoyce because your names are written in heaven. Saint Paul speaking of Himeneus and Philetus, who were fallen from the faith; lest the Church should be discouraged by the apostacie of two such notable pillars, as they were thought; comforteth them thus, 2 Tim. 2.19. Neverthelesse (albeit those men fell off from Christ to their owne damnation, yet Neverthelesse) the foundation of God standeth sure, having the seale, the Lord knoweth them that are his. His Election is a foundation that shall never be removed. But Paul calls the Thessalonians, Elect; yet they fell away, I answer; they are called elect, not from the greater, but the better part. It is called an heape of corne in the barne, though the bigger part of it be chaffe. Againe, by the Law of charitie we grant all those that professe Iesus Christ to be elect. But David prayes, Psal. 69.28. that his enemies may be blotted out; blot them out of the booke of the living. This was not Precantis votum, sed Prophet^^tis vaticinium: not the desire of a petitioner, but the knowledge of a Prophet: blot them out, that is, I know they were never written there. But Ioh. 6.70. Have (...) I chosen you twelve, and one of you is a divell? This is to be understood of and election, not to everlasting life, but to the office of Apostleship, which was changeable and temporary, 2 Cor. 13.5. know you not your owne selves, that Iesus Christ is in you, except yee be reprobates? Whence two things necessarily follow: first, if Christ be in (...), we are no reprobates: secondly, we may know this; know you not.
The Certainty of Election is a point wherein Rome makes some shew of
 comming neere to us; yet there is a great difference. They say, a man may know it by divine revelation, so say we. They say, that men may have a certaintie of hope, we stand for a certaintie of faith. Theirs of hope is conjecturall, ours of faith is infallible. Hope is an affection of the will, faith is a perswasion of the mind. Whatsoever God commandeth in the Gospell, that a man must and may performe: but God commandeth a Christan to beleeve his owne salvation; therefore he may, yea ought to beleeve it, 1 Ioh. 3.23. Indeed the Law did command that which we could not doe; but this is the difference betweene the Law and the Gospell; the Law did impose dutie, but gave no power of performance: the Gospell imperat and impetrat; commands and assists, gives grace whereby it may be obeyed, Ioh. 6.63. The words that I spake to you, they are spirit, and they are life. Againe, that which God hath charged us to pray for, hee hath charged us to beleeve: but we are bound to pray for everlasting life, therefore we are bound to beleeve it, Mark. 11.24. What thing, so ever yee desire when yee pray, beleeve that yee receive it, and yee shall have it. In every petition there are two grounds; Mandatum, quod jubet facere; Promissum, quod jubet credere; the Precept that binds us to aske, and the Promise that binds us to beleeve: otherwise to what purpose doe we conclude our prayers with Amen? Againe, he that is the member of Christ, can never be cut-off: if this could be, then should there follow a second Baptisme: for Baptisme is the Sacrament of Ingraffing.
Against the undoubted truth of this doctrine our adversaries bring two objections: first say they, where there is no promise, there is no faith; for these two are relatives but there is no particular word to assure any individuall person, therefore no faith. We answer, that there is a generall promise: indeed God saies not, beleeve thou Iohn or Thomas, and thou shalt be saved: but he saies; Whosoever beleeveth and is baptised, shall be saved; which is as good. The promises are indefinite, and the minister in CHRISTS stead applies them to every particular mans heart, Ioh. 11.40. If thou beleevest, thou shalt see the glory of God. Hereupon our faith and obedience eccho's to God, Psal. 27.8. when thou said'st, seeke yee my face; my heart said unto thee, Thy face O Lord; will I seeke, Zach. 13.9. I will say, It is my poople: and they shall say, The Lord is my God Secondly they object; we are taught to pray for the pardon of our sinnes daily; this were needlesse if we be sure of our Election. I answer; we pray for the pardon of our sinnes, not because we have no assurance, but because our assurance is weake. The heart of a Christian is like a vessell with a narrow top: being cast into the sea, it is not filled suddenly, but by drop after drop. God throwes us into the sea of his infinite mercie: if we had a capable nature, we should be suddainly filled; but this grace is received according to the measure and capacitie of the receiver. Let it then stand firme against the gates of Rome, against the gates of hell; that our Election may be made sure. Non erit praesumptio credentis, ubi est authoritas jubentis. There can be no presumption of the beleever, where there is authoritie of the commander. God never broke his word with any soule.
Now we come to the manner, how this may be assured. There are but two wayes for a man to know it; Ascendendo in coelum, descendendo in seipsum: either by going up into heaven, or by going downe into himselfe. In the one there is presumption and danger, in the other is security and peace. Have we recourse to Saint Paul for his direction? and see how he consents with Saint Peter: the spirit of God can best declare himselfe, Rom. 8.16. The spirit it selfe beareth witnesse with our spirit, that we are the Children of God. Here are two testimonies, not Gods spirit alone; there may be presumption: not our spirit alone; there may be illusion: both must (...), Contestari, witnesse together; concurre to make up this certificate. There is some question what this testimonie of the Spirit is. Some take it to be an Enthusiasme, or extraordinarie revelation; but then were it rare, and to few. Some take it for the affection of the mind obedien to God, non ex timore; sed ex amore, not out of feare, but out of love, Origen. But our spirit alone can testifie this, what need is there of Gods Spirit to it? Some referre it to the Imitation of God which makes
 us like him.Ambr. Anselm. Haymo. Gorrhan. But this testimonie ariseth not from any act in our selves, but from the divine spirit. Others thinke that this inward testimonie proceeds from our good workes. Cum spiritus noster per spiritum sanctum bona agit. But the testimonie that riseth from the effects, is rather our conclusion, than the Holy Ghosts proposition. Some by this witnesse of the spirit understand Holy Doctrine, Theodor: and the truth of the catholike faith, Lyran. But the Apostle speakes not of any outward signe, but of an internall testimonie. Therefore saith Chrysostome; Non vox charismatis praestiti, sed praestantis; non gratie donatae, sed donantis. The testimonie comes not from the effect, but from the efficient; not of grace given, but of him that gives it.
This is then that inward assurance of the spirit, whereby we know our selves to be children of God. Perhibet testimonium incorde per occultam Inspirationem. Caiet^^ saies, it is not a testimonie de possibili, that it may be; but de facto, that it is. This may be formed like a practicall syllogisme: the proposition is made by the Gospell; Whosoever beleeves in CHRIST is chosen to life everlasting: man meditates upon this blessed promise, and suckes sweetnesse to his soule from it. Then comes the spirit, illuminates the mind, opens the heart, begets a true faith; so that with freedome mans spirit makes the assumption; I beleeve in CHRIST, I renounce my selfe; all my comfort and affiance is in him: flesh and bloud cannot say this, it is the operation of the Holy Ghost. Last comes the blessed conclusion, which is the testimonie; therefore thou art the child of God. The proposition is grounded on the promise of God, that is Objectum fidei quod creditur, the object of faith, which is beleeved: the assumption out of the former, is Actus fidei quo creditur, the act of faith whereby we beleeve? Our assurance therefore is not, as Aquinas and Lyran^^ speake; Non scientiae, sed conjecturae; non rei sed spei: for children call upon their fathers, not with a conjecturall perswasion, but with a confident assurance. This certaintie is true; for though faith be of things beleeved not perceived, yet faith it selfe is a thing perceived not beleeved. There is a threefold assurance, first of opinion, when a man deceiveth himselfe by his owne imagination. The second of perswasion, as the divells know the Articles of faith without any comfort. Thirdly of Resolution, which is not onely in the truth of such an Interest, but of our Interest in such a truth. The first of these is in the will onely, without the understanding; the second is in the understanding only, without the will: the last is both in the understanding and will. Now the testimonie of our spirit must concurre to this: for if our heart condemne us not, then have we confidence toward God, 1 Ioh. 3.21. This is the witnesse of a heart purified and sanctified in the bloud of CHRIST, Prov. 27.19. As in water face answereth to face; or the pure Chrystall glasse lively represents the Image set before it: so here the witnesse of our sanctified spirit answers the sanctifying spirit.
This testimonie may be perceived by many effects; especially take one: it is the right estimation of our sins. Now this estimation must be in respect of their termes; as they are past, present, or to come. Wee must find in our selves, for sinnes past Dolorem, griefe: against sins present, Praelium, combate: concerning sins future, Odium,2 Cor. 7.10. hate and resistance. First we must be grieved for the sins we have done. Godly sorrow worketh repentance to salvation not to be repenetd of where is Efficax, Effectus, Qualitas, Finis: the thing operating, godly sorrow: the Effect, Repentance: the Quality, (...) to be repented of: the End to salvation. There be two sorrowes, and they differ much: for worldly sorrow Deum intuetur iratum, beholds God justly incensed, godly sorrow Deum intuetur pacatum, beholds God sweetly pacified. They also differ causally: the former grieves for the punishment, not for the sinne: the other grieves for the sinne, not for the punishment: this would be sorrowfull for sinne, though there were no hell to punish it. Cain groanes under the penaltie, David grieves for the iniquity. The one trembles as a slave, the other feares as a son. These penitent teares,Bern. Cor maculatum lavant, oneratum levant, contritum laetificant; they
 purge the heart from the foulenesse of sinne, ease it of the burthen of sorrow, and give it the chearefulnesse of comfort. Therefore no Repentance, no testimony. Secondly, for sinnes present, there must be in us an holy and valiant combate against them, Gal. 5.17. The Spirit warreth against the flesh, as well as the flesh against the Spirit. This combate can onely befall the elect; whose soule is in the state of Rebecca's wombe, when the twinnes struggled within her: Esau will not let Iacob rest, nor Iacob Esau. Two enemies in a Countrey are too neere; two in a Citie dangerous, two in a house worse, but two in a bosome smartest of all. And yet unlesse this strife be in a man, he can have no peace with God. Indeed for naturall things, warre and peace are contraries; yet this spirituall warre is the onely meanes to our eternall peace. The Saints in heaven have no such strife, for they are wholly spirituall: the reprobates on earth have no such strife, for they are wholly carnall: onely the regenerate beleevers in the militant Church, maintaine this battell, and feele the bitternesse of this conflict. The pressure of native corruption is heavie: as in the Ephi^ltes or disease called the Night-mare, a sleeping man thinkes he feeles some heavie weight lying on his brest, and holding him downe; he groanes and strives to remove it, but he cannot. So this inborne corruption lyes on the heart of a Christian, and he would faine be rid of it, he fights against it, and complaines that he is forcibly over-borne by it, to doe the evill he neither would nor should: but let him be comforted, Christ shall one day give him a full deliverance. No combate, no testimonie. Lastly, concerning sinnes to come, we must finde in our selves hatred and resistance: We know, that whosoever is borne of God, sinneth not.1 Ioh. 5.18. Hee is alwayes fixing his eye upon that rule, Philip. 4.8. Whatsoever things are true, and honest, and just, and pure, and lovely, and of good report: if there be any vertue, if there be any praise, he thinkes on these things. So that, Sanctimonium est Testimonium, our Sanctimonie is this Testimonie: 1 Ioh. 2.5. We know we are in God, by keeping his Word. Hence it is that some bookes have read, (...); make your election sure Through good workes: so Beza sayes, he found it in two Greeke manuscripts. This is a good witnesse, when a man reasons from the proper effects to the proper cause, 2 Tim. 2.19. The foundation of God standeth sure: it is granted; God is sure of it, but how may I be sure of it? Paul there answers; Let every one that nameth the Name of Christ, depart from iniquitie. Happie soule, that comes with this certificate, under the hand and seale of the holy Spirit, to the gate of heaven. He may justly chalenge mercy; Feci quod jussisti, redde quod promisisti; I have done what thou hast commanded, performe to me what thou hast promised: I have worne the short white robe of Innocencie, give me the long white robe of Glory. There is a private mark, and a publike mark; Goe thorow the City,Ezek. 9.4. and set a marke upon the forheads of them that mourne for the sinnes of the times: there is the Private marke, Well done, thou good and faithfull servant,Ma^th. 25.21. etc. there is the Publike marke.
Thus we see, it may be made sure, now therefore let us goe about it, and that with diligence. If you purchase lands, you buy the strength of law to make sure the tenures: if you drive a bargaine, you will have earnest for assurance: if you let money to interest, you will not doe it without good assurance. The common voice of all the Vsurers about the towne, is Assurance: the very Stage knowes them by no other names, but Security and Assurance. You bind a debtor to you surer, than the Philistims bound Sampson: and if he cannot loose himselfe, you put out his eyes, set him to grind at the mill, while you eat the floure. All is made so sure, that neither the corrupt man of law, nor the Devill himselfe, can finde a tricke to untie it. But now for heaven and salvation, you play at fast and loose: the last thing that ever is assured, is your eternall blisse. Beloved, I would this were a slander, and that you could nobly confute my jealousie with your actuall piety. O that upon so good termes I might bee brought hither againe, to recant it: for you are sure! when did you ever take so much paines, to be sure of the pardon of your sinnes, as you doe weekely to make sure your debts? The want of that assurance hath often broke your sleepes,
 when did the want of this disquiet you? I will tell you; the purchase of your lands, the leases of your houses, the bonds of your moneyes, the care of your bookes; shall all at the day of Iudgement, be bills of accusation, and indictments against you. A man apprehended for a robbery, is convicted, condemned; yet by suit of friends reprived, till they can get a pardon for him. In the meane time come some of his acquaintance, and will him to be of good cheare; they sing, dance, and drinke with him: he answers, I am condemned, the sentence is past, the execution is ready; how easie it will be to get a pardon, I feare: if I were sure to escape, I could be merry with you; till then, I must say to laughter, thou art madde; and to jovisance, be thou a stranger to me. Thus stands the case with us; the Law hath condemned us for transgression, the devils are ready executioners to hasten Iustice; shew me my pardon, assure me that the great King of heaven hath forgiven me; I can then rejoyce; till then, no comfort can downe with me. There is a tale of a covetous man, that had nothing in his mouth, but It is good to be sure. If his servant went to sow his land, he would follow him; why? O it is good to be sure. Though himselfe had lockt the doore; yet he must needs rise out of his bed in the cold, to feele it fast: why? O it is good to be sure. Let him have told his money often over, yet hee will tell it againe: why? O it is good to be sure. It came to passe that he fell very dangerously sicke; and his servant perceiving little hope of life in him: asked him, Master have you said your prayers? Yes, I have said them: nay, but say them againe master; you know it is good to be sure. No, sayes the worldling, it is more than needs, for I am sure enough of that. Hee bids his servant open his chest, and bring him all his gold in it, to looke upon. The honest servant, willing to worke his master to repentance, having opened it; told him; Master, the Devill is in the chest, he layes his paw upon all the gold, and sayes it is all his; because it was extracted out of the life-bloud of widows, orphans, and poore wretches. Sayes he so, quoth the Extortioner? Then bring me the gold, the chest, the devill, and all; It is good to be sure. Perhaps from hence came that by-word; that the covetous worldling gets the devill and all.
O the vaine assurance of these fugitive things! Vel sequendo labimur, vel assequendo laedimur. No, I will hold me fast by the LORD, for that is sure. They that trust in the LORD,Psal. 125.1. shall be as mount Sion, which cannot be removed, but abideth for ever. The Dove makes moane to her fellow-birds, of the tyranny of the Hawke. One counsels her to flye aloft, but the Hawke can mount as high as she. Another adviseth her to keepe below, but the Hawke can stoope for his prey. Another, to shrowd her selfe in the woods, there shee shall be sure: but alas, that was the Hawkes manour, the place where he kept his court. Another bids her keepe the Towne, there shee was sure from the Hawke: but so shee became a prey to man, and had her eyes put out to make the Hawke sport. At last one bids her nest her selfe in the hole of a Rocke, there shee should be safe, violence it selfe could not surprise her. The Dove is mans Soule, she would gladly be secured from Satan: come to me, saith Riches, here thou shalt be sure? No, wealth is the Devils stirrop whereby he gets up, and rides the covetous. Come to me, saith Pleasure, here thou shalt be sure; as if she were not as very whore as Dalila, to betray thee to that Philistine. Honour sayes, Come to mee, here thou art sure; as if the Devill durst not come neere the Court-gates; or Greatnesse were a Supersedeas to sinne, or a protection against the arrest of judgements. No, there is no Surenesse in thy lands, none in thy moneyes, none in thy honours, none in thy pleasures: neither Court, nor Citie, nor Countrey; neither Castles nor Forts can save thee; yet there is a Rocke for this Dove,Cant. 2.14. O my dove that art in the clifts of the Rocke. The clifts of this Rocke are the wounds of Iesus Christ; flie thither, O my soule, and be safe! Psal. 55.6. O that I had wings like a Dove, then would I flie away and be at rest. Thy wings are faith and prayer; hye thee to this Rocke, there onely thou art sure; all the devils in hell shall not plucke thee from the mercifull armes of Christ, Ioh. 10.28. They shall never be pluckt out of my hand. How are we sure that we are in his hand? if his Spirit be in our
 heart. It was a good argument of Manoahs wife, Iudg. 13.23. If the Lord were pleased to kill us, he would never have accepted of our sacrifice. So conclude thy owne conscience; If the Lord were pleased to reject me, hee would never have given mee his Spirit. If I were a vessell of wrath, such a Comforter should never have come within my doores, Psal. 41.11. By this I know that thou favourest mee, because mine enemies doth not triumph against mee. If Satan prevaile not, sure then I am in favour, and the Lord IESUS hath reserved mee to his eternall Kingdome.
Your calling. Calling hath divers acceptions; it is here meant of that spirituall and inward calling, wrought by the Spirit in the ministery of the Gospell. August. Non quacunque, sed qua vocatione sit credens; Not every kinde of vocation, but onely that whereby a man is made a beleever, Act. 16.14. Lydia attended to the things that were spoken, and the LORD opened her heart. Shee attended to the Word; there is the outward calling: GOD opened her heart; there is the inward calling. In the triall of this Vocation, I should consider, Vnde nos vocarit Deus, and ad quae vocarit; from what we are called, and to what. Saint Iude sayes, we are sanctified by GOD the Father, preserved in IESUS CHRIST, and called. To be brought into the Church, is Vocation externall: to be sanctified, is Vocation internall: to be preserved in CHRIST, is Vocation eternall. Here are the three parts of our Incorporation to CHRIST; Vocation by GOD the Father, Sanctification by GOD the Sonne, Preservation by GOD the HOLY GHOST. Vocation is the fruit of Election, Rom. 1.7. To all that be in Rome, beloved of GOD, called to be Saints. First, beloved of GOD, then called to be Saints. You have heard before, that Calling is the way to assure Election. But now you would be sure of your true Calling: good reason, otherwise your journey to heaven would be like Hannibals on The Alpes.
There are many signes, like hands in a crosse-way, to tell us the right, Esay 30.21. Thou shalt heare a word behinde thee, saying, This is the way, walke in it. I could tell you of Love to the Word preached, a sure effect of true Calling. He that is called, loves the lowest staire of the Pulpit, better than the highest staire of the Tribunall. One loves the Taverne, whiles another runs to the Temple; What is the reason? This man is called, rather than the other. I could also tell you of a sincere and devoted affection to Christ; when we desire his company above all things, and love the place where his Honour dwelleth. Vbicunque fueris Domine Iesu, sive in patibulo, sive in sepulchro, sive in inferno; Wheresoever thou art, O blessed Saviour; whether on the Crosse, in the grave, or in hell, I care not, so I be with thee, so I finde thee my Saviour. This love should be to Christ, not so much for his bounties sake, as for his owne sake. This holy affection produceth our love to Christians: Diligo (quia) dilectos; I love them, because God loves them, 1 Ioh. 3.14. We know that we are passed from death unto life, because we love the brethren: Eos qui sunt fratres, and quia sunt fratres: We love them that are brethren, and because they are brethren. What is true of this blind affection in the bloud; that it ariseth often, not Ex virtute affectae, sed ex voluntate afficientis; Not from any merit in the affected, but from the lust of the affecter: therefore the Poets have called Amantes Amentes, Lovers mad-men. This is here made good of divine love in the Spirit: I affect that man, not because hee is good to me, but because God is good to him.
I might adde another signe, that Vocation testifieth it selfe in a plenary obedience, at least in respect of Resolution. This must be Ad totum, per totum, de toto; To the whole Law, during our whole life, with our whole heart. To the whole Law, Psal. 119.6. I have respect unto all thy Commandements. During our whole life, Luke 1.75. In holinesse and righteousnesse before him, all the dayes of our life. With the whole heart, as David speakes, With my whole heart have I loved thee. Otherwise GOD will come against us with a But, Rev. 2.14. But I have a few things against thee. With a Neverthelesse, Revel. 2.4. Neverthelesse I have somewhat against thee. With a Notwithstanding, Revel. 2.20. Notwithstanding I have some things
 against thee. All these exceptives; But, notwithstanding, neverthelesse, are against us. I know, I must offend; I must suffer many sinnes, I will allow my selfe no sinne.
I could also adde another signe, how we may be sure that we are effectually called; that is, our dislike to this world. He that despiseth not earth, was never yet inwardly called to heaven. If the love of this world cannot stand with the comfortable assurance of our heavenly calling, let us divert our desires, and elevate our affections from things on earth, to things above, Coloss. 3.2. But if none be called to heaven, but such as be sanctified and separate from earth, I feare that the greater number takes the broader way: It is your method in the Citie; you say, there be more of the Company, than be of the Livery: but for heaven, and the profession of the Gospell; there be more of the Livery, than be of the Company; Many are called, but few are chosen.
To conclude, let mee now characterize to you the man, in whose heart there is this assurance. He stands like an impregnable Fort, upon whom misery and malice would spend all their shot: much they doe, to their owne shame, to his glory. Sinne like a flattering neighbour, hath often knocked at his doore, and would have come in, but found cold welcome: and if it was importunate, was sent away not without repulse and blowes. Perhaps it lurkes about his out-houses, and spight of him will be his Tenant, but shall never be his Land-lord. He hath some faults, but God will not see them. He meets at every turne with his railing and accusing adversary, Satan: but he stops his throat with a pardon sealed in the bloud of Iesus Christ. He is never out of warre, never without victory. Those roaring fiends set upon him proudly, and he beats them downe triumphantly. The shield he alwayes beares with him, was never pierced, Faith. He hath beene often tripped, once or twice foiled, was never vanquished. His hand hath beene scratched, his heart is whole. Tyranny bends on him a sterne brow, but could never dash him out of countenance. Is he threatned the Surgery of the sword? hee sees Esay under the Saw, Iohn in Patmos cutting in pieces. Is he threatned drowning? he sees Ionas diving into that inextricable gulfe. Burning? hee sees those three Servants in their firy walke, and the Sonne of GOD amongst them. Is he threatned devouring? he sees Daniel in that sealed den of terrible Lions. Stoning? he sees that Protomartyr of the Gospell sleeping in peace under so many grave-stones. Heading? he sees the Baptists necke bleeding in Herodia's platter. He is sure, that the God which gave them such strength, is not weaker in him: what could they suffer without God? what cannot he suffer with God? If he must endure their paine, he lookes for their faith, their patience, their strength, their glory. The terrors of death amaze him not; for first he knowes whom he hath trusted, and then whither death shall lead him. Hee is not more sure to die, than to live againe: and out-faceth death with his assured resurrection. Like Enoch, he walkes every day with God, and confers familiarly with his Maker. When he goes in humbly to converse with him by meditation and prayer, he puts off his owne clothes, and takes a rich sute out of the wardrobe of his Redeemer: then confidently he entreth the presence-chamber, and faithfully chalengeth a blessing. He hath cleane hands, and a white soule, fit to give lodging to the Holy Ghost: not a roome is reserved for the enemie: he that gave all, findes all returned to himselfe. He is so certaine of his eternall election, and present justification, that he can call God Father, his Saviour Brother, the Holy Ghost his Comforter; the Devill his slave, earth his foot-stoole, heaven his patrimonie, and everlasting life his inheritance. Those celestiall spirits doe not scorne his company, nor refuse to doe him service. His heart is so devoted to Christ; that if misery, if death, if torments, stood in his way on the left hand: if parents, children, friends, wife, inheritance, stood in his way on the right hand; he would disdaine all obstacles, and breake thorow all difficulties, to come unto him whom his soule loveth. He fixeth his spirituall eye upon the2 Cor. 4.18. eternall things, that are not seene* others see that is present, he that is to come. He walkes upon earth as a stranger, his heart is at home. He hath laid up a sure treasure in heaven, a portion that shall never
 be taken away. He vexeth not himselfe with cares, he knowes that he lives not at his owne cost. Without omitting good meanes, he rests on a Providebit Deus, the Lords providence. Without the warrant of GOD hee dares doe nothing, with it any thing: nor is his faith more valiant, than his bowels are compassionate. Hee hath teares plenty, bot^ for his owne sinnes and others sufferings. Hee is no niggard of those showers on earth, hee is sure never to weepe hereafter. When hee departs this life, his body sleeps in a peacefull grave: and those glorious Angels beare his soule with triumphant songs to the glorified Saints; where it is maried to the Bridegrome IESUS CHRIST for ever.
For if yee doe these things, yee shall never fall. The doctrine of election, as it is to the faithfull the sweetest assurance, so to the proud an occasion of presumption. Nihil dulcius quando sobrie assumitur, nihil periculosius quando superbe praesumitur. A man may be so bold of his predestination, that he forget his conversation: so hee may dreame himselfe in heaven, and waken from that dreame in hell. Presume not therefore, that thou art so surely Electus, chosen; that thou become, Elatus, proud. Pride is no better an argument of an elect soule, than a tumid swelling is of a sound body. A Proclamation is read, wherein a Christian King grants honour and wealth to certaine of his subjects; with assurance of donation upon their just demand. One among the multitude leapes at the newes, springs away and staies not to here it out: there is a condition following, provided first that they put on armes, and expell the Turke, which infests some part of his dominions. This man comes one of the formost to demand the promised honours: hee is asked for a testimonie of his valour and service in such warres. Alas! he never tarried to heare that condition, and therefore lost the retribution. GOD so promiseth eternall life to men; but withall chargeth them to beleeve in Christ, and to doe him faithfull service against the devill, that great enemy to this kingdome. But how many are quite lost, for not staying to heare the proclamation of the Gospell out? they run away with opinion of sufficient beleefe, and never thinke of obedience. But to prevent such false hopes, there must be Doing; For if ye doe these things, etc.
In which words we considered two parts; the Qualification, and the Ratification. If yee doe these things, there is the Qualification. Yee shall never fall, there is the Ratification. There is a Condition premised, and a Reward promised. If you for your part, bee doing; GOD for his part will keepe you from falling. That is your obedience, and this is GODS recompence. Your devotion goes before, and his retribution followes after. First, to take the Qualification asunder, here bee three circumstances; from the Order, If First yee shall performe; there is the Condition: Yee doe, not say or purpose, but Doe; there is the Practise: These things, not what you lust, but what the Lord commands, there is the Sincerity. Thus it lies taken in sunder, then being put together againe, we shall find this the summe; the necessity of our active obedience.
For the Condition, we must first doe and then have, not first have the reward and then doe. Indeed wee must first have Vnde, grace whereby to doe before wee doe: but not the reward till we have done. Among men he first serves, that deserves: for God, we can merit nothing by doing, yet we shall have nothing without doing. The good man sayes, Non mereor gloriam, sed vereor vindictam: I deserve not reward for my goodnesse, but I feare punishment for my sinfulnesse. Let mee looke to my obedience, let GOD alone with my recompence. The tenour of the Scripture doth alwaies set the worke before the wages, Luke 19.17. Well done good servant: then Enter into thy LORDS joy, Matth. 20.8. First call the Labourers; and if they have laboured, then Give them their hire, Rev. 22.12, I come and my reward is with mee; to give every man according to his worke. First, wee must arme, then fight: first fight, then conquer: first conquer, then triumph. Esay 62.11. His reward is with him, and his worke before him. His worke is before him, but his reward hee brings with him. First, seeke the Kingdome of heaven:
 first seeke it, then find it. There is none among us, but lookes for eternall blessednesse: but where is our precedent obedience? GOD is not such a Prodigall, to deale his treasures among them that never sought to please him. Quidam luxuriantur in Christo.Ambros. Some are too bold with CHRIST, they spend too fast upon his stocke: indeed through their owne default, his riches mal^ them poore. The conceit of his sufficiencie causes them to neglect their owne deficiencie: they will faile in doing, yet CHRIST must not faile in Crowning. They forget their first, yet expect Gods last. They are deceived; if they will not first doe these things, they shall fall. It was a prayer of the Iewes every morning; Puram animam, quam mihi dedisti, da ut tibi restituam: so let it be ours, Lord, as thou gavest me an undefiled soule, so grant I may returne thee an undefiled one againe. Let us spend this short time in agendo quae ad gratiam, in doing the workes of grace; that wee may spend that eternall time in habendo quae ad gloriam, in possessing the riches of glory.
For the practise or fruitfulnesse in good workes; If yee doe: not thinke or say, but doe. Idlenesse never had the testimonie of Gods acceptance: it is a vice that damnes it selfe. The idle person seemes to be Gods outlawry; out of the compasse of his protection. Art and nature bring forth nothing suddainely: there must be growing degrees in the one, and intervenient labours in the other, Matth. 20.8. The Penie had never beene theirs, if they had stood in the market idle till Sun-set. The Philosopher said, that a man should give a lazy beggar a bit and a blow: a bit to releeve his body, a blow to correct his mind. Nothing better pleaseth God, than the sweet composition of a mans hand with his heart. When the one doth Prop^^ere quid agendum, the other Exponere quid propositum: When the heart doth direct what the hand should doe, and the hand doth doe what the heart directs. For the hand is the best commentary of the heart: what a man does, I am sure he thinkes; not alwayes, what he speakes. We must serve God, as one said he would marry, Pro amore, for love. Now there are foure things comprehended in that word, and they are found by cutting off the first letter. Amore, with love: as life in the body, so devotion in the soule, begins at the heart. More, with the conversation, practicall obedience, doing that which is good. Ore, with the mouth, setting forth Gods praise. Re, with the estate; when we doe not offer sacrifice to the LORD, of that which cost us nothing.
There must be hearty love, lively practise, kindly thankes, costly service. When the good workes of our ancient fathers and progenitors in this land are mentioned, presently the malicious cry out; Tush, they were Idolaters. Were they so? then a man may well say, that those Popish Idolaters were better than these Puritane Saints. If their superstition set up Churches, I am sure that these mens zeale pulls them down. Let them shew us some Doing of good: verae dicuntur res, quae apparent quales sunt, Aug. Things are said then to be true, when their appearance doth manifest their being. If a man have a righteous hand, I will beleeve him to have a righteous heart. Physitians judge of the bodies health, not by the colour of the face, nor by the quickenesse of the eye, nor by the glibnesse of the tongue; (though these also may give some symptomes) but by the pulse of the arme. It is not the lifting up of the eye, nor the bowing downe of the knee, nor a demure and affecta^^ manner of speaking, nor the Bible under the arme, nor the hearing of foure Sermons a day; that justifies the syncerity of a Christian; but If yee doe th^se things.
For the Syncerity, These things: not what gaine prompts, or lust suggests, (...) what God commands. What are they? Such things as appertaine to knowledge, (...) vertue, to godlinesse. Every worldling is left-handed: he will be doing, but he (...) no thankes for his paines. They that lay baits to intrap and enwrap their neighbo^^^ are still doing, to keepe their hand in ure: but this left-handed action is cursed. The rich Saint makes a feast, so doth the rich sinner, but with great difference: the (...)
 of the former are the poore, who can returne no recompense: the guests of the other are the rich, who are likely to bid them againe; so they tosse the ball of courtesie to such, as are able to tosse it backe to them againe. There is a right-handed charity in those, a left-handed respect in these, Luk. 14.12. As we have opportunitie,Gal. 2.10. let us doe good to all men, especially unto them who are of the houshold of faith. Rich worldlings will doe good, not to all men, but to some men: and of those, not to the houshold of faith, but after a sinister sort to the houshold of Belial; to flatterers, to pandars, to drunkards, Phil. 4.8. There is a perfect rule of this (...); whatsoever is true, honest, just, pure, lovely, and of good report. Those things which you have learned and received and heard and seene in me, Doe. Martha had a busy hand, but not about these things. Cain had a working heart, Achitophel a working head, Ioab a working hand: but Cains heart, Achitophels head, and Ioabs hand, are ill met in one man. Thou expectest eandem mercedem, the same reward that the Saints had: therfore thou must performe idem opus, the same worke that the Saints did. These things.
Now to reduce all these branches to their root, and as we have taken the words a sunder, so to put them together againe; all the particulars unite their forces in this one summe, or generall Doctrine. The mercie of God in our salvation requires our actuall obedience; we must doe these things. All the bells of Aaron ring this peale, Deut. 4.1. Hearken unto the statutes and Iudgements which I teach you, for to doe them, Gal. 3.10. Cursed is every one that continueth not in all things written in the Law, to doe them. Not sufficient to know them, but to doe them, Rom. 2.13. not the hearers of the Law are just before God, but the doers of the Law shall be justified. There was a woman, Luk. 11.27. that blessed the wombe which bare CHRIST: but hee replied, Yea, rather blessed are they that heare the word of God and keepe it. Yea, that thou saiest is true, she is blessed indeed, and all generations shall call her blessed; but there are others also blessed, even as many as heare the truth, and doe it. Blessednesse is desired of all, but few will goe to the price of it, Psal. 106.3. Blessed are they that keepe judgement, and doe righteousnesse: that keepe within the bounds of the one, and live in the practise of the other: the one being as it were their ore, the other their compasse. Be yee followers of God as deare children, Eph. 5.1. Summa religionis est imitari quem colis: the abstract of religion is to imitate him whom thou dost worship. Such a one hath done me insufferable wrong, how can I forgive him? God would. Another is gotten into my debt, and abuseth my patience, how can I forbeare him? God would. Be thou a follower of God in grace, that thou maist ascend to his glory. A man is travelling to this Citie; at least in his owne opinion he thinkes so, and tells all he meetes that he is going to London; yet still he keepes his backe upon it, and bends his course the contrary way. So ridiculous a thing is it, for men to professe that they are going to heaven, when their whole life is directly forwarding themselves to hell.August. Omnes ad Deum ire volunt, post Deum pauci: all men would come to God, few will be perswaded to follow after God, Matth. 7.21. Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter the kingdome of heaven. For many call CHRIST their LORD, yet serve the divell.
Hee that hath my Commandements, and keepeth them, hee it is that loveth mee, Ioh. 14.21. Aug. Qui habet in memoria, and servat inevita: qui habet in sermon^^^^, and servat in moribus. Qui habet andiendo, and servat obediendo: or qui habet f^ciendo and servat perseverando. Qui habet lectione, and servat dilectione. We must have the Gospell in our hearts, and keepe it in our lives* have it in ^earing, keepe it i^ obeying: (...) understanding must containe i^, ou^ actions expresse i^. Scriptur (...) i^ opera vertere, and non modo dicere sancta, sed fa^^^^, Hieron. Let u^ endevour to (...) the Scripturall words into workes, and not onely to speake holy things, but to doe them. For Frus^ra Script^ra lec^^ nisi intellectua; frustra intellect^^ nisi (...): in ^aine we read the Scripture if we understand i^ no^, in vaine wee understand it if
 we obey it not, Iam. 1.22. Be yee doers of the word, and not hearers onely, deceiving your owne selves. We must first be hearers: for David hath branded the wicked man with this marke; Noluit intelligere ut bene ageret: he would not heare nor understand, that he might doe well. A man may know the will of God, and not doe it: but he cannot doe it unlesse he know it. Then not hearers only, but Doers; and th^^ without any plea, or excuse, or feare of danger by holy obedience. The dove will not leave her flight because there are some ravens in the aire: so the good Christian will alwaies keepe obedience upon the wing, Psal. 34.14. Depart from evill; what and speake good only? No, but Doe good. De virtute loqui minimum, virtutibus (...); Hic labor, hoc opus est, Persi. To speake of vertue is nothing, the labour is to shew the power of in it virtuous actions. Magna dicere Golia sonus est: magna facere Sampsonis opus est, Tertul. To speake bravely, this is but the sound of a swelling Gyant: but to doe heroically, this is the worke of a valiant champion. It is not enough to say, as it is in the Psalme, Credidi, and ideo locutus sum; I beleeved and therefore I spake: but Credidi, and ideo operatus sum; I beleeved, and therefore I wrought. No man can worke unlesse he beleeves: no man can beleeve unlesse he workes. Christian Religion is more practicall, than theoricall: rather an occupation, than a meere profession; dwelling like the Artisans wit, at the fingers ends.
Let this bee understood to the confutation, to the confusion of hypocrisie; which turnes Religion into a vizard: it hath mouth, and eyes, and nose; all but painted. Hypocrites are not like the heathen Idols, save in one thing, Psal. 115.5. They have mouthes, but they speake not: eyes, but they see not, etc. These have mouthes, and they speake: eyes, and they see: eares and they heare; noses, and they smell: feet, and they walke: they have hands, but they doe not worke. Plutarch hath a tale of the Moone, that she entreated her mother to make her a coat fit for her. Her mother answers, my daughter, it is impossible to fit thee with a coat: for thou sometimes waxest, sometimes wanest: art now in the full, by and by changing: to day bigger, to morrow lesse. The hypocrite is such a man in the moone; sometimes a gyant, sometimes a dwarfe: now great, presently small; evermore so changing, that no coat can fit him. Hypocrites are like pictures on canvase they shew fairest at farthest. Heare them speaking, and see them not doing, and you would thinke them Angels: but see them doing, and heare them not speaking, and they are devills. Or at least, as you would Iudge of dancers, when you heare not the tune of their musicke; leaping and turning, in al points like mad-men. Their voice is the voice of Iacob, but their hands are the hands of Esau. Tace lingua, loquere vita: let thy life speake, and thy tongue hold her peace. Hypocrites have the running gowte, but it settles most in their fingers; Chiragra laborant. A beggar being reproved for his lasy life, answered that he had a secret disease lying in his bones, which for modesties sake he must not declare: they beleeved him and relieved him. One among the rest being unsatisfied, would needs know of him what that secret sicknesse was; seeing that he appeared so well outwardly: he told him plainely; it is within, a disease lying in my bones; some call it Idlenesse. Tell an hypocrite, (whose zeale is so pepper-hot at the tongues end) that his workes be cold: Oh he hath a secret disease in his bones; a scurvy dissembling humour, settled in his heart, and creeping through every joynt. If you will, you may call it Idlenesse or Hypocrisie; for I understand them as convertible termes. It must be very strong physicke that purgeth this humour. They are only good, when on the Sabboth day they are fowing tap-houses, and scouring the common sewers and sinkes of sinne.Prosper. But mendacia fallax Damnat, and in mach^^ gladiu^ distringit Adulter. Adulterers punish wantons, and presumption judgeth weakenesse. Is not this to be doing? yes, they doe till they undoe a man: they doe, but not these things: Omnium libidinum servicos puniunt qu^^ imitantur; Plin. They condemne that in others, which they applaud in themselves. But let us doe what wee should, that ^e may receive what we would, 1 Tim. 1.5. The end of the commandment is charitie, not of a pure heart, and of a good conscience, and faith unfained. Th^^
 may we expect the reward well done good servant: not well professed, but well expressed: not well knowne, nor well spoken, nor well purposed, but well done. This is the perfect rule, Gal. 6.16. And as many as walke according to this rule, peace be on them, and mercie, and upon the Israel of God.
Yee shall never fall. I come to the Ratification: these words are diversely read: Non impingetis, non offendetis, non cadetis: this is the best, (...): Ye shall not fall. The originall ad verbum, yee shall not fall for ever, that is, yee shall fall never. Such a phrase you have, Ioh. 13.8. Thou shalt not wash my feete for ever, that is, Thou shalt never wash them. This seemes to be derived from the, Psal. 15.5. He that doeth these things, shall never fall.
But here the Apostle seemes to attribute something to our workes; as if the merit, of our doing, should preserve us from falling. No, he speakes not De causa misericordiae, sed de via gratiae; not concerning the cause of mercie, but the way of grace. Our owne workes doe not uphold us, but assure us by a token that we are upholden of God. Sunt testimonia electionis qua fulcimur: they are the inseparable effects of that grace, by which we are kept from falling. So long as we feele thy pulse beating, we are sure thou livest: yet the beating of thy pulse is not the cause thou livest, but a signe by the effects. Bellarmine observes, that CHRIST saies not definitively; you are unprofitable servants, Luk. 7.10. But when yee shall have done all that is commanded you, Say, we are unprofitable servants. Dicite, say so, for good manners sake, and the acknowledgement of humility. Nay, but rather subscribe to veritie; say so, and say the truth: for CHRIST might give something in charge, Propter humilitatem, to beget in us humility; but nothing contra veritatem, never any thing against the truth. The God of veritie never bad us lie: say so then, and say truely, that wee are unprofitable servants:Bern. for God is a loser even by the best of us; if we consider and compare the cost he hath beene at with us, with our fruites. The earth restores us foure for one, we scarce returne to God one seed of foure. Vsurie brings us backe one above our ten by interest, we hardly restore to the Lord one of ten, of his principall. Wee know no merit but CHRISTS; therefore we pray, forgive us our trespasses, and give us our daily bread. Qui misericordiam petit, meritum negat: he that beggeth mercies, boasts no merits: if thou aske an almes, never plead thy worthinesse. As the Servants to Princes make their gifts better than their wages: so let us that serve God, stand upon his gifts, not upon our wages. We are not upholden by our pietie, but beholden to Gods pitie; we are kept from falling only by the grace of Iesus Christ.
Shall never fall. Falling is two fold, of Infirmitie, and of Apostacie; the one is a falling into sinne, the other a falling into the state of damnation: there is weaknesse in the one, there is presumption and obstinatenesse in the other. The former of these falls may befall the faithfull, but not the latter: for there is no damnation to them that are in Iesus Christ, Rom. 8.1. Indeed he may fall into diverse sins, but never into that sinning sinne: they be slippes, not foiles: or if foiles not falls: or if falls, yet falling forward to repentance, not backward from mercie. The faithfull shall not fall into apostacie; from the Lord: the reason is, because God establisheth his goings, Psal. 40.2. The Lord will preserve him, and keepe him up. If that were understood of sin, that Salomon speakes; The just man falleth seven times a day; yet it implies his repentance: for he could not properly bee said to fall seven times, unlesse hee had rose six times. Toties resurgit paenitendo, quoties cecidit peccando; he doth not more often fall by sinning, than he riseth againe by repenting. Thus he may fall into infirmitie, but he shall never fall into apostacie.
And this is a sweet comfort, that those which are upheld by Gods power, shall never fall away from IESUS CHRIST. Eli was Priest of the Sanctuarie, yet he fell: Adam was in Paradise, yet he fell; Lucifer was in heaven, yet he fell: but whosoever is in CHRIST, shall never fall. Indeed he may fall into affliction, but not into destruction. Subjicitur miseriis, non rejicitur cum miseris: he is laid under the
 rod of calamity, but he shall never be forsaken with the miserable. Death may trip downe his body, Satan cannot get downe his soule; In abyssum non cadet. His name is written in heaven; and untill that name fall, which will not be though heaven fall, himselfe shall never fall. Though he wrastles with Gyants, against Principalities, and Powers, and wicked spirits in high places; yet he shall stand. Though death lay his body in the dust, yet it hath no power to touch his soule; he shall stand. The poore Philosopher dying said; Anxius vixi, dubius morior, nescio quo vado: I have lived uncertaine, I die doubtfull, I know not whether I goe or what shall become of me. The blind reprobate, what he would not credite presuming, he shall see then despairing; the gates of hell wide open, and a bottomlesse gulfe ready to swallow him. The resolved Christian knowes, that the mouth of the pit is shut against him, that the gate of glory stands open for him; that he is elected, not to fall, but to rise. No descent doth feare him, but his ascent doth cheare him, I goe to him that is above. Now the mercie of God keepe us from falling, and giue us a blessed rising at the Resurrection of the Iust, through the merits of Iesus Christ. Amen.



VERSE 11. For so an entrance shall bee ministred unto you abundantly, into the everlasting kingdome of our LORD and Saviour Iesus Christ.

THe dependance of this verse with the former, we shall in due place bee fitly occasioned to consider: first, therefore to the distribution. It may bee distinguished into two maine parts.
The
Passage; For so an entrance shall be ministred to us.Palace; Into the everlasting kingdome of Christ.
In the passage are observable these foure Properties
Certitudo, the Surenesse; So shall be; without faile.Promptitudo, the Readinesse; An entrance; without trouble.Aptitudo, the Fitnesse; shall be ministred; without let.Latitudo, the Easynesse; Abundantly; without paine.
In the Palace consider two things: The
Royaltie; it is the Lords owne kingdome.Eternitie; it is an Everlasting kingdome.
In the Surenesse we find two circumstances; the Reason by way of connexion, in the word For: and the meanes by way of relation, in the word So.
For. This is a binding word that knits the discourse together with a naturall dependance. As if the Apostle should thus declare himselfe; There are some blind, and forget the way of truth: what then? Therefore make your election sure: why? for if ye doe so, yee shall never fall: how are we sure that we shall not fall? For so you have a full entrance to blessednesse. If you study in mind, affect in heart, and
 strive in hand, to doe these things; God will helpe Per opem suam operam vestram, your endevour with his grace, you shall enter into his glorious kingdome. Plaine and simple averring of the truth is sufficient in holy Scriptures, which bind the conscience authoritative. Gods, Sic facite, or Hoc credite; doe this, or beleeve that; is enough without any reason. For as in mens commands, we examine Quid, non quis, what is enjoyned, not who imposeth it: so in these we examine Quis, non quid; who it is that chargeth us, not so much what we are charged. The precepts of Superiours are sometimes evill, therfore we obey them only in good: but when the Lord commands, we doe not examine, but execute, 1 Sam. 3.18. Dominus est, It is the Lord. Yet as CHRIST led the Iewes Tam oculo, quam oraculo; as well by his Miracles amazing them, as by his Oracles instructing them. So his Apostles perswade us, Et argumentis and ornamentis; and doe not come evermore with a Mandamus. As the father to bring on his childe a long Iourney, winnes him by faire promises, lifts him our hard passages, holds him by the hand all the way: so the Lord doth allure us by gracious affordements, perswade us by arguments; and rather than wee should bee weary of well doing, encourageth us with reasons; For so you shall enter, etc.
So. This is a description of the meanes, and hath a relation to the former counsell. As if he should say, make your election sure; and by living soberly and righteously endevour the ascertaining to your owne hearts, that God hath decreed you to salvation: for So you shall have a free entrance into the kingdome of CHRIST. That is the only meanes whereby you may be admitted, and without that you shall be excluded. There be numbers that would enter the kingdome of Christ, but they faile in their Sic, they will not So enter, Luk. 10.37. When Christ had made the Lawyer tell himselfe, who was the good neighbour; He that shewed mercie on him: he presently upon it chargeth him, Goe and doe thou likewise. Wouldest thou arrive at heaven? set their Precedents, who are now in heaven, before thine eyes; Goe and doe thou likewise. So Paul left it in charge behind him, Phil. 3.17. Be yee followers of me, and walke so as you have us for an ensample. If you would come to the place where we are, you must follow us in the workes which we have done: So you shall have an entrance. Sic, whatsoever is a Non sicut, dissonant from this So, is an hindrance. God sets us, as Moses on Nebo, upon the mount of a sanctified speculation, and shewes us Canaan, with the way to it; So you must enter it, or not at all. One minds nothing but his cuppes, another nothing but his purse, a third only his courtesan; yet all these point to meet at heaven: but they faile in their So; for this is not the way thither, 1 Ioh. 2.16. The lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life; is a broad way, but not to salvation. Of all the manuductions to the Citie of God there lies no way by three signes; the signe of the Pot, the signe of the Purse, and the signe of the Punke. Therefore we say, the drunkard is a man out of the way, the worldling crosses the way, the adulterer dammes up the way. All these faile in their (...), therefore shall misse in their (...), the desire of their hearts. One presumes himselfe a David, and thinkes to conquer the Goliah Satan with Sauls armour; not So, but in the Name of the Lord of hostes, 1 Sam. 17.45. The Seminary askes the Pope, as Abishai did David, 1 Sam. 26.8. Shall I smite the king? Not So, for who can stretch forth his hand against the Lords annointed, and be guilt-lesse? Treason is not the way to heaven. Covetous men like those stronger souldiers, will not give the faint and poore any of their spoile: not So saith David, 1 Sam. 30.23. You shall not doe so my brethren, with that which the Lord hath given us. There is another So to salvation; and blessed is the servant, whom his Master findeth So doing, Matth. 24.46. This is the surenesse; if you goe by the meanes, you shall come to the end. So you shall have an entrance; an infallible rule, if you walke So, you shall not misse it.
An entrance shall be given you; I call this the Readinesse of the Passage. The way is not hedged up with thornes, nor barricado'd with bulwarkes, nor maz'd like
 an intricate labyrinth; Patet, there is an Entrance. In the tractation of this doctrine, because it is the heart of the Text, I will consider three things. First, the proposition, that the way to blessednesse is open: next, I will cleare the way from certaine obstacles, that may seeme to crosse the truth of this assertion: lastly, I will declare wherin this Entrance consists.
The passage to grace and mercie is open, and ready to entertaine al entring feete. From the first fall, sinne had shut it up, but now CHRIST hath opened it, Revel. 3.7. He that hath the key of David openeth, and no man shutteth. The Pope presumes he hath that key, and lets in whom he pleaseth: Oh miserable man, why doth he not then let in himselfe? Idolaters, Sorcerers, Adulterers, Heretickes, have had that imaginary key; yet could they get no entrance into heaven. Only CHRIST opens that gate, and gives entrance. Thrice was heaven opened to himselfe: at his Baptisme, Matthew. 3.16. at his transfiguration, Matth. 17.5. at his ascension, Act. 1.9. I know that the apertion of heaven doth often meane a manifestation of Gods glorious power onely: but in these places it signifies visibilis caeli scissuram, ut aliquid planetis and astris superius perspiciatur; a visible fissure of heaven, that something might be seene farre transcendent to the starres and planets. Such an apertion was to Saint Stephen, Act. 7.56. Behold, I see the heavens opened, and the Sonne of man standing on the right hand of God. Praevidebat Stephanus, quod Stephano providebat Dominus. The Lord afforded him a vision of that, whereof he was instantly to have the fruition. The like patefaction was to Peter, Act. 10.11. He saw heaven opened. Those visible scissures were figures of this invisible entrance. Into the Sanctum Sanctorum, the type of heaven, went only the high Priest once a yeare: but CHRIST at his death rent the veile of the Temple, to signifie that he had made now a cleare passage for all beleevers, Hebr. 9.8. The Holy Ghost this signifying, that the way into the Holiest of all, was not yet made manifest, while as the first Tabernacle was standing. Indeed it is true, that from the beginning heaven was not shut to the faithfull; for how then did Abraham enter into blessednesse? Non clausum fuit Iudaeis, sed non apertum fuit omnibus. As it was not shut to the Iewes, so it was not open to the Gentiles. For they were aliens from the common wealth of Israel, and so strangers from the covenants of promise, Eph. 2.13. But now yee which were sometimes far off, are made nigh by the bloud of Christ; who hath broken downe the middle wall of partition betweene us. The Gentiles were esteemed as dogs; and the childrens bread is not given to dogs, Mark. 7.27. But he that could make ex lapidibus filios, children of stones; can also make ex canibus servos, of those dogs servants. The gate then stands wider open Per Christum missum, than it did Per Christum Promissum; by a Saviour borne, than it was by a Saviour only promised to be borne. That to the Holiest, was a typicall entrane, this is a topicall entrance.Rom. 13.11. Therfore, Our salvation is now neerer: for we doe not goe to the gate of heaven, but rather the gate of heaven comes to us, Rev. 21.2. I saw the holy Citie, new Ierusalem comming downe from God out of heaven. Because we could not ascend to it, it doth ascend to us. CHRIST calls himselfe The doore, Ioh. 10.7. which place being compared with Revel. 3.20. I stand at the doore and knocke: we find that Ostium est, and ad ostium pulsat: he is the Doore and yet he knockes at the doore. He that hath a sute to the King, concludes with himselfe; I must goe to the Court, for the Court will not come to me. Yet Matth. 21.5. Rex tuus venit ad te; Thy king commeth unto thee. Petit tua limina virtus. Thus Christ promised the penitent malefactor; This day thou shalt be with me in Paradise. Sanguis Christi clavis Paradisi. The bloud of Christ is the key that openeth Paradise,Hieron. Eph. 2.18. Through him we have an accesse by one spirit unto the Father. Thus the doctrine is cleared, Heb. 10.19. We have boldnesse to enter into the Holiest by the bloud of Iesus: By that new and living way which he hath consecrated for us, through the veile, that is to say, His Flesh. He is the Way, and the Truth, and the Life: there is no way but by thee, no truth but from thee, no life but in thee, Oh deare Lord Iesus.
In the second place, let us proceed to the removall of such impediments as might
 hinder this passage. There is no glory of entrance, where is no hindrance. Sinne was the first obstacle, Gen. 3.24. So he drave out the man. It shut him out, and kept him out: Angels that were his friends, were set to with-stand his re-entry. This taught him, that as sinne cast him out of Paradise, so it would also shut him out of heaven, but for the mercies of God in the merits of a Redeemer. There are many enemies, back'd by the malice of sinne; but because they are numerous, and must be ranked to some Generalls, I will reduce them to foure.
The world is none of the least; and in this there is a double opposition: on the left-hand Indigencie, on the right-hand opulencie.August. They are both removed by Christ; Qui omnia bona terrena contempsit, quae contemnenda docuit: and omnia mala sustinuit, quae sustinenda pracepit; The good things of this world he despised, that he might teach us to despise them: the evill things hee bore, that hee might teach us to suffer them. 1 Iohn 5.4. Whosoever is borne of God, overcommeth the world: Wee so cast away this hinderance, whether of prosperous or adverse things; Vt nec in illis quaeritur foelicitas, nec in istis timetur infoelicitas; That we neither seeke to be blessed in the one, nor feare to be cursed in the other, August. Faith is the principall in this victory: good works are underling souldiers, but Faith is the Captaine,Sarcer. which commands all under the great Generall, IESUS CHRIST. Opera bona vincunt executive, sola fides imperative; Is want an hinderance? No, Matth. 6.20. There is Treasure enough to be had in heaven. Is dearth? No, Prov. 15.15. For a good conscience is a continuall feast. Is exile? No; for the home wee seeke, is a Citie to come, Hebr. 13.14. Doth prosperitie assault us? Indeed this is a sore barre to our entrance; for one man could foile the Devill in his misery,August; whereas many have beene foiled by the Devill in their felicitie. Esay 38.17. In my peace I had great bitternesse. The Churches estate, saith Bernard, was Amara in nece martyrum, amarior in conflictu haereticorum, amarissima in moribus domesticorum; bitter in the losse of her childrens bloud, more bitter in the oppugnations of her doctrine, most bitter in the vices of her professed friends. Thus the world hinders our entrance, worse by his courtesies, than he can by his crosses. Yet let him doe his worst, faith followes Christ, and he is that great Martiall that makes way for us thorow the world, Ioh. 16.33. Be of good cheere; Ego vici mundum; I have overcome the world.
The Flesh steps in next to barre up our entrance; this is a Dalila in Sampsons bosome, that seekes to cut his throat: It is like the moth in the garment, that breeds in us, and feeds on us. There is no man hath a worse friend than he brings from home. An unfaithfull servant is mischievous, an unfaithful friend more mischievous; but Infida uxor, an unfaithfull wife, most mischievous. It is ready to prompt us, as Iobs wife tempted him, Iob 2.9. Curse God and die. This Clitemnestra for the love of her adulterous friend, Satan, will betray her owne betrothed Agamemnon. The onely course is to be bold with it; and Reprimere ne pereat, supprimere ne perimat; To restraine it, lest it kill it selfe, and to mortifie it, lest it kill us. This obstacle hath also Christ removed; not but that it still offers to withstand us, but that it shall never hurt us. Christs assistance is stronger than her resistance: in Christ she is mortua, dead, though in her selfe she be mortifera, deadly. Christs innocent flesh was crucified, that this sinfull flesh might be mortified, Ro. 7.25. Let her doe the worst to hinder my entrance, yet I shall enter: and for this I thanke GOD through IESUS CHRIST.
The Devill is a master antagonist, a watchfull and a wrathfull enemie. His weapons are Tentations, whereby he makes men sin: and Accusations, whereby he makes them despaire for sin. But this hinderer is mussell'd, Iohn 16.11. The Prince of this world is judged: Iohn 12.31. The Prince of this world is cast out. He is mortuus in lege, condemned himselfe, therefore unable to condemne us. Hee is excommunicated, therefore his testimony is nothing worth. Doth he fright thee with thy sins? Answer him that the Lambe of God hath taken them away. Perhaps the politike Serpent quiets thee in the setled opinion of thine owne righteousnesse. Oh Devill! wouldst thou have me turne Iuditiary, and trust to mine owne righteousnesse? I am a
 sinner, or else what needed I a Saviour? Matth. 9.12. They that be whole, need not a Physitian, but they that are sicke. I have infinite sinnes, but there is an infinite ransome payed for them.2 Cor. 5.21. He was made sinne for me, who knew no sinne, that I might be made the righteousnesse of God in him. Factus est peccatum propter nos, qui fuit ipsa justitia: ut nos facti simus per eum justi,August. in quibus fuit ipsa malitia; He that was righteousnesse, was made sinne for us; that wee who were unrighteous, might bee made righteousnesse in him. Satan doe thy worst, we have an abundant entrance through IESUS CHRIST.
Death is the last enemie, but not the least enemie. Albeit it be hatefull and hurtfull to the wicked, because it ends their short joyes, and begins their everlasting sorrowes. Yet to the faithfull, that fiend is a friend; Dum egressum properat, ingressum praeparat: while it hastens their going out of this world, it prepares their going into the world to come: Philip. 1.21. To me to live is Christ, and to die is gaine. That which meant us the greatest dammage, procures us the greatest advantage. The Lord Iesus hath Led captivitie captive, and swallowed up death in victory, 1 Cor. 15.54. O death where is thy sting? O grave where is thy victory? Out of that Strong one hee brought honey: Out of that eater of all flesh, meat for all spirits. Thorow the jawes of cold death, he hath opened the gates of eternall life. Mors, quae perpetuo cunctos absorbet hiatu; Parcere dum nescit, saepius ipsa favet; While death strives to barre the way against us, it doth make way for us, into this everlasting kingdome.
Thus the hindrances being removed, wee come to consider the matter of this Entrance, wherein it consists. and how we are here said to have it. It stands in two things; our Vnion with Christ and our Communion with the holy Ghost.
First, for our Vnion with Christ; for if the head be entred, the members cannot be denied. The personall union of the Sonne of God to our nature, was a great mystery, 1 Tim. 3.16. Without controversie, great is the mystery of godlinesse; God wa^ manifested in the flesh. Yet let me boldly say, in respect of us, there is another nearer conjunction required to this Entrance, 1 Cor. 6.17. Hee that is joyned to the Lord, is one Spirit. First, that hypostaticall union was the conjunction of Gods Nature and mans nature in generall: but this is an union of the Son of Gods Person, and the beleevers person in speciall. Secondly, though Christ tooke our nature upon him, and that with all humane infirmities, yet cleane void of all sinnes: in this hee takes to him the beleevers person with all his sinnes: though we be full of wickednesse, he knits us to his holy and glorious selfe. He is the Head, wee are the members: but some tyrant may cut off the members from the head. He is the Husband, we are the wife: but death divorceth man and wife. He is the Vine, we are the branches: but man may slippe off a branch from the Vine. Hee is the Corner-stone, we the building: but a foundation may be bereft of the edifice; and come to the Temple of Ierusalems case; Non lapis super lapidem; To have not one stone left upon another. But when it is said, we are One Spirit with Christ, here can be no separation: spirit may be parted from body, not spirit from spirit, never from it selfe: not two, but one spirit, Cant. 8.6. Set me as a seale upon thine heart, and as a seale upon thine arme. The arme is the Instrument of power; and the heart is the fountaine of life, the first that lives, and the last that dies. If therefore we be set there as seales, there can be no disjunction: unlesse we could be plucked from his armes that is Almightie; unlesse his heart could die, which is life it selfe. Set me as a seale, etc. That Petition is now a Position; what the Church then desired, it hath now enjoyed: their wish is o^^ Article, their Pater-noster, our Creed. Were we not deepely engraven on his heat, when his heart was divided with a speare for us? When in a manner he seemed forsaken of his owne Father for a time, rather than his Father should forsake us for ever. That Evangelicall Prophet testifies it, Esay 49.16. Behold, I have graven th^^ upon the palmes of my hands. Were wee not ingraven there, when his hands were pierced for us? Foderunt manus, Psal. 22.16. They digged my hands and my feet. And they digged them so deepe, that the very prints remained after his Resurrection,
 Iohn 20. and their fingers were thrust into them for evidence sake. Some have thought that those scarres remaine still in his glorious body, to be shewed at his second appearing; They shall see him whom they have pierced. That is improbable, but this is certaine; There remains still an impression upon Christs hands and his heart; the sealing and wearing of the elect there, as precious Iewels. For the same affections he had on earth, hee hath carried up with the same body to heaven. Hee cannot there Pati, but he doth Conipati; Saul, why persecutest thou me? He that remembred us on the Crosse, will not forget us in the Crowne: as Pharaohs officer forgate Ioseph when he came to his preferment. For this that penitent malefactor prayed; Lord remember me when thou commest into thy Kingdome. As if he should say, now happily thou thinkest on us, because thou art in the same fashion and passion with us, suffering the same torment, subject to the same death; perhaps thou feelest more grievous things than wee. But when this passion is over all, thy sufferings past; when thou art exalted to glory, when thou commest to thy Kingdome, Lord, remember me then. He did so, This day thou shalt bee with me in Paradise. Hee remembers us now triumphing, so well as he did then suffering. The affection of love is noted to be most vehement in women: David spake of a transcendent and incomparable love, when he preferred it above the love of women. 2 Sam. 1.26. Thy love to me was wonderfull, passing the love of women: because they are naturally most tender and affectionate. Therefore Christ, that he might wonderfully love us, was made of a woman. Gal. 4.4. God sent his Sonne made of a woman. But because sinne can harden the heart of any woman, therefore he tooke it of a pure virgin. And because every virgin is originally conceived in sinne, to make it more pure and tender; he tooke it of a woman, of a virgin, and cleare from all sinne. Now this affection he tooke with him to heaven, and set it at the right hand of his Father there.
Thus Aditum per vulnera pandit: His side was opened, thorow that breach we have entrance. His heart was pierced, thorow that heart we have entrance: every wound is a passage. Who condemnes? It is Christ that justifies. Who shuts? It is the Lord IESUS that opens. Death seemes to dissolve this union, but doth not: for looke what was Christs condition in the grave, such is the condition of all his members. In death the soule of Christ was severed from his body, as farre as heaven is from earth; for his body was laid in the Sepulcher, and his soule was in the hands of his Father: yet was neither of these separated from the God-head. Chrysostome gives a familiar similitude to explaine this: A man holds a sheathed sword in his hand, he drawes out the sword from the scabberd, holds the sword in one hand, the scabberd in the other; here the sword and the sheath are parted one from another, but neither of both are parted from the man, for he hath them both in his hands still. So the Deitie tooke Christs soule from his body when he died, as a sword drawne out of the scabberd, but held them both in his hands, and at his Resurrection put them together againe: the soule was separated from the body, neither of these from the Lord. So it is with us; Death, whether naturall or violent, may rend the soule from the body, it can take neither from Christ. But why then is not the body quickened in the grave by his vertue, and by the inseparability of this union? As when an arme is taken with a dead palsey, it receiveth little or no heat, sense, motion, or life from the body; yet it still remaines a member of the body: because the flesh and bones abide still tyed with ligaments to the body. Our bodies in the grave are but taken with a dead palsey, they are still members of Christ, and shall by his vertue be revived: when againe the soule shall be wedded to the body, and both body and soule to everlasting glory.
Thus we are sure, if Christ be entred, that our entrance is easie. Es^h. 5.2. We have obtained fev^nt in the sight of the great King, his golden Scepter is held out unto us, let us enter, Hebr. 4.16. Goe wee boldly unto the throne of grace: there is no quarrell against us in heaven, all is peace through Christ; let us enter. It is the voice of the King himselfe, Matth. 25.23. Enter into the joy of your Lord. All excuses of our not
 entering into this kingdome are taken away. It is storied of a great Conquerour, that when hee had vanquished his enemies, after a long siege laid to the Castle wherein they had fortified themselves; and had opened that inaccessible Palace; he sent some of his Garrisons to enter and keepe it for him. They, ignorant of his victorie, excuse themselves; There be Giants; he answers, I have slaine them. Thereb^ Dragons about it; I have chained them fast. There is a deepe trench, how should we passe over it? I have dammed it up. There are brazen-gates, strongly guarded* I have set them wide open. There wants roome for so many as thou sendest: No, there is roome enough: it is as large as a Citie; therefore goe in, and possesse it. So when God sends men to enter this Kingdome, they cowardly excuse themselves, as Israel did; There bee Giants, the sonnes of Anak; there are Principalities and Powers to withstand us: CHRIST answers, I have staine them on my Crosse. There is a great red Dragon; I have chained him fu^^e enough, Revel. 20.2. Th^^ blessed Angell, with the key of the bottomlesse pit, and the great chaine in his hand; hath bound the Dragon that old Serpent for ever. But there is a Fortification of (...) Law against us; saith Christ, I have scaled that Fort, performed full obedience ^o the Law, and given satisfaction to the Iustice of God for you. But there is a deepe trench, a sea of glasse before the Throne, Revel. 4.6. How shall we get over tha^ to the Kingdome? Ioh. 16.33. Be of good cheare: Ego vici mundum; I have overcome the world. But there is an high wall, and mightie gates, Revel. 21. too high to climbe over, and too thick to break thorow. You need not attempt such a course, for the ga^^ are set open, Vers. 25. The gates of it shall not be shut at all. But there wants roome (...) so many as thou invitest to this Kingdome. No, Ioh. 14.2. In my Fathers house (...) many mansions, there is roome enough for you all. Thus is this Entrance readie (...) us, God grant we may be ready for this Entrance.
Secondly, this Entrance consists in our Communion with the Holy Ghost, 2 Cor. 13 14. The communion of the Holy Ghost is with us. When two Princes would establish peace together, either sends his Ambassadour to other, as a pledge or earnest of that truce. So God, to confirme an everlasting league betweene himselfe and our soules, sends his Lieger; the Holy Ghost to us; and we send our Lieger, our Saviour Christ, and our Fidelitie with him, unto God: 2 Cor. 1.22. He hath sealed us, and given the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts. An earnest seales the bargaine, as a handfull of corne is given to assure the whole field. We have begun to reape, therefore it is truely said, we have made our Entry. This Entrance consists in many felicities communicated to us by the Spirit, but I principally apply my selfe to that of Saint Paul, Rom. 14.17. The kingdome of God is not in meat and drinke, but righteousnesse, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost. Paul calls it the Kingdome of God; so doth Peter in this place: Paul saith, it is participated in this life; so Peter, that we have here an Entrance into it. It must be understood of that fruition which we have of the Kingdome of God in this life; for otherwise why should he mention and exclude meats and drinkes; Quae in Regno gloriae non erunt necessaria; Which have neither use no^ place in heaven? Chrysostome and Haymo construe it thus; That meats and drinkes are not in coelum introducentia, of any power to bring us to heaven. But Peter Martyr calls this Alienam interpretationem; for so neither is Righteousnesse any cause, (...) beginning of this Kingdome. Saint Augustine mentions one Vrbi^us, who by this Text would prove, that Christians ought to fast on the Saturday, the Iewes Sabbath, because the Kingdome of Christ is not in meats and drinkes. But then it would follow, that at other times, as on the Lords day, or when we fast not, wee should ^^pertaine to the Kingdome of Christ. But to our purpose, if it consist in Righteousness, Peace, and Spirituall joy; then having these, we have an Entrance into it. If I seeme too tedious in this instance, I answer with Saint Peter: Bonum est esse hic: adif^^^ (...) tria tabernacula, Matth. 17.4. It is good for us to be here; let us build here three Tabernacles; One for Righteousnesse, another for Peace, and a third for Ioy in the Holy Gho^^. Where can we be better than in the Kingdome of Iesus Christ.

For Righteousnesse: this is not to be understood of a particular Iustice, Tribuere cuique suum; with Gorrhan. But it is the imputed righteousnesse of CHRIST, and our inherent righteousnesse proceeding from it. There is Iustitia operata pro nobis, A Righteousnesse wrought for us; whereby of evill men we are made good: and Iustitia operata in nobis; a Righteousnesse wrought in us, whereby of good men we are made better, Rom. 6.18. Being made free from sinne, we become the servants of righteousnesse. So farre then as we are righteous, so farre have we made our enterance. Where our desires are, there our selves are: but we desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ: therefore we are there with him; Vbi amamus, potius quam ubi animamus; Whither our conversation is entered, our selves are entered: but our conversation is in heaven, Phil. 3.20. Therefore we are there; not locally, but spiritually. Israelitico more vixisse, est in Israele esse; To live after the manner of Israel, is to be in Israel, saith a Father. If heaven be in us, then are we in heaven: but Gal. 2.20. We live not in our selves, but Christ liveth in us; and the life which we now live in the flesh, we live by the faith of the Sonne of God. He that hath the faith of eternall life, hath eternall life in his faith, Ioh. 5.24. He that beleeveth, is passed from death unto life. A Christian is like Iacobs Ladder, while his body, that lower part, stands on the ground, the top, his higher and better part, is in heaven: Ephes. 2.6. The Apostle speakes of a thing already done, He hath made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Iesus. If a stranger bee but come into your Suburbs, you say commonly, he hath entred the Citie. Sequitur vita Angelica, ubi praecessit Evangelica; If we now live like the Saints, we shall hereafter live like the Angels.
The next is Peace; Pax filia Iustitiae; Peace is the daughter of Righteousnesse, Rom. 5.1. Being justified by faith, we have peace with God: Peace and Righteousnesse, Invicem osculantur, Psal. 85.10. doe kisse each other. But how is it said then, Ioh. 16.33. In the world you shall have trouble? How can trouble and peace stand together? It is true indeed that the wicked will molest us, but we must still goe forward. Navigation is not to bee lost, because there are some sea-rockes: Doves forbeare not flying home, because there are some Kites abroad in the aire. God did not destroy all the Canaanites, lest the wilde beasts should breake in upon Israel. A countrey of India hath a law, that no man shall kill any Ravens; they are let alone to devoure the carrions, which else would corrupt the aire. We have disturbers enough; some, per pravitatem operis, by mischievous acts, against our lives, our wives, our children, our estates. Some, per falsitatem sermonis, by scandalous speeches; such are calumners, slanderers, flatterers. Others, per perversitatem cordis, by malicious envyings; as unfriendlinesse, suspitions, jealousies. Malice workes mischiefe at home, and Envie sends it in from abroad. Summa petit livor ut ignis; Our happinesse is their eye-sore. Envie hath Os sublime, a lofty looke, but non in coelum tueri, not to looke up unto heaven. There are Dogmata transalpina, Italian trickes, Revel. 13.1. There was a beast risen out of the Sea, having seven heads and ten hornes, and upon his heads the name of Blasphemie. A savage beast, that first deposeth Kings, and then exposeth them to death. A murdering point of religion; he that first invented it, was vir sanguinum, a bloudie wretch. But from the Devill it came, and to the Devill let it goe. These be our greatest peace-breakers; Facile est movere regnum, sed Dei solius quietare: These may easily breed commotion in a Kingdome, but God alone can pacifie it.
I know there are home-bred mischiefes enow: and many an Ahab doth trouble our Israel. The pestilent Vsurer, whose words are as soft as his Fox-furre, is a licking dogge that bites sore. The Mouse told her young ones in the Fable, that they should not feare the lowd crowing Cocke, but the still Cat. Lowd and lewd wantons disquiet us, but the oppressour doth more hurt sitting silently in his cash-house, than the other with all their noise in the streets. Caesar said, hee feared not Anthony, because his heart was in his tongue; but Cassius, because his tongue was in his heart. If all this be, where is our peace? Yes, Patientia filia spei; Patience is the daughter of hope: in their wrongs is seene our patience, in our patience our hope, in
 our hope, our peace. We have peace in the world, though we have no peace with the world. Our troubles are seene without, our peace is felt within. Travellers write of a certaine Iland, they call De Fierro, where no fresh water is to be had: yet there is a certaine tree in it, which drops so abundantly, that it satisfies all men and cattell of the Countrey. Our exigents and indigence are great, but there is an inward peace of conscience, that satisfies us all with the precious liquor of content. The Lord layes all that blustring wind, all the thunder and lightning of menaces, all the stormes and tempests of persecution, with one sweet and peacefull showre of comfort. Thus though we have not yet Pacem coeli, that Peace of heaven; yet wee have coelum Pacis, a heaven of peace, that is, assured remission of sinnes, and reconciliation to the God of peace. Satan, the World, Sinne, all fight against us; that warre is our peace. If the happinesse of that place, as Augustine speakes, be Peace i^ eternall life, and eternall life in peace; then have we some present entrance into it, for the Peace of God that passeth all understanding, and surpasseth all commending, doth preserve us.
The last materiall is Ioy in the HOLY GHOST; which ariseth partly from the hope of future reward, and partly from the sense of present comfort. For if there be such sorrow in the contrition of sin, what is the joy in the remission of sin? Rachel wept for her children, because they were not: we might have wept for our soules, because they were in worse case than if they had not beene: No wombe but a Rebecca's, feeles those conflicts, Psalm. 6.6. Every night wash I my bed, saith David, with my teares: We might have so washed our eternall beds. Mary Magdalen wept, as if she powred forth water, not by drops, but by flouds; Peter bitterly. This Winter lasted not long, the Spring-Sunne shone out with beames of comfort. Now one dramme of their present joy, did out-value all the loads of their former sorrow. Like men over-burdened, wee feele such ease when the Crosse of Christ takes all this weight from our shoulders. When sin is remitted, nothing afflicts, Iam. 1.2. My brethren, count it all joy when ye fall into divers tentations. What, joy in trouble? Will the world beleeve you, Saint Iames? They answer, take you such joy, we will not meddle with it. Yes, he that prescribed it, proved it; he found affliction turne to his profit; hee learned this benefit by good experience. As we say, Quae fuerunt laboriosa juventutis studia, haec sunt jucunda senectutis otia; Humane learning is mens paines in their youth, their recreation in their age. So what was the greatest sorrow to the heart penitent, proves the greatest joy to the heart pardoned. Who would not give the iron fetters of his thraldome, for the weight of gold in freedome? It is a false accusation, that the Word of God brings with it sullennesse and discontent: for Psal. 19.8. The Statutes of the Lord rejoyce the heart. It is the tidings of joy, of great joy, of such joy, that the mountaines skip like Rammes, and the little hills like young sheepe. So farre as this holy joy is entered into us, we have entered into the everlasting Kingdome of Iesus Christ.
Shall be ministred unto you.] I come to the third point; the Fitnesse or preparation: we are not beholding to our selves for this entrance, it is ministred to us. Vt ne^ bonum quod, sic nec bonum per quod; as neither the good which we would obtaine, so nor the good by which we doe obtaine, is our owne. The meanes is ministred, therefore it is called the ministery of the Word, the ministration of the Sacraments. The apprehension of this meanes is ministred, for it is given to us to beleeve, Phil. 1.29. The object of this apprehension is ministred; Eternall life is the gift of God through Iesus Christ, Rom. 6.23.
Admire the mercy of God, which doth not onely prepare a kingdome for us, but also prepare us for that kingdome. In the world there is no mercy to a sinner: it hath commonly beene the fault even of men entred into this kingdome, to shut the doore after them, and to keepe out others, Luke 13.14. The Ruler of the Synagogue could not endure, that the people should be healed on the Sabbath day, Matt. 20.31. When the blinde men cried to Christ; O Lord, thou Sonne of David, have mercy (...)
 us: The multitudes rebuked them, because they should hold their peace. This is a malicious and uncharitable sinne, when men are passed over the deepe pit by a bridge, to plucke it up, and suffer none to follow them. Thou saiest, such a one is a refractary and dissolute offender; what then? therefore shut the Church doore against him? this is thy mercie, but Gods mercie is more; to repentance he ministers an entrance. Yes, saith the malevolent repiner; he seemes to repent, but he is only humbled in hypocrisie: but what window hast thou into his heart? It is worse in thee to be so criticall a censurer, than in him to be so hypocriticall a sinner. The Lawyers say, Semel malus, semper malus: once bad, never good. The Cathari did use to excommunicate for ever: if a man were once revolted, never to be received: but this was but a Puritan tricke. Or if upon undeniable contrition, and humble submission, they admitted such a one to their outward service, yet they held him a reprobate: as the Gibeonites were permitted in the Tabernacle, but with disgrace. The Brutii in Italie, for their revolting from the Romans to Hanibal, were upon their submission received again into the Roman protection, but might never be trusted for that tricke. Paul saies, 1 Cor. 6.9. Neither Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor theeves, nor drunkards, nor extortioners, shall inherite the kingdome of God. Yet was Salomon an Idolater, Mary Magdalen an adulteresse, the malefactor on the Crosse a theefe, Zaccheus an extortioner, Noah drunke: yet did all these enter into the kingdome of God. The Apostle addes, Verse 11. Such were yee; you were, but you are not: neither did they enter into heaven, Idolaters, or Adulterers, or Extortioners, but they became new creatures: they were washed, sanctified, justified, in the Name of the LORD IESUS and by the Spirit of GOD. Tu muta sententiam tuam, Deus mutabit suam. Doe thou turne from wickednesse to pietie, GOD will turne from Iudgement to mercie.
One of the Puritanes told Constantine the great, the strictnesse of their opinions; to whom he answered, Erige tibi scalam, caelumque ascendito solus: set up thy selfe a ladder and goe to heaven alone. The Iewes were such absolute malecontents, grudging the Gentiles any mercie. This envious fault is too common, and there is still some of this Puritane bloud that runs in many mens veines. That man thinks hee loses, what another gaines: it is not enough for him to have a place in heaven himselfe; but he must be Porter, or rather housholder, to direct who shall come after him; to let in whom he please, his friends and acquaintance only, Act. 13.45. When the Iewes saw that a great audience was at Pauls Sermon, they were filled with envie, and fell to contradiction and blasphemie, Luk 15.28. When the elder brother heard the sumptuous and joyfull entertainement of his lost brother; hee was angry, and would not goe in. So Rome thinkes that the Gospells rising, must needs be her falling. Therefore she cannot endure like a sister to communicate with us, but like a tyrant to excommunicate us. They thinke it is with them and us, as the Poets imagined it to be with Castor and Pollux; when the one lived, the other dyed. Or as when the day comes, the night must end: or as two buckets in one well; one dryeth while the other dippeth. Or as the Iewes might feare, when Agrippa built Caesarea, and removed all the ornaments of Israel thither; that the flourishing of that Citie would be the drooping of Ierusalem. Envie is sicke, if her neighbour be well.
But let this malicious heart heare Gods argument and eviction. Is thine eye evill, because I am good? This was the Prophet Ionah's discontent. chap. 4.1.Matth. 20.15. When the Lord would not destroy them according to his threatning; It displeased Ionah exceedingly. God meanes to spare Niniveh, Ionah would not have it so. God thought it best, the man is of another mind. Here is an opposition of two, but the match is very unequall. I am certainely perswaded, that no man is like to gaine much by such bargaines. The Poeter is on the one side, and the pot-sheardon the other. Fire, thunder, lightning, saies it shall be so, flaxe and tow saies, it shal not be so. Yet is weakenesse angry that he may not beare away the bucklers. Therefore he proceeds to argue the matter with God, Ver. 2. But as Tully said of Romulus pretending a Law to kill his brother
 Remus; It was a fault by the leave of Romulus: so if Ionas pretend reason why God should overthrow penitent sinners, this was a fault by the leave of Ionas. The Disciples were not free from this error, Matth. 19.13. When they brought little children to Christ for his blessing; the Disciples rebuked them. They that have part in the kingdome, grudge it to others. Onely Iesus spoke for them: it is his goodnesse to answer for that is not able to answer for it selfe. Suffer them and forbid them not: he doubles his charge, both affirmatively, suffer them: and negatively, forbid them not. As in the kings writte there is not onely a Capias, but a Nullatenus omittas. Abundans cautela non nocet. Let them come unto me: If I have given them a kingdome, will you not let them come to the King? Let this teach us to yeeld a joyfull consent to Gods doings: we must not dislike his will though it be to destroy: but when it is sweetned with mercie, let us vehemently love it. When Ioshua told Moses of Eldad and Medads prophecying in the campe, Numb. 11.28. My Lord Moses, forbid them: he answers, Enviest thou for my sake? would God that all the Lords people were Prophets, and that the Lord would put his Spirit upon them. When Paul was called to be an Apostle, those Pillars envied not, but gave him the right hands of fellowship, Gal. 2 9. They that went to heaven by the bloudy way of Martyrdome, prayed for others an easyer passage even their persecuters and murderers had their prayers. As Fulgentius notes on Stephen and Paul; whether Stephen went before slaine by the stones of Paul thither Paul followed after helped by the prayers of Stephen. Let this comfort us in the mercies of our God; whosoever grudgeth, whatsoever hindreth, the Lord doth minister an entrance unto us.
Abundantly. I come to the latitude or broadnesse of this passage. Faith and a good conscience finds an easy entrance to blessednesse. Abundantly, It is demanded then, how the word of God makes the passage so straight, and so narrow, Luk. 13.24. Strive to enter in at the straite gate; for narrow is the way which leadeth unto life,Matth. 7.24. and few there be that find it. The answer is easy, the gate is not narrow in it selfe, but inrespect of the unqualifiede nterers. It is too low for lofty and aspiring ambition, too narrow for impostumated pride, too strait for gowtie covetousnesse: but to faith it is broad. As it is Speciosa for the gloriousnesse, so Spaciosa for the easynesse: it is both a Beautifull gate, and a Bountifull gate. But this bountie is onely to the poore, Luk. 1.53. He filleth the hungry with good things, and the rich he hath sent empty away. Rich men scorne to be beggars, their dition admits no such condition. This gate is open, not Potentibus, to mightie usurpers; but Petentibus, to humble petitioners. The Lord is rich in mercie: to all? No, but to all that call upon him faithfully. And apud eum copiosa redemptio with him is plenteous redemption; it is all one, abundant entrance. But, Matth. 11.12. The kingdome of heaven suffers violence: true, but it loves that violence that it suffers: as GOD was well pleased to be overcome of Iacob. This violence doth not take away the facility of entrance, but rather notes the facultie of them that enter.
It is true, that there are many oppositions, yet is there still a sufficient entrance. We may say of it, as Saint Paul speakes of his occasion of preaching the Gospell, 1 Cor. 16.9. Lata porta, sed multi adversarii: a great doore and effectuall is opened, but there are many adversaries. Saint Paul himselfe was a little feared with the apprehension of this difficultie; when he prayed thrice against those buffettings of Satan, 2 Cor. 12.9. But he was confirmed in the Lords answer; My grace is sufficient for thee. Indeed flesh and bloud, in the naturall corruption of it, cannot enter the kingdome of God, 1 Cor. 15.50. no more than a cable rope can be brought through a needles eye. While it is whole it cannot passe; but untwine it, and lay it threed by threed, and then you may easily draw it all through. If the worldling would untwist his riches by charitie, and the sinner untwist his sinnes by repentance, they may abundantly enter. There is an Abundanter that shuts many out; abundance of worldly riches, and lusts of covetousnesse: for, Luk. 12.15. Mans life consisteth not in this abundance. And if not his naturall life, much lesse doth his spirituall life, consists in it. There is an Abundanter
 that lets many in, Tit. 3.6. It is the grace of God which is abundantly shed on us through Iesus Christ.
But our Apostle himselfe makes it a difficult thing to be saved, 1 Pet. 4.18. If the righteous scarcely be saved, etc. The Apostle doth not intend any difficultie in respect of Gods election; but in regard of our affliction; because through a fiery tryall, and through many tribulations we must enter into the kingdome of God, Act. 14.22. So scarcely saved, that by reason of their miseries they seeme to the world not to be saved at all. Through much tribulation, they must enter, but howsoever they shall enter. This doth not hedge up the way, but enlarge it: Stephen saw great happinesse by Christ in his peace, but under the stones he saw heaven it selfe open, Heb. 12.6. God doth receive, not reject, the sonne whom he doth scourge. Dignus amore non eris,August. si dignus castigatione non censeris: if God doe not think thee worthy of his rod, he will never thinke thee worthy of his Crowne. Doth any man find the way to blessednesse difficult? himselfe is in fault. Doest thou complaine the gate is shut? No, but thou art not habited for entrance. None might come to Ahasuerus court in sackcloth, but they that come so are best welcome to God. It is said of the vertuous wife, Pr. 31.21. that all her houshold are cloathed in Duplicibus, in double garments. All gods servants have double garments; a blacke mourning garment of penitence, and a white robe of Innocence. Either of these must be vestis Talaris, downe to the heeles, even to the end of their life.
If men be foule and impure, no marvell though there be strait entrance; for there is no entrance, Revel. 21.27. Is no wise shall any uncleane thing enter into it. But otherwise, Invia virtutis nulli est via. Art thou wrap'd in thy sinnes, and safest the passage is narrow? It is abundant, but not to thee. Vnlode thy conscience by repentance, and those everlasting doores shall give thee entrance abundantly to the king of glory. It may seeme hard at the first, because there is weeping to part with beloved sinnes; much adoe to keepe the eye from Sodome; but endevour, and thou shalt find it easier, and easier. Capta vides sero Pergama, capta tamen, Revel. 22.25. The gates of it shall not be shut by day: by day, well; but yet they may be shut by night: neither, for there shall be no night there. The Prophet intreats God to Spread the heavens as a Curtaine: now he did spread them wide, when Publicans and harlots were converted, and did enter into the kingdome of heaven. I conclude.
This abundant entrance is given to us by CHRIST: our owne debts did make it narrow, his payment hath made it wide, Phil. ver. 10. As Paul pleaded to Philemon for Onesimus, so CHRIST to his father for us. I beseech thee; CHRIST mediates, intercedes for us. For my Sonne, saith Paul; for my children, saith Christ. Whom I have begotten; CHRIST hath begotten us againe of water and the Spirit; not only In my bonds: but in my bloud. Which in time past was to thee unprofitable, but now profitable to thee and me. So CHRIST; they were, O father, uselesse and rebellious enemies, but now I have made them usefull and profitable for thy glory. Verse 12. Whom I have sent againe: we were all runne-awayes from God and goodnesse, CHRIST hath sent us backe againe. Thou therefore receive him, that is in mine owne bowels. Receive them oh Father: shut them not out, but open thy everlasting doores of mercie to entertaine them; and that so neere, as unto thine owne bowels, Ioh. 17.21. As thou art in me, and I in thee, so let them be one in us, Verse 16. Not now as a servant, but above a servant, a brother beloved, specially to me. I have made them a degree above servants, even friends, Ioh. 15.15. I call you not servants, but friends. Yea, a degree above friends; Brothers to me, Hebr. 2.11. He is not ashamed to call us, brethren; Beloved to me, whom I bought with my owne bloud. Verse 17. If thou count me therefore a partner, receive him as my selfe. As I of my glory, so let them participate of our glory, Ioh. 17.22. The glory which thou gavest me, I have given them. If thou count me a partner, that thinke it no robbery to be equall with thy selfe; receive them as my selfe; admit them to thy owne blessednesse. Ver. 18. If he hath wronged thee, or oweth th^^ ought, put that on mine account: so saith CHRIST,
 Si quid debent, ego solvam; whatsoever they are indebted to thy Iustice, I will pay it: put it on mine account, take my reckoning on the Crosse for it. Verse 19 I Paul have written it with mine owne hand, I will repay it. I IESUS have written it on the paper of the Crosse, with the Inke of my bloud, the pen being a speares point; I will pay all. And his payment was good, who had Potentiam ad satispatiend^^, and Iustitiam ad satisfaciendum, power to suffer enough, and righteousnesse to satisfie enough. All this was to give us an abundant entrance: what shall we then doe, but as David, Psal. 116.13. I will take the cup of salvation, and call upon the Name of the Lord. Hath Christ made us way? let us then enter in, and blesse the Name of the Lord.
Into the everlasting kingdome of our Lord and Saviour Iesus Christ. Some copies have read Dei and domini, etc. so the vulgar latine. Idacius Clarus against V^^imadus the Arrian, from hence proves, Idem esse Patris and Filii Imperium, that the Sonne hath the same kingdome with the Father: and that in nothing he is unequall or inferior to him. Ambrose so reads it, and from it demonstrates against the Arrians, Vnitatem Substantiae aeterni Filii cum Patre. For every kingdome divided against it selfe, is brought to desolution, Matth. 12.25. If the kingdome of the Father, and of the Sonne, were divided, how could they stand? If any man should distinguish a kingdome of Christ onely, and so conceive a difference betwixt Gods power and Christs; Is tamen fatebitur; yet that man shall confesse that Christ hath a kingdome, and that an everlasting kingdome. But how can his kingdome be called everlasting, when as it is said, 1 Cor. 15.24. that Christ shall deliver up the kingdome to God the father? and Ver. 28. the son also himselfe shall be subject to him? we must know that God did commit the government of the world to Christ, and therefore he is called by Divines, Patris vicarius: not that the father could be idle, but Christ was his Counsellor. Now this government given to Christs mediatorship shall end: his mediation and interceeding office shall cease. He shall raigne no longer as the Son of man in the midst of his enemies; but he shall raigne over them being vanquished, as God. Through the subjection of his humane nature, the glory of his God-head shall more fully appeare, such and the lame it was before eternitie, neither shall this diminish, but rather encrease the glory of his humanitie; when we see it personally united to the sonne of God for ever. Thus we are sure that Christ hath himselfe, and will give us, an everlasting kingdome: for the love of GOD is from eternity in respect of our predestination, and unto eternitie in respect of our glorification.
In this Palace or court I consider two things; the Royaltie of it, in that it is a kingdome: and the Perpetuitie of it, in that it is an everlasting kingdome. Which give it two excellencies above all other Principalities. First, in regard of the Majestie which it hath from the king, who is above all kings. Non locus hominem, sed homo locum: the place makes not the man, but the man makes the place. Neither doth the kingdome honour Christ, but Christ honours the kingdome. Next, in respect of the Immutability: the honour of earthly Princes is often layed in the dust; but this is an Eternall kingdome. The Royaltie of Christ is absolute, undependant, universall, and everlasting. Luk. 1.33. He shall raigne over the house of Iacob for ever, and of his kingdome there shall be no end. The Angell assures the virgin that Christ shall have the Throne of David; And therein he shall raigne for ever, And of his kingdome is no end. This (...), And, is not redundant, but expository. Here be two termes that signifie an interminable thing; For ever, and No end: a double universalitie, of Place, and of Time. Nullus terminus, ad Tempus; it is For ever: Null^s ^^nis, ad locum, it hath no limits, but extends over all; No end.
Now it is fit that he should be so honoured, that was so humbled. Our (...) brought him exceeding low, let his owne righteousnesse exalt him exceeding high Miror Deum in mero; (...) ip^ tentem in cunabulis. He that thundereth in the clouds was lying, perhaps crying, in the clouts. He had a kingdome even while he f^^^ell
 and Pilate could not undoe, what he had ignorantly done; not alter his Title; Iesus of Nazareth king of the Iewes, Ioh. 19.14. He saith unto the Iewes, Behold your King. They spake truth in their mockerie, Mark. 15.18. When they began to salute him, Haile king of the Iewes. If his kingdome had depended upon their lippes, it had soone perished with himselfe. For now they gave him Palmes, and presently Thorns: Once Ecce Rex noster, behold our King: and againe, Non habemus Regem nisi Caesa^em, Ioh. 19.15. We have no king but Cesar. Simeon, told his mother, Luk. 2.34. This child is set for the rising and fall of many in Israel, (...); and for a signe that shall be spoken against. He shall be set: he was set for, set against, set at ^aught, but not set by. He was set, by intention for all, by occasion against many, by apprehension for many, by permission for a signe that should be contradicted. But he that was a Lambe, is now a Lion: Flos campi fit ferrea virga: qui lux radians, ^gnis consumens: that shining light is also a consuming fire. He that was a servant, is a king: not indeed of this world is his kingdome. Ioh. 18.36. My kingdome is not of this world: in it, not of it.
Here we may well consider these points; the Supremacie of the king, the Securitie of the subjects, and the eternall felicitie of the kingdome.
For the former, by comparing earthly things with heavenly, we may observe the excellencie of that Regiment in which we stand: it is a kingdome; and the Dignity of the governour, he is an eternall king. Vnto the king eternall, immortall, invisible,1 Tim. 1.17. the onely wise God, be honour and glory for ever. All inferiour kingdomes are derived from him, and subordinate to him. Non eripit mortalia, quiregnadat caelestia: he doth not take away temporall kingdomes, that gives an eternall kingdome. He who is the blessed and only Potentate, the king of kings, and Lord of Lords;1 Tim. 6.15. is content to distribute some honour among certaine men. Of whom it is too presumptuous to say, Divisum imperium cum Iove Caesar habet: but Imperium summum sub Iove Caesar habet. The Papists indeed more esteeme Monachum quam Monarcham: with them Magus is more than Magnus; the Priest is above the King, But there is no greater calling under heaven, than a King. Rex omnibus major, Deo solo minor.Tertul. The King is above all, onely under the Lord: he hath no Peere in his dominions. The power of a Maister over his servants, of a Parent over his children, of a Shepheard over his Lambes, of a Prince over his subjects, of a good man over himselfe, all these concurre in a good King, all are eminent in our great King IESUS CHRIST. Ioh 10.34. I have said, yee are gods. There is Deus naturaliter, a God by nature, the one only God himselfe. Dii opinative, gods in opinion, such are Idols: Dii participative, gods by participation, such are kings. Deus est immortalis Rex, Rex est mortalis deus: God is an immortall king, the king is a mortall god. In Greeke (...) signifies a foundation; (...), People: hence comes (...), a King; the foundation of his people. But CHRIST hath made us all kings, Revel. 1.6. Spiritually, not civilly. Rom. 13.1. Let every soule, be subject unto the higher powers. Spirituall kings have a dominion over sinne, temporall kings over them. Princes and other men are Pares in esse naturali, impares in esse morali: equall in regard of naturall being, unequall in regard of civill and morall being. The common golden coine, the golden Candlesticke, the golden Snuffers, the golden Chaines, and the golden Crowne; are all made out of one lumpe of the same Gold; yet is the golden Crowne more honoured than the rest. The common coine is the People: the golden Candlesticke that beares the light, is the Minister: the golden Snuffers, to clense those lights if they burne dimme and foule, are the subordinate Magistrate. The golden Chaines are the Nobles for ornament, the Senators for government. The last and best is the golden Crowne; this the King onely weares, and all the rest are subject to it. One peece of gold is under another in value, all are under the Soveraigne, the golden Crowne. This world is the possession of men, men the possession of kings, kings the possession of God. Psal. 18.51. Great deliverances giveth he to His King: he is the Lords King. There is a double relation, betweene the Kings God, and Gods King.
 All men are his by a common right, but kings by a speciall prerogative; Touch (...) Mine annointed.
Thus by comparative and ascending degrees, we come to percieve the grea^nesse of our Soveraigne, IESUS CHRIST. He made Kings on earth to have honour above all men, that himselfe might have the honour above all Kings. O^^ neighbours of Rome cannot endure the Supremacie of Princes: the Pope is the man. Kings must be his vassalls, to hold his stirrop, to beare his canopie; to be exposed, deposed, disposed at his will; if they be not composed to his will. All royaltie is confined to that Chaire, which the lateran Counsell calls, Regale Pontific^^ Romanorum genus; the Royall race of Romane Bishops. His Titles are, Christia^^ reipublicae Monarcha, Pontificae omnipotentiae assertorinvictissimus. But these Attributes that he would have, ascribe that to him which he should have, and prove him Antichrist for his labour: whom Paul saies we shall know by this marke. 2 Thes. 2.4. that he exalteth himselfe (...); above all that is called God, or is worshipped; above all Augusteitie. To manage outward affaires was ever Ius regale, the Kings right. Salomon the King deposed Abiathar the Priest; would it not be strange now if the Priest should depose the King? Optatus against the Donatists; S^per Imperatorem non est nisi Deus, qui Imperatorem fecit: above the King is none but God, who maks Kings. Strabo writes of a high Priest in Pontus that wore a Crowne, whose subjects were called Hieroduli; but he was a Pagan. The Romists will be Pagans, Donatists, Anabaptists; any thing, what you will, so they be no subjects. They that ascribe so much to the Fathers, me thinkes should give credite to Saint Chrysostome. Were he an Apostle, a Prophet, an Evangelist, a Bishop, a Priest, a Monke? saith he. But say they, among all these he names not the Pope. Why, is the Pope no Priest, no Bishop? well, let us heare him on; Sive quisquis tandem fuerit, whether cardinall, or Pope; what cloth soever his coate bee made of; the King is above him. Nicephorus writes of a King that going in his Barge, his Crowne fell into the water: a bargeman leapt in after it, and taking it up, he put it on his head as he swamme till he recovered the Barge. The King gave him a talent for saving it, but cut of his head for wearing it. Our Seminaries have done more than reach at the Crowne to save it, for they have endevoured to steale it: and, if they were suffered, they would sinke it, drowne it, destroy it. But saith CHRIST, Give unto Cesar the things that are Cesars, and to God the things that are Gods: Let Cesar have his kingdome, and let CHRIST have his kingdome. We distinguish betweene the eternall GOD, and the temporall LORD: but we obey the temporall LORD,August. for his sake that is the eternall God. And certainely he that refuseth obedence to the temporall King, hath yet made no gracious entrance into the everla- kingdome of Iesus Christ.
Thus by degrees of comparison, and by arising from things inferiour to things higher; if a kingdome of substitution under Christ be so great, what is the eminence of Christs owne Supremacie? Kings are above other men, Christ is above all Kings, above all things. Now in the second place let us consider our owne safetie and security under him. We have a King to rule us; a King of Majesty, a King of mercy. It is an happinesse to have a King: as the people said to David, 2 Sam 18.3. Thou art worth ten thousands of us; and thou art the light of Israel. Any King is better than no King, Tyranny is better than Anarchie. Iudg. 17.6. In those dayes there was no King in Israel, but every man did that which was right in his owne eyes.. In the reigne of a bad King, no man can doe the good he would; but under no King every man doth what evill he list. The Israelites would have a King: their very first was a tyrant; yet were they then in better case than when they had none. Christians are safe, they have a King. It is a greater happinesse, that they have a good King: a^ evill Prince is a plague to the people for their sinnes; Vt malos puniat malus, that one evill man may punish another. Rom. 13.4. He is a revenger to execute wrath upon him that doth evill. They hurt much by their unjust commands, but more by their bad
 examples. For the Common-wealth, like a fish, first rots at the head. It was the King of Syria's charge to his Captaines; Fight neither against small nor great, but only against the King of Israel. Scanderbeg would aime at none but the Generall: he said that he never knew body could move without a head. A Prince falls like a great tree, that quasheth downe all the under-wood about it. Sometimes the people sins, and the Prince smarts. God charged Moses to Take the heads of the people, and to hang them up before the Lord, Numb. 25.4. The hand steales, the throat drinkes, the head payes for it. Such was our King to us: we offended, he was plagued. Esay 53.6 We like sheepe have gone astray, and the Lord hath laid on him the iniquitie of us all. It is reported of a certaine King, who knowing that either himselfe must perish, or all his people; disguised himselfe like a meane souldier, entred the thickest troupes of the enemie, invited danger, and was entertained with death. So Christ our King, having the choice put to him, that either himselfe must die, or the whole world perish; disguised himselfe in the humble habite of mortall flesh, for otherwise they would not have killed him. 1 Cor. 2.8. For if they had knowne it, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory. Sometime the King sins, and the people smarts: Delirant reges, plectuntur Achivi; David commits the sinne in numbring the people, and the people are plagued. The head plots mischiefe, the backe or necke payes for it. To a Common-wealth, the King is either the greatest blessing, or the greatest curse: Therefore, Minimum libere decet, cui plurimum licet; a man should not shew himselfe in the confines and extremitie of his power: to can doe ill, and will not, is noble. But we are under such a King, as can protect us from evill, and will supply us with good. Some doubt of his power: Marke 9.22. Si potueris; If thou canst doe any thing, helpe us. Others doubt of his will, Matth. 8.2. Si volueris; If thou wilt, thou canst make me cleane. But his power is infinite: Psal. 135.6. Whatsoever the Lord pleased, that did he in heaven, in earth, in the seas, and in all deepe places. He can doe, what he will doe, every where. All places there named, but Purgatory; perhaps hee can doe nothing there, but leaves all that worke for the Pope. His mercie is also infinite: it was but hyperbolicall of Trajan, it is true of Christ; Citius desinit vivere, quam benefacere; He can sooner cease to be, than to be good to his. It was nobly said of Augustus; that when he had done no good to his subjects any day; Hodie non regnavi; I have not beene a King to day: there is no such day passeth by our King, IESUS CHRIST.
Now lastly, let us come more narrowly to examine the Felicitie of this Kingdome: Cujus lex veritas, Rex Trinitas, modus aeternitas The Kingdome of heaven is taken divers wayes: sometimes for the life of the Iust, under the similitude of the marriage of men, and of the carriage of men. So Matth. 22.2. The kingdome of heaven is like unto a certaine King, that made a marriage for his sonne: The elect are the guests bidden to the wedding; Matth. 25.1. The kingdome of heaven is likened unto ten Virgins: Not that onely Virgins shall enter the kingdome of heaven. For as Paul sayes, Gal. 6.15. In Christ, neither circumcision availeth any thing, nor uncircumcision, ^ut a new creature. So, neither marriage is any thing, nor virginitie, but chastitie. Chrysostome, who was a great admirer of virginitie, could say; Primus gradus castita^is est sincera virginitas; secundus, fidele conjugium. The first degree of chastity is ^potlesse virginitie; the next, faithfull wedlocke. Christ was conceived in virginity, ^nd borne in marriage; to shew that Coelibarus is not onely coelo beatus; whether single or married, if faithfull, they are admitted to this kingdome. Sometimes the kingdome of heaven is taken for the Church militant, mixed with good and bad, Matth. 13.24. The kingdome of heaven is like unto a field, that had in it both wheat ^nd tares, vers. 47. The kingdome of heaven is likened to a net, that gathered of every ^inde. In a Kingdome there be divers subjects, some true, and some false: so in the Church, some be loyall, and others hypocrites. Therefore the course of Christ in ^is kingdome is such, as good Magistrates should take in Common-wealths; Vt bo^i invitentur praemiis, ut mali dent poenas: to reward the good, and to punish the wicked.
 In this present state, among men the best are regarded least. Iacob is bound prentice, while prophane Esau rides a hunting. But in the future estate, Major serviet minori; The greater shall serve the lesse. Sometimes it is taken for Christ himselfe: Matth. 18.23. The kingdome of heaven is likened to a certaine King. Regnum est ipse Rex. Tuum est regnum; Thine is the Kingdome, the Power, and the Glory: In respect of that kingly order whereby he governes it; Mat. 20.1. The kingdome of heaven is like unto a man; for Christ Quatenus homo; as man, is also a King. In that state hee shall Iudge, in which he stood before a Iudge: he bought that right and title in his manhood. Now can there be a sweeter government, than under our Saviour; that purchased his subjects with his bloud? He was humbled, therefore, Philip. 2.9. God hath exalted him, and given him a Name which is above every name. Lastly, it is taken for the glory of Christ in heaven. Dost thou love riches? seeke it where it can never be lost. Dost thou love honour? seeke it where no basenesse is. Dost thou love health? seeke it where no sicknesse is. Dost thou love life? seeke it where no death is. Bernard describes the glory of this Kingdome, from that allegory, Revel. 12.1. Corona duodecim Stellarum; The Crowne of twelve Starres. Into this little ring let us bring the discourse of that infinite glory.
1 Let the first Starre be; Memory without forgetfulnesse: here we forget what we should remember, and remember what we should forget. We forget benefits, and remember injuries. There we shall have a perfect memory: Gregory stickes not to say; even of our very passed miseries and faults: But how? We shall remember them, not with sorrow to distract us, but with joy of deliverance to confirme us: it shall be our sense, not our offence. When we remember how wretchedly we once lay, under the torment of such a sicknesse, under the tyranny of such a foe, and which was worst, under the pressure of such a sinne; and now finde our selves delivered and safe for ever; how unspeakable will bee our joy? Olim haec meminis. se juvabit.
2 The second Starre is, Reason without obscurity, understanding without errour. 1 Cor. 13.12. Now wee see thorow a glasse darkly, but then face to face: Now wee know in part, but then we shall know even as we are knowne. The mist which sin brought over this intellectuall light, shall be removed. 1 Cor. 2.9. Eye hath not seene, nor care heard, neither have entred into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that love him. As Saint Augustine sayes, Fide non capitur, etc. Faith cannot containe it, nor hope comprise it, nor charity comprehend it: it transcendeth the reach of all our thoughts. Acquiri potest, aestimari non potest: it may be obtained, it never can be sufficiently esteemed.
3 The third Starre is; a perfect will of Good without perturbation. This is a maine difference betwixt Paradise and Heaven. There was Posse non peccare, a power not to sinne: here is Non posse peccare, no power at all to sinne. The regenerate man on earth hath a will not to offend, shall have there no will nor possibility to offend. Here he hath desiderium quietis, a desire of rest; there quietem desiderii, the rest of desire.
4 The fourth Starre is; the Clarity and Impassibilitie of the body. Phil. 1.21. Christ shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body, according to the working whereby he is able to subdue all things unto himselfe. This mutatio^ is not by any propensenesse of nature, but by the operation of Christ. This consi^^ in foure properties; in Claritie, in Subtiltie, in Impassibilitie, in Incorruption. For Claritie, Dan. 12.3. They that be wise shall shine as the brightnesse of the firmament, and as the Starres for ever. Christ as the Sunne, it is enough for us to be as Starres. 1 Cor. 15.41. There is one glory of the Sunne, another of the Moone, another glory of the Starres. Christ the Sunne, gives glory to the Moone; the Moone, that is, the Church, ha^^ a great glory: and the same glory is to every particular Starre. When Christ w^^ transfigured,Matth. 17.2. His face did shine as the Sunne, and his rayment was white as the light. Such glory shall our bodies have, as is able to lighten the darkest corners of hell. (...)
 sowen in dishonour, it is raised in glory. For subtilty and agility; Secundum mobilitatem cogitationum nostrarum; It shall be made moveable according to the quicknesse of our thoughts. As CHRISTS body being risen, was suddenly out of one place into another. Luke 24.36. As they spake, he stood in the midst of them. Christ sayes, They shall be like the Angels, who are said to have wings, in respect of their speedie removall. 1 Cor. 15.44. There is a naturall body, and there is a spirituall body: a spirituall body is as quicke as a Spirit it selfe. For impassibilitie; Quamvis spissum and solidum, tamen impenetrabile; Though it retaines soliditie, yet it remaines invulnerable. Every thing now vexeth it; a sword, an ague, a thorne; then no violence can dint or daunt it. Though the body stood in the midst of an armie, it could not be hurt. The violent, murderous, and massacring Cannon, which now makes a lane where it spits; cannot then wound our impenetrable brests. Here our bodies have heavinesse and weaknesse, there lightnesse and power. It is sowen in weaknesse, it is raised in power: so that it can powerfully move from place to place. It shall be strong as a spirit, and one spirit is able to conquer many men. For Incorruptiblenesse; the body is so corrupt now, that it is faine to have Animam pro sale, the soule in stead of salt to preserve it. Then it shall be cleare, and shine pure as the Sunne, which at that time shall also exceed it selfe in glory. This is the glory of the body, which is but the body of glory: besides the soule of glory, which is the glory of the soule.
5 The fifth Starre is, the Renovation of all things, Revel. 21.1. I saw a new heaven, and a new earth. Not that there is an abolition of the old, but an alteration of them from being old. Manebunt vetera, non ut vetera; The same things may remaine, but not in the same state. Fire shall purge out the corruption, and all things shall be restored to their first majesty; Vbi nec fallit quisquam, nec fallitur;Prosper. No man can deceive, or be deceived.
6 The sixth Starre is, universall charity without envie. Every one shall be a King, and possesse a kingdome, yet shall there be no repining. Non minuitur copia possessorum, nec fit angustior numerositate cohaeredum, Aug. Though it be imparted, it shall not be impaired: the number of heires shall not impeach the Inheritance. Tanta multis, quanta paucis: tanta singulis, quanta omnibus; That glory shall be to all, that is to some: every one shall have as much as any one. An earthly kingdome like the Zodiacke, admits but one Sun: in this all are Kings, and every one hath his crowne. 2 Tim. 4.8. There is laid up for me a crowne; and not for me only, but for all those that love the appearing of Iesus Christ. Nobile perpetua caput amplectente corona. Revel. 4.4. About the Throne were foure and twenty seats, and on the seats foure and twenty Elders, that had on their heads crownes of gold. By which number is signified the whole Court of the Saints. On earth the ambition of a Crowne brookes no rivality: breach of faith to get kingdoms is held no sin; but this shall never get the kingdome of heaven. A kingdome made Absalom a Parricide in wil, Abimelech a Fratricide in deed; that heIudg. 9.6. murdered seventy persons, his brethren, the sons of Ierubbaal, upon one stone. This hath made some traytors to their deare friends, that would have died for them: to their dearest friend that hath died for them: friends to their enemy, Satan, that will torment them: they are worthy of kingdomes that pay so deare for them. Here it is otherwise; different glory, perfect charity.Iohn 14 2. In my Fathers house there are many mansions. Now saith Gregory, If there were no difference in degrees of glory, Christ would have spoke of one mansion, rather than of many. They received every man a peny.Matth. 20.10. But he sayes, Many mansions, because there are distinct orders of Saints: and One penny, because Vnica cunctorum gloria; there is but one and the same glory of them all. In terra distinctio operum, in coelo discretio dignitatum; On earth there is a difference of works, in heaven there shall be a difference of honours. So much as one doth here excell another in grace, so much he shall there excell him in glory. But howsoever there be not to all the same dignity, there shal be the same felicity. There can be no repining at anothers more glorious clearnes, where shall reigne in all one most gratious dearnes.
7 The seventh Star is, the common and universall joy, an effect of the former:
 where all love others in purenesse, all rejoyce in their happinesse. Besidesse, the joy in our owne salvation, it shall be also unspeakable in the salvation of others. Not only of wife, children, or former friends: for there all shall be equally deare and neere unto us.Gregor. What abundance of joy is this? When Quod in se quisquam non acceperit, hic se accepisse in alio exultet; It shall rejoyce a man to behold that measure in another, which he hath not in himselfe.
8 The eight Starre, is a love of our selves, Tantummodo propter Deum; Only for Gods honour. The glory of God shall so swallow us up, that it cannot be so great for our owne salvation, as for his glory in our salvation. It is much on earth, if a ma^ love God for his owne sake; but in heaven he shall love himselfe for Gods sake. It shall ravish him with delight, to see God honoured in himselfe, whose Image hee shall then beare in perfection.
9 The ninth Star, is the Beatificall vision of God, when there shall be no markes to keepe us from the Mount of the Lord, no bounds to separate us from that border of glory.Exod. 19.12. When it shall no more be said, Whosoever toucheth the mount, shall surely die. But the contrary;Hebr. 12.21. Whosoever toucheth the mount, shal surely live. The sight was then so terrible, that Moses said, I exceedingly quake and feare. This sight shall be so comfortable, that every one shall say, I exceedingly rejoyce and love. We shall see the Deity so glorious; even the Lambe advanced in our flesh to bee one Person with God. How we love to behold the majesty of Princes, in all the state, magnificence, and pompe of their Courts? But this heavenly vision for one houre is worth a thousand yeares speculation of their glory. This is the Diamond of the Ring, the precious stone of the gate, the brightest Star of all, to behold the glorious presence of God.
10 The tenth Star is, the Fulnesse of pleasures. Psal. 16.11. In thy presence is the fulnesse of joy,Bernard. and at thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore. Festivitas sine tabe, tranquilitas sine labe, ferenitas sine nube. Corrupt flesh reasons; what is there to doe in heaven? The lascivious thinkes there is no other heaven, but amongst his faire Paragons: O poore and unblest understanding! what is a mortall piece of painted dust, to those glorious bodies out-shining the Sunne in his greatest splendor? These we shall there see, these love, admire, and rejoyce in for ever. There is not a thought can bring other than pleasure. Electos in futuro tria manent: Externa societas, interna satietas, aeterna jucunditas, Bern. Looke we outwardly, there is joy in the society: looke we inwardly, there is joy in our owne felicity: look we forward, there is joy in the eternity.Prosper. This is the chain of delights; Certa securitas, secura tranquilitas, tranquilla jucunditas, jucunda foelicitas, foelix aeternitas; There is a secure safenesse, a safe peacefulnesse, a peacefull pleasantnesse, a pleasant happinesse, an happie everlastingnesse.
11 The eleventh Star, is the continuall praising of God for his glory; Blessing and glory,Revel. 7.12. and thanksgiving and honour, power and might, be to our God for ever and ever. This is Perpetuum carmen,Esay 66.23. an everlasting song. From new Moone to new Moone, and from one Sabbath to another, all shall worship the Lord. We shall incessantly sing to God in the Temple,Revel. 21.22. which is God himselfe the Temple. I saw no temple in it: for the Lord God Almighty, and the Lambe, are the Temple of it. There shall be no wearinesse of this merrinesse. How meanly soever we judge, and rarely practice this duty on earth; there is no joy or delight in heaven shall more content us.
12 The last Starre of this Crowne, is the last passage of my Text; which is the eternity of all, it is an Everlasting kingdom. The Monarchies of the Chaldeans, Persians, Grecians, Romans, those foure tyrannous beasts. Subversa corruerunt, are brought to nothing.Dan. 7. Vers. 12. Their dominion was taken away; but vers. 14. His dominion is (...) everlasting dominion, which shall not passe away: and his kingdome that, which shall not be destroyed. The Heathen rage, and the Kings oppose; but let them doe their worst. T^^ have I set my king upon my holy hill of Sion.Psal. 2. The gates of hel (that is hel-power, for their gates had strong fortifications: or hel-policy, for they held their councel in the gates) shal not prevaile against this kingdome. Ye shall not sow, and others reape, ye shall not plant vineyards, and others drink the wine; this was promised as a blessing to Israel.
 But this Land of Promise is sure, and abides for ever. Why doest thou feare or doubt, because thou seest earthly kingdomes to perish?August. Ideo tibi coeleste promissum est, ne cum terrenis perires. Therefore is the kingdome of heaven promised to us, that we might not perish with earthly kingdomes. This is the Crowne of twelve Starres, wherewith the God of mercy crowne all our heads in the everlasting kingdome of IESUS CHRIST.



VERSE 12. Wherefore J will not be negligent to put you alwayes in remembrance of these things, though you know them, to bee established in the present truth.

I Acknowledge to your comfort, that you know and performe in some measure these commended duties; and have made a good progresse in them. Yet though you be confirmed, I will not so give you over, and leave you to your selves; for there is danger of relapsing, but will diligently solicite your memories, and incite your affections, to a more zealous observation of them. I doe not confirme you, as if you were wavering; but only admonish you, as being established in the truth. The gravitie and weight of the businesse requires it: in a matter of such consequence, admonitions are never superfluous. Abundans cautela non nocet; Therefore let it not seeme tedious unto you.
This verse is spent upon the Pastor and the people: and therefore to be applied to the Preacher and the Parish. I will not be negligent to remember you of these things; there is the Ministers duty. You must know them, and be established in the truth; there is your duty. It is easily distinguished into the Pastors Informing, and the Peoples Performing: his Preaching, and their Practising: his Diligence, and their Obedience.
In the former we may note his
Pietie; desirous to bring them to the prementioned kingdome.Vigilancie; admitting no neglect of their soules; what discouragements soever affront him.Modestie; professing, that he doth rather remember them, than teach them.Fidelity; he will doe it Alwayes, without wearinesse of that may tend to their edification and comfort.Sinceritie; hee doth not incite them to vaine and unnecessary things, but These things that build them up to salvation.
In the other part, which is their Proficiencie, we have commended their
Illumination; They knew these things.Confirmation; They are established in the truth.
Wherefore, (...), for this cause: this the first praise of his Diligence, the foundation wheron it is grounded; which is derived from the precedent verse. Because the foundation of eternall life is to be laid here, and in this life an entrance must be made to ^hat everlasting kingdome, or there will be no fruition hereafter: Therefore I will ^ake all possible paines to prepare your soules for it. Now it is certaine, that the foun^ation of Eternity is to be laid in this life: the proposition is proved by Saint Paul, Laying up in store for themselves a good foundation against the time to come,1 Tim. 6.19. that they may lay hold on eternall life. The state future followes the former; as the upper
 building followes the foundation. If we live ill, that is a bad foundation: if we live well, that is a good foundation. Luke 19.9. This day is salvation come to this house. This day, for it must come in the day of Grace, or it will not come in the day of Glory: now, or never. The penitent malefactor might say to Christ; Hodie es mec^^ in Patibulo; To day thou art with me on the Crosse: and Christ sayes to him, Hodie eris mecum in Paradiso; To day thou shalt be with me in Paradise. If Christ first be with us below, then shall wee also be with Christ above. The Kingdome of God must first come into thy heart, before thy heart can come into the Kingdome of God. A wicked life doth (even on earth) make an entrance into that lower kingdome of darknesse. Interiour darknesse begins exteriour darknesse, inferiour darknesse. Iohn 3.18. Hee that beleeveth not, is condemned alreadie. Act. 8.23. Thou art now in the gall of bitternesse, and bond of iniquitie. As God said to Abimelech, Gen. 20.3. Thou art but a dead man. Sinne is the very threshold of hell, and the Fewell of that unquenchable fire:Prov 5.5. her very steps take hold on hell. Mis-livers, and mis-beleevers; next them stands hell. So faithfull goodnesse hath one foot already in heaven: therefore looke to thy life; for he must goe out of this world by the mortification of the flesh, that shall come to heaven by the vivification of the Spirit. Such is Gods mercy to us; that we who have deserved punishments externall on bodie, internall on conscience, eternall on both; should not onely scape these, but have in present a gracious entrance into blessednesse. But alas, we see our wretchednesse, we doe not see our blessednesse: we know that a picture but begun, is not of perfect beautie: let us tarry till God hath finished his worke.1 Iohn 3.2. We are now the Sonnes of God in grace and peace, we shall be the sonnes of God in glory.
I will not be negligent.] (...). This is the second praise of his diligence: i^ is well furthered by his Sedulity. Negligence of good duties is in all men damnable, in a Minister execrable: in others robbery, in us Sacriledge. Cursed is hee th^^ doth the Lords businesse negligently, saith the Prophet. God was so carefull to avoid negligent Ministers under the Law; that the Levites were to beare no office till five and twenty, and to cease againe at fifty: not sooner than the first age, Propter imbecilitatem mentis; For the disability of their minde: not longer than the latter terme, Propter infirmitatem corporis; For the infirmitie of their bodie. There is not a Calling of a greater labour: Qui temere eligit, non intelligit; He that rashly chuseth it, never understood it. If a man knew the weight of it, it would take away his stomacke. It brings a man from a quiet, to a laborious life: I have much adoe to look to my own soule,August. how shall I look to the soules of others? It is indeed lawfull to s^e to be in the Ministery;1 Tim. 3.1. as Paul sayes, If any man desire the office, he desireth a good work: it is then lawfull to desire, therefore lawfull to expresse that desire. But let him thinke of the Account:Hebr. 13.17. To watch for soules, as one that must give account. Some have observed upon CHRISTS calling of those foure Apostles, in the 4. of Matthew; Simon, Andrew, Iames, and Iohn. That Simon signifies Obedient; Andrew, Couragio^^, Iames, a Supplanter: and Iohn, the Grace of God. And that a Minister of the Gospell should be accordingly qualified: he must be obedient as Simon, couragious as Andrew, and a supplanter of sinne as Iames, and manifest the power of the grace of God as Iohn. There belong to him, Infusion, Diffusion, Effusion, and power of Confusion. Infusion of knowledge, diffusion of grace, effusion of doctrine, confutation of error. Saint Paul was so diligent in this office, that he was called The wing^^ Husbandman: one writes of him, that Terra citius deficeret; quam studium praedica^di: the earth might sooner have wanted roome for him, than he neglected through the earth preaching. Now, too many make the Ministerie, a matter of Policie to raise themselves; and once gotten up, though no Bishop suspend them, they p^^ themselves to silence: ambition shuts up many lippes. They see and say, that a pai^^ful Teacher seldom comes to preferment. Therefore they wil only raise themselves by silence. When Aristodemus bragged how great a fee he had got for speaking Demosthenes answers; say nothing foole, I had more for holding my peace. Th^^
 such an one thinkes to speed; and therefore his motto is, Sibi and musis. But a good Minister is not negligent, either in his penne or tongue, his tongue is the penne of a ready writer, and his penne is the tongue of a ready speaker. It is the negligent fashion, Ditescere, pinguescere, segnescere: to grow rich, to grow fat, to grow lazy. When the fish is caught, to cast away the nette: to starve the flocke, when they have shorne the fleece. But negligence can never befall him that is truely called of CHRIST.
To put you in remembrance:] this is the third praise of his diligence, to fasten it in their memories. We must often be stirred up; Line added to line, and precept upon precept: here a little and there a little. Some would have rare Sermons, and those excellent ones: yet they can receive the doctrine but by drops, not by flouds. For whatsoever is received, is received according to the capacitie of the receiver. Others would have frequent Sermons though they be meaner. And this course is better, for we need continuall remembrancings. It is no hard matter to produce, Eliphanti partum, a yeares bird; to study up one rare Sermon in three moneths: such Sermons are for Courts. The Emperour that gave silver to his souldiers, was taxed by others that gave gold: but he answered, I did it of purpose, that all might have some: for it is better all should goe away with peeces of silver, than a few onely with peeces of gold. Indeed every minister is not a Preacher: all cannot say with Paul, 1 Cor. 1.17. I was not sent to baptise, but to preach. To the building of the Tabernacle there went not onely purple, but goates haire; yet are all Remembrancers of us in their places. We have many remembrances, God blesse us in the honest use of them. Other countries have larger bounds, goodlier buildings, stronger bulwarkes, richer soiles, onely England hath the best Pulpits. O that I could also adde, that England hath the best conversations! could I what streete passe through, but some monstrous and manifest sin would give me the lie? We have many that heare the word all their daies: yet being questioned concerning their faith on their death beds, they answer as Ahimaaz to David, 2 Sam. 18.29. I saw a great tumult, but I knew not what it was: so they would say; I heard a great noise, but I never knew what it meant. Some know the way twice on the Sunday to Church, yet hardly learne there to know the way to heaven. But to your dutie anon, first look we to performe our owne. For a Minister to neglect this office of Remembrance, is to make the divell beholding to him: the negligence of the Priest is the injurie of the people, Hieron, Detrimentum pecoris, ignominia Pastoris. As the dammage of the flock, is the shame of the Shepheard. Now the Lord remember us to remember you, and remember you to remember him; and forgive the forgetfulnesse of us all.
Alwaies to remember you. This is the fourth praise of his diligence, which shewes it to bee well followed; wherein we noted his Fidelitie, in the assiduitie of his Preaching. Now this dutie cannot be performed by any Minister of the Gospell, without a constant abiding among his owne. When we learne, that a president should be Resident. Some have their Poole lying in the Countrey, yet they are still angling about the Court. But they answer it with the Proverbe; no fishing to the sea, no service to the King. Indeed the Apostles were Vbiquitaries, but Ministers must be Residentiaries. Now there is a distinction of parishes and charges: therefore let every man Take heed to that flocke, over which the holy Ghost hath set him, Act. 20.28. And Paul left Titus in Crete, to ordaine elders to every Citie, Tit. 1.5. Residence is two-fold; Personall and Pastorall. It is not so much the Personall, as the Pastorall residence, that is required Iure divino. A Minister may be Pastorally resident, though not Personally; in watching over the peoples soules; and feeding them immediately by himselfe so much as he can, and mediately by as good as himselfe when he cannot. Another may be Personally resident, yet not Pastorally; when he is amongst them, and doth not diligently preach unto them. There may be a just non-residence, when the Church hath imployed a man about publike busynesse. Yea, it may be also just; when it is necessary; Pro vita and viatico; for the
 recoverie of health, or needfull maintenance, to keep himselfe from hunger and unrelieved penurie: nature it selfe allowes it. Herein every mans owne conscience is his best direction. But they that preach altogether by an Atturney, are like to be saved altogether by an Atturney. As they wholy feed the flocke Per vicarios, by their deputies: so shall they goe to heaven Per vicarios, by their deputies. Some cannot endure to be resident in any place: but he that loves to be a runnagate, not seldome proves a runnagate: the wandring starre is swoop'd downe by the dragons taile, not fixed by the hand of CHRIST, Alwayes. The businesse of a Minister is like the Husband-mans, and that is compared to a ring, because it is endlesse. Esa. 62.6. I have set watchmen, which shall never hold their peace day nor night: yee that make mention of the Lord, keepe not silence: for Ierusalems sake we have no rest. Paul adjures Timothie to preach opportune, importune: ut obsecret, increpet, 2 Tim. 4.2. i^ season, out of season, to reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all long suffering. We read Matth. 13.25. that while men slept, the enemie came and sowed tares. Let the Preachers but sleepe a little, how quickely will Satan cast in the seed of errors! Let Moses be non-resident forty dayes, though he went to fetch the Law; yet in this while Israel hath calved an Idol. There is nothing more easy than to decline, if Christ set not watch-men over us, to put us alwayes in rem^^brance.
Of these things.] (...). This is the last praise of his diligence; whereby he hath fitted, directed, and applied it to matter of the best consequence. Herein we observed his Syncerity; These things, that is, such as may save your soules. He aimes at nothing, but that concernes their salvation. The Minister must not labour Pro stolida aura, nec pro solido auro; neither for praise nor for purse, but for conscience. Oportet esse Piscatorem, non decimarum, sed animarum: he must fish for soules, not for riches. Some fish without nettes, some with broken nettes, some with whole ones but not cleane, some have nets, whole, and cleane, but cast them not: others have nets but not cleane, and doe cast them, but not on the right side; They like well to fish, but only where they are sure with Peter, to draw up a fish with silver in the mouth. These are farre short of Saint Peters Integrity: they mind many things, but not These things. There are three things in the Ministery; Worke, Reward, and Honour: the good Minister embraceth the first, minds not the other, onely refuseth them not if they come. To desire it for the Honors sake, or for the wages sake, is not good. There is Desiderium boni, and Desiderium bonum: a desire of good, and a good desire. The thing may be good, yet is ill to desire it, if it be not fit for us, or we not fit to desire it. Simon Magus had a desire of good, but not a good desire; when he offered coine for the Holy Ghost. His intention damned his petition:Bern. which was to give money for it, that he might get money by it. Appetere ut praesis, malum est: appetere ut prosis, bonum est. To desire this office that we may be honoured in it, is corrupt: to desire it that wee may doe good by it, is honest, Bernard. Quoties praeesse desidero, Domino praeire cupio. So often as we seeke glory and greatnesse in the ministerie, we both mistake the office, for to be a minister is to serve; and we strive to be better than CHRIST, for he served. Indicitur ministratio, interdicitur dominatio. We are commanded to serve, we are forbidden to dominere.
Indeed there are too many that seeke Opes not Opus: not Officium but Beneficium; rather the Church-goods, than the Churches good. But let us aime at Gods glory, not our owne praise: let none of his honour cleave to our earthen fingers. Though spirituall fishers catch many soules, yet they must not ascribe it to themselves. This were, as the Prophet speakes. Hab. 1.16. To doe sacrifice to their net. Let us only mind These things: an honest heart is required in all men, especially in a Minister. When the Apostles were to chuse a twelfth into Iuda's roome, from which hee had fallen by trecherous apostacie; they put it to God; Quia novit corda, because hee knew the hearts of men. Act. 1.24. Thou Lord, which knowest the hearts of all men, shew whether of these thou hast chosen. They spake not of understanding nor memorie,
 nor learning nor eloquence: but insisted only on the heart. Indeed the principall in Minister is an honest heart. A good wit for invention, doth well: a good Iudgement for disposition, well: a good memorie, a gracefull pronuntiation, a comely presence, all doe well: but the chiefe of al is a good heart. Diligence and painfulnesse, and patience are good; but it is the sincerenesse of heart that commends the rest. These things! I could be negligent, and not remember you: or remember you, and not Alwaies? or remember you alwaies, but not of These things: but this is the perfection of his holy diligence; (...), to remember you alwaies of These things. Phil. 4.8. Whatsoever is true, or honest, or just, or pure, etc. let us all be diligent about these things. Luk. 2.8. The shepheards were a biding in the field, keeping watch ^ver their flocke by night. As CHRIST at his first comming found the shepheards tending their flockes: so the spirit of God guide us, that we the Shepheards may be found well leading, and you the Flocke well following, at the second comming of Iesus Christ.

Though you know them, and be established in the present truth.]

The Apostle takes it as granted, that they understood these things already, and were constant in the assurance of the truth of them. A happy progresse! Oh that we could say so to our auditories: and as Paul, Rom. 7.1. Scientibus legem loquor, I speak to them that know the Law. But Nescitis? know you not? is a word often used by Saint Paul. Rom. 6.3. and in many other places; know you not?1 Cor. 3.16.5.6.6.16. Is it possible that you have heard so much, and still remaine ignorant? Well, suppose you know; but are yee established in your hearts? If yes; Oh you are worthy to be commended, I will not withhold your just praise and acknowledgement. 1 Cor. 11.2. Now I praise you brethren. Other grounds have received showres, and conceived thornes, whose end is to be burned. Hebr. 6.9. But we are perswaded better things of you, such as accompany salvation. Faine would we be so perswaded of you also: but I feare then, our perswasion were better than our experience. 1 Cor. 15.34. For some have not the knowledge of God; I speake this to our shame. It were to our shame indeed, if we did not know God. As in countries where be the greatest plentie of fruites, they have the shortest lives; they doe so surfet on their abundance. So we have the greatest plentie of spirituall food, but we turne the fulnesse into loathing and contempt. We have the best Pulpits, but I cannot say we have the best lives. The Indians were the most beggarly and naked people, amongst whom was all the gold: so in the midst of Gods mercies, and the riches of grace; we are the most poore, naked, and miserable in our conversations. Which being true, our commendation must be turned into Commination: Our, In this we praise you; into, In this we praise you not, 1 Cor. 11.17. In this that I declare unto you, I praise you not. But if your mind be established in understanding, your heart in affecting, your life in obeying, blessed are you; your Minister shall praise you, the Church your mother will praise you, the Angels praise you, yea you shall be praised of CHRIST himselfe.
I come to the conclusion: this concession makes way for a further imposition. Though you know these things, and be established, yet you must admit a further confirming. So Paul insinuates to the Romans, Chap. 15. Ver. 14. I my selfe am perswaded of you, that yee also are full of goodnesse, filled with all knowledge, able to admonish one another. Well, be it granted, Ver. 15. Neverthelesse I have written the more boldly to you, as putting you in mind. Bene etiam currentibus addenda sunt calcaria: no man runs so fast, but he may need some spurring. Quamvis Sceva satis per te tibi cons^lis, and scis; Disco docendus adhuc. There is still something, that he would teach, and they should learne. So Ambros. Per hunc laudem provocat ad meliora: by praising the goodnesse they have, he provokes them to a greater degree and measure of it. Lai^da^sque virtus Cresci^, and immensum gloria calcar habet; saith the Poet. Vertue thrives by commendation, and glory is a spur to doe well.
Acer and ad palmae po^ (...) sutus honores,Si tamen horteris, for^^^ ibit equas.
 The horse that would run well of his owne metall, doth yet mend his pace by the riders encouragement. The Apostles commendation is not to quiet them in the conceit of their owne sufficiencie, but to incite them to a further degree of sanctitie. The cessation of remembrancing may easily lapse us to forgetfulnesse. Thomas got such incredulitie by a little absence, that he was hardly brought to beleeve an evidence. Albeit his speech was Dubitantis,August. non negantis, the voice of one that doubted, not of one that denyed: yet we see when illumination is but a little dusked, how good men fal into blind errors. The Italians have a proverbe; It is good to be born wise, or bo^^ twice. Surely we are first borne, in respect of heavenly wisdome, fooles: therfore we had need of a second birth: borne once to come into the world, and then borne againe to overcome the world. This is not done without continuall warring, ^^d not that without continuall encouraging. We vowed in our Baptisme, not only (...) be CHRISTS souldiers, and to fight manfully; but so to fight perpetually and (...) continue this warre unto our lives end. Aut sors, aut mors. When Agamen^^^ said; victor timere quid potest? What can a conqueror feare? Cassandra answered, Quod non timet; That he doth feare. If the Minister doe not ring continually this alarme bell, you will forget to fight. Though you be established, you must thinke there will be some offering to shake you. Therefore a Christians resolution should be like king Alfreds:
Si modo victor eras, ad crastina bella pavebas.Si modo victus eras, ad crastina bella parabas. If we conquer to day, let us feare the skirmish to morrow: if we be overcome to day, let us hope to get the victory to morow. When you have fought the maine battell, gotten the conquest, and are crowned with that triumphant wreath in heaven; as you blesse God for many things; so you will blesse him for this, that he gave you a good Remembrancer upon earth; such a Preacher as did alwaies set you forward to your eternall rest. The Lord faile not us and ours of such Remembrancers, till we all meete together in that high and everlasting glory.



VERSE 13. Yea, I thinke it meet, as long as J am in this tabernacle, to stirre you up, by putting you in remembrance.

THe Apostle had formerly professed a good resolution; faithfully to sow i^ their hear us the seed of life. Now lest any man should thinke his carefulnesse a meritorious or supererogative worke, himselfe confesseth it to be (...) more than just. Iustumasse arbitror, it is but the payment of a due debt. And this n^^ due for a while, but during life; So long as I am in this tabernacle. But it is granted, a^^^ they know the truth, and live in the faith; yet they may be a-sleepe; I will therefo^^ stirre them up, for living men may sleepe. But what, is there a new lesson (...) bee given them? No, that I need not, but even rubbe over the old, by putti^^ them in remembrance. Here he seemes to backe his diligence by certaine arguments; they are foure in number, and forcible in nature; derived
 Ab
Equitate vocationis; I thinke it meet.Opportunitate Temporis; As long as I keepe this tabernacle.Securitate Hominis; To stirre you up.Necessitate Monitionis; By putting you in remembrance.
The consideration of his owne office and calling moves him to it: it is a meet and ^ust thing for him to observe it, and the neglect were to do a manifest injurie to God, ^o his Church, and to his owne conscience. Secondly, the opportunity of the time moves him; for this life is but a Tabernacle, and will not stand long; and therefore he resolves to apprehend occasion as it is offered, and to thrust in his sickle while the harvest lasts. Thirdly, the Security and dulnesse of men moves him; who ^re naturally so averse and stupid, that they had need be stirred up, rowsed from their ^lothfull couch, and by all instigations be set forward to religion. Lastly, it is the ^se of his office, and due exercise of his calling, alwaies to put them in mind of ^heir last reckoning: and he cannot answer the neglect of it to the Iustice of God, who hath set him over them for that purpose,
I thinke it meet.] This is the first argument or motive: the nature of his office binds him to it Aequum est agere, quod Personam and conditionem deceat: but this is imposed upon us, by him that sent us; therfore it is most unjust to with-hold it, Esa. 62.6. Yee that are the Lords remembrancers, be not silent. The precept is negative in sound, affirmative in sense. For this [Not] excluding the privation of speech, answereth after a sort to an Infinitans: in logicke admitting any thing rather than silence. Be not silent, is not onely, Speake; but implies a continuall speech: for when a man ceaseth to speake, he is silent. 2 Tim. 4.2. Be instant in season, and out of season. Not that Timothie should breake through the rules of discretion, to preach at all times in themselves unseasonable. For there is a time to keepe silence. Eccl. 3.7. There is a time to speake, and a time to keepe silence. But opportune volentibus, importune molentibus: in season, to them that will heare: out of season, to them that will not heare. Bee not silent, hold your peace: hold the truth, hold your faith, hold your profession, hold your zeale, hold your innocencie; hold not your peace. Tenuisse silentia clerum; Oh it is the basest Tenure any Minister can hold his living by.
But it may be objected, that it is wisedome to be silent. Many have surfeted by eating, none by forbearing: many have sinned by speaking, no man by holding his peace. God shall judge many a one Ex ore suo, out of his owne mouth. And, Iam. 3.2. If any man offend not in word, the same is a perfect man. Now he that saies nothing, offends not in word. But we take not silence in a metaphysicall consideration; as a meere privation. Non entis nullae sunt operationes: that which hath no being, hath no working: and he that saies nothing, saies no harme. But we take it in a legall consideration; as a cursed omission; or neglect of that should have beene performed. As he that is bound to worke, shall give an account of his idlenesse: so he that is bound to speake, shall answer for his silence. As the darkenesse in Aegypt, was a darknesse that might be felt: so silence in a Preacher, is a silence that will be felt: it shall smart to the quicke. There are graces Personall, and graces Ministeriall. Personall graces are essentiall to a Christian, accidentall to a Minister; as Faith, Hope, Charitie, Temperance, and the like. And these serve especially for the good of the receiver, the person in whom they dwell: in a second degree for the good of others. But Graces ministeriall; as Preaching, exhorting, comforting, discerning of errors; confuting them, etc. respect him that hath them in the last place and principally tend to others benefit. 1 Corinthians 12.7. The manifestation of the spirit, is given to every man to profit withall. If wee hold our peace, we first wrap our selves in a criminall mischiefe: because silence directly crosseth our vocation. A silent Preacher implies as harsh a contradiction; as a darke light, a dumbe cryer. Next in a Penall mischiefe: and that either of the greatest privation or losse in this life; the tabe and consumption of our graces and gifts. Zach. 11.17. The
 Idol shepheard that leaveth the flocke, shall have his arme cleane dried up, and his right eye utterly darkned. Matth. 25.28. Take the talent from him. Or of the most grievous position of paine, and vexation of sense for ever; the bloud of the lost being required at their hands, so long as there is a seat of Iustice in heaven. Therefore saith Paul; vae mihi, si non evangelizavero; Woe unto me if I preach not the Gospel. The Ministers silence doth encourage the peoples going to hell, Lam. 2.14. Thy Prophets have seene for thee false burdens, and causes of banishment: but they have not discovered thy iniquity, to turne away thy captivity. It is a maxime in the civill Law; Qui (...) improbat, probat: Consentit, qui tacet; he doth allow that doth not disallow; and he that holds his peace,Numb. 30.4. gives his consent. There is a case. The father that heares his daughters vow, wherewith she binds her soule, and holds his peace; consents that it shal stand. A mute indeed is no vowell, but a mute among vowells cannot avoid the office of a consonant.Prov. 29 18. Certainly a disable Minister is a grievous plague to the people. Whe^^ is no vision,Gregor. the people perish. Tot homines quotidie occidimus, quos ad mortem ire ta^^tes videmus. We kill daily so many men, as we see going to destruction, and say nothing to. Act. 20.20. Paul protested that he had kept backe nothing which was profitable to the Church: and from hence inferreth, Ver. 26. that he was Pure from the bloud of all men. Mundus ergo a sanguine eorum non fuisset, si eis Dei consilium ^^nuntiare noluisset, Gregor. He could not therefore have beene pure from their blood, if he had not diligently taught them the Gospell. So, Verse 27. himselfe gives the reason of this Purenesse; Because I have not shunned to declare unto you all the counsell of God. Ezeck. 3.18. The unwarned sinner shall die in his iniquity; but his bloud will I require at thine hand. So that to be guiltie of silence, is to be guilty of murder. Lord, we cannot speake so well as we should; yet alwaies give us grace to speake so well as we can.
So long as I am in this tabernacle.] This is his second argument or motive; the opportunity of the time urgeth him. I cannot rise from the dead to admonish, therefore I will doe it in the time of life, which is the due and afforded season. There is no preaching in the grave, therefore Quamdiu sum in hoc tabernaculo. Here observe three things.
First, every thing hath the time to be done. Ioh. 4.23. Hora est nunc; The houre commeth and now is, Psal. 1.3. The tree planted by the rivers of water, brings forth his fruite Tempore suo, in his season, Eccl. 7.17. Be not overmuch wicked; why shouldest thou die Tempore non tuo, before thy time, 2 Thes. 2.6. Antichrist shall be revealed, Tempore suo, in his time, Ioh. 2.4. Nondum venit hora mea; my houre is not yet come; I must doe my workes, Tempore meo, in my owne time. Gal. 6.9. In due time we shall reape. If this be neglected, the Angell sweares, There shall be no more time, Rev. 10.6. Few men doe marke what time is more than your Vsurers: they marry Time and Mony together, and so breed an everlasting generation of Interests.
Secondly, that therefore every man must doe good in his time. Gal. 6.10. While we have time let us doe good to all men. Let us heare the great Shepheard and Bishop of our soules. Ioh. 9.4. I must worke the workes of him that sent me, while it is day: the night commeth, when no man can worke. Opportunitate nihil faelicius, amitti nihil faci^us. Occasion is happily taken, easily lost. While a Minuter is in his tabernacle, let him preach: he is now a moveable, hereafter he shall be fixed. There shall be no Sermons in heaven, for there all are full of grace: there shall be none in hell, for there all are past grace: therfore (...), So long as I am in this tabernacle I will preach. Psal. 88.10. Shall thy loving kindnesse be declared in the grave? or thy faithfulnesse in destruction? Shall thy wonders be knowne in the darke? and thy righteousnesse in the land of forgetfulnesse? But if there be no preaching in hell, how then is it said. 1 Pet. 3.19. that CHRIST went and preached to the spirits in prison? I answer; there is no ^^^tiation of the Gospell; howsoever there may be a proclamation of judgement, and a declaration of CHRISTS power; a publishing of what the reprobates have lost by not beleeving on him. Augustine objects; if there be any preaching in hell,
 what needed so much regard to it upon earth? Preaching on earth is to beget repen^ance: if there could be any in hell, it were but to encrease vengeance. Therefore ^emember thy Quamdiu: preach while thou mayest, lest God stoppe thy mouth ^efore thou wouldest. Tremble at that fearefull Iudgement, Revel. 16.10. They ^nawed their tongues for paine. Their tongues were once tyed up with gaines, there ^hey shall be loosened with paines. Flattery made them (like that shamelesse Sy^ophant, that licked up the Emperours spittle) to licke the sores and vices of their maintainers, therefore they shall lambere flammas, licke those unquenchable flames.
Thirdly, observe, that the Apostle compares his life to a Tabernacle; a little ^^ed or tilth, wherein the immortall soule dwels. The metaphore is taken from ^ouldiers, Pilgrims, and Shepheards: who for the better expedition of their affaires, ^re said to have Sedes non fixas, moveable seats. We are Souldiers, and must dwell ^n tents, till we have got the victory. We are travellers, and must sleepe in Pavil^ons, till we come to our Citie. We are shepheards, and must lodge in the fields, ^n the folds, to looke to our flockes: till the drought consume us in the day, and the ^rost by night; and our sleepe depart from our eyes, Gen. 31.40. This teacheth us the ^^ailenesse of our life; which is still moveable from one part of the earth to another, ^^ll it be removed to heaven, there it shall abide immoveable for ever. Nihil firmum ^^fra firmamentum: There is nothing firme under the firmament: but above there is ^mmobile regnum; A kingdome which cannot be moved, Hebr. 12.28. Why art thou ^roud, O man, that considerest thy selfe? Cujus conceptus culpa, nasci miseria, vivere ^oena, mori angustia; Whose conception was sinne, birth a misery, life a punishment, ^nd death a torment. The soule indeed that dwels in this Tabernacle, is an immor^^ll guest: Dei inspiratione condita, similitudine insignita, cruore redempta, fide decorata, ^^iritu adoptata; Created by Gods hand, formed to his likenesse, redeemed with his ^loud, beautified with his grace, and adopted by his Spirit. She requires not soft ^odging, and curious food of thee; but thy bodies obedience to her, that she may give ^bedience to Christ: that she be not forced to serve, which should rule: Dominam ^^cillari, ancillam dominari; For the servant to rule, and the mistresse to serve, is a pre^osterous overture.
Men live without considering themselves; Vnde, ubi, quomodo, quo; whence ^hey came, where they are, how they doe, whither they goe: that all these Mathe^aticall lines have earth for their center. Whence came we? from the earth. Where ^re we? upon the earth. How live we? unworthy of the earth, or any blessing in it. Whither goe we? to the earth: Terram terra tegat; Earth to earth. We are compo^ed of foure Elements, and they strive in us for the mastery; but the lower gets the ^etter, and there is no rest till Earth have the predominance. Yet wicked men live, ^s if there was no earth to devoure their bodies, nor gulfe lower than earth to swal^ow their soules. Mans life is a sparke, a breath, a smoake: a sparke in the heart, a ^reath in the mouth, a smoake in the nostrills. A drop of water will quench that ^parke, a little haire can choake that breath, a little aire take away that smoake. Look ^o thy wayes, thou livest in a Tabernacle, quickly dissolvable: the Dart may light up^n thee next. When Harrald, King of Denmarke, made warre upon Harquinus, and ^as ready to joyne battell; a Dart was seene flying into the aire, hovering this way ^nd that way, as though it sought upon whom to rest. When all stood wondering to ^ehold what would become of this strange prodigie, every man fearing himselfe; ^t last the Dart fell upon Harquinus head, and slew him. This Dart of Death is ever ^overing; watch, for thy turne will come.
To stirre you up.] This is the third motive to his diligence; an argument fet^hed from the securitie of men; who sleepe till they be wakened, and when they ^re wakened, sleepe againe: therefore they need Stirring. Wicked ones are dead, weake ones sleepe, even the best have their naps. To the first you may crie as lowd ^s the Idolatrous Priests did to Baal; but they will not waken. To the second, though we call once and againe, they will not stirre; but let us give them no rest. He that to
 such a one knockes not mainely, knockes vainely: at last they will rise. Luke 11.8. Because of our importunity they will rise. To the last an easie stirring serves: his nap is not so long, nor his sleepe so deepe; but Cor vigilat. Cant. 5.2. I sleepe, but my heart waketh. An Oxe hath strength enough, but dulnesse withall; there must be a goad to pricke him on. The spirit is ready, but the flesh is heavie: we must be stirred upward, and spurred forward. Every good Sermon hath in it two things; a Bridle, and a Spurre. To meet with two dispositions in men; Inclination to evill, aversenesse from good. For the former precipice; there is a bridle, for the latter; dulnesse a spurre: hi pressi, illi repressi; these must be strained, those restrined. Some runne so fast as they can from Christs Ensigne, and treacherously confederate with his adversary Satan; these be desperate offenders. Others will not oppose him, so, nor take part with him, but cowardly stand and looke on. Like the cursed inhabitants of Meroz, Iudg. 5 23. that came not to the helpe of the Lord against the mightie. If a ma^ could borrow of the one a little swiftnesse, to quicken the others lazinesse: and of the other a little coolenesse, to allay the formers heat: this might make up a reasonable and indifferent temper.
Vpon the whole face of the earth there is an universall slumber: as Sardi though shee lived, but shee was dead: So men dreame they are awake, but indeed they are fast asleepe. I doe not say, the Vsurer, Drunkard, Oppressour, the sacrilegious are asleepe; for mortui sunt, they are dead. But I see professours of religion slumber; acquiescere lucro; over-give themselves, though not give over themselves, to the world: Doe you thinke they will ever be brought to heaven without stirring? No, it is well if perpetuall punction can drive them to compunction: if often repea^^^ rules can worke any amendment. We call, and cry, and thunder; yet still complain^ as Aeneas for his Creusa: Nec quicquam ingeminans, iterumque, iterumque voca^i. Rom. 10.21. All the day long have we stretched forth our hands, and lifted up our voices. Paul told his Thessalonians, that he had no need to write unto them touching some duties, 1 Thess. 4.9. O that we could say so of our people. Eccles. 12.11. The words of the wise are as goads: now the Spirit of God infuse into us that wisdome, that our words may be as goads, to provoke and stirre you up to your owne salvation.
By putting you in remembrance. This is the last motive, drawne from the necessitie of often preaching and writing; otherwise how should they bee stirred up? wherein we may consider two things; the necessitie of the ministery, and the nature of that dutie.
For the former, there must be Remembrancers, that by them salvation may be conveyed to us: by them as Instruments, not of them as Principals. Illi non tribuunt, quae per illos tribuuntur; They doe not give that of themselves, which the Lord doth give by them. Luke 15.22. Dixit Ministris, Proferte stolam: He said to his Ministers, Bring forth the best roabe. Though GOD gives you the roabe of salvation, yet by their hands. But you thinke, you have pick-lockes to open heaven doores, though they be not opened by us. Iohn is the voice of the Cryer, CHRIST is the Word that doth crie: he that despiseth vocem clamantis, the voice of the Cryer; despiseth verbum clamans, the Cryer himselfe. Now this necessitie is not Infallibilitatis, sed ordinis; Not of infallibility, but of order: GOD can save us without it, but he doth not. Iohn Baptist must give water, or CHRIST will give no bloud. Rom. 10.14. How shall they beleeve on him, of whom they have not heard? And (...) shall they heare without a Preacher? They must needs forget, that have none to p^^ them in remembrance. A people is never neerer their woe, than when they suspe^^ their Preachers. Mic. 2.6. When they say to their Prophets; Prophecie not. The Citie is in hazard, when they have tyed up the alarme-bell. Newes came to a Towne once and againe, that the enemie was approaching: well he did not approach. He^^upon in anger, they enacted a law, that no man on paine of death should bring agai^^ such rumours, as the newes of an enemie. Not long after the enemie came indeed; besieged, assaulted, and sacked the Towne. Of whose ruines nothing remain^^
 but this proverbiall Epitaph; Here stood a Towne, that was destroyed with silence. We have too many such townes; God keepe them from such a destruction.
For the other; every true Minister is a Remembrancer.1 Tim. 4.6. If thou put the brethren ^n remembrance of these things, thou shalt be a good Minister of IESUS CHRIST. Of these things put them in remembrance. It is a civill terme, proper to civill officers.2 Tim. 2.14. 2 Sam. 8.16. Esay 36.22. Iehoshaphat the sonne of Ahilud was Recorder. There is mention made of Ioah the sonne ^f Asaph the Recorder. The Recorder is a prime Office, well knowne in this Citie. This the Apostle here naturalizeth to the Church, and signifies Ministers to be Re^orders. This Remembrancing or Recording, is not a publication at randome, but (...) Commemoration; or a fetching backe of some forgotten thing. The proper principle from whence it proceeds, is no other facultie of the soule, but the memorative. The proper object is not occurrents of all sorts, but occurrents past.
You see now a Preachers errand: it is not a new invention, but an ancient Record enrolled in the memory. As Saint Iude speakes. Verse 3. Of the Faith which was once delivered to the Saints. Once, not so much Ratione temporis, at one ^eason: as Ratione perfectionis, in respect of the perfection: so given once, that it ^eeds never be given againe. We invent no novelties, but remember you of that which was delivered to us. That good thing which was committed unto thee, keepe.2 Tim. 1.14. Quod tibi creditum, non quod a te inventum: quod accepisti, non quod excogitasti: cu^us autor non esse debes, sed custos; That which was intrusted to thee, not invented by ^hee: which thou hast received, not conceived: whereof thou art not a founder, but a keeper. Yea, CHRIST himselfe added no new precepts to the Law,Lyrinens. but revived and explained the old. Therefore he used to say, It is written; and that writ^en Law he expounded. But it is objected. Iohn 13.34. Novum mandatum; A ^ew Commandement give I unto you. This was not Nouum, sed novatum; not new in ^t selfe, but rather renewed: there being the addition of a new Spirit, that helpes our infirmities. For, 1 Iohn 2.7. I write no new Commandement unto you, but an old Commandement which you had from the beginning. But the preaching of faith is cal^ed Nova Iustitia, a new Righteousnesse. I answer, It is not a contrary Righteousnesse to that the Law required, but a different conveyance of Righteousnesse. Both ^equire a Righteousnesse; the Law an inherent, the Gospell an imputed Righteousnesse. The Decalogue, without contradiction, is still that Magna Charta; to which as their common Principle all doctrinall conclusions are reducible. Eccles. 12.13. The conclusion of the whole matter, is, Feare GOD, and keepe his Commandements; for therein is the whole dutie of man. In Arithmeticke, when we once passe ^he number of ten, the latter numbers, though multiplied to millions of millions, ^re but compounded resumptions and repetitions of the former. When the workes of GOD were crowned with their Makers approbation; Behold, it is very good: ^ll the inventions of men were but surveyes and discoveries, all actions but imita^ions; Nil novi sub sole; There is no new thing under the Sunne. Eccles. 1.9. The thing ^hat hath beene, it is that which shall be. Is there any thing whereof it may be said, See, ^his is new? It hath beene already of old time before us. All are but remembrances of ^is worke, but rehearsals of his praise. So after the full and perfect delivery of GODS Word; all praises are but like the hundred and fifth, the hundred and sixth, ^nd the hundred and seventh Psalmes; Rehearsall Psalmes: or as David especially ^ntitleth the eight and thirtieth Psalme, Memorandum; A Psalme of David to bring ^o remembrance. All prayers, but like the Levites in the ninth of Nehemiah; Re^earsall prayers. All Sermons, but like Stephens in the seventh of the Acts; Re^earsall sermons.
But there are some, that thinke to disparage all Sermons, and shift off hearing, with this objection; Nil dictum, quod non dictum prius; nothing can be said, but that hath beene said. And when any good Instruction is commended, they thinke by ^his exception to disgrace it. Grant that all is the same for the matter; yet for the method, I am sure there are many things now spoken, that were never spoken before.
 Some of later times have averred, that all manner of Vsury is lawfull: this was never said before. The Devill himselfe durst not have beene so impudent, as to have broached this in those ancient and purer times. Others have published, that Tenths are not due to the Church, Ex jure Divino: now for fourteene hundred yeeres after Christ this was never spoken. The Church would have denied her blessing to such a sonne, yea, refused him for her sonne, that should have said it. As Christ said in the case of unjust Divorce, Matth. 19.8. Non fuit sic ab initio; From the beginning it was not so. We see opinions newly broached, that were never heard of before. There are daily productions of new acts, never done before. The blowing up of a State with Gun-powder; whosoever speakes of it, speakes of a thing never spoken of before. Can your selves thinke new thoughts, speake new words, execute new acts; and yet cannot we preach new Sermons? Is there a necessitie, that all suggestions of Gods Spirit, and contemplation of man, must be disgraced for being old? Indeed we desire to tell you of the old Righteousnesse, but we are faine to wi^ your nice and curious attentions by new formes and methods. Matth. 13.52. The good Scribe bringeth out of his treasure things new and old. What careth a wise man whether the Balme be new or old, so his wound be cured by it? Let it bee old or new, a present instruction, or a repetition, it is sufficient if it may profit your soules.
To conclude, all our Sermons are but Remembrances, and our selves Remembrancers. We can doe no more, we can doe no lesse. Act. 4.20. We cannot but speake the things which we have seene and heard. We cannot; not that it is absolutely impossible: but first for Outward congruitie of reason and law: for Id possumus; quod jure possumus; We can doe, what we may doe. And then for Inward resolution; the Word being as burning fire shut up in our bones, that makes us weary of forbearing, Ier. 20.9. Or like new wine, which if it have no vent, will burst the vessels, Iob 32.18. I cannot, that is, I will not: love as strong as death, necessitates me: Mori possum, tacere non possum; I can die, I cannot hold my peace. Esth. 4.16. Howsoever I will speake; If I perish, I perish. There is great need. Satans remembrancers are abroad in every corner: marke how they vouch their precedents. Ezra 4.15. The adversaries of Ierusalem slander her to Artaxerxes, that she is a rebellious Citie, Seditious, and hatefull to Princes and Provinces. Iohn 19.7. The Iewes coloured their murther with a legall proceeding; We have a law, and by our law he ought to die. These Instruments of the Devill speake, and shall we hold our peace? Doe they remember you of carnall things, and shall not we remember you of the LORD IESUS? The silence of a Remembrancer in the Kings Exchequer, may diminish the Kings Revennews: and by the same fault, wee may shorten the Lords commings in. It is true indeed that his glory can finde other issues; but to our shame. Esth. 4.14. If thou hold thy peace, God will send deliverance another way; but thou and thy fathers house shall be destroyed. No, pray you for us, that the doore of utterance may be opened unto us: yea, Lord, doe thou open our lips, and our mouth shall shew forth thy praise. Our hearts shall meditate, our lips shall speak: and may the words of our lips, and the meditations of our hearts, be alwayes acceptable in thy sight; O Lord our strength and our Redeemer.




VERSE 14. Knowing that shortly I must put off this my Tabernacle, even as our Lord Jesus Christ hath shewed me.

THe Apostle proceeds to amplifie the reason, why he so plyed them with the remembrance of these things. My life is but short: Why so? because I am old: yet an old man may weare out some yeares; nay, but I know it is short: How can this be knowne? Yes, by Gods revelation; As our Lord Iesus Christ hath shewed me. I must die, I must die shortly, I know I must die shortly: my Saviour Christ hath told me so. Therefore pardon me, though I inculcate, and beat so much upon one string; it is a lesson worth your learning, and I have but a small time to teach it you. Knowing that shortly I must etc.
I know;] not perhaps precisely the day, or the place, or the manner. But Death is not a stranger to my thoughts; my account is cast up, I am ready. I know.
That I must put off, or lay down;] willingly, not on compulsion: not pulled downe; but laid downe. It is a metaphore drawne from a wager; Depono tecum; the faithfull man doth wager, and pawne his soule to God.
This my tabernacle;] not my castle, or strong tower, or standing house; but a Tent, a moveable, a Tabernacle.
Shortly:] The time is not so farre off that I dreame not of it: not, likely to happen in another age, and creeping on by slow degrees. The Sunne is not descending, but ready to sett: the messenger knockes at the doore: the clocke runs upon the last minute: the Epilogue is on the stage: the taper at the last glimpse: the oake falling under the latest blow of the axe: Instat tempus; Shortly.
As the Lord Iesus Christ hath shewed me.] I dare take his word: he that died for me, hath told me that I now shall die for him. It is a shame for me to be unprepared, when such a Prophet hath certified me; both in prediction, and example; Monstrante viam.
He speakes of an assurance; I know. What doth he know? that I must die; part with this tabernacle. How must he part with it? Put it off. When must he put it off? Shortly. How is he sure of that? The Lord Iesus Christ hath shewed me. The whole may be distinguished into three generalls: A
Resolution; (...), I know.Dissolution; I must shortly put off this my tabernacle.Revelation; As our Lord Iesus Christ hath shewed me.
The Resolution is intire in it selfe; an infallible certainety of inevitable death: which is manifest to him, both by the common condition of nature, and a more sensible impression of vicinity: a thing that growes fast upon him. I know.
The Dissolution is observable in divers circumstances: It is
Personall; I, though an Apostle of Christ.Necessary; I must, there is no remedie.Voluntary; Put off, willingly, without snatching from me.Instant; Shortly, the decree cannot be suspended.
The Revelation or Premonition of his death, is referred either, Ad
Genus mortis, The kinde and manner of his death.Tempus moriendi, The time prefixed of his dying.
Knowing:] This is his Resolution. The assurance of unavoidable death, is a
 doctrine well knowne: every one can say with Peter; I know. Nil dicitur frequentius, nil creditur facilius; Nothing is more frequently repeated, nothing is more readily beleeved. Bern. Cogita te mortuum, quem scis necessitate moriturum. Thinke thy selfe, as it were, already dead; whom thou knowest necessarily to die. Bed. It is fit that Death should effect death:Spiritualis corporalem, culabilis poenalem, voluntaria necessariam. the spirituall, a corporall: the death of sinne, a death of punishment: a voluntary death, brings a necessary death. Therefore, saith Chrysostome, Let us make a vertue of necessity; Offeramus Deo pro munere, quod pro debito tenemur reddere; Let us offer God that for a gift, which wee are bound to pay as a debt. This is an hard and wofull necessity, saith Anselme; Perdidit homo beatitudinem ad quam factus est, and invenit mortem ad quam factus non est. Man lost that life to which he was ordained, and found the death to which he was not ordained. All men die in time, some before their time. Eccles. 7.17. The overmuch wicked dies before his time; Tempore non suo; in a season which the constitution of his nature doth not threaten. Thus sometimes die the godly, that they may be no longer vexed of the guilty: often the guilty, that they may no longer vex the godly. This necessity all must undergoe, Sed diverso fato with a diverse event. To the wicked, death is the beginning of sorrow: to the Elect, the end of paine. The death of the wicked, saith Bernard, is, Mala in mundi amissione, pejor in carnis separatione, pessima in ignis combustione; Evill in the losse of this world, worse in the separation of life, worst of all in the torture of quenchlesse fire. Death to the godly is, Bona propter requiem, meli^^ propter novitatem, optima propter impassibilitatem futuram; Good in the cessation of paines, better in the renovation of all things, best in the immutability of happinesse. Therefore the Saint that desires to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, Non patienter moritur; sed patienter vivit, and delectabiliter moritur; That man doth not only die patiently, but hee lives patiently, and dies joyfully. Hee loves Iesus Christ but a little, that doth not rejoyce to goe unto him.
But in this point, in vaine I spend my breath, to tell you that I and you all shall lose our breath: you know it. Tell the Oppressour, Thou shalt die; hee answers, I know it. Dost thou know it? and wilt still live like a Christian Iew, extorting from thy brother? How shall Christ, (whom thou supposest thy brother) give thee Spem tuam; thy Hope; when thou takest away from him Rem suam, his Substance? Tell the worldling, Thou shalt die; hee sayes, I know it. Dost thou know that thou must leave the world, and yet dost cleave to the world? Dost thou know, thou must lose the possession of earth, and wilt thou not assure to thy soule the fruition of heaven? The Drunkard sayes, he knowes he must die, he can sing you songs to that purpose. Doth he know it, and yet keepe his bodie so perpetually drunke, that his soule hath no time soberly to bethinke it selfe? Is the gate of heaven so broad and wide, that he can reele into it? Drunkennesse is no way to blessednesse; as the Poet wittily epitaph'd upon a dead drunkard: who lived in the love of wine, and died in the strength of it:
If by the pot, to heaven he got,This I dare boldly say;He was the last which that way past,And first which found that way. Tell the Contentious, Thou shalt die; he answers, I know it. And yet wilt thou reserve, Bellum cum proximo, pacem cum Diabolo; Warre with thy neighbour, peace with the Devill? Shall a turbulent spirit ever enter that Citie of Peace? Tell the Deceiver, Thou shalt die, with all thy frauds; I know it. Dost thou know it? Why then is thy tongue Satans anvile, whereon he sits forging his lyes? Why dost thou sweare away thy salvation before thou hast it? Tell the Adulterer; Thou shalt die; I know it. Why then wilt thou be one flesh with an Harlot, which must both rot under the clods; and not rather one spirit with Christ, who reigneth above the clouds? Do we know, we must die, and yet run such lewd courses? We know that we must die; let us so live in faithfull obedience, that we way know we shall live for evermore with ISESUS CHRIST.

Shortly I must lay downe this my tabernacle.] This is the Dissolution, wherein I considered foure circumstances. First, the Personalitie; I, though a Preacher, though an Apostle, one that have seene the Lord Iesus in the face; I. Next, the necessity, I must, there is no evasion, no prevention: I must lose a tabernacle, no mansion, a thing not worth keeping. Thirdly, the Liberty, voluntarinesse, and willing heart of the Apostle to doe this; which he calls a Deposition, or Laying downe of his Tabernacle: it is not a thing violently extorted from me, but laied downe with a quiet and temperate mind. Lastly, the Instance and vicinitie of it; It is not long a comming, but approching so neere, that I see it and feele it: the sands are almost out of the glasse: but a few moments, and I depart; Shortly.
I must; it is Personall; I. The Apostle out of that generall necessitie wisely collects a particular, a proper conclusion to himselfe, I. These singular deductions out of universall propositions, are profitable to men, and acceptable to God. All men are sinners; and I am the chiefe, saith Paul. All men are mortall, and I must shortly die, saith Peter. No degree of men is priviledged from death: not a Patriarch, not a Prophet, not an Apostle, could plead exemption. Zach. 1.5. Your fathers, where are they? and the Prophets, doe they live for ever? Abraham a great Patriarch, Moses a great Prophet, David a great Prince, Samuel a great Priest, Iohn a great Evangelist, Peter a great Apostle; where are they? their soules live in blisse, their bodies are dead in the grave. God doth often take away his Ministers, and that for three reasons:
1 For their owne sinnes; as Nadab and Abihu. Lev. 10.2. They offered strange fire before the Lord, and there went out fire from the Lord that devoured them. They offered strange fire, and they suffered strange fire. They sent up hellish impietie toward heaven, therefore hell came out of heaven upon them. So Hophni and Phinehas, those uncorrected sonnes of Eli. 1 Sam. 2.34. In one day they died both of them. They desperately offended, the father too mildly reprehended, they harkened not, because the Lord would slay them, Ver. 25. So Zach. 11.8. Three shepheards have I cut off in one moneth; my soule loathed them, and their soule also abhorred me. This God doth for the good of the people; Vt illi pereant, ne caeteros perimant: that such might perish themselves, and not destroy others by their bad examples, and uncleane course of life.
2 For the sinnes of the people. As Salomon saies; Propter peccata populi erunt multi Principes: so we may say, multi sacerdotes. For the sinnes of the people there shall bee many Princes: so for the sinnes of the people there shall be many Priests. God smites the Shepheard, when he meanes to scatter the sheepe, he puts out the light, when he purposeth to leave men in the dark. This was Pauls resolution, Phil. 1.24. To abide in the flesh is more needfull for you. Propter vos; for my selfe it is better to be dissolved, and to be with CHRIST: but to remaine in the flesh, is better Propter vos, for you. This may be better for my wife, for my children, for my friends, for those that depend upon me: but I mind none of those; but Propter vos, it is better for you.
3 For his owne glory, lest what belongs to God, should be ascribed to man. CHRIST cannot endure, that that should be attributed to Paul and Barnabas, which pertaines to him, Act. 14.12. As the superstitious Lystrians, that called Barnabas Iupiter, and Paul Mercury; when they brought garlands, and would have done sacrifie to them. Princes use to change their deputies often, as the Turke does his Bashaw's; lest continuance should bring them to be taken for Princes. So God takes away often a good Minister; lest Assueti servo, obliviscerentur Dominum; they being too confident of the servant, should forget the Lord. There are some Sectaries, that thinke of their Elders, as Simon Magus thought of the Apostles; that they can give the Holy Ghost. They arrogate to the in instrument, and derogate from the agent. Let him speake the abortive figments of his owne braine, yet their superstitious applause is, Vox Dei; It is the voice of a God, not of a man, Act. 12.22.
 Let another deduce sound conclusions from the sacred truth, and justifie his sober assertions from the undeniable scriptures: yet because the man is not according to their humour, the doctrine shall not have their honour. They must chuse for themselves, a Minister of their owne faction: whereas neither Prophets nor Apostles were chosen by the people: the sheepe used not to chuse their own shepheards. Thus these professors out of their wits, hate Rome worse than hell; yet meete it, and congratulate it, in the same ranck superstition another way. As they thinke it enough that Papa sanxit; the Pope hath decreed it: so these thinke it enough, that Praesbiter dixit, their Elders hath affirmed it. Thus the people, made Bishop, and their Elder a Pope. When men shal thus deifie their Minister, no marvell if God nullifie the man.
Now, seeing we must die, doe you pray for us, that we may doe your soules good while we live. Eph. 6.19. Pray, and make supplication for all Saints: And for me, that utterance may be given unto me. Where the Clergie may learne humility, and the people charitie: we humilitie, that we need your prayers: you charity to pray for us. Weake ones pray with us, malicious ones pray against us, covetous ones prey upon us, few pray for us. Examine your consciences; how seldome doe we find place and memorie in your prayers! Perhaps, Morne and Even you remember your selves, but when is the Preacher in your thoughts? Sure you have not found sweetnesse by him, or else you could not forget him. If we forget you, let our right hand forget her cunning. We will pray for you, doe you pray for us, and our mediator Iesus Christ pray for us all.
Againe, seeing our life is so short, doe you apprehend the meanes while it lasteth. Zachary may be stroke dumbe: sicknesse may suspend us for a season, but death doth silence us for ever. Heare therefore while the voice soundeth; To day if yee will heare my voice hearden not your hearts, Hebr. 3.15. Though I trust, God will never faile you successively of a diligent Pastor: and we wish that those who in time come after us, may in worth goe before us: that as they succeed us in place, they may exceed us in grace. But because certainely, either death must take us from you, or you from us: as it is our part, dum vires annique sinunt, tolerare labores: while we keepe on our tabernacles, to take paines: so let this be your part; while you have eares to heare, heare: while you have hearts to beleeve, receive: while you have hands to worke, obey; that while there is a Saviour in heaven you may be blessed.
I must; it is necessary, there is no remedie but I must lay downe my Tabernacle. If heaven were to be had upon earth, Saints should not dwell in tabernacles. But it is observable of our Apostle, Saint Peter, at the transfiguration of CHRIST, Matth. 17. even whilest he had not knowledge enough to discerne of CHRISTS kingdome, that it was in heaven: and was mistaken in the place; (It is good for (...) to be here:) yet he knew thus much, that eternitie was not to be had upon earth; and therefore he spake but of tabernacles; Let us build here three Tabernacles. Let us build; well, men may build: yea let us build here; but what? not mansions, but tabernacles. Even in the midst of that unspeakable glory, that little mappe of blessednesse, that abridgement of joy, and glimpse of heaven; he speakes but of tabernacles: putting a difference betweene mount Tabor and mount Sion. 2 Cor. 5.1. If our earthly house of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made with hands eternall in the heavens. He calls it not the Man, but the House: not of stone, but of mud-walls, Earthly: not a mansion, but a Tabernacle: not such as God made, but our selves marred, Our house: not abolished, but Dissolved; then we have, not expectantly many yeares after our dissolution, but we presently have: not a tabernacle, but a Mansion: aedificatum, non adificandum; not to be built, but Built already: not by man, but by God; a Building of God, made without hands: not transient, but Eternall: not on earth, nor in the ayre, but in the supremest place; the heaven of Heavens. This leaving the Tabernacle, signifies a migration; not onely Vnde, from the earth, but Quo, to the heavens. The losse of mortalitie precedes, the
 gaine of immortalitie followes. Iob 14.14. If a man die, shall he live againe? All the dayes of my appointed time will I waite, till my change come. The book of Iob plentifully abounds with two things; Impressions of mortalitie, and Instructions of moralitie. It teacheth us that we must die, it teacheth us how we should live. Both are propounded and compounded in that verse. A man must die and live againe, there is mortalitie: therefore all his appointed time, let him watch, there is for moralitie. There are foure remarkeable circumstances in it; A Dissolution, Restitution, Resolution, Revolution. If a man die, there is a Dissolution: he shall live againe, there is a Restitution: all my dayes will I watch, there is a Resolution: till my changing come, there is a Revolution.
Man is by generation dust, by degeneration the ashes of that dust; meere rubbish. The soule in the body, as a prisoner in a dungeon, receives all through a grate. The body is but like Saint Peters Prison, and death as the Angel that frees us. Luk. 12.32. Feare not, little flocke; it is my fathers will to give you the kingdome. Feare not; though you be now tossed about in tabernacles, I will gather you to a kingdome. Israel was a flocke removed often, from Canaan to Aegypt, from Aegypt to the wildernesse, but was at last folded in Iudea. We are now often removed in tabernacles, we shall have an abiding place. Ioh. 16. Nunc vado ad Patrem, saith CHRIST: Now I goe to the Father: CHRIST led us we must follow him. He went to his father three waies. 1. Via Passionis, the way of his Passion; a sorrowfull way. 2. Via Resurrectionis, the way of his Resurrection, a joyfull way. 3. Via Ascensionis, the way of his Ascension, a glorious way. Psal. 47.5. God is gone up with a shout, the Lord with the sound of a trumpet. All this was for our sake. Hebr. 9.24. He entred into heaven, to appeare in the presence of God for us. By those three workes of CHRIST, we have three speciall benefites; all expressed by Paul, Eph. 2.5.6. By his passion he hath quickened us, by his resurrection, raised us up: by his ascension, Made ut sit in heavenly places. Now I goe to the Father; Now, there is the brevity of this life, it is but a Nunc, Now. I goe, there is the mutability of the world, Vadit, it fades like grace. To the Father, there is the glory of future blessednesse, to be with God himselfe for ever.
Indeed to the wicked death is more than a dissolution, even a destruction of the Tabernacle. Eccl. 41.1. O death how bitter is the remembrance of thee, to a man of prosperity! It is terrible, not onely for the separation of his delights, but for the not separation of his sins. Beholding his sins with amazed eyes, he cryes to them, Oh give me one houres libertie; when he shall say to his lusts, covetice, pride, drunkennesse; Depart from me: and they shall answer; No, Tu nos egisti, opera tua sumus: thou hast made us, we are thy creatures; we will goe with thee to judgement, we will dwell with thee in torment. Ejus est mortem timere, qui ad Christum nolit ire: ejus ad Christum nolle ire, qui non sperat cum Christo regnare. Let him feare death, that desires not to be with Christ: and let him refuse going to Christ, that hopes not for mercie of CHRIST.
But to the faithfull, the grave is but a Chamber. Esa. 26.20. Come my people, enter thou into thy Chambers. But a Bed. Esa. 57.2. They shal rest in their beds. A very parlour, where the Lord shuts up our bodies with the key of Peace, and opens them againe with the key of Resurrection. Vnto this hope the Apostle lifts up our hearts by his owne example. It is observable that to the two chiefe Apostles, Paul and Peter, God did afford this priviledge; in this mortall life to have a tast of heavens joyes; that they might more feelingly and effectually raise up our affections to that supernall Citie. Paul was wrap'd up to the third heaven, and so ravished with this joy, that he knew not whether he had his body about him or not. 2 Cor. 12.2. Whether in the body, or out of the body, I cannot tell. And me thinkes, when he comes downe againe out of heaven, he writes so contemptibly of these worldly things; that hee calls them very drosse and dung. Such respect hath any man of all things under the sunne, that hath but tasted the sweetnesse of Paradise. So Peter, together with
 Iames and Iohn, on Mount Tabor, saw a glimpse of heaven. They beheld it, that they might preach it, preaching: lift up our hearts to it: and our hearts being lifted up to it, might be blessed in it. On purpose they were shewed this glory, that they might enflame our affections with it. Imagine that it were possible for the most worldly soule here, to be lifted up so high as Paul; be admitted to look into Paradise: to see that glorious societie of Saints and Angels, and so much of that Beatificall vision as their nature is capable of: and from thence to looke downe againe upon this earth, hanging like a little clod in the midst of the world: and see so many millions of men busied about nothing, like Ants on a molehill, or flies in a sunne beame: how basely would he esteeme this world, and contemne that which is now his glory, and for which he is content to venture his soule! Doe you now wonder, that we so much commend that blessed rest? when one gazed long on Minervas picture another askes him the reason of such curious speculation: he answered, O, si me^s haberes oculos: Oh that thou hadst my eyes! So, o that you had Saint Peters eyes; you would not admire our admiration.
Put off, or Lay downe. It is also voluntary; Depono. The Apostle calls himselfe a depositary, that hath a jewell committed to him on trust, which hee is willing to surrender. A man that hath some precious treasure intrusted to him, is not onely anxious to defend it from the violent attempts of others, or from their subtle underminings: but is also troubled in himselfe, with some invasion upon his owne honestie, by a corrupt desire to possesse it, and employ it at his owne pleasure: and never finds full peace from these reluctations, till the proprietary resume it. So for this sparkling Iewell, our soule, which lightens our night of ignorance, and darke body of earth, lodging in our flesh: we are exercised with a continuall trouble to preserve our life from sicknesses, and other offensive violences: and are tempted with covetousnesse to enlarge our terme, to strengthen our tenure and state in it; and to make it so much our owne, as to spend it unthriftily upon lusts and surfets: and we have no perfect peace till the giver receive it backe: donec deposuimus a nobis, and reposuimus in Domino; till we have put it off from our selves, and layed it up in God.
He doth lay it downe being called for, not cast it away without bidding: that were not to lay it downe, but to runne away from it. God saies, Thou shalt not kill: si non alium, multo minus teipsum: if thou maiest not kill another than much lesse thy selfe. Sapiens non fugere debet e vita, sed exire, Sen. The wise man doth not runne out of his life, but maturely goe out. This life is a warfare, where God hath placed some in the foreward, some in the Rere, some in the wings, others in the maine battell: every man hath his station, and must not depart from it without his Nunc dimittis, without his Pasport. Neither light of nature, nor light of grace, directs a man to put out the light of his owne life.
Not nature: Paul calls death an Enemie: Now, no man loves an enemie properly, and for his owne sake, quatenus inimicus, so farre as he is an enemy. Homicida in se, insepultus abijciatur, saith Seneca. It is pittie any hands should bury him, whom his owne hands have slaine. We may say of a selfe-murderer, as it was said of Cato; Occidit se, ne dicat, Caesar me servavit: he slew himselfe, rather than he would say, Cesar hath saved me: so that man kills himselfe, lest CHRIST should save him. Cleombrotus read Plato's Phaedo unadvisedly; otherwise he would not have destroyed a mortall body to make way for an immortall soule. Scripta Platonis non ita erant animo percipienda tuo.Virg. Aen. 6. The poet by that naturall light condemned such attempts, Qui sibi lethum, Insontes peperere manu, etc. Quam vellent aethere in alto, Nunc and pauperiem and duros perferre Labores! Those that have extricated themselves from misery on earth, by an unnaturall violence upon themselves; if they might be restored to life againe, they would endure ten thousand times more with patience. God hath tied the soule and body together with such a passionate love, that they cannot part without griefe. Man is borne with little insensible paine, but dies with extreme
 anguish. If the wisedome of God had not interposed that let to timorous nature, there would have beeney many Lucreces, Cleopatra's, Achitophels; so many wilfull funeralls, that good Lawes should have found small opportunitie of execution. But as God would have our birth bitter to our mothers, that they might love us the dearer: so he would have our death bitter to our selves, that we might the more feare to hasten it. Man saith; it is a miserable privation for him, that hath seene the starres, the sunne in his glory, and the heavens reconciled with the fruitfull earth, both sympathising in our benefit: for that man to be tumbled into a silent grave, neither seeing nor seene, uncapable of comfort! now what nature loaths, thy owne sober heart dislikes, and God detests, doe not accomplish.
Not Grace, for all such in holy writ have their brands; as Achitophel, Saul, Iudas. They slew indeed Malos, sed Male; evill men, but after a worse manner. Our Saviours direction was; When you are persecuted in one Citie, fly into the next. He saies not, dispatch your selves lest your enemies triumph over you; nor get others to doe it that you may escape further torments: but save your selves by flight, run ^ot out of your owne lives. Non recipio animam, quae me nolente egreditur de vita.Sen. God will refuse that soule, which leaves the body before himselfe call for it. It is objected, that
Sampson did this, yet he is reckoned in the Legend and kalendar of Saints, Heb. 11. But his fact cannot be excused, but that by divine revelation it was warranted. Nisi quia latenter Spiritus hoc jusserat; unlesse the Spirit of God did infuse this into him, who purposed to worke miracles by him, Aug. He prayed to the Lord, he was heard of the Lord: therefore I doubt not but his motion was divinely inspired. For God after that his strength was departed, assisted him in the act. Therefore as Augustine saies of Abrahams offering up of Isaac; That which without Gods command had beene no lesse than madnesse; when GOD commands it, proves obedience.
But Rhasis is commended for this. 2 Maccab. 14.42. He fell upon his sword, chusing rather to die manfully, etc. Even that commendation is warrant enough, to raise the book out of the Scripturall Canon. But he called upon the Lord of life and spirit to restore his bowels againe: alas, this shall be common to the very reprobates. Yes, but he died nobly: it had beene a better report to have died humbly. He did it saith the Author, manfully: and I doe not say, that he did it womanly. It was Magne, but not Bene factum: farre more Roman, than Christian.
But those Virgins in the sacke of Rome, that to prevent the Ravisher slew themselves, are praised. Saint Augustine refutes those praises; It is an error to thinke, that whatsoever is done on us, is also done of us. For then were chastitie a vertue of the body, not of the mind. The polluted mind makes the body stained, though it did never act: but the body abused by violence cannot make the unconsenting mind guilty. Was Thamar to be condemned, because Amnon did defile her? It is Consent, that maketh the sinne: as Augustine said of Tarquin and Lucrece. Duo fuerunt, and unus adulterium commisit: there were two persons in the action, yet but one offender; the other being not an actor, but a sufferer. Why then did Lucrece kill her selfe? If she were unchast, why is she honoured? if she were chast, why was she murdered? Si non est illa impudicitia, qua invita comprimitur; non est haec justitia, qua casta ^unitur. If that were no unchastitie, where a woman is ravished: then this is no justice, wherein a chast woman is punished. But saith the Matron or Virgin, If I be ravished and surviue, the world will say, it was done with my will, what world? that which est positus in maligno, knowes nothing else but wickednesse. Howsoever, Davids testimonie is sufficient; Lord, thou knowest mine innocence. But it is opposed, that the feare of death and crueltie may make them consent to these constuprations. How can they tell, what extremity may worke upon them? What then? Satius certum homicidium in praesenti, quam incertum adulterium in futuro? Is it better to commit a present murder, than hazard a future rape? Shall we perpetrate a certaine sinne, to
 prevent an uncertaine shame? Shal we do that we cannot live to repent, to avoid that we may live to repent? Oh let them, and let themselves alone that they may recover themselves; before they goe whence they shall not returne, even to the land of darkenesse and shadow of death, Iob 10.20. Saint Augustine decides it; Non sit vobis vita vestra taedio, quamvis fuerit hostibus castitas vestra ludibrio. Doe not you make havocke of your soules, because others have abused your bodies. Paul was in a straite betwixt this double choice, of life or death. Phil. 1.23. Though he was desirous to die, yet he was content to live. Quasi sapiens amplectitur mortis lucrum, tamen quasi so vus non refugit vitae obsequium, Ambros. In his wisedome he could chuse the gaine of death, yet in his obedience he refuseth not the service of life.
But to doe this argues a stout and valiant mind, fearelesse of death. Indeed such may be more admired for stoutnesse of mind, than commended for soundnesse of wisedome. But that is not magnanimity, but rather the greatest cowardice. Nature it selfe teacheth, that there is more valour to endure a miserable life, than to embrace a wretched death. That is farre the greater mind, quae vitam arumnosam potest magis ferre, quam fugere. There is no sorrow, no shame, no miserie; that should force a Christian to so desperate a prevention. The servants of God never did this, when their soules were heavy to the death: their bodies in Iobs plight, when a prick could have ended all his woes: when the pulling away of the pillow would have eased all their griefes. They never payed the debt of nature, till their creditor called on them for it: which time they would never have stayed, if the service of their owne hands might lawfully have released them. But as we cannot live without a Permittis, so we must not dye without a Dimittis. Some that enjoy the worlds Paradise, desire to live: others that endure the worlds Purgatory, desire to die. Saint Augustines rule is good for both. Si habes vitam in desiderio, habet mortem in patientia: habet vitam in patientia, si habes mortem in desiderio. Though thou desire life i^ thy election, yet embrace death in thy patience and admit life in thy patience, though death be in thy desires. When God calls, be not troubled to put off thy Tabernacle: till God calls, be not troubled to keep on thy Tabernacle.
The causes of this unnaturall sinne, are many. 1. Impatience of crosses: if they cannot have their will on others, in a curst heart they will have their will on themselves. And so leape like some fishes, out of the boiling caldron into the broiling flame. As Dido; Sic, sic juvat ire sub umbras. 2. Ambition of a name, and to be famoused in the world for Heroicall spirits. Yet alas, they are plagued in that they affected, for their memories stinkes above ground. Such a fire was in the bloud of Rhasis. 3. Preservation of chastitie: so Pelagia at fifteene yeeres old. This is a grievous follie to save the body from deflouring, by deflouring the soule. 4. Infidelitie; when they have no faith in God, nor hope of good issue out of troubles. Thus did the younger Cato, to avoid the tyrrannie of Cesar. God holds it a great indignitie to him, not to be trusted: therefore justly plagues diffidence with desperatenesse. 5. Pride; when a man will not submit himselfe to Gods will: but will chuse not to be at all; unlesse he may be as he list himselfe. 6. Crueltie to others. Nero that was so artificiall in cutting throates, at last runnes on his owne sword, saying: I have lived dishonorably, I will die shamefully. Saul being so bloudied against David and the Priests, became as unmercifull to himselfe, to wreake his teene on his owne bowels. Iudas that was so cruell against the innocent bloud of his Master became as cruell against the nocent bloud of himselfe. Achitophel thirsting after Davids life, became as ill minded against himselfe. He that is thus savage and mercilesse to himselfe, to whom will he be mercifull? Let no man thinke him a friend, that is his owne enemie. Trust not such a one: who spares not his owne bloud, will never spare mine. 7. Desperation; when a man thinkes that all the doores of mercie are shut against him; and there is no goodnesse enough for him in IESUS CHRIST.
But I forget my selfe, and hold you too long in disputing a question, which
 many a one hath disputed against himselfe in a moment of time, without reply: not with tongue, but with hand: not with sharpnes of wit, but of sword. I wil pronounce nothing determinatly of any particular person: but wee shall find it to be the end of usurers, murderers, traytors, and such branded wretches. I know the mercy of God may come, Inter pontem and fontem, inter gladium and jugulum; betwixt the bridge and the brooke, betwixt the knife and the throat: and repentance may be suggested to the heart in a moment; in that very instant. But this only may be: there is no promise for it, many threatnings against it, little likelihood of it. It were madnes for thee to break thy neck, to try the skill of a Bone-setter. Tarry, till God calls, patiently, and then lay downe thy tabernacle cheerfully, and the Lord Iesus will receive thy spirit in mercy.
The use of this point serves to reprove the hasty wishers for death. In the least extremity; let mee die. Some of the Saints have not escaped this infirmity. Elias, 1 King. 19.4. He arose, and went for his life to Beersheba; and after that a dayes journey into the wildernesse; all to scape Iezabel: yet when he was there, he requested for himselfe that he might die. It is enough, now, O Lord, take away my life: for I am not better than my Fathers. In the morning he fled for his life: at evening being a little weary, he prayes for death. So Ionah; first cries earnestly for life, Chap. 2. Out of the belly of hell I cried, and thou heardest my voice. Some dayes after he begs and sues for death, Chap. 4.3. Take, O Lord, I beseech thee, my life from me: for it is better for me to die than to live. Because Iezabel pursues him in the world, therefore Elias must needs out of the world: because the Ninivites did not die, therefore Ionas will not live. If they had then departed, the one had died fainting, and the other had died chafing. They that desire death in passion, desire it only for fashion. For when sicknesse, Deaths messenger comes, Medici adducuntur, munera promittuntur; Physitians are consulted, rewards promised, prayers conceived, vowes offered, that death may be deferred, Aug. You remember the Fable of the old man with the burden of stickes; wherewith being overloaden, and weary of his misery, he cals for Death to come to him. Death came, tooke him at his word, and asked him what he would with him. But he answered, quickly turning both his mind and language; I desire thy help to beare my burden of sticks for me. Young Clitipho in the Comedy, being abridged of his lusts, had nothing in his disconted mouth, but Emori cupio, I would faine die. The wiser father replied; My sonne, Prius disce quid sit vivere; First learne what it is to live. Desire life with aged Simeon, till thou hast got the Lord Iesus in thine armes: without whom the first death will be terrible, the second death intollerable. Bern. Tu quomodo exibis anima misera, quae ducem itineris Dominum Iesum non nosti? Miserable soule, with what courage canst thou set on thy way, which knowest not the guide of the journey, Iesus Christ? If a man should live as long as Methushalem, if his head were as white as snow, yet it is not fit to melt till hee have knowne Christ. Though his skin were as writhled as parchment, yet it is not time to bee folded up, till his soule be ripe in the faith. If he knowes not Iesus, he is not fit to die. Let us then desire to put off this Tabernacle, when we are sure of that immortall clothing. 2 Cor. 5.4. We doe groane in this Tabernacle, not that we would be unclothed, but clothed upon, that mortality might be swallowed up of life. Then let us wish to leave the earth, when wee perfectly know the way to heaven. Desire to live till you are inspired with grace, desire to die when you are assured of glory.
Shortly] I must put it off; this is the last circumstance; the Deposition is instant. How the Apostle was assured of his approaching dissolution, I will not yet examine; but referre it to the due place, which concernes his Revelation. That which I here onely observe, is his principall intention; to expresse his owne diligence, and to convey into their hearts a more powerfull acceptance of his holy counsels, because his time is short. Velox depositio.
First, to strengthen his owne diligence; Quo brevior operandi opportunitas, eo major operandi sedulitas; The lesse space a man hath allowed for his businesse, the more he should plie it. Pancioribus diebus, potioribus argumentis; The fewer dayes the fruitfuller
 lessons! Ioh. 9.4. I must worke the works of him that sent me, while it is day. Neere to his end he washed the Disciples feet, preached Sermon upon Sermon, of humility, charity, fervencie: revealed many things before secreted: Haec ab initio non dixi vobis; I told you not these things from the beginning. Iacob gave his best blessing in his last Will: Moses made the best Sermon to Israel neere his end: David gave the best counsell to Salomon on his death-bed. Peter plies his preaching and writing, when hee knowes there followes instant silence. Rev. 12.12. The Devill hath great wrath, because he knoweth that he hath but a short time. As he is never idle, so then most busie, when he perceives his terme of rage expiring. Therefore let not Gods Ministers be negligent, for they have but their time, and that is short. May we all spend it to the peace of our consciences, the good of the Church, and the honour of our Maker?
Secondly, to beget zeale and embracing of his doctrine in our hearts. The words of dying-men have beene most emphaticall, most effectuall. We remember what our Fathers or friends spake last, because we heare them not speake againe. The last words of good men are best: as the last glimpse of the candle is the most bright: the last glare of the Sun going downe most cleare: the last speech of a deare friend parting with his friends, and departing out of the world, is usually most compassionate and patheticall. An admonition uttered by such a Teacher, and at such a time, and to such an auditory; chalengeth good attention, great devotion. Phil. ver. 9. For loves sake I beseeeh thee, being such an one as Paul the aged. This was his adjuration of Philemon, to grant his request for Onesimus. He is a Preacher of Christ, heare him: an Apostle, heare him: a dying Apostle, O now or never heare him. Wee preach to day, perhaps not be able to morrow: this Sermon may be the last Sermon: therefore heare while you may, lest you desire it when you may not. He that will be good at last, must begin at first. Occasion is like Manna, it must be gathered before the Sun is up: or like the poole of Bethesda, we must enter as soone as it is stirred by the Angell. If we preach, must you not heare? If we preach to day, ought not you heare to day? I meane not only with your eares, heare us with your hearts. Shew us not only our Sermon in your Tablets, let us see it in your hands: worke it, and so preach it againe over with your fingers. Be not meere earthly merchants, to fill your sailes, and fill your ships, and fill your shops, and fill your houses; and cannot fill your soules. They write of some Traffickers on the coast of Lapland, that they often buy their winds of the Devill. Take heed, you that grow so rich in purse, and poore in conscience, lest you buy your wealth of the Devill. The learning of most Preachers in the Land, at one time or other, in one place or other; doth emptie it selfe within your walls. Yet, the wickednesse of the greater part, hath brought a scandall on the better part. And it is a Countrey prayer, God blesse us from the Citizens of London: they will heare three Sermons a day, but deceive ten plaine men in an houre: they have so much preaching, that they are the worse. Poore soules, they are mistaken in this: mens wickednesse comes not by too much preaching, but by too little practising. The Lord worke in us a conscionable obedience, that we may not heare to our condemnation, but comfort. Nostrum est dicere, vestrum agere, D^^ perficere, Cyril. It is our part to preach, yours to practice, Gods to accomplish.
Even as our Lord Iesus Christ hath shewed me.] This is the Revelation or Premonition of the Apostles death. Some refer this ad genus mortis, to the kinde and manner of his death: Others, ad tempus moriendi, to the time of his dying. Some say, (...) signifies modum obitus sui, the manner of his departure; that he shall So die as Christ shewed him. Others understand by the word (...), velox; that he was to die shortly, because the Lord had revealed the instance of his departure. I know that I must not abide long upon earth: for Christs Word, Oraculum veritatis, hath spoke it: and I am sure to finde veritatem oraculi, to suffer it.
They that referre it to the Manner, conceive this Revelation to be given him. Ioh. 21.18. When thou wast young, etc. It is added, ver. 19. This he spake, signifying by what death he should glorifie God. So that if this be the ground of the Revelation, certainely
 it intends rather quomodo than quando, rather the manner, than the time. So August. Extendes manus tuas, hoc est, Cruci; Thou shalt stretch forth thy hands, that is, to the Crosse. Tunc Petrus ab altero cingitur, cum cruci astringitur, Tertul. Then was Peter girded by another; when he was fastened to the Crosse. That Peter was crucified, is the current and universall consent of History. First, vers. 17. If thou lovest me, feed my sheepe: Christ told Peter in what vocation he should live: then in the next verse, after what manner he should die, which questionlesse must be a violent death, of martyrdome, though the particular kinde be not specified. At last he concludes and alludes to both; Follow me. Theophil. Aret. Be thou such a Pastor in feeding my sheepe, such a Pastor in suffering for my sheepe, as I have given thee example, Ioh. 13.36. Peter asked his Master, whither he went. IESUS answered; Whither I goe, thou canst not follow me now: but thou shalt follow me afterwards. IESUS remembring this conference, together with his question; Why cannot I follow thee now? and his Resolution, I will lay downe my life for thy sake; tells him, Ioh. 21.18. When thou wast young, thou girdedst thy selfe, and walkedst whither thou wouldest, Rupert. Maldonat. When thou wast a youngling in the faith, and didst gird thy selfe with thine owne strength; it was thy folly to thinke thou couldst follow me whither I went. Therefore by denying me thrice, thou didst prove my words true; Whither I goe, thou canst not follow me now. But when thou shalt be old, thou shalt stretch forth thine hands, and another shall gird thee, and carry thee whither thou wouldest not. When thou shalt feele the weaknesse in thy selfe, and grow strong in the Lord, my other saying will prove true; Thou shalt follow me afterwards They that say this, [Follow me] intends the manner of his death, that he should follow him in being crucified as Christ was; have strange eyes. It is not good to find out more in Scripture; than God meant should be found there.
Some contend that this Revelation here mentioned, is not that Ioh. 21. for they say, it was not given at Ierusalem; a Christo jam resurrecto, by Christ immediately risen againe: but at Rome, a Christo jam ascenso, by Christ after his Ascension. So Ambrose and Gregory cite this history from Linus, upon the Acts of Peters Passion. But Origen, Tom. 7. in Iohan. referreth it to Paul, and that a great deale more probably than to Peter. The story is this: Peter being at Rome, imprisoned by Nero, and sentenced to death; by the importunity of the people, perswading him to save himselfe; and by the opportunity of Processus and Martinianus concession, who were governours of the watch; was over-ruled, and fled. Comming to the gates of Rome, there Christ met him. Peter asketh him, Domine quo venis? Cui Christus, venio iterum crucifigi; Lord, whither commest thou? Christ answered, I come againe to be crucified. Now Peter knowing that Christ had an impassible and immortall body, Intellexit Dominum crucifigendum in servo; Presently apprehended, that the Lord was to be crucified in the servant. Hereupon he came backe, and died on the Crosse to honour Christ, that had died on the Crosse to save Peter. Our credite answers this Story, as countrey-men doe the report of Travellers; They will rather beleeve it, than goe to see it: Mallem admittere, quam quaerere. Whether Peter were crucified at Rome or not, we are not certaine: but that Peter is dead, we are certaine: on this let us rest, that we may rest with Peter.
They that refer it to the time of his dying, understand it thus. Calvin. That Peter should die, he knew in generall; that he should die a Martyr, he knew in particular. Ioh. 21.19. Signifying by what death he should glorifie God. But that he should die Shortly, he could not know, except by some later revelation in special. It is probable, that where Peter wrote this Epistle, even there he received this Revelation. But it is manifest that he wrote this Epistle at Babylon: for he wrote the second, where he wrote the first; Chap. 3 ver. 1. but he wrote the former at Babylon, 1 Pet 5.13. The Church that is at Babylon elected, together with you, saluteth you; and so doth Marcus my son. Therefore it is more likely and consonant to reason, that Peter died at Babylon, than as the Papists say, at Rome. Here they will distinguish, though therby they destroy. They say directly, that by Babylon is meant Rome; even that Babylon. Rev. 17.5. The mother of harlots
 and abominations of the earth, is Ipsa Roma, very Rome. So Papias in Euseb. To have some proofe that Peter was at Rome, they are content to allow that Rome is Babylon. So that Babylonis fuisse, is all one with Romae praefuisse; for Peter to be at Babylon, and to be Bishop of Rome, there is no difference. The infamie of that damnable name doth not deterre them, so they may have some pretence of their Apostolicall title. Indeed they doe not so much care for Christ, Modo Petrus illis relinquatur, so they may enjoy Peter. Calvin. Let them but retaine the name of Peters Chaire, Suam Romam in profundis Inferis collocare non recusabunt; They will not refuse to seat their Rome in infernall Babylon. Much good doe it them: if they will not sticke to call their glorious Church, stigmaticall and accursed Babylon; surely we need not sticke much to allow them that Peter was at Rome. But heare we further.
We say, that this locall Babylon was not Rome, but that great Citie in Aegypt, now called Cayr or Alcayr; which they say to be thirteene or fourteene Germane miles about. For Babylon is typicall Rome, not Rome topicall Babylon. The Apostle did not speake aenigmatice, by a Riddle: hee did not date his Epistle from a place so called in an allegoricall sense. Letters are dated from Cities or places so usually called. Indeed Rome in the Revelation, is called Mysticall Babylon: but this was not the first Rome, Qualis erat sub Christo, As it was in the dayes of Christ: but the last Rome, Qualis erat sub Antichristo; Such as it should be under Antichrist. But Saint Peter writing at and from Babylon, doth yet handle no point concerning the seat and rule of Antichrist there. Which plainly sheweth that Antichrist should reigne, not in materiall; but in mysticall Babylon. Thus they have gotten it allowed, that Rome is Babylon: but it still remaines to prove, that Peter was at Rome when he was at Babylon.
The Apostle sayes that Marke was with him, 1 Pet. 5.13. My sonne Marcus saluteth you. Now Marke is said to be constituted the first Bishop of Alexandria in Aegypt; where hee was put to death, and buried, Nicephor. But these adversaries affirme, that Peter was at Rome five and twenty yeares: now if Marke kept his Episcopall seat in Alexandria, how could he be with Saint Peter at Rome? Who can untie this knot? Admit that Peter was at Babylon; and then Marke might easily be with him; for both those Cities were in Aegypt.
Divers have opinioned that Peter died at Ierusalem, by warrant of that place, Matth. 23.34. Some of them shall yee crucifie: Yee, that is, the Iewes. Now if any of the Apostles were crucified there, it must be Peter: for none of the rest was crucified in Ierusalem.
Lastly, it cannot be proved, that Peter was at Rome, at all. For first, Paul foureteene yeares after his first comming to Ierusalem, found Peter there: as it is undeniably evident, Gal. 2.1. and 9. At which time they celebrated that Apostolicall Councell, Act. 15. Giving the right-hands of fellowship, that Paul should preach to the Heathen, and Peter to the Circumcision. If any say, that Peter came from Rome to the Councell; what time then had he to visite Antioch, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia, to all which Churches he preached? 2. When Saint Paul wrote his Epistle to the Romans, Saint Peter was not at Rome: otherwise he would not have forgotten so great a Pillar in his liberall salutations. Chap. 16. He mentions many, but no word of Saint Peter. 3. When Paul came to Rome, Peter was not there: he sent Epistles from Rome, and many commendations from the Brethren: as appeares, Col. 4.10. Philem. ver. 23. but no remembrance from Peter. If Peter had beene at Rome, Paul would not have forgotten to send greeting from him. Yet more plaine, 2 Tim. 4.11. Onely Luke is with me: then Peter was not there. Ver. 16. At my first answer (...) man stood to me: had Peter beene there, he would not have forsaken Paul. 4. It was fitter for Peter to be at Babylon, (for Gal. 2.7. The Gospell of Circumcision was committed unto him) that he might follow the Countries most frequented with his own people.
I conclude this point; if Peter received the oracle of his death so neere, at Babylon; he must fly over seas and mountaines if he died at Rome. But howsoever, the Romists will have it so: and rather than not domineere over all the world with the
 Chaire of Peter at Rome, they will sinke downe to hell with cursed Babylon. Albeit S. Iohn Lateran chalengeth Peters head, Poytiers in France his nether jaw with the beard on it; Triers many of his bones, Geneva part of his braine, which was found to be a Pumice stone; yet still Rome must have his body, and boast of his Sepulcher. Let them have it without our envie, so long as we keepe the true and only Head, the LORD IESUS CHRIST.
Now to speake to our selves more usefully: howsoever our Apostle had some speciall premonstrance of the nearenesse of his end, yet this is not common. So had Aaron, Num. 20.26. Aaron shall be gathered to his people, and die in Mount Horeb, Deut. 32.50. Moses knew that he should die in Mount Nebo. Luke 2.26. Simeon had a revelation by the Holy Ghost, that hee should not see death, before hee had seene the Lords CHRIST. Though old age and consumptions be Prognostica and indicia vitae brevitatis; Certaine signes and forewarners of approaching death: yet the condition, manner, and houre of our departure; is alwayes kept secret from us.
Howsoever, it is observable that this Apostle died in a good age; an old man. Ioh. 21.18. When thou shalt be old, thou shalt stretch forth thy hands. Long life is given as a blessing to such as preserve obedience. Honour thy father and mother, that thy dayes may be long in the Land. Prov. 3.16. In the right hand of wisdome, is length of dayes. But disobedience shortens our time. Psal. 55.23. The wicked men shall not Dimidiare dies suos; live out halfe their dayes. Psal. 109.8. Let his dayes be few. Eccles. 7.17. The sinner shall die, Tempore non suo, before his time. It was threatned to Eli, 1 Sam. 2.32. that there should not be an old man of his house. It is not evermore a curse to be barred of old age. Iosiah, whose name is sweet, as musike at a banquet of wine, died young, that he might not see the evill to come. A sonne of wicked Ieroboam was promised this for a favour, because there was found in him some good thing toward the Lord, 1 King. 14.13. It is a mercy, when the Lord takes away his children so young, that they be neither affected with the evill of action, nor afflicted with the evill of passion. A man lives too long, if untill Non desideratus, that no bodie desires him to live any longer. The world is soone weary of an old man, especially of an old Minister. Can he no longer answer their expectation? turne him out of his place: this is their mercy. The Levite might not serve after fifty: what then, must he lose his maintenance? no, he had the same provision still. A man will not cast away his Dogge being old, because he hath done him service.
Let not the young Minister despise the old: when one said to his friend, while he was looking on an old man; You see not Hominem sed umbram, not a man, but the shadow of a man: it was answered, that an old mans shadow was oftentimes better than a young mans whole body. Athanasius was very old: yet upon his shoulder, our Mother the Church leaned, in her sharpest persecutions, to take her rest. Nor yet let the old despise the young. The Spirit of God is not bound to age, nor is wisdome tied to yeares. It is not with senses, as it is with wines, the older the better. There may be a young man of sixty, and an old man of twenty yeares. Young David may excell his teachers: Daniel was a young Prophet, Salomon a young King, Samuel a young Priest, Iohn a young Evangelist, Aquilinus Discipulus; Timothy a young Bishop, Timothy was so young, that Paul cals him Son: yet Timothy was acquainted with Christ, before Paul was acquainted with Timothy. 2 Tim. 3 15. He knew the Scriptures from a childe, which made him wise unto salvation through faith which is in Christ Iesus. Yet Paul is called his Father; first, because hee did instruct him more perfectly: so they were called the Sons of the Prophets, whom the Prophets taught. And because he did minister to Paul, as to a father. Now though he was Aetate filius, tamen dignitate Episcopus; For age a son, yet for dignity a Bishop. Some say he was chosen to such a place, Ob penuriam temporis; but they manifest penuriam ingenii. No, saith Ambrose; Iuvenis ille nil juvenile habuit; That youth retained no youthfull humours. A young man with his undowned chinne, whose face hath not yet discovered to the world of what sex he is; may bee old in the gifts of the Spirit. It is an old proverbe; Cucullus non facit
 Monachum; A well shooted beard striving for length with the cassocke, makes not a Priest. Ministers must be young before they be old: Ordinate ad ordinem, non saltando, sed ascendendo; proceeding orderly, not by jumpes, but by degrees. First, they are tried with a lesse charge: For, Qui non bene regit naviculam in fluvio, non reg^^ navem in oceano; He that rules not well a small vessell in the river, trust him not with a ship in the sea. A young man may often say, My youthfull affections are dead, and I live; when an old man shal have passed many yeares in the world, and yet is scarce a day old in Christ.
Now seeing I am fallen upon the point of old-age, let me consider two things: the miseries by nature incident, and the comforts by grace accident to it.
The miseries are many, partly mentall, partly corporall. Mentall are the worst: Sordities, ira, nummorum copia mira: His natura senis tribus est infecta venenis. They will covet, as if they were to begin a new race of foure-score yeares. Quo minus via restat, eo plus viatici quaerunt; The lesse journey they have to goe, the greater provision they make. Plautus quoteth it as a wonder, to see an old man bountifull: Benignitas hujus sicut adolescentuli est. Horat.Multa senem circumveniunt incommoda; vel quidQuaerit, and inventis miser abstinet, ac timet uti. Many miseries wait upon old men: first, they greedily seeke, and then they miserably forbeare, what they have found. Ignorance and Arrogance meet in unsanctified old age. For Ignorance, Hosea 7.9. Gray haires are here and there upon him, yet ^e knoweth not. Senescit, being cut into two words, is quasi Se nescit, or nescit se: as if Senescere, were all one with Se nescire. For Arrogance; it takes away wisdome from the young, and all true knowledge, as if they were weifts and strayes, proper onely to it selfe, as Lord of the soile; and conjures all learning into the circle of its owne night-cap. This is the first and the worst misery of old age; when a man is just come backe againe to a childe. When he is only Laudator temporis acti, se puero; praising the ancient times so vehemently, as if hee would sell them, and forgetting the present dayes to use them.
Corporall miseries are innumerable; Morbusque est ipsa Senectus; Even old age it selfe is a disease. Sometimes it hath beene without any great decay of senses. It is said of Moses, Deut. 34.7. When he was an hundred yeares old, his eyes were not dimme, nor his naturall force abated. So Ioshua said of himselfe, Iosh. 14.11. As yet I am a^ strong this day, as I was when Moses sent me. Eccles. 46.9. The Lord gave also strength unto Caleb, which remained with him unto his old age. But the strength of old age is not a certaine and infallible argument of Gods favour: his grace is not to be sought in outward blessings. Most commonly it is a feeble estate: Eccles. 12.5. The very Grashopper is a burden to it. Even the old man himselfe is a burden, Vxori, natisque, sibique; to his wife, to his children, to himselfe. As Barzillai said to David, 2 Sam. 19.35. I am fourescore yeeres old, and can I discerne betweene good and evill? Can thy servant taste what I eat? Can I heare any more the voice of singers? Old age, we say, is a good guest, and should be made welcome; but that hee brings such a troope with him; blindnesse, aches, coughes, etc. these are troublesome, how should they bee welcome? Psal. 90.10. Their strength is labour and sorrow: if their very strength, which is their best, be labour and griefe; what is their worst? Hast thou Senses? use them to Gods glory: hast thou eares? heare: eyes? reade: tongue? pray: hands? worke that which is good. Vse thy members while thou hast them, because they will faile. Are they defective? be patient, and say with the Prophet, Non sum melior patribus meis; I am not better than my Fathers. Art thou blinde, and canst not behold something thou wouldest see? yet for amends, thou escapest something thou wouldest not see. When Iulian upbraided a Bishop being blinde; Why doth not the Galilean helpe thee; he answers, I am glad that I am blinde, and so cannot see thee the Monster of men. All these infirmities bring us to the grave, but wee shall leave them there. Thou sayest, this stitch will bring me to my grave, yet shalt thou
 then bid it farewell: thou shalt rise without gowte or blindnesse or any other imperfection. Doest thou feele a declining of thy senses by age? know that death cannot be farre off. Death is as neare to the young, as to the old: here is all the difference: death stands behind the young mans backe, before the old mans face. Senibus mors est in januis, Iuventuti in insidiis, Bern. Iuvenes cito mori possunt, Senes diu vivere non possunt. Young men may soone die, old men cannot long live. They must goe speedily; that they may goe comfortably, let them make sure to themselves the favour of Christ.
Thus much of the Inconveniences, now of the comforts of old age: which are Scientia Christi, and conscientia bene peratae vitae; the true knowledge of CHRIST, and the comfortable remembrance of a good life spent in his service. Let us be sure to live bene, well; no matter Quam diu, how long. Let us not be greedy of old age, but say? Here am I, let him doe with me as seemeth him best. God will not judge us how long, but how well, we have lived, Hieron. But betwixt him that hath lived twentie yeares, and him that hath lived twentie score yeares, what is the difference? Nisi quod senex magis onustus peccatorum fasce proficiscitur: unlesse that the old man goes away more loden with the burden of his sins, Sen. One man eateth more, another lesse; what matters it, when either is full? He drinkes more, I lesse; but neither of us thirsts. Ille pluribus annis vixit, hic paucioribus; quid refert? Si tam illum multi anni beatum fecerunt, quam hunc? That man hath lived many yeares, this man fewer; what is the difference? If the few yeares of the one hath made him as blessed, as the many yeares of the other? Looke rather to the goodnesse of thy life, than to the length: Longum aevum habuerunt plurimi, pauci faelicem, Sen. Ante senectutem curavi ut bene vivam, in senectute ut bene moriar. While I was young, my care was to live well: now I am old, my care is to die well.
Old age may be good three wayes. Naturally, when it is accompanied with sense, and not overtaken with decay of those necessary Organs. Barzillai had an old age, but not a good old age. Morally, when it is led by the line of vertue; when Iustice hath balanced it, fortitude quickened it, Temperance dieted it, and Charity quieted it. Constitution and countrey may make it naturally good: but it is then morally good, when a man likes it so well, that he would not wish it to begin againe. Spiritually good; and this is best when a man can looke both wayes: backward with comfort to his life past, forward with joy to his reward to come. Pulchrum est ante obitum consummari vitam.
Will you know when old age is a blessing? principally, when a man hath sure handfast of CHRIST; as Simeon. He desired not to die sooner, he desired not to live longer: Nunc dimittis, now Lord send away thy servant in peace. It was promised Abraham, Gen. 15.15. that he should goe to his Fathers in peace, and be buried in a good old age. Now there is no peace without CHRIST: who ever dies in peace, he dies in CHRIST the Prince of peace. Abraham died many hundred yeares before Christ was borne; yet Ioh. 8.56. Abraham rejoyced to see my day: he saw it, and was glad: he saw him with the eyes of faith. Gen. 25.8. Then Abraham gaue up the ghost, and dyed in a good old age, an old man and full of yeares. There is Mortis facilitas, aetatis faelicitas, vitae satietas: He gave up the ghost, willingly surrendred it; it was not rent from him; there is the easinesse of death. In a good old age, not tempest-beaten with troubles, and wearied out with vexations; there is the happinesse of age. An old man and full of yeeres, like corne ripe and white for the barne of joy; there is the fulnesse of life. When a man is assured of peace in heaven, he is then, Satur dierum full of dayes.
Againe, when a man is old in knowledge and obedience, his age is blessed. Prov 16.31. The hoary head is a Crowne of glory, if it be found in the way of righteousnesse, If we may say of it, as Boaz of Ruth, Ruth. 3.10. that it is better in the latter end, than at the beginning. The Israelite gathered every day a Homer full of Manna: but on he day before the Sabbath two Homers full. Be gathering in youth every day a
 little; but in old age twice so much, because thy Sabbath is neere. Old men are busy to gather goods for their posterity, but their fittest employment should be to gather grace for themselves. It is thy last time of gathering, therefore plie it. Gen. 18.12. As Sara said, Shall I lust now I am old? So shall I covet now I am old? shall I be drunke now I am old? shall I lie now I am old? Those courses are reprovable in youth, damnable in age. The gray head is a shame, if it be found in the way of wickednesse. As our bodies decrease in strength, our soules must encrease in grace: mending the unsoundnesse of our limbes, with the soundnesse of our lives: recompencing a weake body with a strong faith. No marvell if thy Ages reverend flood ebbes into aire, when thou art old, not good! where thy morall corruption is greater than thy mortall corruption: and the conscience is more rotten than the carcase. It is a common saying; He that will be old long, must be old while he is young. Expresse the sobrietie of age in thy youth, that the remembrance of thy youth may sweeten the bitternesse of thy age. A young Saint, an old Angell? So then let us spend our life in the thriftinesse of grace; that when youth hath ended infancie, age ended youth, and death ended all; we may be young againe in heaven. Into which eternall doores old age shall never enter: but every body shall be made young for ever, strong for ever, healthfull for ever, beautifull for ever; fashioned like to the glorious body of Christ, and in that glory bee preserved for ever and ever.
Even as our LORD IESUS CHRIST hath shewed mee. I am still in the same text, and not out of the same subject; mortalitie: to teach you a comfortable deposition of your Tabernacle. Oh that you would heare me so well this once, that of the same matter you need not heare me againe. Let me encourage your attention thus farre, that in this very Theme, as Seneca said in his travells, I shall be Semper novus; alwaies new. Peter had a revelation concerning his death: somewhat was told him of the time of his death, somewhat of the manner, somewhat perhaps of the place. Yet by no collection is it found, that he knew for time the day; nor for manner, the direct qualitie and kind; nor for place, punctually such a space or plot of ground. He knew much, we are not allowed it: therefore ought we to have the more preparation, by how much we have the lesse revelation. For methods sake, that I may not lose your attention, nor your attention lose me; that we may draw all to a Summe; Consider somewhat for substance, somewhat for circumstance. For substance, that Abeundum est nobis, we must die: for circumstance, Vbi, Quomodo, quando; How, Where, and When. To all these we resolve an answer like the Grand Iury: to the former we say, it is Billa vera: for the other we give up an Ignoramus. We know that we must depart; this is a true Bill: we know not how, where, or when; this is our Ignoramus.
For the Resolution; men must die; and the Apostle calls death the Dissolution of life. For the marriage of the soule to the body is the bond of life, the dissolution of this bond is death. This divorce must be suffered, one husband must be lost: happy are we if we find another in heaven, Iesus Christ. Morieris, non quia aegrotas, sed qui vivis; saith the Philosopher. Thou shalt die, not because thou art sicke, but because thou art alive. Cui nasci contigit, mori restat, Sen. He that comes into this world, must goe out of this world. It is no new thing to die, for life it selfe is nothing else but a journey to death. Quicquid ad summum pervenit, ad exitum properat. Whatsoever hath aspired to the highest, must descend to the lowest. Hebr. 9.27. It is appointed unto men to die once: it is a Statute-law decreed in the high Parliament of heaven. God so threatned Adam, Gen. 2.17. In the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shal^ surely die. But Adam lived above 900. yeares after? yet was there no delay nor evasion of Gods doome; for he presently became mortall, and fell into a consumption, that never left him till it had brought him to the grave. Quisquis queritur hominem mortuum esse, queritur hominem fuisse, Sen. Whosoever complaines that a man is dead, complaines that he was a man. Thus for the certaine substance; now for the uncertaine circumstance.

We know not the manner of our departure, or how we shall die. Vnus intro^tus, innumeri exitus. There is but one way to come into the world, a thousand waies ^o goe out. What matters it, whether by an enemies sword, or by the fit of an ^gue, seeing we must depart. Iob compares mans life to a Flower, Esay to Grasse, ^ohn Baptist to a Tree, the Preacher to a Passenger. Is it any matter, whether the flow^r be crop'd, or the grasse mowen, or the tree hewen downe, or where the passenger shall lye next night? We know whither our spirits shall goe, we know not in what manner our soule shall be taken from us. This happens alike both to good ^nd bad: wicked Ahab and good Iosiah are both slaine by war: The pestilence takes ^way the righteous as well as the sinner: wisemen may die the death of fooles. Both ^ravell together in this Thorow-fare of life, both lodge in one Inne of the grave: ^ut in the morning their waies part: Partes ubi se via findit in ambas.
We know not the place: Rachel dies in the high way, as Iezabel in the streets: ^aul and Ionathan are slaine in one battell, and their bodies hung up as trophees of a ^loudy victorie. In the mathematickes, the circle is equally distant in every point of it from the Center. Conceive earth to be this worlds Center, Heaven the Circumference: now from all points of this center, there is an equally distant remotenesse or neerenesse, to the circumference, heaven. Let a man die in England, in Spaine, in Turkey, or in the Indies; his body is neither neerer nor further off from heaven. Say the bodies of men are entombed in the entralls of beasts, or mawes of fowles, or their dusts scattered on the waters; yet can no dust bee concealed. What hurt was it to the Christians in the sacke of Rome, whose bodies lay unburied in the earth, when their soules were received to heaven? Nec vivorum culpa, qui non potuerunt sepelire: nec mortuorum poena, qui non potuerunt sentire, Aug. The living committed no sinne, in that they could not bury them: the dead felt no paine, though they were not buried. The Cynicke desired to have no other Tombe over him but heaven; he admired that for the most glorious monument. Another replied, but then the fowles of the aire will devoure thee: he answered, shall I feele them? No; then Vbicunque moriar, me tegat coelum; wheresoever I die, let earth be the pavement, and heaven the roofe of my Tombe. But onely for the livings sake, there was no Sepulcher like it. If there was a place, which could hide from God, I would not die there. But Psal. 139. On the earth, in the sea, in the darke, in hell, in heaven; the Lord is every where: all places are specified but Purgatory; because none are found there. Be therefore alwaies ready; Incertum est quo loco mors expectat te, itaque tu omni loco expecta mortem. Thou art not sure in what place death lookes for thee, therefore in all places doe thou looke for death. It watcheth us like an Enemie, Insidiando: when it comes, we may say as Ahab to Eliah; Hast thou found mee O thou mine enemy? Thou hast found mee, and wilt conquer mee; but Thankes bee to God, who giveth us the victorie through IESUS CHRIST our Lord.
We know not the time. Christ saies that the sonne of man himselfe knowes not the day of judgement. What, doth not CHRIST know it? Without question he knew it as he is God; though as man he might be ignorant of it. For he said, none knowes, No not the sonne of man; but the Sonne of God knew it. He knew it not, not because he could not, but because he would not. Ne illam molestius feramus ignorantiam, quae cum Christo and Angelis nobis communis est, Bern. That we might contentedly beare that ignorance, which is common to us with CHRIST and the Angels. But men sicke of lingring consumptions doe know their time: No, but still they languish in hope, and know not the houre of their dissolution. But HeZekiah was promised the addition of fifteene yeeres; therfore he knew how long he should live. We answer, this was by speciall revelation, and who else was so ascertained? Yea, rather this was a conditionall and limited promise, depending on the order of second causes. For Hezekiahs body was not impassible, nor incorruptible: but God did repaire the defects of nature, and extend it to the possibility of
 fifteene yeares; upon the implicite condition of repentance. No man knowes his appointed time. Ne inquiras prohibitum, ne perdas concessum. Inquire not after that which is concealed, lest thou lose that which is granted. Tutum est nescire quod tegitur: a man may safely be ignorant of that, which he is not bound to know. They are wretched men, that runne to Sooth-sayers for such predictions: Periculosa disquisitio, when God hath locked it up, to offer to picke it with a false key. Some depart in youth, others in age: some fruit is plucked violently from the tree, other drops downe with mature ripenesse; all must fall. The corne is sometimes bitt^^ in the spring, often trod down in the blade, never failes to be cut up in the eare, whe^ it is ripe. Mori nil certius, quando, nil incertius. There is nothing more sure that death, nothing more unsure than then time of death. Moses and Aaron were certaine to die, and never to enter into Canaan: but they were not certaine when they should see Canaan from the mounts, and so die. It is a common fault, to run ill courses in health; and to allow themselves the time of a lingring sicknesse, to make ready for death: as if God were bound to give them so long warning. But he often disappoints them: and deaths properation, prevents their preparation. Iob 21.13. They spend their dayes in mirth, and in a moment goe downe to the grave. This was that Cosmopolites presumption, Luk. 12.19. Soule, eate, drinke, and be merrie: but he reckoned without his host. Corah was suddenly swallowed, Ishbosheth slaine a sleepe, 2 Sam. 4.7. The house fell upon Iobs children at a banket. Ananias and Sapphira were put out like a candle new lighted, and that in stench. Iob 24.24. They are exalted for a little while, and cut off as the tops of the eares of Corne. When the thought of death is furthest, the stroke of death is neerest. Cesar desired a suddaine death: as he desired, as he deserved, so he had it, Naturalists that love the avoidance of paine, and have no hope of future blessednesse, desire a suddaine dissolution. For my part, my prayer shall be with our Church. From battell, and murder, and from suddaine death, Good Lord deliver me.
Thus we see, the time is unknowen to us, whether in youth or in age: often i^ youth the bud is cropped. Homo per nativitatem viret in carne, per inventutem c^descit in flore, per mortem aret in pulvere; Greg. In birth we are greene in the bud, i^ youth we are white in the flower, in death we wither in the dust. Death like a fishnet catcheth at one draught, not only the growen fishes, but even the little frie. The Poets have a fable, that Death and Cupid lodging together at one Inne, interchanged each others arrowes. From that day to this it comes to passe, that sometimes old men dote, and young men die. Sic moritur Iuvenis, Sic moribundus amat. Therefore let me be bold with CHRISTS words, Luk. 7.14. Young man, I say unto thee, Arise: raise up thy soule to grace, thou knowest not how soone thy body shall fall downe to dust. Perhaps thy imagined wisedome makes thee beleeve, that thou art early ripe: and so like a blossome that prevents the spring, thou wilt dare to looke forth upon Februrary sunne, but thou mayest soone be nipped with a frost. And if youth be but so weake a taper, quickly put out by death; how carefull should parents be, with what oile they supply those young Lampes! Vsually they provide faire estates for their childrens bodies, nothing for the estate of their soules: to shew that they are parents of their bodies, not of their soules. Zeuxes having artificially painted a boy, carrying grapes in a hand-basket: the birds came, as if they had beene true grapes, and pecked at them. Hereupon he was wondrous angry with himselfe and his art; saying, If I had painted the boy, which was the chiefe part of my picture, so well as I have done the grapes, which were but a by-accident; the birds durst never have beene so bold. Were parents as carefull for their childrens good nurture, as about their appendant trifles; those ravenous kites, evill companions, durst not venture upon them, could not so easily corrupt them.
For Age, then death is looked for: young men know they may die, old men know they must die. The youngest is old enough to die, the oldest too old to live long. Iuvenes mortem a tergo, senes ante faciem. There are three messengers of death;
 Casualtie, Sicknesse, Age. Hath not the first messenger spoke with thee? yet the ^econd. Hast thou escaped the second? yet the third will not faile. Am. 5.19. ^s if a man did flee from a Lyon, and a Beare met him; or went into the house, and a ser^^nt bit him. While a man runs from the Lyon, the Beare assaults him: if he scape ^^em both, yet death (that Serpent) will find him out. Child-hood is our mor^ing, middle-age our high noone, old age our evening, death our sun-sett. One ^ould have young men saluted with, good morrow, or welcome into the world: ^^en of midle age with good day: old men with good night, because they are going ^ut of the world. It is miserable for an old man not to bee prepared for death: ^eath shakes him by the hand in the palsey, yet no acquaintance? he hath one ^ote in the grave; and yet no thought of dissolution? hee is come to the thres^old of his long home; yet still worldly minded? But the good old man ^^inkes this life, like a throng in a narrow passage: the sooner out, the soo^er at ease.
Seeing our dissolution is so certaine, the time so uncertaine; the very mention ^f it bids us be prepared. Put not off your amendment; ne quod diu differatur, in per^^tuum auferatur: lest what you differre for a long time, God take away for ever. ^or it is just, ut moriens obliviscatur sui, qui vivens oblitus est Dei: that he who living ^orgate God, dying should forget himselfe. Many serve God, as they doe their ^^rvants, with Reversions, in ultimis diebus mortis: but he lookes to be served with ^resent obedience, in omnibus diebus vitae. Latet ultimus dies, ut observetur omnis dies: ^t dum semper ignoratur, semper proximus esse credatur, August. We know not our ^^st day, that we might watch every day: we cannot tell how farre it is off, there^ore let us beleeve it to be very neere. God allowes man a liberall time, a whole day: ^ow a day consists of 12 houres. Are there not twelve houres in the day? saith CHRIST. What enemies are wee to our selves, that of those twelve houres, which God allowes us, we allow our selves not one! Many men post off their con^ersion; and at twentie send Religion afore them to thirtie: then put it off to fortie: ^nd yet not pleased to overtake it, they promise it entertainement at threescore. At ^^st death comes, and he allows not one houre. In youth men resolve to afford them^elves the time of age, to serve God: in age they shuffle it off to sicknesse. When ^icknesse comes, care to dispose their goods, lothnesse to die, hope to escape, mar^yrs that good thought: and their resolution still keepes before them. If we have ^ut the lease of a Farme for one and twentie yeares, we make use of the time, and ^ather profit. But in this precious farme of Time wee are so bad husbands, ^hat our lease comes out before wee are one penny-worth of grace the rich^r by it.
They that have lived ill; quando anima in extremis labris, when the soule sits on ^heir lips ready to take her flight, then they send for the Minister, to teach them to ^ie well. But as in such extremity, the Apothecary gives but some opiate physicke: ^o the Minister can give but some opiate Divinitie; a cordiall that may benumbe ^hem, no solid comfort to secure them. Here is no time to ransake for sinnes, to ^earch the depth of the ulcer: a little balme to supple, but the core is left within. Let men repent while they live, that they may rejoyce when they die. You tell me that one malefactor went from the Crosse to Paradise: but we must not hide from you, ^hat God opened the mouth of one Asse: yet every asse is not thereby priviledged ^o speake. Let us be liberall on Gods part; He that truly repents one day before he dies, shall surely be saved. With greedinesse you heare this, but abuse it not: trust it, but trust not your selves. He that gives pardon to repentance, is not bound to give repentance to sinners. Be sure thou repentest, that one day before thy death: but hereof thou canst not be sure, unlesse thou repent every day. The Lord hath made a promise to repentance, not of repentance. If thou convertest to morrow, thou art sure of grace: but thou art not sure of to morrowes conversion. For three reasons God conceales from us the time of our death. 1. Because in nature,
 Terribilor morte timor ipse mortis, the feare of death is more terrible than death it selfe We know that we must die, to avoid all doubtes: we know not when, to qualifie our feares. 2. To preserve men from dispaire. Vt nec impii desperent, quasi (...) tempus relictum paenitentiae: nec boni, quasi longum tempus patientiae, Basil: That neither the ungodly should despaire, as if they had no time allowed for repentance: neither the faithfull be cast downe, because the time was too long of exercising their patience. 3. That we might be evermore armed with expectation, to encounter death. Because we know not when we shall die, let us learne with Saint Paul, to die daily. The worldling would weepe, if hee knew that he had but a moneth to live: yet hee leapes and sings, and securely rejoyceth, when perhaps he hath not one day.

Fleres, si scires unum tua tempora mensem:
Rides cum non sit forsitan una dies.

The Summe of all, is the certaintie of inevitable death. A mortall father ca^not beget an immortall sonne. If they that brought us into the world, have themselves gone out of the world, we may conclude our owne following. He that may say in life, I have a man to my father, and a woman to my mother; shall say in death, To corruption, Thou art my father: to the worme, thou art my mother, and my sister, Iob 14.17. There is not one in the cluster of mankind, but eodem modo and modo vi^ctus and victus, is liable to the common and equall law of death. Methushalem lived nine hundred threescore and nine yeeres; yet he was the sonne of Enoch, who was the sonne of Iared, who was the sonne of Maleleel, who was the sonne of Cainan, who was the son of Enos, who was the son of Seth, who was the sonne of Adam, who was the sonne of Dust. Aske the woman that hath conceived a child in her wombe: will it be a sonne? she answers, peradventure so. Will it be faire? peradventure so. Will it be witty? peradventure so. Will it be rich? peradventure so. Will it be long lived? peradventure so. Will it be mortall? yes, this is without peradventure, it will die. As the philosopher hearing that his sonne was dead, answered without astonishment; Scio me genuisse mortalem, I know that I begot a mortall man. Mans body, so well as the yce, expounds that riddle; that Gignit filia matrem, the daughter begets the mother: dust begat the body, and the body begets dust. Our bodies were at first strong Cities, but then by transgression we made them the Fortes of rebels: wherupon our offended Soveraine sent his Serjeant death to arrest us of high treason. And though for his mercies sake in CHRIST he pardon our sins; yet he suffers us no more to have such strong horses; but let us dwell in thatched cottages, paper walls, mortall bodies. Therefore Paul calls the body Our house; not such as God created: he may say of our bodies, as the Poet spake of his verses. Quem recitas meus est, o Fidentine, libellus sed ma^^ dum recitas, incipit esse tuus. Thy body Oh man! while it was holy and immortall, it was my worke: but now it is sinfull and mortall, it is thy worke. An old man is said to give Alexander a little Iewell; which he affirmed to be of this vertue. So long as it was kept bright, if it were put into the balance with the choicest gold or most precious stone, it would out-poise and out-value them all: but if it once fell into the dust, and tooke rust, it would be lighter and slighter than a feather. What meant the Sage, but to moralize to that great Monarch his owne Life: which being kept bright and healthfull, commanded the world; but once fallen to the dust, even Groomes would despise it. For Hares dare plucke dead Lyons by the beard. Luci^^ hath a fable, the morall is good. Menippus meeting Mercury in the Elisian fields, would needs know of him, which among all the ghosts was Philip that great King of Macedon. Mercury answers; He is Philip, that hath the hairelesse scalpe: Minippus replies, why they have all bald heads. Mercur. Then he with the flat nose. Menip. they all have flat noses. Merc. Then he with the hollow eyes. Menip. they all have hollow eyes: all have naked ribbes, disjoynted members: all are carcases. Mercur. Then Menippus, in death there is no difference betwixt the King and the beggar. Mors dominos servis, and sceptra ligonibus aequat: Dissimiles simili conditi^^
 ligans; Men upon earth, as in the game at Chesse, supply different places: one is a King, another a Queene, another a Bishop, another a Knight, another a Pawne. But when the game is done, and they are shuffled into one bag; all are alike.
What meane worldlings then to bee so covetous? Natura excutit redeuntem, sicut intrantem; In our birth wee had but swadling clouts and a cradle: in our death wee shall have but a winding-sheet and a coffin. Alcibiades bragges of his ^ands, Socrates reacheth him a Mappe; bids him demonstrate where they lye: alas hee could not finde them, nor scarce discerne Athens it selfe; it was so small a point in respect of the world. Ecce vix totam Hercules implevit urnam; The dusts of mightie Hercules can scarce fill a pitcher. The Philosopher said of Alexander; Yesterday the whole world did not content him; now ten cubites containe him. I will not deale so sparingly with you, yee landed-men. You shall have some land in death, and you can have no more; even so much ground, as will hold your carcases. Why doe you covet? Were you owners of more land, than ever the Devill shewed CHRIST; yet call no more yours but the grave. This is Terra mea, and Terra tua; My land, and thy land. Purchase there, where is true possession: or rather get that by faith which IESUS CHRIST hath purchased for you. Lay up your treasure in heaven. Quaenam est haec stultitia, illic reponere unde iturus es, and illuc non praemittere quo iturus es? What folly is it to lay up our treasure there, whence we must depart: and not to send it afore thither, whither we must goe, and where we shall live for ever?
What meanes the Epicure so to pamper his body? A fat corps is but a fat supper for the wormes. 1 Cor. 6.13. Meat's for the belly, and the belly for meat's: but God shall destroy both it and them. Let us eat to live, not live to eat. When we have devoured the most delicate creatures, the wormes shall devoure us.
What meane the proud? the soles of their feet must not touch the ground: they flie betwixt heaven and earth on their foure wheel'd wings. But they must have other Porters,; to the grave they must. After all their painting, the earth will spoile their colours. The fairest woman, that sayes, Touch me not, I am of purer mould; as if Praecordia Titan de meliore luto finxit; must lye blended in the forgotten dust with the poore bond-woman.
What meane we all so foolishly to forget our latter ends? Adam could call all the beasts by their names, but his owne name he forgot; Adam, the son of earth. Such fooles are we, to forget our owne names; that we are the sonnes of Adam, the sonnes of dust. Stultum est timere, quod non poteris vitare; It is no wisdome to feare that we cannot avoid: Mortem non effugit, qui etiam distulit, Sen. I shall die neither the first, nor the last: Omnes qui me non antecedunt, sequentur; They that goe not before me, shall follow me. Hac conditione intravi, ut exirem; Vpon this condition I came in, that I should goe out. We must fall, and as the tree falls, so it lyes: and commonly it falls to that side, which is most loaden with branches and fruits. They that abound most with the fruits of obedience, shall fall to the right hand, life; eastward, to salvation: they that abound with wicked actions and affections, to the left hand, death; westward, to destruction.
What meane the faithfull to be so much cast downe in the apprehension of death? To them it is, though Poena nascentis, gloria renascentis; The punishment of the first birth, yet the glory of the second birth. Non obitus, sed abitus: Not a dying, but (...) departing. Praemissa est anima, amissa non est. Durius seponitur, melius reponitur. Life is with some sorrow laid off, but with much joy laid up. Though every man ^hat hath his Genesis, must have his Exodus: yet Profectio est quam putas mortem; It ^s but a journey, which they call a death. 2 Cor. 5.1. Paul calls this life an Earthly House, Heaven a new Building. Death is but the pulling downe of at old house, that (...) new one may be set up. Or as a Clocke that is growne rusty, is taken asunder by ^he makers hand; disjoyned wheele from wheele, and pin from pin: not to be lost, but to be repolished, and put together againe, that it may goe clearely. So Death
 doth pull the clocke of our life asunder, when it hath struck the last stroke of breath: wheele from wheele, limbe from limbe, joynt from joynt, member from member; all to dust and peeces. But then the omnipotent Maker takes it into his owne hands, sets it together againe at the Resurrection, and it shall goe well in glory for ever: bearing a part in those celestiall Chimes, which the blessed Angels, the Quoristers of Heaven, sing to the King of Kings. For Rom. 6.23. Though the wages of sinne be death; yet eternall life is the gift of GOD through IESUS CHRIST our LORD. Amen.



VERSE 15. Moreover, J will endevour, that you may bee able after my decease, to have these things alwayes in remembrance.

SEeing my life is so short, and with it my ministery must cease; therefore I will take advantage of the time, and yet againe remember you of these things. This I have done hitherto, viva voce, with my living voyce: but my care ends not with my life; I will strive that even after my death you may remember them. So often as you turne over the leaves of my Epistles, you shall (though not heare, yet) see me preaching to you these things. You shall heare mee while I live, and reade mee when I am dead. I die that spake these words, but the words spoken shall not die in your memories. As it is said of Abel; Defunctu loquitur. So it pleaseth GOD that I should preach to his Church even to the worlds end.
This is the Sense: for method of discourse, many things inherently naturall to these words, have beene pretractated on just occasion, Verses twelve and thirteene. I am loath to fall into a coincidence of argument, and therefore willingly abridge my selfe of some necessary matter. But to rest content with what is behinde, and to give you the gleanings of the former vintage: there are some scattering grapes, which well pressed may afford you a cup of good wine. First, the Apostle moves them to embrace his doctrine, because he is old, and hath but a short time to tarry amongst them. Then he comforts them, that he will strive to leave an impression of his Doctrine behinde him in their hearts.
The grave exhortations of old age are to be ponderously received. There is somewhat in the Person, that procures attention to the Doctrine. A reverend Bishop is heard Tanquam Pater Ecclesiae, as a Father of the Church, saith Augustine: his speech may be Brevis, sed gravis; short, but effectuall; leaving a deepe impression in the hearers. Saint Iohns short Sermon in his old age, [Little children, l^^e one another.] so warmed his Disciples hearts with the fire of charitie: that their head was turned into a Limbecke, and did distill downe water at their eyes. The same weight of doctrine doth not feele so waighty in a young mans mouth, as in the gravitie of reverend old age. Not that the truth of God depends on the regard of persons: but because mens affections sooner melt at his speech that is stuffed with experience; than at theirs who onely averre the theoricall truth. But for us, whether he be a young Timothie, or an old Peter, that tells us the truth in Christ; the Spirit of God worke in our hearts a faithfull obedience!

Well, I am old, and must leave you: yet I will leave that behinde mee, which shall remaine with you. In the whole Verse we finde two generalls: The Content, and the Intent: his Practise, and his Purpose: his Labour, and the end of his Labour: the thing he does, and the thing he seekes. I will endevour; there is his labour, practise, and the thing he does. That you may bee able after my decease, alwayes to remember these things; there is his purpose, the end of his labour, and the thing hee seekes. For the former.
I will endevour. I can doe no more, I must doe no lesse. Now a Ministers Endevour consists in three especiall things: he must endevour by learning, endevour by life, endevour by labour: none of these must be wanting.
The first thing required to this endevour is Learning. The Bishop of Traiectum in Germanie, said that hee would not admit Asses to holy Orders. One replied, that he must not now looke for Ambroses and Cyprians. He answered, Cyprianos non requiro, sed asinos non admitto; I doe not expect Cyprians, but I will not admit Asses. There are some that never knew, nor cared to know, the Schooles of the Prophets; yet they send themselves into the Harvest; they pen their owne commission. But sayes the Church; Quid agitis in meis, non mei? What make you in my worke, that are none of my servants? They are sonnes without a father: their owne creators, and owne creatures too. Matth. 22.12. Friend, how camest thou hither, not having a wedding garment? Quomodo intrasti, non habens vestem Sacerdotalem? How didst thou get into the Priest-hood, without having a ministeriall garment? Periculose docent, qui prius non didicerunt; They are dangerous Teachers, that never were learners. Dum discipuli veritatis non erunt, magistri erroris sunt; While they will not be ^chollers of truth, they become masters of errour. For all CHRISTS Faciam vos; I will make you fishers of men; Yet they went not presently out of the Boat into the Pulpit: Hee was three yeeres instructing them. CHRIST commanded them to stay at Ierusalem, till the Holy Ghost descended on them, Act. 2. They must not Simul recipere and effundere; not receive in; and poure out at once, Hieron. Heri catechumenus, hodie Episcopus. Like Davids messengers, they must tarry till their ^eards be growne: not Lapwing-breed, to runne away with the shell on their head. They must know their winds, ebbings and flowings, creekes and sea-markes, that will be Fishers.
Wherein consists this learning? Not in a theory of divers arts; but in the so^er use and discreet application of Divinity. Cant. 1.11. We will make thee borders of ^old, with studdes of silver. Divinitie is that border of gold, humane learning the ^tuddes of silver. A garment to have here and there a fringe, or button, or jewell, ^s comely: to be nothing but buttons is ridiculous. Quaero documenta, non ornamen^a; Give us lessons, not laces. When Salomon made preparation for the building of the Temple;1 King. 5.15. He had threescore and ten thousand that bare burdens; and fourscore ^housand hewers in the mountaines: there was hewing and knocking in the mountains. But when the House was a building, there was neither hammer, nor axe, not any ^ole of iron heard in it, 1 King. 6.7. The studie of arts must goe before, but not ^ee too busie in the edification. That which moves the conscience, and saves the ^oule, is the Word of GOD; yet attendant to this Queene, are certaine maids of ho^our; Artes. I cannot say they are commanded; I dare not say they are for^idden. Indeed a flourishing and meretricious eloquence puffed up with these, (...) unprofitable. GOD affects not Aulicismes, and Courtly termes. It is like a ^reat deale of painting in a Church-window, to keepe out the light. What be^efit is in a gilt armour? it is the armour that defends, not the gilt. Or to what ^urpose is a golden key, if it will not open the doore? If a wooden key will open (...) it is better for mee. Neither would I have the truth stripped of her ornaments, ^^d set barely forth; this is a kinde of treason. There is a learning, no man can be good Preacher without it. Matth. 13.52. Every Scribe instructed unto the king^^me of heaven, bringeth out of his treasure things new and old. The New Testament,
 and the old: to the broken hearts evangelicall comforts, to rebellious spirits legall menaces. New and Old, new before old: because the Gospell was promised, before the Law was printed.
Some thinke a Minister hath no great need of Learning, because he is to speake to the unlearned. But as, Hebr. 5.11. We have many things to say, and hard to be uttered; seeing you are dull of hearing. For, when for the time ye ought to be Teachers, you had need be taught againe the first Principles of the Oracles of God; and had need of milke, and not of strong meate. So, 1 Cor. 2.6. We speake wisedome among them that are perfect. Such is our unhappy exigent: if we preach learnedly, they thinke us mad: as Festus told Paul, Act. 26.24. Thou art beside thy selfe, much learning doth make thee mad. We seeme mad, but onely to those that are mad. As David seemed a foole, Sed Regi Achish, to King Achish, that was a foole. To common simplicity, Divinity seemes a kind of heresie; and Ministers a kind of Conjurers. It is with Learning as it is with Language: let it be strange, be sure it will be ridiculous. Hos. 8.12. I have written to them the great things of my Law, but they were counted a strange thing. Art hath no other enemy, to speake of, but Ignorance. Licinius can make a decree against Learning, though he want so much learning as will serve to write his owne name, and to subscribe to it. But not to torment him here, that is tormented enough elsewhere; we have too many ignorant censurers of Learning: they cannot understand us, they can with-stand us. No wonder! for who can distinguish right from wrong, that hath not either a Rule in his hand, or some notion of a rule in his head. Iudicare quis sit sapiens, vel maxime videtur esse sapientis, Tull. To judge who is a wise man, is only the office of a wise man. But Mat. 11.19. Wisedome is justified of her children. If it were not for this justification at home, poore Wisdome would speed ill. Either the Temporall Law would non-suit her for want of evidence: or the Ecclesiasticall would excommunicate her for want of compurgatours. Such fortune hath Wisdome among barren and unblest understandings; that the common opinion of learning is no more but this: It it a pretty shift for a younger brother to live by. This entertainment gives the world to her and her hand-maids, which hath most need of her and all her hand-maids. But, 1 Cor. 2.14. The naturall man receiveth not the things of the Spirit, neither can hee know them, because they are spiritually discerned. He knowes them not; there is a deniall of the Act: nor Can know them, there is an excluding of the Habite. Howsoever you judge, yet this is the truth: a man may as well saw downe a tree with his nailes, as be a profitable Minister without learning. You will not venture your estate with an unlearned Lawyer, nor your body with an unlearned Physitian; and will you venture your soule with an unlearned Pastor.
The next thing required to this Endevour, is an honest and religious life. If this have beene bad before thy calling, redeeme it now. Aeneas Sylvius having wrote wanton bookes; when he came to be bishop of Rome, accepted the name of Pius. Aeneam rejicite, recipite Pium; Forget Aeneas, and receive Pius. Though thou alter not thy name, yet alter thy nature. The Minister that spends himselfe like a Taper to light others, must not himselfe goe out with an ill savour. It is preposterous for a Divine to trouble himselfe too much with secular things. For there is commonly, Otium in sacris, Idlenesse in holy matters: where is Negoti^^ in profanis, Too much businesse in the worlds imployments. Mat. 5.19. He that shall break one of these least Commandements, and (though but by his example) shall teach m^^ so; shall be called least in the kingdome of heaven: Minimus, that is, Nullus, saith Theophylact. All in a Minister should be Vocalia; his very conversation must preach: a^ Noah was called a Preacher of Righteousnesse, because his life was an actuall Sermon. An innocent and unrebukeable Life is a silent testimony of a good Minister. Efficacius est vitae, quam linguae testimonium, Cyprian. A good worke perswades much more, quam ineffectum verbum, than an unperformed speech, Nazi^^ This was the cause why the Indians refused the Gospell brought by the Spaniards;
 because their lives were more savage than those Savages. Heaven it selfe was despised, for feare of those mens company there that did promise it. Common auditors receive not a doctrine in the abstract, onely minding what is taught: but in the concrete, with reference to the person that teacheth it. Therefore, if your credit be cracked, it is as bad as if your braines were craz'd: you may preach of heaven and hell untill Doomesday: and truth will bee truth in your mouthes, not in their hearts.
Tunc etiam fatis aperit Cassandra futurisOra Dei jussu non unquam credita. I doe not say that holinesse is an essentiall grace of a Minister: personall offences suspend not the power of the Holy Ghost. Suspend it not, I say, directly; yet may occasionally: through the infirmitie of simple men; who were not then simple men, if they did onely adhere to the doctrine. His life is bad, therefore his doctrine is false? O this is an harsh Non sequitur. Yet is it a thousand times better, that our good lives should prevent it, than our great learning be driven after to confute it. Psalm. 50.16. Vnto the wicked God saith, What hast thou to doe to declare my Statutes? Though it be truth thou preachest, yet thou art not fit to preach it. Christ reproved the Devill, even confessing truth, Marke 1.24. I know thee who thou art, the holy one of God. This was truth, yet saith IESUS; Hold thy peace, keepe thy breath to coole thy torment. The true Prophet is hee; Cujus in ore verbum vitae, cujus in more vita verbi; In whose mouth is the Word of life, in whose behaviour is the life of the Word.
Otherwise men seeme to propound doctrines impossible to be kept. Act. 1.1. Of all that Iesus did both doe and teach. It is said of Christ, that he did first Doe, and then Teach. The question to the Minister shall be at last; not how many bookes he hath read, but what life he hath led: not onely how he hath preached, but how hee hath lived. They must not be like scribbling schoole-boyes, that write faire with the fore-finger, and blurre it with the hind-finger. Indeed ranke hypocrites often maske in sheepes clothing: and as Physitians that would minister a draught of bitter potions to children, anoint the brimmes of the cup with honey, or some well tasted liquour. So these paint the exteriour apparance, that men may more easily swallow their drugs and dregs of heresie. But we may soone discerne these wolves in lamb-skins; for sheare them, and their wooll will grow no more. Yet must not the lambe put off his fleece, because the wolfe hath worne it. Lest he divert Dispensationem in dissipationem; his office of gathering the flocke together, into a scattering them asunder. Every Shepheard hath a Scrip, a Staffe, and a Whistle: so a Minister must have Maintenance to live on, Sanctimony to live by, Doctrine to enliven others. Worldlings that minde the purse, and neither preach fervently, nor live charitably; have lost the Staffe and the Whistle, and onely keepe the Scrip: Neither doth well asunder, all doe very well together: yet what ever becomes of the Scrip, keepe we a good Staffe, and a good Whistle: that we may out-preach sinne; out-live sinne; and be our reward in the hands of Iesus Christ.
The last thing required to perfect this Endevour, is constant Labour. There is nothing more wretched, than for a man to live without care, when he hath gotten a Cure: Sine cura, cum pervenerit ad curam, Bern. Matth. 9.38. Pray the Lord to send forth Labourers, not loyterers, into his Harvest. But there is no need to follow this point: You in this Citie will looke to it well enough, that your Ministers shall labour: you have here the law in your owne hands; if he will not labour, you will keepe him fasting. Yet it is to be feared, that as curious as you are to set us on work, and watch us with continuall labour; you rellish none of our fruits, you will be never the better for it. You send us a hunting, as Isaac sent his sonne: but when with Iacob wee say,Gen. 27.19. Sit and eat of our Venison, that your soules ^ay blesse no^: You question, how we came by it so soone? Wee answer; The Lord brought it to our hands. You look upon it, and say, It is good Venison, a good Sermon: but still you goe away fasting.
 Thus we are forced to labour in vaine. Esay 49.4. Wee have laboured in vaine, and spent our strength for nought. That wee may hereafter labour to purpose, Lord knit your hearts unto our lips; Prosper thou the workes of our hands upon us, O prosper th^^ our handy worke, Psal. 90.17.
Observe further, that all a Minister can doe, is but his Endevour: Paul can but plant, and Apollos water; it is God that gives the encrease. Nostrum est dare operam, D^i dare operationem. It is our part to endevour, the Lords to blesse it with successe. Preachers are called Saviours, Obad. vers. 21. Saviours shall come upon mount Sion: yet is there but one Saviour of us all, IESUS CHRIST. They are called Lights, Vos estis lux mundi: yet there is but one Light, Ioh. 1.8. Christ is that true Light, which lighteneth every man. They are called Reconcilers, yet Christ is the onely Reconciler, 2 Cor. 5.19. God was in Christ, reconciling the world to himselfe: and we have but the ministery of this reconciliation. Aliud est docere, aliud flectere; It is one thing to teach, another thing to convert. Well may the Minister move his tongue and his lips like Organ-pipes; but if there be no breath of Gods Spirit with them, it is to no purpose. Lift up your hearts to heaven: he hath a Pulpit above the clouds, that preacheth to the conscience. Act. 3.16. It is the Name of IESUS, through faith in that Name, which converts us: let none of his glory cleave to our earthen fingers. You thinke it enough to commend us: no, blesse the Lord, whose power is magnified in our weaknesse. When we have done all, it is but our endevour; we would have saved you. And be it to our comfort, our endevour shall be accepted. 2 Cor. 8.12. If there be a willing minde, it is accepted according to that a man hath, not according to that he hath not. Non secundum quod valuimus, sed quod voluimus, shall our reward be. We endevour to save you; doe you endevour to be saved: and the Spirit of God blesse both our endevours. That though the Minister part with his people on earth, they may all meet together in heaven.
That you may be able.] All is Propter vos, for your sakes: this preaching, this remembring, this writing, all propter vos, for you. 1 Cor. 3, 22. Whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, all are yours. You may say to your Ministers, as the Poet of Oxen; Sic vos non vobis, fertis aratra boves; They labour in the plough, not for themselves, but for your soules. 1 Thess. 1.5. Yee know what manner of men we were among you for your sakes:Ier. 6.29. (...): inter vos, propter vos. The bellowes are burnt, the lead is consumed of the fire: yet the Founder melted in vaine, for the wicked are not plucked away. He had burnt a hole in his bellowes, gotten the consumption of the Lungs, exhausted his spirits; and all for the people. Phil. 1.24. Neverthelesse, though it were better for me to be dissolved; yet to abide in the flesh is more needfull for you.
After my decease. Some have read, in stead of Dabo operam, ut post obit^m meum; Et post obitum meum: I will endevour even after my decease, that etc. So they give to Saint Peter, and other Saints, a provident care over us still. If they would extend it no further, then that the Saints in heaven pray for us on earth, wee would easily grant. Or that their Sermons once preached still do us good, we assent. What then? because we reverence their words, must we therefore worship their bodies, or relickes? Yet such is the fond collection of Fevardentius on this place. He urgeth it from, Rom. 10.15. How beautifull are the feet of them that preach the Gospell! If their feet be beautifull, how beautifull then are their hands and join^s, and tongues and lips! If the shadow of Peter, and the hand-kercher of Paul, could cure the sicke: why may not the body of that shadow, and the hand of that hand-kercher, effect as much? why should not these be worshipped? Wee honour their writings, how much more their relickes! This ridiculous stuffe needs no other confutation, but derision. There was read in the Nicen Councell; by the Monke ^^^phanus, out of the booke of Sophronius, this Legend. A Monke was continually troubled with a devill: at last being very of his guest, he did pray the devill in faire and friendly tearmes, to let him alone. (And was not this religiously done, to pray (...) the deville, Satan answered, that if he would promise and sweare to satisfie hi^ (...)
 one thing, he would forsake him. The Monke swore a deepe oath; then quoth the devill: Thou shalt never hereafter pray any more to such an Image of our Lady, holding her child in her armes. But the Monke was too crafty for the devill: for the next day he went and confessed himselfe to the Abbot, and he dispenced with his oath, upon condition that he should continue praying to that Image. And is not this an excellent proofe of praying to Saints, which is borrowed of the devill? But what is this to Relickes? yes, they that speake so much for the Image of Saint Peters head, what will they say for the head it selfe? Fevardentius addes; The dusts, the rags, the shooe, the naile of a Saint is venerable. This is the drunken doctrine of Rome, that adores the reliques, but regards not the lives of Saints. Neither Peter nor Paul shall teach them by their writings, they will bee taught by their relickes.
To have these things in remembrance.] The Apostles did not only preach to us vocally while they lived: but even now also exemplarily by their former conversation, and still doctrinally by their holy rules. The words of a Preacher die not with him; but live in the hearers hearts: and shall either convert them here, or convince them hereafter. The word that I have spoken,Ioh. 12.48. the same shall judge him in the last day. Thou hast forgotten such a Sermon; but this Sermon shall not forget thee, Zach. 1.6. The Prophets are dead: but the words that I commanded them to speake, did they not take hold of their fathers? If it take no hold in thee by due obedience, it shall take hold on thee by deserved vengeance. A Prophet comes to Ieroboam, and saies,1 King. 13.2. Oh altar, altar, thus saith the Lord; Iosiah shall offer the priests of the high places upon thee: and upon thee shall mens bones be burnt. That Prophet died, yet his word came to passe; Iosiah did accomplish this. 2 King. 23.17. and was shewed the Sepulcher of that man of God, which had proclaimed these things that he did. It is said of Samuel. 1 Sam. 3.19. that the Lord did let none of his words fall to the ground. Stephen foretold the Iewes of their future desolation by the contempt of CHRIST: they confute him with hard arguments, stop his mouth with stones: Stephen dies, but Stephens Sermon dies not. We tell the usurer, that the third generation shall rue all: we die, but our words come to passe. We tell the Impropriator, that his robbing God of his due, shall make his posterity like Achan, accursed: we die, but this saying is fulfilled upon them. We tell the proud officer, that his suites are the suites of Gehesi, cut out of bribes; and will engender a leprosie in his issue: wee die, but this event followes. Our Sermons shall bee thought on: even when wee are dead you shall remember them: God grant you may remember them to your comfort.
To conclude, we have Saint Peter still preaching among us. As it is said plainly, Act. 15.21. Moses was preached, by being read in the Synagogues every Sabbath day. While the writing of Peter is read, the voice of Peter is heard. The Apostles are dead, their holy Sanctions live with us. But now what entertainement have they found in our hearts? you shall see that by our lives. If you have digested those excellent rules, Lord what a change they will worke in you! you will be as men that dreamed, wondring at your former loves: your faire Herodias of this world will appeare a stigmaticke Gypsie. All the toile and cost you have beene to get riches, will appeare as ridiculous, as if a countrey man should annoint his axletree with Amber-greece; or a traveller should liquor his bootes with Balsamum. You that have runne by the Church as a Pest-house, would now continually waite at her doores. Then if you know that finger, which but itched to be accessary to any corrupt dealing, you would cut it off: and bite off that lip which but lisped out any equivocation: and plucke out those eyes, that lusted after adulterous mixtures; Let Religion be held a Fable, and Ministers false Prophets, if you find not in your selves a wonderfull change. But alas, where is this change? where is the fruit of such plentifull Preaching? There is a cursed devill that marres all, called covetousnesse. It was once said of this Iland; Luc^ Britaniad^ves, England is rich in ^ight; alluding
 to the long dayes, and short nights. It may truely be said of her in respect of the Gospell; that she is rich in the best light: but the darkenesse of this worldlinesse hath almost overcast it. This Land hath beene foure times conquered, say our Chronicles: but by the Chronicles leave I will adde a fift conquest. First, it was possessed by the Britaines, the Romans conquered the Britaines, the Saxons conquered the Romans, the Danes conquered the Saxons, the Normans conquered the Danes: but now covetousnesse hath conquered all. I know you have eares judicious enough; I heare you extolling the learned, praising Preachers, magnifying Sermons: yet and more, England gives preferment to her Ministers. But beloved, there is one preferment behind, and that most proper to Preachers; a preferment in the hearts of the hearers. Let the rest goe, give us this. Though I have no hope to attaine to any preferment in this world, yet I shall rest joyfully contented with this; if I may find preferment in your consciences.
That after my decease, you may have these things alwayes in remembrance.] There are two materiall points in this verse, which I durst not pretermit. The first is; what the proper intention of all Preachers and Sermons is; they are but Remembrances. The other is a method, how we may remember the Apostles preaching after their departure; which is by a diligent and frequent reading of their writings.
That you may beable to remember. There are two offices of the holy Spirit; Docere and suggerere, to Teach and to call to remembrance. Both are expressed. Ioh. 14.26. The Holy Ghost when hee comes, shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you. Suppose that the fundamentall articles of faith may be taught, within lesse than the terme of a Preachers life: which (curious speculations, and idle digressions, layed a side) I conceive not impossible. In the remainder what shall he doe? Either he must preach the same over againe, and so be a Remembrancer: or else be silent, and so be no Preacher. It is too true that, who hath not an Athenian eare? We long for novelties, and would have men preach not only Nove, after a new methode; but Nova, new doctrines. But Christs sheepe love not only his name, but the Eccho of his name: they hearken to his voice, and to every reflection of his voice. Were your sanctification absolute, continuall obedience to his Word would no more trouble you, than the everlasting aspect of his countenance doth trouble the Angels. Therefore answerable to the degree of your regeneration, must be the degrees of your attention. Likewise causeth liking. 2 Cor. 3.18. We with open face beholding as in a glasse the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image. If you be changed into that Image, you will desire to behold in the Gospell, as in a glasse with open face, that Image into which you are changed.
When we heare an excellent lesson on an Instrument, we call for it againe, and againe. If Gods peace dwell in our hearts, we love the songs of Sion rehearsed; Decies repetita placebunt. All our Sermons are but Rehearsalls of that old Sermon. Gen. 3.15. The seed of the woman shall breake the head of the Serpent. All the summe of the new Testament is but the repetition of that one Prophecie. What are the Father writings, but expositions of the Apostles? the Schoolemen, but abridgements of the Fathers? It is an usuall adage in the Schoole, that the soule of Augustine was pythagorically transfused into the body of Aquinas. The Iesuite is nothing else but a^ old Schoole-man bound up in a new cover. As one observed wittily; The Schoole-man is Philosophicall in his Theologie; the Iesuite. Theologicall in his Philosophy. As Augustine wrote of his bastard Adeodatiu^; Ego in illo puero prater delictum (...) h^bebam; I had no share in that boy, but onely sinne. So the Iesuites may confesse of their bookes; that there is nothing in them of their owne, but that which is had* The good stuffe is the fathers, onely the lace and pinking is their owne. As it is said of a Cimnell, that it is but bread upon bread: so we may say of the Iesuite; it is but Aquinas they licke him over, and let him goe. As Galaton painted Homer vomiting;
 reliquos vero poetas ea quae ipse evomuisset haurientes; and all the rest of the Poets licking up what he had vomited, Aelian.
All is but Remembrance: thrice in these foure verses doth our Apostle presse it; Paul, Phil. 3.1. It is not grievous to me to write the same things unto you: but for you it is safe; a most sure course. Vnregenerate hearts are termed Stony hearts: if they were brasen, they might be melted: if iron, they might be wrought: but hearts of stone must be broken with continuall hammering. The bloud of CHRIST must be often dropped upon these adamantine hearts to mollifie them. Gutta cavat lapidem, non vi, sed saepe cadendo. Deut. 32.2. My doctrine shall drop as the raine, and my speech distill as the dew. If all the world were Paradise, the sower might sow but once for all. Or if it were like the land of Albanoises, he need to till it but once in three yeares. Or if it were so fertile, as some soile is said to be under the Northerne Pole; he might sow in the morning, and reape in the evening. But sinne hath made the ground full of thornes, and much seed falls among these thornes, Matth. 13. Some is trampled under feete with the vulgar tract: other washed away with the common streame of the time: the rest pecked up by the fowles of the aire: there is need therefore to sow even often the same seed, and alwaies to put you in remembrance, not of other, but even of these things. We have brittle memories, weake retentions; therefore there is need or frequent and hearty incitations. Esa. 28.10. Precept must be upon precept: line upon line: here a little and there a little. The Scripture often ingeminates the same word, the samething, to give strength to the declaration of it. Esa. 28.7. They have erred, they are out of the way, through wine: the phrase is repeated seven times in one Verse; to vilefie drunkennesse. So Ver. 21. The Lord shall doe his worke, his strange worke: and bring to passe his act, his strange act. So Ver. 23. Give eare, and heare my voice, hearken and heare my speech; that the eare might bee throughly charmed. Psal. 62.11. God hath spoken once, twice have I heard it. Prov. 4.14. Enter not into the way of the wicked, goe not in, avoid it, passe by it, turne from it, and passe away. Prov. 31.2. My sonne, the sonne of my wombe, the sonne of my vowes. Ier. 22.29. Oh earth, earth, earth, heare the word of the Lord! Our Saviour thrice questioned Peters love, and thrice urged his dutie. Esa. 6.3. The Lord is thrice called Holy. Vanity is thrice called Vaine, to shew the vilenesse of it. In these and such like places, so fraught with repetitions; as it is with Numeration in Arithmeticke: the figure in the first place stands for it selfe; in the second place for ten-times it selfe; in the third for a hundred times it selfe. So when the Scripture condemnes a sin; as it proceeds in iteration, it riseth in aggravation.
Oh the infallible power of the word! heaven and earth shall passe, it shall never faile. Time may faile, speech may faile, audience may faile: but the matter of that abundant treasure shall never faile. It may be, Samuel knowes not Gods first call, nor his second, nor his third; yet at last, speake Lord, for thy servant heareth. It may be as Peter, Act. 10.16. in his vision; Arise, kill, and eate; he excuseth himselfe; Not so Lord, for I have never eaten any uncleane thing. But when this was done thrice, he is resolved. So when the Lords voice comes to us once, Arise and eate; it may be we excuse our selves; Not so Lord: but when it shall be spoken thrice, often; there is some hope that we will heare at last. It may be according to the signe that God gave Hezekiah, Esa. 37.30. This yeere yee shall eate such as groweth of it selfe: the second yeere, such as springeth of the same: but the third yeere yee shall sow and reape. So the first time we heare the doctrine of salvation, it is without profit; and it breeds no meditations in us but such as grow of themselves. The next time, such as spring of the former, thoughts of flesh and bloud. But yet the third time, it may worke us, to a more industrious cogitation of heavenly things. Paul in the 17. of the Acts; three Sabbath daies together handled one doctrine.
Good things are not wearisome in their continuall use. Our daily bread, though daily received, is daily craved. The light of the Sun would displease none but some lover of darkenesse, though it never went downe in our coasts. The perpetuall
 use of necessary things can never offend us though they never forsake us. Shall then the doctrine of life, the restorative of our fainting spirits, through the often repeating discontent us? No, here the eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the eare with hearing. Yet many use themselves in the hearing of beaten points, as they doe in drinking of wines: the first draught is for necessitie, the second for pleasure, the third for sleep. If they heare you once, that's enough: if a second time, that's too much; but if you come with the same a third time, fare you well, they must goe sleepe. When Paul preached at Antioch,Act. 13.42. The Gentiles besought him that those words might be preached to them againe the next Sabbath. (...); the very same words. Gal. 4.19. My little children, of whom I travell in birth againe, untill Christ be formed in you. Now the ripening and perfitting of a child in the wombe, requireth nine moneths at the least.
The time then, is not idly spent, that calls to mind fore-recited principles. If you aske us, Quousque eadem? how often shall we heare the same? we would to God there were no need of repetitions. But it is true what Elihu speakes in Iob.Iob 33.14. God speaketh once, yea twice, but man perceiveth it not. Yea, Ver. 29. God doth worke it twice and thrice, often times with man. Let us answer, as Augustine did the Donatists; being enforced to some iteration; Let those that know it already pardon me, lest I wrong them that are ignorant. It is better to give him that hath, than to turne him backe that hath not. If it were true of Homer, or may be true of any man formed of clay; One Homer never cloyed any man that read him. Then certainely it must be true of truth it selfe; One IESUS CHRIST in his Gospell never satiated any that read him. To conclude, for your part;Col. 3.16. Let the word of CHRIST dwell in you plenteously. The word of grace hath beene often offered unto you: whither it hath gotten house roome in you or no, I cannot tell. Perhaps it is but in the Nature of a Passenger to you; and your bosome the Inne to give it only a baite and away. Perhaps as the Levite, that sate in the streetes, and no man received him to house, Iudg. 19. it hath sounded in your Churches, but none bade it to dinner in their consciences. Perhaps it hath gotten admission by force, as they let downe the sicke man by the tiles of the house: the doores of your hearts being pester'd with a throng and crowd of worldly businesse. But now let it be no stranger, but like a brother dwell with you, never to depart: not in a corner, as if it were pinched for want of roome, but Plenteously: not with in-mates and chamber-fellowes, as lusts and evill affections; but in your hearts, alone. Yea in corde cordis, in the very heart of your heart. Psal. 40.8. The law is within my heart, in the midst of my bowels. Not unconceived or misconceived, unapplied or misapplied, but in all wisedome. And the God of all wisedome bring you by it to the end of your faith, even the deare salvation of your soules!
The other point is the method of our memorie, the meanes how we may remember them: which is indeed, frequently to read them. Ioh. 5.39. Search the Scriptures. Honour and admire the depth and secrecy of Gods word; yet faile not in thy diligence to search it. The Scripture is not like a kalendar, to die with them for whom it is written; but serves for us, in what climate soever we breath. What Paul wrote to the Romans, Corinthians, etc. serves also for the meridian of England. What is written, is ever ready to be read; if men would be at leasure to read it. CHRIST repells all Satans assaults with his owne weapon; It is written. Him discamus omnes arma nostra esse sacras Scripturas saith Caietan. From hence let us learne that all our weapons are the holy Scriptures.Cant. 4.4. It is like the Tower of David builded for an armorie, whereon there hang a thousand bucklers, all shields of the mightie men. There are shields for defence, and swords for offence. As Laban deceived Iacob in the night, giving him in stead of faire Rachel, bleare-eyed Leah. So Sathan in the darkenesse of our ignorance cozens us: onely the Scriptures day-light can discover Leah from Rachel. Cant. 5.12. His eyes are like the eyes of doves by the rivers of water. The dove sitting by the rivers, discryeth a farre off the shadow of the hawke,
 her mortall enemy: so either escapes by flight, or by hiding her selfe under the bankes, He that sits by the banke of these living waters, can discover the practises of Satan, by them he can sound him, and wound him. This is that Sword of the spi^it: not the woodden daggar of fabulous stories, nor the rusty scabberd of old Tra^itions; these are blunt: but the two-edged sword of the Spirit. Scriptum est, It is writ^en, this is the voice of CHRIST. Traditum est, it is by Tradition, this is the voice of Antichrist.
We appeale to your consciences, we feed not your eye with pictures and bables, ^or your eare with Legends and fables: no holy water from the font: but It is writ^en: This is that sacred water which is cast in the devills face, and stops his mouth. Rom. 15.4. Whatsoever things are written, are written for our instruction. Paul saies, ^he Scriptures are the peoples instruction: the Romists say, they are the peoples de^truction. Paul saies,1 Tim. 3.27. It makes the man of God absolute; the Romists say, it makes him dissolute. Paul saies,Cor. 10.11. They are written to admonish us: they say, they are writ^en so difficult that in a knowen language they rather seduceus. CHRIST bids ^s to Search the Scriptures, for there is eternall life: take heed, say they that forbid us, ^or therein is eternall death. Esa. 8.20. To the Law, to the Testimonie: no say they, Ad Traditum, ad decretum, ad Papam; To traditions, to decretalls, to the Pope. Psal. 119.105. Thy word is full of light: no say they, It is full of darkenesse. Thus ^hey cast a mist before mens eyes, that they cannot see their Iuggling. They blind ^he people, and buffet them: and then aske them, as the Iewes asked CHRIST; who smote them? These are they that compare the Scriptures to a nose of waxe, formable to what proportion the handler pleaseth. They make the Fathers their children, ^nd the ancient Doctors their puny Scholers; that they shall only speake what they would have them. It is nothing with them to abuse the sacred Writ. Non scrip^uras ad materiam, sed materiam ad Scripturas excogitant, Tertul. First they make their Sermons, and then looke for a Text. Thus that vision, Act. 10.13. Rise Peter ^ill and eate; is made warrant enough for the Pope to designe the killing of any Prince. Sometimes they cite the beginning without the end, as the divell served CHRIST; sometimes the end without the beginning: sometimes they take the words against the meaning; often they make a meaning against the words. So in summe, they doe not keepe the old Scripture, but coyne a new. Either they suppresse the word, or not expresse the sense: as if they would convey away the gold, and throw us the bagge.
But wee have the Scripture, let us read it: not the bare words onely, but the ^ense, The Scripture is like Ezekiels Roule, written within and without: without in ^he outward sentence, within in the inward reference. It is the golden pot of Man^a; the words, that is the golden pot: the sense, that is the Manna. It is not enough to take what offers it selfe at the first proposed; but to digge deepe. God that ^s rich in the veines of nature, is not poore in the veines of Scripture: excellent in ^he historie, more excellent in the mysterie. The Scriptures are not in superficie sed in medulla: non in verborum foliis, sed in radice rationu, Chrysostome. It is not the letters and words, but the sense and heart of the Scriptures, whereupon our faith depends. Revel. 1.3. Blessed is he that readeth, and they that heare. We must not onely reade, nor only heare, nor only meditate, but all. Lectio sine meditatione arida, meditatio sine lectione erronea. Reading without meeditation is fruitlesse, meditation without reading subject to errour. Meditate, to profite by reading: and read to rectifie meditation. Otherwise it may be said, as of the Delphicke oracle; Quoties legitur, negligitur: it is not soone gotten, than forgotten. Col. 3.18. Let the word dwell plenteously in you. The word must dwell in us, therefore the Bible must be in our house. It must dwell plenteously, therefore we must read it daily. The word doth dwell plenteously among us, God grant it may dwell plenteously in us. It is but a shift now, and will be no good answer at the last day; I am no Divine, this is none of my profession, to be busy with the Scriptures. Yet you would be Christ
 sheepe: butIoh. 10.4. his sheepe know his voice. You should be thought honest men; but is there any thing except Gods word can make thee honest, Mic. 2.7. You would not be thought uncleane: butPsal. 119 9. Wherewithall shall our way be clensed, but by the word? you would all be made blessed: but Blessed is he that delighteth in the Law of the Lord, and meditates in it day and night, Psal. 1.2. But o the profanenesse of this age! reading this booke is thought a fit of melancholy; deductions out of this booke, Paradoxes, and the Language of this booke a Shibboleth, which all the world besides pronounceth not. Alcibiades comming into a Schoole, and asking the Schoole-master for one of Homers workes, when he answered that he had none: he knitting his fist, smote him on the eare. If God come to visite thy house, and find thee without a Bible, the booke of thy faire profession; God shall smite thee thou whited wall, thou shalt feele the waight of his hand.Act. 28.2. The barbarians shewed Paul no little kindnesse, God forbid we should use him as a Barbarian. Other bookes, Histories and Poems, we read and remember: but let a Text of Scripture be pressed, and we say not;Act. 19.15. Iesus we know, and Paul we know. But Quis novus hic nostris successit sedibus hospes? The Fairy Queene we know, the Arcadia we know, the booke of Statutes we know, the Chronicles we know; but who are yee? The LORD of his infinite mercie, lay not this neglect to our charge: but bind the Bible to our consciences, and our consciences to the bible. That our faith may embrace the comforts there; and our eyes one day see the joyes wee have beleeved, in the blessed kingdome of IESUS CHRIST.



VERSE 16. For wee have not followed cunningly devised fables, when we made knowen unto you the power and comming of our LORD IESUS CHRIST, but were eye-witnesses of his Majestie.

THe Apostle proceeds to another argument, why these things should be fixed in their hearts: because they know that their labour is spent upon a certaine thing. What should more animate our constancie, than the infallibilitie of prosperous successe in our calling! If the Divinitie we preach, were built upon the fennish and hollow grounds of humane fancies. Wherein men shew more wantonnesse than wit, more wit than learning, more learning than conscience. Or if it were like some oracles of the heathen Idols which were aliquo modo vera, nullo ^^do certa; true some way, certaine no way: if the event did not answer the prediction, they would make the prediction answer the event. Or like the spurious, e^^cene, and bastardly equivocations of our Iesuites: who have a tricke to sweare and not to sweare, to lie and not to lie: and so are Saints and no Saints, holy in appearance, divells in existence. But we preach that which is indubiae fidei, which the faithfull doe feele on earth, and the unfaithfull shall feele in hell. The former find here, the truth of Gods mercies, the other shall find there, the truth of his Iustice. We bring no fables, but things knowen to us, and made knowen by us. That the LORD IESUS did c^^e in the flesh, dwelt with us in the flesh, suffered for us on
 the Crosse, rose againe from death. That he came not in weaknesse, but in power; with signes and great wonders: to the terrour of the bad, to the comfort of the good, confirmation of the weake, conviction of the proud, admiration of all. Neither received we this by tradition or heare-say, but were eye-witnesses of it: That which wee have seene and heard, we declare unto you. Therefore receive us, beleeve us; yea, receive ^he truth, beleeve the truth, the sound doctrine of Christ.
For method ^n tractation, con^ider three principall passages: A
Disclaiming of all fabulous mixtures with the sacred Truth. We followed not cunningly devised fables.Proclaiming of the vertue and Excellencie of Christ. When we made knowne to you his power and comming.Testifying of this, and that from the surest witnesse: Ab oculato testimonio; We were eye-witnesses of his Majestie.
These be the generall and doctrinall roots; there are some sub-distinguished branches, which we referre to their owne places.
We have not followed cunningly devised fables.] This is the thing he removes and disclaimes: (...). Arte compositas fabulas, according to Erasmus. Calvine ^ayes, it intends Subtile artificium. But because (...) doth not onely signifie a Fable, but also Orationem, a Rhetoricall discourse: the Apostle condemnes both poeticall fictions, and oratorie eloquence: the Sophistry of Logicke, the painting of Rheto^icke, and the meretricious figments of poetry; when they shall stand in competition with Divinitie, and presume of their owne power to helpe a soule to Iesus Christ. The embroidered orations of the one, and the gaudy tinctures of the other, are all out Fables. To omit those that regarded rather Sonum than Sensum; the cadence of ^anguage, rather than the substance of reason; the very best did but fabulize.
For the Philosophers, Coloss. 2.8. Beware lest any man spoile you through Philoso^hie and vaine deceit. First, it taught devillish things, as Magicke, Conjurings, a great ^art of Iudiciall Astrologie among the Pagans. This (...), a fable. Secondly, ^t taught doctrines; of the Eternity of the world, of the mortalitie of soules, of a Purgatory-fire out of Plato, of the Stoicall fate; all which diametrally oppose the ^ruth: all were fables. Thirdly, it taught principles, which in themselves, and their ^wne nature are true; but in Divinitie false. Such were these maximes; Ex nihilo ^ihil fit; Of nothing can be made nothing: this is true in second causes, but in respect of Gods omnipotence in the creation, a fable. For God can constitute something of ^othing, and reduce something to nothing, at his pleasure. So it is said; A privatio^e ad habitum non datur regressus; There is no returning from the privation to the ha^ite. This is true Physice, naturally: but if it be referred to the Resurrection, it is Fabula mendax; a lying fable. That a virgin remaining still a virgin, cannot conceive; ^ true in the ordinary course of nature; but to deny this to be once done by the su^ernaturall worke of God, is a Fable. Even the best of them in their most serious ^isquisition of heavenly things, were but as hounds, swift of foot, but ill of sent. They ^unted an object strongly, but tooke the wrong course; so spent their mouthes and ^ourses in vaine. Like wandring Empiricks, which make great ostentation of Cures ^rawne out in pictures and tables: but hee that comes to trie their skill, hath not a worse disease belonging to him, than the Physitian. If Seneca had had grace to his wit, he had beene the wonder of men. This praise he deserveth and hath; never any Philosopher wrote more divinely: he hath not lost his commendation, but he lost his ^opes. Certainly, as a worthy Divine said; If I had no other Mistresse than Nature, would wish no other Master than Seneca. But neither Athens nor Rome could teach his doctrine, but Ierusalem. In the end of his book De Tranq. he allows drunkennesse: his was a fable, fit neither for Philosopher to prescribe, nor honest man to practice.
For the Poets, their writings were but Fables. Innumerable such: whole bookes ^f Metamorphoses; it is all one, whole bookes of Fables. They did but fabulize an ^pish imitation of Gods truth. Must Abraham sacrifice his sonne to the GOD of ^eaven? Agamemnon must sacrifice his daughter to the Prince of darknesse. A Ram
 redeemes Isaac, so a Hinde redeemes Iphigenia: this was a cunningly devised fable. Noahs Floud shall be quitted with Deucalions Deluge. For our Noah they have a Ianus, for our Sampson an Hercules; for our Babel-builders, such as lay Pelion upon Ossa, Giants. If Lots wife bee turned to a Pillar, their Niobe is metamorphosed to a Stone. Let God historifie his Ionas, Herodotus will say more of his Arion. But saith Saint Augustine, we may justly suspect, that the Greeke tale of the one, mean^ the Hebrew truth of the other. The Devill strives to be Gods Ape. If thePsal. 18.13. Lord thunders from heaven, haile-stones and coales of fire: the Red Dragon also maketh fire to come downe from heaven in the sight of men, Revel. 13.13. God delivered his truth; Satan had his imitating fables, to seduce and divert mens mindes from the substantiall truth, to enervate the credit of goodnesse, and to amaze mens hearts with the counterfeits. Their writings were fabulous; they held it as their Patent with Painters, Quidlibet audendi aequam potestatem; an equall power to faine any thing. Some were scurrilous and obscene, most of them impious and prophane. They durst make their gods murderers, whore-masters, malicious, contentions, unjust, cruell. And Ovid confesseth; Ignoscite fasso, Sollicitor nullos esse putare deos.
But if all these were fables, and Peter disclaimes them in delivering the truth of the Gospell; why then doe Preachers make use of them in Divinitie? I answer. There is a difference betwixt the venome in a materiall, and the wholesome vertue. Saint Paul that condemned the one, often used the other: there may be honey in a nettle. As in the Law of a beautifull woman (Deut. 21.11.) that was a captive: he that desired her for his wife, was first to shave her head, and pare her nailes. Humane learning is the Grecians Helena, full of admirable beautie: but must not be admitted into the Divinity Schooles, till her head be shaved, and her nailes pared. But from her take her abominable figments; shave and pare off what is dead, idolatrous, voluptuous, fabulous, those superfluous excretions of sinne; of a Moabite make her an Israelite, and then accompany with her: she shall bring forth faire children to the Lord of Hosts. As Hosea tooke Gomer the daughter of Diblaim, a wife of whoredomes; who yet bare him Iezrael, the Seed of God, Hos. 1.4. They were adversaries to the truth: their ingenie was great, their industry greater, but against the truth, Aug. Therefore cut off Goliahs head with his owne sword, Hieron. The Word of God is the Bread of life, humane inventions but for glosse and ornament; hanging gold and jewels upon our apparell, as the Israelites did on their garments. Ab illis inginua animi delectatio, ab his sanitas and vita petitur. Those like the Aliptae, may put blood in our face, and mend our colour: this is the nourishment that maintaines our life. Without this, all that growes in the greene fields of Philosophie is but Toxic^^, banefull: mors in olla, there is death in it; the Word of God is that Salt of Elisha, that sweetens the broth. The wood of the Crosse is that wood of life, which rellisheth the Marah of Gentile-learning. Ierome was buffetted by an Angell, for studying Heathen Authors too much: and Saint Iohn had a booke of this given him to swallo^ downe. Yet I would not have men to raile downe arts, and use them as the King of Ammon did Davids messengers; to grub their beards, yea, their very chins. As if the captive woman were to be slaine, not shorne: as if Hagar stood Abraham in no staed for procreation, and all learning were but coozenage. Though they happily can reach to the top of preferment, and never climbe by the staires: seeme Giants in Divinity, while they professe warre to Philosophie; yet I would not have them teach their nurse to sucke. It is blasphemous to preach fables, for truth: but it is not honest^^ condemne all learning for fables. Moses rod was a common rod, yet it wrought great miracles. It is the rod that does the miracle, yet Moses must be learned to handle it.
The Sophistrie of Heretickes is another disclaimed Fable: for whatsoever contradicts the truth, is a fable. The Devill sped so successefully in disputing with our mother Eve in her estate of innocence, that he doubts not to prevaile over her ^^cent children. I speake not here of the Iewes Talmud, a bundle of most fabulous and ridiculous lyes, too vile for a Christian eare. Nor of the Turkish Alcoran, a fa^^^
 of foolish impossibilities: as the stories of Angell Adriels death, Seraphuels Trumpet, Gabriels Bridge, Horroth and Marroths hanging, the Moones descending into Mahomets sleeve: the Littour wherein he saw GOD carried by eight Angels: their swinish Purgatory: Fables fit for none but beasts or mad-men. The Papists have innumerable volumes of Fables, Legends which they equall to the sacred History. That Saint Francis carried a thousand out of Purgatory with him to Heaven, when he went thither. That Saint Dunstane held the Devill by the nose with a paire of pincers. That Saint Anthony, when a Toad was served to his table, and a Text cited by his Host; Eat of every thing that is set before thee: he presently with the signe of the Crosse turned it into a Capon ready roasted. That Frier Andrew should make roasted birds flie away by the same conjuration. I speake not of their monstrous miracles, and shamelesse wonders; their very Doctrine is fabulous. That CHRISTS body should be locally circumscribed in heaven, yet wholly present in ten thousand places at once on the earth; this is a Fable against the fundamentall truth of his Humanitie. That there is a Purgatory, is a Fable, (and that a cunning one) against the truth of CHRISTS sufficient satisfaction. Their Schoole-men have invented a doctrine of Fables, cunningly devised: and the Friers had crochets enow, but the Iesuits put downe all. As the Instruments of battery which the Ancients used in the warres, were more able to ruine and demolish than our new inventions; but were not so maniable, and apt for transportation. So the arguments of the Friers and Schoole-men of the Romish Church, had as much force against the truth, as the subtilties of the Iesuites: but these are apter for conveyance and insinuation, than those cloisturall Monkes. For there are some poisons that will not worke, except they be ejaculated from the live creature that possesseth them: his personall malignity must concurre to it. For this purpose these Vbiquitaries have the advantage. For otherwise as Rhetorick is like the hand open, and Logicke like the hand shut. So the Frier is an open Iesuite, and the Iesuite a close Frier. Or, as gallopping is but a lofty amble, and ambling a soft gallop: so the Frier flies ^ut in larger fields, and the Iesuite like a cunning waggoner, turnes in a narrower compasse. They are such as will distinguish of any truth, till they extinguish all truth. They say, there is an Idolatry which is bad, and an Idolatry which is good. Hoc in Grammar and Logick demonstrates this thing: yet in Christs Word, Hoc est corpus ^neum, it demonstrates nothing. All their positions are like that swinish breakfast; many dishes made ex Sue mansueto, of a tame Sow. No marvell, when a Pope him^elfe called all Christianity a Fable, Quantum nobis profuerit ista de Christo fabula!
Astrologers are other fabulists: who gather out of the conjunction of Planets, ^nd position of Starres; the ruines of publike weales, and misfortunes of private families. If Sol be in opposition to Mercury, then the Lawyers shall have a bad Terme. If Mars meet with Venus, great custome is promised to the Stewes. As if ^hey were Bawdes to the celestiall bodies; Doctors to cast the water of the heavens, ^nd knew of what disease they were fick. In a common Almanack, the Prognostica^or out of his deepe judgement sayes, that such a day shall be something differing ^rom indifferent. What weather is that? Be it hot or cold, wet or drie, faire or foule; it ^t still something differing from indifferent. Astrologie at the best is but conjecturall, ^t the worst coozenning and diabolicall. Basil cals it occupatissimam vanitatem, a most ^usie vanitie. Conservam creaturam adversus Creatorem seditiose concitat, Naz. It pro^okes the creature against the Creator. Themselves laugh at those, who, vel adeunt ^el audiunt, either goe to them, or heare them. They smile how they fill their eares with Fables, their owne purses with moneys. Bion condemned them that professed to now Pisces in Zodiaco, the Fishes in the Zodiack: yet did not see nantes in oceano, the ^^ishes that swim in the sea- The events have fooled them: Manfridus told Ordelaphus Prince, that he should have a long and happy life; ye he was both married and bu^ied the same yeare. Henry 7. in derision of Star-gazers, asked one who had prophe^ied of his death; What shall betide me this Christmas? the prophet answered, he
 could not tell. Then what shall become of thy selfe this Christmas? he still answered, I cannot tell. Then I know more than thou, saith the King: for I know thou shalt presently be sent to prison for a jugling companion. How they have beene extremely troubled about this last Comet! whether it threaten Spaine or England; or the rising of new Sects: whether it portend Warre, or Plague, or Famine: whether to Princes, or to people; as if God had made them his Secretaries? Particular conjectures are but Fables: God knowes what he hath to doe. And if this did premonstrate a rod to scourge us, let us like Niniveh repent, and pacifie the LORDS wrath before the blow comes. Let us beseech him, Talem nobis aevertere pestem: and the Starre shall leave behinde it, not a curse, but a blessing, to all those that sincerely love and obey the Truth.
For use of this point to our selves; let us turne our mindes from Fables to serve the living God. The world indeed is too much addicted to fables. Mic. 2.11. If a man walking in the spirit of falshood doe lie; he shall even be the prophet of this people. If a man tell you that the keeping of the Sabbath is but a ceremoniall office, this is a Fable; yet you embrace it. If another tell you, that all dues belonging to the Church are arbitrary: that no Tithes are requirable, but a Benevolence; this is a cunningly devised fable: yet received with that impudent precipice of judgement, that it is given out bravely, there is not a Minister in England can disprove it. Alas, what arguments should poore Ministers give, when the plaine Text of that GOD who shall judge them, is despised! Let GOD and man say what they will; they have extorted our meanes, and they will keepe it. Let it be told you, that you shall never give account of your unjust and usurious gaines, though you never make restitution; this is a monstrous Fable, yet readily beleeved and admitted. For the Stage-fables, how lawfull or unlawfull they be, I will not here determine: he that goes to see a Play, intends not to see a Truth, but a Fable: a morall presented to his eye, that should convey some profitable document to his heart. But that some should say, they can learne more good at a Play, than at a Sermon; this is a wretched blasphemie, able to rot out the tongue of a Christian. The true purpose of Poems and Fables, is both Delectare and prodesse, to refresh the minde with delight, and to be^ter it with profit. When one accused the Comicall Poet, that he brought a lewde and deboish'd Ruffian on the Stage, and so gave bad example to young men. Hee answered; True, I brought such a man on, but I hang'd him before he went off: and so gave good example to young men. Saint Augustine doth exceedingly condemne the stage of the Heathens; and upon good cause, for it was bloudy; the Actors slaying and butchering one another. So as Abner said to Ioab, 2 Sam. 2.14. Let the young men arise, and play before us. He called it Playing, when every one thrust his sword in his fellowes side. For them that seeke to defend it thus: because Cities are populous, and where are many men, are many lewd men: if their time were not spent so, it would be spent worse. As when the Tyrant objected to the Player his sawcinesse, that he durst personally tax men on the stage; he made him this answer; Be content for while the people laugh at our foolery, they never mind your villany. But this is no good argument, to excuse sin by sin: to prevent an evil not allowable, by allowing an evil that is preventable. In a word, that wch makes a man evill, is his own evill mind.
But to conclude, you will say, that we are here forbidden to use Fables in the Pulpit; and taught barely to preach CHRISTS power and comming in the evidence of this Spirit. Beloved, I would to God your hearts were so sanctified, that your eares need not be delighted: and that we could save your soules without pleasing your senses. But to what purpose doe wee interpose a Fable? To make you beleeve that it is literally true? No, but to worke an impression of the morall use into your hearts. If we tell you that Aesops Dog lost the substance, by catching a the shadow; you apprehend our meaning, that men lose God by catching at Ma^mon. Or, that the fly on the chariot-wheele gave out that she made all that glorious dust; you know we meane, that a vain-glorious man brags more than does. When
 Iotham told the Shechemites, Iudg. 9. of the confederacie of the trees to chuse them a King, which the Bramble accepted: they understood him of Abimelech, and their ^o kindnesse to Ierubbaal. These fables then have their use, by a neere and familiar way to derive instruction to the heart. Profanalegimus, Sacrisque interteximus; With the holy things they become holy. When God gave that great deliverance to Israel, from Pharaoh and his Host by dividing the Red-sea; he commanded a Song to be made of it, Exod. 15. knowing that when they had forgot both Law and Prophe^ie, yet they would still keepe the Song in memory. So when you forget the better doctrine, you are helped to recall it by the Parable.
Receive not those then, that would cast away all learning as a Fable. Some there ^re that purely pretend themselves, to preach nothing but Christ crucified: and ^hese men have not stucke to boast, that all the flowre of the Land is of their boul^ing: wee are so full of Latine, of Fathers, of Poets, that there is nothing in us but ^ranne. What, is all theirs? New Palaemons, to crie, Nobiscum natae, nobiscum peritu^ae litera? Must all wisdome die with Iobs friends? Hath Philip gotten so much, that ^e hath left nothing for Alexander to conquer? Have these mowers carried all into ^heir barne, and not left us so much as the gleanings after their full carts? Can the Amnons of the people eat no cakes, but such as are of Thamars baking? It is the mad merchant that cries from the Key, All the ships are mine. They speake of us, as the people did of Saul; Is Saul among the Prophets? Alas, we may then say with Peter; We have fished all night, and caught nothing. But certainly God hath abundance of Spirit, and gives not all to one man. But saying aside pride, prejudice, scorne, malice; ^et us all labour to turne mens soules to Christ; and doe you with a good conscience ^eare us: that Gods Name may be honoured, our office discharged, your understan^ings enlightned, and all our soules everlastingly saved, in the day of our Lord Iesus.
When we made knowne unto you the power and comming of our Lord Iesus Christ.] This is the Proclaiming, wherein are considerable two things; The manifestation it ^elfe; We made knowne to you.] And the things manifested; (...); the Power ^nd the Presence of Christ.
We made knowne to you.] The Apostles did not hide the mysteries of salvation: ^evealed to them, Rom. 16.25. The revelation of the mystery, which was kept secret since ^he world began; is now made manifest, and according to the commandement of the everla^ting God, is made knowne to all nations for the obedience of faith. Not that it was ut^erly unknowne before: for it were strange to thinke, that the Prophets knew not of ^hat Messias they fore-told: but the light of it was not so cleare and manifest. Christ ^efore his comming was knowne to many, but obscurely: after his comming hee was knowne Pluribus and clarius, to more, and more clearely; after his Ascension, to ^et a farre greater number, and more manifestly; he shall be knowne in heaven face ^o face, Ephes. 3.5. In other ages he was not made knowne to the sonnes of men, As he is ^ow, in the same manner and measure, as he is now revealed. They saw thorow a veile, ^o us the cutten is drawne. Tunc patuit Iudaeo, latuit mundo: jam patet mundo, latet In^aeo; Then the Iewes knew him, and the world was ignorant of him: now the Iewes ^re ignorant of him, and the whole world acknowledgeth him. The clearenesse ^s greater, Ex Christo misso, that it was Ex Christo promisso. The Sunne of Righte^usnesse did then cast up some beames; now it is more glorious, as riding in the midst of heaven. Psal. 19.5. Comming as a Bridegroome out of his chamber, and rejoy^^ng like a strong man to run his course. And nothing is hid from the heat thereof: No^hing? Yes, uncharitablenesse, that lives under the frigid Zone, Ice that cannot be ^hawed; an hard heart, nothing but hell-fire can melt it. Affected Ignorance wil^^lly hides it selfe from it. Ioh. 3.19. Light is come into the world, and men love darknesse ^etter, because their deeds are evill. Oderunt crucem pendentis, oderunt lucem splenden^^. The world hates both the Crosse of him that suffereth, and the Light of him ^hat shineth. Their mindes being blinded by the God of this world, that the light of the ^lorious Gospell of Christ should not shine unto them, 2 Cor. 4.4. But, If it be hid, it is hid to
 them that are lost, vers. 3. Such are the muffled Papists, that love like Owles, onely to keepe a whooting in the darke. Iohn 7.39. The Holy Ghost was not yet given to the Apostles, because Iesus was not yet glorified. The Apostles had the Spirit before; but Non Taliter, nec tantum; Not after the same manner, nor in the same measure. But he that winked at the former times of ignorance, now commandeth all men every where to repent, Act. 17.30. This is the tenour of the new Covenant, Hebr. 8.11. I will write my Lawes in their hearts: and they shall not teach one another, saying; Know the Lord: For all shall know mee from the least to the greatest. As light, so the participation of Gods light is communicative: his will must be knowne on earth, that it may be done on earth: as it is knowne and done in heaven. Before, God was well knowne in Iury, and his Name was great in Israel; but the Heathen had not the knowledge of his Lawes; much lesse of this Gospell, of his Christ. But now his way is knowne upon earth, and his saving health among all nations, Psal. 67.2.
This doctrine makes to the conviction of them, that conceale the way of the Lord. Rom. 1.18. The wrath of God is revealed from heaven against them, that withhold the truth in unrighteousnesse. Here the Romish Priests have cause to tremble; that play at blind-mans-buffe with the people; smite them, and bid them prophecie who did it. Our Saviour denounceth a Woe unto them, that shut up the kingdome of heaven against men, Matth. 23.13. The Romists thinke it their best policie, that the blinded Laity might not see their impostures. They resolve, Woe unto us if the people should know it: but indeed woe unto them, because the people doe not know it. Like Iugglers, if they did not cast a mist before mens eyes, their trickes would be nothing worth.
This reproves them also, that content themselves with their ignorance, and never labour for knowledge. Wee dare take you to record, that wee are pure from your bloud: because we have not shunned to declare unto you the counsell of God, Act. 20.26. But we may say of you, as it is said of the miser, when hee is moved to give almes; you cannot heare on that eare. We have told you the wickednesse of profest Vsury, made knowne Gods will in that point: we have told you the necessity of restitution, reproved the excessse of drinke,2 Tim. 2 19. of apparell: we urge that holy duty; If any man ca^ on the Name of Christ, let him depart from iniquity: that if you doe not amend your lives, Christ will not save your soules: yet these thing you will not know. How often have you beene told; Make you friends of your unrighteous Mammon: you will not know it. You will make a friend of it, not make Christ your friend by it. Amicus Christus, amicus Christianus, sed magis amicus mundus; You say, Christ is your friend, and the Christian is your friend, but the world is your best friend. As the evill spirit said, Act. 19.15. Iesus I know, and Paul I know; but who are yee? So your whole life speakes; Money we know, lands we know, security we know, commodity we^ know; but for Christ and his poore members; Who are yee? The world is the God they worship. As the popish dolt boasted of his picture of Saint Francis, curiously painted in his Closset; They talke of the Rood at Rome, and our Lady of Loretto, and Catherine of Sienna, and Iames at Compostella; but I have a picture at home worth ten of them. So the worldling heares us preach of Christ, his precious merits, grievous passion, gracious redemption, glorious reward; but still his Closset-picture he thinkes better of than all these. Thus we can but preach it, and y^^ heare it, onely God must give you hearts to know it. Pray and beseech the God of knowledge, to give you the knowledge of God, in the wayes of salvation.
The power and comming of our Lord.] This concernes the matter manifested: wherein the Apostle intends the Summe of the Gospell, and the full salvation that is given us by Christ, in whom are all the treasures of blessednesse. Of this he makes two distinct parts. First, that Christ came in the flesh, suffered for our sinnes, and rose againe for our Iustification. Secondly, the vertue and efficacie of this in our hearts, when we manifest the fruit of it in our well living, and well beleeving. He^ came to suffer for our offences, to deliver us from Satan, Death, and Hell; to reconcile
 us to God, to consecrate us holy Temples of himselfe, and to give us everlasting life. Now when we feele these gracious effects wrought in us, killing lust, quickning goodnesse, conforming us to obedience, and confirming us in faithfulnesse; this is to be benefited by the power and comming of our Lord Iesus. Iustus venit ^ad peccatores, ut ex peccatoribus faceret justos: humilis venit ad superbos, ut ex superbis faceret humiles, Ambr. He that is righteous came to sinners, that he might make sinners, righteous; he that was humble came to the proud, that of proud he might make them humble. Here observe many things.
First, that the Comming of CHRIST was in Power, Esa. 64.1. Oh that thou wouldest rent the heavens, and come downe; that the mounntaines might flow at thy presence. Alas, how could this be when as he came in such basenesse! Esa. 53.2. He hath ^o forme nor comelinesse, and when we shall see him, there is no beautie that we should desire him. Therefore when hee came unto his owne, his owne received him not, Iohn 1.11. His Palace was a stable, his Courtiers beasts, his chaire of state a man^ger, his royall robes a few ragges. No bells ring, no bonefires proclaime his birth through the popular streetes: no great Ladies came to visite his mother. In stead of thundering in the clouds, he lyes crying in the cloutes* for beating downe his enemies, he is glad to flee from their faces into Aegipt. Where was then his glorious Power, or how appeared his majestie? Yes, his comming was in great Power: for if all the divels in hell could have hindred it, he had beene stayed. Yea for this he came, ^o dissolve the workes of the devill. If our sinnes could have letted it: yea, they rather brought him. De caelo traxerunt non merita nostra, sed peccata, Aug. It was not our merites, but our sinnes, that drew him from heaven. The tyrannie of Herod, and that butcherly Inquisition bloudied in the deaths of so many Infant Martyrs, could not crosse it. Psal. 2. The Kings of the earth conspire, and take counsell together but nec artes nec martes, neither their power nor policie could withstand it. Neither was the glory of Christ wanting, though it conveyed it selfe in a lesse publike for me. He had a famous Harbinger to goe before him, and to prepare his way; Iohn the Baptist, than whom there rose not a greater, among them that were borne of women. His bonefire was in heaven, a Starre directing the wisemen to him. The bells that rung for joy, were armies of Angells; an heavenly host praising God, Luk. 2.13. His Palace heaven, his regall Throne mans conscience, his robes his owne merites, richly adorning us: there was majestie in his humility. Thus came the Lord of life to the children of death. Non liberatum fuisset humanum genus, nisi Sermo Dei dignatus esse humanus, Aug. Mankind had not beene redeemed, unlesse the word of God had beene hominified. If we say that he hath humanity in him, that receives a man into his house; Quam humanus ille qui suscipit hominem in seipsum; how full of humanity is he, that receives manhood unto himselfe! His comming was like a Lambe in meekenesse, yet he triumphed like a Lion in powerfulnesse; leading captivitie captive, and free^ng all his children from eternall bondage.
Secondly, observe that the Gospell is no weake thing, but comes in Power: for CHRIST. Comming hath yet further Latitude. He came once unto men, he comes still into men: that was in the flesh, this is in the Spirit. The Law indeed did more amaze the conscience, and was delivered with greater terror, that it made Moses himselfe quake and feare. (Now if there was such thundring at the Law giving, what would have beene at the Law breaking?) The Law came with more terror, but the Gospell comes with more Power. For that could not turne his heart that bare it in his hand: but the Gospell is able to change the man. It is the power of God unto salvation, Rom. 1.16. The Law may set before us our wretched estate by sin, but there leaves us desperate: it discovers our disease, prescribes no cure: it doth expresse sinne, but cannot suppresse sinne. It is the glory and bleeding spectacle of Iesus crucified in the Gospel, that heales the soule. 1 Cor. 1.18. The preaching of the Crosse unto us that are saved, is the power of God. If there be no feeling of that Power, there are no sparkes of salvation yet kindled. Peters Sermon tooke little effect, till
 he came to this point. Act. 2.36. The same Iesus whom yee have crucified, hath God made both Lord and Christ. Cum audiverunt hoc. Ver: 37. When they heard this, they were pricked in their hearts; What shall we doe? Paul and Silas might have given the Iailo^^^ good words, faire intreaties, and the most valid argument of all, monies, yet all this could not keepe them from the dungeon. But when the Power of God had shaken the foundation of the prison, and Paul began to preach Iesus; then he was baptised, rejoyced, and beleeved in God with all his house, Act. 16. Let men come with oratory and the entising words of mans wisedome; those flouds doe but beat upon surd rockes: but if1 Cor. 2.5. in the power of God, this shall turne those rockes into soft and fleshy hearts. Let the naturalist with all his eloquence, disswade the covetous worldling from his greedinesse; alas, one ounce of Gold waighes downe all his reasons. Offer to stay a furious man from anger with arguments, he hath not the patience to heare them. Could the Poet detaine the lascivious from his harlot, though he tell him that she is a quicke-sand to swallow him alive? alas, one smile from her is stronger with him than all reason. But now come with the Gospell, and urge them with the heart-bloud of IESUS CHRIST, shed to save their soules from hell, and to satisfie for their sinnes. This is that powerfull pleading which makes good men confesse their hearts to burne within them: and bad men, even an Agrippa to say; I am almost perswaded to be a Christian, Act. 26.28.
Thirdly, collect wee hence, that the word of God hath more power than all mens edicts. Men in their writings are at much cost in adorning their stile, and reducing their words to number, waight and measure; interlacing many rhetoricall figures to beget attention. But on the contrary, the Scriptures in a plaine simplicitie, accommodates it selfe to the capacity of the weakest. Yet under this simplicitie is included a strange majestie, and gravity of speech. As great Princes in their Edicts use no figures to their subjects, but plainely and breefely set downe their commands: so God absolutely imposeth his will without debating the matter. Yet in perswading, moving affection, and posing the deepest apprehension, they have a Power beyond all writings. Read the first Chapter of Esays Prophecie, and compare it with the best Oration of Tully. Read the Historie of Ioseph, and confer it with any tale of Aeneas. Read the acts of David, and waigh them with the wonders of Tamberlaine. Read the Gospell, which is the Historie of the life and death of Christ; and you will thinke the saddest stories of any humane pens meere counterfeits to it. Let the Scripturall Psalmes and Hymns be balanced with the most accurate and patheticall poems; alas, when these vanish with their aire, those shall ravish the eare, and withall take the conscience. Iosephus was a man admired for eloquence, yet how he halts in his imitation! concerning Abrahams sacrificing of his sonne Isaac, he makes a large rhetoricall discourse:Gen. 22. the Scripture is briefe and plain. Take now thy son, thine only son Isaac, whom thou lovest: He tooke him, and the wood of the burnt offering, land laid on his sonne, as Christ bore his owne Crosse. Behold, saith the child, the fire and wood: but where is a Lambe for a burnt offering. The Father answers, My son, God will provide himselfe a Lambe. There be two lines able to wring teares from the Reader, whereas Iosephus with his ample illustration moves nothing. It is recorded of one Theodectes, who would have brought some of the Bible into a Pagan tragedie, that he was stricken blind, till falling to repentance he was restored.
Lastly, the invincible power of the Gospell is manifested in throwing downe those bulwarkes raised against it. When the waters of life began first to flow, what strong floud-gates, rampires, and dammes, were set to stop their sourse. All the learning, power, and policie of men, with the helpe of infernall spirits were bent against it. Demosthenes and Tertullus for eloquence, Solon against Solomon, Plato against Moses, Aristotle against Paul, Alexander and Cesar against CHRIST: but whatsoever contenders opposed the truth, they discovered the invaliditie of their arguments, with the confusion of their owne persons. Christ sent a few fishermen to the sea of this world, with the nettes of faith; and they inclosed multitudes of
 ^ishes, of all sorts and sises; tanto mirabiliores, quanto rariores, even Kings and Philo^ophers themselves, Aug. He sent not kings and Philosophers to perswade fishermen; but fishermen to convert Philosophers and kings. They that had no autho^ity to countenance them, no friends to side them, no oratory to second them, no ^iches to maintaine them: yet went abroad preaching the disdained Gospell of the ^rucified Iesus. And even when the kings of the earth did set themselues against the Lord, ^nd against his Christ: yet even then God did give him the heathen for his inheritance, ^nd the uttermost parts of the earth for his possession. Psal. 2.8. Emperors and Monarchs ^ave throwen downe their Scepters at the feet of the Lambe, as theRevel. 4.10. Elders cast ^owne their Crownes before the Throne; embracing the faith, and yeelding to the Sove^aigne supremacie of IESUS CHRIST. Then was that Prophecie fulfilled. Esa. ^1.6. The Wolfe shall dwell with the Lambe, the kid with the Lyon, and a little child shall ^ad them. Nero and Domitian study strange deathes, to afflict the Saints, and to ^ppresse the Gospell: yet the Church groanes and growes, bleeds and battens: eve^y drop of bloud that ends one Christian, begets a thousand. Those men who at ^he first, Timebant in verbis, postea gaudebant in verberibus; trembled at threatning words, afterwards embraced killing swords, for the testimonie of Iesus. You had ^^nce ten Apostles flying, one denying, yet afterwards all rejoycing, to suffer for ^im that suffered for them. Ioh. 16.8. When the Spirit is come, he will convince the ^orld of sinne, of righteousnesse, and of judgement. How shall he convince it? not ^mmediately by himselfe, but mediately by his Apostles, and Ministers; who otherwise durst never have beene so bold. Neither was this a Personall promise, but re^ll to the Church, unto the end of the world. Now if this had beene a cunning fable, ^ome tale of Iupiter or Apollo, it could never have effected such a content of consci^nce, in forsaking of lands, liberties, wives, lives; in exposing us to calumnies, calamities, torments. Tell a Turke, the worshipper of a Mahomet, concerning riches, ^onours, and carnall satisfactions that come to him by his Prophet; this pleaseth ^is flesh and bloud. But tell him of persecution, anguish, contempt, and death, which ^is profession must call him to; he will none of that for any Idols sake. Yet preach CHRIST to the conscience, the value of the price he payed to redeeme us: and then ^et a thousand dangers stand in our way; prison, hunger, tyrants, torments, deaths, di^els; we run through them all with patience, and overcome them with confidence. In ^hese latter times, when the deluge of Popery overflowed; all pietie was drowned, ^itie and mercie lost, the Woman fled into the wildernesse, Antichrist in his highest ^uffe, Kings kissing his feete; when it was death to thinke of restoring the light. Yet ^gainst al clamours of Friers, excommunications of Popes, execrations of his Priests ^ppositions of Princes by sword and fire: the Truth was delivered from the jawes of ^rror, set in a white chaire of chrystall sincerity, and most powerfully lodged in a bed ^f peace. Where she reacheth forth to us her milken hand, guiding us to those ^verlasting doores, whereinto heresie and darkenesse shall never enter. O may this Sun shine to us, and our children after us, so long as the sun and moone in heaven en^ureth! Amen.
To apply all to our selves; The power and comming of CHRIST, ^s the kingdome of CHRIST: let us all pray; that this Power may come ^n our hearts: LORD, let thy Kingdome come. Now what wee pray with ^urlippes, wee must endevour with ourlives. Shall wee desire the removall of all ^indrances to this kingdome, and most of all hinder it our selves? If wee obscure ^hat glory, which we apprecate our owne tongues and hearts, and the tongues and ^earts of all under heaven, shall rise up in witnesse against us. He that makes such a ^eeming prayer, and retaines such a sinning desire, doth begge consuming vengeance ^n himselfe. Tremble at this yee wicked; you may as well spit upon CHRIST, ^s come to Church and say, Thy kingdome come; and yet actually uphold the kingdome of the devill. Let us take heed of withstanding the comming of this Power: CHRIST preached to the Iewes, they would not receive him. Behold; their house
 is left unto them desolate. Noah preached to the old world: Lot to Sodome: Gildas to the Brittaines; they despised it; their land was destroyed, and given to others. Iohn wickleffe was raised up to this office, himselfe was burnt, and his bookes: what followed? they slew the next king, set up three usurpers, the nobility was butchered, the land havocked. The contempt of this Power hath brought on infallible desolation.
What this sinne may worke upon us, onely the Lord knowes, and knowes to prevent. Comets may threaten, and rumors of warres sound in our eares: none of these destroy us, but our owne sins. Let us not hurt our selves, none shall hurt us. I^ we be false to God, let us not blame others for being false to us. It was Christs complaint over that apostate Citie, O Ierusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and sto^^ them which are sent unto thee!Matth. 23.37. If we retaine their sinnes, there remaine for us their plagues. We use to arraigne and judge our prophets, whose Ministery is to arraigne and judge us, that we may not be judged of the Lord. The Iewes killed their Teachers, doe not we so when we withhold their life bloud from them, and stand (...) justifie it? Is it not all one, to cut a mans throate, and to take away the sustenance wherby he lives, and without which he must needs famish? Certainely, of both it is the greater mercie, or (at least) the lesse crueltie, to dispatch him quickly. It is their worke to mortifie and kill our sins, and shall we kill them? that our sins may live? Oh there is a cursed devill that bewitcheth us! God that suffers this, meanes thereby to suffer this lands destruction. There were not (let not envie here me) so flourishing a Church under heaven, if this sin of Sacriledge were taken from it. But this effect hath followed it; that the profession of the Gospell in many places comes upon the stage, to helpe to make up the play, and to minister matter of mirth. And the Law doth dominere over the Gospell, as Pilate sate to Iudge IESUS. If this land should ever come to the danger of destroying, (which God avert) those deriders of the poore Ministerie will run into holes, that have already buried their talents from ever doing good. And then the poore clergies prayers will prevaile more for mercies, than all their proud arrogated glories. But alas, how should Christ come in power to helpe us, whom we have rejected comming in power to convert us! Do^^ he come now, and we will not know him; and can we hope he will come then when we call him? Open your hearts, all yee that feare the Lord, and let him in. As it is his owne promise; Behold I come quickly: so it is the Churches prayer, Come Lord Iesus, come quickly. Wickednesse is powerfull, the devill is powerfull, covetousnesse is powerfull, lust is powerfull: and hath the Gospell of Christ lost the powerfulnesse? No, if it have not power to convert us, it will have power to confound us. If Christ be not suffered to come unto us, he will not be hindred from comming against us. Oh let us come unto him, that he may come unto us: subject we our hearts and lives to the obedience of his Gospell; that we may he found holy and blamelesse at the second comming of the Lord Iesus. It shall be powerfull then, when the heavens shall passe away with a noise, and the elements shall melt with heate, and the earth with her workes shall be burnt up. Let us now honour him when he come i^ grace, that he may honour us when he comes in glory.
And were eye-witnesses of his Majestie. This is the testification. Our Saviour intending that the Apostles should lay the foundation of his Church; upon that Corner-stone whereupon themselves and we all are built; he furnished them with all fit provision for it. He declared his will to their eares, presented his workes to their eyes, fixed his truth in their hearts; and sent them not to publish riddles and paradoxes and fabulous reports; but reall and actuall things which they had seene and heard. So might they from infallible experience give a well grounded testimonie. The Summe is this; Christ made himselfe manifest to them, that they might manifest him to us. He let them see, that they might teach us to beleeve. The things which I have received of my Father, I have made knowne unto you. They must needs be scribes well fitted for the kingdome of heaven; when such a Master read unto them the oracles of Truth. He that is the life of the Gospell, taught the Gospell
 of life. It did not hold, that he must needs be a good scholer, that had Socrates ^o his Master. But he must be a good Disciple, that hath Iesus Christ for his Tutor. ^e are not reporters, but witnesses: not eare-witnesses, but eye-witnesses: not only of ^is Humilitie, but of his majestie.
We were witnesses.] But Non eget testimonio hominis, Ioh. 5.34. I receive not te^imonie from man. He is the Way, the Truth, and the Life: the way to the truth, the ^ruth of the way, the life of both, of all: therefore a sufficient testimonie to himselfe. Yet he saith, Ioh. 5.31. If I beare witnesse of my selfe, my witnesse is not true. And of ^he contrary. Ioh. 8.14. Though I beare witnesse of my selfe, my witnesse is true. These ^wo places seeme at the first view, contradictory. But are easily reconciled: in the ^ormer, CHRIST did accommodate himselfe to the capacitie of the hearers, who ^cknowledged nothing more in him then Humanitie: in the other, he sets forth his Divinitie, and discovers another nature in his owne Person: that howsoever they ^ight vilipend the testimonie of the one, yet were convinced by the testimonie of ^^e other. But this answere seems not to satisfie; for CHRIST as he was man, was ^ithout error, and could not give a false testimonie how then could he say, My ^itnesse is not true? I answer; My witnesse is not true, that is, it is not effectuall, nor ^ould be accepted as true by the Iewes, though it was most certainely true. Though ^ be true secundum rem, according to the matter testified: yet not true secundum accep^^tionem, according to their acception. To the other it is objected, My witnesse is ^^ue: that according to the Law no mans witnesse is accepted for himselfe. And, Pro. ^7.2. Let another man praise thee, and not thine owne mouth. But CHRIST is the ^^ght of the world: now the light doth not onely helpe us to see other things, but al^o to discerne it selfe. But further, if CHRIST receives not testimony for man, why ^oth he admit of Iohns witnesses? Ioh. 5.33. Yee sent unto Iohn, and he bare witnesse ^nto the truth. Iohn did not intrude himselfe into this office, but the Iewes required ^im to it; Yee sent unto Iohn. This appeares, Ioh. 1.19. This is the Record of Iohn, ^hen the Iewes sent unto him to aske him, who art thou? now Christ admitted of Iohns ^estimonie for their sakes; as he declares himselfe; That yee might be saved. I re^eive not mans witnesse, Propter indigentiam meam, for any need that I have of it: ^d recolo propter salutem vestram, I suffer it for your salvation, that you might be in^uced through a witnesse of your owne chusing to beleeve on me. I receive not the ^itnesse of man, as it is meerely mans, and of no further authoritie than flesh and ^loud: but as it is inspired by God, I entertaine it.
Our blessed Saviour accepted of many witnesses, which I will but touch, ^s being not in the center, but not out of the circumference of this argument.
1 God the Father. Ioh. 5.37. The Father himselfe which sent me hath borne wit^esse of me. The substance of his testimonie was delivered in an audible voice; This (...) my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.
2 Iohn the Baptist. Ioh. 1.8. He was not that light, but he was sent to beare witnesse ^f that light. The Testimonie of Iohn was Inducens, perswading: but the testimonie ^f the Father compellens, prevailing.
3 The workes of Christ. Ioh. 5.36. The workes that I doe, beare witnesse of me. This is Testimonium majus Iohanne; a greater witnesse than Iohns; against this wit^esse there is an exception: if Christ might be knowen sufficiently by his workes to ^e the Messias: the same testimonie might be given to the Apostles, who wrought ^s great miracles. It is answered, that Christ when he wrought these workes de^lared himselfe to be the Messias: the Apostles when they wrought them, declared ^hemselves not to be Christ, but the servants of Christ: and that they effected all ^nely through his name and vertue. When the disciples of Iohn came to Christ to ^e satisfied, whether he were he that should come or no; he refers them to no o^her testimonie but his workes. Luk. 7.22. Goe and tell Iohn: what things you have ^^ene and heard: that the blind see, the lame walke, etc. Magnum magna decent: he proves his goodnesse by his good workes. It was this that preferred Corazin and
 Bethsaida before Tire and Sidon in torments: because mighty workes were done among them, and they repented not, Matth. 11.21. Opera virtutis, mighty workes. Luk. 24.19. He is called a Prophet mighty, not only in words, but in deeds. Neither were the Iewes only convinced, with a Nunqnam locutus est homo sicut iste, Ioh. 7.46. Never (...) spake like this man. But also with a Nunquam operatus est homo, sicut iste; never man di^like his man; We never saw it on this fashion, Ioh. 7.31. Will Christ when he comes, (...) more miracles than this man hath done? Ioh 9.32. Since the world began the like was never heard before. What is inferred on it? Ver. 33. If this man were not of God, he could doe nothing.
4 The Scriptures, Ioh. 5.39. Secarch the Scriptures, and they are they that testifie of me. All or them, like so many Mathematicall lines meeting at that one comes. Every page, like a Iohn Baptist, pointing us to the Lambe of God that takes away the sin of the world. Nil fere continet verbum Domini, nisi verbum Dominum. The word of the Lord containes almost nothing else, but the Lord, that is the word. Act. 10.43. To him give all the Prophets witnesse. They by predictions and figures, the Apostles by demonstration, and truth. The first, of these Testimonies was pronounced, the second, inspired, the third, exhibited, the last, written.
5 Angels; they witnessed his conception, Luk. 1.31. His nativitie, Luk. 2.10. His Majestie. Matth. 4.11. The Angels came and ministred unto him. His Resurrection, Luk. 24.5. His Ascension, Act. 1.10.
6 The creatures; In his nativitie a Starre, a burning Lampe set in the heavens: Lucifer ante solem; a day-starre before the sunne. In his life, the winds and the sea answer his commands, Matth. 8.27. What manner of man is this, that even the wi^^ and the seas obey him! The sunne was darkened at his death, the veile of the Temple rent, the earth did quake, the stones clove; and the graves were opened. At his birth the heavens did witnesse that he was come downe to earth: at his Resurrection, the earth did witnesse that he was ready to goe up to heaven. The sea was his path to walke on, the cloudes his charriot to ride on.
7 His very enemies: neither Pilate nor Herod could find fault in him, Luk. 23.15. Ye have brought this man to me, I have examined him, but can find no fault i^ him; No, nor yet Herod. Pilates wife justfies him to her husband. Matth. 27.19. H^^ thou nothing to doe with that just man. They that came to ensnare him, depar^ ^^mending him. You have, Matth. 22. Pharises, Sadduces, Lawyers; all apposing him, all convinced, and astonished at his Doctrine. The Centurion at his death acknowledgeth; Truely this is the Sonne of God. The very divells acknowledge him, Mark. 1.24. I know thee who thou art, even the holy one of God, Act. 19.15. Iesus I know. O powerfull Christ, that couldest Ex ore inimicorum, out of the mouth of thy profest enemies derive thy praise? How should thy friends, bought with thy precious bloud, glorifie thee: when thy very enemies thus honour thee! Deu. 32.15. Their Rocke is not as our Rocke,Luk. 4.22. even our enemies themselves being Iudges. Even the Iews that crucified him, and All bare him witnesse, and wondered at his gracious words.
8 Lastly, the Apostles were especially designed for this Testimonie, Ioh. 15.27. Yee shall beare witnesse, because yee have beene with me from the beginning. There are twelve Apostles, a whole Iury of these witnesses: and when one of them aposta^^ by transgression, and the roome was void, they cast lots to supply the place with a new witnesse, Act. 1.22. One must be ordained to be a witnesse with us of his Resurrection. There were twelve Patriarchs in the old Testament, twelve Apostles in the new. Salomons twelve Officers, 1 King. 4.7. Moses his twelve Pillars, Exod. 24.4. The twelve cakes of Shewbread, Levit. 24.5. The twelve stones in A^^^^ Pectorall. The twelve stones that Ioshua tooke out of Iordan, The twelve Spies, the twelve Tribes, the twelve Starres. Revel. 12. The twelve foundations, twelve g^^s, twelve Angells, Revel. 21.14. The wall of the Citie had twelve foundations, and in them the names of the twelve Apostles. These twelve were to lay the foundation of the Church. Eph. 2.20. Wee are built upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles
 Iesus Christ, himselfe, being the chiefe corner-stone. We are built on them; they and we ^ll Iesus Christ. But were there no more than twelve of these especiall witnesses? What say you to Paul and Barnabas; were not they Apostles? were not they wit^esses? Yes, they are both called Apostles and Witnesses, Act. 14.4. Part held with the ^postles: now at that time in Iconium were no Apostles, but Paul and Barnabas; ^erefore they were. Vers. 3. God gave Testimony to the Word of his grace by them in ^^gnes and wonders: therefore they were Witnesses, 1 Cor. 9.1. Am I not an Apostle? ^ith Paul. Yea, 2 Cor. 11. They are Apostles; Nonne ego plus? I am more. Hee is ^^lled the Apostle: when we speake of an Apostle, and distinguish him not by name, ^^e commonly meane Saint Paul. But he calls himselfe Abortive, 1 Cor. 15.8. One ^^rne out of due time. One is said to be abortive three wayes. First, either Extra ^^mpus debitum, when he comes not in the due and expected time. Secondly, when ^e is forced from the wombe of the mother. Thirdly, when he comes not to full ^erfection. Paul may be said abortive two wayes, not the later:1 Cor. 15.10. 2 Cor. 11.5. for hee laboured ^ore abundantly than they all. Ingenuously he confesseth, that he was not a whit behind ^^e very chiefest of the Apostles. There is a three-fold difference betwixt the rest of the Apostles, and S. Paul. 1. The Twelve for twelve years preached only to the twelve Tribes of Israel: Paul went presently after his calling to the Gentiles. 2. The Twelve ^ivided the world amongst them, Paul took the whole world for his Parish. 3. The ^est were called (all but Matthias) a Christo mortali, by Christ in his mortality; Paul Christo immortali, by Christ in his immortality. The rest, by Christ humbled: ^aul, by Christ glorified. Though this difference be in their Apostleship, there is ^o difference in their Testimony: they all witnessed the same LORD IESUS.
This Witnessing was one of the Apostles prime excellencies and privileges above ^thers. The first privilege was their Mission, which was immediately from Christ ^imselfe, I send you: whereas we are sent from him mediately by others. The se^ond, was their Commission; Preach and Baptize, etc. They were sent to plant the Church, whereas we build upon their foundation. The third, was their Authority, ^^h. 20.22. Christ breathed on them, and said, Receive yee the Holy Ghost. There was number of ceremonies to make up a Leviticall Priest; anointings, washings, etc. ^ut to make up an Evangelicall Priest, Christ only breathed on them: thus in a great ^easure they received the Holy Ghost, Act. 2.3. There sate upon them cloven tongues, ^^ke as of fire. Such a fire was kindled on that day of Pentecost, that the whole world ^ath beene the warmer for it ever since. Therefore Chrysostome calls the Apostleship, spirituall Consulship, which was the greatest office in the Roman Government. ^he last privilege is their Testimony, and Election to this testimony.Act. 10.41. God raised up Christ, and shewed him openly; Not to all the people, but to us Witnesses, chosen before (...) God. The Lord sent them forth ad testificandum, to beare witnesse of Christ.
In witnesses there are three things especially required: 1. That they be Bonae ^^mae, of good report and repute: for a bad and vicious life enervates their testimony. ^ut these were holy men: he that sent them to give testimony, did not deny them ^^nctimony, Ioh. 17.17. Sanctifie them through thy truth. Nihil est puero teste certius, ^idor. No witnesse is surer than a childs: when he is come to those yeeres to under^^and, and not to those yeeres to dissemble. Thus doth God Ex ore lactantium, out of ^hildrens mouths magnifie his owne praise. The witnesses were not children in un^erstanding, but in simplicity and innocence of heart. They might be reproved, they ^ould never be disproved. 2. That they be Oculati testes, Eye-witnesses: so were these, we shall heare. 3. That they be Concordes, (...), to agree in their Testimony. ^alse witnesses are easily found out, by being examined sunderly; unlesse they have ^^nningly digested their tale; and then their mischiefe is more pernicious. But these ^itnesses, when they were dispersed over the face of the earth, did Vnum sentire, ^um dicere, minde one thing, and speake one thing: they delivered the same, wrote ^^e same, wrought the same, witnessed the same truth even with their blouds. There^^re were in all points Idonei testes, sufficient witnesses.

This Apostolicall Testimony was not without some opposition: for there were others that came in the name of CHRIST, who had nothing to doe with him. Simon Magus bewitched not onely the Samaritans, but also the Romans. Claudius set up a brazen Image on Tyber bridge, with this blasphemous Inscriptions To Simon the great god. But while hee sailed in the aire Remigio daemonum, hee fell downe to the earth, and burst his necke. One Manes, admired of the Persians, tooke twelve men, whom he called his Apostles, and stiled himselfe the Comforter of Israel. But undertaking to recover the Kings sonne, who was dangerously sicke, and failing in the cure, he had his skinne pulled over his eares. A Romish Doctor, called the Oracle of India, gave out that he was more holy than the Apostles, yea, than the Angels: yea, that God made him a proffer of hypostaticall union, and assumption into the fellowship of the Deitie; but the modest man refused it. That he was the worlds Redeemer, quoad efficaciam, in respect of efficacie; as Christ performed it, quoad sufficientiam, in respect of sufficiencie. Horrid and unpardonable blasphemie! So one Postill, a Iesuite, under the name of mother Iane, printed a booke called the Victory of women: Maintaining, that as CHRIST redeemed the superiour world, Man: so mother Iane saved the inferiour world, Woman. Here Saint Pauls Prophecie was fulfilled, 2 Thess. 2.11. For this cause GOD shall send them strong delusion, that they should beleeve a lye: that they all might bee damned who beleeved not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousnesse. They would none of Christ, let them welcome Antichrist. Iohn 5.43. I am come in my Fathers Name, and ye receive me not: if another shall come in his owne name, him will ye receive. He that will not beleeve these witnesses, shall everlastingly perish.
For as, Seeing wee are compassed about with so great a cloud of witnesses, let us beleeve, 1 Iohn 5.7. There are three that beare record in heaven: the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost; and these three are one. The Father bare witnesse to CHRIST, at his Baptisme, Matth. 3.17. at his Transfiguration, Matth. 17.5. at a manifest and glorious Revelation, Iohn 12.28. There came a voyce from heaven, etc. The HOLY GHOST bare witnesse to CHRIST, in descending first upon himselfe, Iohn 1.32. then upon his Apostles, Acts 2.4. making them also to beare witnesse, Iohn. 15.26. Both hee shall testifie of mee, and make you testifie of mee. The WORD bare record of himselfe, Iohn 10.25. When the Iewes put him to it; If thou bee CHRIST, tell us plainely: Hee answered, I have told you* When Iohns Disciples asked him; Art thou hee that should come? Hee witnessed, I am hee. Matth. 14.62. When the high Priest questioned him; Art thou the CHRIST, the Sonne of the Blessed? IESUS said; I am, Thus he witnesse to the blinde man whom they had excommunicated, Ioh. 9.37. Who is the Sonne of God? It is he that talkes with thee; I am he. This he testified to Paul, Act. 9.5. I am IESUS whom thou persecutest. And these three are one; Non tantum in testimonio, sed (...) essentia; Not onely in their witnesse, but in their essence, Ardens. There be three th^^ beare witnesse in earth; the Spirit, and the Water, and the Bloud: and these three agree to one. The Spirit of God, or of man inspired with that Spirit, applying to his comfort the water and bloud that came out of Christs side. Water being a signe of o^^ Sanctification, Bloud of our Iustification. These three are one, saith Augustine, I^ mysterio, non in natura; Not in nature, but in mystery: they agree in one Testimony. Si qua in aqua gratia, non ex natura fluminis, sed ex praesentia Flaminis; The vertue that is in the water, is not of the water, but of the Spirit. Thus if in the mouth of t^^^ three witnesses every word be established; How strong should be our faith, that is confirmed with so many and so great witnesses? The intent of all is that wee should beleeve, Iohn 19.35. Hee that saw it, bare record, and his record is true, that yee mig^^ beleeve. Not to give credit to all these witnesses, is (so farre as in us lyeth) (...) make GOD lose his purpose. Therefore these shall either witnesse to us, or (...) day witnesse against us.
Eye-witnesses.] One eye-witnesse is better than many eare-witnesse. They
 spake not by tradition, or what curious relaters have buzzed in credulous eares: but oppose their owne knowledge against all fabulous reports; Vidimus, we have seene.1 Ioh. 1.1. That which we have heard, and seene with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled of the Word of life. That which was from the beginning: Not of ^ate dayes, no new sprung up noveltie. Which we have heard, immediately speaking in the world, as well as mediately speaking in his Word. He spake to our Fathers by the mouth of all his Prophets from the beginning: but in our dayes, by his owne mouth: our eares have heard his Sermons. Which we have seen with our eyes: Behold him working miracles, raising the dead, casting out devils. Which wee have looked upon; not having onely a glimpse of him, but intentively looked upon him: as Iohn pointed to him with the finger, Behold the Lambe of GOD. Our hands have handled his precious body, both before his death, and after his Resurrection. Doubtfull Thomas would not beleeve, and that Ex professo; till he saw the prints of his nailes, and thrust his hand into his side; and then hee cries, My LORD, and my GOD. Handled of the Word of life: How can this bee? Though this being very GOD of very GOD, is neither visible nor palpable: yet in respect of the personall union of the two Natures in him, wee say againe; That which we have heard, seene, and handled. The Apostle Saint Iohn doth especially of all the rest presse this point; 1 Iohn 5.10. Iohn 20.31. Iohn 21.24. This is that beloved Apostle, Evangelist, Martyr, all. Saint Peter was an Apostle, not an Evangelist. Saint Marke an Evangelist, not an Apostle. Saint Matthew both an Apo^tle, and an Evangelist, not a Prophet. Saint Augustine a Doctor, not a Martyr. Saint Laurence a Martyr, not a Doctor: but Saint Iohn was all these, Dyez. Pontan. In his Epistles an Apostle, in his Revelations a Prophet, in his Gospell an Evange^ist, in his faith a Confessour, in his preaching a Doctor, in his chastity a Virgin, in his readinesse to die for CHRIST a Martyr? suffering for him under the Crosse, whom he saw suffering for him on the Crosse. This is the Disciple, that hath testifie ^hese things, and we know that his Testimony is true. Saint Paul doth also earnestly ^rge it, 1 Cor. 15.5. He was seene of Cephas, then of the Twelve: he was seene of above ^^ve hundred brethren at once: he was seene of Iames, seene of all the Apostles; and last of ^ll seene of mee. And Saint Peter here confirmes it; Wee were eye-witnesses of his Majestie. Now as Aristotle said; If Timotheus had not beene, we had not had ^o much sweet musicke: but if Phrynis (Timotheus his master) had not beene, wee ^ad not had Timotheus. So, if these Apostles, Iohn, Peter, and Paul had not beene, ^e might have wanted such witnesses: but if IESUS their Master had not beene, we had wanted such Apostles. They saw with their eyes, we heare with our eares, ^ORD grant us all to beleeve with our hearts, the Majestie of IESUS CHRIST. So it followes.
Of his Majestie.] The Apostles saw not with such eyes as the world. The world saw neither for me nor comelinesse, nor any thing desireable in him, Esay 53.2. The Apostles saw his Majestie. The world saw him as a dejected, rejected man; ^^h. 19.5. Behold the man: the man loden with sorrowes, and overwhelmed with mi^eries. The Apostles saw him white and ruddie, of the purest complexion, the chiefest ^mong ten thousand, Cant. 5.10. Whiter than the Lilies of the valleyes, redder than ^^e Roses of Sharon. Were our eyes opened, to behold the incomparable vertues of ^ur blessed Saviour; as Plato said of Vertue; he would ravish our soules with an un^xpressible love. He is a spirituall, Intellectuall Sphere, whose circumference is eve^^ where, his Center no where. His Majesty is infinitely puissant, the chiefest of ten ^^ousand. The Iewes have a Pradition, that the Messias appeared to them at the ^^d sea, like a man of warre, delivering them from the Aegyptians. For this they ^^d a Song, Exo. 15.3. The Lord is a man of war. It is prophecied of him, Esay 53.12. (...) he shall divide the spoile with the strong. His Majesty is infinitely great, his mercy is ^^finitely sweet. Cujus aspectu dispellu^tur tenebrae, cujus effectu liberantur animae; His ^okes dispell all dar^nesse, his power delivers our soules. Come now, and behold him
 with the Crowne wherewith his mother crowned him in the day of his espousals, in the day of the gladnesse of his heart, Cant. 3.11. There is no peace but from him, no life but by him, no blisse but through him, no comfort but for him, no joy but in him; O blessed eyes that see the Lord Iesus.
How, when, where, and wherein, the Apostles were Eye-witnesses of his Majestie, the ensuing verses chalenge to instance. Onely learne we now, to make CHRIST the Object of all our eyes. Our carnall eyes cannot now see him: we must wait for that day, when with these our eyes in our very flesh we shall behold him, Iob 19.27. Our spirituall, intellectuall, faithfull eyes may now see him. As the Israelites, when they were stung with those firy Serpents, looked upon the Bre^^^ Serpent, and were healed. So we that are stung with our sinnes, must looke upon the Sonne of man lifted up to his Crosse, that we may not perish, but have life everlasting, Iohn 3.14. No contemplation of him, no benediction from him. As Peter said to the Creeple, Act. 3.4. Looke on us: and he gave heed to them, expecting to receive something of them. So we must looke stedfastly on Christ, or shall receive no almes of comfort. Behold him in faith, that God may behold thee in him, 2 King. 2.10. When Elias was to be taken up, Elisha begged of him, that a double portion of his Spirit might bee upon him: hee answered, Thou hast asked a hard thing; neverthelesse, If thou see me, when I am taken away from thee, it shall be so unto thee: but if not, it shall not be so. A sinner doth desire of Christ, to be made a Saint, and to have his holy Spirit put upon him: Christ answers, Thou hast asked a hard thing; neverthelesse, if thou canst see me with the eye of Faith, thou shalt have thy request, thou shalt be saved.
But before wee come to behold his Majestie let us first looke upon his misery. Let our meditations follow him, from his agony in the garden, all the way of his Passion, by the tract of his Bloud, till we finde him dead on the Crosse. Behold the scourge fetching bloud from his sides, the thornes harrowing his sacred head, his life-bloud issuing out by the wounds of the nailes. And as if all that were too little, a souldier opening his side with a speare after his death, and broaching out bloud and water, Lament. 1.12. Is it nothing to you, all yee that passe by? Behold and see, if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow. Sorrow is a thing of that nature, it calls for beholding: and humanitie cannot chuse but yeeld an ocular pitie. Every good eye will turne it selfe, and looke upon them that are in distresse. Those two mercilesse men, Luke 10. that went by the wounded man; though they helped him not, yet before they passed, they looked upon him as he lay. Our Saviour being advanced on the Chariot of his Crosse, unlesse we purposely turne away our eyes, wee must needs be eye-witnesses of his sorrow. Looke upon IESUS, the Founder and Finisher of our faith, Hebr. 12.2. Thinke of the torments he suffered, of the mercies he proffered, of the sacrifice he offered: and then, as there was never griefe like his griefe; so there was never love like his love. When the Iewes beheld Christ weeping for Lazarus, they said, Behold, how hee loved him! Ioh. 11.36. When wee see CHRIST bleeding, weeping streames of bloud for us, we may well say; Behold, how he loved us!
Wee cannot now with Zaccheus, see his face, yet we may behold his mercie. We cannot with the sicke woman, touch his hemme, yet we may touch him. We cannot heare Verbum Dominum; we may still heare Verbum Domini. We cannot behold him dying on the Crosse, yet wee may contemplate the efficacie of his Crosse, and the price of his sacrifice. His Bloud is like the widowes oyle, ^ King. 4. Enough to pay all our debts, and to spare, for our selves to live upon be^^i^. Luke 10.23. Blessed are the eyes which see the things that yee see. Blessed eyes, (...) with faith and love see the LORD IESUS. Iohn 8.56. Your Father Abraham ^^joyced to see my day: he say it, and was glad. Hee saw it in hope, we see it in faith. H^^ saw it and rejoyced: who can behold, the day of CHRIST, that is, the day of salvation and not rejoyce? Indeed we are naturally borne blinde, how then shall (...)
 ^me to see? Ioh. 9.19 Onely IESUS must open our eyes, that we may see him^^^fe. Ioh. 20.29. Thomas, because thou hast seene me, thou hast beleeved. Blessed are ^^ey that have not seene, and yet haue beleeved. Tanto magis beati in credendo, quanto mi^^s expediti in videndo; Our faith shall have so much the more commendation, as our ^^es have beene permitted the lesse vision. It is held by Divines a principall part of ^^r glory in heaven, to see IESUS CHRIST. They that are in the Courts of ^^inces, behold gorgeous apparell: at rich mens tables, we see costly delicates: on ^^e sea men see strange wonders: on the land, glorious Palaces: yet Peribit visus and ^^sum; the eyes shall be stopped with dust, and the objects burnt with fire. The ^ost blessed sight, is to see God in peace: though we lose all the spectacles on earth, ^^do videamus te, Lord Iesus let us see thee to our eternall comfort. Blesse us, O Fa^^er of lights, with that everlasting vision, where no clouds nor darknesse shall hin^^r our speculation. O may we spend that eternitie never to be spent, in the joyfull ^^ght and peacefull enjoying, of Thee our Maker, thy Son our Saviour, and that ho^^ Spirit our Comforter; to whom be glory for ever. Amen.



VERSE 17. For he received from God the Father, honour and glory, when there came such a voice to him from the excellent glory; This is my beloved Sonne in whom J am well pleased.

THe Apostle might seeme to have delivered a wonder, a paradox, an incredible mystery: he must now stand to it, and declare the wonder, explaine the paradox, unfold the mystery. What was it? that they had Seene the ^ajestie of Christ. His Majesty? This is that wonder, that paradox, that mystery. ^he world had seene his paine, his contempt, his poverty; but his Majestie? It had ^^ene him come thirstie to the fountaine, hungry to anothers table, weary to his re^^se, desiring entertainment where he found it not: but his Majesty? It had seene ^^m crowned with thornes, bleeding with scourges, forsaken on the Crosse: but his ^ajesty? It had seene him in the forme of servant, full of ignominie, full of misery; ^ut full of Majesty? It never saw that. Well then, this Majesty doth our Apostle de^^are: he hath said it, he will prove it. For he received from the Father honour and glo^^e. We say, that honour conferred by the King, is dyed in graine, and will hold co^^ur: yet it hath the change, for though the colour hold, the garment it selfe will ^eare out. Now when the garment is tottered to rags, farewell colour: so when the ^ody is consumed to dust, farewell honour. But when the King of heaven gives ho^our, it will hold indeed:
--hunc nec Iovis ira, nec ignis,Non ferrum poterit, nec edax abolere vetustas.
^s Isaac said Iacob, I have blessed him, and he shall be blessed: so God saith of that ^an, I have honoured him, and he shall be honoured.
He received from God the Father, etc.] You see, the forme of the words is Re^^ptory; He ^^ceived. The ^arcels are ^ive:
Who, Christ; He received.Of whom, God; Of God the Father.What, Honour and glory.When; When the voice came from the excellent glory.How; This is my beloved Sonne, etc.

There could be no Testimony, Plenius vel planius, manifestius vel magnificent^^ more perspicuous, or more glorious. Honour requires reverence: God hath honoured his Sonne, let us honour the Father, and give the devout reverence of humble hearts to the whole Trinity.
He received.] This is the first Circumstance, the person to whom this honour is given. He received, but Receiving implies want; now is there any want in Christ? Coloss. 1.9. It pleased the Father, that in him should all fulnesse dwell. The oyle of gladnesse did so fill him, that it ran over the brinkes of his Humanity, and fills us (...) members. Of his fulnesse we have all received, grace for grace, Ioh. 1.16. The Plenitude of Christ was not Plenitudo sufficientiae, a sufficient fulnesse, enough to serve his turne: but superabundantiae, an over-flowing fulnesse; a sea of grace, able to fill all (...) chanels. Not Transitionis, a passing or vanishing fulnesse; as a Cisterne may be^^^l, and emptied againe by cockes: but Habitationis, a permanent and inexhaustible fulnesse: it dwels in him. How then is hee said to receive? Could there be addition, where is no defect? Can a thing be more than full? This receit doth in nothing prejudice the immensenesse of the Deity: for Christ must be considered two waies, as he is God, and as he is man. He that mediates betweene both, must be both. He^^ then the answer is easie; It is God that gives, and it is man that receives. The Father hath not more glory, omnipotent, or perfection, than the Sonne, as he is God; b^^ as this Son of God is made the son of man, he receives grace and glory. God gives to man, and receives nothing of him: man receives of God, and gives nothing to him. Heare him speake as God; All thine are mine, Ioh. 17.10. Heare him as man, Vers. 9. They whom thou hast given me, are thine. As man he receives of the Spirit, Luke 14.18. As God he communicates to the Spirit, Ioh. 16.14. He shall receive of mine. The Son takes of the Father, and the Spirit takes of the Son, vers. 15. Yet so that what is of one Person, is of the whole Deitie; excepting onely those personal and individuall proprieties; as the Father to be the Father, and to beget; the Son (...) be the Son, and begotten, not to beget; the Spirit neither to beget, nor to be begotten, but to proceed. So the Son onely to be man, not the Father nor the Spirit. As God he had no beginning, as man he received a beginning in time, Galath. 4.4. As man, he was made of his mother; as God, his mother was made by him: so he is both Mariae Factor, and Filius, the Father of Mary, and the Son of Mary. As God, he chargeth us to Continue in verbo suo, in his owne Word, Ioh. 8.31. and vers. 51. If a man keepe my saying, he shall never see death. As man, he confesseth, Ioh. 7.16. My doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me. As heIohn 8.49. honours the Father, so hee receives honour of the Father, Ioh. 13.32. God doth glorifie him, and is glorified in him. As God he sayes, I have of mine owne: as man, All things are delivered unto mee of the Father. As God, he doth what he will in heaven, and earth, and all places: as man; A^ power is given to me in heaven and in earth, Mat. 28.18. Thus is this doctrine cleane; that CHRIST, who as GOD gives all things, as he is man receives something here, Honour and glory.
Now for whom doth Christ come to be a Receiver? For whose sake did eternity admit an estate to receive in time? Perfection it selfe to grow in stature? Wisdome it selfe to increase in knowledge? not for himselfe, but for us. Contentus ^^pere, ut posset tribuere; He would take of God, that we might take of him, Gen. 13.2. Abraham was wealthy, exceeding rich in cattell, silver, and gold: yet when he recovered the spoile of Sodome, and it was re-offered him by the King; he tooke somewhat: but how much? no more than he meant to give away, Gen. 14.23. I will ^^^ take away any thing from thee for my selfe, lest thou shouldest say, I have made Abra^^^ rich: but I will accept a portion for the young men that went with me. Christ was so rich, that he need not receive honour and glory: yet was hee content to receive it of his Father, that he might give it to us his children.
From God the Father.] This is the second Circumstance, of whom he received it. Here observe the manifest distinction of Persons in the Deity. The Father
 ^ives honour, the Sonne receives it. The Father speakes from heaven, the Sonne ^eares it. Personae non confundendae, sed suis proprietatibus secernendae, Aug. There must be no confusion of the Persons, but a distinction of their proprieties. We be^eeve, there is a Father, Eo quod habet filium, because he hath a Sonne: wee be^eeve there is a Sonne, Eo quod habet Patrem, because he hath a Father. We beleeve here is an Holy Ghost, proceeding from the Father and the Sonne, coequall and ^oevall with the Father and the Son. Because he is a Divine Person, and neither the Father nor the Sonne. Non confusa in una Persona Trinitas, against Sabellius: non digisa in natura Divinitas, against Arrius. The father is not greater than the Son, nor ^he Sonne than the Spirit: Eadem aequalitas, eadem aeternitas. But the father is said to ^end the sonne, and the sonne to send the Spirit: this seemes to implie some superio^^tie of the sender to the person sent? The Father sends, and is not sent: the ^onne sends, and is sent: the Holy Ghost is sent, and sendeth not: yet is ^here no inequalitie. There are three wayes of sending. 1. Per authoritatem, ^y authoritie, so a superior sends an inferior. 2. Per consilium, by advise ^nd Councell: so the lesse may send the greater. As the privy Councell may ^end the king to take the aire, or to lead an army. So an equall may send his ^quall; as Act. 15. the Elders sent Paul and Barnabas to Ierusalem. 3. Per originem, ^s the fountaine naturally sends forth the spring. So the Father sends the Sonne, the Sonne sends the spirit. The father as the fountaine begets, the Son is begotten, the Holy Ghost proceeds. CHRIST is said to be sent in respect of his acception of ^nother nature. Gal. 4.4. When the fulnesse of time was come, God sent his Son made of woman. The man confesseth; My Father is greater than I: yet in regard of his Person, I and my Father are one, Ioh. 10.30. And Saint Iohn addes to them the Holy Ghost, and concludes; These three are one.
The word Trinitie, say our Papicolists, is not found in the Scriptures: yet the ^ubstance of the word is apparent, Matth. 3. At the Baptisme of CHRIST, there was a manifestation of the three Persons. Patris vox auditur, etc. the voice of the Father is heard, the Humanitie of the Sonne is felt, the visible signe of the Holy Ghost is perceived. Who spake of his Son, but the Father, who was baptised and ^poken to, but the Sonne? Neither of these appeared in the forme of a Dove, but ^he Holy Ghost. A Trinitie did begin both the world and the word, that is the Scripture. Gen. 1 Creavit Elohim coelum and terram. The verbe is singular, Creavit; ^oting the most simple essence of God. The substantive plurall, not El, but Elohim, ^o shew the pluralitie of Persons. It is observed on, Deut. 6.4. Dominus noster De^s unus est Dominus. The Lord our God is one Lord. Why doth Moses thrice mention the name of God, but to shew the distinction of three persons? Why doth he apply the word Vnus, One, to all of them, but to shew the unitie of essence? Why is Noster, Our, put in the second place; not in the first, nor in the last, but in the middle or second place; but to shew that the second person should take our nature upon him? Aug. Esa. 6.3. Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of hostes, the whole earth is full of his glory. Ter Sanctus, thrice is God called Holy, to note unto us the three persons. Dominus non domini, deus non dii; once Lord, once God: and the earth is full of His glory, not Their glory; here is the unitie of the essence. Gen. 1.26. Let us make man in ^ur Image, Faciamus, let Vs make; there is a Pluralitie of Person. Ad imaginem nostram, to our Image, not Images; there is the unitie of the Essence. Matth. 28.19. Baptisme in the name of the Father, of the Sonne, and of the Holy Ghost. The Father, Sonne, and Holy Ghost; there are three distinct Persons: in Nomine, non in nominibus; in the Name, not names; there is one Essence. The Holy Ghost is called the finger of God, CHRIST the Hand of the Father: now as the finger is in the hand, and the hand in the body: so of one and the same most pure and simple essence is the Father, Sonne, and Spirit. But as it was reported of Alanus, when he promised his auditorie to discourse the next Sunday, more clearely of the Trinitie, and to make plaine that mysterie: while he was studying the point by the Sea-side,
 he spied a boy very busy with a little spoone, trudging often betweene the sea and a small hole he had digged in the ground. Alanus asked him, what he meant: the boy answers, I intend to bring all the Sea into this pit. Alanus replies, why doest thou attempt such impossibilities, and mispend thy time? The boy answers; So doest thou Alanus: I shall as soone bring all the sea into this hole, as thou bring all the knowledge of the Trinitie into thy head: All is equally possible: we have began together, we shall finish together: saving of the two, my labour hath more hope and possibility of taking effect. I conclude with Bern. Scrutari temeritas, credere piet^^, praedicare securitas, noscere aeterna faelicitas. It is rashnesse to search, godlinesse to beleeve, safenesse to preach, and eternall blessednesse to know the Trinitie, yet let us know to praise the Trinitie. In the words of our Church; Glory be to the Father, to the Sonne, and to the Holy Ghost, And let all answer; As it was in the beginning, (...) now, and ever shall be world without end. Amen.
Honour and Glory.] This is the third circumstance, the matter what he received Observe we here three collections.
1 CHRIST would receive honour of his Father. The divell would have given him glory: Matth. 4.8. When upon a high mountaine he shewed him all the kingdomes of the world, and the glory of them: All these will I give thee, if thou wilt fall downe and worship me. Where was Promissum and Pactum: his promise, all these will I give thee: his Covenant, bargaine, or condition, Si cadens adoraveris ^t. If falling downe thou wilt worship me. This seemes to be a faire match; for one crouch of his knee, to have so many Crownes for his head: for a little prostration, so great promotion. If the divell had proffered this to Alexander, or to Cesar; it had beene a bargaine. When he made this offer to the Hierarchie of Rome, they presently tooke him at his word. But our Saviour would none of it: he knew that Satan could give no honour to another, that had none himselfe: that this glory would dishonour him, and his Father also. Therefore he requited him with, Get thee hence Satan. Men would have given him honour: they purposed to have Crowned him King. Ioh. 6.15. but he refused it. I receive not honour from men, Ioh. 5.41. Divine and religious honour he refused not: they worshipped him, this he suffered. He that honours me, honours my Father; this he preached. But humane and temporary honour he rejected; and would none of their hasty coronation with carnall hands. Ioh. 18.36. My kingdome is not of this world. Yea more, he sought not to honour himselfe. Ioh. 8.50. I seeke not mine owne glory. Verse 54. If I honour my selfe, my honour is nothing. Teaching us to accept praises from others lips, not to be our owne trumpets. But when the Father gives him Honour, this he receives, this is onely worth acceptance. 2 Cor. 10.18. For not he that commendeth himselfe is approved, but whom the Lord commendeth. For this he prayes. Ioh. 12.28. Father, glorifie thy Name. The Father in honouring the Sonne, honoured himselfe. As CHRIST said; He that hath seene me, hath seene the Father: He that beleeves in me, beleeves in my Father: He that receives me, receives my Father: so he that honoureth me, honoureth my Father. But Honor in conference, non in accipiente; honor is in the Person giving it, not in him that receives it: but Christ that received it, was also God the giver of it. It is he that gives honour and glory, and it is he that takes honour and glory, and to him he honour and glory for ever.
2 All honour and glory is CHRISTS; as being delivered to him by the Father, Luk. 10.22. He is Primogenitus, the first begotten, the only begotten of God; only worthy of the kingdome. Rev. 5.12. Worthy is the Lambe that was slaine, to receive power, and honour, and glory. Worthy; when he takes it, he doth not I^^^dere alienum, or arripere indebitum; arrogate that to himselfe which is not his owne right: but Dignus est, he is Worthy. It is his owne proprietie; yet he is content to communicate and impart it. The glory which thou gavest me, I have given them, Ioh. 17.22. The same glory Qualiter non Aequaliter: the same glory, not the same degree of glory. Eandem in natura, non in mensura: the same in nature, not so much
 i^ measure. Let the priviledge of Primogeniture be reserved to himselfe. 1 Cor. 15.^1. There is one glory of the Sun, another glory of the Moone, and another glory of the ^^rres. Christ is that Sun which gives glory to us the starres. Of his fulnesse we have received grace for grace here, glory for glory hereafter. On earth the glory that divided, seemes to be diminished: and one thinke that, so much honour is taken ^^m himselfe, as is added to another. But in heaven the glory of Christ shall not abated to himselfe, though it be communicated to millions. Nor shall ones glo^^^ ecclipse anothers: Tanta singulis, quanta omnibus: such shall be to every one, as is any one. We see to whom we are beholde^ for our honour. 2 Sam. 9.7. David ^^aced Mephibosheth, set him at his owne table, teste^^ed him all the land of his grand^^ther Saul; and all for the love that he bare to his father Ionathan. So God honou^^^h us, sets us at his owne table, yeaRev. 3.21. with his Son in his Throne; restoreth to us all the ^^heritance which our Grandfather Adam lost, yea more than ever ^e possessed; and (...) this for his Sonne, and our Father, IESUS CHRIST his sake. King Pha^^^h, honoured the Eleven Patriarchs for Iosephs sake, gave them the fat of the ^nd of Aegypt, and highly enriched them. So GOD honoureth us with his his grace this life, and with his glory in the life to come, and all for Iesus his sake.
3 All true and blessed honour comes from God, and is to be sought there. Iob ^^^es, it is He that girds on the kings girdle. Promotion commeth neither from the East, ^^r from the West; from North nor South, but only from the Lord; saith the Psal^ist. It is true that wordly honour is often arrogated: and Datur indigno dignita^. ^ignitas a doo, non Indignus: the honour is of God, not the us worthy person that ^^^th it. He alwaies gives Principatum, the dominion: not alwayes Principem, the ^overnour: for he may come to it by Intrusion, and hold it by usurpation.
The honour of this world is meerely titular. Either infeoffed to the bloud: ^^d what glory is it to the degenerate sonne, that such a noble Father begot him? ^ll greatnesse had a beginning, and the beginning of that greatnesse was Desert. Am noble? let me know, this Noblenesse is the lest part of mine: my fathers wonne it ^y their vertue: they had the glory, I enjoy but the Titles. This priviledge of bloud, ^ithout respondent vertues, is but an empty conduit pipe: it is a pipe still, but it hath ^o water in it. Another by his just merite hath gotten honour: it is derided, because is not derived: yet is that man more truely honourable. For the other weares ^ut the shadow of his Predecessors triumphs: this man weares the substance of his ^wne. Et que non fecimus ipsi, vix ea nostra voco. It was a witty answer, that a young ^entleman gave to Arn^bius, one who disgraced his honour because it was of ^he first head: my Genealogie. is a shame to mee, but thou art a shame to ^y Genealogie. Or, as a Prelates sonne said to a noble heire, who twitted ^s upstart Gentry: Ego sum ortus domus meae, tuos casus tua: I am the East or ri^ng of my house, thou art the West, and falling of thine. It is a shame for a man ^o thinke, that the booke of his Pedigree, and his Fathers Seale-ring, are sufficient ^mblemes of honour: that he is glorious enough, because he is ^attered. Or, it may ^ee, there is an honour entailed to riches as in the Citie, credit growes just as fast as money: and in the countrey, reputation is measured by the acre. Then honour must ^e overtaken, when it cannot be met. And now some honourable progenitor must ^e found out, that either was dead many hundred yeares since, or never was noble (...) perhaps never was at all. Moses condemned it for a hainous sin to steale children: ^ut we have those that think it no sin to steale parents. This is a popular, ticular, ridi^ulous honour. If thou wouldest know such a one, Nudum i^spice, loo^e upon him ^^ked, saith Seneca. Depona^ patrim^^nd, let him put off his patri^io^ie, let him (...) ^ff the vaine acclamations of the multitude, let him put off his popularity, let him (...) of his opulencle; and al^^ fo^tui^^^dudaci^, and all the other const^^^ties of (...) ^^une: corpus ipsum exuat, animum intuere: let him put off his very body, looke (...) ^^^o his soule. Then thou must see, Quia^^^i^l qua^t n^f^^, ^^^no (...) ^^gnuo; how noble he is, by observing how good he is w^ither he ^well with ^^ther mans subtance,
 or stand upon his owne worth. A good man will not follow honour, but is all if he let it overtake him. Honorem Cato non debuit petere, sed civit ^s ob v^t^^^ non petenti reddere, Aug. It was not for Cato to beg honour of the Citie, b^^^ the Citie to give him honour for his vertue.
Quintus C^^i^^e writes of a Gardiner, a very poore man rich in all plentie, ^^cept plentie of riches. Alexander of Macedon proffered him the kingdome of S^^^ but he refused it with this answere. Nunquam erit mihi curiae perdere, quod (...) erat mihi curae potere. That shall never trouble me with care to lose, which did ^ver trouble me with care to get. Memorable and worthy, and such a proced^^^ may cast a blush on the cheekes of Christians: for wee are all too greedy (...) honour.
Well if we would be honoured, let us honour CHRIST: for in is, and (...) him comes, al Honour. The most noble deriving of our selves, is from Christ: the (...) Nobilitie is the nobilitie of Faith, and the best Genealogie the genealogie of g^^^ workes. Mens earthly glories are like their shadowes in the Sunne: the bodies ^^^dow is at morning before us, at noon beside us, at night behind us. So their ho^^^^ is at morning before them, in a goodly lustre: at noone in the full beside them, wi^^ a violent heate: at evening in the wane behind them, with a neglected pitie. Only some differ in their noone or meridian of greatnesse: for in stead of having their ^^nour besides them, they are besides their honour. 1 Sam. 2.30. Them that honour me, I will honour: and they that despise me, shall be light esteemed; saith the Lord. H^^ that shall seeke the Lords honour, and neglect his owne: shall find his owne hono^^ in the Lords. A man while hee hunts after his owne shadow, flies from the same and his shadow is still unovertaken before him: but when he turnes his face to the sunne, and followes that, his shadow will follow him. He that seekes honour, a^^ turnes his backe upon CHRIST, cannot reach it; it is too swift of foote for him let him turne his face to CHRIST, and follow him; behold, honour waies a^^ his backe, and will never faile to attend him. Now seeing we looke for all hono^^ and glory from CHRIST, let us ascribe all honour and glory to CHRIST, singing that heavenly Hymne, Revel. 7.12. Blessing, and glory, and wisedome, (...) thanksgiving, and honour, and power, and might bee unto our God for ever and e^^. Amen.
When there came such a voice to him from this excellent glory.] This is the fourth circumstance, the time when; the Apostle Beheld, and their Master record, this glory and Majestie. For to this we must restore the last clause of the former verse: They were eye-witnesses of his Majestie: when? at this time, when there come such a voice from the excellent glory. Considering therefore together, their (...) Testimonie, with his audible assurance from the supreme glory; we may justly conceive here three things:
A
Spectacle, with the time of it; When they saw it.Oracle; Such a voice from heaven.Miracle; that a uoice should be heard on earth, which d^^^e, from (...) excellent glory.
So there is in the words, Quando, Qu^^^ando, inde When it was; at the (...) of his glorious testification. How, by a voice, such a voice. From whence, s^^^ (...) excellent glory.
When ^b^ir come.] The precise denomination of the time and place of (...) glorious revelation, but al^^e questionable, but without al doubt it we (...) figuration no the ^o^^t i^ for so the Apostle declares himselfe in the next verse. (...) but his Majestie might appeare also at other times, and in other matters, yet (...) most conspicuously.
For they speake not ^er^ of Christs ^^ding in triumph to Ierusalem, (...) (...). When the people gave the acclamation of Hosanna, and Blessed is he that (...)
 ^^th in the Name of the Lord; they then saw his Majestie. Ver. 5. Tell yee the daugh^^^ of Sion, Behold, thy king commeth. Though meekely, sitting upon an Asse; yet thy ^^ng. The veile of his humility was so farre lifted up, that they might see his Ma^^stie. But the Apostle speakes of a sight, not common to the people, but peculiar to ^^emselves.
They speake not here of his miracles, wherein also appeared his Majestie. When ^e quieted the winds and seas, walked on the waters, raised the dead, cast out divelsl ^^re was Majestie. When, Matth. 21.12. he went into the Temple, cast out all them ^^at bought and sold in it, and overthrew the tables of the mony changers. Ierome ^^nceives this to be the greatest of all his miracles. His wonders did evidently prove ^^s majestie. Now these were of two sorts; such as he wrought upon the bodies of ^en, which we most admire because they are most visible, and subject to sense. And ^^her, that he wrought upon the minds of men; Quantum ad immutandas interiores ^^res, as the Schoole speakes; to the change of the inward power: and these were ^^e greater miracles; but because they were not so visible, therefore not so remar^^ble. Act 4.13. The Iewes hearing the words, and seeing the wonders, wrought (...) Peter and Iohn and perceiving that they were unlearned men; Admirabantur, they ^ought it a miracle: and conclude, that they had beene with IESUS. If this mira^^e be wrought upon a man, that his conscience be sanctified, sure he hath beene with ^^sus, or Iesus hath beene with him. Matth. 9.9. CHRIST findes Matthew at the ^^ceite of custom; and saies but, Follow me, and he arose and followed him. Though ^e sate at the custome house, like an Vsurer in his broking house, yet upon his call he ^^llowed him. Fulgur divinae majestatis videntem ad se traxit. Some strange light^^ng of Majestie appeared in his lookes, and miraculously drew a worldling unto ^^m, Luk. 4.29. They brought him to the brow of a steepe hill, purposing to cast, ^^m downe headlong; But he passing through the mids of them, went his way. Stare in ^^edio insidiantum, and non apprehendi; to stand in the midst of his enemies, and no ^an able to lay hands upon him; here was a great majestie, Chrys. Ioh. 18.6. The ^ind rabble came with torches, the cowards with swords, a traitor with a band of men; ^^d as if multitudes were not sufficient, there must be Officers among them: but ^hat was the issue? Assoone as he said unto them, I am he, they went backward, and fell to ^e ground. With the breath of two short wordes, sweetely and kindly spoken, Ego ^^m, I am he; they were repelled. Quid faciet judicaturus, qui hoc fecit judicandus? Quid regnaturus poterit, qui hoc moriturus potuit? Aug. What can he doe when he shall ^^dge, that did thus when he was to be judged? What shall be his power raigning, ^hen such was his power even dying? Here was Majestie. But of all, that Matth. ^1.12. did farre transcend in expressing his Majestie. That one man unarmed, with^ut guard of souldiers, without a Commission from Herod or Cesar: in despight ^f the Scribes that hated him: of the people that contemned him: should cast forth ^en, tradesmen, covetous tradesmen! How Demetrius would have stormed to see ^is occupation of silver shrines endangered, endammaged; and cryed out two houres ^ogether; Great is Diana of the Ephesians! Yea, that he should cast forth abundance ^f them; such a multitude of men and cattell, that a pretty army could hardly have ^erformed it. And that with a little Whip, without noise, contradiction, or tumult! Oh here was Majestie. Igneum quiddam and Sydereum radiabat in oculis ejus. ^ieron. Something more bright than the fire or starres did certainely shine in his ^yes. Such a Majestie of Divinitie appeared in his lookes, that none durst resist him. ^rigen. This was a greater miracle, than turning water into wine: there Inanimata ^ateria, a matter without life doth yeeld unto him: but in this, Tot milium hominum ^omantur ingenia; the refractary and perverse hearts of many thousands of obstinate ^en are convinced. Here they might manifestly see his Majestie: but of this our Apostle discourseth not.
Nor yet of that visible scissure of heaven, Matth. 3. Where was manifest the ^eavens apertion, the Spirits descension, the Fathers testification; This is my beloved
 Sonne. There was a voice, and a voice from heaven, and witnessing the same thing th^^ here: even there they were eye-witnesses of his majestie: but neither is that pla^^ meant here.
Now is it understood of that testimonie, Ioh. 12.28. There was also a vi^, and a voice from heaven and from the Father in heaven; and a voice that ho^^^ CHRIST, I have both glorified it, and I will glorifie it againe. The people said, i^ Thundred, others that an Angell spake; CHRIST, saies plainely, that the voice came for their sakes. Ver. 30. Here also were they witnesses of his Majestie: but ^^ither to that testimonie hath our Apostle here a reference.
Nor is it meant of his Resurrection from death, worthy of all admiration. When out of a Sepulcher, a sepulcher not of earth, but of Stone, one entire stone without any seame or fissure in it: another stone rolled to it, that stone sealed th^^ seale guarded: the Lord arose, bursting the bands of death, and triumphing over the grave: manifesting himselfe to one, to two, to tenne, to more than five hundred brethren at once, and thus dwelling on the earth fortie dayes! Here was a cleare demonstration of his powerfull majestie.
Lastly, it is not referred to his triumphant Ascension; when he led captivitie captive, and went up gloriously to the place whence he came. At this the Apostles were present, beholding while he was taken up, Act. 1.9. He was received out of their sight, therfore till that moment they had the sight of him. They saw the Angels the testified it; Why stand yee gazing up into heaven? This same Iesus shall come from heaven, in the like manner as yee have seene him goe into heaven. They saw him, and they worshipped him, Luk. 24.52. Here was also an apparant manifestation of his majestie. Act. 1.8. Yee shall be witnesses unto me. Himselfe told them immediately before, that they should be witnesses of this: and here was a sufficient Majestie for their testimonie, and they gave a sufficient testimonie of that Majestie.
But yet Saint Peter intends another, and that a more especially instance: (...) seene to the people, as were some of the former glories: nor to all the Apostles, a^ were the rest. But particularly to three, whom the LORD IESUS chose one. Matth. 17.1. Iesus taketh Peter, and Iames, and Iohn, and bringeth them up into a high mountaine apart: And was transfigured before them. Why this revelation was given to them three only; Non qui legit, sed qui elegit, novit: not he that reads it, but he he that chose them knowes. So far as we may soberly, and with due reverence search the next verse will fitly call on us to consider.
But why did the Apostle single out that Time and Place, more than any other, to exemplifie CHRISTS Majestie, and the honour confer'd on him by the Father. 2. Because Moses and Elias appeard to him there: in all the rest of his miracles he had no company but men on earth, now he had a testimonie from two glorious Saints in heaven. His command was knowen to be great over the creatures below, this was every day conspicuous: but that now it should extend to heaven, but was an ample shew of Majestie. 2. But especially because he was caelesti gloria ^^tus; his face shining as the Sunne, and his rayment white as the light. Nil terrenum ^^spiciebatur, sed caelestis undique refulgebat Majestas. Nothing of earth was seene, but a divine and heavenly Majestie appeared. For this was a little mappe of heaven, a glimpse or abridgement of that infinite glory. Before his power might appeare, (...) under the veile of his mortall flesh: now the manhood is become glorious. As the fire makes every thing that is cast into it, like it selfe: so the glory circling him, and inherent upon his body, similem sibi reddidit humanitatem, made his humanitie gloririous like it selfe.
This was then the most magnificent demonstration of his Majestie; where heaven was brought downe to earth to illustrate it. He rose from the grave to the earth of the living, there was Majestie, Rom. 1.4. For in this he declared himselfe to be the Sonne of God with power, by the resurrection from the dead. He ascended from the earth to heaven, there was Majestie. But here he commanded heaven to come downe
 (...) him, this was the greatest declaration of his Majestie. Now he sits in heaven with ^ajesty, Hebr 8.1. On the right hand of the Throne of the Majestie in the heavens. He ^^all one day come to judge the world with Majesty. The Lord hath given him this ^onour and Majestie; A Name which is above every name. Let us ascribe glory to that ^ajesty, and blessed be his Majesty for ever! Here now it is plaine, what the Apo^^es saw: the world was eye-witnesse of his misery, they, of his Majestie. The ^orld beheld him in the forme of a Servant, they as their Master and Maker. The ^orld, as a worme, not a man: they, as the King of glory. The world, as a thing ^ot desireable: they, as Fairer than all the children of men, Psal. 45.2. Blessed eyes ad^^tted to this vision! It was Saint Augustines wish to have seene three things: Rome ^her glory, Paul in the Pulpit, CHRIST in the flesh. That is now past hope ^re on earth, our labour must be to see him hereafter in Heaven. Esay 33.17. Thine ^^es shall see the King in his beautie. LORD give us this vision, this fruition, and we ^e then blessed for ever.
Such a voice.] This is the second point, the manner how God testified, con^^rning the honour of his Sonne: by a voice, his owne voice. The Logicians di^^inguish betweene Sonus, Vox, and Verbum; a Sound, a Voice, and a Word. Sound of insensible things, as Lute, Organ, etc. Voice, of sensible, but irrationall, as ^easts: a Word, of that which hath both sense and reason, man. Here is a Voice, at a Word with it. A word is first conceived in the heart, and then uttered by the ^oice: yet we heare the voice before we know the word. Iohn calls himselfe, The ^^ice of a Crier: CHRIST the eternall Word, was before Iohn, and all other voi^^s. For, Ioh. 1.1. In the beginning was the Word: and that beginning was before (...) beginnings, without beginning; Principium sine principio: yet the world knew not ^e Word, till it was preached by the voice of men and Angells. The word in it ^^lfe is before the voice, yet to us the voice goes before the word, Iohn 1.15. Hee ^^at commeth after me, was before me. Tully commends voices, Socrates for sweetnesse, ^^sias for subtiltie, Hyperides for sharpenesse, Aeschines for shrilnesse, Demosthenes ^^r powerfulnesse. Gravity in Affrican, smoothnesse in Laelius; rare voices! In ho^^ Writ we admire a sanctified boldnesse in Peter, profoundnesse in Paul, loftinesse in ^^hn, vehemencie in him and his brother Iames, those two sonnes of Thunder; fer^^ncie in Simon the zealous. Among Ecclesiasticall Writers, we admire waight in ^ertullian, a gracious composure of well mattered words in Lactantius, a flowing ^^eech in Cyprian, a familiar statelinesse in Chrysostome, a conscionable delight in Ber^^rd, and all these graces in good Saint Augustine. Some construed the Scriptures ^^egorically, as Origen: some literally, as Hierome: some morally, as Gregory: ^^hers pathetically, as Chrysostome: others dogmatically, as Augustine. The new ^riters have their severall voices: Peter Martyr copiously judiciall: Zanchius ju^^ciously copious. Luther wrote with a cole on the walls of his chamber: Res and ^^rba Philippus, res sine verbis Lutherus, verba sine re Erasmus, Nec res nec verba Ca^lostadius. Calvine was behinde none, not the best of them, for a sweet diluci^^tion of the Scriptures, and urging of sollid arguments against the Antichristi^^s. One is happie in expounding the words, another in delivering the matter, a ^^ird for cases of conscience, a fourth to determine the Schoole-doubts. But now ^^t all these together: an hundred Peters and Pauls, a thousand Bernards and Au^^tines, a million of Calvins and Melancthons: let not their voices be once na^^ed with this voice. They all spake as children, this is the voice of the An^^ent of dayes, Ioh. 7.46. Never spake man, as GOD himselfe speaketh. Herod, it ^^emes, had a pleasing voice, when he drew to himselfe such an acclamation, Act. ^^.22. It is the voice of a god, and not of a man. But the Angell proved to Herods ^^nfusion, that acclamation to be the voices of men, not of God. But this voice that ^^me from heaven concerning this God and man, was the voice of God, not of man. ^he Angell that talked with Zachary, spake Debarim tohim, debarim nehummim, ^ach. 1.13. Good words, and comfortable words. But this voice is the voice of Power,
 the voice of comfort, the voice of love, the voice of life. Man hath virtutem ^^cis, power to speak: but God reserves to himselfe vocem virtutis, to speak in power, Psal. 67.33. Loe, he doth send out his voice, and that a mighty voice. Saint Paul had a powerfull voice, when he said to the Creeple with a loud voice, stand upright on ^y feet: And he leaped and walked, Act. 14.10. In so much that when the people saw it, they cried; The gods are come downe to us in the likenesse of men. S. Peter had a power full voice, when he perswaded three thousand soules at one Sermon. But this voice of power gave power to all their voices. Herodotus tells us of an Aegyptian, that had in shrill a voice, that From the Promontory of Hister he was heard by Histaeus, Admirall of Darius, being then at Miletum. But this is the voice, that shall one day be heard from one end of the world to the other. Christ here heard the voice of his Father, we shall all heare the voice of Christ, Ioh. 5.28. The houre commeth, in the which (...) that are in the graves shall heare his voice. This shall be a wonderfull voice, terrible (...) the wicked. When Ioseph revealed himselfe to his brethren; I am Ioseph, Gen. 45.3. they could not answer him, for they were terrified at his presence. But when he added, ver. 4. Frater vester, I am Ioseph, Your brother, they were then comforted. When Christ shall say to the reprobates, I am Iesus; Iesus whom yee contemned, scorned, persecuted, sacrilegiously robbed; whose servants ye have hated; they shall be confo^^ded. But when he addes to the faithfull, Frater vester, I am Iesus, Your Brother; they shall be with heavenly peace rejoyced. Will you consider the power of the Lords voice? Looke Psal. 29. The voice of the Lord divideth the flames of fire. The Nightingale hath a sweet voice, but a leane carcase: vox and praeterea nihil; a voice, and nothing else but a voice: and so have all hypocrites. But the Lords voice will be against them with a Woe, Heb. 3.15. To day if ye will heare his voice, harden not your hearts. Let us now heare his voice with obedience, lest we one day heare it with a vengeance. Non (...) hominem sonat, O Deus certe. It is not an ordinary voice, but Vox hujusmodi, Such a voice. Saul said to his subject, 1 Sam. 24.16. Is this thy voice, my son David? Wel^ may we say; Is this thy voice, O Lord our King? We will then obey it, Psal. 85.^. I will heare what the Lord will speake, for he will speake peace to his people. The Lord, apply this voice to our hearts, and our hearts to this voice.
From the excellent glory.] This is the last circumstance, the place whence it came. There is a great distance betweene Mount Tabor and heaven: yet was a voice heare in the hill, which came De magnifica illa gloria, From that excellent glory. There be glories in the world, but they are not Excellent. Israel ascribes glory to Reuben, but hea ddes an instabilitie to it, Gen. 49.4. Reuben, the excellencie of dignitie, and the excellencie of power; but unstable as waters, thou shalt not excell. Vnstable as waters, that is, a fluid glory: Thou shalt not excell, there is a barre in the Armes. Such a the condition of all worldly glory; but the glory that shall bee revealed in us, is an exceeding and eternall waight, 2 Cor. 4.17. This Glory is admirable in foure excellencies: for the Dignity, for the Clarity, for the verity, and for the Eternity of it.
1 For Dignitie, it is a glory: and this hath beene the scope of most mens endevours and reaches. There is not the silliest Artizan, Manuary, or Mechanick, but would be glorious for something. Mutius Scevola burnt his owne hand for striking amisse. Curtius in glittering armour, mounted on his horse, cast himselfe headlong into a gulfe, to deliver his countrey from the plague: Vicit amor patria, ^^dumque immensa cupido. If they did thus for a puffe, what should we doe for this excellent glory! Esa. 23.8. The Citizens of Tyre are said to have beene compa^^^ unto Princes: but in this glory, every Citizen is a crowned King: none but King (...) free men of that Incorporation. Where a man shall videre ad voluntatem, habet (...) voluptatem, frui ad securitatem; see what he liketh, have what he delighteth, and enjoy it without envie, without end. Non est timor in finibus tuis, quia Dominus posuit fines tuos pacem; There is no feare in the borders of it, for the Lord hath compa^^^ it with peace for ever.
2 For Claritie, it is not a hidden, but as Saint Paul saith, a Revealed glory. ki^^
 now indeed hidden; but when Christ our life shall appeare, then shall we also appeare with him in glory, Col. 3.4. Cleare, both for Condition, it shall be excellent: for cognition and apprehension, it shall be seene in the full excellencie of it. It is Perenne solstitium: nec ^ongitudo terminum, nec claritas occasum, nec satietas fastidium habebit, Bern. It is an everlasting Solstice; the length is interminable, the brightnesse unchangeable, the fulnesse unweariable. Our very bodies shall be made glorious; The righteous shall shine as the Sunne. Qualis erit splendor animarum, quando solis splendorem habebit lux cor^orum? Bern. What shall be the glory of our soules, when the Sun it selfe shall not equall the glory of our bodies? If the glory of the body be but the body of glory: then the soule of glory is the glory of the soule. Yea, then the Sun shall septuple his owne glory, and we shall centuple the glory of the Sun. It is a glory to the Firmament, that it is stucke full of such shining lampes; a thousand times excelling the luster of precious stones. O then thinke what it will be, to walke in the Courts of heaven, and to behold so many millions of Stars; spirituall and intellectuall Stars: a sight able to ravish us! If they that dwell in the Courts of Kings, make such a glorious shew with their garments, borrowed from worms, or from the earths excrementall bowels: what a delightfull a sight will it be to behold the splendour of Gods owne ^mmortall Courtiers!
3 For verity, it shall be indeed, not in shew only, but upon us. The worldling is all glorious without, but the Kings daughter is all glorious within, Psal. 45.14. That is a shadow, this a substance. Civill honour, sayes the Philosopher, is not in the person honoured, but honouring: the worldlings glory depends on the possession of vaine matters, and the breath of vaine men; therefore hath no true being. But this is a true and substantiall glory, because affixed to him whose glory is immutable, 2. Cor. 4.17. Our light affliction, which is but for a moment, worketh for us an exceeding and eternall weight of glory. The crosse is light, the crowne weightie. The crosse but for a moment, the crowne for ever. The pleasures of sin are but for a season; therefore nothing, being compared with that infinite waight of eternall wrath. But as the seven yeares of famine in Aegypt, did quite eat up the seven yeares of plenty: so the reprobates endlesse paines shall eat up their short pleasures. On the contrary, there is a ^ime to weepe, and a time to laugh: the good man shall not much remember the dayes of his sorrow, because God answereth him in the joy of his heart, Eccles. 5.20. not much remember it, not all. Therefore Non quaeras in via, quod tibi servatur in patria, Aug. Let us not seeke for that in our journey, which is onely to be found in our countrey. Let the world take these shadowes; it is a portion my soule desireth not, only may ^he be sped of this substantiall glory through Iesus Christ.
4 For the Eternity; if it had an end, it were not excellent. We see commonly, that high glories here waste themselves, and goe out in stench; like great candles in windy houses: that can be no excellent glory. If we love this life, which we feele to be miserable, and and know wil end: how should we love that life, where is no feare, either to die, or to live in trouble. Nothing but happy eternity, and eternall felici^ie, Ioh. 14.2. In my Fathers house are many mansions: here we have no abiding citie, but dwell in Tabernacles, set up to day, and pulled downe to morrow. Our best houses on earth, let them be never so glorious: if it were possible; let their walls be of gold, and their windowes of Saphire: yet they are no better than Innes for strangers. But our mansions in heaven abide for ever. I goe to prepare a place for you, saith Christ: but ^t is said, Matth. 25.34. Inherit the kingdome prepared for you from the foundation of the world. These were prepared before; now then did Christ goe to prepare them? Saint Augustine answers; They were prepared from everlasting, but the men that should ^nhabite them were unprepared. Parat quodammodo mansiones, mansionibus parando mansores; He went first to take possession of this Kingdome, and there sets open the ^oores of those prepared mansions for us.
Here is then the figure of heaven: it is glory, therefore excellent: yea, substantiall glory, more excellent: yea, a Crowne of glory, most excellent. It is a Kingdome, and
 Immobile regnum, a kingdome that cannot be moved. It is an Inheritance, and ann immortall inheritance; all excellent. It is excellent, and a Glory; yea, The excellent glory. What wouldst thou have? Is any thing better than life? Is any life better than a life of glory? Is any glory better than a kingdome of glory? Is any kindom surer than the Kingdome of Heaven? Yet this Kingdome, this Life, this Glory, this excellent Glory, is prepared for us. The Lord hath prepared this excellent glory for us; the Lord prepare us for this excellent glory!
This is my beloved Sonne, in whom I am well pleased.] This is the last generall Circumstance of the Verse; the matter and substance of the Testimony from the Father. This; the word shewes him to be that Messias, long before prophecied, presently after the fall promised, ere the world was purposed, and now manifested. This, singularly; not another, but this is He. My Son, consubstantially, because begotten of mine owne substance. Originally mine, by union of nature: though in him other be made mine also, by adoption of grace. Beloved, Eternaliter; not in time accepted, b^^ before all beginning begotten. In whom I am well pleased, and never was offended: all other men were the children of wrath, I could not be pleased with them: but in thi^ Son I rest. He pleaseth the Father by himselfe, all other only by him. Here is Propriatas Personae, unitas naturae, Dignitas gratiae, Foelicitas meriti; This is, there is the Propriety of Person: My Son, there is the unity of nature: Beloved son, there is the Dignity of grace: In whom I am well pleased, there is the Felicity of merit. In him well pleased; in all with him, in none without him: in Himselfe without all, before all, above all. Here is the Testimony; This is my beloved Sonne, etc. For methods salt we observe in this heavenly voice three notes:
Distinctionem Personae. This is my Sonne.Dilectionem Distincti. My Beloved Sonne.Sufficientiam Dilecti. In whom I am well pleased.
This is my Son.] Son, this distinguisheth his Person: Father and Son are relatives, one depending necessarily on the other, Luke 1.32. He shall be great, and shall be called the Son of the Highest. With this Christ opposed the Iewes, that questioned him concerning the Son of David. If David called him Lord, he must needs be the Son of God. Now he is the Son of God two wayes: First, by Nature, of the Eternall substance of his Father: not after a carnall manner, for hee departed with no substance, nor suffered any change, losse, or diminution. Secondly, as he was the Son of Mary: and this other Sonship in regard of God, was not by nature, not by adoption; for then there had been a time when he was not the Son of God: but by Personall union. The man Christ never was a Person of it selfe, but was at the first Personally united to the Son of God. The Son of Mary was ever the Son of God, but the Son of God was not ever or alwayes the Son of Mary. This was necessary, saith Augustine, that the Mediator betweene God and man, should be of the Natures, both of God and man. Ne in utroque homini similis, longe esset a Deo: vel in utroque Deo similis, longe esset ab homine; Lest being in every respect God, he had been too great to suffer for man: or being in every respect man, he had bin too weak to satisfie God. Non ^^ter a Patre, alter a virgine: sed aliter a Patre, aliter a virgine, Eus. Emiss. God of God, God the Son of God the Father. Fulgent. Alter in Persona, non alius in natura; If ^e were the same Person, how is he here called Filius, a Son? If he were not the same Nature, how is he called Meus, My Son? Son, thou art therefore another Person. My Son, thou art therefore the same God.
This filiality doth not chalenge him of inferiority to God. But Phil. 2.6. he is said to be In the forme of God: yet it is added, He thought it no robbery to be equall with God. So it is said, Vers. 7. that he tooke upon him the Forme of a Servant. Si forma ser^^ est natura humana, forma Dei est natura divina; If the forme of a servant be the nature of man, then the forme of God is the very nature of God. This the Iews could easily interpret;Iohn 5.18. He said that God was his Father, making himselfe equall with God. When he called God his Father, they could presently infer, Illum se fecisse parem Deo; That he
 made himselfe equall with God: and that is no other thing, than to be true God in nature and subsistence. Semper apud Patrem, semper cum Patre, semper de Patre, semper in Patre. Filius ex ipso, cum ipso, hoc quod ipse, Lomb. Alwayes with the Father, alwayes of the Father, alwayes in the Father, alwayes the same God that the Father. So also very man of mans flesh, according to mans nature, for mans sake, above mans condi^ion. Psal. 2.7. The Lord hath said unto me, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee. This might be said by God to David in type, but only agrees Christ in truth. David indeed was Gods son, as he was a man, as he was a King, as he was a Saint. 1. As man; so are all men, Act. 17.28. We also are his off-spring.Psal. 100.3. He made us, and not we our selves, therefore we are his sons, Deu. 32.6. Is not he thy Father that made thee? 2. As King, for all Princes are the Children of the most High, Psal. 82.3. Lastly, as a sanctified man; for he that is new-borne is the son of God, 1 Ioh. 3.9. He cannot sin because he is borne of God. But this title most properly belongs to Christ, and that in respect of his generation temporall and eternall. Some construe it of his temporary birth, because Hodie in the Scripture signifies this present life, Heb. 3.13. While it is called To day. Thou art my Son to day have I begotten thee: that is, To day I have brought my begotten Son into the world. So Hebr. 1.6. When he bringeth in the first begotten into the world. Begotten before all beginning, but made flesh in time; proposed to the world in humane flesh, at the decreed fulnesse of time. Others understand it of Christs eternall generation: My Son; others are my sons improperly, but thou art properly my Son; my naturall, singular, substantiall Son. A Sonne, not by creation, as the whole world is: not through adoption, as the whole Church is: but by nature and incommunicable generation, as himselfe only is. Primogenitus, Vnigenitus, the expresse character of his Person, and brightnesse of his glory. But there is then exception against the Word Hodie: why To day my Son, when as for ever his Son? Aug. Apud Deum nunquam crastinus, nunquam hesternus dies est, sed semper Hodie; With God it never is Yesterday, nor To morrow, but alwayes To day: all times are present with him. Vbi dies nec hesterni fine inchoatur, nec initio crastini terminatur, semper hodiernus est; Where never was, nor can be night, must needs be eternall day.
My Sonne.] This Flesh that stands before you, is the naturall Sonne of God: which gives us to understand, the infinite honour that belongs to Iesus Christ. Though our nature was once poore and wretched through our degeneration, yet now it is made noble and blessed through this Personall union. And the Lord Iesus did habitually honour it, even above the nature of Angels, Hebr. 2.16. For Christ in his very birth, was the most excellent and noble man that ever was: and that both by Fathers side and Mothers side. By Father, being the Son of Almighty God: by Mother, descending of the Patriarkes and renowned Kings of Iudah. A truely great Prince! wherein consists a kingdom? In authority? Psal. 135.6. He doth whatsoeuer he will, in heaven, in earth, in the sea, and all deepe places. In Power, Mat. 8. The winds and the seas obey him. In multitude of subjects? Angels, Saints, and all Kings are his Subjects; either voluntary, or against their wils, Psal. 82.1. He standeth in the congregation of the mighty, and judgeth among the gods. In abundance? Psal. 16.11. In his presence is the fulnesse of joy. In continuance? He shall reigne over the house of Iacob for ever,Luke 1.33. and of his Kingdome there shall be no end. In amplitude and largenesse? The heaven is his, and the earth is his, and the fulnesse of them both. In subduing enemies?Luke 19.2. Bring those mine enemies, that would not have me reigne over them, and slay them before me.
The faithfull doe not hold Christ in small account, because of his poore estate in this world; but prefer him to Nobles and Kings. They had no such Herald, to blazon their Armes as he: even Iohn the Baptist, not a greater borne of women. Yea here,Matth. 11.11. even God himselfe with a voice from heaven proclaimes it. They have no such memoriall of their antiquity, as he, whom S. Luke lines from Adam, S. Matthew derives from David and Abraham. It is impossible for them: for there is no such Instructer of antiquity, or Recorder of Genealogie, as the Holy Ghost. Great Monarks have long and tedious titles: Christ is short in sound, but Eternal in sense; This is my beloved Son.

This gives comfort to us: for CHRIST being so royall, and taking our flesh, conveyes part of his noblenesse to us. Men stand much on their bloud, and the pedegree of their Ancestors: as if noblenesse consisted in that which descends from, man to man. All true and waighty honour is fetched from CHRIST: Not my Birth, but my Christianitie, makes me noble; faid that noble Martyr, Romanus. To so many as received Christ, he gave power to be the sonnes of God, Ioh. 1.12. This engraffing to Iesus, is the dignitie, true bloud Royall of God Himselfe. Not Generation, but Regeneration is truely noble. Sanctification is the best ornament of blood, the worthiest part of the Honourable Scutchion, the fairest flower in the Goodmans Garland. It is no discredit to mens honours, to honour Him. We love to peruse the Genealogie of Princes, and succession of States: but what are these to us? we are not heires to those honours. But if CHRISTS Title be good, ou^ is good in him. Thus we are enriched with the whole world. Cor. 3.22. Whether the world, things present, yea or things to come; All are yours, and yee are Christs, and Chr^st is Gods. But because the wicked have this world, that have no right unto it therefore Feare not little flocke, it is your fathers will to give you the kingdome, Luke 12.32. Bee we never so poore, even the contempt of this world; rich men sco^^^ our acquaintance; yet he that is the onely Sonne of God, is not ashamed to call us brethren, Heb. 2.11. An earthly Prince may honour much; by enrobing a subject with Princely apparell, investing his head with the Crowne Royall, and mounting his person in the Kings owne Charriot, Esa. 6.8. But Christ doth honour infinitely more; by adorning us with white garments, Palmes in our hands, and Crownes on our heads, and that before the Angels in heaven. Psalm. 149.8. Such honour ha^^ all his Saints.
This is my Sonne;] This is he, which the Prophet, presignified, the types prefigured, the Lord himselfe promised, the Gospell presented, and is now universally preached; This is he. Elias was a great Prophet, but not He: Iohn Baptist was more than a Prophet, but not He. Ioh. 1.8. He was not that light, but a witnesse of it. This is He. He that fulfilled all the prophecies, performed all the promises, ended all the Ceremonies; This is Hee. Hager and Ishmael were kept in Abrahams house, til^ Isaac was borne and weaned: so were ceremonies reserved in the Church, till Christ was dead and risen. They were like a mould, whereinto we cast a bell: when the mettall is runne, and the bell made, we throw away the mould. He that was crucified himselfe, crucified all these. The Philistins aske for Sampson; who is he that hath given us so many overthrowes, triumphed in our ruines? This is hee. So, who is that strong God, that could say to the gates of death and hell, Eph^^, be yee opened? This is he. Who is he that conquered the devill, foiled death in his owne Throne, led captivitie captive, overcame sin that overcame the whole world; that pacified an infinite wrath, that made way to an infinite glory; who? This is he; this is my beloved Sonne.
Beloved Sonne.] Gods love to his Sonne is eternall, infinite, inexpressible. I^^. 3.35. The Father loveth the Sonne, and hath given all things into his hand. Ioh. 17.24. Thou lovest me before the foundation of the world. Col. 1.13. Transtulit nos in reg^^ filii dilectionis suae: his deare Sonne; the Son of his love. 1. Because he is most worthy of all to be loved: as Iudas is called the Sonne of perdition, because hee was (...) worthy to be destroied. 2. Because he was begotten of his Fathers love from euerlasting. 3. Because he is infinitely filled with this love. So they are said to be children of the Bride-chamber, that are full of joy in respect of the wedding. 4. Because he makes other sonnes to be beloved. Filius dilectus, qui facit dilectos. 5. In respect of his humane nature; For God powred his love upon him with gifts beyond measure, wherewith that nature is admirably qualified. Beloved: here are two scandals taken away by this word. First, that we may not thinke Christ to be sent in the flesh ab irato Patre, from God the Father being angry: for he is his Beloved sin. N^^, that when we are afflicted, we should not thinke our selves minus a Deo diligi, to be
 the lesse beloved of God, for he loves the Sonne, whom he scourges.
But how appeares this love, when God did so cast him downe that he seemed ^ven to hate him? Law^. 1.1^. Vindemiavit me Dominus; The Lord hath afflicted me (...) the day of his fierce anger. God afflicts some in mercie, but this was in wrath. In ^is wrath God is not a like to all: some he afflicts more mildly; but this was in his ^ierce wrath. His sufferings, his Sweat, and Cup, import so much: they could not ^ome, but from a wrath whereof never was the like. Two things especially may ^eeme to abate the Fathers love to his Sonne. First, his sweat in the Garden. Luk. ^2.44. Which was as it were great drops of bloud falling downe to the ground. When ^o manner of violence was offered him in body, none touching him: in a cold night, ^or they were glad of a fire within doores: lying abroad in the aire, and upon the ^old earth; to be all or a sweat, and that sweat to be bloud, and that not a thinne ^^int one, but Gr^mosus, of great drops; and those so many as went through his ap^arell, and streamed to the ground in abundance: never was the like sweat. But se^ondly, to be in this distresse, and then to want comfort! This was his most sorow^ull complaint; not that his friends on earth, but that his Father from heaven had ^orsaken him. So that betweene the passioned powers of his foule, and whatsoever might refresh him, there was a Traverse drawne: My God, my God, why hast thou for^aken me? Martyrs in their most exquisite paines had some chearefulnesse. Augustine ^nswers Martyres non ^ripuit, sed nunquid deseruit? God did not deliver them, but ^id he forsake them? He freed not their bodies, he left not their soules. But here, Direliquisti me, thou hast forsaken me. How then was he beloved? non solvit unio^em, sed subtraxit visionem. The influence was for the time restrained, the power ^f darkenesse let loose to afflict him, and the vision of comfort not permitted to re^eeve him: yet still the Lord loved him. But this shewes how immensely God lo^ed us: when he seemed to forsake his Sonne for a time, that he might embrace his ^ervants for ever. Yea, how much CHRIST loved us; that would be content to ^uffer a sense of this desertion for a while, that we might not be eternally lost. Thou wast forsaken for us, let not us forsake thee, neither doe thou forsake us, oh blessed Iesus!
In whom I am well pleased.] This was a voice never heard since the fall of man, ^^ill that instant. That God was justly angry with the world, it was manifest: but to ^ave him now pleased with the world, or any man in it, this was rare and sweet. Never was man borne before of woman, that had this grace. Though it were said to Mary, Haile thou art highly honoured, or much graced; yet this was for her sons sake. Propter filii meritum, mater in enit gratiam: the honour done to the mother, was for ^he merite of the Sonne. The Father tooke all delight in the Sonne. Esa. 42.1. Be^old mine elect, in whom my soule delighteth. And in him onely, he is delighted with ^s. Cursed is that Religion, that makes him but a chiefe Saviour, and requires o^her concurring helpes: we must have only CHRIST, and wholly CHRIST. Our prayers are heard only through him, our wounds healed only by him, our soules ^aved only in him. To what end should we joyne others with him, seeing all are be^oved only for him? Let this make all sin abhorred of us, for if we displease the Son, how shall we please the Father? The Father will be pleased with none, but for the Sonnes sake. Oh then let us alwayes seeke to please the Sonne. Kisse the Sonne lest he ^ee angry, and so yee perish, Psalm. 2.12. Oh deare Saviour, give us hearts to ^ove thee, and faith to trust thee, and grace to please thee, that God may be pleased with us in thee.
This Son of God hath made us also sonnes: God hath right to us Iure Proprie^atis, so hath the Father, Sonne, and holy Spirit: and Iure Propinquitatis, so hath CHRIST only, for he was a kinne to us. CHRIST is both our brother and our Father. Our Father as he is God; our brother as he is man. Hebr. 1.11. He that sanctified, and they who are sanctified, are all of one: for which cause he is not ashamed ^o call them brethren. This is the Sonne, that makes us sonnes. Ioh. 1.12. To as many
 as receive him, he gives power to become the sonnes of God. Christ is Filius Dei, (...) Trinitatis; nos filii Dei and Trinitatis: he is the Son of God, but not of the Trinitie we are the sonnes of God, and of the whole Trinitie: he by nature, we by grace it was the ambition of the heathens, to forget their owne parents, and to derive themselves from the parentage of some god; as Alexander from Iupiter, etc. Behold, a^ Christ hath honour naturally, so we gratiously in him, to be called the sons of God. How great is this happinesse, to be the Almighties sons? but perhaps there are diverse younger brothers, landlesse; No, they are all heires: there is not a child of Gods, but shall inherite the kingdome. Quid Pater negabit filiis, qui hoc dignatus (...) ut sit Pater? What will the father deny to his children, who hath already thus farre honoured them, to be their Father. Rom. 8.32. He that spared not his owne Sonne for us, how shall he not with him also freely give us all things? Nonne dabit sua, qui non ^^it nuit se? Will he deny us his goods, that hath given us himselfe? Qui dabit se in^^^ ritum; dabit and suaii^ praemium. He that parted with himselfe to merit for us, will n^^ with hold his mercies to crowne us. As Abrahams servant said of Isaac to Reb^^^. Gen. 24.36. He is my masters only sonne, and to him he gives all that he hath. So i^ God give us his onely Sonne, he will give us all things with him. Therefore wa^ the Son of God made the Son of man; that the sons of men might be made the sons of God.
All love that comes from God to us, is through his Sonne, Ioh. 17.23. That the world may know, that thou hast loved them, as thou hast loved me. Christ define^^ it, the Father will not deny it. Christ is Gods beloved, and we are Christ beloved. All things are ours, because we are Christs, and Christ is Gods. When we consider, how infinitely God loves Christ, and how infinitely Christ loveth us, we cannot despaire. Pater and filius sunt duo in persona, unum in desiderio. The Father and the Sonne are two in Person, but one in desire. It is not possible, that he should be hated, for whom Christ suffered. Hence it followes, that God will not faile to lift us up to the place where his owne beloved is. Ioh. 7.24. Father, I will that they also whom thou hast given me, be with me where I am. Rom. 8.17. We shall also be glorified together with him. It had beene a great favour to be admitted for doore-keepers in his house: great satisfactions to have our sinnes pardoned and that the Lord would be friends with us, considering our rebellion. But to be restored to that Paradise which Adam lost; this had beene more: but to be advanced further and higher than ever Adam was; even to the Lords owne throne; this is most of all. If all mens hearts were one heart, it could not comprehend the measure of this love. God hath life, for he is the fole fountaine of it: but how shall we come at it? Esa. 33.14. Who shall approch the devouring fire? who amongst us shall dwell with the everlasting burnings? Yes, the bloud of the Sonne hath qualified this fire, and quenched the wrath of the Father: thus that life is made ours. 1 Ioh. 5.11. God hath giuen us eternall life, and this life is in his Sonne. In dilecto, cum dilecto, pro dilecto. Excellent favour, not only to give us place and grace with the Angels; but even with his owne Sonne! We are made Lords of all creatures but the Angels: and our head [IESUS] is also head of the Angels. For his sake they are all ministring spirits, for the good of all those that are the heires of salvation. If we be thus loved in the beloved, we may bee sure of all necessary things. For howsoever God hath distinguished the things of this world i^ a proprietie: yet we have such interest in them, that the Sunne should not shine, not the world stand, but for the elects sake. The wicked are excluded from the Tree of life, and therefore from all things that should maintaine life: and through they be ^^t on earth yet they shall have double torment for their single merriment. For they are never in their owne house till they be in hell, Act. 1.25. For us, they shall be as well able to save themselves without God, as to hurt us having God: and the worst they can doe, is but to send us to GOD; and our desire is to bee with GOD for ever.
To conclude, Christ was Gods Son, his only beloved Son: we servants, ^^^s^ll
 servants: yet was this Sonne borne and slaine for these servants. This is the ^oint we are bound to consider! how farre God suspended his love to his Son, and ^ttended his love to his servants: even so far, that this Son of love died for those sons ^f wrath. Here me thinkes we should even stay and wonder. 1 Ioh. 3.1. Behold, what ^anner of love the Father hath bestowed upon us that we should be called the sons of God. ^his is a depth that cannot be sounded: cold language may utter it, and regardlesse ^^tention heare it; but men and Angels stand amazed at it. That the Creator should ^^e for the creature: that this Filius meus, the Son of God; and Servus tuus, the ^^rvant of man; should meet in one person. That the same, who is Dominus omni^m, the Lord of all; should bee made Sacrificium nostrum, our sacrifice: that the ^on of love should die for the sons of wrath! There have beene many demonstrati^ns of love in the world, Gen. 42.37. Reuben yeelded much to his Father: Slay my two ^^ns, if I bring him not to thee: it was in the behalfe of Benjamin. Here were two sons ^o be lost; Si If their uncle was lost. His owne sonnes were deare to him, as the ob^^cts of of a descending love; but intrusted to their Grandfather, whose love com^only transcends an immediate Fathers; Iudah tenders more for Benjamin, Gen. 43.^^. I will be surety for him; of my hand shall thou require him: he engaged himselfe, but it ^as a sonne ventured upon the mercie of his Father, Gen. 44.33. He goes further ^hen Ioseph offered to detaine Benjamin, for whom Iudah had thus interpossed him^^lfe; he tenders his owne person for redemption. I pray thee let me abide in stead of ^^e Lad, a bondman to my Lord: and let him goe home with his brethren. Yet he would ^e but a bondman, and that for his brother, and that in respect of his Father; and ^^l to save all from the destruction of famine. Therefore this is a poore patterne to ^atch with the love of God, that did not tradere filium pro patre, vel ex necessitate; ^eliver up a sonne for the fathers sake, or compelled by any exigent: sed pro hostibus, (...) ex voluntate; but for his enemies, and that with a voluntary donation. The Po^^ speakes of a great love betwixt Nisus and Eurialus; me, me, adsum qui feci, in me ^nvertite ferrum: Mea fraus omnis, nihil iste nec ausus, nec potuit.
Two friends are said to come into Vulcans shop, and to begge a boone of him: it as granted. What was it? that he would either beat them on his Anvile, or melt ^hem in his fornace, both into one. But without fiction, here is a farre greater love CHRIST: for he would be melted in the fornace of wrath, and beaten on ^e anvile of death, to be made one with us. And to declare the exceeding love: here ^ere not both to be beaten on the anvile, or melted in the fornace: but without us, he ^one would be beaten on the anvile, he alone melted, that we might be spared. Esa. ^3.6. The Lord hath layd on him the iniquity of us all. They talke of an Athenian King, ^^at offered his owne life to save his people. And no doubt, the zeale of Moses ^^d Paul was great, when they desired Perire pro pereuntibus, to perish themselves for ^^e redemption of others. Ionathans love was great to David, hazarding his owne ^^fe for him, 2 Sam. 1.26. Thy love to me was wonderfull, passing the love of women. ^avids love was great to an evill sonne, 2 Sam. 18.33. Would God I had died for thee, ^h Absolom, my sonne, my sonne. Alas, all these copies are short of this originall: ^ome we yet neerer. Abraham had but one son, the son of his old age, likely to have no ^ore: Filius rei, filius spei; the heire of his estate, the pledge of the promise of his ^^lvation: yet in love to his commander, he suffered him not to be banished, but ^^lled: not behind his backe, but before his owne face: not by another, but by his ^wne hand. This was much: yet it was but to lose a sonne for a Father, a mortall ^^nne for an immortall Father; that could give him more sons, or raise up that son ^gaine to life. But here God did give a Sonne, not for an immortall father, but for ^ortall enemies. He loved him ten thousand degrees better than Abraham could ^^ue Isaac: yet he gave this Sonne, not by command as Abraham, but willingly: not to the hands of them that sorowed to kill him, but to butchers that delighted to ^^rment him: not for his friends, as Abraham did, but for traitors that would have ^alled him out of his Throne: not to a death that onely parts body and soule, and instantly
 directs to heaven, as Isaacs should; but to a death cursed and detestable: this not to be done in a secret place, as Abrahams was appointed; but before all his scornfull enemies: not to die as an innocent, like Isaac, but to hang as a notorious sinner; hi^ accusation being no lesse than blasphemie; to have a murderer preferred before him in the peoples opinion: to be scorned of the basest,Iob 30.1. whose fathers he might disd^^^ to set with the dogges of his flocke. Yea, and which is yet most; while all this is doing on earth, that even then his Father should arraigne him above: that he should take off the burden of vengeance from the head of his adversaries, and lay it all on his Son. The comfort of all comforts is from above: let all forsake me, but let (...) my Father leave me: but the Lord afflicted him. The high Priest tooke him to be an offender in his owne Person, but God tooke him to be an offender in our person. He that deserved no sorrow, felt much; that we who deserved much, might feele none: by his woundes we are healed.
Now take the Person upon whom as one Center all these sorowes met my Te^^ saies, It is my beloved Sonne. Sonne; this is enough: man loves his owne sonne, the walking Image of himselfe. Mine, that is more, the Sonne of God: as is the person, so is the passion. Beloved, if possible, yet more: for the love of God far transcends all love of man. If he had beene but as Pilate said, Behold the man; it was much, we pitie a dumbe creatures suffering this, much more a man. Yea, but he was Ins^^ homo, saies the Iudges wife, a righteous man: now we pitty malefactors, much more the innocent. Yea besides his integrity, he was Magnus and nobilis, a noble person, a Royall Prince: for whom men might justly complaine; Alas, that noble Prince, Ier. 22. All these are short: this Ecce homo, ecce agnus, ecce magnus; behold the man, behold the Lambe, behold the Prince; are true, but not enough. Here Ecce filius ^^us, behold my sonne; as the Centurion acknowledged, Truely this is the sonne of God; is above all gradation. If he had not beene the son of God, it had beene impossible for him to sustaine it: and yet being thus, he was brought so low that an Angell wa^ dispatched from heaven to comfort him. Here all words forsake us, we blesse the Lord, and hold our peace.
Take the summe of this application: we have heard much of Gods Son, and of his dearenesse to the Father. Now joyne with it another Text, Ioh. 3.16. So God love the world that he gave this only begotten Son. Here meditate, wonder, and waigh the setence; Who, what, how, to what end. Who loved; God; that made us his friends by creation; whose enemies we made our selves by prevarication. What did hee love? the world, a bad world, a mad world, a blind world, a bloudy world; that hated him and all his, Ioh. 15.19. It was no wonder, that he should love the Angels, for they serve him: or the very reasonlesse creatures, for they obey him: but that he should love the rebellious and hatefull world, this is boundlesse mercie? How d^^ he love it? So that he gave his onely begotten Sonne. If like Gideon, he had had threescore and tenne Sonnes, Iudg. 8.30. it had beene much to part with one of them; bee his onely sonne. Iacob rent his clothes, and went mourning in sackcloth many daies for losing one sonne of twelve, Gen. 37.34. Even an harlot pitied the fruit of her wombe, and her bowels yerned upon her sonne. 1 King. 3.26. Oh my LORD. give her the living child, and in no wise slay it: but GOD gave the onely Sonne of his love. To what end? That whosoever beleeveth in him, should not perish but have life everlasting. Where observe two things: the felicitie that is goo^, and the facility to get it. The felicity consists of two things; a deliverance, and an Inheritance. He shal not perish, there's the deliverance. He shal have everlasting life, there's the inheritance. For the facilitie; it is not to keepe the Law, but only to beleeve. Psal. 8.4. Lord what is man that thou shouldest so regard him! Yea, that to regard him, thou didst not regard thy selfe? It is reported of a great Souldier, that the very gingling of his spurre was a terror to his enemies. So the very sound of this Te^^^ makes all the divells in hell roare, all the foes of mans salvation to quake. This is the Christians armory, that Tower of David, whereon there hang a thousand bucklers a
 shield of mightie men, Cant. 4.4. If thy conscience be assaulted with guiltinesse of thy ^^ns, remember first, that this CHRIST was the Son of God: and then that this ^onne was given for the world. Dedit filium, non servum suum, non alienum; unige^tum, non de multis unum. God gave not a servant but a Sonne: not anothers but his ^wne Sonne: not one of many, but his onely Son. If Satan now object; Yes, but he ^^ve him onely for the holy and just; answer, nay, So he loved the world; mundum ^mundum: mundum therefore mundanum: he gave him not for the righteous, but ^^r sinners. I am of that number, therefore I have my part in that favour. Paul ^^ies Eph. 6.11. Put on the whole armour of God: and Rom. 13.14. Put on the Lord ^ESUS CHRIST. In the one place, all those pieces of armour is but the Lord ^^sus taken asunder: in the other, the whole armour is but the Lord Iesus put toge^^er. Psal. 2.12. Kisse the Sonne lest he be angry. To make peace with the Father, kisse ^onne. Cant. 1.2. Let him kisse me, was the Churches prayer: let us kisse him, that ^e our endeavour. Indeed, the Sonne must first kisse us by his mercie, before we can ^^sse him by our pietie. Lord grant us these mutuall kisses, and interchangeable em^^aces now: that we may come to the plenary wedding Supper hereafter. When ^^e Quire of heaven, even the voices of Angels, shall sing Epithalamiums, nuptuall ^^ngs, at the bridall of the spouse to the Lambe.



VERSE 18. And this voice which came from heaven we heard, when wee were with him in the holy mount.

THis is a cleare description of the place, where they had that heavenly vision; the holy mount. Before he professed them eye-witnesses, now also eare-witnesses. This voice came not in secret, it was no whispering voice: not in ^error, it was no thundring voice: not in a strange language, it was no unintelligible ^oice. It was not like the voice at Babel, confused. At the building of Babel there ^ere strange tongues, that one could not understand another: at the building of Sion were also strange tongues, but readily understood, Act. 2. This voice heard, this they ^nderstood, this they declared.
The body of this verse reflects upon the transfiguration of CHRIST, where^f we shall find many considerable members. But first let us looke upon the outside ^f the Text, and the garments it weares. There is.

Quiddam

Vocale; a Voice; This voice which came, etc.
Locale; a Place; In the holy mount.


There are two annections to these two circumstances.
To the
Voice, audience This voice we heard.Place, presence: (...); we were with him.
This voice which came from heaven.] First for the vocall part; we have alrea^y considered: what this voice was, and from whence it came. Here is only some ^ariation of the latter phrase: there it was (...), from the excellent ^lory: here it is (...), from heaven. Now as. 2 Cor. 12.2. and. 4. When Paul ^peaking of his rapture and revelation, saies in one place that he was caught up to the ^hird heaven: and in another, into Paradise: we may safely inferre, that Paradise is
 heaven, a place of infinite joy. So finding that here called heaven, which was before called glory; we conclude that it is a place of infinite glory. The earth had many cities, onely Ierusalem was the holy Citie: many mountaines, but Sion was the mount of joy. Psal. 48.2. The joy of the whole earth is mount Sion. The Courts of Princes have glorious shewes, onely the Court of God hath the Excellent glory. The Athenian thought all the world, as barbarous in knowledge, so infamous in honour, in respect of Athens: therefore they would goe heavily forth, but make (...) home. Wee know that to bee true of our countrey, what they dreamed of Athens: the pride of the world is vanity of vanities, the meanest of heaven is glory of glories.
Good things are knowen by their contraries, where they cannot bee seene in their owne perfections. To contemplate this glory, let us looke lower than heaven, upon earth; lower than earth, upon hell; and so learne to judge of heaven.
Looke upon this world, what is found in it but vanitie, which is evill: miserie, which is worse: iniquity, which is worst of all. For vanitie, there have you some building houses, as the Estriches lay egges, or as children make ovens, to bake no bread in: there is vanity. Another wasts his time, braines, meanes, to find our ridiculous projects; only studies trickes: as if his soule could be made happy by a trick there is vanitie. Another sweats, non pro solido auro, not for riches, which is also vaine: sed pro stolida aura, but for the barren aire of emptie commendation, which is most vaine. The world it selfe is vanitie, and a mistresse that makes her Idolaters most vaine. Blanditur oculis, seducit osculis: if you looke upon her, she will beguile you if you kisse her, she will bewitch you. For miseries, one shakes a pained head, another rores for the torment of his reines, a third complaines the racking of his gowtie joynts, another is halfe dead with a Palsey: that it may be said of him more truly than of sea-farers: he is neither amongst the living, nor amongst the dead. Which of this whole multitude can say he is so well, that he feeles no distemper: Shew me the man that saies, he ailes nothing: and I will answer, that he is in most danger: the proximity to death is the insensibilitie of sicknesse.Bern. Ingressus debilis, progressus lebilis, egressus flebilis. Our entrance is full of weakenesse, our proceeding full of wickednesse, our departure full of wretchednesse. If thy body be healthfull, doth nothing about thy estate, thy friends, thy neighbours, thy children, trouble thee? lastly for iniquity; this is a morall corruption, worse than that mortall corruption. There flie a crew of oathes, like night-ravens: there stalkes pride, blustring through the streetes; the language of whose pace is, Who makes me? drunkennesse is reeling to the ground, and uncleanenesse strives to hold it up, Hypocrites dare lye God in the face, as if he had no window into the heart: or he that hath eyes like a flame of fire, could see men no otherwise from heaven, than the halfe cured man in the Gospell, that saw them walking like trees. Profane persons sweare, as dogges barke: non semper pro feritate, sed pro consuetudine; not ever for curstnesse, but for custome. If these externall offences did not vexe thee, yet thou hast enow at home: ever sinning, before, after, yea even while thou repentest; none of these conveniences are in heaven, Revel. 21. No misery, but habitation with God, neere whom sorrow can never come. No vanity, for the former things are passed away. No iniquity, for God shall make of things new. Revel. 19.9. Blessed are they that are called to marriage supper of the Lambs. Feasts have more than ordinarie diet: marriage-feasts more than common abundance. This exceeds all; new wine, pure Manna, great cheare, and an answerable welcome. Cant. 5.1. Eate Oh friends, drinke, yea drinke abundantly and be merry. Of beloved.
Looke yet lower, and consider the infernall pittie, full of horror and amasednesse: Where is no remission of sinne, no dismission of paine, no intermission of sense, no permission of comfort, Bernard. Where friend shall cry to friend; Percute, dilacera; infer prunas, and ebullientibus impone lebetibus. That Parisian massacre was but a sense-schoole to this bloudy field: yet thinke of that dismall cry there; of
 enemies insulting and butchering, kill, kill; of innocents suffering and dying, save, save. But Matth. 8.12. There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. Flet us ob ignem qui non extinguitur, stridor ob vermem qui non moritur, Bern. Weeping, for the fire that shall never be quenched: gnashing of teeth, for the gnawing worme that shall never bee satisfied. Fletus oculorum ex dolore, stridor dentium ex furore, Gregor. Weeping of eyes, the effect of a passive agonie: gnashing of teeth, the effect of an impatient fury. Illic dentes stridebunt, qui hic de edacitate gaudebant; If the rod of affliction which scourgeth the deare ones of GOD, bee so smart: what are their plagues, in whose righteous confusion GOD insulteth; I will avenge mee of mine enemies! Esay 1.24. Bernard observes on the 25. of Saint Matthew. That the blessed are first called to the Kingdome, before the cursed be cast into thraldome. Vt ^sti acrius doleant, videntes quid amiserint: illi foelicius gaudeant, noscentes quid evase^int; That the ungodly may be the more vexed, seeing what joyes they have missed: and the faithfull the more solaced, seeing what sorrowes they have escaped. If our mortall eyes were suffered to view the horrours of that lake, how would we loath sinne which onely can endanger us thither!
Thus because I cannot tell you what heaven is, I have shewed you what it is ^ot. For the pleasures of that place, let us not so much stand to examine what ^hey bee, as whether they belong to us. Enquire not too curiously of them, ^s Manoah did for the Angels name, Iudges the thirteenth Chapter and the eigh^eenth verse. Lest thou receivest such a snibbe: Why askest thou thus after my ^ame, seeing it is secret? It is Secret, or Wonderfull: the originall signifies both. ^o this excellent glory of Heaven is both wonderfull and secret. When a servant was carrying a cover'd messe, another was inquisitive what might be in it: the bea^er answered, To what end then was it cover'd? The covering of this mystery, as (...) denyes intelligence, so it forbids inquisition. There is now no window to looke ^nto it; there is a doore for our foot to enter into it: let us take it at a venture, it is ^e best match wee can make; and the LORD bring us to it through the merits of IESUS CHRIST.
Wee heard this voice.] The circumstance annexed to this vocall part, is Au^ience; Wee heard. Formerly there was provision for the eye, now GOD sup^lies the eare also. There wee have Seene his Majestie, here wee have Heard his Testimony. The object to the eye was Gloria Testati, the glory of the Person ex^ibited: the object to the eare was Vox Testantis, the voice of the Person witnessing. These are the two principall organs of Sense: and the wise love of God by the ex^rcise of them both, brings us to a certaine perswasion of these holy mysteries. It a Philosophicall question, whether of these senses be better in it selfe. To answer ^ccording to nature, certainly the sight is most excellent: both for celerity, and per^icacity; quicknesse and sharpnesse. Segnius irritant animos dimissa per aures. But ac^ording to grace, for the benefit of the soule, Hearing far excelleth: and that both for ^mplitude and Altitude. 1. For Amplitude, we see not many things in comparison (...) them we heare. Few can say, I have seene all the workes that are done under the Sun, ^ccles. 1.14. Vnlesse he meane by All workes, all kinde of workes: or by Vision, ^onsideration; as there certainely Salomon doth. But we have heard what Salomon ^w; a large Inventory of worldly things, the totall Summe whereof is Vanity. The ^ctions and events of former times, are brought home to us by Hearing: whose au^ors and agents went to darknesse, before we came to light: we have heard far more ^an seene. 2. For Altitude, we have heard higher things than we have seen. The eye ^ay reach almost to the Sieling of this lower world, but it cannot pierce the pave^ent of heaven. The eare heares what is done within those everlasting doores: that ^od beholds our thoughts, and accepts his Sons Intercession and merits for us. Psal. 8.8. As we have heard, so have we seene in the Citie of our God: first heard, then after^ards come to see, Psal. 132.6. Loe we heard of it at Ephrata, a strange land: but Vidi^us in monte Sion; We only shall see it in mount Sion, in the glorious kingdom above.
 Let a deafe man see some new and strange object; the huske, colour, and visible part is onely apprehended by him: let his eare bee open to discourse, and relation shall give him the intelligible sense.
The Queene of Sheba's eye was pleased with Salomons royaltie, but her eare was more ravished with his wisdome, 1 King. 10.7. I beleeved not the report of thy glory, vntill mine eyes had seene it: there she saw. But vers. 8. the thing she most admired and blessed, was his wisdome, let into her soule by her eare; Happie are they that heare thy wisdome, Matth. 13.16. Blessed are your eyes, for they see: that was proper to the Disciples: Blessed are your eares, for they heare: that blessing is left to us. But blessed are the hearts that understand and embrace, this is the height of blessednesse, Ioh. 20.29. Blessed are they that have not seene, and yet have beleeved. We may beleve without seeing, but how shall wee beleeve without hearing? For Faith commeth by hearing, Rom. 10.17. But saith Augustine, Seeing is applied to all the Senses. To Tasting, Psalm. Taste and see how gracious the Lord is. To Touching or Feeling, Psal. 16.10. Thou wilt not suffer thine holy one to see corruption: that is, to Feele corruption, Ioh. 8.51. He that keepes my sayings, shall never see death, that is, feele destruction. To suffer is sensibly to Feele, yet called, to See, Ioh. 20.27. Tange and vide; Reach hither thy finger, and see my hands. Had Thomas his eyes in his fingers! if not, then Seeing is Touching. To Smelling: Olfac, and vide quam bene oleat; Such and See how sweet the Flower is. Gusta and vide, quam bene sapiat: Taste and See how well the fruit rellisheth. Tange and vide, Touch and See how I am wounded. (...) Audi and vide, Heare and See how pleasant the musicke is. The phrase is not unknowne to the Scriptures, Rev. 1.12. I turned to See the voice that spake with me. To see the voice, for the Person that ought it. Or else, video is put for Intelligo: I see mentally, not elementally.Mica 6.9. The man of wisdome shall see thy Name, that is, understand it.
The eye as a meere Organ of sense, must give place to the eare. Therefore it is wittily observed, that our Saviour commanding the abscission of the offending hand, foot, and eye; yet never spake of the eare, Marke 9.43 If thy hand, thy see or thine eye, cause thee to offend, deprive thy selfe of them: but part not with their eare, for that is an organ to derive unto thy soule salvation. As Christ sayes there; a man may enter into heaven, lamed in his feet, as Mephibosheth blinde in his sight, a Barzillai, maimed in his hand, as the dry-handed man in the Gospell: but if there be not an eare to heare of the way, there will be no foot to enter into heaven. Si des non prius fuerit in aure, non erit in ore, nec in corde; If God be not first in the eare, it is neither sanctifiedly in the mouth, nor comfortably in the heart. The Iewes has eyes to see Christs miracles, but because they had no eares to heare his wisdome, therefore they had no feet to enter into his kingdome. The way into the house is by the doore, not by the window; the eye is but the window of the heart, the eare is the doore. Now Christ stands knocking at the doore, not at the window, Rev. 3.20. And he will not come in at the window, but at the doore. He that entereth in by the doore, is the shepheard of the sheepe, Ioh. 10.2. He comes now in by his oracles, not by his miracles, Ioh. 10.3. To him the porter openeth, and the sheepe heare his voice. The way to open, and let him in, is by the eare; to heare his voice. There was a man in the Gospell, Blinde and Deafe: blinde eyes, is ill; but deafe eares, worse. It is bad (...) have the eyes sieled, but worse to have the eares sealed up.
Open your eares therefore to this heavenly voice. Bernard hath this description of a good eare: Quae libenter audit docta, prudenter intelligit audita, obedium agit intellecta; Which willingly heares what is taught, wisely understands what heareth, and obediently practises what it understandeth. O give mee such an (...) and I will hang on it jewels of gold, ornaments of praises, Psalm. 85.8. I will (...) what the Lord will say: Quid loquatur Dominus. Wee have those will heare what tempting harlot can say for Luxurie, what a false prophet can say in the behalfe Vsury, what a Lawyer can say in the behalfe of Sacriledge, what a factious Schi^maticke can say for Separation, what a Iesuited Seminary can say for Treas^^
 Christ promised his presence to all those that are assembled Nomine suo, in his Name: ^hese meet not in the name of Christ, but of Antichrist. Where in stead of the ^owers of Gods Garden, they gather the poisonous weeds of the Forrest: and the Devill gets in at the Lords doore. I may say of these Convents, confederating to mischiefes; what Chrysostome said of the virgin possessed by the Devill at a Theater. When God rebuked him, Quomodo ausus es ingredi domum meam? How durst thou ^e so bold as to enter into my House? Satan answers, Inveni eam in domo mea; because I found her in my House. In the Congregation of Saints, the Holy Ghost ^^ters in, and the Devill is cast out: but in these houses of sedition, and places of ^alicious errour, the company of sinners and seducers; the Holy Ghost is shut out, ^ad the Devill is let in. I know that the common streets are not free from offences (...) honest eares; but it is one thing, Audire non quaerenda; To heare things that are to (...) hated: and another thing, Quaerere non audienda, to listen after things that are not (...) be heard. Betweene Odio invenire, and ultro convenire; finding evill against our ^ills, and seeking evill with our delights; there is great difference, Psal. 120.5. Woe is ^e that I sojourne in Mesech; that I dwell in the tents of Kedar. Blesse your selves from Mesech, but love Mount Sion: there are the songs of peace. Thus after hearing the ^ice of God from heaven, you shall come to heare the voice of God in heaven. You ^ave heard Hosanna's you shall heare Hallelujahs: here, God praised by his Mini^^ers: there, praised by his Angels. There we shall both heare others, and beare a ^rt our selves, in the everlasting praises of God, and our Saviour IESUS Christ.
When we were with him on the holy Mount.] Wee are come to the Locall part: ^hat this Mount was, and how Holy, we shall heare presently. First, consider the ^jacent circumstance; We were with him. The Voice had their Audience, the Mount ^eir Presence: (...), with him: O blessednesse to be with Christ! What meant ^ter to be ashamed of this, when the Damosell said, This man was with Iesus? Mat. 6.71. What, deny to be with IESUS? Alas, it was his weaknesse then: after^ard he was so glad to be with him, that he was content to die for him: he refused ^t the sharpe and bloudy way of martyrdome, to be with IESUS. What meant ^icodemus to be with him onely by night? as if he feared to be seene in his company (...) day? Shall a man feare his joy, his comfort, his salvation? Mary Magdalen so ^nged to be with him, that non erat ubi erat, she was not where she was, for her whole ^art was with him. Mallem non esse, quam sine Christo esse: I had rather at all not (...) than to be without Christ. It is impossible to be with him, and to be without ^mfort, Act 4.13. When they saw their boldnesse, and miraculous working, they ^arvelled, and tooke knowledge of them, that they had beene with Iesus. If there be ^urage of zeale, and peace of conscience in men, we may well conclude, they have ^ene with IESUS. When Gehesi went from Elisha, he presently fell into sinne: so ^e all they that keepe not with Christ. With him is comfort and peace, Ioh. 6.68. ^rd, whither shall we goe from thee? Thou hast the words of eternall life.
When we were with him on the holy Mount.] Our Saviour had fore-told the great ^ory and power of his second comming: to the comfort of his servants, to the ter^r and conviction of his enemies, Matth. 16.27. The Sonne of man shall come in the ^ry of his Father, with his Angels: And then shall he reward every man according to his ^rkes. There is his Iustice, and the distribution of his justice. He shall reward every (...), there is his Iustice: (...), according to his workes, there is the distribution ^his Iustice. It is distinguished plainly, Matth. 25.46. To them that have done ill, ^erlasting punishment: to them that have done well, life eternall Now lest his Disci^s should doubt of that glory, which he hath ascribed to himselfe at his second ap^ring; and stagger at the ignominy of his present estate: immediately upon it, he ^kes them a promise, that they should see it, or at least a glimpse and abridgment of ^hat so enjoying this vision, they might more confidently and authoritatively give ^r testimonie to it. There be some standing here, which shall not taste of death, till they ^he Son of man comming in his kingdome. And this promise is prefixed by the three
 Evangelists, that record this story, immediately before CHRISTS Transfiguration on the Mount, Matth. 16.28. Marke 9.1. Luke 9.27. Which words of Chil^ have divers expositions. Some take it meant of his glorious Resurrection, as if the sense were thus. There be some standing here, that shall not die, till they see the So^^^ of man in his glory, and conquest of sinne and death. Some, not all, for this (...) exclude Iudas: all the rest of the Apostles, but onely Iudas, did live to see it. (...) and some others take it, Pro Ecclesiae dilatatione, meant for the enlargement of (...) Church. As if this were the sense; There be some standing here, that shall live (...) see my Kingdome flourish, and spread powerfully over the face of the earth; (...) the despised Name of IESUS to command the Scepters of Kings and raigne ov^r the Dominations of the earth. Some understand by it, the last comming to Iud^ment: as if there were some Apostles yet living, and that should live unto the (...) day; because he sayes, Some stand here that shall not die, till they see this glory. (...) that opinion as frivolous, hath alwayes beene exploded, excluded. The last, (...) and most agreeable to the History, and context of the Scripture; is to understand^^^ De clarificatione Christi, concerning his Transfiguration, which immediately followes. Of this there was Promissio clara, exhibitio manifesta, occultatio jussa; It (...) clearely promised, manifestly performed, and the concealement of it for a time commanded, Matth. 17.9. This Christ promised under the forme of an oath; (...) verily I say unto you. There are certaine circumstances of this Transfiguration (...) rent in the Text; other adherent to it, which wee will borrow from the Evangelists, and so make up the discourse. The points are, The
Time, when this was done.Place, where this was done.Manner, how this was done.Witnesses, before whom this was done.Event, that followed this being done.
 The time, to expound our Apostles When, is expressed, Matth. 17.1. and M^^ 9.2. After six dayes. Only Saint Luke, Chap. 9.28. seemes to differ from them: for (...) sayes Eight dayes after. Now betweene six dayes, and eight dayes, there seemes to (...) some difference of the time. Saint Hierome easily reconciles them thus. Matthew (...) Marke, Ponunt dies tantum intermedios; speake onely of the intervenient dayes, (...) went betweene the promise and the performance. Lucas addidit and primum in qui (...) misit, and ultimum in quo solvit. Luke addes both the first day in which he promise (...) and the last day in which he performed it. Eight dayes Exclusively; six dayes Inclusively. Some mystically, by these six dayes understand the six ages of the world, (...) they call them; which being past, we shall come to that glorious vision of our Lord Iesus in heaven. But why did not Christ presently vouchsafe to his Disciples (...) Sight, but defer the performance of it, till six dayes after the promise? Chrysostome answers; Visionem distulit, ut eam vehementius appeterent, and gaudentius acciperent. (...) deferred it to encrease their desires before it came, their joyes when it came. To (...) flame their desires, for Cito data vilescunt, things easily come by, are little set by. (...) encrease their joyes, for Dulcius obtinetur, quod diu detinetur; That which hath (...) long detained, is at last more sweetly obtained. Moreover, if Christ after the pro^^^ of this vision, had immediately singled out some to the participation of it, this (...) have bred envy and grudging in the rest, who were apt enough to quarrel about (...) businesses. That extraordinary gracing of some, would have beene held a dispar^^ment to all the rest. Therefore as Christ concealed their names in the promise, (...) of these, not naming who they were; so for six dayes hee deferred the perform (...) That without emulation of the rest, he might give satisfaction to them he had (...)
 The Place is delivered in the Text, the Holy Mount. Saint Matthew saye^ was Mons excelsus, an high Mountaine: Saint Peter, Mons Sanctus, an Holy Mountaine. By common consent this Mountaine was Tabor, thought it be not no^^tively expressed in Scripture. A faire Hill in the territory of Galile, Mira^^^ tate ex omni parte aequaliter finitus; Of so wonderfull a roundnesse, that you (...)
 thinke rather Art than Nature had fashioned it: the ascent of it was thirty furlongs, ^t was a Sea-marke to Marriners; It was full of herbes, fruits, flowers, fountaines. Thus it was high and conspicuous for situation, fertile by condition, and lastly, Ho^y, by this most holy apparition, Hieron. True it is, that all places are of their owne ^ature equall: Nec alter altero dignior, Nor is one more worthy, or more holy than ^nother: but by the accession of some speciall blessings and priviledges. Whither ^ever the Lord comes, that is the fountaine of holinesse, such is the odour and per^^me of his gracious presence, that hee sanctifies the place. It was his presence which cause Iacob to turne Luz into Bethel, Gen. 28.17. This is none other, but the ^ouse of GOD, and this is the gate of Heaven. So GOD himselfe testified to Moses (...) Horeb, Exod. 3.5. The place whereon thou standest, is holy ground. And the Cap^^ine of the Lords host to Ioshua, Iosh. 5.15. Loose thy shooe from off thy foot, for the ^lace whereon thou standest is holy. Thus became this Mount holy: there being God, ^ater sanctitatis per vocem auditam; The Father of holinesse heard speaking: Christ, ^anctus Sanctorum, per carnem ad tempus glorificatum; That Holy of Holies by his ^ody for that time glorified: Moses and Elias, those holy Saints: Peter, Iames, and Iohn, those holy Apostles: needs must this Mount bee holy. Nicephorus writeth, ^hat Helena built upon that hill a Cathedrall Church, and dedicated it to Saint Peter. And in processe of time, others also added two Monasteries, endowed with faire ^evenewes: in allusion or answer to Peters desire, Let us build here three Tabernacles. But now etiam periere ruinae, there is not left any (so much as) ruine, to tell the pas^enger, here stood such monuments: and that holy Mountaine is become an habitati^n for Wolves and Foxes. Ierome upon Hosea, writes liberally of this Mount, and ^alls it Thabor, Psal. 89.12. Tabor and Hermon shall rejoyce in thy Name. It had cause (...) rejoyce, when it bore the glorious Person of IESUS CHRIST. Hee inter^rets it to signifie, Lux veniens, Light comming. Not unfitly, that CHRIST, ^ho is the light of the world, upon a mountaine of light, should give remonstrance ^f that glorious light of his Majestie. But why did our Saviour choose a moun^ine for this apparition, why not rather a valley? True glory is not to be sought (...) Profundo hujus seculi, in the low bottomes of this world: but on high; Set your ^fections on things above, where CHRIST sitteth on the right hand of GOD. All ^at come to GODS glory, must ascend on high, Psalm. 24.3. Who shall ascend into ^e hill of the LORD? The Devill tooke CHRIST into a mountaine, when he ^ewed him the kingdomes of the world, and the glory of them. So our Saviour ^oke his Apostles up into a mountaine, when he shewed them the kingdome of heaven, and glory of the world to come. Moses went up to a mountaine, to speake with ^e Lord: now the Lord goes up to a mountaine, to speake with Moses.
The manner is set downe, Matth. 17.2. Hee was transfigured before them, and his  ^ce did shine at the Sunne, and his rayment was white as the light. Some are of opini^n, that this clarity was In aere circumfuso, non in corpore Dominico; In the ayre about ^m, not in the body of Christ: But that that is false, for Himselfe was transfigured, ^t the aire about him. Some have said that his very substance was changed from ^ortalitie to Immortalitie for the time. But that is false: for Transfiguration is ^operly Transitus de figura ad figuram; from one figure to another: not De natura (...) naturam; not from one nature to another. Some say, this Transition was not Se^ndum mutationem, sed secundum manifestationem; Not by any change into that ^hich was not before, but by a manifestation of that which was (not revealed) ^efore. These affirme, that CHRIST tooke from his mother an immortall ^d impassible bodie: but this is a most impossible opinion. How then could this (...)? If CHRIST reserved mortality, how was he capable of glory? If he tooke ^mortality, then was there a change of his substance. Neither, but onely a change ^his forme. And why is this impossible to his miraculous hand? Qui cicatrices osten^^ in corpore immortali, quare non splendorem in corpore mortali? He that could shew his ^rs in a body immortall, why not also his glory in a body mortall? Luk. 9.29. The
 Fashion of his countenance was altered. There is a change, not of his Person, but of his looke: nor yet is it said, Vultus, sed species vultus: not his Countenance, but the Fashion of his countenance: not Alia, sed altera, that is, Alterata. This was done by the Clarity that was in his body, ut in subjecto, as in the very subject. This splendour was Aliter in corpore, aliter in veste; After one manner in his body, after another (...) his garment. In his body intrinsecally and inhaesive, inherently: in his garment (...) exteriori, and supereffuso candore; By an externall whitenesse powred upon it. His fa^^ did shine as the Sunne. Sol est causa splendoris; The Sunne is the cause of Shining; ascribing to Christ the greatest degree of splendour, that our understandings can a^prehend. Non ut splendor solis, sed ut sol splendoris; Not as the brightnesse of the Sun, but as the Sunne it selfe. His garments were white as the Light. Lumen causa candori. The light is the cause of whitenesse, and whitenesse is received and perceived by the benefit of light. Saint Marke sayes, they were white as snow; and what can be whiter? Thus our Lord Iesus put off his despicable forme, wherein he was conte^^^ of the world; and the veile of his humble mortality, wherewith his glory was ^^dowed: yet as he retained the same garments, so he put not off the same substance. Onely he put Majesty upon his countenance, his habite, his whole body; that (...) might give his Apostles a shew of their future glory. So shall the faithfull one day shine; as the Starres, Dan. 12.3. as the Sunne, Matth. 13.43. For Christ shall change our vile bodie, that it may be fashioned like his owne glorious body, Phil. 3.21.
 The witnesses before whom this was done, were of two sorts: some that Chri^^ tooke with him, others that met him. The Disciples he tooke with him were three, Peter, Iames, and Iohn. Numerus in se perfectus, and in testando integer; A number a^^ to give a sound and sufficient Testimony. Here two questions are moved; first, why Christ chose but three: secondly, why onely these three. Why three and no more, why these three and no other? First, why but three? To shew unto us, that Paci electi; Few are chosen: God doth not reveale his glorious mysteries to all; (...) some whom his owne good pleasure calleth and culleth out, Act. 10.41. God (...) shew him openly, not to all the people, but to us witnesses chosen before of God. Beside three can give a sufficient testimony, Deut. 19.15. Matt. 18.16. In the mouth of (...) three witnesses every matter shall be established. Next, why these three, and none of the rest? 1. I do not answer with Feverdentius, because these three were Flos totius (...) Christi, and Principes novi Testamenti; Because they were the flower and prime of a Christs Apostles, and the Princes of the New Testament. I never read that Christ gave unto them any such prerogative or superexcellencie above the rest. 2. (...) doe I fetch an answer from the mystery of their names, with Gorrhan. He that will see the glory of God, must be a Peter, agnoscere per fidem, to acknowledge Christ (...) faith: a Iames, supplantare peccatum, to supplant sinne: a Iohn, operari per gratiam, (...) worke good by the grace of God. For in these three, Credendo verum, extirpando ^^lum, and operando bonum; To beleeve that is true, to root out that is evill, and to practice that is good; hee placeth all perfection. 3. Nor yet doe I answer, because these three were more eminent in vertue and graces than the rest. Three sorts (...) men are qualified to see God: Such as love him, Ioh. 14.21. If a man love me, I will love him, and Manifestabo ei meipsum; I will manifest my selfe to him. Such as are H^^ble, Matth. 11.25. Thou hast hid these things from the prudent, and hast (...) them unto babes. Such as are of a pure heart, and cleane life, Matth. 5.8. Blessed (...) the pure in heart, for they shall see God. Psal. 50.23. To him that ordereth his corruption aright, will I shew the salvation of God. These are all gracious qualities: and with them were the rest of the Apostles as truely sanctified, that were not here admi^^^ 4. What, was it then because Christ did love these three above the rest? (...) his love was great to Iohn; and therefore among all his honourable Titles, he mentioneth that ever in the first place; The Disciple whom Iesus loved. But his loves Iohn was greater Extensive, non Intensive; by way of Extention, not by way intention. He shewed more signes of familiarity to him, than to the rest of the company:
 but he equally loved and prized them all. 5. Because the wisedome and unquestionable goodnesse of God chose them out, and secretioribus suis adhibuit, accepted then to the participation of his secrets. Thrice he called out those three, and made them witnesses to three great workes. The first was to the raising of Iairus his daughter. Mark. 5.37. He suffered no man to follow him, save Peter, and Iames, and Iohn. He did put forth the mourners, the musicians, the people, and left behind the lest of the Apostles; only these three he admitted. The next election was to this ^lorious transfiguration; singularly the same three againe. The last was to his A^onie in the Garden, Mark. 14.33. He charging his Disciples to stay, tooke with him Peter and Iames and Iohn, and began to be sore amazed. He made them three particu^arly witnesses; in the first worke, of his Power: in the second, of his Majestie: in ^he last, of his Agony. 6. Lastly, if men may give any reason of the Lords actions, ^hose wisedome is unsearcheable; I doe not thinke that CHRIST chose them, because they were more excellent than the rest, but because they were rather ^ore weake than the rest. It was subvenire infirmitati eorum, to helpe their ^firmitie, and to strengthen them in the assurance of their Master and Savi^urs glory.
The company that came from heaven, were Moses and Elias. Some have thought ^hat these did not appeare Vere and Personaliter, truely and personally; but Angels in ^heir likenes: but that is a manifest error; for themselves appeared, not Angels in their ^militude. Some are of another opinion, that they did not onely appeare personally, ^ut that in their very bodies with their soules. Because it is said that Elias was taken ^p, and no man knew what became of Moses his body: which occasioned that ^isputation betwixt the Archangell and the divell.Iude. ver. 9. But it is most plaine that the body ^f Moses was buried. Deut. 34.6. in a valley in the land of Moab, over against Beth^eor: though no man knoweth of his Sepulchre unto this day. Neither are all of that ^pinion, that the very body of Elias was taken up into heaven; some be perswaded, ^ere is no humane body in heaven, but the body of our Lord IESUS only. Ioh. ^.13. No man hath ascended up into heaven, but he that came downe from heaven. But ^ere it is questioned, why did Moses and Elias appeare, rather than David and Abra^am, from whose loynes CHRIST IESUS came and who were so famous among the people? Reasons.
To omit, that those three great fasters met together, Moses, Elias, and CHRIST: each of them having fasted fortie dayes, and forty nights.
1 To manifest a difference betweene the Lord and the servants. Moses and Eli^s were of high esteeme with the Iewes, CHRIST not regarded, a man of no ^epute among them; therefore he would now shew that he was the Lord, and they ^ut the servants to waite upon him. That he was not Elias, but the God of Elias: ^ot Ieremie, but he that sanctified Ieremie: not unus ex Prophetis, one of the Prophets, ^ut the Lord of the Prophets, that sent them.
2 If it be granted that Moses was dead, and that Elias died not: this declareth ^at CHRIST is the Saviour of both quicke and dead: whether of men living with Elias, or dead as Moses. To manifest that he hath the power both of life and ^eath; Adducitur Moses mortuus, and Elias vivus; both living Elias, and dead Moses ^re brought; both saved by this Iesus Christ.
3 To come neerer home; Moses was called the Law-giver, and Elias was (af^er a sort) the Law restorer; now the Iewes traduced CHRIST for a Law-brea^er. Their common Imputation against him was, that he transgressed the Law, and ^as contrary to the Prophets. Therefore he was content to be put to his purgation ^nd to Iustifie himselfe. Matth. 5.17. Thinke not that I am come to destroy the Law or ^e Prophets: I am not come to destroy, but to fulfill. And for a further testimonie of ^is Moses that brought the Law, and Elias that revived the Law, witnesse that hee ^as obedient to the Law. Gal. 4.4. God sent forth his Son made of a woman made un^er the Law to redeeme them that were under the Law.
4 They meete that brought the Law, with CHRIST that brought the Gospell; to shew that Law and Gospell must be joyned together. But we are freed by CHRIST from the Law? I answere, there is a double obligation of the Law: the obligation of penaltie, and the obligation of dutie. We are freed from the obligation of penaltie, but not from the obligation of dutie. 2 Tim. 2.19. Let every one that nameth the Name of CHRIST, depart from iniquity. He hath taken from the Law. Damnandi potestutem, all power to condemne us: but not Dominandi authoritatem, all power to rule us. We must still serve God according to his Law, or he will (...) save us according to his Gospell. Our faith in the Lord IESUS, and our obedience to the Law, must bee joyned together: as Moses and CHRIST met upon the mountaine. Ioh. 1.17. The Law was given by Moses, but grace and truth come by Iesus Christ.
5 To shew that this was the true Messias, to whom both Law and Prophets bare witnesse. Moses in the Law, as it is cited by Saint Peter, Act. 3.22. A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you among your brethren, like unto me: him shall ye heare in all things. And Elias in stead of all the Prophets, who was Prophetarum clarissimus, the clearest of all the Prophets. Now Suspecta est veritas, quae sola se ^^^tur, Ambr. That truth is suspected, which barely testifieth of it selfe. Therefore as CHRIST had three witnesses from the earth; Peter, Iames, and Iohn. So he (...) three from heaven; the voice of the Father, Moses and Elias. That now he which fulfilled both the Testaments, might enjoy both the Testimonies.
6 Lastly, CHRIST proposed two such famous men, as Moses and Elias to his Apostles for patternes: that their spirits might be well tempted in them. Moses ^i^mitissimus, a man most meeke on the earth: Elias a man exceeding zealous. Twice he doubles this testimonie of himselfe. 1 King. 19.10.14. I have been very jealous for the Lord of hostes. He had such a sacred fire of zeale in his heart upon earth, that God advanced him in a charriot of fire into heaven. Therfore are these two brought hither, that the Apostles might learne to mixe Moses his meekenesse, with Elias his ferventnesse. Yet this rare and excellent composition they forgate, Luk. 9.54, When they could not be entertained in a Samaritan village, say Iames and Iohn; (and that as it seemes, not long after their descending from the mount.) Lord, wilt thou that we command fire from heaven to consume them, as Elias did! There they thought of Elias, but forgate Moses: they had too much of the ones fire, but too little of the others water: zeale enough, but without the mercie of meekenesse. Againe at the apprehension of CHRIST, when Peter denyed him, and all the rest fled from him; there they had too much of Moses, but forgate the spirit of Elias: they had meekenesse enough, but wanted zeale: both together make a good temper.
 The event or consequents of this transfiguration, are these. First, the testimonie of the Father from heaven; which came out of a bright cloud overshadowing them. (...) was from a cloud, saith Chrysostome, that they might the more confidently receive (...) for the voice of God, qui solitus loqui Patribus in nube; who was wont to speake to their fathers in a cloud. This is my beloved Sonne, etc. They could formerly see his mother poore, his supposed father labouring for his living, CHRIST himselfe hungry, thirsty, weary, despised. Therefore now they heare a voice from heaven to make amends for all: recompencing his supposed basenesse, with Attributes of great glory. God speaking that to him, which he never spake to any; This is my Son. Not to the Angels, Heb. 1.5. Vnto which of the Angels said he at any time, That (...) my Sonne? Christ was shortly to die, and to suffer hard and unjust usage of his enemies; and all this in humilitie to beare. Therefore now he shewes Potentiam (...) passionem, gloriam ante injuriam, honorem suum ante horrorem suum: his power before his passion, his glory before his injurie, his honour before he come to feele his horror. That when they should afterwards see him taken, bound, scourged, Sco^^^, crucified, buried; they might then know and say, that this was effected not (...) potentiam eorum, sed propter patientiam suam; not by reason of their power over him
 but by reason of his patience under them: not because they could inflict it,Aug. but be^ause he would suffer it. Non miseranda necessitate, sed miserante voluntate: not by a miserable necessitie, but by his owne gracious mercie.
Another event was Saint Peters counsell. The point whereof Moses and Elias ^onferred with CHRIST, was De Excessu ejus, concerning his decease, which ^e should accomplish at Ierusalem. Peter hearing this newes of his masters death and ^hat by the testimonie of two such famous Prophets: he thinkes it good to provide ^etimes for his safetie. Such a course he had formerly attempted. Matth. 16.22. ^ee it farre from thee Lord, this shall not be unto thee. But CHRISTS rebuke was ^en so sharpe, Get thee behind me Satan; that Peter durst no more in plaine termes, ^dvise him againe to that favouring of himselfe. Therefore now he doth it aenigma^ce, covertly, and by involved insinuation. Lord, it is good for us to be here: we are ^ow in a safe place; a mountaine high, sure, solitary, pleasant: guarded by the com^any of two such potent men; a cloud to compasse; us glory to sustaine us, delight (...) content us. Let us tarry here, where no harme can find us out. Were it not ^adnesse to leave a place of such security, and expose thy selfe to the furie of thine ^dversaries? It is good to be here: but alas it was his error: for if this were to have ^eene a permanent and durable glory; Peter should not have called for Tabernacles, ^ut for mansions. Let us build here three Tabernacles, moveable tilths? No; fun^amentall and constant habitations. Quid dicis Petre? mundus perit, and tu montem ^tis, Aug. Doth the whole world perish, and must fire burne it all, and callest ^ou only for a mountaine? His error was both wayes culpable: either to seeke in ^ia Patriam, or in patria Tabernaculum; his countrey in the way, or a Tabernacle in ^is countrey. If he knew this to be but the earth, why doth he seeke for heaven up^n it? if he tooke this to be heaven, why doth he call for an earthen Tabernacle? ^ne for thee, another for Moses, etc. Why not, one for me, another also for Iames, ^nd Iohn? No, he mentions none for them, for he hoped that CHRIST himselfe would be their Tabernacle. Triaquaeris, factria, Bed. Thou seekest three, make ^hree, one for the Father, another for the Sonne, another for the Holy Ghost; none ^or Moses, none for Elias: doe not joyne the Servants with the Creator. Mystically ^here be still three Tabernacles: Exterius, Ecclesia: Interius, Conscientia: Superius, ^aelestis Patria. One outward, which is the Church: another inward, which is the ^onscience: the last upward, which is the kingdome of heaven. Let us dwell faith^ully in the former, let God dwell spiritually in the other; that we may all dwell to^ether comfortably in the latter; that is for ever in the peace of glory.
Lastly, this glorious vision and voice from heaven, amazed the Disciples; that ^hey fell on their face, and were sore afraid. CHRIST with the Touch of his hand ^ecovered them; And when they had lift up their eyes, they saw no man save Iesus onely, Matth. 17.8. Because indeed he was that Person onely, to whom both Law and Pro^hets bare witnesses. They have done their office, and then they vanish, that Christ ^ay be all in all. There is onely one mediator, Christ: it is he onely that satisfies ^he Law, and sanctifies the conscience: he onely, that reconciles us to God. Let Moses and Elias, and all others disappeare to the worke of our salvation; Da modo ^bis Iesum; Onely give us Iesus Christ. This testimonie they heard, but might not ^resently utter, for Christ forbad them. Tell the vision to no man, untill the Sonne (...) man be risen againe from the dead, Matth. 17.9. The reasons of this interdiction ^ay be. 1. Because the Iewes were to have no signe, but the signe of the Prophet ^nas: they had seene enough to leave their unbeliefe without excuse. 2. Because ^mong the rude, after the publication of such a glory, Crux scandalum pareret, the fol^owing Crosse would have bred scandall. If he were invested with such glory, why ^ould he not keepe himselfe in it. 3. Because till his resurrection had made way for (...), the world would never have given credite to this wonder. But perceiving his ^ower in raising himselfe from the dead, they might easily embrace the faith of that ^arification. Lastly, according to that, Eccl. 11.28. Neminem laudaveris ante mortem;
 Iudge no man blessed before his death. Then they witnessed it, then they preached it, then they wrote it, we heare it, let us all beleeve it, that we may one day enjoy it, in the everlasting kingdome of Iesus Christ.
I conclude; Peter and the rest knew Moses and Elias on the mount, whom they never saw before: they being departed many hundred yeares before the other were borne. Yet Mosen ab Elia, Eliam a Mose, utrumque a Christo potuerunt discernere. They could distinguish one from another; and say, this is Moses, this is Elias, and that is Christ. This is a lively type and shadow of that glory in heaven; where every Saint shall perfectly know all. Not Abraham nor any of the Patriarchs, not David nor any of the Kings, not Elias nor any of the Prophets, not Peter nor any of the Apostles, not Stephen nor any of the Martyrs, not any of our friends, kindred, acquaintance, none of the now unknowne beleevers scattered on the face of the broad earth shall in that place be stranger to us. Our knowledge shall extend to every individuall person: all shall know every one, and every one shall know all. Now let us love one another, pray for one another, doe good one to another; then and there wee shall know one another, and all bee eternally knowen and loved of our blessed God.



VERSE 19. Wee have also a more sure word of Prophecie, whereunto yee doe well that yee take heed, as unto a light that shineth in a darke place, untill the day dawne, and the day starre arise in your hearts.

THe Apostle had formerly delivered a certaine truth: such as both their eares had heard, and their eyes seene: and by many strong arguments confirmed it. Yet because the Iewes to whom he wrote, did much adhere to the Prophets, he refers them thither; to compare the events manifested, with their predictions. As if he did answere a challenge, with Paul to his Corinthians;2 Cor. 13.3. Since yee seeke a proofe of Christ; You shall have one more; in it selfe profitable, and to you plausible, a word of Prophecie. That as Festus said to Paul, Act. 25.12. Hast thou appealed unto Cesar? unto Cesar thou shalt goe. So Appellastisne Prophetas? ^ad Prophetas ibitis: have you appealed to the Prophets? to the Prophets you shall goe. They also shall witnesse to you the same Christ.
You see, the Apostle comes to a new manner of testifying the former truth. We have a word. A word, what's this? so we had before. Nay, but a word of Prophecie. Why, what strength hath this above the other? Yes, it is more sure. Well say it be more sure, what is this to us? we heard it not. Yes we have it, visible to our ^yes. But men may have it, and not regard it: as the Indians that were owners of all he gold, yet were the poorest beggars. Nay, but we take heed to it, attend it. Say we should, is this a thing so commendable? may we not rest satisfied with your word and assertion, that saw these things? Nay, but Bene facitis attendentes, Ye die very well in taking heed to it. Well, say we should observe it, what shall we find it to
 be? Not an obscure and involved matter, as it was before the completion; but a light. What need have we of a light, that live in the broad day of knowledge? Nay, but the world is full of darkenesse; and in a darke place a light is comfortable. But this may be some dimme candle, that can cast us no rayes or beames of illumination: No, it is a Shining light: like Iohn Baptist, a burning and a shining light. A light that shineth in a darke place. How long shall this light continue? Vntill the day downe, till the glorious presence of our Lord Iesus Christ be fully manifested to us and that we see no longer through a window or spectacles of faith; but behold with cleare eyes the Sunne himselfe. We shall then say of this light of knowledge here, compared with that; as Iohn Baptist said of himselfe compared with Christ; He must encrease, but I must decrease, Ioh. 3.30. Or as Paul, 1 Cor. 13.10. When that which is perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be done away. Then that same Day star of blessednesse shall arise, and tell us that the night is quite past, the day is come, the Sun of righteousnesse appeares, and that we shall appeare with him in glory. Let us all therfore first walke faithfully in the light of grace, that we may walke joyfully in the light of glory for ever.
We have also a more sure word, etc. The whole verse may be distinguished into foure generall parts:
A Conference; wherein he compares the Propheticall prediction, with the Evangelicall predication; ascribing to it some greater certaintie; We have a more sure word of Prophecie.A Reference, whereto he referres their scrutation, and commends their attention; Whereunto you doe well that yee take heed.A Preference, wherein he preferres that excellent light to the common darkenesse of the world. For the comparison is not betweene the Propheticall and Evangelicall light; but betweene the light of the Scripture, and the darkenesse of nature. As unto a light that shineth in a darke place.A Difference; wherein he gives that future day light a transcendencie to the former candlelight: that being but like a lampe in a darke night, this like a star that brings in the day. Vntill the day downe, and the day star arise in your hearts.
The word of Prophecie.] There are foure sorts of Prophets. 1. Some write of things past, as Moses. In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth: penning an Hexameron many yeares after the world was made. The Samaritan woman hearing Christ relate unto her the things which he had done, concluded; Sir, I perceive that thou art a Prophet, Ioh. 4.19. 2. Some prophecie of things to come. As God foretold by the mouth of his holy Prophets. Those did Dicere facta, these Praedicere facienda: the one was a relation, the other a prediction. 3. Some prophecie of things present: such a Prophet was old Simeon, whose eyes saw that present salvation. Thus Iohn the Baptist was a Prophet, and more than a Prophet. A Prophet, because he did point him out with the finger that was all the Prophets ayme: Behold the Lambe of God. More than a Prophet, because he baptised Dominum Prophetarum, the Lord of the Prophets, Ier. 4. Those that expound the Prophets: an Evangelicall Preacher is called a Prophet. 1 Cor. Chapter 14. Verse 1. Desire spirituall gifts, but rather that yee may prophecie. Chap. 13.9. We know in part, and we prophecie in part. He that interprets the Prophets, is called a Prophet, Aquin. But here the Apostle intends principally that sort, which foretold future things. Some of their words were more darke, some more plaine. Daniel and Iohn wrote darkely: the reason is given, because they wrote in times of persecution. So that if they had done otherwise, themselves and their bookes had beene burned. The events were the clearest expositions of them. It is the propertie of a Prophecie, Compleri priusquam intelligi, to
 bee fulfilled before it bee understood, Augustine.
A Prophet is called of the Hebrewes, Naba, vates: and Roeh, videns, a seer. Of the Grecians, (...): such as did foresee and foretell the purposes of God. Of the Latines, Vates, that is Fates: for Vaticinatio, is Faticinatio, Fatum canere, to preindicate an inevitable event. The words they spake, come to them Ex divino afflatu, by a divine instinct. Numb. 24.13. I cannot goe beyond the commandement of the Lord: but what he saith, that will I speake. So soone as ever the Lord had appeared to Samuel, presently the people tooke notice of him for a Prophet. 1 Sam. 3.20. All Israel knew that Samuel was established to be a Prophet of the Lord. They cannot know Gods will in future things, but by his relation or revelation. Psal. 139.6. Such knowledge is too wonderfull for me: it is high, I cannot attaine unto it. A vision of their owne heads, a fiction of their owne braines, were accursed. He that coines money out of base mettall, though he stampe upon it the image of the Prince, is a traitor. So is he, that to his owne invention shall put a Dicit Dominus, the Lord spake it. The prediction that comes not by divine instruction, is but a delusion: for none can praenoscere, fore-know; but he that did proponere, forepurpose.
Devills and men may guesse by observation, and collection of causes probable to beget such events: onely God knowes, Esa. 45.11. Aske of me things to come. If men could tell as much, aequiparent Iovi, they would be even with God. How wise were God, if he should write the secrets of his will on the top of his gate, the doores of heaven! yet your Astrologer presumes, Ex stellis, tanquam tot stillis and literis: ex syderibus tanquam tot syllabis: ex constellationibus, tanquam tot verborum conjunctionibus: to know all things by the heavens: as if the starres were so many letters, the planets syllables, and the constellations expresse sentences. So they make the whole heaven a Syntaxis or discourse of Gods purpose. Will any King ingrosse the secrets of his Counsell on the doore of his Palace? That late character which was set on the brow of heaven, did certainely meane the world some newes. But who could undertake to translate the letters of it, or expound the meaning? To breake into Gods Counsell chamber, will be dangerous treason: only the hand that wrote it, can interpret it. If men could by their owne wisedome prophecie; they were not only Sapientiores filiis lucis. Luk. 16.8. Wiser than the children of light: but as wise as Ipsa lux, even selfe. The very divells that hover in the aire, (uti Adam prope suum Eden, like Adam who being cast out of Eden, dwelt so neere it as he could) and by reason of their vicinitie to the starres, can read them better than mortall men, sundred from us so farre as earth: yet are they all dunces in respect of Prophecie. They can tell you what may happen, never what will happen. Therefore they delivered their oracles in a doubtful and bastard language: that if the event did not answer the prediction, they might then expound the prediction according to the event. Onely God can make Prophets, and put into their mouthes the foretelling of future things. Ezek. Sonne of man, I have made thee a watch man over the house of Israel: therefore heare the word at my mouth, and give them warning from me. It is God that speakes in ore Prophetarum, by the mouth of his holy Prophets, which have beene ever since the world began. He speakes by the Prophets for the good of our soules, let us heare his Prophets for the honour of his holy name.
A more sure word of Prophecie.] (...). Why, was not the Apostolicall Testimonie sure enough? could there be more than ocular and articular witnesse? The Prophets foretold what they never saw, the Apostles saw what they told. Besides, did not one and the same God speake by them both? Hebr. 1.1. conferred with, Matth. 10.20. plainely demonstrates: that the same God who spake unto the Fathers by the Prophets; spakes also by the Apostles, For it is not yet that speake, but the spirit of your Father which speaketh in you. How then can this be Certior Sermo, a more sure word. Seeing the Prophets be a darke lanthorne, which himselfe here confesseth hard to be understood. This point hath troubled many expositors: it was some trouble to me to find it, let it be no trouble to you to read it.
1 Some answer, that here a comparative is put for a positive; More sure, for Sure: or for a superlative: (...), for (...); more sure, for Surest. A place is instanced, Act. 25.10. Paul cleared himselfe to Festus; To the Iewes I have done no wrong, as thou very well knowest. The word is not (...), but (...); not Well, but Better: the comparative for the positive; as Thou better knowest. This same Enallage graduum is not rare among the Greekes and Latines. The French write Tresnoble for Noble: we Most Honourable, for Honourable: and some, To my Worthyer friend, for Worthy. But this answer satisfies not: for first I doe not see but that speech of Paul might very well be translated, as Thou better knowest. For Festus being a Roman Iudge did better know, that Paul had not done nothing against the Roman Lawes, than could the Iewes. But it is objected, that Paul appeales to Festus his knowledge, that to the Iewes he had done no wrong. True, and why might not the Iudge better discerne of the cause than the Plaintife? Every man is well affected to his owne cause, and the Iewes were blinded with malice, charging Paul with many things, but proving nothing. Festus therefore seeing their malice, and Pauls innocency; did better know that he had done them no wrong, than themselves. Besides the Context manifestly intends a comparison; it must be admitted Certior sermo, to be a more sure word.
2 Beda, with some other, answer; that this may be a Surer word, not simply and absolutely; but in respect of the Gentiles: who might haply calumniate the vision of the Apostles, but durst not the oracles of the Prophets. As if Peter should say; You may perhaps doubt that perticular sight we had in secret, but none wil contradict the Prophecies manifested in publike. Infidels being so wel acquainted with Necromancie, might ascribe this voice to magick. As Psaphon was accepted of the Lybians for a great God, because certaine birds had beene first taught to sing this lesson, and afterwards being let loose into the aire, did sing it; Magnus deus Psaphon. Or as Mahomet got the reputation of a great saving prophet, by a Pigeon trained to come to his eare, and there picke out corne, which his credulous followers beleeved to be the conference of the Holy Ghost: and by a Bull taught and tamed to carry the Alchoran on his hornes. To prevent any such suspition here, the Prophets are brought in, who did fore-tell all these things long before Christ came himselfe. Nunquid Magus Christus antequam natus? Could Christ be a Magician before he was borne? Thus there was a Celestiall Word, whereby beleevers are confirmed: and a Propheticall Word whereby unbeleevers are convinced. But this answer falls also short of satisfaction: for Saint Peter wrote not to Infidels, but to Beleevers; such as had alreadie embraced the truth of the Gospell.
3 There is another Solution. Aquin. Lyran. Hugo, Catharinus, Calv. The Apostle speakes this in respect of the Iews unto whom he wrote. Here the truth of the Gospel is proved by a double testimony: Patris Elogio, Prophetarum vaticinio; by the assertion of God, and by the prediction of the Prophets. Now this were an absurd thing to imagine, that the Propheticall witnesse should be Surer than the Divine and Paternal. First, because their Word did meerely depend upon the authority of the same God. Secondly, because Christs comming had performed what they promised. Now if either of the two can challenge the greater firmenesse, it is the latter: for let a promise be never so sure, yet the performance is surer. Cedant dicta factis; It could not be more sure in their Prophecie that Christ should come, than in the Apostles sight that he was come. Coram quem quaeritis adsum; He came unto his owne, he dwelt among us; there could be nothing surer; than he only promised, now he hath paid the debt. Well yet, albeit Gods Testimony were most sure with the Apostles, yet the Prophets Word was more sure with the Iewes. They knew them to be the lawfull Ministers of God, they were brought up in their Schooles; of their words there was no suspition. His avi, atavi confiderunt: and vetustas ipsa aliquid reverentiae secum trahit; Antiquity it selfe chalengeth reverence. God here said, This is my beloved Sonne: This they had read before in the Prophets, Psalm. 2.7. I will declare the decree: the LORD hath said vnto me, Thou art my Sonne, this day have I begotten thee, Thus was it a Surer Word,
 not in it owne nature, nor to the Apostles, but to the Iewes. To this consents Augustine; Certiorem dici, non meliorem, non veriorem; It is not said to be Better, nor Truer, but only Surer. This testimony was as good as that, as true, as usefull: but in this respect, that is surer, because it makes more strongly to confirme such hearers. If you will not beleeve me, have recourse to your Prophets, Ioh. 5.39. Search the Scriptures, they all testifie of IESUS CHRIST.
4 Some by this Word of Prophecie would understand onely the preaching and writing of the Gospell: and extend it all no further than Evangelicall prophecie. But the Context will not beare such an exposition, for the Apostle speakes of fore-written Prophecies, Vers. 20. Prophecie of the Scripture.
5 Some would have this Word of prophecy, to be the very testimony of the Father concerning his Son. But there is no such trajection of phrases in the Scripture. We finde Christ to be called the Prophet of God, not God to be the Prophet of Christ.
6 Some reade it thus, More sure than the Prophets; in the Genitive case plurall: but no Copie so hath it.
7 Bradford resolved it thus, in his answer to this, among other questions put to him by the Papists. That the Apostles in this did humble themselves; as if men not giving credit to their private testimony, would yet with all reverence receive the Prophets. But if they should thus disable themselves, who would beleeve them? whereas, they were to write Iure Apostolico.
8 Lastly, the answer that seems to me most probable and profitable; and wherein I have few or none before me, doubtlesse many will follow me; is this. The foundation is ever more surer than the building: that being sound, though the edifice it selfe should fall, will firmely stand. Now the new Testament was not yet written; I meane the Gospell of the foure Evangelists: nor was it collected into a volume till eight and twenty yeares after. But the Prophets were extant, and their writings miraculously preserved: these the Iewes readily had, and might peruse at their pleasure. Therefore the meere and naked report of Christs glory on the Mountaine, was not so sure as the Prophecie inspired by God, and ingraven in the tables of their hearts. And this authenticall proofe was the surest, untill the day did fully dawne, and the divine hand had made the Gospell knowen and visible. Thus were the things related never so true in themselves, the question here is not concerning the Truenesse, but the Surenesse: and certainly thus farre, the Scriptures of the Prophets were surer to the Iewes, than the unwritten doctrines of the Apostles, or the naked delivery of their particular visions.
Now whatsoever may be said for exception. That the Prophets had only involved promises, not understood till they were fulfilled. In a promise there are many doubts: mens minds may change, occasions divert, their power be defective: but in a performance there is nothing wanting: now the Gospell was established by the ministry of the Senses. It is true that in the Scripture, there is no difference concerning the truth and certainty of all places and parts of it: but there may be some difference in the materiall and formal parts: for things may be more plainely, more comfortably set down in one place than in another. Therfore Augustine gives this praise to the Gospell, in allusion to that miracle of turning the water into wine, Ioh. 2. That Christ did turne the Propheticall water, into Evangelicall wine. There have beene some, that through disability to cleare this doubt in my Text, have thrust the whole Epistle out of the Canon; and it was foure hundred yeares almost, before it was received, as Eusebius testifies. This was like Alexander, when he could not undoe the Gordian knot, to cut it. That was to make quicke, but sacrilegious dispatch. There is no such need; to put out the light, because we are blinde and cannot see it.
But to conclude plainly; Christ had not yet gotten so much credite with the Iewes, as had their Prophets: for their common opinion was, that all Iesus did was by Magicke. This they expresly objected, when he had cast out a devill, Mat. 12.24. This fellow doth cast out devils, but by Beelzebub the prince of the devils. And when the
 voice of such a glorious testimony came from heaven; h The people that stood by, and heard it, said, that it thundered. They would not beleeve it to be the voice of the Father. Doe you speake of a voice from heaven? Who heard it? Doe you tell us of his rising from the dead? who saw him? Therefore the Apostle refers them to the Prophets, those Ancients: whose Word was (as it were) the foundation of the Gospell, Ephes. 2.20. We are built upon the foundation of the Prophets, as well as of the Apostles: the same Iesus Christ, the Center of them both, being the chiefe corner-stone. Now the foundation is surer than the house: antiquity, the foundation, is more surely received. Thus the Scriptures of the Prophets stop the mouth of the Iewes, who referred all the actions of Christ to a bad spirit. We call that most sure, that can give best satisfaction to the scholler: we are late reporters, but the Prophets are ancient. Therefore their Word is certius judicio vestro, surer in your judgement, though not in it selfe, Aug. Christ is an infinite masse of gold, but they were so tired with expectation, that when it came, they were not able to finger the money; therefore he refers them to the Prophets; that comparing both these together, they might be more assured.
To conclude. All this doth serve to manifest that usuall government, whereby God will guide his Church: this is not by visions, but by the Word. He hath appointed us to be sons and daughters of Faith, not of Sense. He that will not beleeve without a miracle, is himselfe a miracle: yea, and it will be a miracle, if ever he be saved. When that Rich-man in hell requested a Signe for his brethren, he was answered; If they heare not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be perswaded, though one rose from the dead. Thus the Prophets had the more Sure Word, untill the Gospell was written. But now it being written, let us aske for no shadowes, that have the Substance: demand we no signes, that have Iesus Christ.
Amore sure Word of Prophecie.] this may seeme to ascribe some more credite to the Prophets, than to the Gospell? No, they were all written by divers men, in divers ages, at divers places, on divers occasions: yet eadem veritas, eadem authoritas; they all have the same truth, the same authority. Though the Iewes acknowledge the old Testament, abhor the new: though Turks disclaime both, Atheists despise both, sinners neglect both: yet as the Disciples had but one Master, and were all brothers: so the bookes have but one Father, and they are all sisters. One Lord is originall and Subject of them, one Spirit indited them, one bloud of the Lambe sealed them, one truth is maintained in them, one Spouse of Christ hath with an unpartiall respect equally received them, and miraculously preserved them: and rather than any rent or maime should be made in their sacred body, she hath sent her members dismembred, and bereft of their dearest bloud, into heaven. These are the Gages of our Saviours love, Gods royall Covenants, the oracles of his Sanctuary, the key of his revealed Councels, milk from his sacred brest, the light of our eies, the joy of our harts, the pillars of our faith, the anchor of our hope, the evidences and deeds of our eternall blessednesse. It is true that one Star differs from another in glory, and the rule of the day is given to the Sun, of the night to the Moone. The Captaines of the sons of God may heare an unequall report, 1 Chro. 12.14. The least could resist an hundred; the greatest, a thousand. And no wrong was done in that Antheme, 1 Sam. 18.7. Saul hath slaine his thousand, and David his ten thousand. One Plato may be more of value, than a thousand vulgar men: and our Saviour prefers the old wine to the new, Luke 5.39. The old is better. But the whole Scripture, as it came by the inspiration of one Author, so it preserves the equality of one honour. Moses is no better than Samuel, Samuel than David, David than Salomon, the father than the son: David a King, than Amos an heard-man, Peter first chosen, than Paul borne our of due time. Some portion of it sometimes, lend more usefull application to our soules: but all of it is like Manna, which rellisheth to every faithfull conscience, as his heart desireth. Oile is best at the bottom, wine at the midst, milke at the top; but the Fountaine-water is all alike. This is the Spring-water of life; cleere, cooling, healthfull, helpfull in every part. One part is not surer than another, but all is so sure, that it is sealed by him
 that is Yea and Amen: These words are true and faithfull. They are Sure in Gods promise, Sure in Christ performance, may they be Sure in our beleeving hearts for ever!
We have a more sure Word.] I come to the third Circumstance, the Persons to whom these Prophecies were committed: the Apostle joyning himselfe with the Iews; We have. The Iewes might well attend to the word of Prophecie, for they Had it. They had many privileges, but this was the chiefest, Rom. 3.2. What advantage hath the Iew? or what profit is there of Circumcision? Much every way: but chiefly, because unto them were committed the oracles of God They had the Patriarkes, the Sacraments, the Sacrifices, the Promise of the Messias; but Chiefly the oracles, as comprehending all the rest, Act. 7.38. Moses received the lively oracles, to give unto us. He received oracula viva, the lively oracles: to what purpose? To give unto us; we have them. They were not Alienae rei deposita, but their owne proper treasure. And indeed they were faithfull keepers of them, preserving them from falsity and corruption: and to this day servant, etsi non observant; they keepe them in custodie, though they keep them not in obedience. Therfore in our Saviours dayes, when many corruptions both of life and doctrine were objected against them; yet they were not charged to be falsifiers of the Scripture. Therefore well might the Apostle say, We have them: for to them pertaine the Covenants,Esay 2.3. Ro. 9.4. To them it was credited, to them it pertained, they had it, they kept it, and from them we receive it. Lex e Sion: Out of Sion shall goe forth the Law, and the Word of the Lord from Ierusalem.Iohn 4.22. So Christ himselfe testified; Salvation is of the Iews. This was Pauls Farewel to them, able to have melted their hearts, who had been keepers of that sacred Word of so many hundred yeares.Act. 13.46. It was necessary that the Word of God should first be spoken to you: but seeing ye put it from you, and judge your selves unworthy of everlasting life: Loe we turne to the Gentiles.
Thus they had, but now they have lost; not the Letter, but the Spirit and life of this propheticall Word. Deus misit, Iudaeus amisit; God gave it, and they lost it. And as it is fit, he that condemnes the Sun, should not have a Star to light him: so they that refused Solem justitiae, that Sun of righteousnesse; should not retaine Lumen Prophetiae, the light of Prophecie. Esau hath sold his Birth-right to Iacob: the Iewes are to us Christians; Imprecatores in cordibus, suffragatores in codicibus: Enemies in their hearts, but friends in their books. They have only the word prophesying, we have the word prophesied: they the Propheticall shadow, we the Evangelicall truth, Iesus Christ. This Word is now devolved to us, we have it, Rom. 15.4. Whatsoever things were written afore-time, were written for our learning; that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope. The letter for our eyes, the history for our tongues, the mystery for our heads, the comfort of all for our hearts. God grant we never inherit the sinnes of the Iewes, with the Scriptures of the Iewes. Like Gehezi, that could not take Naamans money, but must also take his Leprosie. Or Nadab, that succeeded Iereboam, both in his Crowne, and in his sin. Or as Satan offred Christ, Glory, but Idolatry withall. No, the Lord that hath given us their light, keep us for ever from their darknes! We will be content with Esaus Birth-right and his Blessing, we wil none of his Profanenesse. While these Oracles were with them, they were like jewels in an infected house, or the precious stone in the Toads forehead, we might say of them, as it was proverb'd of Galba's wit; Ingenium Galbae male habitat; the Romans lov'd his policy, but not his company. The Prophets foretold things they could not see, the Iews beheld things they would not see.Matth. 23.3. Our Saviour made distinction between the Pharisies doctrines and doings: whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do: but day not after their works. So we say to them still; Give us your doctrines, we will none of your deeds: you rejected that Iesus Christ, whom your prophecies teach us to embrace. When a deboish'd Limner had drawne an exquisite Piece, many desired the picture, but all disdained the Painter. Pulchrum hominem pinxisti Pictor fadus; The Iewes had verbum propheticum, the word of prophecie: not fidem propheticam, the faith of prophecy. They were the most miserable men, for whose sake there was so much cost and pains to make them happy. God in his good time turne their hearts: that Sanguis essu simit,
 which was to them Sanguis Confusionis; The bloud of Christ which they shed, may be to their seed Sanguis Perfusionis, the bloud of redemption. That they may be saved by him, whom their Fathers condemned; Iesus Christ.
And for us, let us remember Saint Pauls caution, Rom. 11.20. Because of unbeleefe they were broken off, by faith thou standest: Be not high minded, but feare. We have the same meanes to be saved, yet we see it is no impossible thing to goe to hell. Micah thought himselfe so sure, when he had got a Levite to his Priest, that God must needs blesse him, Iudg. 17.13. So we think it enough to have the Bible in our house: yet we may come to complaine, as Micah to the Danites; Ye have taken away all that I have. Or as Christ threatned the Iewes; The kingdome of heaven shall be taken from you, and given to nations that will bring forth answerable fruits. Or you shall call the fruit of your sin, as Phineas wife called the fruit of her wombe; Ichabod, because the glory is departed from you, 1 Sam. 4.22. If the naked habite of the truth in our understanding, or approbation; vel sensu, vel assensu; could save men; who would goe to hell? We see it, we know it, we confesse it, we professe it, we do it not. Those are wretched and perverse men, and shew that the Sacramentall water was spilt on their faces; that curse the Scriptures, and blesse their sins. That had rather (Execrare legem, quam emendare vitam; and O disse praecepta, potius quam vitia;) cast the law behind their backs, then not foster their lusts in their bosomes. I hope there are few so bad; but, O that men were so good, as truely to expound the Prophets by their lives. A Christians good conversation, is the Scriptures best Comment and exposition. We do expound them in our words, doe you expound them in your works. Be you a counterpaine to that blessed originall: O that their lines, and our lives, did consort and match together. God hath given the Word of life to us, O let him find the life of the Word in us.
But alas! this is our fault: we have the Scripture in our houses, we have it in our Churches, we have it in our hands, we have it not in our hearts. What shall we answer to the Lord for all his means to make us good? Our God is good, our time is good, our health is good, our peace is good, our truth is good, our preaching good, all good; we are not good. We have this Word, we have it to shew: so that evill servant had his talent, and he could shew his talent. We call it our Evidence of Gods favour toward us: and we dare say, By this we know that thou favourest us, Psal. 41.11. It is an evidence that God doth love us, let it not be an evidence whereby he shall judge us. All is made ours, saith Paul: The Prophets ours, the Evangelists ours, the Apostles ours, the Fathers ours, the Promises ours, the Sacraments ours, things present ours, things to come ours: O let us be Christs, for Christ is Gods. They were written for our learning, they are preached for our living: let us beleeve them with resolution, and obey them to our salvation, through Iesus Christ. Amen.
Whereunto ye do well that ye take heed.] I come to the Second Generall, which we called the Reference. Seeing this Word of Prophecie is so Sure and authenticall, that no exception can be taken to the truth of it; I refer you to it. Trie and peruse it: you shall finde it speaking the same, that you have heard from us. There is no disparity in their Prediction, and our Predication: in their Sic erit, So it shall be, and our Sic est, So it is. The Apostles argument is strongly perswasive: all men will give affiance to a Sure thing; but the Word of Prophecie is sure: therefore let us adhere to it. What he propounds, is by demonstration: what he assumes, is by concession: what he concludes is by justillation. Attendite certo, Give heed to a thing that is Sure. There is no worldly thing sure, yet Attendimus his, wee give heed to such things.
No riches: God so hedged Iob in on every side, and made such a sense about him, that the Devill himselfe knew not where to breake in upon him, Iob 1.10. Yet the Lord againe took downe the pale, and Iob became poore to a proverb. Yet to wealth we take heed our eies are stil open to watch it, our hands open to catch it: and when we have it, we house it: with as great affection, as the Spouse did her beloved. Cant 3.4. I held him, and would not let him go, untill I had brought him into my mothers house, and
 into the chamber of her that conceived me. Men hold it, and will not let it goe, but rather bury it in the earth, Domo matris suae, that house of their mother. The covetous, as if they would revenge Corahs death, seeke to swallow up the earth, that swallowed up him. But alas, they take need to a thing most unsure. Antequam cupidus aliquid lucrife cerit, seipsum perdidit, Aug. Before the covetous man can gaine any thing, hee loseth himselfe. Therefore Paul charged Timothie, to charge us. 1 Tim. 6.17. That we put not our trust in uncertaine or unsure riches. If we doe, we are sure to bee deceived.
Pleasure is not sure; alas nothing is more unsure. Not only in respect of continuation, but even of present fruition. It is a question whether the carnall man doth truely joy, when he smiles: or whether a merry heart hee declared by a jesting language. For there is a joy like Romney marsh: in summer of prosperity bad, in winter of affliction mad, never good. Prov. 14. Verse 13. Even in laughter the heart is sorrowfull: and the end of that mirth is heavinesse: gone, ere you can say, It is here.
Honour is not sure, it comes with a breath, and goes with a breath, and goes with a breath: as a boy that can blow up a bubble unto aire, and presently blow it into aire. Cesar goes an Emperor to the Senate, is brought a corpse home. Pompey was great, yet he was begg'd. Opiniative honours are like curious peales on the bells, rung with changes: there may be sweet musicke in the change, but they are presently out of it. The divell taking CHRIST up into a high mountaine. Luk. 4.5. Shewed him all the kingdomes of the world in a moment of time. In a moment? How all the kingdomes of the earth should be shewen in a moment, is a question and wonder; though one stood in the body of the Sunne. Therefore this must be done by representation; which is indeed more capable of admiration, than of demonstration. But why in a moment? to teach us that all the glory of this world is but for a moment. In a moment of time there is neither Prius nor Posterius: and this is the terme of all worldly glory. Dum exaltarentur, dejecisti eos, saith the Psalme. In the midst of their lifting up, thou didst cast them downe: not afterward, but even then: in articulo exaltationis Ostenduntur ista res, non possidentur: and dum placeant, transeunt, Sen. These things are only shewed, not possessed; and while they please us they passe away from us.
Not friends, alas even they are unsure: our Saviour found his Hosanna turned to a Crucifie him. Doth any aske him, how he came by his wounds? Zach. 13.6. he answers, Thus was I wounded in the house of my friends, Psal. 41.9. Homo pacis mea; Yea my owne familiar friend, in whom I trusted, conspired against me. Thus were Paul and Barrabas served, Act. 14. The same people become ready to kill them, that were a little before ready to kill sacrifice to them. There are still innumerable such Lystrians, that are alwayes in extremes; either they will defie, or deifie. Matth. 10.36. A mans enemies shall be they of his owne houshold. Whom to day thou lest it Fidum, a Counseller; to morrow thou shalt find Perfidum, a Traitor. Be not too bold in trusting thy secrets to another: he that now loves thee dearely, may come to have thee deadly.
Not life; alas nothing is more uncertaine. Belshazzar is sitting at a feast, on a suddaine comes death like avoider to take him away. Hereupon, his face so coloured with the wine, begins to looke pale and gastly with feare. His hands, that lifted up the massy goblets in defiance of their owner, tremble like a leafe in a storme. His knees, that never stooped to his Creator, are loosned with a suddaine palsey of terror. All, because death hath written him a challenge on the wall, and he dares not answer it. As Noahs Dove went out of the Arke, and came into the Arke, went out againe, and came in againe; at last went out, and came in no more. So it is with our breath; it goes out, and comes in, comes in and goes out, at last goes out and comes in no more.
There is no Surenesse in all these things, yet is our affection too strongly set upon
 them, Ion. 2.8. They are all lying vanities. If they promise you any certaintie, they lye unto you. All is unsure, only the word of God is sure. The heavens are a lasting piece, and the earth abideth for ever, Eccl. 1.4. Yet they are all unsure in respect of the Lords word. We may say of all that wrote his will, as of Samuel; None of their words ever fell to the ground. 1 Sam. 3.19. Riches are inconstant, friends inconstant, pleasures, honours, life, the whole world inconstant: onely Ego Iehovah non mutor. Mal. 3.6. I the Lord change not, Psal. 19. The commandement of the Lord is pure, inlightening the eyes. The testimonies of the Lord is sure, making wise the simple his word is both pure, and sure, and so shall be for ever.
Whereunto yee doe well that yee take heed.] In this branch there are two things considerable.
The Attention, (...), Yee take heed, intend, observe.
The Commendation, (...), Yee doe well in this attention.
Yee take heed.] It is a speciall meanes to settle our faith, by conferring the Prophets with the Evangelists. Take heed to the word of Prophecies. This is a sure and convertible rule: nothing was done by CHRIST, which was not foretold by the Prophets: nothing was foretold by the Prophets, which was done by Christ. It would take up a life to observe all the analogies, and exact cadences of the events to the predictions: and to compare the Prophecie with the Historie. The Summe whereof is, Vt impleretur, That it might bee fulfilled. This is the musicke of that sweet harmonie, the Terme wherein they meet. Matth. 21.4. All this was done, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophet. One said, that Plato was nothing else but Moses translated out of Hebrew into Greek: and Virgil nothing but Homer versed out of Greeke into Latine: so the new Testament is but an exposition of the old. Divines make the same difference betweene the Law and the Gospell, that Philosophers did betweene Logicke and Rhetoricke: the Law like the Fist shut, the Gospell like the hand open. Evangelium revelata lex,Aug. Lex occultum Evangelium. Invetere novum latet, in novo vetus patet. The Law is a concealed Gospell, the Gospell a revealed Law. The new Testament lies hidden in the old: the old Testament lies open in the new. They goe arme in arme, like inseparable friends; the two daughters of the great king: with their faces, like the Cherubins, one toward another, and both toward the mercie-fear. Though the Iewes deny the Scriptures of the Christians, yet the Christians will hold the Scriptures of the Iewes to the death.
Now that we may know how to take heed to the Prophets, we will consider this Reference in some particular instances, Prophet. That CHRIST should come in the flesh. Gen. 3.15. completion, Gal. 4.4. God sent his Sonne made of a woman: and Iob. 1.14. The word was made flesh, Prophet. That he should be borne of a Virgin. Esa. 7.14. Compl. Luk. 1.27. A Virgin espoused to a man. That Rod of Aaron, which without the common generation of Plants, Frenduit ac floruit; flourished and fructified. Prophet. That he should be God and man expressed in his name, Immanuel, Esa. 7.14. Compl. Rom. 9.5. That person came in the Flesh, who is over all, God blessed for ever. The Prophet describes the time of his comming, Gen. 49.10. Vpon the departure of the Scepter from Iuda. The Completion answers, Luk. 2.1. Augustus Cesar had set Herode an Alien upon the Throne of David. Prophet points to the place of his birth. Mic. 5.2. Thou Bethlem in the land of Iuda. The Gospell verifies it. Matth. 2.1. IESUS was borne in Bethlem, and without all evasion, that same Bethlem of Iuda. The Prophets foretold his miracles and wonders. Esa 35.5. The eyes of the blind shall be opened, the deafe shall be made to heare the lame, man shall leape as an Hart, and the tongue of the dumbe shall sing. This was fulfilled, Matth. 11.5. in the presence of Iohns Disciples, that they might know him the very CHRIST. His Precursor was specified in the Prophet, Esa. 40.3. The voice of him that cryeth in the wildernesse. It is fulfilled, Matth. 3.3. He must be apprehended; it was Prophecied by Ieremie; The Lords annointed was taken in their (...). But how? hee must
 bee sold: for what? Thirtie pieces of silver: what must those doe? Buy a potter-field, Zach. 11.12. By whom must he be taken? by that child of perdition: what was he? His familiar friend, whom he trusted, his steward, his Almoner? it was prophecied, Psal. 41.9. What shall his Disciples doe? Runne away: so it was prophecied. Zach. 13.7. I will smite the Shepheard, and the sheepe shall be scattered. What must now be done to him? he must be scourged, spit upon: it was prophecied; I hide not my face from shame and spitting. Those filthy excrements of his enemies, fell not upon his face without a Prophecie. What then? he must bee led to death: it was prophecied. Dan. 6.26. The Messiah shall be cut off. What death must be suffer? Crucifying, prefigured by the lifting up of the brasen Serpent. Whither must he be lifted up? to the Crosse; hanging on a Tree, saith Moses. How, he must be nailed to it: it was the Prophecie; Federunt manus, Psal. 22.16. They pierced my hands and my feete. With what company? Two malefactors: it was the Prophecie. Esa. 53.12. He was numbred with the transgressors. What becomes of his Garments? the Prophet tells. Psalm. 22.18. They part my garments among them, and cast lots at my vesture. They cannot so much as throw the dice for his coate, but it is prophecied. There was not a bone broken of him: it was plainely presignified in his Type, the Pascal Lambe, Exod. 12.46. Not a bone broken? what hinders? Loe there be hangs neglected, at their mercie: yet not all the raging Iewes, nor roaring divells, could breake one bone of him. What then followes? he must be pierced in the side: the speare could not doe this, but directed by a Prophecie. Zach. 12.10. They shall looke upon me whom they have pierced. His very words were not unforetold: the resignation of his Spirit into the hands of his Father. Psal. 31.5. His prayer for pardon to them that killed him: that same, Father, forgive them, for they know not what they doe, Luk. 23.14. It was prophecied by Esay, he prayed for the transgressours There is one yet behind. Iohn 19. Verse 28. Sitio, I thirst. Thirst? this is strange, that a dying man should complaine of thirst. Could hee endure those tortures of body, horrors of soule, the curse of our sinnes, the unsupportable wrath of God; and yet shrinke at thirst? It was surely, not the necessitie of nature, but the necessitie of his Fathers decree, which drew from him that Sitio, I thirst. He could have borne his draught unsatisfied, he could not beare his Scripture unfulfilled. They offered him drinke before, he refused it, now he calls for it, now he receives it. Psal 69.21. In my thirst they gave me vineger to drink: the very qualitie and kind of his drink is prophecied. His triduan sepulture was prefigured in Ionas, Matth. 12.40. His glorious resurrection, and conquest over death. Psal. 16.10. Thou wilt not suffer thine holy one to see corruption. So Paul derives it from Hosea. Chap. 13.14. Oh death I will be thy plague: Oh grave: I will be thy destruction. His Ascension was prophecied. Psal. 68.18. Thou hast ascended on high, thou hast led captivitie captive. The vocation of the Gentiles was prophecied. Hos. 2.13. I will say to them that were not my people Thou art my people. His comming to Iudgement prophecied: his first comming was as a Lambe, without crying, or having his voice heard in the streets. Ver. 2. His second comming as a Lion. Ver. 13. The Lord shall goe forth as a mighty man. Thus in reading the Scriptures, let us still have an eye to CHRIST. They are a field, and the precious Iewel hid in it, is Iesus Christ.
Can there be now any Iew, that will move that question. Matth. 11.3. Art thou how we should come? or doe we looke for another? Or that will keepe in the old (...) of that tempting divell; Si Filius Dei es. Matth. 4.3. If thou be the Son of God: If. Certainely he hath upon him the brand of that old stife-neckednesse, that will not relent with the yoke of sixeteene hundred yeeres conviction. Let them shew one Prophecie unfulfilled: one other in whom they can be fulfilled. It was the great question of the world, who is that CHRIST? It is the great question of the Church; who is that Antichrist? In both these are the Iewes ignorant. Let them beware their doome: Lu. 19.27. Bring those my enemies that would not have me raigne over them and slay them before me. But I would to God there were no vipers of this monstrous
 generation among us: no compounded gallimafrey of Religions; a Christians face, Iewes heart, a worldlings foote, an Atheists hand. That confesse a God, and know him not: professe a CHRIST, and beleeve him not. The worst kind of fooles, Psa. 14.1. In this worse than the devills: for they could say, Act. 19.15. Iesus I know. Oh God, that after so many miraculous confirmation, thousands of Martyrdomes, glorious victories of truth, confessions of Angels, of men, of divels, universall contestation of all ages? that there should be any sparke of this damn'd Infidelitie left? whom have the Prophets foreshewed? what have they foreshewed, that he hath not fulfilled? who could foretell them but the Spirit of God? who could fulfill them but the Sonne of God? he hath prophesied, he hath accomplished; one true God in both. No other wisedome could say, this shall bee done: no other power could make menifest, this is done. The Law was (...), a word Prophesied: the Gospell (...), a word pronounced. CHRIST is the Alpha of the Prophets, the Omega of the Evangelists; All in all. Therefore If any man love not the LORD IESUS CHRIST, let him bee Anathema Maranatha. 1 Cor. 16.22.
For our selves, let us be confirmed by this Reference, and perswaded in conscience, that the Scripture is the booke of God. If Ptolome was amazed at the seventie Interpreters; because they being placed in sundry roomes, never conferring, nor seeing one another; did yet upon the same Text write the same thing, not only for sense of matter, but even for sound of words; as Augustine reports. How should we be moved with the Divine concordance between the Prophets and the Apostles who wrote in diverse ages and places, yet so agreeing in one, that they seeme not diverse penmen, but diverse pens of one writer. The divell raged, the Pharises stormed, Herode and Pilate vexed, Caiaphas prophesied; all intruded against the Lords annointed. Yet they all did against their wills; as no more than God determined, so no lesse was than prophesied. For the determination, read, Act. 4.28. They did what thy counsell determinrd before to be done. For the prediction, read, Act. 13.27. They not knowing the Prophets, fulfilled them incondemning him. Even by this also we know him to be the right promised Iesus Christ.
Yee doe well.] I proceed to their commendation; the Apostle praiseth them. Goodnesse deserveth praise, and let it have the merite: let no man be afraid to blesse, where God hath blessed. If Mary be blessed of God, all generations shall call her blessed. 1 Cor. 11.2. Now I praise you brethren. Our Saviour praiseth Iohn the Baptist. Matth. 11. Among them that are borne of women, there hath not risen a greater. If Alexander so envied the happinesse of Achilles, qui virtutis praeconem Homerum invenerit; that found such a trumpet of his honour, as Homer: what glory was it for Iohn, to be commended by CHRIST, who neither would flatter, nor could falter? Indeed adulation is dangerous; Plus nocet lingua adulatoris, quam gladius persecutoris, Greg. The word of a flatterer is worse than the sword of a persecuter. A malicious enemie often doth us good, by telling our vices: but a fawning friend doth us hurt, in telling our vertues. This is Simonia linguae, verball Simonie: to commend what we have not, or to extol too much what we have. Col. 4.6. Let your speech be alwayes with grace, seasoned with salt. There must be salt in our language, so well as honey, Plant. The Parasite hath bread in one hand, and a stone in the other: using a man, as the Iewes did CHRIST; carry him up to the top of a hill, and then strive to throw him downe headlong, Luk. 4.29. But withall, as even beasts will draw better, or ruine faster by being encouraged: so just praises upon due deserts, are spurres to vertue. When God had given such an approvall of Iob, that he was a perfect and upright man, one that feareth God, and escheweth evill: who but a divell would picke quarrels against him? It is a breach of that Iustice, which is due from man to man, Rom. 13.7. Render to all their dues, honour to whom honour belongeth. The whole time is not to be spent in reproofe of evill, there is some to commend what is done well. That you doe attend to Sermons, in this you doe well; I feare not to
 praise you. But then be sure you are such hearers! Sophocles ever made women good in his playes, Euripides ever made them bad. Sophocles being asked the reason of this disparitie, answered I make them such as they should be, Euripides makes them such as they are. When I tell you of attentive auditors, I speake of such as you should be: when I mention negligent and forgetfull hearers, I speake of such as you are. First come hither mended, then depart commended.
But what is the vertue here praised in them? Attention to the Scripture. This is Speculum and regula vitae, Luk. 10.25. When the Lawyer asked CHRIST, what be should doe to inherite eternall life? he answered, what is written in the Law? how readest thou? This was Abrahams answer. Luk. 16.29. They have Moses and the Prophets, let them heare them. Esa. 8.20. To the Law, to the Testimonie. De rebus fidei suadeamur ex literis fidei, Tertul It is an old proverbe: the letters of Princes are to be read thrice: but the Epistles of the King of Kings would be read over seventie times. Nocturna versate manu, versate diurna, Horat. Meditate in this Law day and night, Psal. 1.2. And in this let us apply our selves more, Ad sensum rei, quam ad finum vocabuli; to the sense of the matter, that sound of the letter. 2 Cor. 3.6. The letter killeth, the Spirit giveth life. The letter not understood kills, but being understood helpes. One sharpely reprehended an ignorant Priest: thou hast taken heed, Ne te ulla occidere possit litera, non ulla est litera nota tibi. The nobles of Berea were praised for searching the Scriptures daily, Act. 17.11. I would to God, this just praise would be inherited with the Gospell: we have the same happinesse to heare, but not to consider.
Give me a man that takes heed to the word. They that settle themselves to their cups, as if they meant so much love to the wine, that they are content to make themselves sicke with it: doe not take heed to the word. Eph. 5.18. Bee not drunke with wine. The fury of the Law, I doe not say the Lawyer, that sittes in his study like a Foxe in his borow, glad to spie a goose that hath feathers on the backe; (such a one as will bee content to part with a wing, so his adversary may lose a quill:) and will sell truth and conscience for a fee; takes not heed to the word; buy the truth, and sell it not. The miserable trader, that did shut up the feare of God, the same day he first opened his shop: that married his wife and the world at once, to save the charges of a double wedding: that bids a good conscience farewell for thirtie yeares, and chargeth it to meete him againe when he is Alderman: that tooke one and the same oath, to be the Cities-free man, and moneyes bond-slave: this man takes no heed to the word. 1 Thes. 4.6. Let no man goe beyond or defraud his brother, for the Lord is the avenger of all such. The griping usurer, who proclaimes with a Noverint universi, that he hath money to let, and a soule to sell, which Interest shall buy: who though the husbandmen cry for raine, or the merchant for faire weather; though the shepheard complaines of the rot, the Grasier the drought, and every man that depends upon Gods blessing, sustaines losse: yet he hath a tricke beyond God, and beside heavens leave to be rich: he takes no heed to the fifteenth Psalme, which denyes his soule any Roome in heaven. The proud painted woman, whom the divell hath dressed up for temptation that, gives occasion to other of lust, albeit shee intends it not: yet is like a man that shoots an arrow at a ventures; a foole comes in at the moment of emission, and it kills him: he did it not by his will, yet the sting of conscience doth not so leave him: he could wish that he had not shot. Etsi tu non perit ^^men tu perdis. Though the alluring woman doe not perish her selfe, yet she destroyes another Into the Church every one should come with preparation to die: painting is no signe of preparing for death, but filling up the wrinkles of age. These take no heed to the word, Give no occasion of evill: the oppressor that undoes many hundreds, and helpes two or three: like a Tyrant, that hath robbed and killed the Father and mother, and then gives the child a coate: that like Socrates, wills his executors to offer a cocke to Esculapius; perhaps lest be should die in the divells debt, and bee impleaded in hell: he takes no need to the word, Rom. 13.8. Owe nothing to any man:
 doe thou restore according to equitie, or the Lord will not restore thee according to mercie. Wee are not heedy, but heady: wee doe not tarry for the direction of the word.
But as the Architect without his rule will never build a good house: nor the traveller come to the end of his journey, that neither knowes nor askes a step of the way. So there is no hope of salvation without submission to the rule of eternall truth. As it is in the fable of the golden chaine; men and gods were not able to draw Iupiter downe to the earth: but Iupiter was able to draw them up into heaven. As we must submit our reason unto faith, not faith to reason: so we must subject our affections to Gods word, not Gods word to our affections. The word of God is that Herbe of life, able to cure all diseases of the conscience. A Sage observing that many passing by an unseene Cockatrice, fell downe dead: onely a shepheard with a Garland of herbes and flowers went by unharmed. He called the shepheard to him, and begged his garland: then sent him backe to the place from whence he came. But by the way the serpent stroke him dead, infecting his visory spirits with her unprevented poison. The old man hastned to him, and began to rubbe his eyes with one herbe of the garland; that failing, with another: and so continued, till he lighted upon that herbe which effected his recoverie. Thus he came to know the herbe, preserved it, prescribed it, and defended all that had such. Such a saving herbe is the word of God: when that old serpent the divell hath killed men, and laid them dead in sinnes and trespasses; yet if their hearts be rubbed with this flower, it shall receive them, Ioh. 5.25. The dead shall heare the voice of the Son of God, and they that heare it, shall live. Now the Spirit of God fill the gardens of all our consciences with it; that the poison of this world, the venome of Satan may not hurt us: but that obedience and faith may bring us to the Paradise where it growes; even that Eternall Word of GOD himselfe, who sits at the right hand of his Father in heaven.
As unto a light that shineth in a darke place.] This is the third Generall; the Prelation. We have heard how the word of Prophecie is said to be the surer; because that was written, visible, legible, the knowen will and word of God, whereunto they have an universall consent and attestation: whereas the Gospell was not then committed to writing. Now further we must not thinke here is any comparison made betweene the Law and the Gospell: but as formerly, betweene the written Scripture and their particular revelation: so here betweene the said extant and manifest light, and the darkenesse of this world. For all men that are not acquainted with the word of CHRIST, wander in darkenesse. Rom. 1.21. Their foolish heart is darkened. And no otherwise doth he shine unto us, then as we looke on the light of his blessed truth. Now to a man shut up in a darke prison, and cooped about with a blacke night, nothing is more comfortable than a light. So from the caliginous shades of error and ignorance wee cannot bee extricated, but by this manduction, the Lampe of truth, maintained by the oile of love which is the bloud of Iesus Christ.
Me thinkes, the parcels of this point may be distinguished into Aegypt and Goshen; in the same state they stood. Exod. 10.23. In Aegypt they saw not one another, neither rose any from his place for three dayes: but all the children of Israel had light in their dwellings. The world is great and spatious, in respect of the Church: so was Aegypt a large countrey, Goshen but a corner of it. Yet it was day in Goshen, when it was night in Aegypt: so the Church seeth clearely in the broad day, when the world gropes in the darke night; darkenesse is an orbitie and privative thing, that necessarily followes the absence of light. Man hath seene light, who could ever see darkenesse? Yet let us take this light in our hands, and by it we shall discerne this darke place. First, let us consider this Aegyptian darkenesse, and then come to the light of Goshen. There is a sixefold darkenesse; all expelled by this blessed light.
1 Caligo naturae, naturall darkenesse; caused by no positive thing, but necessarily following upon the secession or absence of the Sunne; and againe dispersed by the succession of the next light, Wis. 17.21. Over them was spread an heavy night, Imago tenebrarum quae ipsos erant susceptura, an Image of that darkenesse which should afterwards receive them. Such was the judgement upon Elymas the Sorcerer, Act. 13.11. Thou shalt not see the Sunne: and then necessarily and immediately there fell upon him a mist of darkenesse. We all know this darkenesse, God blesse us from ever knowing a worse. If that darkenesse be tedious to our unsleeping eyes, which we know after few houres will have a morning, and to which God hath promised a rising Sun: how intolerable is that darkenesse which shall never be enlightned, where men shall wish in vaine, Phosphere redde diem? Therefore said the wiseman, every night is an image of that swallowing darkenesse. Me thinkes then, we should not dare to put out the light, till we had made our peace with the God of mercie: lest his Iustice throw us from this short, to an eternall darkenesse. Consider the horror of Aegypt in that thicke and sicke night? As the Grashoppers had lately taken from them the sight of earth, so now this grosse darkenesse takes away the sight of heaven. Other darkenesses were but privative, this reall and sensible. They thought this a long night: alas how should they chuse, when it was the space of sixe nights in one? Ioshua and Hezekiah had the longest dayes, but Aegypt had the longest night. God enlargeth the day to his friends, the night to his enemies. No man could rise to talke with another, but was necessarily confined to his owne bed and thoughts. One thinkes the fault in his owne eyes, which he often rubbes in vaine. Another, that the firmament hath quite lost the Sunne, and that it is set for ever. Another, that all things are returning to their first confusion. All thinke themselves past remedie miserable: and wish, whatsoever had befallen them, they might have had but light enough to see themselves die. Now joyfully doe we looke up to heaven after a tedious darkenesse? Eccl. 11.7. Truely the light is sweet, and a pleasant thing it is for the eyes to behold the Sunne. Yet how forgetfully doe we omitte praise to him, that hath both placed the light there, and given us eyes to see it! We looke on it, yet we doe not duely prize it, or if we prize it, we live not worthy of it, by neglecting to blesse him that gives it.
2 Caligo miseriae, the darkenesse of calamitie and trouble: for so the Hebrewes tooke it, and by light the deliverance from it, the comfort that doth follow it. Sorrow lasts for a night: that is, miserie: the effect is put for the cause, the daughter for the mother: but Ioy commeth in the morning, Eccl. 11.8. Though a man rejoyce many yeares, yet let him remember the dayes of darkenesse for they shall be many: that is, the dayes of sorrow. So many dayes of trouble, so many dayes of darkenesse. Psal. 91.5. Thou shalt not be afraid for the terrors by night. This same Pavor nocturnus, is of all feares most terrible. Pray that your flight be not in the night; it was CHRISTS warning to the Iewes. Nothing is more without comfort than darkenesse, nothing more without joy than calamitie. Hence it is that comforts in holy writ bee let downe. Nomine lucis, under the name of light. Psal. 112.4. Vnto the righteous there ariseth light in the darkenesse; that is, comfort in trouble. Iob 18.5. The light of the wicked shall be put out, and the sparke of his fire shall not shine: all his joy, comfort, hope shall be extinguished. So miseries are called darkenesse: David in his afflictions complaines, that the darkenesse had covered him. Hereupon some have derived Lugere, quasi luce egere. The godly are called the Children of light, Luke 16.8. Now can the children of light mourne, while the Sun of comfort is with them? No more, than the children of the Bridechamber, in the presence of the Bridegroome Matth 9.15. He is mad that can be merry in darkenesse; he is worse than mad that can laugh and sing in wretchednesse. Eccl. 3.4. There is a time to laugh, and a time to weepe: there is a time of light, and a time of darkenesse. There is a time to laugh, and that is he time of light: there is a time to weepe, and that is the time of darkenesse, Psal. 137.4. Doe you require of us a Song in our heavinesse? How shall wee sing the
 Lords song in a strange land? The captivity in Babylon, might well marre the mirth of Ierusalem. When God troubles the state of our peace, he would trouble the eyes of our heads: as when the thunder shakes the aire, the clouds weepe to still it. Shall we compassionate others miseries, and not our owne? As August. Confess. 1. cap. 13. Ploravi Didonem mortuam, non me a Domino morientem; What is more wretched than he that pities not himselfe? that can lament the death of Dido, which came by overloving Aeneas, and not lament his own death, which comes by not loving the Lord? Psal. 23.4. Though I walke thorow the valley of the shadow of death, I will feare none evill. Calamity is this shadow; there is no comfort in it, but onely the light and presence of CHRIST.
3 Caligo Ignorantiae, the darkenesse of Ignorance, the worst kinde of cecitie. The seeing man sayes in the night; Adsunt mihi oculi, sed deest lumen; The blind man sayes in the day; Adest lumen, sed desunt mihi oculi; The blinde Papist among Christians may say, Here is light, but I have no eyes. The beleeving Christian among Papists must say; I have eyes, but here is no light. The Infidell failes in both; hee hath neither an eye for the light, nor light for the eye: neither the Truth visible, nor an understanding capable; this is a wretched darknesse. Pagans have Lucem nullam, a darkfull night: Papists have Lucem dubiam, a doubtfull light, we call it Twi-light: we have Lucem lucidam, the broad day. Our eyes have seene thy salvation, Luke 2.30. When I considered well that same Popish doctrine, how they extoll and obtrude ignorance to their people; yea, justifie it to the world, and commend it as the speciall meanes to hold them to the line of obedience, and within the lists of Gods service. Me thought I did wonder, which of Satans transformations had brought Rome to this inextricable darknesse. First, he came like a Lion, roaring out Persecution, and bloud: there he tried the Patience of the Church, Revel. 13.10. Here is the patience of the Saints. Then he came like a Serpent, winding himselfe in by Heresie: there hee exercised the wisdome of the Church, Rev. 13.18. Here is wisdome: let him that hath understanding, etc. Then he came transformed like an Angell of light: for he could worke nothing upon us, if he should professe himselfe Id esse quod est, to be the very same that he is: there he exercised the Faith of the Church: whether renouncing all aberrations, we would adhere to the manifested will of God. Try the spirits; and then this spirit of borrowed light, will prove a spirit of very darknesse. But what shape or semblance tooke he, what kind of devill was he, when he came to perswade men to ignorance? O impudence! he durst then, Se profiteri quod est, professe himselfe to be what he is, a spirit of darknesse. Aske him, what art thou? he answers plainly, I am the Devill, and come to put out thine eyes. Oh who but a bewitched Romist will thus entertaine him? Mica 3.6. Therefore night shall be unto you, and it shall be darke, that ye shall not have a vision: the Sun shall goe downe over the Prophets, and the day shall bee darke over them. O fearfull! The Centinell perceives a passenger; Who goes there? A Friend. Give the word. Lux Christi; I am for the light of the Gospell: though he be a false friend, yet the word admits him. But the Centinell, asking, Who goes there? it is answered, a Friend. Give the word: Tenebrae mundi, I am for darknesse and Ignorance. Shall he passe, he is a friend to the Pope? As Demosthenes got more by silence, than other Advocates by pleading: so the Pope hath got more by darknesse, than any Bishop of the Christian world by light. Others get onely heaven, but he hath got heaven, and earth, and Purgatory, (and perhaps hell) to boot.
Simplicity, sometimes a sin Personall in the Lay-people, is now become a sinne Cathedrall in the Teachers. But though the people may not reade the Scripture, yet they preach Scripture. But alas, how should the people know whether they preach Scripture or not? who can discerne a wolfe from a sheep, without some light? They tell you the miracles of such a Blocke, the wonders of a Crucifix, what prayers you must number to Saints. They make Sermons, as they did their Church-windows: so much painting in them, that they quite keepe out the light. And in conclusion, they perswade the people to love darknes: for this wil bring them to devotion; just as sure
 as the Devill would bring them to salvation. Consider and pity their estate: exterior darknesse hath caused interior darknesse. When the heavens are shadowed with thick clouds, the glorious Sunne retired to his descent, the Moone afraid to put forth her silver hornes, the Stars not able to twinckle in their spheres; not a little candle, not a sparke of fire to be gotten: O uncomfortable confusion! Ten thousand times more wretched is the soules estate in this spirituall darknesse: what are the companions of it, but errour and terrour? First, as in the night all things have lost their colours, in respect of our apprehension. Who could know the blew Friers from the gray, or the white from the blacke, or Nicholas Clarkes from either? So the darkned soule thinkes blessing and cursing all one: to worship our Lady as good as to worship our Lord, Eccl. 9.2. To sacrifice, and not to sacrifice: to sweare, as to feare an oath. Againe, as in the night a man is often amazed and affrighted, his haires staring, and his thoughts distracted with feare. So there is nothing but dread and perturbation of conscience in this inward darknesse. They know not whether they shall be saved or damned, till they come to heaven or hell. O fearfull death, when soules depart to know; whether there be a heaven or hell, or no. Suppose they doe slumber in this darknesse, yet it is not without starting. All the glimpse of their hope consists in some perfunctory prayers to our Lady: this is the maine Popish light. Whereof an Hermet tells us in good earnest; that he saw a great light descending from heaven, like unto fire, and lighting upon her Church at Loretta. It was, saith he, twelve foot high, and six foot broad: and this was concluded by the loving Divines at Lovaine, to be our Lady; who came downe in her own person to see her Feast solemnized. For this, you must note, happened on the eight of September, the very day of her birth: in those dayes when beasts spake, and houses did fly: and then the cocke crew, and it waxed day. This story for demonstration, is written in the Church of Loretta: let us there leave it. And for them poore soules, led in blindnesse, let us pray, that the Lord would translate them out of darknesse, into the kingdome of his deare Sonne, Col 1.13.
4 Caligo malitiae, the darknesse of iniquity: sinnes are called opera tenebrarum, the works of darknesse, Rom. 13.12. Eph. 5.11 Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darknes. When that great sin was a committing, the murder of the innocent Lambe Iesus, there was a darknes over all the earth, Luke 23.44. To shew that this was a great worke of darknes, the houre of darknes, and power of darknes, consented and convented to assist it. The black Night-raven will foster her owne bird: the mother darknes makes much of the daughter. There was an hellish dance led by five, the men of darknes, a deed of darknes, houre of darknes, power of darknes, and the Prince of darknes, to make up number and measure. The Sun was darkned, as if shame would not suffer it to behold so black a deed. A heathen observing it, concluded; Either that God suffred, or the world perished. There was no interposition of the Moon betwixt Sun and earth, to make a natural eclipse: but the invention, intervention of a foule and cloudy sin. Men could endure to doe it, the Sun could not endure to behold it. Mens eyes have dazled to behold the Sun; but now the Suns eyes dazled to look upon men. The Sun is called Oculus mundi, the eye of the world: that eye winked and was shut; lest beholding their darke and dismall worke, it should have drop'd from heaven, set the world on fire, and burnt it up to ashes. The whole Canopie of aire was drawne, and all the face of the skie hung with blacke, to witnesse their compassion, like mourners at the Funerall of their Maker. This malicious darknesse is terrible: the other is a blinde and passive, this an active, operative darknesse.
Now 2 Cor. 6.14. What communion hath light with darknesse? Let a childe of light be brought into the ring or circle of these darklings; who are indeed the Epitome and abridgement of that greater world which lyes in wickednesse: and they conspire to afflict his eyes with unchast and horride visions, his eares with fearfull oaths, his unwilling appetite with drunken salutations. And if they can, like that Babylonish Harlot, make him taste in calice aureo venenum, poison in a golden cup, wrap him in a mist of darknes; they presently sing, vicimus; and rejoyce as in the
 division of a spoile; that they have drenched sobriety, and blinded the light. He may be a good taper, but they will ever after become his snuffers. But let such an errour be thy mirrour: see thy weaknesse in that glasse, and trust no more the company of sinners. Let this Antiparistists recover the more zeale: Nec tu cede malis, sed te melioribus offer; Thinke not that counsell availeable: Noctem peccatis, and fraudibus objice nubem; The mantle of night shall cover them. For an ill companion is like a Promooter, that in Lent eats flesh at thy table, and yet is the first that accuseth thee to the Magistrate: so he will drinke of thy cost, and then whisper thee abroad for a drunkard.
Beware these night-workes, 1 Thess. 5.7. They that be drunken, are drunken in the night. Noctivagants are negligent in their habits: an old gowne will serve the turne; neither decency, nor hardly modesty is respected. But in the day men desire to goe handsome, according to their quality. So let us put off our night-clothes, and put on apparell fit for the day. The drunkard is in his night-gowne, as if God could not then see his luxury. The adulterer is in his night-gown, he presumes that the dark shall cover him. The hypocrite is in his night-gowne; he lookes like day, but he lives like night. The fraudulent trader is in his night-gowne, he loves either no light, or a false-light. The profane ruffian is in his night-gowne, not dressed like a Spouse for Christ. The Schismatike in his night-gowne, he cannot abide that comlinesse and order which the day requireth. The theefe is in his night-gowne, Iob 24.16. In the darke they digge thorow houses, which they had marked for themselves in the day-time. All these Tenebriones are night-attired; and unlesse timely repentance helpe them, they will be benighted ere they come to heaven.
5 Caligo mortis, the darkenesse of death. Death is a putting out of light, and a committing to darkenesse. Psal. 88.12. Shall thy wonders be knowne in the darke? shall thy loving kindnesse be declared in the grave? Iob calls it A land of darkenesse, without any order, where the light is as darkenesse, Iob 10.22. Remember the dayes of darknesse, Eccl. 11.8. Heaven is the place of light, the bowels of the earth the place of darkenesse. Mans life is in the mid-way betweene them: he sees whither his soule may goe, whither his body must goe. There is an old Apologue: a man going out of his beaten and directed way, to gather unlawfull fruites, fell into a deepe pitte. In his fall, he caught hold on the arme of a tree growing in it. Thus he hung in the midway, betwixt the upper light from which he fell, and the lower darkenesse to which he was falling. Hee lookes downe ward, and sees two wormes gnawing at the roote of this tree: he lookes upward, and spies on a branch a hive of honey: he climbes up to it, and fits feeding on it. But in meane time the wormes did bite in sunder the root, and downe falls man, and tree, and all into the bottome of the darke pit. Man himselfe is this wretch, who straying from the way of Gods commandements, fell to eate of the forbidden fruit: instantly he fell. The pit over which he hangeth is the grave, the tree whereby he holdeth is this mortall life: the two wormes are day and night: the hive of honey is the pleasures and lusts of this world. Hereupon he greedily feeds: untill the two consumers, day and night in their vicissitudes, have eaten asunder the root of life. Then downe drops earth to earth, Corpus putidum in locum putridum. There it must lodge in the silent grave, neither seeing nor seene, blended in the forgotten dust and undistinguished mould; till it be wakened by the Archangels Trumpe in the great day of Christ.
6 Caligo Inferni; The last is the darknesse of hell, Iude vers. 6. The lost Angels are reserved in everlasting chaines under darknesse, Matth. 8.12. They shall be cast into outer darknesse. Whereby a man may conjecture, that hell is not the aire: for in the aire shall be light, the splendour of the Sun being septupled: but hell is called (...), outer darknesse, Matth. 25.30. This is the place where sinne began, where it shall end: it came from hell, and to hell it goes. It began from Satan who is the Prince of darknesse: it ends in hell, which is the place of darknesse. There is a naturall propensity of heavy things downwards: sin is heavy, therefore it sinkes downward, The way of life is above to the wise, that hee may depart from hell below.Prov. 15.24. Oh that is a
 place of intollerable darknesse: here we are allowed a candle, though the Sun be set, and the Moone not risen: there is not a sparke of light in hell. Those upon earth that are said to have halfe a yeare night; yet not without some trajection of light, and diffusion of the Sunnes reflective rayes, though he be not risen above their hemisphere. Yet if this be tedious, what is that everlasting darknesse, which will continue so long as God is just? This is that common Sewer whither the sinke of all darknesse runs: darknesse externall, darknesse internal, both run to darknesse infernall, and there make up a darknesse eternall. But there shall be unquenchable fire; shall not that fire give some light? No, Vltrix flamma concremandi, non illuminandi, vim habet, Greg. There shall be no vision, but all division: the sense must feele what doth torment it, the fight must not behold what may refresh it. That horrour hath in it two things, Mat. 8.12. Weeping, and gnashing of teeth. Fletus de ardore, stridor de frigore, Greg. Weeping proceeds from heat, gnashing of teeth from coldnesse. This is a strange compound; unquenchable fire, unlightable darknesse! But how then shall they know one another in hell? If there be any light, it shall be a glimpse to aggravate torment: as the fight of their partners in sinne, to be partakers in punishment. But though their bodies see not, their understandings may discerne; their eares shall heare their shriekes, and reprobates may be distinguished by their cries. But let us not be curious, Scire, to know; what we so abhorre, Sentire, to feele. It is a darke, desolate, disconsolate, torturing place; where is no hope of light, nor light of hope. Now the bloud of our blessed Saviour deliver us all from it for ever.
Thus you have the description of many darknesses, and haply have thought your selves in the mist of darknesse all this while. Aegypt hath beene too tedious to you, you aske for Goshen: indeed you have beene all this time in the light, that you have looked upon darknesse. For darknesse could never be seene by it selfe, but by the light, Eph. 5.13. All things that are reproved, are made manifest by the light: for whatsoever doth make manifest, is light. But now, would you see all these blacke clouds dispersed in a moment? Behold the light that doth it, the true knowledge of Iesus Christ. The Sun doth no sooner shew his face, but evanescunt tenebrae, the darknesse vanisheth. Caesar did no sooner looke upon his enemies, but they were gone; vill, vici. Aegypt swarmed with Locusts till the West-wind came, that left not one. Sennacheribs armie was innumerable, yet the Angell arose and struck them; and behold, they were all dead corpses, Psal. 68.1. Let God arise, and his enemies be scattered: but shall drive them away like smoake. It is the light of the Gospell that dispels all these shadowes. Our aire is full of this light: our aire, I say; if our hearts be full also, we are blessed for ever!
For the darknesse of Nature, it must indeed have the due course by creation, Gen. 8.22. While the earth remaineth, day and night shall not cease. So the Makers hand hath disposed it; and by the vicissitude of time, and alternation of the wheeling heavens it continues: untill all men arrive, either at that eternall day in heaven, or eternall night in hell. As that Spanish Bishop, staggering in the question whether Salomon was saved or lost; caused him to be pictured in his Chappell, the one halfe in hell, the other in heaven. Or as Proserpina was censured by her father Iupiter, to live halfe the yeare in heaven, and the rest in hell. So we spend halfe our time upon earth, in light, and halfe in darkenesse. But if this light be in us, our night shall be turne in day, Psalme 139.12. The night shall bee light above us, and shall shine as the day. What darkenesse can offend, where the Father of lights shineth? Or what (...) can keepe off that Sunne of Righteousnesse? 2 Sam. 22.29. Thou O LORD (...) lighten my darknesse. No darkenesse shall afflict thy body, while there is this (...) light in thy soule.
For the darknesse of affliction, true it is that the brightest day hath the (...) most quiet minde her disturbance. Our best estate hath ague-fits; but he that (...) ter luminum beholds us, Psal. 31.7. Thou hast knowne my soule in adversity. This (...) forts us in misery,Psal. 31.16. as the suffering childe that knowes his father seeth: Make thy (...)
 to shine upon thy servant, and save me for thy mercies sake. We cannot be so broken, but the light of his countenance will make us whole. Peter was in hard bondage by Herod, Act. 12.6. Sleeping betweene two souldiers, and bound with two chaines: yet even then a light shined in the prison. Say that thou liest betweene usury and oppression, as Peter betweene two souldiers; bound with two chaines of debt and penury: yet if the comfort of this Light shine in thy heart, thy prison shall be an heaven, thy keepers Angels, thy chaines thy glory, and thy deliverance salvation.
For the darknesse of ignorance, indeed it is tetricall and dangerous. Whether it be intrinsecall by an indisposition in the Instrument, naturall or accidentall: or through want of Medium, which may transmit the object to the sense Knowledge is to these as the Sun to the blind, or a cracke of thunder to the deafe. But now there is no darknesse so invincible, but the Lord can enlighten it, Matth. 4.16. To them which see in the region and shadow of death, light is sprung up: Thou wantest knowledge, despaire not: he hath none that sayes he hath enough, Psal. 25.14. The Lord will shew them his covenant: Iam. 1.5. If any man lack wisdome, let him aske of God that will give him. For direction, two words are as good as twenty: Ora, labora. Pray for it, and use the meanes to get it. Love the light, and have the light. It is more true of Gods Truth, than it was of that Greekish beauty: no man loved her that never saw her; no man ever saw her, but he love her. Heare attentively, pray intentively; and doubt not but God will send thee light enough on earth, to bring thee to the light of heaven.
For the darknesse of sin, indeed it is fearfull for the wicked: but this shining light shall expell it out of thy heart, Ioh. 1.5. That light which shineth in darknesse, and the darknesse comprehendeth it not. Esay. 8.22. The wicked shall fret themselves, and curse their king, and their god: and when they looke upon the earth, behold trouble and darknesse. When others curse their darknesse, thou shalt blesse this light. As the wicked have a prelibation of that darknesse they shall goe unto hereafter: so have the faithfull an earnest of that light which is prepared for them. The light of heaven must first enter into a mans soule, before his soule can enter into the light of heaven.
For the darknesse of death, know it is but dust and ashes that suffers it, which is insensible of the privation. It is but like the laying up of thy garment in a trunke: what matters it, so long as thy soule hath the light of blessednesse? Lord lighten mine eyes, the eyes of my soule, that they sleepe not in death: it is sufficient.
For that infernall and eternall darknesse, it shall not come nigh thee. Keep thy face of faith still toward the Sunne, and thou shalt leave that darknesse behinde thee, Rom. 8.1. There is no damnation to them that are in Iesus Christ. He shall deliver us from the errour of darknesse, and from the terrour of darknesse; from the valley of the shadow of death; and advance us to that light wherein himselfe dwelleth: and that Lord send us all the light of heaven.
Vntill the day dawne, and untill the day-star arise in our hearts.] Some refer darknesse here, to that shadowy, misty, or at best mysticall time, which was under the Law. When they saw their Redemption onely in figure, the bloud of Christ in the bloud of lambs, the performance in the promise. And during that darknes, the Word of Prophecie was of singular use. Thus by faith they beheld Messiam missum, quamvis (...) nisi promissum; The Messias that was to come, as if he already was come. Ioh. 8.50. Your Father Abraham rejoyced to see my day, and saw it. Christ was come when Father wrote this; but because he was yet a stranger to their minds, and had not gotten sufficient credite in their hearts, he commends their attention to the Prophets. For they spake concerning Christs birth and passion, as himselfe spake concerning his rising and ascension: These things I have told you, that when the time shall come,Ioh. 16.4. you may remember the prediction. When we know the way the King will come; and have his (...) imprinted in our minds, wherby we may discerne him when he is come we shall (...) more readines welcome him, with lesse doubt. Thus Zachary sung,Luke 1.78. The day-spring from (...) high hath visited us. This was that day dawning, and morning-starre; (...) that great Sunne of Righteousnesse had newly risen from the wombe of the
 Virgin, and began to cast abroad his saving beames. For Non citius factus, quam patefactus; He was not sooner made, than made manifest. The Wise-men saw the Starre that wayted on the Sunne, and worshipped that Sunne that made the Starre. The Angels proclaimed it to the Shepheards, the Shepheards divulged it to others: and made it knowne all abroad, Luke 2. Herod heares and feares: he suspected that the day would be his night: therefore would have put out the light in the morning of it: but he could with more ease have plucked a fixed Starre from heaven. Christs may hide the Sunne, nothing can hinder the Lord of Glory, when he purposeth to shine in his Majestie.
But they that thus understand it; by Darknesse, that time which preceded the cleare, knowledge of Christ: and by Day, a free and liberall apprehension of him; come too short. For this were a very cold commendation of the Prophets, to bee regarded no longer than untill Christ be manifested to us in the flesh. But it is objected, Matth. 11.13. All the Prophets prophesied untill Iohn. True, for what (...) they further prophecie Affuturum qui adest; Him to come that was present? But doth the use of their prophecie last no longer to us? Yes certainely; Mortai (...) Prophetae, non Prophetiae; The benefit of the Prophets dyed not with the Prophets. There is no end of the use of their saying, till there be an end of the worlds being. This is then the Sense we settle upon; that this full Day here spoken of, is the plenary and perfect light which shall be given us in the kingdome of heaven. For as the former Darknesse is to be extended to the whole course of our life: so this Day-dawning, and Day-starre arising, is our entrance into the celestiall glory. For in the other acception there would follow absurdities; as that the Prophets should be idle and superfluous to those that knew Christ, which are necessary to the worlds end. But how can that glory be called a Day-dawning, or Day-starre? Not that that clarity hath any morning in it selfe, but in regard of us that newly arrive to it. The world is five thousand yeares old, in the very evening: yet to the childe new-borne it is but a morning. Certainely, so long as we are pilgrims here, we see thorow a glasse, (...) there our hearts shall be filled with that glorious light of perfection: and wee that were dwarfes below, shall be made tall men in Iesus Christ, Ephes. 4.13. When we all meet in the unitie of the knowledge of the Son of God, to a perfect man, and to the measure of the stature of the fulnesse of Christ.
They that object against this Exposition, say that the word Donec, Vntill, is not alwayes taken Terminatim, limiting, bounding, or confining a set time. So that the Word of Prophecie may shine like a light in a darke place, untill the promulgation of the glorious Gospell; and yet not then bee rejected as uselesse; but remaine (...), though a dimme light in respect, yet a light. So Matth. 28.20. I am with you (...) the worlds end. What, will hee leave us then? No, but as spiritually hee is with us here, so locally and personally we shall be with him hereafter, Acts Chapter third, twentie one verse. The heavens must receive Christ, untill the restitution of all things. Shall heaven lose him then? No, he sits on the right hand of Eternity for ever, Psal. 112.8. The faithfull man shall not be afraid, untill he see his desire upon his enemies (...) I hope, he hath lesse cause to be afraid afterwards. God saith to Iacob, Gen. 28.15. I will not leave thee, untill I have done what I have spoken to thee: When this was performed, God did not forsake the seed of Iacob: Matth. 5.18. The Word of God (...) not passe, untill heaven and earth passe: no, not then neither, Psal. 57.1. under the shadow of thy wings will I make my refuge, untill these calamities be over-past. Did he (...) to leave that refuge after his deliverance? No, Thou art my rest forever, Cant. 3. (...) held my Beloved, and would not let him goe, untill I had brought him into my (...) house. Did she let him goe then? No, she held him fast in her nuptiall bed of (...) for ever, Cant. 2.7. Waken not my Love till he please. Disquiet not my Saviour (...) grieve his Spirit, nor dishonour his Name, not by any provocation of (...) his peace, Till he please: but hee will never be pleased with such a (...) The reprobate shall not come out the prison, Matth. 5.26. Till hee hath payed (...)
 most farthing; and that will be never. But againe, sometimes, untill, excludes the time past; doth not inferre the time future, Matth. 1.25. Ioseph knew not Mary, untill she had brought forth her first borne sonne: it doth not follow that he knew her afterward. So CHRIST is called her First borne: yet this insinuates no probability of consequence, that she had more formes. Quia (...) est eam (...) ere, quae sanctificata (...) Deum parere. Who durst touch that sacred vessell, which God had hallowed to beare his owne Sonne. 2 Sam. 6.13. Michal had no child (...) the day of her death: and it (...), she had none afterwards. But now, when (untill) is used by way of Precept, it alwaies defines, and determines. Ambala donec vlam persolveris, then thou shalt rest. Pugna dones viteris, fight till thou overcome, then have peace, Rev. 2.25. That you have already, hold fast till I come, Eph. 4.13. The Lord sends Preachers to edifie the Church, untill we all meere to a perfect mine: then shall that office cease. So here, attend to the light of Prophecie, untill the day downe, untill you come to that full day of glory in heaven. So that the point of doctrine intends the difference, betweene that measure of knowledge which Gods grace also Iesus in our pilgrimage: and that measure which his glory shall endue us with in the kingdome of heaven. For methode of tractation, first let us consider the light in generall; and then passe through the degrees of it, till we ascend to the perfection.
The light was made three dayes before the Sunne: Iunius thinkes, that light was the Element of fire. Nazian. and Theodor a light without a subject, afterwards dispersed and fastned to diverse bodies; of Sunne, Moone, and Starres. So Mercie, those light some bodies were made the receptacles of the former created lights. But if God created the light, it seemes that he was before in darkenesse. No, he needs not a temporall and created light, that is himselfe a spirituall uncreated light. But if God made the light, who made darkenesse? darkenesse is nothing, it need no creation, being but the absence of light, and nakednesse is the want of clothing. But God saw that the light was good, therefore he knew it not before. It followes not: his approvall of it being brought forth in action, doth not prejudice his foresight in intention. Matth. 8.10. CHRIST marvailed, and wondred at the Centurions faith, which indeed himselfe wrought in him. Thus did God begin with the light, to shew that he is Pater luminum, Iam. 1.17. That father of lights, in whom is omnis Praestantia and compositus ordo. The Persian Magi used to call their god, Oromasten. 1 Ioh. 1.5. God is light, and in him is no darkenesse at all. None, not actively to deceive, not passively to bee deceived, Iohn 1.9. CHRIST is called That true light, which lightneth every man. But as he calls himselfe, so also his Apostles, Lux mundi, the light of the world: but with a difference. CHRIST is the fountaine of lights, Luminare majus, that greater light. The Apostles shine Lumine mutuato, with the borowed light of the Sunne; are Luminare minus, a lesse light. Lux (...) dicta: (...) the ancient Greekes understood for the first light, or early morning. So the Apostles were Aurora Solis, being sent to preach the light: as Iohn Baptist was Praenuntius lucis. Indeed in respect of their successors they were great lights. First, by a transcendencie, as Lux reipublicae, etc. We call an eminent man the light of the State; the light of religion; Lux poetarum. So David was called the Light of Israel, 2 Sam. 21.17. Propter vitae sublimitatem cateris universis aspectabiliores: in respect of their life and doctrine they were more famous lights, than any that followed them. Then because like blessed lights, they did not onely instruct us by their doctrines, but direct us by their doings. But now in respect of God, they were dimme: we say of them as Iudas Baptist said of himselfe. Ioh. 1.8. They were not that light, but sent to beare witnesse of that light; 1 Cor. 25.41. There as one glory of the Sun, another glory of the Moone, and another glory of the Starres. There is Lux illuminant, non illuminata; a light that doth enlighten, is not enlightned; as the Sunne, Vehicutum lucis, that carries about with him the light of the world. The heathens lay of the Sunne, that he doth (...) ^^^vem. There is Lux illuminata non illuminunt; a light that doth not enlighten, but is enlightned, as the Firmament. There is Lux illuminata and illuminans
 a light that is enlightned, and doth enlighten; as the Moone and Starres. The faithfull are such lights, Phil. 2.15. They shine as lights in the world. Absente (...), luna lux: in the absence of the Sunne, the Moone is a great light. A touch (...) light it selfe, yet being kindled is able to give light to others: so no man can illuminate himselfe, yet being illuminated by that Sunne of Iustice, he can give a light of direction to others. Therefore the Church is compared to heaven, Revel. 12. (...) get Ecclesia Doctoribus, sicut calum fideribus: the Church shines with Teachers, as the heaven with starres. They are lights, both Ministerio conversionis, and exemplo conversationis; both with the ministerie of conversion, and the example of conversation. In the one is verbum vita, the word of life; in the other vita verbi, the life of the word. The light in the window doth not only give light to them that are in the house, but also passengers in the streete. The other shippes guide their course, (...) only by the starre in heaven, but also by the light in the Admirall. So there is the light of life in doctrine, the life of light in exemplary conversation. Iohn was a burning and a shining light, Ioh. 5.35. Lights burning and not shining, are like hell fire lights shining and not burning, like Glo-wormes. Our God is not onely a (...) fire but also a shining light; both Formaliter and Effective. Psal. 50.2. Out of Sion the perfection of beautie, God hath shined. Such a light is his sacred truth, able to illuminate all the darke corners of the world. There is a foure-fold light.
1 Lux naturalis, the light of nature; this was goodly in Adam, Iob 24.13. They are of those that rebell against the light; that is, against the light of nature. (...) was of opinion that every soule had this light till it came into the body; and by that mixture it was onely mufled and blinded. Hence was that his maxime; that (...), to know, he was nothing else but Reminisci, to remember. But this opinion presupposeth a Seminary or Promptuary of soules, from whence they are derived to their bodies; which is false. The Scripture saith, God formeth the spirit of man within him, Zach. 12.1. Infundendo creatur, and creando infunditur: it is created with infusion, and infused with creation. Yet when the spirit and flesh meet, and man is made, this light is defaced; for Anima cum infunditur, inficitur: the soule even when it is infused, is infected.
2. Lux Evangelica, the light of the Gospell. Ioh. 8.12. I am the light of the world: he that followeth me, shall not walke in darkenesse, but have the light of life. This was the intent of our Saviours comming, To give light to them that sit in darkenesse, and in the shadow of death, and to guide their feete into the way of peace, Luk. 1.79. It is true, that the Law was a light; lex est lux: but like a lampe, farre short of the day which comes by the rising of the glorious Sunne, IESUS CHRIST. Thy word is a light to my feete, and a lampe to my paths: but thy CHRIST is a Sunne, that hath saving health under his wings; Mal. 4.2. In the night a man is glad of the light of a candle: so was the word of Prophecie a great helpe during the darkenesse which oppressed the whole world. But now the day is broken, and the splendor of the Sunne shines in our faces. There is in the world, Psal. 91.5. Pavor noctornus, terrour by night, the trouble of a vexed conscience. Sagitta per diem (...) the arrow that flieth by day, the temptations of Satan in prosperity and peace. ^^stie in caligine, the pestilence that walketh in darkenesse, heresie to pervert the (...) Lues in meridie, the destruction that wasteth at noone day, profanenesse to (...) the affections: none of these shall destroy us, because we have the light of the Gospell to avoid them. This light shall defend us from all dangers; apertis, opertis, open or hidden, externall or internall, corporall or spirituall. Esa. 8.20. To the Lux, to the Testimonie: if they speake not according to this word, there is no light in there. He that doth not direct us by that rule, wee can see there is no morning in him. Some have God, and know him not; as Infants. Some know GOD, and have him not, as baptised reprobates. Some neither have him, not know him; as Pagans. Others have him, and know him, as all faithfull Christians.
3 Lux Gratiae, the light of Grace. Thus we are made Partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light, Col. 1.12. This is wrought in us by the light of the Gospell, the holy Spirit opening the window of our heart, that this day might shine into it. For men may be in the light, and yet the light not be in them: and it is one thing to have the light in a mans head, another to have it in his heart. The light of knowledge may illuminate the braine, and yet leave a man unblessed: but they are Saints, in whose hearts the day starre is risen. That man knowes the good he hath not done: this man doth the good he hath knowen. They say, he playes best that wins; but I am sure hee knowes best that does. When the Apostles prayed for that decision, Act. 1.24. That God would be pleased to shew whether of the two, Barsabas or Matthias, he had chosen into Iudas his Episcopall roome; they said. Thou Lord, which knowest the hearts of all men. Not the heads, but the hearts: many have lightned heads, but darke hearts. Rom. 1.21. Their foolish heart was darkened. The Apostle there saith they knew God, there was light in their heads; but darkenesse was in their hearts. Never had age more light in their understandings than ours; I feare never lesse light in their hearts. Ioh. 3.19. This is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men love darkenesse rather. The day starre is risen, and shineth, and wee see his glory; as the glory of the onely begotten of the Father, full of Grace and Truth: GOD grant withall, that hee bee risen in our hearts.
4 Lux Gloriae, the light of glory. In thy light shall we see light, saith the Prophet. When they shall need no candle, nor the light of the Sunne, for the Lord God giveth them light, they shall raigne for ever and ever, Revel. 22.5. The light of nature is like a sparke, the light of the Gospell, a Lampe, the light of Grace a starre, but the light of glory the Sunne it selfe. The higher our ascent, the greater our light. 1 Tim. 6.16. God dwelleth in the light which no man can approach unto. No man, while he carries mortalitie and sinne about him: but when those two corrupt and uncapable qualities shall be put off, then shall we be brought to that light. We are now glad of the Sun and Starres over our heads, to give us light: what light and delight shall that be, when these shall be under our feete! That light must needs as farre goe beyond their light, as they now goe beyond us. But alas! they are only able to discourse of that light, that doe enjoy it, to whom that eternall day is risen: not we that live in the humble shade of mortalitie, and naturall dimnesse. I leave it therefore to your meditations: it is a glorious light which we doe well, often to consider, considering to admire, admiring to love, loving to desire, desiring to seeke, and finding to enjoy for ever.
Vntill the day dawne, and the day starre arise in your hearts.] The Kingdome of Grace, is both an entrance to, and a resemblance of the Kingdome of glory. This Evangelicall day on earth, is a glimpse of that Angelicall day in heaven. And CHRIST is our day starre here, in respect of his gracious light: as he will be hereafter, in respect of his glorious light. CHRIST hath beene often called a Starre, and that without disparagement to him, that is the Sunne himselfe. It was given him both by Propheticall prediction, Numb. 24.17. There shall come a starre out of Iacob. And by Evangelicall ascription, Revel. 22.16. I am the root and off-spring of David, and the bright morning Starre. CHRIST hath in the Scripture, diverse names of light given him, according to the different degrees of his emication. Sometimes he casteth forth a scanter became, and then he is called the day-dawning. Sometimes he gives so much light, as onely presignifies a bright day at hand; then he is called Lucifer, the morning starre. Other times he diffuseth his knowledge, then he is the light, and the day: then he shines out in his glory, and is the Sunne himselfe. This is the Star we sayle by, over the sea of this world: other stars are under us in service, though they be above us in situation. Psal. 8.6. The heavens, Moone and Starres, Omnia subjecisti; Thou hast put all things under his feete. If it be true that Astra regunt homines, the Starres governe men: yet it is more true,
 that Deus astra regit, God governes the starres: this Starre commands all. Here the trouble and Philosophicall Quaere, concerning the morning Star is decided. Plinnatur. Hist. lib. 2. cap. 8. Some take this Starre to be venus, some Isis, some Iuno's, some the mother of the Gods. We need not trouble our heads about it; our morning starre is IESUS CHRIST. That Babylonian Monarch was called, Metus Aurora, Esa. 14.12. Lucifer, Son of the morning. A morning starre, but falling starre: he rose against this Day-starre, and therefore was turned out of his high or be, wherein he had advanced himselfe above the kings of the earth. So tread downe all thine enemies, Oh Lord: but to thy Church give this day-starre, Christ for ever.
This gracious Day hath dawned unto us, and shineth upon us: but it will not last ever, it must have an evening. Are there not twelve houres in the day, saith CHRIST! If no more, certainely the last houre will come. Ioh. 12.36. While you have light beleeve in the light, that your may be the children of light. We all say, we are Filii luci, the children of light: but we make not Lucem Ducem, the light our guide. So the Iewes said, we have Abraham to our Father, yet shewed themselves degenerate bastards. 1 Ioh. 1.6. If we say we have fellowship with God, and walke in darkenesse, (...) lie. It is as if a clod of squalid earth should boast it selfe Filiam Ignis, to be the daughter of fire. 1 Ioh. 2.9. He that saith he is in the light, and hateth his brother, is still in darkenesse. But no man will be thought odisse fratrem, to hate his brother. He will scorne his brother, strike his brother, bely his brother, oppresse his brother, undoe his brother: yet forsooth, he will not hate his brother. Palpable darkenesse; if he knowes not this, in his head: if he knowes it then in his heart. Esa. 5.20. Woe to them that put light for darkenesse, and darkenesse for light. If such a man persist, he shall goe to bed at noone, and drop downe to hell like a meteor, when all the stars remaine in their glory. For it is just with God to take the light from thine eyes, when thou hast taken thine eyes from the light.
This day is ours, let us be the dayes. Let us not be noctivagants, straying abroad with Dinah, lest our chast soule come home de floured. Or, as the Poets say of Proserpine; that while she was gadding abroad with her mother Ceres, Pluto rap'd her to hell. So if men wilfully run from the light, they may be violently ravished by the Prince of darkenesse. A Virgin being tempted by a dissembling lover, followed him: in this pursuite of her vaine desires, she scapes many unsuspected dangers, and found expected deliverance. For though her lover led her over deepe pits, and deadly snares, purposing to ravish her, and destroy her: yet still an Angell was present to defend her. A glorious shew had attracted her eyes, she thought him a person of all delights: and still as she went, she found scattered gold, which she gathering minded not whether she strayed. When he had brought her to his cave, and was even ready to defloure her with violence, and to wound her to death; the Angell steps in, and puts him to flight. He discovers himselfe to be an Angell of light, and the other an Impostor and Traitor to her. He brings her to the gulfes side, and shewes her the bottomlesse depth of the pit, which she scaped; and the Serpent that was ready to devoure her. He bids her examine the gold, loe it was base mettall, counterfeit and venomous drosse. Tells her what losse of a faithfull betrothed lover she hath hazarded. Hereupon the Virgin breakes forth into lamentations and bitter teares: begins to sowne with despaire, and dares not looke up to that light she hath so offended. The Angell lifts her up, revives her spirits, promiseth to bring her too fountaine, that shall wash off all her defilements. Being thus washed, he shewes her true husband comming towards her with a gracious aspect. Hee takes her in his armes, wipes her eyes, dryes her teares, and seales on her cheekes millions of kisses. Loe now she begins to recover, on her bended knees she intreats his constant love to her, and promiseth chast adherence to him for ever. This virgin is mans soule her false lover the divell, her betrothed husband CHRIST, the Angell is the Gospell, the night wherein she wanders is ignorance, the gold profit or pleasure, the sea is
 this world, the pit hell, the bridge whereby she escapes is Gods mercie. Satan transformed like a friend wooes her, gets her good will to follow him. If she will admit of this or that sinne, at every step she shall take up Gold, have her desires satisfied. This golden temptation so strongly takes her, that she runnes from vice to vice, from error to error; thinkes all is safe, and that she is in the company of one who dearely loves her. At last she is brought to some foule and capitall offence, to the very doores of hell, ready to be turned in. But behold then, he that never forsakes his, sendeth an Angelicall, Evangelicall light, opens her eyes, unhands the divell, and sets her at libertie. The day dawnes, and the day-starres arise in her heart: and now observe the course is taken to bring this poore soule to salvation. First, the Gospell shewes her, that the lover she so doted upon, was an Adversary, Satan; not the spirit of light, but the Prince of darkenesse. Oh how ugly does this monster appeare in her eye! how doth she hate her selfe for loving him! Next, it discovers the counterfeit gold, that all the vanitie of this world is but slip-coine; so farre from making man rich or blessed, that it is the divells poison to make him cursed. Then it brings her to the deepe gulfe of perdition, which she passed over without feare because without knowledge. Wherein she had beene drowned for ever, but for the saving bridge of Gods mercie; who was good to her, even while she was so bad to him Lastly, it describes to her the beautie and perfections of that husband she had forsaken, the Sonne of glory, fairer than all the children of men; white and ruddy, of the purest complection, the chiefest among ten thousand. Hereupon she breakes into amazed complaints; wretch that I am, what shall become of me? there is nothing but death and damnation due unto me. I dare not looke up to that heaven I have so offended, nor speake to that Father I have so provoked, nor hope for that husband I have so wronged. Did by redemption cost him the deare bloud of his heart, and doe I sell my selfe to Satan for gold, for vanity, for nothing? Oh looke not upon me yee daughters of Ierusalem, for I am blacke, swarthy and polluted. Time was that the King did greately desire my beauty, Psal. 45.11. But now I lie defiled in my owne bloud, my shame is upon me, and my confusion hath covered me. I am sicke, my heart strings burst, let be grone and die. Now steps in this blessed light of the Gospell, takes the sowning soule by the hand, lifts her up from the dust of despaire, and puts into her mouth that song, Psalm. 27.13. I had fainted, unles I had beleeved to see the goodnesse of the LORD in the Land of the living. This brings her to a fountaine, yea brings a fountaine out of her: her heart bleeds the teares of compunction, and they runne not by drops, but by flouds from her eyes. She weepes like David, Vntill she can weepe no more, 1 Sam. 30.4. But lest this shower should melt her to nothing, the Sunne of mercie comes to stay it: and now this light directs her in the voice of Iohn; Behold the Lambe of God, which takes away the sinnes of the world. She lifts up her eyes of faith, and sees him come leaping upon the mountaines, and skipping upon the hills, Cant. 2.8. She runneth to him, throwes her selfe in the dust at his feete, bathes them with her teares like Mary; and with an humble heart and suppliant voice beseecheth him; Lord, be mercifull to me a sinner. She takes hold of him, as Iacob; I will not let thee goe till thou hast blessed me. The Lord takes her in his armes of mercie, puts his left hand under her head, and with his right hand embraceth her, Cant. 2.6. He speakes peace and comfort to her conscience, heales all her wounds with his owne bloud, promiseth to mediate for her to his Father, and to make her peace in heaven. She kisseth his hand with faith, he kisseth her cheekes with blessings. There is a betrothing of fidelitie, and constant love of either to other. She prayes, Lord forsake not the soule which thou hast redeemed: he promises, Fui tibi in meritum, ero tibi in praemium; I was thy redemption, I will be thy salvation: nothing shall separate thee and mee. Oh blessed Light, whereby that darknesse is expelled: O blessed soule, by this light delivered: O blessed Saviour that sent this light: Oh blessed Father that sent this Saviour: O blessed Trinitie, that blessest all unto us; mayest thou be blessed of us and in us for ever and ever. Amen.





VERSE 20. Knowing this first, that no Prophecie of the Scripture is of any private Interpretation.
VERSE 21. For the Prophecie came not in old time (or, at any time) by the will of man: but holy men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.


THe Apostle had formerly commended reading of the Prophets ab utilitate, by the benefite of them: how in reading them he gives warning a difficultate, from the difficultie of understanding them. There are things in them hard to be understood: the historie is not without the mysterie: and there often lies a deepe and hidden sense, under a familiar and easy sentence. Let not men rush into their exposition, like hasty souldiers into a thicket, without seeking direction from the Captaine. When we come to read them, we must throw away the sense of flesh and bloud, and subject our selves Magisterio Spiritus. Some copies have read (...), which signifies, Quidam Impetus: then the sense were thus; No Scripture is of any private motion. But the most and best read, (...), Interpretation. Now let him that gave the proposition, give also the exposition: the Spirit which inspired the Prophets, can onely declare the prophecies. We grant this to men, giving every one leave to bee his owne Interpreter, and to expound his owne meaning. Deny not this to the Holy Ghost: that which Gods Spirit hath indited, must be by the same spirit interpreted.
This impossibility of true and sound interpretation without Gods Spirit, occurres not to some Scriptures, but to all. (...): to the letter, All Prophecie is not of any private interpretation. An Hebraisme, for, No prophecie is of any, etc. Such a phrase there is, Ro. 3.20. (...), etc. All flesh shall not be justified: for, No flesh shall be justified. As the Prophets durst not Proferre dictamina sua, broach their owne inventions, so wee must not Ingerere acumina nostra, crowd in our owne constructions. But beseech him that decreed them to tell us the meaning of them. Sampsons riddle could not be dissolved, but by Sampsons owne mouth. The Iewes came to the Prophet: Wilt thou not tell us what these things meane? This was the Angels proclamation. Revel. 5.2. Who is worthy to open the booke, and to lose the seales thereof? Who? Verse 3. No man in heaven, nor in earth, nor under the earth, was able to open the booke, neither to looke thereon. None in heaven, not the Angels none in arth, not living men: none under the earth; this could not be meant of divells or damned spirits; for they of all have no worthinesse to open this booke. Therefore most probably, it is meant of the Saints, who as touching their bodies sleepe in the graves; whom he speakes of in respect of that part which comes neerest to our sense. Iacob saies, Gen. 37. Verse 35. I will goe downe into the grave unto my
 Sonne. I, yet was it but his body that could goe downe thither. So that the place is too cold to kindle the fire of Purgatory. Who then? Vers. 5, The root of David hath prevailed to open the booke: none but the Lambe can doe it. All doth modulum nostrum superare, we can say nothing but what the Lord doth tell us. By his helpe and instinction onely, we preach and expound the Prophets. He did write by all the Prophets and Apostles. By him did the Fathers interpret them to us, by him wee doe interpret them to you; onely the HOLY GHOST himselfe interpret them to us all.
For methods sake, I desire to lead your attention thorow these three principall passages. The Suggestion, Conscription, and Exposition of holy Scriptures. There be certaine adjacent Circumstances which shall finde their due places.
The
Inspiration from God, it was not a vision of their owne heads; but they spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.The Conscription; which albeit it were not by the will of man, yet was it done by the hand of man. They were Men, Holy men, holy men of God.The Exposition, which is by no private spirit, but by the Holy Spirits illumination of mans minde, and directing the Church. For as the Invention of them came not by the will of man, so neither doth the exposition of them come by the wit of man.
The Prophecie came not by the will of man, but men spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.] This is the first point; their Indictation, Inspiration, Suggestion. Saint Augustine from this place, condemnes their damnable heresie, that esteemed the Holy Ghost lesse and inferiour to the Father and Sonne: Aut quod sceleratius est, ministrum potius quam Deum; But, saith he, shall we call him a creature, qui carnem Domini creavit, who created the humanity of CHRIST? Qui Filium Dei misit; Who sent the Sonne of God? Luke 4.18. The Spirit of the Lord hath sent mee to heale, etc. Qui plane Deus, Who is plainely called God? Act. 5.4. Thou hast lyed to the Holy Ghost: What is he? the Apostle directly explaines it, Thou hast lyed unto God, 1 Cor. 3.16. You are the Temple of God, and the Holy Spirit (who is that God) dwelleth in you. Here that Spirit speaketh in the Prophets: Matth. 10.20. he speaketh in the Apostles. It is not yee that speake, but the Spirit of your Father which speaketh in you. Who is he that doth all this? 2 Tim. 3.16. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God: it is God himselfe. Will you consider with me some reasons, arguments, and demonstrative proofes; whereby our faith may be confirmed, that all Scripture commeth by the inspiration of God.
1 Consider the infallible completion of things long before prophesied, in their due seasons, 1 King. 13.2. Behold, a childe shall be borne unto the house of David, Iosiah by name, etc. A man was named five hundred yeeres before he was borne. A right famous man may in that space be easily forgotten upon earth: but to tell now who shall live, or what such an one shall doe, a thousand yeares hence: this can be done by none, but onely by him who uno intuitu, with one looke beholds all things: with whom nothing is past or to come, but all present.
2 Consider that their being hath continued from Moses unto this day. This is miraculous, that in so great hurly-burlies and alterations, they should not be lost! We must yeeld, that the Devill would faine have extinguished their light for ever; and his instruments were not backward to attempt it: the same Almighty hand that made it, preserved it, and will not let it perish.
3 That the scope of it should be to build up no worldly thing, but onely the kingdome of heaven, and to direct us to Iesus Christ, Gal. 3.22. The Scripture hath concluded all under sinne, to make way for the promise of faith by Christ. It condemnes sinne in all, and all for sinne; that only such might be saved as trust in him that died for their sinnes.
4 That it should passe with credite thorow the whole world, and finde approbation of all languages, nations, and places. And where it meets with oppositions,
 should make way thorow them, as thunder thorow the clouds.
5 That the Hebrew tongue, wherein the Old Testament was written, doth so excell all tongues, in Antiquitie, Sanctitie, Majestie. Gravitas in sensu, modestas in dictis, Ambros. He knew her, or went in to her, or slept with her. Such is the gracious modesty of the sacred Scriptures.
6 The majesty of the style, which yet is not only powerfull in words, but effectuall in working: renting the heart, Piercing even to the dividing asunder of the soule and spirit, of the joynts and marrow, Heb. 4.12. When I reade them, me thinkes they are not verba, words; sed tonitrua, but thunders, Hieron. Other Authors, sweet like Mer-maids, had inchanted my Intellect; Blandiebatur virgilius, etc. But Dulcius mihi nunc immurmurat Filius Iesse; Now the Sonne of Iesse is more pleasant than all, Bern. We have heard the writings of Poets ancient and new so commended, as if Wisdome it selfe had lived and died with them. And it may be, this is the sinne of our Samaria, to commit idolatry with such bookes. The Turkish History, Herodotus lyes, Poeticall fictions, scurrilous pamphlets, have thrust the Bible out of our windowes. As Angelus Politianus preferred Pindarus his Odes, before Davids Psalmes. But Hierome otherwise to Paulinus; They may talke of Simonides, Pindarus, Flaccus, and the rest: Horum instar omnium David Psalmist a nobis; One David, that sweet singer of Israel, is to us more worth than all those. 1 Cor. 2.2. I determined not to know any thing among you, save Iesus Christ, and him crucified. Mee thinkes there is no Text but Crux, Christs Crosse: no Theme but the hole in his side: no Inke but our Saviours Bloud, no Conference but his Merits, no Object but his Obedience, no Oratory but love the Lord Iesus, no Musike but blesse our God for evermore. We should chuse musike, as he chose his friend: not him that would be plausible to his humour for a day, but him that should be profitable to his minde during life: so not that musike which to flesh is sweetest, but that which lasteth longest. This is the song of Hallelujah, Praising the LORD: this musike shall continue for ever.
7 From the very basenesse of falshood, we learne to admire the lustre of truth. Consider Satans ambition, though he be the father of lyes, to imitate the Scripturall truth. He had his Sorcerers in Aegypt, to follow Moses in his wonders; albeit non passibus aequis, they came farre short of him. To disgrace and weaken the credit of the Scriptures, he had his Poets and Fabulists, whose Mythologies were obtruded for true reports. But there are three maine differences betweene them: First, there drosse was mingled with the gold, water with the wine: happily it was truth, but wronged in the reporting, as a good tale is marred in the telling. That the great Armie of Senacherib was destroyed, both Esay and Herodotus agree. But Esay sayes, it was by the Angell of God; Herodotus sayes, it was by an infinite number of Mise, which in the night-time did eat up the leathers of their armours, targets, and bridles, and hereupon they fled. Secondly, that is said to be derived from the Gentiles to the Iewes, which indeed came from the Iewes to the Gentiles. Plutarch sayes that some of the Iewes Feasts, yea, their Sabbath-day, and the word Sabbos, was derived from the Feasts of Bacchus. But indeed the solemnities of Bachus came from them, being nothing so ancient as Moses. Thirdly, there have beene like reports, but under borrowed names, as Augustine observes. In allusion to the true Historie of Ionah, his swallowing and egestion by the Whale; Herodotus writes of one Arion; who for his money being throwen over shipboord, a Dolphin tooke him on his backe, and being delighted with his musike, carried him to Tanarus, from whence hee went to Penander at Corinth, informing him of his received injury, and strange deliverance. But we may justly suspect, that the Greeke tale of the one, meant the Hebrew truth of the other. Satan knowing that it was prophesied of CHRIST, Esay 42.7. that hee should open the blinde eyes, unstop the eares of the deafe, make the lame leape like Harts, and the tongues of the dumbe to sing, Esay 35.6. He fained an Aesculapius, and gave on
 as strange wonders of him: and for better facilitating his purpose, hee called him the Sonne of God. Now to wound the Devill with his owne weapon, even this argument proves the Divine and indubitate verity of the Scripture. For counterfeits doe ever presuppose that there is ever some such thing, as they attempt to resemble. Perkin Warbecke in England, that pretended himselfe to be Edward the fifth; did manifestly declare that there had beene one of that name. Coyners of false metall, imply by their art, that there is some of that stampe good and currant. Alchimists that labour to make gold by projection, intend that there is naturall gold. Painters, though they have the libertie, Quidlibet audendi; yet account their art to be a resemblance of that which is, or hath beene. So the affected imitation of holy stories is a cleare remonstrance, that the subject which they take for patterne, is of justifiable truth, and without exception.
8 Lastly, this is an argument of the finger of God, and supernaturall power in holy Writ; that the Penners of it renounced all affection, and delivered the true message even against their owne reputations. So did this Holy Spirit over-rule their pens, that they depresse and disgrace themselves, and remaine exposed as wonderments to all succeeding ages; that all glory may be the LORDS. If they did amisse, their errours are recorded either by themselves or their friends. The faults of Noah and Lot, are not concealed by him, that honoured the memory of Noah and Lot. Luke loved Paul and Barnabas, yet writing their Acts, he speakes of an unbecomming strife betweene them; which grew so sharpe and hot, that they parted, Act. 15.39. Moses in his five Bookes, as he spared not his brother, nor his sister, nor his wife; neither Aaron, Miriam, nor Zippora; when they came in his way: so he least of all spared himselfe. That God had almost slaine him for neglect of Circumcision; that when the people murmured, he was one: that he was onely permitted to see, not to enter into Canaan: all this he writes of himselfe. Ieremie records his owne impatience, Ier. 15. David is owne bloud-guiltinesse: Ionah his owne uncharitablenesse, frowardnesse, and repining at Gods mercie. He was the writer, that was the offender; yet he reports the fault as if it had beene of a stranger. Hee sets aside affection to his owne credite, runnes not into a bush with Adam: but writes his fault on his brow, points the finger at the transgressour under his owne proper and individuall name. Hee tells such a tale of himselfe, that if all his enemies had studied to lash him, they could not have matched it. Men are naturally ambitious, desirous either to blaze their owne vertues, or to blanch their owne errours. Looke upon humane pens, how they are dipped in the oyle of ostentation! They professe to chronicle the truth; but this friend, or that faction shall have a partiall favour. They will not detect the evill that is, but insert the good that is not. But that one should in sobrietie write a Treatise, to declare his owne faults; this is not found in any Heathen. Tully will not have it buried, that Rome was beholding to him in the cause of Catiline. Plutarch, Aristotle, Plato, Socrates, may write much in their owne praise: I never read in them one line of their wickednesse. Dion will have the world know, that hee was a man employed in matters of State. Iosephus is abundant in relating his owne stratagems. Horace sayes of his Poems, that he had set up Monumentum are perennius, regale situ pyramidum altius. Ovid of his Transmutations; Iamque opus exegi, quod nec Iovis ira, nec ignis, etc. And Ille ego sum nulli nugarum laude secundus. Mahomets writings extoll him for an onely Prophet; that he received oracles from heaven: that hee shall rise from the dead, but eight hundred yeares after; a prettie time to trie a conclusion in; but there is not a syllable of all his damnable vices. Thus men will be men, humorous, ambitious, selfe-loving. This cannot be refrained, nor restrained; but that directly or indirectly it will breake out. But those whom God employes, cast dung on their owne faces, publish their owne errours to the ends of the world: that every eye may see, and every tongue confesse; All men are sinners; God is only good, and wise, and holy; who is blessed for ever. Amen.

Holy men of GOD spake.] This is the second Generall, the Conscription of GODS Word. GOD would have his Word written: though it be here said, they spake; yet that they spake is called Scripture, a thing written, Rom. 15.4. Whosoever things were written afore-time, were written for our learning. Wherein observe the Authority, Antiquity, Vtility of the Scriptures. It is written, there is the Authoritie. Afore-time, there is the Antiquitie. For our learning, there is the Vtility. The voice is vanishing; aske for the voice, and finde it in aure, in the eare: aske for the Scripture, finde it in aere, written for the eye to looke upon. Therefore would God have it written in bookes, that the syllables might be alwayes in our eyes, so well as the sound in our eares. Hereby we may come to exercise ourselves in it day and night, Psal. 1.2. By this meanes no man shall adde to it, or detract from it. Deut. 4.2. Though the Sound of the thundring Apostles went into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world, Rom. 10.18. Yet the holy Ghost would have a Treatise written of all that Iesus did and taught, Act. 1.1. And this shall be intitled The booke of the generation of Iesus Christ, Matth, 1.1. The Scripture is a Bible, because it is written: and The Bible, because it excels all other bookes, both for the matter, and the maker. God would not have his Instruments onely Nepthali's, to give goodly words, Gen. 49.21. But that his will be committed to Zebulun, the handler of the pen, Iudg. 5.14. Oh that my words were written, oh that they were printed in a book! Iob 19.23. What would he have written? the words of his passion? No, but the words of his faith; even the truth of God; I know that my Redeemer liveth. Schismatickes are all for a Speaking Scripture: Anabaptists all for an infused Scripture: Papists are all for a Painted Scripture: they love Testes fenestras; with them no lease of the Bible is so authenticall as the Painters worke in the window. But all true Catholikes are onely for the written Scripture: And the Lord make this our light and delight to the end.
The Persons that are the Manuaries, directed by God, as a Schoole-master guides the hand of a young writer, have here a threefold description. They are Men, men of God, Holy men of God. Men, there is their Condition: Men of God, there is their Dispensation: Holy men of God, there is their Qualification.
Men; Why did not God choose some other nature of greater authoritie and credite? 1. That no glory might be ascribed to the meanes, 2 Cor. 4.7. We have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellencie of the power may be in God, and not of us. When Sampson with the the jaw of an Asse slew so many; the weaker the weapon, the stronger the man. The infirmitie of the instrument makes for the glory of the Agent. 2. In commiseration of mans weaknesse, Exod. 20.19. They said unto Moses; Speake thou with us, and we will heare: but let not God speake with us, lest we die. The voice of the Lord is like thunder, it will shake in peeces the timorous heart of flesh. 3. For the security of our soules: if our Preacher were an Angell, Satan could transforme himselfe into that shew. If one from the dead, the Devill can appeare in the shape of Samuel. If by miracles, Iannes and Iombres withstood Moses; and Antichrist shall doe wonders. If by visions, the Pagans had their apparitions. 4. In fit respondence to the worke of our redemption: a man died for us, therefore is a man fit to preach this to us, Act. 3.22.
Men of God.] This is an ancient attribute; Viri Dei, Sancti Dei, Nuncii Dei, Prophetae Domini, Prophetae Altissimi, 1 King. 17.18. 1 Tim. 6.11. 2 Tim. 3.17. Men of God. Men not only in request living, but even dead: Princes over Princes: these reigne but during life, those even after death: But especially they are called Men of God, because their dispensation comes from God, 1 Cor. 2.13. Wee speake in the words, we which mans wisdome teacheth, but which God teacheth. So the Prophets came, Os Domini locutum est. The mouth of the Lord hath spoken it, 1 Cor. 11 23. Quod accepi a Domino; I received of the Lord what I delivered unto you, Matth. 22.43. David to Spirit called him Lord, Psal. 45.1. My tongue is the pen of a ready writer; Calamus Scriba, that is, the pen of the Holy Ghost, Psalm. 85.8. The vulgar reades; Andiam
 quid in me loquatur Dominus; I will heare what the Lord will speake in me. Hence was it that the Lord did not manifest all things to them, Semper and Simul, together: but as Paul said to the Church, so God to Paul, Act. 20.20. I have kept backe nothing; vobis necessarium, that was profitable to you. Elisha know the king of Syriah's stratagems and plots, which he consulted in his bed-chamber, 2 King. 6.12. Yet he did not know at first the purpose of the Armie to Dothan; untill his servant told him. He could foretell to the Shunamite, that she should have a sonne; yet the death of that childe was hidden from him, 2 King. 4.27. The Lord hath hid it from mee, and hath not told me. He did not presently resolve the three Kings concerning the event of the warre; but called for a Minstrell, 2 King. 3.15. And when the Minstrell played, the hand of the Lord came upon him.
Holy men, the LORD that sent them, qualified them. But was this a necessary and inseparable annexion to all the Secretaries of GOD, Holinesse? was not Prophecie (without this) incident to some reprobates? Indeed some transient revelations might passe through them, themselves mean-time remaining as wise as Trunkes. Balaam is called a Great Prophet; God opened his mouth: yet did he not in this more favour him than his Asse: hee made them both to speake his glory, and Balaams shame. Saul does prophecie; Nunquid Saul inter Prophetas? Yet he was as farre from the Grace of God, as hee was from the God of Grace, when he had cast him off. Caiaphas could prophecie the expedience, that one should die for the people, Ioh. 11.51. This he spake not of himselfe: but being High-Priest that yeare, hee prophesied that IESUS should die for that Nation. His Office prophesied, rather than himselfe. Matth. 7.22. They shall say in the latter day, We have prophesied in thy Name; yet be rejected with a Depart from me, I know you not. But it is on all sides consented, that Gods publike Notaries, the Canonicall Writers, were all regenerate and Holy, the children of light and life: once gracious Saints on earth, now glorious Saints in heaven.
Thus are they qualified: one may be a man, yet not a man of God: a man of God, yet not Holy. To be a man is noble, an emphaticall word, Act. 1.11. Men of Galile. Act. 2.14. Men of Iudea. Act. 17.22. Men of Athens. Act. 19.35. Men of Ephesus. 1 King. 2.2. Shew thy selfe a Man. Multi homines, pauci vtri; One may be Adam, not Ish; Homo, not Vir. As David said to Abner, 1 Sam. 26.15. Nunquid tu Vir es? Art thou not a valiant Man? But to be a Man of God, this is more noble; to be intrusted with the secrets of heaven, the mysteries of Salvation. The Ambassadour of a King is of no small account; but these are Legati a latere Divino, the Lords Legates: Whosoever harmed them, Protinus Deum sensit ultorem; Found God himselfe their avenger, Matth. 10.16. He that despiseth you, despiseth me. Yet there be some that dare, and that in extremity, doe it, though they are sure to be condemned for it. But lastly, to be Holy, this is most noble. Prophecie shall cease, Preaching cease, ministration of Sacraments cease, Holinesse shall never cease. There are divers gifts, 1 Cor. 12.31. to be an Apostle, to Prophecie, to teach, to worke miracles, to speake with tongues; But let us covet earnestly the best gifts; even our Sanctification. The rest are needfull for you, this for our selves: they bring you to heaven, this must bring us to heaven. That blessed Spirit which hath made us Men, and men of God, make us also Holy men; that our Nazarites may be whiter than the snow, and our Priests purer than the Saphires.
No prophecie of the Scripture is of any private Interpretation.] These Holy men were the Sacraries and Secretaries of GOD, the Registers of his Royall Covenant. Now as they could not speake or write, but by the Spirits inspiration; so neither can wee expound what they have written, but by the same Spirits Interpretation, 1 Cor. 12.10. Interpretation is given by the Spirit. He that expounds the Scripture upon the warrant of his owne spirit onely; doth lay the brands of the fire together without the tongs, and is sure at least to burne his owne fingers. Salomon confessed that hee studied for his Doctrines, Eccles. 12.10. The
 Preacher sought to find out acceptable wordes; yet was he the wisest man. Daniel was a famous Prophet, yet he desired respite to expound. Nebuchadnezzars dreame, Dan. 2.16. Is the Scripture lighter than a dreame? or Nunquid tu sapientior Daniele? Art thou wiser than Daniel? It is true that all right and sober exposition is of God. Dan. 2.28. It is God in heaven that revealeth secrets. But the Lord doth not now reveale this to us in visions and dreames: but sets us to ordinary meanes; conferring with orthodox writers, turning over many bookes, zealous invocation to the Father of lights, studious observing the context of Scriptures. You thinke our preaching and expounding the word to be very easy; indeed so it might be, if we should doe with our Sermons, as you doe with your moneys. They are not Sermons, that come forth like untimely births, from uncircumcised lippes, and unwashen hands. I know there are some, that thinke scorne to bring a premeditated Sermon: that were to tie the Holy Ghost to an inkehorne: No, turne the Cocke, and let it run. They say, they bring Sermons of Gods owne making, because they tooke no paints in the composing. As if this were to preach in the Evidence of the Spirit, and demonstration of power. But as every sound is not musicke, so every Sermon is not Preaching. Speaking is from custome, but saying from Art. Psal. 45.1. My heart is inditing a good matter: It was Sermo natus in pectore; a speech first conceived and borne in his heart. Iohn Baptist went before CHRIST to prepare his wayes: so our heart must goe before our tongue to prepare our words. We must hew the stones before we bring them to the building, or they will never couch in order. He that commeth wildly to this holy worke, shall be driven to beate the aire, and to seeke up and downe for matter, as Saul sought for his fathers Asses. As we study for your good, so doe you pray we may study to your good; that we may bring you to the Scripture, and the Scriptures bring you to salvation.
I conclude; the Summe of this whole Chapter hath beene a sweet Garden of Grace and mercie. The first Flower, was a Salutation, and that is a wish of mercie. The second, a Promise, and that is a word of mercy. The third, a Consolation, and that is a worke of mercy. The fourth, an Exhortation, and that is the way to mercy. The fift, a witnesse of our Election, and that is an Assurance of mercy. The sixth, an Induction to heaven upon earth, and that is an high degree of mercy. The seventh, a Testimony from heaven, and that was the voice of mercy. The eight, a Word of performed Prophecie, and that was an argument of mercy. The ninth, an Illumination of the Gospell, and that is a light of mercy. The last, is the glory of heaven, and that is the full day and perfection of mercie. Through these blessed degrees my discourse hath brought you: first we begun with Peace, then dwelt long with Grace, and lastly are come to Glory. This Peace possesse your consciences, this Grace beautifie your hearts,Iude verse 24. and this Glory crowne all your soules. Now unto him that is able to keepe you from falling, and to present you faultlesse before the presence of his glory with exceeding joy: to the only wise God our Saviour, be glory and Majestie, dominion and power, now and for ever. Amen.




AN EXPOSITION VPON THE SECOND EPISTLE GENERALL OF THE HOLY APOSTLE, Saint PETER. CHAP. II.




 VER. I.

But there were false Prophets among the people, even as there shall bee false teachers among you, who privily shall bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves swift destruction.


THe conclusion of the former Chapter was in a sweete colour of truth, the Induction of this begins with a discoverie of error. Damnable doctrine bound up in a faire cover; resembling that Romish practise, of poysoning an Emperour in the Sacrament. Here is a true Prophecie of a false prophecie: I tell you truely, that some shall come to teach you falsely. The Church of God cannot escape this danger, so long as there is a sheepe-skinne to be gotten for a Wolfe to maske in: or a Sorcerer, Elymas can put on the name of Bar-jesus, Act. 13.6. These have beene, these will bee; As it was then, so is it now, Gal 4.29. And so it will continue untill time hath housed all Gods friends, and imprisoned all his enemies; till it hath melted the world in a fornace, and cast it in a new mould. You have a Sure word, sit fast in your adherence: there will come furious champions to thrust you from your handfast; beware that they doe not weaken your faith in Iesus CHRIST.

There were Prophets indeed, but durst there be false prophets? Yes, false prophets. But it may be they were among uncircumcised Pagans, not in Israel: yes (...), among the people, that People, emphatically; chosen for the Lords owne Peculiar. Well, but that danger is past, they are condemned and gone: Nay, be not too secure, Erunt, there will be still false teachers. The divell loves no vacancie; if he can helpe it with supply, the chaire of Antichrist shall never be empty. Indeed these may be admitted amongst the heretikes of their owne tribe, in that land of darkenesse where the truth is forgotten: but they will not presume into the light? Yes, (...), among you; that know the truth, and to whom the glorious Sunne shineth. They will venture to vent the divells commodities even among you. What are those wares? Heresies: alas, that is but their owne election or opinion, and can doe little hurt. Yes, they are damnable heresies, (...), exitiall, of destruction. If they doe, I hope we shall easily distinguish them: howsoever, they will bring them in, speed as they can But the Church discerning it, will shut her doores against them: nay, but they will doe it Privily, cunningly, steale them in. Oh what pernicious malice are those Impostors? So impudent, that they dare deny the Lord, their Maker; the Lord that bought them, their Saviour. What shall be their end? Destruction. How long shall it bee deferred? not a jot, it shall be Swift and suddaine. How shall it come? it shall be brought. Who shall bring it? Themselves upon themselves. They bring upon themselves swift destruction. This is the Exposition, now for the disposition of these words. Three Generalls; A
Narration; There were false Prophets, etc.Caution; There shall be false Teachers.Description, how to know them; They shall privily, etc.
In the narration consider these particulars, The
Connection of the words; Also.Corruption of the persons; False Prophets.Intrusion of their mischiefe; Among the people of God.
In the caution we observe three other branches, by which we perceive and Finde
Who they be that assault us, False Teachers.Whither they presse; Among you, even Christians.The unavoidable necessity of them, Erunt, they will be with you, you cannot help it.
In the description, they were declared to us by three mischiefes or evills: One
That issues from them, Seminale malum, noxious to others. They bring in damnable heresies.That abides in them, Criminale malum, making themselves guilty; Denying the Lord that bought them.That falls upon them, Paenale malum, their owne plague; They bring us themselves swift destruction.
In the former mischiefe or evill, consider two things: Both
What they bring in; Damnable heresies.How they bring them in; Privily.
The second evill is aggravated by a threefold gradation: That
They doe not only neglect, but Deny him.Not a man, not a King, not an Angell; but The Lord.Not only their Creator, but Saviour; That bought them.
The last evill is described by The
Measure, it is no lesse than Destruction.Manner, it is Swift, suddaine, unprevented.Author, even Themselves. They bring on themselves.
There were false Prophets also among the people.] I begin with the narration, which
 hath recurrence to those past times, the state of the Church under the Law. Who being the beloved people of GOD, yet were not exempted from that exercise of their faith, by the seducements of false Prophets. To proceed in order.
There were also. This is the connexion; (...), Also, implies that there were alwaies true Prophets; such as he formerly had specified: otherwise he could not say here; Also false prophets. Where behold Gods carefull indulgence to his children, that never leaves them without Tutors. Zach. 1.5. The Prophets doe not live for ever: there is no everlasting Priest but IESUS CHRIST. Moses and Samuel are dead, Paul and Iohn have layed downe their Tabernacles. Yet still the Lord raiseth up Ministers to stand before his Alter, and to keepe the holy fire of the Sanctuary from going out. Some have observed that Ionah began his Prophecie with And, or Also. Which intends a conjunction, either of Ionah with other Prophets, or Niniveh with other Cities, or of the businesse related with other affaires: as if it began a booke without a beginning, and continued a course of some precedent dealings. When one Lampe is spent, God will also send another: when one starre sets, another rises. The Church shall be no more destitute of Ministers, than the Firmament can be without starres. God will not leave his house without builders, till the edifice be perfectly finished. Eph. 4.13. He placeth Pastors and Teachers, to the edifying of his body, untill we all meet unto a perfect man. This comforts us, that if our sinnes cause not God to remove our candlesticke from us, we shall have shining lampes in our Church, untill wee be all lighted to the kingdome of heaven. The Greekes of Constantinople had store of wealth, but because they would spare none of it to the reparation and defense of the Citie, they lost all to the Turkes, which afterwards no money could recover. The foolish virgins, to spare a shilling, bought no oile: but when their lampes were out, and the Bridegroome came, what would they have given, what would they not have given, for a little oile? I pray God this prove not the unfortunate case of this land: we have store of lampes to light us to heaven, but we are so niggardly of oile to feed them, that they must needs at last goe out, and leave us darkling. It is no wonder, if God take from us Altaria, our Altars; who have taken from him Altaragia, his Tythes and offerings. Psal. 74.8. They have burnt up all the Synagogues in the Land: if men doe so, no marvaile though they complaine, as it is in the next verse. We see not our Signes, there is not one Prophet among us. We have done our best, or rather our worst, to make our soules one day complaine; there is not a Prophet left among us.
There were false Prophets.] Falsehood is an aberration from the Truth: they are false Prophets that teach false things. Matth. 7.15. Beware of false Prophets. The master there, as the servant here, having first shewed the right way, cautioneth us of things hurtfull in the way. Beware of heresie, which corrupteth the pure fountaines of holy faith. False Prophets may be taken in a threefold sense; literally, mystically, or as they are taken here.
Literally, so are tell-tale Astrologers, who have learned in the divells Academcy to coozen the world with false alarmes. Aures verbis divitant alienas, ut opibus domus locupletent suas. Alas, how can they tell anothers end or infelicity, that are ignorant of their owne? Qui sibi nescius, cui praescius? CHRIST bids us beware of false Prophets, what will he judge of those that runne to them? A theefe hath stollen thy beast, and thou in going to the wizard, runnest after him with thy soule. Thus when one takes away the childs apple, he throwes the bread after him. Will not the divell laugh to see two such theeves meete together in his kingdome? Levit. 19.31. Regard not them that have familiar spirits, neither seeke after wizards, to bee defiled by them. Regard them not, if you doe, the LORD will not regard you.
Mystically, the divell is a false Prophet: he calls evill good, and promiseth to bad attempts good events. Either he conceales the end from the way, or the way
 from the end. Thou mayest travell the way of lust, yet not come to the end of it, damnation. Or thou mayest come to the end of thy hope, salvation; yet never limit thy selfe to the way of grace. These are all false prophecies, and this is that false Prophet which coozens the world. He sped so unhappily with our first parents: you may eate of the forbidden tree, yet be like Gods: it was false, for he knew that so eating would make them like divells. The world is such a false Prophet, like those lying spirits to Ahab. Goe up to Ramoth Gilead and prosper, 1 King. 22.12. It promiseth like a Lord, as the Lord of it did to the Lord of all; All these will I give, Matth. 4.4. It was false, for all this glory is but a shadow; umbra transit, and leaves the substance of bitternesse behind it. The world saies; Your houses shall continue for ever: it is a false prophecie; for man abides not in honour, Psal. 49.12. The world saies your gold shall make you blessed: it is a false prophecie, it rather makes men cursed.
The flesh is a false prophet. Psal. 14.1 The foole hath said in his heart, There is no God: false, for he shall find a God to judge the earth. Every affected sinne is a false prophet to the soule. Falshood, if it cannot deceive another, will deceive it selfe: as Chrysostome observes on the Psalm. Mentita est iniquitas sibi, wickednesse lyed to it selfe, Luk. 12. Worldlinesse flattered the rich man with immortality in his barnes false, for his passing-bell went that night. Presumption of health whispers that thou art at a league with death: false, for death is at no league with thee. Be not beguiled, as Alexanders flatterers would have gulled him with the title of Iupiters sonne: least being wounded, thou cry to thy flesh, as he did to his friends; this is the bloud of a man, not such as issueth from the gods. Love of wine prophesies to the drunkard; To morrow shall be as to day, and much more abundant, Esa. 56.12. False, for Ioel. 1.5. Awake and howle yee drunkards, for the wine is cut off from your mouth. Ambition flatters the haughty. Esa. 14.13. I will exalt my throne above the starres of God, I will arise out of the dust to sit with Princes: false, for thou shalt be brought downe to the grave, and to the sides of the pit: thou shalt fall from the throne to the dust. Infidelitie perswades, there shall be no reckoning, epicurisme dreames of no future life; false, for the Lord shall take them away as with a whirle-wind: so that a man shall say, Verily there is a God that judgeth the earth. Pleasure saies like Babylon, I am a Queene, I shall see no mourning: false, for the day of lamentation comes, worse than the wailing of Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddo. Pride whispers the beautifull; natures colours will last; if not, artificiall ones shall helpe: false, for art it selfe shall make a foole of nature, time make a foole of art, death make a foole of all. But presumption saies, God will have mercie upon all: false, for a small number is saved. But CHRISTS bloud payed for all mens sins: false, for some tread that sacred bloud under their feete. But if the worst come, sayes carnall hope, I will be sure to repent: false prophecie, for thousands are in hell that promised themselves this evasion: thou hast no patent of repentance.
Thus Satan is a false Prophet, in making sowre to seeme sweet, this is deceptio gustus. The world a false Prophet, in making shadowes appeare substances, this is deceptio visus. The flesh a false Prophet, in calling fraile things durable, this is deceptio auditus. In a word, every man is naturally a false Prophet to himselfe, lying to his owne soule. Vis tollere mendacem? tolle teipsum. Wouldest thou punish a lyer? punish thy selfe. Doe not kill thy life, but kill thy lust: mortifie thy false-hearted affections, ut tu vivas, that thy selfe mayest live. Moriatur iniquitas, ne moriatur iniquus: let the sinne be mortified, that the sinner may be saved. Thou needest no falser a prophet, than thou art to thy selfe. Psal. 140.1. Deliver me O Lord, from the evill man. Augustine studiously considers who this evill man should be: he knew that he had many enemies, perhaps Satan might be that evill man: at last he lights upon the evill man, and that was himselfe. Domine, libera a me; Lord deliver me from my selfe; deliver Augustine from Augustine. Let me aske my soule this question. Gal. 5.7. Who did hinder me, that I should not obey the truth? Who? mihi obsto, I have
 beene false to my selfe. Qui sibi nequam, cui bonus? Hence there is so little fidelitie of man to man, because there is so little faith of man to himselfe. He that is not true to his owne soule, will never be good to me. An oppressor gaping for a young Gentlemans estate lately morgag'd to him, sent him in pretence of love a loose fellow to accompany him, and encrease his luxurie: he smelt it, and wittily returned his answere; I thanke him for his care to set me forward: but tell him, I can spend my estate fast enough my selfe, I need no helpe. So what need Sathan send false Prophets to them, that are false Prophets to themselves? If wee desire to prevent all instruments of error from working upon us, let us be faithfull to our selves, in being faithfull to Christ.
The last sort of Prophets false, are these meant here, which are of two sortes. 1. They that came in the name of God, but were never sent from God, Ier. 23.21. I have not sent these Prophets, yet they ran: I have not spoken to them, yet they have prophesied. Therfore is it said, The word of the Lord came to Ieremie, came to all the true Prophets: it was of the Lords sending, not of their owne fetching. Rom. 11.34. Who hath knowen the mind of the Lord at any time? surely none but they to whom he taught ^t. I received of the Lord, saith Paul: God must infuse, before we effuse: the springs of our hearts must be filled from that ocean, before we can derive drink to the thirsty. Christ must give us this bread, and then we cause the people to sit downe, and we breake it unto them. Moses would not goe to Pharaoh, till he had learned his lesson of God. Esa. 40.6. The voice said, cry: the Prophet replyed, What shall I cry? he will not trust his owne invention, but take his Text at the mouth of the Lord: what was it, All flesh is grasse. They that preach the visions of their owne heads, have their woes shadowed out, and yet but shadowed, with wormewood and gall. Ier. 23.15. I will feed them with wormewood, and make them drinke the waters of gall. Their cup is so tempered by Ezekiel, the head and foote of their curse being full of unhappinesse, their welcome a Woe, their farewell an Anathema. Ezek. 13.3. Woe unto the foolish Prophets, that follow their owne spirit. ver. 9, They shall not be written in the writing of the house of Israel.
Secondly, they that come in Gods name, and are sent, but deliver a false message when they are come. They are called False, because they be falsifiers of Gods holy word; like the cunning lapidary, that sells a Byrall for a Diamond. No messenger of the Lord must goe beyond the bounds of his commission, by adding his owne devices: nor come to short of it, by keeping backe his Masters counsells. It is a fearefull protestation in the end of the Bible, summing and sealing up all the curses and woes that went before. Revel. 22.19. If any man shall take away from the words of this book, God shall take away his part out of the booke of life. If any man shall adde unto these things, God shall adde unto him the plagues, that are written in this booke. It hath terrour enough to amaze all those, that dare set their sacrilegious hands to these nice and religious mysteries. He that ventures to broach the dregges for wine, traditions of men for the constitutions of God; unwritten truthes, untrue writings, for those sacred sanctions, to father lies on the Father of truth; and teach the bastards of his owne braine to call the wisedome of heaven Father: Hee hath said it, when he said it not; this is the false Prophet. This was Saint Pauls earnest charge to Timothie. I give thee charge in the sight of God who quickneth all things, and before IESUS CHRIST, who before Pontius Pilate witnessed a good confession. 1 Tim. 6. Keepe that which is committed to thy trust: doubling his charge with intensive adjuration. Keepe it, for enemies watch to purloine it: Quod tibi creditum, non quod a te inventum: a thing intrusted to thee, not invented of thee: a matter not of thy wit, but of thy learning; whereof thou art a Scholler, not a Master. How keepe it; as the miser keepes in his corne? No, feed the poore with it, divide it in right order and matter: thou hast received gold, returne gold: be sure to impart the same, neither more nor lesse, but just weight: ut cum dicas nove, non dicas nova; though thou speake in a new methode, let it be old substance. Some have too many
 fingers on their hand, like the Gyant of Gath: some too few, like those whom Adonibezek maimed: some offend in excesse, some in defect. But keepe thou a steddy flight: so did a bad Prophet against his will; when his fingers itched for the gold,1 King. 22.14. Numb. 24.13. so did a good Prophet resolutely; What the Lord saith unto me, that will I speake. If men adde to that word, he that hath power to adde plagues while everlastingnesse can adde yeares, shall encrease them to a thousand fold. If they diminish, he that can diminish blessings so low, that not the least dram shall remaine, will retaile their doings into their owne bosomes.
Among the people:] this is the intrusion of these false prophets, even among the people of God. But durst these blacke impostors presse into so famous a light, and not feare discerning? Yes, examine, 1 King. 18.9. and 1 King. 22.16. they come by the hundreds. Corah had his confederates, who would with violence have snatched the Priests office out of their hands. Nadab and Abihu had their strange fires. Deut. 13.2. Eamus and sequamur deos alienos: was this charge in vaine? were there never any such? These unblest tares have ever sprung up in Gods field: and no man can doubt of such prophets on earth, that knowes there is a divell in hell. It hath beene his impudent malice, thus ever to oppose himselfe against Gods omnipotence. God had his true Prophets to instruct the people, Satan had his false prophets to seduce the people. As the Lord had Angelos majestatis suae, Angels of his Majestie: so had Satan Angelos crudelitatis suae, angels of his cruelty. God had his lawes written in two Tables, Satan had his counterfeit lawes in twelve tables. God had Ponifices suos, Satan had Flamines suos. He had his Temples, Sacrifices, Altars, Oracles, in a bravery so well as God. If Gods people sing, Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised: the divell hath his people that can cry loud enough two houres together, Great is Diana of the Ephesians. God had his Levites to keepe the fire perpetually alive on his Altar; Satan had his vestall virgins, Sacri ignis sempiternae custodes. Neither had he these false Instruments abroad only in the wild forrest of the world; but he brought them into Gods owne garden. He that durst presume to be proud in heaven, and to play the divell in Paradise; trust him not in his owne walke and Regiment. Well wee may doe our best to barre them out, and beseech him that keepes Israel to shut them out: but in they will come, into our doores, the HOLY GHOST keepe them out of our hearts for ever. I conclude.
It was thus with them, in it we may see, our owne case. Cernimus in prisco jam nostra pericula mundo. They say, it is halfe a protection to foreknow a danger: behold the Apostles fidelitie, and therein Gods mercie, we are forewarned. Precedents give light to succeeding times: we see further than the Fathers; because like dwarfes we get up on their shoulders; we see with eyes and our owne also. So Diogenes might bragge that he had more wit than his mother; because he had his mother-wit and his owne too. There is no treasure so much enricheth our mind as learning: no learning so appliable to our life as historie, no historie so directing as Example, no example so worthy our observing as that is written by Gods owne finger. It was an old saying, Optimum est aliena insania frui: to get knowledge by anothers expence and experience, is as it were to feed fat on anothers mans cost. Israel was Gods people so well as we; yea in respect of their faith, our Fathers: therefore if they were tempted by false prophets and sinned, if they sinned and were punished: let not us having the same danger, and erring in the same manner, thinke to escape the same punishment. 1 Cor. 10.11. All these things happened unto them for ensamples, and are written for our admonition. God hath set up these sinnes as crocodyles to terrifie us, and we entertaine them as Sirens to seduce us. Ver. 7. Be not yee idolaters, as were some of them. Paul like a good scribe, brings out of his treasure things both old and new: there is both an historiall narration, and a theologicall application. Now lege historiam, ne fias historia: read the historie of others, lest thou be made a historie to others. If the errors of former ages cannot teach us for the time present, our
 delinquishments wherin we perish shal teach the succeeding ages for the time to come. Cannot the example of Iudas teach thee to be no traitour? of Elymas, to be no Sorcerer? of Gehesi, to be no bribe-taker? of Achan, to abhor Sacrilege? of Nabal, to be no Churle? Then the wretched exorbitances coupled with Gods fearfull judgements, shall teach others hereafter, 2 King. 1.14. The third Captaine seeing the two former miscarrying in the businesse, could learne to humble himselfe; Let my life be precious in thy sight. They were miserable, that thou mightest be happy: if thou will not repent, others shall be made happy by thy being miserable. This a very Iezabel could oppose to Iehu, 2 King. 9.31. Had Zimri peace, which slew his master? As if she had concluded; Seeing thou wilt not take example by Zimri, thou shalt be example to others. The Lord left not Israel without true Prophets:2 Chro. 21.19. Yet he sent Prophets to them, to bring them againe to the Lord, but they would not give care: therefore he suffered false prophets, and to them they hearkned. Behold now their example exposed unto us: God sends us Preachers that declare the right way of salvation, delivering their message from his owne Word: for Scriptum, Praescriptum, the Scripture is their Theme. They say, Give obedience to Kings, Let every soule be subject to the higher powers: there be others that say, An hereticall King (and he must be so that an hereticall Pope so pronounces) can challenge no faithfull alleageance: are not these false prophets? The true Prophets say, Of all that thou hast thou shalt give me the tenth; this is a Dixit Dominus, the Lords reservation. Some say, thou art bound neither to give tenth nor twentieth, but what thou list; is not this a Dixit Sacrilegus? Is not this a false prophet? As the former absolve subjects of their duties to Kings: so these latter absolve men of their duties to the Church. The true Prophets say, Thou shalt not take usury of thy brother: some say, thou maist, if not above ten in the hundred: are not these false prophets? Observe how Israel sped:2 Chro. 21.22. In the time of this distresse did he trespasse yet more against the Lord: this is that King Ahaz. That, emphatically, that infamous, that impious King; branded with a note in the margent, a dash of the Holy Ghosts pen; like a sea-mark to point out a shelfe, that no vessell be spilt by such a wickednes. What did he? He sacrificed unto the gods of Damascus, which smote him.Ver. 23. Frantick idolatry, to doe service to Idols that smote him! Then he turned to the gods of Syria: he would take no warning: they kill him; They were the ruine of him, and of al Israel:Deut. 8.20. when you follow other gods, is it a wonder if God destroy you? Did he not for this cause cast out the nations before you? were not they your precedents? So saith Christ,Luke 17.32. Remember Lots wife. These things are recorded in holy Writ, not for imitation, but for prevention. When the comicall Poet was accused, because he brought a profane fellow upon the stage, and so gave bad example to young men: true, replies he, but I hanged him before he went off, and so gave good warning to young men. Having such a caution, if we fall into the same transgression, we shall be rewarded with a double affliction: Therfore whosoever slayeth Cain, vengeance shal be taken on him sevenfold.Gen. 4.15. Therefore; because Cains example of murder went before, so Lamech concludes to his wives, If Cain shall be avenged sevenfold, then truly Lamech seventy and seven-fold.Vers. 24. Now the Lord give us wary hearts, that being warned of sin, we may be armed against sinne. That dangers of others may make us circumspect, the troubles of others strengthen our patience, the sinfulnesse of others quicken our penitence; that the pride of others may make us humble, and the miseries of others occasion our eternall blessednesse.
Even as there shall be false teachers among you.] Doe not you thinke to speed better than Gods beloved Church of Israel: for this is that kinde of temptation wherewith he is wont to exercise his children. There is no other condition of the Church under Gospell, than was under the Law. When this triall comes, let not the noveltie of it molest you: what was common with them, let it not seem strange to you. But the Prophets did promise solide peace, cleare light, and the perfection of all good things at the comming of Christ; The wolfe shall dwell with the lambe,Esay 21.6. and the child shall play at the hole of the Aspe: They shal not hurt nor destroy in al my holy mountain. To him was reserved that honour; That though the Law was given by Moses,Iohn 2.17. Grace and Truth came by
 Iesus Christ. Therefore there is no disquietnesse expected in the state of the Christian Church. But there was no promise of such a peace, as should utterly acquit the faithfull from combates and conflicts. There is peace from the dominion of sinne, damnation of the Law, and terrour of conscience. But there is still a Devill, and a serpentine breed; who finding that the Gospel hath given a wound to the peace of hell; are the more busie to give a wound to the peace of the Gospell. Let us quiet our hearts in the remembrance of this, which the Spirit of God hath pronounced; there must be expected on earth no immunity from this intestine evill. The same triall abides the children, which set upon the fathers: Non sum melior patribus meis, I am not better than my Fathers: Erunt, there shall be, an indefinite word comprehending al future times: so that no age hath had a vacation from these turbulent falshoods. Hee speaks of them generally, and doth not paint them out in their particular kindes and colours: but Erunt, They will be: and Inter vos, among you, among us, God grant they be not of us. Now because these evill spirits threaten to haunt the house of Christ, and to run like familiars up and downe the earth, to doe the devils errands, that their purpose may be infatuated, let us unmask their faces. For I called this second generall point, the caution or premonition: and I desire to method my discourse into these three circumstances: 1. Who they be that assault us. 2. Whither they presse. 3. Their unavoidable necessity: the use of all which is in conclusion, how they may be discerned and eschewed.
False teachers.] What this falshood is, you have formerly perceived; observe now how it insinuates it selfe: this is alwayes in the semblance of Truth. For Errour is so foule a hag, that if it should come in the own shape, nuda facie, all men would loath it. If Iezabel had not painted her selfe,Matth. 7.15. shee had not gotten so many doting adulterers. Those Wolves come evermore in sheeps-cloathing: Sub pelle ovina Lupus rapax. As the fowler by the benefit of his stalking horse murders the fowls: who but for their familiar knowledge of the beast their friend, would mistrust the man their enemie. Mary, saith Christ,Matth. 24.5. shall come in my Name: Nomine meo, non suo; not in their owne name, for then their words would not be taken. The sects of former ages came in other names: as the name of Stoicks, of Peripateticks: and in the Church, the name of Pharisies, the name of Sadduces: but since Christ all come Nomine meo, in his Name. Sub specie veritatis veritatem vulnerant; They wound the Truth in her owne coat: as Iacob put on the garments of Esau his brother, to deceive Isaac his Father: so these in the apparell of their elder brother Christ, seek to beguile the Church their Mother. It is no wonder if there be false Teachers,Matth. 24.24. when there shall be false christs. Strong impudence of men, that they dare call themselves by his Name on earth, that sits on the right hand of Majesty in heaven. Now that this Prophecie of our Saviour was true, experience hath justified. Among the Persians, one Manes, with his twelve Apostles, called himselfe the Comforter of Israel. Bencosben was received of the very Rabbi's for thirty yeares together, as their Messias. Stella in Luc. reports that in Setuvall, in the kingdome of Portugal, in our time, arose one that called himselfe the Messias. Your selves have heard of David George, and of ungracious Hacquet, with his two prophets of mercy and justice, who impiously usurped that incommunicable name of the Messias
But what say you to our Pope-holy catholikes; dare not they obtrude a thing that shall say, Ego sum Christus, I am Christ? Yes, if it could speak; but because it cannot, they will speak for it. Every Easter-day early in the morning the Priest fetcheth his woodden Crucifix out of the Sepulcher; and after walking about the Churchyard in solemne procession, goes to the Church-doore, where he knocketh, and saith; Open O ye gates,Psal 24. and be ye set open ye everlasting doores, that the King of glory may come in. The Sexton knows his qu, attends within, and replies; Who is the King of glory? The Priest holding up his Crucifix, answers; This is the King of glory: the Lord strong almighty in battel;Matth. 24.23. this is the Lord of glory. Is not this just according to our Saviours prediction; Some shal say, Loe, here is Christ? Alas, that is not a glorious King, but an inglorious Idoll, unable to wipe the dust from it own face. Among them, who can make
 the well-favouredst god, is the best Catholike. The Baker and the Painter contended who should make the best christ: Hic fuco doctior, ille foco. Paint. I can make a faire god with my colours. Bak. No, thou makest but the shadow; it is I that make the substance. Paint. Thy god is torne with mens teeth. Bak. And thine is gnawed with wormes. Paint. My god lasteth many yeares, whereas one houre swallowes an hundred of thine. Bak. Thou canst scarce make one god in a moneth: I can make a thousand in halfe an houre. Hereupon the Masse-priest came in as moderatour, fretting; I am sory sirs, you are no wiser: Who can make god? none but the Sacrificer. But we say of such gods, as Clemens Alexandr. Ego didici terram calcare, non adorare; I have learned to tread upon the earth, not to worship it.
Thus doth false teachers come in the counterfeit of truth. Indeed the Iews were apt to embrace any that came Nomine proprio; in their owne name, Ioh. 5.43. If one come in his owne name, him will ye receive. It is not so now: the world is wiser, therefore the Devil must double his subtilty. And if he would bring men to the kingdome of hell, he must make them beleeve that he is altogether for the kingdome of heaven. 2 Sam. 16.18. If Hushai had not said, I am for Absalom, and whom Israel chuseth, his will I be: He had not disappointed the counsell of Achitophel, which was then like the oracle of God; nor re-established David in his kingdome. So if these false doctors should not say, we are for Christ; they could not with-stand the true Ministers that deliver the words of God, nor in throne Antichrist in the Seat of Christ. Thus in our time, the Romish heretikes cry, The Church, The Church: and the Schismatikes in their invective Pamphlets usually make bold with the Prophets words; For Sions sake I will not hold my peace. But the one seeke to bring upon Gods Israel a tyrannie; the other an Anarchie; both meet in one Tertio, corruption of doctrine, and destruction of conscience. Pro Ecclesia clamitant, and contra Ecclesiam dimicant, Cyprian. They both cry for the Church, yet fight against the Church. Omnes amici, omnes inimici, Bern. Their pretences are friendly, their intentions malicious. You see how they come, and but for so comming, their powder would not take: if the cup of their poison was not rubbed with honey, it would not down. There be two defects which make a man either an unfit Teacher, or a false Teacher. When either they have not learned their lesson before they come, and so lacke ability: or doe not deliver it faithfully when they are come, and so lacke honesty.
1 They that want aptitude and requisite graces: God touched Esayes tongue with a live-coale from his Altar: gave Ezekiel a roll to eat: shut up that sacred fire in Ieremies bones: teacheth the lips to preserve knowledge: to minister a word in due season to him that is weary, Esay 50.4. So ordering the words, that they shall be like Apples of gold with pictures of silver, Prov. 25.11. There is no ability to preach without God, Mic. 3.7. They shall cover their lips, for there is no answer of God. We looke now for no enthusiasmes, nor venture our Sermons upon extemporall rhapsodies; with a Dabitur in hora; no more but turne the cocke, and let it run. It may run indeed, but still we complaine as they did of the waters of Iericho: The water is nought, and the ground still barren. It may run, and run apace, because like Ahimaaz,2 King. 2. it runs by the way of the plaine. For this cause are Schooles and Vniversities erected, to be Ecclesiae Plantaria, the nurseries of learning. Being like that Persian tree, which at the same time doth bud, and blossome, and beare fruit. Some are in the bud of hope, others in the flower of knowledge, others ripe for practise. Moses was learned in all the wisdome of the Aegyptians, Act. 7.22. Paul was brought up at the feet of a great Doctour, Act. 22.3. Timothie knew the Scriptures of a childe, 2 Tim. 3.15.. Augustine was beautified with varietie of gifts; Hierome omnium trium linguarum peritus; Excellent at the three most famous Languages. The Apostles themselves went not immediately out of the Ship-boat into the Pulpit: they were first Christs Schollers, before they became the worlds Teachers, Matth. 11.19. Wisdome is justified of her children. If they come without this qualifying, they are the worlds owne changelings, wrongfully laid at Wisdomes doores. They enter in at a Non licet
 gate; and they that admit them, suffer wise-mens rights to be entailed to fooles While barbarous ignorants steale into the Church, the same way that Totilas entred Rome; Porta asinaria. As Pope Adrian inscribed his Colledge; Trajectum plantavit, Lovanium rigavit, Caesar autem incrementum dedit; The Bishop of Trajectum planted, of Lovaine watered; but Caesar gave the increase: no more. Another therefore in scorne subscribed; Hic Deus nihil fecit; here God did nothing. So Simony planted, Ambition watered, and Covetousnesse gives the encrease: but let them take heed lest they finde this under-written; Hic Deus nihil fecit; Here the Lord had no hand, here he will give no blessing.
2 They that have gotten knowledge, but want honestie; and these are the most dangerous seducers, 2 Cor. 11.13. Such are false Apostles, deceitfull workers, transforming themselves into the Apostles of CHRIST. When Achitophels head stands upon Simon Magus his shoulders, there is a world of mischiefe towards. A will bent to doe harme, and a wit able to prosecute it; like Cannon-shot makes a lane where it goes. Such a Prophet was Balaam, he could not make Israel cursed by his Prophecie, therefore he tries to effect it by his policie. He sends a troope of Moabitish whores among them: that so they might be tempted to offend GOD, and GOD might cease to defend them. Hee had confessed before, Numb. 23.23. That there could be no Inchantment nor witchcraft against Israel. No devils, but those shee-devils could doe it. A whore is that damnable witch that often brings a Saint in danger of a curse. In this ranke is that ranke rabble of Iesuites: they have fired their braines at Machiavels forge, and cast their hearts in the mould of Antichrist; and now they are fitted to steale away soules from IESUS. These are Satans Emissaries, the Popes Seminaries, the Lands Incendiaries, the worlds Voluptuaries, the bane of a kingdome that habours them. The cruellest murderers. He that lets out the bloud, the body kills: But he that breaks hearts-peace, the deare soule spills. O that these Foxes were un-earth'd from their theevish boroughs, and our Land preserved from that kinde of false Teachers! Their very mercies are cruell; we know their bloudy purposes both to soules and bodies. The Lord or his mercy cast them for ever farre from us; and let all people, that have, or desire to have, in themselves and their Posterity, the heads of good subjects, and the hearts of good Christians, say Amen.
Among you.] This is the second point, the Place whither these false Teachers come; unto you, to the Church. So Mat. 7.15. Beware of false Prophets which come to you. Not to the Turks, or Gentiles, or other heretikes only; but to you, that have the Gospell. They seeme to come unto you, but indeed they come against you: they promise your good, but they performe your hurt. Here may be demanded, why GOD doth suffer such in the Church? For Paul saith, 1 Cor. 11.19. Oportet haereses esse; There must be heresies among you. Now there is an Oportet of necessitie, and of duty: in respect of the latter, Oportet haereses non esse; saith Augustine; There must not be heresies. This is an oportet of consequence: the Apostle concludes it necessarily, upon the presupposition of Satans malice and mans wickednesse. Neither is this prediction any cause of it: a man sees some loose companions set close to drinking: hereupon he sayes, These men will be drunke: the necessity is not because he said so, but because they will doe so. Another sees men quarrelling, and multiplying incensive termes, he sayes, These men will fight; he doth not cause their combate: they would have done it, though he had never said it. So we perceive the aire cloudy, the weather muddie; we say, it must needs raine: it doth; yet never the sooner because we spake it. So Peters Erunt, and Pauls Oportet, doe not cause this false teaching, but premonish it.
First, God suffers these for the triall of our faith, 1 Cor. 11.19. There must be heresies, that the approved among you may be made manifest. Deut. 13.3. When a Prophet or Dreamer shall say to us, Come let us goe and serve other gods; hearken not to him; for now the Lord proveth you. Many passe for gold, whom this touchstone often proves counterfeit. A man is what he is, when hee is tried: Accedit, te^^^,
 quasi interrogatio; A temptation is like a question; that examines what is in a man. Iosephs Chastitie never shone out so fairely, as when hee fled from the armes of his tempting mistresse. He that heares the Syrens sing, and with an holy (...) comes off fairely, God seales him up with a Probatus est. Thus was Balaam lost, when Balak told him; Am not I able indeed to promote thee to honour? Numb. 22.37. But not so Moses who chose rather affliction with the people of God, than the pleasures of sinne for a season, Hebr. 11.25. Yet he well enough knew the delights of the Court, being the place where he had his education.
Secondly, God suffers them, that the true Pastors might more painfully and patiently exercise their knowledge. If Arrius and Sabellius had not vexed the Church, the deepe mysteries of the Trinitie had not beene so accurately cleared by the Catholike Doctors. Heresie makes men sharpen their wits, the better to confute it: as Worme-wood is bitter to the taste, but good to cleare the eyes. Paul foretelling this danger, gave an earnest charge, Act. 20.28. Take heed to your selves and to all the flocke, over which the Holy Ghost hath made you overseers. Why? For after my departing grievous Wolves shall enter in among you, vers. 29. For this cause we root up the weeds of Rome in our Sermons as we goe, because we feare that their pestilent seeds-men have cast them in. As Absalom said to Thamar; Hath Ammon met with thee? 2 Sam. 23.20. So hath the false Teacher met with thee? beware a ravished soule.
Thirdly, God permits them for mens ingratitude: because Ahab will not beleeve Micheah; therefore a lying spirit shall deceive his Prophets, to deceive him, Mic. 3.10. They shall build up Sion with bloud. Because the true Prophets might not be suffered to build up Sion with good, therefore the false ones shall build it up with bloud, Mic. 2.6. They had forbidden the sober Prophets to Prophecie; therefore they shall have drunken prophets, that shall prophecie of wine and strong drinke, and walke in the spirit of falshood, vers. 11. This is a sure, but a sore judgement, 2 Thess. 2.10. Because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved: For this cause God shall send them strong delusion, to beleeve a lye. Will they not adhere to the God of Truth? they shall be turned over to the father of lyes. Tremble at this judgement, lest God deliver you up to erroneous teachers, who have despised his true Ministers.
Lastly, these false teachers intrude themselves; as sometimes a gamester being flesh'd with his lucke: and they meet with three encouragements: 1. Auditorum frequentia and applausus; the numbers and applaudings of their auditors, Ierem. 5.31. The prophets prophecie falsly, and my people love to have it so. They tell you lyes, and you thanke them for it, Psal. 73.9. They set their mouth against the heavens, therefore the people turne in thither. And commonly, Major numerus, pejor populus; the more crowd, the worse men. 2. Favor and honor; the honour and respect that is done them. Baal had 450. prophets, while God had but one apparant: they were fed at the Queenes table, while Elias was glad to be served by the Ravens. These are in favour with Ahab, while he sayes of good Micheah, I hate him, 2 Chron. 18.7. True Prophets are not for evill Princes Courts; they have chaplaines in ordinary to forbid them, Amos 7.13. Prophecie not at Bethel, for that is the Kings Court, said Amaziah, the Priest of Bethel. 3. Munera and ampla commoda; Large gifts and riches; Every one for his gaine from his quarter, Esay 56.11. Like souldiers in a Campe, or like cheaters in the Citie, they know their quarters. Rather than faile, they will be such as are spoken of, Mic. 3.5. Mouth prophets, trencher-chaplaines, held in by the teeth: and out they will not goe, so long as their teeth can hold them in.
False teachers shall be among you.] The last point is their unavoidable necessity; they will presse in, and we cannot easily stave them off. Therefore let me reflect this point upon our selves, by way of use. Seeing we know there shall be such, be it our principall care to prevent them. To fore-know evill, and to prevent it, Sapientia est, is wisdom: not to foreknow it, when God hath foretold it, stultitia est, is foolishnes: to foreknow it, and not to prevent it, socordia est, is slothfulnes: to foreknow it and cannot prevent
 it, Desperatio est, is desperatenesse. Here is no such extremity; for God that doth Praedicere prognostica, fore-tell the signes; doth also Praescribere remedia, prescribe the remedies. The particular notes I referre a little further: onely now in summe; it is Iesus Christ that must enlighten our hearts, to decline these false teachers. All wisdome commeth from him, that is called the wisdome of the Father. In him is the fountaine of all spirituall knowledge, as all the senses are in the head, Zach. 4.12. There were two Olive branches, which thorow two golden pipes did emptie the golden oyle out of themselves. The oyle that was in the gold, came from the two golden pipes: that which passed thorow the two golden pipes, came from the two Olive-trees: these two Olive branches were the two anointed ones; and they stood before the Lord of the whole earth. What knowledge soever, thorow what Instruments soever, we receive, it proceeds originally from Christ: In whom are hid all the treasures of wisdome and knowledge. As at the creation, the light which lay diffused abroad thorowout the rude masse of the world, was afterwards aggregated into the body of the Sunne; that from thence it might be communicated to the creatures. So that Wisdome which spake in the Prophets and other holy men of God, may seeme to concenter all in Christ. Now the meanes whereby Christ teacheth us, is the Scripture, Which is able to make us wise unto salvation, 2 Tim. 3.15. Here is the Sunne and the beame, the Spring and the streame, Christ and his Gospell. The one the matter and end, the other the manner and meanes, of all saving revelation. On then, pray earnestly for the Spirit of Christ: but what successe, if we doe? Yes, wee have it alreadie promised, Luke 11.13. Your heavenly Father will give the holy Spirit to them that aske him. Christs Spirit will more surely teach you to confute Christs enemies; that learning and gold could teach Tertullus to plead for his owne friends.
This shall instruct us to destroy and defie Impostors: and though heresie hath crept in like a Serpent thorow secret holes, and by subtill insinuations, scarce leaving a print behind it: yet if we finde not the entrance by some slime or tract; wheresoever we doe finde it, we shall abhorre it. Our knowledge so abounds, that scarce ever had nation more meanes to avoid false Apostles. That as Paul said, 1 Cor. 9.2. If I be not an Apostle to others, yet doubtlesse I am to you. So Christ may say to us; If I be not knowledge unto others, yet doubtlesse I am so unto you, Iosh. 15.15 Mention is made of Kiriath-sepher, which signifies a Citie of bookes: sure this our Countrey may be called Kiriath-sepher: for 1 Cor. 2.6. We speake wisdome among them that are perfect. If not perfect in all degrees of knowledge, like the Gospels Champions: yet perfect in all parts of knowledge, like the Gospels children. Our eyes be good, we know: our hands be good, we can: God grant our hearts be good, that we will, defend Christ his cause. But as it is reported of a Roman Senator, a man somewhat over-matched by his wife; after he had discharged Catiline his house, and forbidden her to entertaine him, which she obeyed not; he said of her, Opulentia valet, ingenium valet, lingua valet, animositas valet; tantum voluntas aegrotat; Her wit is in health, her purse is in health, her tongue is in health, her courage is in health; only her wil is sick. And that is one reason why women are not suffered to make their Will when they die, because they had their will so much while they lived. So God hath charged our soules, his Spouse; not to admit his enemies, spirituall adulterers, false teachers; but to keepe them out of his House, the Church. Wee have hands able to doe it, stomackes able to doe it, wits able to doe it, wealth and means to doe it: only our hearts are sicke, we want wils to doe it. What fooles are we, when God hath shut our foe out at the gate, to let him in againe at the Posterne? He that entertaines a Seminary of heresie into his house, whereas God by his command, and the municipall Lawes of the Prince, hath excluded him: will speed at last, as he that betrayed a Citie to a Tyrant; which when he had conquered, hee first hang'd up him that helped him to it. They that let in the Romish Inchanters, contrary to their expresse bond of allegiance, meet with the first bane themselves; the poison working to the very rupture of their heart-strings, and without extraordinary mercy, to the perdition of their
 soules. God tells them, such shall come; and they rejoyce that they are come: now the Spirit of grace open our eyes, and fortifie our hearts, that neither principalities nor powers, neither height nor depth, neither false Prophet, nor false Apostle, nor false Angell; may ever separate us from the love of God, nor from the truth of God, that is in Christ Iesus.
And let not this tryall discourage us, nor discomfort us. Revel. 20. The divell is let loose for a season. For a season, to try the patience of the Church: and but for a season, to fortifie the courage of the Church. Revel. 2.10. The divell shall cast some of you into prison, that yee may be tryed, and yee shall have tribulation tenne dayes. Into prison, why not unto death? no thankes to Satan; he would faine kill them. Some of you, why not all? no thankes to Satan; he would destroy all. And for tenne dayes, why not longer? no thankes to Satan, he would inthrall them for ever. There are three limitations to his power and malice: for time, but tenne dayes, not tenne moneths: for number, Some, not all: for extremity, into prison, not to death: they shall feele tribulation, not destruction: that they might be tried, not overwhelmed. These false teachers may prevaile for a time; but we shall say truely by inversion, what the Aramites spake by supposition, 1 King. 20.23. Vpon the hills they are stronger than wee, but let us fight against them in the plaine, and surely we shall be stronger than they. On the contrary, they are to hard for us in the plaines, but we shall be too hard for them on the hills. they prevaile against us in this valley of teares, we shall triumph over them in the mountaine of blessednesse. Let falsitie vomite her poyson, we shall find saving health in the truth of Christ.
Who privily shall bring in damnable heresies, etc. We come now to the description of these pernicious lyers; concerning whom we find a threefold mischiefe. One that issues from them, another that abides in them, a third that is inflicted on them. Here first wee are to consider their seminary mischiefe, offensive and noxious to others. They shall privily bring in damnable heresies. Here observe two circumstances, the Matter and the Manner, The matter, what they bring in; damnable heresies, the manner, how they bring them in, Privily. In the matter conceive foure things. The Notion of the word, Heresie: the number of them, which is plurall, indefinite, multitudinous, many heresies: the necessitie of their being, they shall be brought in: lastly, the effect and malignancie of them, they are damnable.
Heresie was at first taken in a good sense: it signifies Election, and was referred both to good and bad Sects. It seemes to be taken from the Schooles of Philosophie, wherein every one chose a faction to which he sided. Among the latines, it was called Secta, a secando: because that part did single out it selfe, and was ab aliis resecta and separata, cut off and separate from the rest. Tertullian used the word for true Religion, and a confession of the Christian verity. Lib. de Fuga. And Ciprian. Eph. 23. Celerinus confessor, timore nostrae Sectae verecundus, etc. Saint Paul is not afraid to use it, Act. 24.14. After the way which they call Heresie, so worship I the God of my fathers: yet hee does not altogether justifie it, because Tertullus had put a scandall upon it. Verse 5. a ringleader of the sect of the Nazarens, Act. 26.5. After the most straitest sect of our religion, I lived a Pharisie. In like manner, Magi at the first were but sages: but time adulterated the word, and made it magicke. So that Heresie is now taken for that, which doth diametrally oppose the truth, and sets up an opinion against it.
There is difference betwixt Error, Schisme, and Heresie. Error is when one holds a wrong opinion alone: schisme, when many consent in their opinion: heresie runs further, and contends to roote out the truth. Error offends, but separates not: Schisme offends and separates: Heresie offends, separates, and rageth; making the partie good vi and armis; if not with arguments of reason, yet with arguments of steele and iron. Error is weake, Schisme strong, Heresie obstinate. Error goes out, and often comes in againe; Schisme comes not in, but makes a new Church:
 Heresie makes not a new Church, but no Church. Error untiles the house, Schisme pulls downe the walls, but Heresie overturnes the foundation. Error is as a child, Schisme a wild stripling, Heresie an old dotard. Error will heare reason, Schisme will wrangle against it, Heresie will defie it. Error is a member blistered, Schisme a member festered, Heresie a member cut off. He that returnes quickly from error, is not a Schismaticke: he that returnes from Schisme, is not an Hereticke. Error is reproved and pitied, Schisme is reproved and punished, Heresie is reproved and excommunicated. Schisme is in the same faith, Heresie makes another faith. Though they may be thus distinguished, yet without Gods preventing grace, one will run into another: error will prove a Schisme, and schismaticall follies will prove stigmaticall furies. When Augustine said, Errare possum, haereticum esse non possum; I may erre, I cannot be an Hereticke: it proceeded from the confident perswasion of Gods mercie, and the resolution of his owne heart, to adhere constantly to the truth. The Hereticke exceeds the Schismaticke: the one hates only peace, the other hates truth. Psal. 120.6. My soule hath long dwelt with him the hateth peace. But, Psal. 139.21 Doe not I hate them, O Lord, that hate thee? He may dwell with them that hate peace: he will not endure them that hate the truth. All faults are not of the same degree; there is a moate and a beame, there is stubble and lead. 1 Tim. 6.3. If any man teach otherwise, and consent not to the words of Christ, If hee consent not, that is Schismaticall: if hee Teach otherwise, that is Hereticall. Matth. 5.19. Whosoever shall breake one of the least Commandements, and teach men so, etc. If he breake the Law, that is a personall sinne: but if he teach so, that is a pestilent sinne. To teach, pulchrum est, is a commendable: Docere diversum, to teach that which is incongruent, is dangerous: Docere adversum, to teach that which directly contradicts the truth; haereticum est, is hereticall. Si quis aliud senserit, if a man be opinioned against the truth, this is not answerable: Si quis docuerit, if a man teach such a doctrine, this is abominable. Let them Teach, but not Otherwise: for otherwise they had better hold their peace. We may say of doctrines, as Ieremie said of his Figges, Ier. 24.3. Than the good and true, nothing can be spoken better: than the bad and false, nothing is more perilously worse. None sing more sweetly than the true musicians of Israel. None howle more tetrically than the dogs of Baal, of Babel, of Belial; that often the divell himselfe cannot roare out a more detestable cry, above ground, whatsoever he doth in hell. As the doctrine of murdering Princes, etc. Satan is then the most dangerous tempter, when he comes as he came to CHRIST, with a Scriptum est, It is written: and Heretickes, while with this sound they tickle the peoples eares; often for want of true discerning sucke the bloud of their soules. Lord, give not over our soules a prey to their teeth; but rescue them from destructions, our darlings from the Lions, Psal. 35.17.
Heresies, in the plurall, to point at a multitude. The troubles of the Church seldome come single: but either they unite their forces, as the five Amorite kings combined against Gibeon,-Iosh. 10.5. Or separately and a part, they vexe her on every side; as Salomon was assaulted with Hadad the Edomite, Rezon the Syrian, and Ieroboam the Ephrathite; finding that true whereof his Father complained, Men enemies compasse me in on every side, 1 King. 11. We read, 1 Sam. 13.17. That out of the campe of the Philistines, came three regiments, all with a purpose to destroy, yet all taking severall wayes: one company of spoilers to Ophrah, another to Bethern, and the third to Zeboim. This is too true a pourtraiture of the Churches condition: as Israel then was temporally wasted, so the Church is now spiritually assaulted; and will be so used, untill hell hath swallowed up all her enemies. For these Egyptians will not cease pursuing Israel, till they all be drowned in the deepe. There is a treble band of them, all bent to murder severall wayes. The licentious by his scandalous life, the persecuter by his drawen sword, the Hereticke by his pestilent doctrine And every one of these blowes his trumpet to sedition, with Shiba the sonne of Bichri; Every man to his tents, O Israel, 2 Samuel Verse 20.
 Our case is not unlike theirs: there was three garrisons of enemies, all armed with all manner of weapons for offense: yet against all these, the Israelites had but two swordes for defense: yet it pleased God that those two were enow. One is the sword of the Spirit, that is Doctrine; the other the sword of the Church, that is Discipline. That as Peter said, Ecce duo gladii; Behold two swords. But two swords for so many, and against so many? a word of extreme want. Satis est, saith CHRIST; It is enough, those two shall suffice; a word of supreme mercie. Mercie to them, comfort to us; that our God can defend us with small meaens, with no meanes. The sword of the Spirit shall overcome Satans fiery darts; though the sword of the Church prevaile not against their bloudy fauchions. 2 Tim. 3.1. In the last dayes shall bee erilous times; men shall be lovers of themselves, covetous, etc. O what a rabble is there! you may say they are Legion; as the divell called his name. Luk 8.30. Legion, they are so many. Or here comes a company, as Leah said at the birth of Gad; A troope commeth, Gen. 30.11. Be they never so many, we waigh not their numbers, so long as CHRIST is with us. It is his good spirit that can stanch the wounds, and dry up the festerd bloud wherewith our Syrophenician woman, the Church hath beene so long vexed. Indeed we must spend the Inke of our pens upon these creeping ring-wormes: but be God only implored to cure the Lazar of his inveterate sore. They have not so many swords, as he hath shields: there cannot be so much venome in the seed of the Serpent, as there is Antidotes in the seed of the woman; saving health in Iesus Christ.
They shall bring in;] here is the necessitie, as the Apostle told us before of these Impostors; Erunt they shall be. Shall, though provision spend all her wit, and prevention all her strength; yet no avoiding it. Saint Iohn tells us, that many spirits are gone abroad into the world, that would be tried before they be trusted. 2 Tim. 3.6. They creepe into houses, and lead captive silly women laden with sinnes, and led away with diverse lusts, Iud. ver. 16. You have the picture of them drawen to the life. Doe you thinke it impossible for the truth to forsake some private brests, yea even whole regions? This were a Popish conceit; so they give out of their infallible Rome; that she hath clipt the winges of Truth, as old Rome did once the wings of victorie, that it might not flee away. This were to imagine the Holy Ghost bound to every Pulpit, as they bind him to their Chaire. No, there shall be some perverters: some? yea too many. There be some yellow seeds that abound; we might well spare them, they marre the field. We daily pray for labourers in the Lords great harvest: but for such as labour for the Lord, not against the Lord. For such as row us in the vessell of the Church toward heaven; not such as hurry us in a man of warre to bondage. For then wee should complaine of multitudes; Ier. 12. Verse 10. Many pastors have destroyed the vineyard. They were pastors, and pastores multi, sed stulti; many pastors, but evill ones: what doe they? Diripuerunt vineam meam, they destroy my vineyard. Wee say not then, the harvest is great, and the labourers are too few: but the harvest is great, and these labourrers are too many. Would they all labour for CHRIST; but when will that be? Oh it were speciall newes to be told in Gath, and would sound terribly in the streets of Askelon; it would goe cold to the heart of the divell, and shake the gates of hell: that the Church had escaped the ingenious sollicitations of these fiends, who not only trouble the waters of her peace, but poison her very springs of life. They shall bring them in, the Lord of his mercie cast them out.
Damnable heresies.] This is the last circumstance, the malignitie of them; (...); they are corruptive, destructive, damnable heresies: doctrines of Perdition. 1. Because they are reprobated of God; so Iudas was called the Sonne of Perdition, because God for his sinne had rejected him. A wicked person is called the Sonne of Belial, because Belial had bred him up. The Sonne of strife, because contention had begotten him, and he begotten contention. So here the Heresies of damnation; because damnation did bring forth them, and they bring forth damnation.
 2. Because they are exitiall and pestilent to the kingdomes and nations where they are admitted. How great a plague did Arrianisme bring to the East, Pelagianisme to the west, now Papisme to all the world. 3. Because they bring destruction to all their followers and defenders: sometimes temporall. Deut. 18.20. That Prophet shall die. Sometimes spirituall; the Lord turning their rivers into bloud, that no man can drinke of their waters to comfort: the increase of their labours being given to the locust, and all their vines destroyed with haile. Psal. 78.64. Their Priests falling by the sword: slaine (if not with the sword of others) with their owne malice: and their widdowes making no lamentation: no widdowes, or but one at the most, to make lamentation. For who can pitie them that hate the truth? the wickednesse of their cause drownes all compassion of their case. The last of all is the worst of all; their eternall perishing; for those transformed Ministers shall receive an end according to their workes, 2 Cor. 11.15. For how should the Crosse of CHRIST bee a friend to them, that are enemies to his Crosse? Phil. 3. Verse 19. Their end is destructino, that's much: but their destruction is without end that's more. There is nothing but damnation in their wayes. Mic. 3. Verse 10. They build up Sion with bloud. Hos. 6 9. As troopes of robbers waite for a man: so the company of Priests murther in the way by consent. A robber waites for his prey, but being single he may either be avoided or conquered: but here are many robbers. Yet their divided forces may be subdued; Nay, but they joyne themselves in Troopes. Theeves may doe thus, that professe not God; Nay, but even apostated Priests. It is much that they fall to robbery, but I hope, no further: Yes, even to murther. The Priest and Levite are condemned that did not succour the wounded man; what shall become of them that give wounds, yea murtherous ones? It may be there is some one such reprobate; Yea, they doe it by consent: or were it but one act; nay agendo agunt: they commit it, it is their practise. Let us all then pray with our Church from sedition and privy conspiracie, from all false doctrine and Heresie. Good Lord deliver us! Amen.
We see what kind of Heresies shall be; consider we then (pardon it, if it be a digression) what may be the causes that produce such inevitable effects. The efficient cause is double; Prima and remotior is the just will of God; who hereby proveth his friends, as some of the Cananites were left to teach the Israelites warre, Iudg. 3. and punishtth his enemies. Secunda and propinquior; the naturall rebellion, ambition, and cecitie that is in men. The end is double; that the good might be made good by their tryall. 1 Cor. 11.19. that the evill might be left more evill. 2 Thes 2.12. That they all might bee damned which would not beleeve the trueth. The forme is Ipse error, error it selfe. The matter, articulus ille in quo peccatur, the very point of their prevarication. The maine fountaine whence they are all derived, is the divell, that Father of lies, and depraver of all goodnesse. But seeing he cannot well effect this immediately by himselfe, how may he facilitate his plot? by corrupting certaine Instruments. But what seeds of hell can he plant in their hearts, that should grow up to such pernicious fruites? For the divell can worke no man to doe evill to another, unlesse he hath first wrought him to admit evill in himselfe. No reprobate will serve Satan turne for nothing: but there must be some end propounded to his lust, for the satisfaction whereof he precipitates himselfe to such a hellish course. What may those infernall fires bee, wherewith hee sets them on burning, and with which they madly runne like a rotten inflamed vessell among the whole Navy? Let us a little examine the motives to this pestilent sedition.
First pride, for that loves at all hands to be formost. Heresies are set on foote by men that thought well of themselves; and perhaps had some cause so to doe, if they could have done it within any good compasse. Never meane parts set Schismes abroach against CHRIST: the stronger wit, the stronger Hereticke. Excellent gifts bind to excellent modestie; in humilitate Sapientia; wisedome is seene in humblenesse. They that blow abroad their owne praises, justly incurre the suspition
 of windinesse. Alienum laudet te, non os tuum; thy praise would sound better in thy neighbours mouth. Vertue never was a gadding Dinah, that runs abroad to be seene of the daughters of the land. But rather an Elizabeth, that hid her selfe sixe moneths together: loe, then was she fruitfull, and bred child, and that so famous a one as Iohn the Baptist. Stand further from me, I am purer than thou, this is vox superbientis, the voice of a proud sinner: Depart from me Lord, for I am a sinfull man; this is vox paenitentis, the voice of a penitent Saint. The wise man never wrote upon his doores, here dwells wisedome: nor did goodnesse ever dwell at the signe of ostentation. It is for hypocrisie to declare the owne worth, otherwise it would never be under stood for Sincerity. As the foolish Painter having pictured a Lion, so rudely and without such due shape that no passenger could know it: he was faine to helpe his apt with underwriting, This is a Lion. So it is for pride, when she cannot make her charitie understood, to proclaime it her selfe, This is charitie. Sincere ministers Nec pugnas narrant, nec cicatrices suas, never publish their owne sufferings and vertues: it is enough for them if they be found one day among those, In quorum ore non est inventus dolus, In whose mouth was found no guile, Revel. 14.5. That is, according to Saint Augustines glosse; who confessed meekely that they were sinners, and sought no other glory then Humility. Whereas Pride, saith Cyprian, is ever looking in her glasse: Speculum consulitur: Cur? nisi quia timet ne sit ipsa: at least the glasse must say she is faire: yet is, this Iezabels paint no better than the plaister of a leprous countenance, Rom. 1.22. Thus professing themselves to be wise, they became fooles! A just judgement to light on them, that thought it nothing worth to be counted wise, unlesse the whole world were fooles besides. None more thrust themselves forward into the battell, than these dwarfes and demilances; meere atomi in true being, yet bigge as Gyants in their owne opinion. But indeed, if onely Artists might censure arts, and the common people were admitted no Iudges in the Court of Faculties; never was dumbenesse more incident to him that is borne deafe, than ignorance is to heresie. 1 Tim. 6.4. Hee is proud, or a Foole; (...): the word signifying, both, as if it would teach us, that every proud man is a foole: and (...), knoweth nothing. Alexander would be drawen in colours by none but Apelles, and graven by none but Lysippus, both excellent in their qualities. God will have none meddle with his Scriptures, but holy and illuminate minds; and they are most humble and circumspect. The most blind are the most proud, and soonest venture on the deepest mysteries. Of the two bad states, to be a Phatisie is worse than to be a Publican: to be proud of good endowments is worse than to have neither pride nor good endowments. To be proud then, according to Saint Pauls methode in ranking their attributes, is the first brand of the Sectary: that same radicall cause of every sinne, especially of Schisme. This is the common proceeding: first the divell brings in Pride, then pride brings in singularity, and singularity brings in heresie.
The next cause is envie and malice: if this furie be in the heart, the divell may save a labour of driving. As they talke of a coach that moves without horses, being set forward by some vices and devices within, certaine wheeles and waights: so malice hurries away it selfe, and tarries not for the Auriga, or driver. All Heretickes are malicious, and carried with a rancorous hate to pervert others. As Ar^hytas tooke no pleasure in viewing heaven, with all the celestiall beauties, unlesse he may have one to tell it to againe: so the Sectary takes no pleasure in his error, unlesse he can worke others to the same faction, Matth. 23.15. The Pharisies would ^ompasse sea and land to make one Proselyte: it was but a tricke of their Father, the ^ivell compasseth the whole earth to spill a soule. Like men sicke of the plague, they have an itching desire to infect others. Hoc fonte derivata clades, that does in patriam ^epulumque fluere: this is the head from whence springs all mischiefe. If Ahab must be deceived, there is no fitter meanes to deceive him by, than Spiritus menda^i, a lying spirit. Generally all the corruptions of Israel are fatherd upon the
 tongues of false prophets: their responsive oracles being not Dictum Domini, sed fictum cordis sui, not Gods word, but their owne conceit. This God acknowledged, that their sowre grape had set the peoples teeth an edge: and they might excuse themselves with Eve; The Serpent gave it them, and they gave it the people. But it was an old saying, Execrabilis ille qui ininxit in torrentem, cursed is he that poysons our current. The Iewes did so once in England, and would have spilt lives: the emissaries of Rome strive still to be the Iewes successors, but with a worse even for they spill soules. Now when the spring by the high way is poysoned, the poore traveller that drinkes of it, dies for it. Psal. 104.11. Such a place is to give drink to every beast of the field, and there the wild asses quench their thirst. Now that being envenomed, infecteth all the beasts of the forrest, all the birds among the branches, and especially the wild Asses, that there quench their thirst. Quid meruistis eves? Alas what have the poore Lambes deserved, that they must be thus deceived? alas, that they cannot be content to goe to hell alone? He that hath once made himselfe a villaine, studies how to make all others fooles. Abner calls it Play, though it be with edge-tooles: Sampsons foxes make a sport to tosse firebrands, though they burne corne fields. The skittish kine care not what becomes of the Arke, so they may be frisking. If the Church findes them, and smites them, strait they complained persecution: but indeed it is not the Church, but they that persecute. Hagar bears Sara, not Sara Hagar, though you would thinke it otherwise when you read the story. Hagar hath gotten a great belly, and now she domineers over her mistresse: Sara doth but just, to strike when she is provoked. Thus the Iesuites come against us with new malice, though with old arguments: they cannot leave their old and owne figure, Pseudologia. Therefore concerning their Tenents, let us not so much waigh virus, the malice; as vires, the validitie and force. For they dip their pens in the gall of the red dragon, and write bitter things; as if they loved cursing, Psalm. 109. Verse 17. But LORD let blessing bee the prayer of our lips, blessing the desire of our hearts, and blessing the end of our hopes, and crowned our heads for ever.
Another cause or motive is discontent. He is not fed with such broth as he loves, findes not preferment as he would, and thinkes himselfe worthy of, but no body else thinkes so. Hereupon he inveighs most lewdly and lowdly, against them that scorned, and happily had good cause to scorne, to set his Fathers or his fathers fathers with the dogs of their flocke. Now the Trumpet of Moses is made a trunk to shoote pellets at truths, and Moses his friends. And the characters of slander must be drawne in the oile of the Tabernacle, to the abomination of God and man. Arus driving ambitiously at a Bishopricke, was prevented by Alexander his competitor, the worthier man, though not esteemed his match for heat of zeale. Vpon the missing his suite, hee pursued his spite, by broaching an Heresie: that after the repulse hee might seeme some body, and draw a world of mal-contents after him, Theod. Eccl. Hist. lib. 1. Cap. 2. How many hath this motive sent oover to Rome!
Another cause is confidence of power and numbers. Seneca reports that the Senators of ancient Rome ordained, that the slaves should goe distinguished from the free borne in apparell: as it might be the cap which made a difference betweene a slave and a Citizen. But at last they perceived that there might be inconvenience in this: for the slaves might chance to fall a numbring their owne side, and upon the understanding of their owne strength, might breake forth into open rebellion, and shake off the yoke of servitude. So let every man doe as he list, and every assembly assume what fashion it list; it will be at last considered who have the most of their side. And where is Major numerus, will follow Pejor populus: they will be followers of the campe, partly for company, and partly for bootie. So they will come to performe indeed, what Hushai dissembled in word, 2 Sam. 16.18. When the people chuse, his will I be, and with him will I abide. Thus the ring leaders begin,
 not only to vaunt of their vertues, but to cracke of their forces; and that by the hundreds and the thousands. But yet numbers should not, shall not prevaile against the right. It was Gods charge, Follow not a multitude to doe evill. You have often a multitude of the simple led by one that is subtill: but one good man will not be led by a bad multitude. Errour steales in at a little hole, through wantonnesse and neglect of order. Therefore to prevent it, Saint Paul did heartily charge us to observe order, 1 Cor. 14.40. Let all things be done decently, and in order. For God is not the author of confusion, but of peace. Coloss. 2.5. I rejoyce in beholding your order, and the stedfastnesse of your faith. Such is the excellencie of order, that the Apostle ranketh it with Faith. Cant. 6.10. The Church is compared to an Armie; because of the goodly array and equipage wherein she marcheth. Without this so many assemblies, so many rents in Christs garment: so many congregations, so many distractions. Quot capita, tot Schismata, Ierom. It is not well to see a Church like Ieremies speckled bird, Ier. 12.9. a bird of divers colours.
They shall privily bring them in.] We have done with the matter, let us come to the manner of this Induction. Latenter, under-hand, Privily. Which word notes to us their subtiltie, their vigilancie, their hypocrisie.
First, their Subtiltie and politicke craft, whereby they insinuate their unseene poisonous seeds, Ephes. 4.14. Paul calls it the Sleight of men, and cunning craftinesse, whereby they lye in wait to deceive. As scandalizers scatter their libels, if it bee liked, they know the authours: if it bee dangered to penaltie, it is none of theirs. Sinnes agents are brought up in her owne house, and taught the rudiments of her owne discipline: as your Dequoyes teach young practitioners their trade of cheating. It is the brand of sinne, to be deceitfull, Hebr. Chap. 3. vers. 13. Take heed lest you be hardened through the deceitfulnesse of sinne. This art of coozenage shee teacheth to all her littor: O it is the subtillest Damme that ever the Devill engendred withall, and most pregnant in generation! Hee was in the Serpent when he begate iniquitie on man; but now he hath made sinne more subtill than the Serpent, Eccles. 21.2. Wee see the craftiest politicians over-reached by sinne: they have trickes beyond all men, Sinne hath a tricke beyond them. Sinne like the Fencer, may teach his schollers many postures, and wards, and trickes; but still reserves one for himselfe. They can coozen other men of their estates, but Sinne can coozen them of their soules. Let us therefore pray for that blessed illumination, to finde out the deceits and cunning of sinne: that albeit it once deceived us of our Birth-right, it may not now deceive us of our Blessing. It stole from us the happinesse of Nature, let it never steale from us the happinesse of Grace.
Secondly, their vigilant care to spie out the opportunitie, how they may privily bring Heresie in. Shee that will lay her bastard at an honest mans doore, must watch the time when the whole family is either far enough without, or is fast asleep within. Never was more watchfulnesse, than where is most purpose of wickednesse. The ungodly cannot sleepe unlesse he doe mischiefe, Mic. 2.1. They devise iniquitie on their beds, and when the morning is light they practice it. They lye waking all night, that they may be working in the morning. Luke 16.8. The children of this world are Sapientiores, Wiser: yea, and Vigilantiores, Watchfuller; than the children of light. You seldome heare of them that watch all night to prayer, and the service of GOD, Iob Chap. 24. vers. 16. In the darke they digge thorow houses, which they had marked for themselves in the day. They spie their opportunitie by day, but act their villanie by night. That is the private and secret season of bringing in their damnable trafficke: they have found the key, and when all are asleepe, they land their merchandize. The biting curre barkes not before-hand: nor did hee that meant to robbe, send a messenger before to tell the passengers, Ware the theefe. These repentine, serpentine mischiefes sting before they hisse: and like the Musket, kills dead before it gives the report. The Lion
 first roares and then preyes; the Wolfe first preyes, and then roares: the Heretike preyes, but roares not at all. As the woman that loves credit more than conscience, will sinne, so it be in private: so this Incendiary resolves to adulterate the truth, and to prostitute his soule to falshood; but his hope and helpe is in the the shadow of darknesse; Privily. When all is cocke-sure, (the good-man absent) GOD not preventing, (the good-wife suspectlesse) the Church without mistrust, (the servants asleepe) the Ministers retired; then doth this incarnate fiend begin to worke upon the children. And in confidence of his two confederate theeves, Place and Occasion; hee so bestirres himselfe; that from poore innocent soules hee often steales the best of blessings, a good conscience. Never did opportunitie meet with one that makes more use of it: hee will husband it to proofe, and like a cunning antagonist, lose not an inch of his advantage. The diligence of such is admirable: the Pharisies would take great paines to damne a Proselyte, Matth. Chap. 23. vers. 15. The children of light are not alwayes the forwardest in their generation. Besides, they have many obstacles, 1 Thess. Chap. 2. vers. 18. Wee would have come unto you once and againe, but Satan hindered us. Our way is like Cushi's, full of rubbes: but they like Ahimaaz, take the Plaine way. Mischiefe is nimble, and he that intends evill, will breake his sleepe to doe it, Matth. Chap. 13. vers. 25. It is the Servants that sleepe, it is the enemie that watcheth to sow tares. I would we had their wings and speed, I wish not their tallons nor their flight. If Hazaels feet did belong to Salomons head, and both these to Davids heart, O there was a man for God, a man of God! The shepheard watcheth to guard his flocke, the Wolfe watcheth to destroy his flocke: the Wolfe hath the advantage, for he may sleepe out of feare: but whensoever the shepheard sleepes, the flocke is in danger. Our comfort is, that though the wolfe be waking, though the lambes sleepe, though the shepheard sleepe, though the Church sleepe, yet he that keepeth Israel neither slumbers nor sleepes; and this Keeper watch over us evermore.
Lastly, their hypocrisie, with the covertly carriage of their intended plagues, Rom. 16.18. By good words and faire speeches they deceive the hearts of the simple. Without this there could be no Privily: appearance would condemne them. Vice dares not walke without a borrowed shape: like an old courtesan, guiltie of her owne witherednesse, she never goes without a maske. Countenances furthest from native beautie, love artificiall shadowes. Never ill would appeare it selfe, if it could be hid. Hypocrisie is the usher of Heresie, a marshall that makes way for her, and cries Roome, here comes my Lady. Like the wench that led Saint Peter into the high Priests Hall; but not with the same purpose, to declare him. Ignorant people are beguiled with glosses and colours, as boyes with babies, and Indians with rattles, and such pretie toyes. Satan himselfe seemes faire, when he is drest up like an Angell of light: and a Wolfe cunningly apparel'd in a sheep-skinne, coozens the poore lambes. That damnable Heretike Pelagius, was a man of austere conversation: and false prophets come with a rough garment next their skinnes, like a Gibeonite in his old shooes. Therefore wee must learne to distinguish betweene Samuel and the Devill, which the Witch of Endor suborned in his likenesse: and wee may easily doe it, by his ascending out of the earth. Hypocrites thinke, as Brutus said when hee was dying; that vertue it selfe was but a name; that all pietie is but a name, and that name they get. Who were they that opposed Pauls Sermon at Antioch? Act. Chap. 13. vers. 50. Devout and honourable women, and the chiefemen. Devout; that they were honourable persons, no wonder: that they were wise after the flesh, no wonder: that they were mightie, no wonder. For, 1 Cor. 1.26. Not many wise after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are called. But that Devout, religious, zealous persons should resist the truth; this is strange, yet true. Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, those three resisters of Moses, were the most famous and eminent men in the congregation. Let us therefore pray
 God, that they may be either inwardly Lambes, as they are not: or appeare outwardly wolves, as they are: either to turne their hearts from their wolvish condition, or to pull their sheep-skin over their ears: that no jugglers may privily by their mists and mysteries, pervert the flocke of Iesus Christ.
Who privily shall bring in damnable heresies.] I am not yet quite wound out of this Labyrinth of heresies: I could wish my selfe well rid of them, wish you all well rid of them, wish the Land well rid of them, wish the world well rid of them. But O that I could as soone turne them out of the Church, as I can out of my discourse. Now at most they doe but trouble your eares; let them passe undiscovered, and they will trouble your hearts. All I have done, is but to shew you the mazes and windings of errour; and now I am readie to lead you out, and with due speed to bring you to a clearer coast. That remaines is for application; to denominate those birds of this feather, whereof wee at this present are in danger. I will discover to you three sorts; one that would disturbe your peace, another that would pervert your faith, a last, that would corrupt your manners; all of which would wound your consciences.
They that would privily wrong your peace, are seditious Schismatickes: who, when the bread of life is broken to the people, throw in crooked pinnes to choake them. These are they that vellicate authoritie, that calumniate our Service-booke, because the forme is uniforme. When we beseech Christ by his Agony and bloudy Passion; this they call conjuring: when the Minister to the penitent pronounceth absolution, this they call a Popes pardon. When we pray for all men, this they say is against Gods Election. When we pray for all those that travell by land or by water; this they say, is to pray for theeves and pyrates. When, against lightning and thunder; this prayer they would have used only in Summer: otherwise they say, we pray against sparrow-blasting. When we pray that our fore-fathers sins may not be laid to our charge; this they say is to acknowledge Purgatory. Thus they have made our Service to stinke in the nostrils of men: but our comfort is that it smels sweet in the nostrils of God. Our Surplisses and Vestments, they say, are not made of the Camels skin, but of the Dragons taile. Take heed of these, who privily bring in offences to your peace. And Bonum pacis martyrio praeferimus, Liber. Indeed they are zealous against all errours but their owne: but Saint Augustine would not have men such confuters; ut error vincat errorem, and quod pejus est, major minorem; that one errour shall be convinced by another, and the lesse by the greater. Is this holinesse, to be alwayes finding faults? Is this zeale, to like nothing but their owne inventions? I remember what Augustine said to Iulian the Pelagian; Cum animositatem viceris qua teneris, veritatem poteris tenere qua vinceris; When thou shalt master that stomack whereof thou art possessed; thou shalt possesse that truth wherewith thou art mastered, Rom. 16.17. Now I beseech you brethren, marke them which cause divisions and offences, contrary to the doctrine which yee have learned, and avoid them: for their conviction, and your owne security.
They that would privily bring in corruptions to your faith, as the Papists. Here Antichrist had cause to be angrie, and plead that he had not his right, if he were not brought in for the ring-leader: whose profession is to make your soules drunke with the wine of his fornications, Rev. 17 2. Beware of these Romish agents and instruments: all their desire is to intoxicate your hearts, and proudly to tyrannize over your consciences. He is that man of sinne, that man of pride, that opposeth and exalteth himselfe above all that is called God, or that is worshipped; 2 Thess. 2.4. Hee rose first above Bishops, then above Councels, then above Kings, then above Scriptures, and now so farre as it is possible, above God himselfe. All that are not dead in sense, know his malice; Killing all those that worship not the image of the Beast, Rev. 13.15. Saint Paul tells us; All things are yours; if all be ours, what unsufferable wrong doth he to us, that takes away from us halfe a Sacrament, the whole Scripture? For what purpose sends hee over his Seminaries, those flies that come humming out of
 the Larder of Hell? They envie, they inveigh, they write, they raile. But as the Iewes did with Stephen; when they could not confute him with arguments, they did it with stones: so what they cannot evince by the Word, they will convince by the sword. They have alwayes powder in the panne; and when they spie their time, they will turne their pens into pen-knives, and their inke into bloud. O but now they plead Kings truce: yet as in France, when it was said there should be a consultation at Paris, to heare complaints, to redresse wrongs, and set all things even: and that the Protestants should have free accesse to declare their grievances, and safe-conduct to returne: one answered, Promise what they list, for Saint Bartholomew-Eves sake I will not trust them. So how ever they shew themselves, looking smoothly, and speaking-fairely: yet for the Fifth of Novembers sake let us never trust them. Onely blesse wee our GOD, that though they doe so much mischiefe as they can, yet they cannot doe so much as they would. And if our sinnes provoke him not, Christ will preserve his flocke from being a pity to their teeth for ever.
 They that infect our manners are evill companions; Satans agents: who is still scattering his firy darts among the Armie of Israel. And when they light upon wood they kindle, when upon flax they flame, when upon gunpowder they blow up all. Infirmitie is as the wood; desire to sinne, that is the flax; delight a sinne, that is the powder. If we be naked, or onely clothed with hypocriticall our sides, or with the thin coat of reason, these darts will wound us: onely the shield of faith rebates the points, and quenches all the fire. Some are afraid of meeting the Devill in a darke night: alas, he will not scare thee from himselfe: what should he get by that? No, it is worse meeting him like an Angell of light: by an Orator perswading, by a Poet delighting, by a friend flattering, by a wife seducing: thus is the Devill often brought in like concealed ware. Some make question whether there be a Devill or no, because they never saw any: but thou mayest see him in his effects, tempting thee to lewdnesse. In the time of Superstition, the Devill did often appeare in some bodily shape, and he had reason for it; for by that meanes bee drave men forward to desperation, to which in those dayes they were most inclined. But in these times of prophanenesse, he will not appeare in his likenesse, lest he should hold men backe from presumption, to which they were running head-long. For he is never a worse devill, than when he comes lap'd up in Samuels Mantle; privily under the cloake of holinesse! so that now all the wisdome is to see the Devill. If a mans eye be too neare the object, the beames of his sight will be confounded; there must be a mediocrity of distance. As in the Optickes, if a man would perceive the art of a perspective picture, he must goe a distance from it, and then looke on it with artificiall eyes, or spectacles fitted for the purpose. So if a man would apprehend the prospects of Satan, with all his shadowings and deepe deceits; he must not stand too nigh him, but goe further off. And then he must looke, not with the eyes of nature or reason, so he shall never descry him: but with the eye of faith in the glasse of the Scripture; this shall plainly represent him.
Feare Satan then most, when with the fairest pretences of good, he seekes to justifie evill. When the woman of Tehoah with a subtill parable procured Absolom's repeale from banishment, 2 Sam. 14.19. David replied, Is not the hand of Iob with thee in all this? When thou beholdest Sacriledge coloured under the title of an impropriation. Is not the hand of the Devill in this? When oppression passeth under the name of reasonable and allowed Interest: Is not the hand of the Devill in this? If you see secret malice strike under the semblance of Iustice: Is not the hand of the Devill in this? If covetous worldlinesse passe for honest thriftinesse: Is not the hand of the Devill in this? If flattery creept up to preferment, under the title of humilitie: Is not the hand of the Devill in this? If plumes, painting, gawdie purfles, the ornaments of Popinjayes, to the inversion of nature, and destruction of modestie; march all under the
 colours of comlinesse, and going according to their state: Is not the hand of the Devill in this? Let us finde out this privie inductions of these damnable heresies, and resist him there, 1 Pet. 5.9. Resist him stedfast in the faith: this wrings his sword out of his hand; he and all his adherents shall fall before us, Ioh. 12.31. The Prince of this world shall be cast out: What folly is it for the wicked to fight on his side, that is sure to bee vanquished? Feare thy sinne, never feare Satan? let him not have Lust that secret factour in thy citie, that Intelligencer in thy soule; and he can doe thee no harme. Through sinne only is their force and fury so terrible to us, Ephes. 6.12. Spirituall wickednesse, or wicked spirits: but spirituall wickednesse is more to bee feared than wicked spirits. But the God of peace shall shortly tread Satan under our feet, Rom. 16.20. Now the Lambe that hath the key of the bottomlesse pit, and the great chain in his hand, binde that Dragon with everlasting darknesse. But for thy Church; send forth thy mercy and truth, and save us; and let thy face shine upon us for ever.
Denying the Lord that bought them.] This I called their Criminall evill, a sinne that seemes to keep the circle of their owne selves; and not to extend to the mischiefe of others, but only by the force of example. In handling whereof, I will first consider the generall doctrine; what it is to deny Christ; and wherein these false teachers deny him: and them the application of it; who they be that in these times deny him. In speciall we find the aggravation of their apostacie in three hainous ascendings. First, They Deny: it were bad enough to slight him, worse to forget him, yet worse to forsake him: but to Deny him, this is fearefull. Secondly, The Lord: not a creature, not a man, not a Father, not a friend, not an Angell, not themselves: but the Lord, this is more fearefull. Thirdly, That bought: it is much to deny a benefactour, more to deny a Parent, more to deny a Creator: but yet there is a step higher, to advance this blasphemie to the full altitude; to deny a Redeemer; Him that with the precious bloud of his heart Bought them; this is most execrable.
Denying of Christ.] is of two sorts: either in Iudgement or in practise: denyall in faith, or denyall in fact. The latter is of infirmitie, the other of infidelitie. 1 Tim. 1.19. Some have put away faith and a good conscience; and concerning faith have made shipwracke. There is a denyall of faith, 2 Tim. 3.5. Some having a forme of godlinesse, deny the power of it, Tit. 1.16. They professe that they know God, but in workes they deny him. There is a denyall of fact. The former makes a man no Christian: the other makes him non nullum, sed malum; not no christian, but an evill christian. The denyall of Christ in judgement hath many degrees. 1. Apostacie, a falling off from Christ, and from the knowen truth into wilfull errors. Heb. 3.12. Take heed lest there be in any of you an evill heart of unbeleefe, to depart from the living God. 2. A violent opposing that truth which they have rejected, both with tongue and hand: justifying and defending their owne mischievous opinions against the Gospell of Christ, Lastly, the sinne against the Holy Ghost. First men forsake Christ, then deny him, lastly blaspheme him. This is indeed that which truely rents a man off from Christ, and deprives him of all hope to be saved. The denyall in fact is a dangerous pit, yet the mercie of God hath helped some out of it. So was Peter delivered; Servus negavit Dominum, sed Dominus amavit servum; The servant denied his Master, but the Master loved his servant. Paul did not only deny him, but persecute him; yet he obtained mercy, 1 Tim. 1.13. Many of the Iewes did not only deny him, but crucifie him, Act. 3.14. Ye denied the holy one, and the Iust: yet were they pricked in heart at Peters Sermon; gladly received his Word, and were baptized, Act. 2.41.
Every action that gives way to Gods dishonour, and heartens others to superstition, is a deniall of Christ in some degree of fact, 1 Cor. 10.20. The things which the Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice to devils, and not to God: and I would not that ye should have fellowship with devils.Chrysost. Oper. Imp. in Matth. He that tasteth the meat offered to Idols, Gustu negavit Christum, hath denied Christ with his tasting. If hee doth not so, yet let him but touch those things with pleasure, Tactu negavit Christum, Hee hath denyed
 Christ with his touching. Though he doth not touch, yet if he stand to looke upon the Idolatry, Visu negavit Christum, He hath denied Christ with his eyes. Though he forbeare to looke, yet if he listen to those charmes, Auditu negavit Christum, He hath denied Christ with his eares. Though he omit all these, yet if he smell to the Incense, Odoratu negavit Christum, He hath denied Christ with his smelling. He may be denied voce, veste, vultu, victu; with the voice, when men speake to dishonour him, though inwardly they reverence him: with the garment, when they weare idolatrous fashions of attire to escape notice: with the countenance, when they seem delighted to behold the breaden god carried in a box: with the diet, when only to give content to some popish spirits, they will forbeare certaine meats on certaine dayes. These be all degrees of deniall in them, that rather seeke to please men, than to be the constant servants of Christ.
He that dissembles a false faith is thus guilty. Faith may be fained; ex parte objecti, when it doth not credit all the Word: ex parte subjecti, in respect of the false heart of man: ex parte exterioris actionis, when a man keeps the true faith of Christ, but dares not professe it. Nichodemus had a good minde to Christ, but he durst not be knowne of it: now in that he did not openly acknowledge him, he did in a sort deny him. It is objected, Rom. 14.22. Hast thou faith? have it to thy selfe before God. Therefore a man may conceale his faith. But the Apostle speakes not there de fide necessariorum, concerning the faith of those things we must necessarily beleeve: but de fide adiaphororum, concerning the faith of indifferent things. Shall I change any faith in these? No, doe not change it, but hide it. Shall my faith then be quite concealed? No, God sees it. To what purpose have I faith, and not to shew it? Yes, shew it to God. Thy faith is to be concealed, not cancelled. But then a man may hide his faith in time of persecution, and be present at idolatrous services? No, for the Apostle speakes not of that faith, Quae ad dogmata pertinet, sed de rebus medis; but onely of things indifferent, and therein sometimes to hide our faith is not to offend, Chrysost. Our owne faith, I say, for a man may sometimes dissimulare fidem propriam, dissemble his owne faith: but he must never simulare fidem alienam, counterfeit a strange faith.
Here may be questioned, whether it is lawfull to be present at a Masse, so long as we reserve our owne faith; and whether this be to deny Christ in any sort. The Apostle cleares it, 1 Cor. 10.14. Flee from idolatrie. This exhortation he strengthens with two speciall reasons; the one vers. 20. They that partake of things offered to Idols, have fellowship with the devils. The other, vers. 21. Yee cannot be partakers of the Lords Table, and of the table of devils. Besides offending of the weake Christian, and confirming the strong Papist. A Protestant cannot possibly communicate with the Papists, without sinne: yet they may communicate with us, without sinne. Our Service is without all feare of idolatrie, even themselves being judges: so that a Papist remaining a Papist, may communicate with us: and it is rather out of pride, than conscience, that they refuse it. Yet it stickes upon the stomacke of some toy-headed Professours, that they may lawfully see a Masse, going with their kindred, for sport; and rather than want excuses, that they might more detest it. But Paul cuts off all these reasons, 1 Cor. 10.22. Doe we provoke the Lord to anger? are we stronger than be? God shall condemne all colourable shifts, and expose thee to his wrath. To exhort this allowance, nothing is more commonly cited than the example of Naaman, 2 King. 5.18. When my Master goeth into the house of Rimmon to worship there, and he leaneth on my hand, and I bow in the house of Rimmon; the Lord pardon thy servant in this thing. To which Elisha doth seeme to give approbation; Goe in peace. This place is their opinion doth prove it, when indeed this place makes most strongly against it. First, Naaman speakes of a civill worship to his Master, not a superstitious one to the Idoll: the King leaning on his hand; either Majestatis or infirmitatis gratia; whether for weaknesse or for State. Secondly, Hee professed the resolution of his heart to worship onely the God of Israel, that had healed him. Begging earth to make an
 Altar, erecting an Altar for sacrifice, and sacrificing that hee might be thankfull. Thirdly, He puts the doubt of his owne weaknesse, that notwithstanding his resolved sincerity; yet being with his Master in that cursed place, he did not know how temptation might worke upon him; therefore he sayes, God be mercifull to me in this; Pray for me that I may not fall, pray for me that I may finde mercy. Fourthly, Some thinke that Elisha did not approbare, sed tolerare; not approve, but suffer Naamans fault; but there is no dispensing with sinne. Fifthly, Goe in peace, is as much, as God be with you Sir; a valediction: not the words concedentis postulatum, of one that granted a request: sed dimittentis abeuntem, but of one that gave him licence to depart. Sixtly, Indeed the Prophets meaning was to comfort the Syrian in Gods mercie; whose strength should be glorified in his weaknesse. Who would either wholly keep him from idolatry, or if he fel upon infirmity, afford him gracious forgivenes. If such a thing happen; but either thou shalt die, or thy Master die; howsoever God wil prevent it; Goe in peace. Seventhly, Naaman did confesse that the bowing in the house of Rimmon was a sinne, or else he would not have begged pardon for it. When I goe to masse, I reserve my heart unto God: so did Naaman, yet he cryed, Lord be mercifull to me in this. He desired mercie, as fearing before hand: we have those that will doe it, and never begge mercie afterwards; that never say, In this Lord pardon me. Thus they have a faire warrant from this place: for Namaan condemnes it, and yet they would by his example find arguments to allow it. If it were not a sin, why doth he crave pardon for it? if it be a sinne, why doe we seeke to justifie it? But we goe to behold it as a Player: but playes are for stages, not for Churches. Darest thou goe to a Temple, to see religion made a mockerie, and the Name of thy God a lest. But we would see it, that we may confute the absurdities of it. But would any sober man goe to a drunken meeting, that he might learne to condemne drunkennesse? he knew it was bad enough before. But we would goe to convert others: goodly! as if the wooll should undertake to turne the pitch white by touching it; will not the pitch rather black the wooll? Peter durst abroad draw his sword against a whole troope, in defence of his Master: yet after all his protestation of inseperablenesse from CHRIST, he was infected with the aire of the high Priests hall. But yet we would see it, that no longer by report, but by ocular testimonie we might hate it. But would any man desire to see murder or incest, that he might more loath it? All reasons are lost that make for sin: therefore resolve against this danger of temptation, lest you be found to deny CHRIST.
This for the generall doctrine; now for the application, that wee may perceive who they are which in any measure or degree deny IESUS CHRIST.
1 The Iewes and Turkes. For the Iewes, their refusall of him more strongly approves him: neither could he be justified to be that Messias, if they rejected him not. Loe now how the Lord hath requited them: they denyed him, and he hath denyed them. Their sinne is capitally written in their long and desperate ruine. If they would compare their former captivities with their former sins; they should now find that they have committed some sinne more haynous than all former sinnes, because they suffer a plague more grievous than all former plagues. This sin was the denyall of CHRIST, and this plague for that denyall. For the Turkes they have taken the name of Saviour from CHRIST, and given it to Mahomet that coozning Arabian. Their malice is not only to deny IESUS, but to murder him; and by all stratagems seconded with bloudy violence to wast christendome, and to bring his name to nothing. But arise o LORD, thou and the Arke of thy strength; convert or confound thine enemies, and Remember those Tyrants that say of thy Ierusalem; Rase it, rase it, even to the foundations thereof.
2 The Greekish Church of the Ruffes and Moscovites have reserved from forgetfulnesse the name of CHRIST, but in the foundations of their religion have
 denyed him. They are the basest dregges of all Christians, and so to call them (...) to allow them the most favour that can be. They will admit none of the Christ an world to their font, but such as solemnly renounce, spit at, and abjure their former God, religion, baptisme. They are as ignorant as Turkes, as idolatrous as Pagans, as obstinate as Iewes, and more superstitious than Papists. If the worst of the Romane, and best of the Russian, were compared, it would be hard to judge which were least evill. They give more honour to Saint Nicholas, if at lest he was a Saint, if an honest man, than they doe to CHRIST. They usually put a scrole into the hands of their dead, when they bury him; it is this, A Russe of R^ss^^; which they call a certificate to Saint Peter. It is their wickednesse and infelicitie to have denyed Christ.
3 Such other Heretickes as have kept the name of Christians, yet have spoiled the just honour of CHRIST. These differ from the other, and are not properly called Religions, but Opinions. Every Heresie though fundamentall, makes not a religion: we say not the Religion of the Arrians, Nestorians, Sabellians, Macedonians; but the Sect or Heresie. Not to discusse the proprietie, no opinion chalengeth the name of a Religion in our usuall speech. Such were the Valentinian and Manichean heresies, that denyed CHRISTS Humanity. The Arrian and Samisetanian, that denyed his Divinity. The Nestorian, that distracted him into two persons. Eutychian, that confounded the two natures. The Sabellian, that mind him with the Hypostasis of the Father. Donatus, that denyed his kingdome, that is his Church to be perpetuall and catholicke. Pelagius, that denyed him to be the Redeemer of little ones in baptisme. Novatas, that denyed his grace and mercie to sinners fallen. There were innumerable such whom the Lord with his fanne hath cast out, purging his Floore from such damnable chaffe. The same gracious hand purge it still; that all men may come with heart and tongue, to acknowledge one true God, and one blessed Saviour, Iesus Christ.
4 The religion, or rather faction of Papisme. It is most wonderfull to read, how Feuardentius and others of them upon this Text, doe challenge us for the principall men that deny CHRIST. But when we come to examine the waight, their very arguments against us doe strengthen us, and we find our selves the more comforted in being so scandalized. Let indifferencie be judge! we adore and trust upon CHRIST for our only Saviour, and ascribe to him the whole of our redemption: they joyne other Saviours, other mediators with him; now which of us doe most deny CHRIST? doe you looke for more evidence? you shall have it that both the cold neuters who treate of a reconcilement betweene us; and the hot separatists that say we have not left them at all because we retaine some ceremonies which they use; may be at once satisfied and ashamed. It is not matter of order, but matter of faith that hath divide us; nor ceremonie, but substance: not a bush, but a wall of stone, that we can scarce imagine the separation greater which divided Abraham from the rich man in hell. 1 Ioh. 2.2. Who is a lyer, but he that denyeth that Iesus is the Christ? he is Antichrist that denyeth the Father and the Sonne. But they deny not the Father, albeit the Son: yea, in this they have denyed the Father: where CHRIST is but halfe a Saviour, God is but halfe a Father. Verse 23. Whosoever denyeth the Sonne, the same hath not the Father. They worship images, adore reliques, invoke Angels; here they deny Iesus. They sacrifice for the sinnes of quick and dead with a wafer cake, hold a Purgatory for the scouring up of soules, as I CHRISTS bloud was not able to doe it; here they deny Iesus. They tread downe the deputies of God from their Thrones, and set up an usurping Prelate, whom all ages have acknowledged a vassall to Prince; here they deny Iesus. They take away Scriptures, mangle Sacraments, license Stewes, condemne marriage, wrappe up the obsequies of our conscience in the strange liverie of an unkowne language; sell pardons for sixepence; open heaven where Christ shuts it, and shut heaven where Christ shuts it, and shut heaven where Christ opens it; here they deny Iesus. They
 mingle the bloud of Martyrs, yea of traitors, with the bloud of the Lambe of God which is spotlesse; which only taketh away the sinne of the world, only quencheth the wrath to come, only abateth the edge of his Fathers Iustice, even that sword cherubicall which glitters before Paradise: this, this is to deny the Lord that bought them. They are all for Traditions, we for the Scriptures: the goods of our Father are in question, whither shall shall we goe but to his will and testament? thither we flie, we doe not deny thy word, o Lord, we doe not deny thee: but they that deny the word of Christ, deny Christ himselfe.
Vnder this ranke of denyers come those whilome professors of Religion, that have now accepted the marke of the beast who are so foolish, that having begun in the Spirit, they will now bee made perfect by the flesh, Gal. 3.3. They despise the chast spouse of their Saviour, and are bewitched with the painted beauty of an ill favoured strumpet. They that have seene her in her gavest dresse with Christian eyes, have loathed her: others have looked on her with the eyes of flesh, and adored her. Diverse have come to Rome with a purpose to be confirmed Papists: by hearsay they magnified her; they came, saw, and scorned her. They looked for religion, and found ranke idolatrie: the fire of their zeale brought them to the flames of martyrdome. We have some that suffer their zeale there to die, where those good mens zeale began to live; and delight to live, where they would but die. Our mother weepes for them, not for need, but for pitie, for pietie, for love. Troopes of better informed soules flocke daily into her bosome, disdaining their late Antichristianisme, and embracing her knees on their owne. The mighty one of Israel, that leaves the ninetie nine to reduce one lost sheepe; fetch them home to his fold, though with shame, though by death. That they may shame the divell, forsake that harlot, love their owne mother, blesse their owne Father, and lastly save their owne soules.
5 The Renegate, that being once baptised unto CHRIST, is afterward circumcised, unto Mahomet. It is in vaine to charge them with Pauls Testimonie. Gal. 5.2. If yee be circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing: for they desire not that CHRIST should profit them. Miserable men, that forsake the bloud of their Saviour, to accept the tyrannie of an Impostor! I have read of a Christian, that to save his life turned Turke; but it could not save him: for they presently in derision hanged him up, with these words; Morieris in fide Turca; However thou livest, thou shalt die a Turke. They are so conscious of their owne great Prophets weakenesse; that if any man deny Christ, they will never trust him in the acknowledgement of Mahomet.
6 The Neuter, that is of either side, of neither side; to day a Romist, to morrow a Protestant, next day no man can tell what, nor himselfe; this man denyes Christ. They thinke him theirs, wee thinke him ours, his owne conscience finds him neithers. O but our differences trouble him: but shall a man deny Christ, because his coate is divided? In religion and faith there is no wavering: hee that doth not beleeve and professe the truth, denyes it. There is no medium: we must be either for it, or against it. Iudg 5.23. Curse yee the inhabitants of Meroz, because they came not to the helpe of the Lord against the mighty. They did not fight against him, but because they did not fight for him they are cursed. Let us say, as that Martyr answered, when he was offered both torments and rewards; rewards if he did deny Christ, torments if he would not; with time of deliberation. In re tam justa nulla consultatio: the case is so cleare, that I need not study about it. Let us much rather lose our selves, than our Saviour Christ.
7 The Separatist, that speaking of his countrey, cryes he is fled out of Babel, he hath forsaken his mother, therefore denyed his Father. And whither runs he? out of the free and cleare ayre of the Gospell, into the stench and irkesome mixture of Iewes, Arrians, Anabaptists. Who but a mad man would forsake the Church of England, which Rome envies, all the world admires; to goe to Amsterdam?
 It is their delight to be thwartingly peevish: and where the gate stands open, to be ever seeking for a stile. They will be crosse, though they be absurd: and because the Law enjoynes abstinence on some certaine dayes; therefore their greatest seals shall be on frydayes. Like certaine Ilanders neere to China, that salute by putting off their shooes, because the men of China doe it by their hattes. Hee that wrongs the wife, is no friend to the husband: in refusing the Church, they have denyed Christ.
8 The Persecuter, that invades the libertie of those who love the Lord Iesus, denyes Christ, Ioab smote Absaloms body but therein Davids heart. The rebell saies, he meanes no hurt to the person of the king: but because he doth it to the subjects, he is therefore a traitor: so he that strikes the Christian, strikes Christ. Such shall not escape unpunished, either here or hereafter. Not even Paul himselfe was transmitted, without feeling what he inflicted. Examine his owne testimonie, 2 Cor. 11.23, etc. Did he make havocke of the Church? the world made havocke of him for it. Did he hale men and women to prison? himselfe was often claped up for it. Did he helpe to stone Stephen? himselfe was stoned for it. Did he afflict his owne countreymen? his owne countreymen afflicted him for it. Did he lay stripes upon the Saints, the Iewes layd stripes upon him for it. Was he weary, painefull, diligent to beate downe the Gospell? he was in wearynesse, painefulnesse, frequent watchings and fastings; in hunger and thirst, cold and nakednesse, to defend the Gospell, 2 Cor. 11.27. Thus Quod fecit Saulus, patitur Paulus: he endured when he was Paul, what he inflicted as he was Saul. They that persecute Christians, and escape judgement here, shall find everlasting judgement hereafter. Let this point bind us all to the good behaviour, that we doe good to them who love the Lord Iesus.
This is the superior and more immediate manner of denying CHRIST: there is also an inferiour and more remote manner. Which is of such as turne the grace of God into wantonnesse, and evacuate to their owne soules the vertue of his crosse: who being redeemed to serve Christ, deny that service: there is a world of these. Tit. 2.11. The grace of God that bringeth salvation to all men, hath appeared: Teaching us to deny ungodlinesse and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, godly to this present world. It perswades to holinesse by this token, that it brings salvation with it. It is grace, a sweet nature: that brings salvation, o more sweet, most welcome but it might lye hid in unknowen obscuritie, nay it Appeares: not to Paul or Peter only, but To all men. Deliverance from danger binds to gratitude: this was Davids security to Bethshabe concerning the succession of Salomon: As the Lord liveth, that hath redeemed my soule out of all distresse, 1 King. 1.29. But advancing to great preferment bindeth more: this was Iosephs apologie to his tempting mistresse: My Master hath intrusted all to my hand; there is none greater in his house than I: how then can I doe this great wickednesse? Gen. 39.9. We were all justly condemned for treason, to hell; the stroke of damnation was neere us: at an instant and exigent commeth our pardon; not by the hand of an Angell, Gods speciall courtier, but in the hand of a mediator; not written with inke, but with bloud; not vulgar bloud, that runs in common veines, but bloud royall; no meaner than ran from the side of his owne Sonne. Now our Soveraigne Creator commends a suite to us; that wee would serve him; by this Token, that he hath redeemed us at such a prize. If we break the covenant, vilipend the mercie, refuse the service, trample under our prophet feete the precious token, deny him that bought us; what remaines but a fearefull expectation of judgement, and firy indignation to devoure us? Hebr. 10.27.29. under this kind I will touch but foure offenders.
1 The dissolute and scattering rioter, that drawes his patrimony through his throat; he denyes CHRIST, will be not beleeve it? let him read, 1 Tim. 5.8. If any provide not for his owne, he hath denyed the faith, and is worse than an Infidell. Where is no humanity, there can be no pietie: he that is not a good morall man, will never be a good Christian. He is worse than an Infidell, because he transgresseth name,
 which teacheth us all providence even the very beast, much more man. He sinneth ^gainst the knowledge he hath received, therefore is the worst offender. The pu^^st ivorie is turned by the fire into the deepest blacke. Wee use to extenuate the ^^fulnesse of such a one; Hee hath no fault, but a little too kind hearted: it is (...) one; Hee hath no fault, but that he hath denyed the faith. He is no mans foe but his ^wne; yes he is his Posterities foe, and no friend unto Christ.
2 the oppressor: Paul sayes directly, They have erred from the faith, 2 Tim. 6.10. ^^a the very uncharitable. Matth. 25.40. In that yee have denyed it to my brethren, ^^e have denyed it to me; saith CHRIST. Little thinkes the Engrosser, that he ^^nyes CHRIST: what, to take advantage of the Law, is this to deny the Gos^ell? Yes, the poore hath lost their right, thou hast multiplied unjust gaine; prefer^d Mammon before the Lord; thou hast denyed him that bought thee. But that who^^ever refuseth to doe mercie to the poore, denyes CHRIST; this is a point of ^octrine which the world will not receive; let God say what he will. But he that ^^d; Whosoever giveth you, giveth me: hath said also, whosoever denyeth you, de^yeth me. I send to my friend for a poore courtesie in his easy power, that have ^^ne him many great favours; hee denyes it, it is all one, hee denyes mee ^^r his friend. 1 Ioh. 3.17. He that hath the worlds goods, and takes no compassion on him ^^at hath none of them; how dwels the Love of God in him? He that being able, gives not (...) them whom the Lord hath bought, denyes him that bought them.
3 The blasphemer denyes CHRIST; for doth any man love him, against ^hom he inveighes? Matth. 12.30. He that is not with me, is against me Indeed, ^^e greatest denyall of all is verball, and the greatest sinnes against God are words. ^bliquities in speech offend more than those of action: therefore the sinne never to ^^e forgiven, is called Blasphemie against the HOLY GHOST, Matth. 12.31. He ^at commits a sinne, offends the Law: he that blasphemes, striketh God himselfe. ^here is no greater grace than thankefulnesse: no greater grace than thankefulnesse: (...) greater sinne than blasphemie. I would the common swearer would thinke of ^is, that rashly, yea rancorously blasphemeth that sacred side, those wounds, that ^oud, whereby our soules are redeemed: hee doth in this deny the Lord that ^ught him.
4 The desperate, that rejects the offer of salvation by Christ; this is a fearefull ^enyall. Let all the rivers and streames that make glad the Citie of God, run un^^ it, they are driven backe: there is no entrance for the graciousnesse of God, ^ough it be preached a thousand times. When the Lord like a loving Physician ^romiseth to cure the sore, the desperate patient thrusteth his nailes into it; Nay, it ^all not be healed. What can be more derogatory and injurious to Christ, then (...) change his truth into a lye, and Satans lies into truth, and to justifie the divell ^ore than God? When God on the one side shall bind by promise, confirme by ^^th, ratifie by seale, exhibite by the bloud of his only begotten Sonne; pardon ^^d mercie to all accepting Penitents: that though he hath broken, he will bind up; ^^ough he hath made a wound, he will heale it; though he hath killed, he will give ^^e: yet he is not beleeved. When Satan on the other side shall suggest, that the ^^stice of God will never be satisfied, the haynousnesse of sins cannot be pardoned, ^^s if he had lost the name of being the Father of lies) he is credited. God hath ^ade a decree in heaven, it belongs to the New Testament, sealed by the death of ^^e Testator, witnessed by three in heaven, and as many on earth, never to be altered:
At what time soever a sinner shall repent of his wickednesse heartily, I will forgive him. (...) heaven before heaven, and he that denyes it findes hell before hell, and damna^^on before his time. The greatest sins are those that are opposed to the three The^logicall vertues; Faith, Hope, and Charity: such are Infidelitie, Hatred, Desperati^n. The other be monstrous sins, to the denyall of Gods justice; but desperation (...) this is the worst, because it denyes his mercie; and his mercie is over all his works. ^ehold the Lambe of God, accept your remedie, deny not him that bought you.

Denying the Lord that bought them. Wee have considered the generall Doctrine, let us come to a particular examination of the words, and an aggravation of their wickednesse. Which discovers it selfe in three degrees.
The Qualitie of their Act; They denyed. So far from fearing or loving, that they fall to Denying.
The Excellencie of the Object; no meane person, not a servant, not an equall, but their Master; The Lord.
The neere relation that was betweene them, and the right that he had in them, by purchase; That bought them.
They denyed.] It had beene very much not to have feared him, especially seing himselfe so warned us. Luk. 12.5. Feare him that can cast into hell. The wrath of a king is frightfull, we feare an ague, wonder at a Comet, tremble at thunder: and feare wee not God the commander of all these? Oh he is of infinite majestie! Mathematicians wonder at the Sunne, that being bigger than the earth, it does not burne it. But this is the wonder, that God being so infinitely great, and we so infinitely wicked; we are not confounded. Amo. 4.13. Hee formeth the mountains, createth the wind, makes the morning darkenesse, and treadeth upon the high places of the earth: can he doe this, and not punish sinfull man? To feare him is Totum homini, the whole dutie of a man: not to feare him, is the way to be left worse than if we never had beene. To want this feare is a wretched orbitie, but to deny him, this is worse (...) had bin very much not to have beleeved on him, considering the oracles that he spake and the miracles that he wrought. They that hated him, were forced to testifie bo^^ these of him;Ioh. 6.36. Never man spake as this man doth: and we never saw it on this fashion: Ye, This ye have seen, and beleeve not. They saw, they heard, they wondred, they were convinced, yet they not beleeved. Their owne eyes in seeing, their owne eates in hearing, their owne hearts in wondering, their owne convicted reasons, shall witnesse against their unbeliefe, Ioh. 16.9. The Holy Ghost shall reprove the world of (...) because they beleeve not on me. Accedente fide discedit peccatum, accedit peccatum discedente fide. If faith comes, the guilt of all sinne departs: if faith departs, the god of all sin remaines. Israel had grosse sinnes, as tempting of God, unthankefulnesse, adulterie with Moab, idolatrie with Baal-poor: every one able to have kept them out of Canaan, to have swept them out of the world: yet Paul imputes all to their want of faith, Hebr. 3. Verse 19. They could not enter in because of unbeliefe, Rom. 11. Verse 20. Because of unbeliefe they were broken off. There is destruction enough wrapt up in this, not to beleeve on him that bought us: but to deny him, is yet worse.
It were very much not to have loved the Lord, who is every way so beautifull, that no soule can behold him, but she must needs affect him! But the wicked never saw him, they looke after him with carnall eyes, which are no more able to discerne him, than a bleare eye can looke upon the Sunne: their spirituall eyes, and intellectuall faith never saw him. They behold him pendentem in patibulo, dormientem in sepulchro, not Sedentem in throno; as a man of sorrowes, forsaken of his friends, afflicted by his enemies, exercised with terrors, killed with torments; yet even that he was lovely. But looke upon his innocencie, that immaculate Lambe; upon his righteousnesse, Christ the Iust one: behold him waited on with Angels, worshiped with prostrate knees, holding out a white hand of mercie, speaking gracious words to penitent sutors, smiling upon his Saints, kissing the soules he bought: Loe, (...) his beautie! If any aske the Church; What is thy beloved more than another beloved? Cant. 5.9. She answers that knoweth; My beloved is white and ruddy, the chiefest among ten thousand. His head is as the most fine Gold, etc. Si pars, quid tum? If every member of him be so beautifull, how excellent is the whole composi ion? He is altogether lovely. Take your choices where you will; This is my beloved, and this is my friend. Ver. 16. This is my choice. Psa. 45.2. Thou art fairer than the
 children of men: all that are faire, are faire only in thee. Therefore doe the virgins love thee, Cant. 1.3. Suppose in a Countrey there is a young Shepheard, whose face hath but newly discovered to the world of what sex hee is: his exquisite proportion and admirable beautie far transcending all the rest. The Virgin Shepheardesses desire his company, are glad to be in his sight, to doe him any service, to tend his flocke; and all for a kinde word or a smile: striving like rivals one with another, who shall be most neere him: and if it were possible, would every one enjoy him. So ten thousand times fairer than all the sons of men is the Shepheard of our soules, Iesus Christ: all the virgins love him, every good soule seekes him, and remembers his love more than wine, striving in a holy emulation who shall be most acceptable to him: they will doe him all service and worship, honouring his Name, feeding his flockes, making much of his followers; glad of a smile, but ravished with a kisse of his lips: all would possesse him, and loe, all shall possesse him that truely beleeve on him. On earth one husband is for one wife, but our infinite Saviour is a husband for all faithfull soules. So many as beleeve on him, he makes the sonnes of God, Ioh. 1.12. Christ being thus sweet, it were much not to love him! They that love not thee, O Lord, shall bee written in the dust. If any man love not the Lord Iesus, Anathema maranatha, 1 Cor. 16.22. But now to deny him, etc.
It was very much not to acknowledge Christ. Tacere laudes Dei, to hold a mans peace when his honour is in question, is to mistake the end of our redemption, 1 Cor. 6.20. Yee are bought with a price; therefore glorifie Christ in your body and spirit, which are the Lords. Now he is poorely glorified, when his Name is concealed. It is said of Iohn Baptist, Ioh. 1.20. That he confessed and denied not. If he confessed, it might seeme a Pleonasme to say, He denied not: but this declares that whosoever doth not openly confesse Christ, doth secretly deny Christ, Iudg. 5.23. The Merozians opposed not, they denied not, they only stood still, did nothing, said nothing:2 Sam. 17. they were cursed. Thinke of this ye that hide Christ, as the woman of Bahurim hid the Spies, in the deepe well of your hearts, and cover the mouth of it with corne: that would keepe in with Christ, and yet not fall off from the world. Rom. 10.10. With the heart man beleeveth unto righteousnesse, and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation. Confession is the effect of faith; I beleeved, and therefore I spake. Si sufficeret fides cordis, non creasset tibi Deus os, Chrysost. If it were enough to beleeve in the heart, to what purpose did God give thee a mouth? If it be sufficient for thee to know Christ, and not to acknowledge him thy Lord: then it shal be sufficient for Christ to know thee, but not to acknowledge thee for his Servant. Christum deseret, qui se Christianum non asserit; He denies Christ, that doth not professe himselfe a Christian. Nor is it any helpe for thee, to say that Silence argues consent: for thou art bound Consentire and confiteri, both to consent and to confesse: and indeed here Tacere is negare. Christ loves this free and humble acknowledgement, and commands it. 1 Pet. 3.15. Be ready alwayes to give an answer to every man that asketh you a reason of the hope that is in you, with meeknesse and reverence: Thus you sanctifie the Lord God in your hearts. Doth the persecuter question thy faith? Feare him not: what then? Sanctifie the Lord in thy hart: ^ow? by giving an answer, not silence: to whom? not only to the Magistrate, but to every man that asketh, whether friend or foe, home-borne or stranger: of what? the reason of thy hope, the ground of thy expectation of eternall blisse: where and when? not only in time of peace, and assembly of Saints, but Alwaies, be ever ready to do it.Iohn 20.16. Christ no sooner said to her, Mary; but she presently confessed him; Rabboni. It was but one word, to him that is the Word, it was taken for an acknowledgement. And ^an it be that we should not acknowledge our Saviour? Hee that will not confesse a benefit, hath arrived at the utmost confines of ingratitude: but he that denies his Benefactor, is fallen so low, that he can fall no lower, except it be into hell. It may be we have not feared Christ with due reverence, nor beleeved with true confidence, nor loved him with sincere affection, nor acknowledged him with free confession; but Lord keepe us from denying him: let us never deny the God that bought us.

The Lord.] One that by just right callengeth their service. Not a creature, yet the naturall man will not deny his owne horse or dog that hath done him service. A man will not deny his owne house: wilt thou Agnoscere domum, and rejicere Dominem; Acknowledge thy house, and deny thy Master, thy Maker? Not a servant: Philemus would not deny Onesimus a runnagate servant, when Paul had written for him: wilt thou Praeponere servum tuum Domino tuo; Prefer thy servant before thy Lord? not a friend:Psal. 55, 13. he is a prodigie that denies his friend. Nabal was branded for a Churle, because he shewed not kindnes to David his friend: and such a friend as protected him, his whole family, his substance, 1 Sam. 25.15. It goes neere when a mans owne familiar friend shall doe him a mischiefe; This Absalom objects to Hushai; Is this thy kindnes to thy friend?2 Sam. 16.17. Indeed men are sometimes so drunk with the honours of this world, that they forget their friends. Like as I have heard of a Lawyer, that pleaded a case very strongly on the one side, yet before the triall of it being advanced to the Bench, adjudged it on the other: yet thus answered all imputation; I spake then as an advocate for my client, I speake now as a Iudge of the cause. Or as when another challenged his friend; You were wont to visite me every day, now you keepe at distance: he plainly answered; I then needed you, now I am afraid you will need me. A good man would not thus use his friend, but is there any friend like the Lord? Not a Father, how unnaturall is it for the fruit to deny the tree? and to forget the rocke whence he was hewen? Salomon a King did not despise his mother, but set her at his right hand. There is nothing but the love of the Lord Iesus must make a man leave his parents, Luke 14.26. Indeed a man is bound to forsake his father and mother to adhere to his wife, Mat. 19.5. But this is to be understood with a limitation, if the competition be unpossible. But for Christ, Hearken O daughter, forget thine owne people, and thy fathers house, Psal. 45.10. But otherwise how cursed a thing is it to deny parents? Let them that glister like the Sunne, and deny to their poore obscure parents part of their superfluities, remember the doome. Prov. 30.17. The Ravens of the valley shall picke out that eye, and the young Eagles eat it. But what is the father of our flesh, to the Father of our spirits? Not a wife, and yet she is not to be denied but in case of knowne adultery, Mat. 19.9. Hath God made you one of two, and shall one deny the other? Deny your selfe? no man doth this, but he lapseth into fornication; denying a chast wife, to embrace an unchast harlot. Not a Soveraigne: Rome only hath broached those Lees of rebellion, and unloosed the bonds of allegiance? And no marvell though she hath denied Gods deputies on earth, which hath first denied God himselfe in heaven. If Kings doe not serve her, she forbiddeth all subjects to serve them: she excommunicates them as prophane. Yet Saul himselfe, though he had not sanctitie of life, had sanctitie of calling. Therefore David, honoravit vivum, vindicavit ^^scissum; Both honoured him living, and avenged him being dead, Aug.
These bee all sinfull denyalls in their severall degrees: but now to deny the Lord that is the supreme apostacie. If it be ill to deny the creature, what is it to deny the Creator? If to deny a servant that feares thee, what is it to deny a Master whom thou shouldest feare? If ill to deny a friend that may change, what is it to deny Christ that is the same yester-day, and to day, and for ever? If to deny a father that begate the body, what is it to deny God that created the soule? If to deny a wife with whom thou art made one flesh, what is it to deny the Lord with whom thou art made one spirit? 1 Cor. 6.17. If to deny a Soveraigne be treason, what is it to deny the King of Kings? We are subject to the Prince propter Dominum, for the Lord, to the Lord propter seipsum, for himselfe. The very word the Apostle here useth is (...), and not (...): Lord hath reference to a Bondman, Master to a free-man, Varin. Intimating in the very proprietie of syllables, that man is a very bond-man under the despoticall power of God.
Here is then the second aggravation of their sinne; (...). The LORD that hath given them his liverie, allowed them maintenance, to whom they have vowed homage, and who can powre on them vengeance. 1. His livery, they
 take and weare. Question them, as the marriners did Ionah; What art thou? they will answer with him; I feare the LORD GOD of heaven. Yea, they will professe with David, Psalm. 116.16. O LORD, I am thy servant. But, alas, they put on this cloake that they may be the more securely wicked under it: and if you trust them not, you shall be sure they will not deceive you. But how can they professe him, and deny him too? Yes, they may professe him in words, and deny him in workes. They beare Caesars stampe upon base metall. There was one condemned for comming to the marriage without his wedding-garment: these have the garment, but they come not to the wedding: God shall plucke their coat over their eares. Secondly, his maintenance they take and live on: the bread they eat, the aire they breath, the cloaths they weare, all are his: they are maintained only at his cost and charges: yet they deny the Lord that feeds them. We are to worship God, ratione immensi Dominii, impensi beneficii; both for his glorious Soveraignty, and gracious bounty. Si non colis, iniquus es: si negas, ingratus es; If thou doe not worship him, thou art unjust; if thou denyest him, thou art unthankfull. Me thinkes thou should'st feare, that the bread should choak thee, the aire infect thee, the water drown thee: when thou considerest, I have denied the Lord of all these. Thinke of his ye that forget God and his benefits: hee that riseth from the table without giving of thankes, goes his way and owes for his ordinary. And because he will not pay God in his thankes, God will pay himselfe in his torments. Shall I take my Masters food, and deny my Master? Thirdly, they have vowed homage to him, and faithfull adherence: Christ covenanting with his bloud to wash away their sins; they to forsake his enemies, and continue his faithfull souldiers and servants to the end of their lives. Now what kinde of souldier is he that runs away from his Colours, and denies his Generall? Fourthly, they deny that Lord, who can destroy all those that rebell against him, Luke 19.27. Those mine enemies that denied me to reigne over them, bring hither, and slay before me. They have not refused a weake, titular, mortall Lord, but the Lord of heaven and earth; that spake the word and they were made, that can speake againe and they shall be marr'd. Psal. 18.7. The earth trembled, and the foundations of the hils were moved, because he was wroth. It was this Lord, Esay 30.33. Tophet is ordained of old, the pile thereof is fire and much wood, and the breath of the Lord, like a streame of brimstone, doth kindle it. It was this Lord, Matth. 18.34. The Lord was wroth, and delivered him to the tormentours. It was this Lord. A Lord that is every where to see his wrongs, that hath a just hand to requite them, and an almighty power to revenge them: from the wrath of this Lord, the Lord himselfe deliver us. Lord, who knowes thy greatnesse, and dares deny thee? who knowes thy goodnesse, and will deny thee? who knowes thy mercy, and can deny thee? Thou art our God, and we will praise thee: thou art our Lord, and we will serve thee: thou art our Father, and we will honour thee: thou art our Iudge, and we will feare thee: thou art our advocate, we will not deny thee: thou art our hope, our joy, our blessednesse, our salvation, and wee will love thee for ever.
That bought them.] This last aggravation is derived from the consideration of the unspeakable good which this Lord hath done them: in that they were delivered by the most excellent benefit that ever came to mankind, which is Redemption by the bloud of Christ. For howsoever it was a singular worke and favour of God, to give us by creation a blessed being: yet was it no otherwise given us, than with a possibilitie to keepe it or lose it. But Redemption hath instated us to a blessednesse never to be lost. Here then is a doubt to be resolved: how they may perish from Christ if they were redeemed; how were they redeemed if they can perish?
First, we must lay this ground of truth: that no soule which Christ hath truely bought can perish eternally. This is the Fathers will, that of all which he hath given me,Iohn 6.39. I should lose nothing. But all they are given to Christ, whom he hath purchased. Ioh. 10.28. I give unto them eternall life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any man plucke them out of my hands. If I give them eternall life, nothing shall bring them to eternall
 death: and to plucke them out of his hand that is Almightie, requires an adversarie stronger than himselfe. And our Saviour there addes, Vers. 29. My Father which gave them me, is greater than all: and no man is able to plucke them out of my Fathers hand. Hereupon Paul makes a free challenge to all the actors, and pleaders, and powers that ever damnation had. Rom. 8.38. Neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depts, (and if all this be not enough) nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God in Christ Iesus: none can doe it. And whether they be Romish or Arminian, that seeke to weaken the grace of God, and permit the redeemed ones of the Lord to perish; let us know them for the brokers of Satan, the Seminaries of despaire, and Denyers of Christ.
But against this Doctrine is opposed, Rom. 14.15. Destroy not him with thy meat, for whom Christ died. 1 Cor. 8.11. Through thy knowledge shall thy weake brother perish, for whom Christ died. But those places may be understood not (...): not that they can perish through thy default, but that thou dost what thou canst to make them perish. But here it seemes most plaine, that they may be lost in Denying Christ, whom he bought. To cleare this, we say that Reprobates may be said to be redeemed in divers respects.
1 Secundum sufficientiam pretii; In regard of the all-sufficient price payed for them. So Christ is said to be that Lambe which taketh away the sinnes of the world. Though he meant not to save all, yet he died for all, quod suum erat adimplens, performing his part, Chrysost. For he doth not really take away all sinne from the world; and this himselfe declares by not praying for the world, Ioh. 17.9. I pray not for the world. Otherwise the two maine parts or offices of his Priest-hood were disjoyned; and he should sacrifice for them, for whom he doth not supplicate. Now for his mediation, concludes his own in it, excludes the world out of it, I pray not for the world.
2 They are said redeemed, secundum apparentiam, in respect of outward appearance. So all the Iewes were called the elect people of God; yet Paul saith expresly; That with many of them God was not well pleased, and they were destroyed, 1 Cor. 10.5. Now, Electorum si quisquis perit, fallitur Deus; If any of the elect perish, God is deceived; but God cannot be deceived, Aug. They were then of his Court, they were not of his Councell; I meane, not of that number which in his eternall Councell he decreed to save. Inward sincerity is not without externall profession, but externall profession may be without inward sincerity. If the forme of godlinesse could save, hell should be filled with none but Pagans and Infidels; not a Christian should come thither. But we know that a man may unhallow that bloud wherewith he was hallowed; and so deserve sorer punishment, Heb. 10.29. And a wicked spirit rejected, may make his re-entry with seven other worse than himselfe, Mat. 12.45. And their fire in hell shall be hottest, that re-admit a devill, which the grace of God had once cast forth. As the wicked here say of the elect,Wisd. 5. That his life is madnesse, and his end to be without honour: in regard of their estate so outwardly miserable. So the elect judge of the reprobate; Wee number him among the children of God, and thinke his lot to be among the Saints: in regard of visible appearance. At last they finde him cast like an unprofitable and hypocriticall servant into outer darknesse.
3 They are said to be redeemed, Secundum ipsorum opinionem, in respect of their owne opinion: they thought themselves to be redeemed, and did apportion Christ. There is a temporary faith, which for a while beleeves, and in time of temptation falls away, Luke 8.13. neither should it be said, Be thou faithfull unto the death, unlesse there was a faith that might faile before death, Rev. 2.10. S. Iames sayes, there is a faith without charity: which indeed Potest esse, non potest prodesse, saith Augustine, may be, but never bee good. This faith is like an high ladder; if men have got up many rounds, and then let goe their hold, they take the greater fall, Heb. 6.4. Some reprobates may taste the heavenly gift; and yet fall so farre away, that no repentance to renew them. They tasted it, but it seemes they tooke it but upon liking, and
 could not digest it. Some are so impudently bold of their salvation, and presume themselves so familiar with God, that they dare challenge him to talke ex tempore with him. They may thinke themselves Gods darlings and favourites, that never had their names registred in his booke.
4 They seeme to be redeemed, Secundum charitatis judicium, in respect of the judgement of charitie: which holds all men partakers of redemption, that are of the profession. We must cast off none, untill we are sure that the Lord hath cast them off. Let us not abridge or limit Gods mercy: how often have our sinnes deserved his wrathfull doome, which yet our prayers and teares have reversed? How often hath the scroll of divorce beene drawen and signed; and yet againe with-drawen and cancelled upon our submission? Let us not grudge others that mercy we have found: Why is man cruell, where God relents? If the Creditour be pleased to forgive the debt, doe standers by complaine? Well then, we hoped that these men were redeemed, they were not: we desired it, we endevoured it: our charity did them no good, it did our selves good:Psal. 35.13. Our prayer returned into our owne bosome.
This truth then remaines, that Christ only bought his Church, and salvation for his Church. Act. 20.28. Feed the Church of God, which he hath purchased with his owne bloud. Ephes. 5.25. Christ loved the Church, and gave himselfe for it. Matth. 1.21. His Name is Iesus, yet he shall save only His owne people. For the rest, 1 Ioh. 2.19. They went out from us, but they were not of us. Howsoever; the price was paid for them, and there was a sufficient ransome in the bloud of Iesus, if their faithfull apprehension had made it theirs. The King hath granted a Pardon for all malefactours at the Parliament; we say, they are all pardoned: yet perhaps some afterwards are condignely punished, because they never sued out this pardon, nor tooke the benefit of it. First, therefore consider what God hath done for them, then what they have done against him: the height of his mercy addes to the weight of their iniquitie.
God in his love redeemed us by the bloud of his Sonne: Now there are foure kinds of redemption: First, when a slave, gratuito manumittitur, is freely released to liberty: wee could not be so discharged; for besides that God is just, and his debts must be paid; Satan would not so part with us. Secondly, when a man is set free, per mutationem alterius, by commutation or exchanging another into his roome: we could exchange no creature to supply our servitude. Thirdly, when a man is rescued, violenta ablatione, by a forcible surprisall; as Abraham redeemed Lot: but herein God was far too strong for us. Fourthly, Dato pretio, by a price payed; and thus were we bought with a price, even the bloud of that unspotted Lambe. His payment consisted in Patiendo and Faciendo; in suffering for our delinquishments, and in performing a sufficient obedience to God for us.
Here admire we the infinite love of God! The Aegyptians in their Hieroglyphickes, or expressions of moralitie by pictures; used to paint Love naked, Minerva vailed: to shew that wisdome may be concealed, love cannot be smothered. The Cherubins covered their faces, which is the seat of wisdome: but not their brests, which is the seat of affection. David by his dissembled madnesse, kept his wisdome unseene from Achish: but spying Bethshabe from the battlements of his Palace, hee could not smother his affection. God reserves his wisdom to himselfe, and the reason of his actions: but his love is visible, breaking forth, and read by every running eye, Cant. 8.7. Many waters cannot quench love. It is an unsuppressible fire; much water cannot quench it; water and bloud could not put it out. Now whom did GOD thus love? The World: not the frame of heaven and earth, but the little world, Man: the compendium and abridgement of all creatures. That whatsoever is imprinted with capitall letters in that large volume, as in Folio, is sweetly and harmoniously contracted in Decimo sexto, in the briefe Text of Man, who includes all. Planets have being, not life; Plants have life, not sense; Beasts have sense, not reason; Angells have being, life, reason, not sense: Man hath all; being with Planets, life with Plants, sense with Beasts, reason with Angells.
 Therefore he is called the World. This world God loved, affective before all time, effective in time.
But what good could man doe to him, to induce this love? None: Our well-doing extendeth not unto him, Psal. 16.2. When wee were made, wee added nothing to God: if we were dissolved to nothing, we take nothing from God. That which the Lord saw in us, was apostacie and rebellion. Every creature obeyes God, in running that course which he disposed to them. But how was this true: when the Sunne being appointed to move his incessant race, did yet stand still in Gibeon? When the sea being charged to keep within his bounds, doth yet burst out with inundations? I answer; God bade them do so, dispensing with his former command, and they obeyed him. Well, yet man, rebellious man he loved: What did he give for him? Paradise, large kingdomes, or mines of gold? No, they are but a farthing token to the price of this purchase.Esay 5.4. He gave his only begotten Sonne: as he sayes, What could I doe more for my vineyard? so, what could I give more for my vineyard? This Son he gave pro ingratis, for unthankfull men, that said not so much as God-a-mercy for him: pro injustis, for unrighteous men, that denied him that was not denied to them. Here was a Sic dilexi, no man could ever find a Sicut for it. Augustine supposeth that some great Prince had a poore desertlesse subject, maimed in minde, without reason or honestie; leprous is body, without any soundnesse; yea, so full of stench that none could endure him: yea, more than all, so arrant a traytour to the same Prince, that he would vex him, kill him. He hath one onely sonne, a sweet and hopefull Prince, the joy of his heart, the light and delight of his eyes, the singular heire of his kingdome. Yet when nothing will cure this forlorne wretch of his leprosie, but onely this young Princes bloud, he freely gives that to bathe and cleanse him. This is much, and such as never was found, yet still short of this precedent. For if the life of a Prince was given for a gnat, it is not so much as for Gods Son to be given for man. Hee is worth ten thousands of us, more worth than all: O unspeakable love, gift, price!
Saint Peter tels us what was the price of this purchase, 1 Pet, 1.19. The precious bloud of Christ, a Lambe without blemish. Had he emptied the veines of the earth, and spoiled them of their richest oares: had he plucked the spangles from heaven, and impoverished the firmament of her sparkling beauties: had he given the whole inheritance of the world; yet all had beene infinitely lesse. When David said to Mephibosheth; Thou and Ziba divide the Land: he answered; Yea, let him take all, seeing my Lord the King is come againe in peace. This was much, yet Mephibosheth's content was for David, a friend, a King: but God parts not with an Inheritance, but with his Sonne; and this for man, an enemie, a servant. Let death seize on my Son, that my servant may come againe in peace. O never was so poore a purchase at so high a price! That he might shew love to us, he forbore love to himselfe. Now see, O renegate, whom thou refusest: Nescis temeraria, nescis, quem fugias, ideoque fugis; Thou knowest not whom thou denyest, therefore thou denyest. If thou hast bought honour by thy valour, thou callest it Thine: if indeared a friend by thy loyaltie, thou callest him Thine: if purchased an house with thy money, thou callest it Thine Christ hath bought thee with his bloud, and yet thou denyest to be his. This ransome is paid, and now in a mercifull offer he tenders it to thee; wilt thou in a peevish sullennesse refuse it? Conceive this dialogue betweene the Redeemer and the Denyer. Red. Open to me. Den. No, I know not whence thou art. Red. Rise and see. Den. No, I am in my warme bed of pleasures and carnall satisfactions, I will not rise: who art thou? Red. I am IESUS, thy Redeemer: wilt thou still sweare and for sweare, I know none such? I bought thee, thou art mine: I come to embrace thee, deny me not. Den. Yes, take me, when all other delights forsake me: let mee be thine when I am not mine owne: till then keepe thy cheare to thy selfe, I have married my pleasure, and I cannot come. O obstinate hearts, whom the King of heaven must buy with his bloud, wooe with his grace, wait upon with his patience, enrich with proffers of mercie; and yet at last be denyed? LORD turne to sad
 as love thee, wee deny not thee, deny not us, O good LORD IESUS. Amen.
This is the latitude and dimension of their wickednesse; wherewith I will have done, when I have declared the Penaltie of it. Their punishment is proportioned to their fault: they denyed him that bought them, and he that bought them will deny them, 2 Tim. 2.12. If we deny him, he will also deny us. How, where, and when will he deny them? They surfet on pleasures, and enjoy the wish of their owne hearts; how then doth he deny them? Doth not God blesse whom he loves and love whom he blesses? Alas, those blessings to such men prove curses: Conceditur opulentia, abscinditur misericordia: wealth is granted, but mercie is withholden. The earth seemes their owne, the world applaudes them; and is not Vox populi, Vox dei; the voice of the people, the voice of God? No, for the whole world lyeth in wickednesse: but here they are honoured, where then shall they be denyed? The eccho answers, Here: even where Saul would be honoured, there was he denyed, before the people. They spend their dayes in peace, their minds are not troubled, they sit not sighing and blubbring for their offences, sure God is not angry with them; when shall they be denyed? Now, even in that they lament not, their case is most lamentable: their pulse hath left beating, this argues Gods direliction; that their life breath is painted out, and they have given up the (Holy Ghost.) Will you heare how, where, and when? Take it from CHRISTS owne mouth. Matth. 10.33. Whosoever shall deny me before men, him will I also deny before my Father which is in heaven. For the manner, How; I will deny him, not conceale him, nor excuse him, not hold my peace and silence it, but deny him. For the place where; Before my Father, where my word will be taken: for I have the key of heaven, to let in and keepe out whom I please. Coram Patre, who hath committed all judgement to me, and set me to sentence every man according to his workes. Coram Patre, if it had beene onely. Coram hominibus, before men, where thou denyest me, they would approve my justice: if Coram daemonibus, before the divells, they would be glad of thy company, and with a hasty rape hurry thee to perdition: if only, Coram Angelis, before the Angels, (which is also expressed, Luk. 12.9. He that denyeth me before men, shall be denyed before the Angels of God.) They would witnesse how often I have sent them to guard thee, how little thou didst regard me. But what is the detestation of men, the rejection of Angels, the derision of divells, to the losse of my Fathers love? This Coram Patre, shall strike thee with horrour Matth. 21. Ver. 37. When the Father sent CHRIST, hee said, Sure they will reverence my Sonne: but they conspired, This is the heire, come, let us kill him. Reject them o Father, for they rejected me. Away must their faces be turned, from joy, from light, from blessednesse; to wander in horrid darkenesse, to lie bound in the chaines of torment; where unquencheable fire, and unsatiable death shall not be denyed them, that denyed everlasting life. For the time when; In heaven: when they knocke with hope to be let in at that gate, when they shall see millions of confessors enter in and be made welcome: In heaven I will deny them, that is in the day of judgement. On earth they spake their pleasures, their tongues were their owne, they denyed me without controll: but when I have denyed them in heaven, and they have acknowledged me in hell, then shall they gnaw those tongues for paine, and wish that they had beene borne dumbe, never to have denyed him that bought them, Revel. 16.10.
This is a fearefull plague, when God will suffer men to fall off from CHRIST, and to reject their Redeemer: alas, they doe no lesse then split and sinke that Ship in the midst of the sea, which alone should save them. Whom shall they trust to make them righteous? none can doe this but CHRIST, and they have denyed him. Rom. 6.33. Who shall condemne? it is CHRIST that justifieth: so who shall justifie, when CHRIST condemneth? They have sinned, and God is offended, who shall make an atonement for them? Only CHRIST can doe this; If any man sinne, hee is our Advocate and propitiation: and this Advocate they have denyed.
 Whom shall they call upon for love and favour? there is none to bee had but in CHRIST, and him they have denyed, Revel. 2.4. I have somewhat against thee, because thou hast left thy first love. He that hath once broken his faith, will not easily be trusted. Him, that hath once vowed love to a virgin, and after fallen off with breach of covenant, no wise maide will ever admit within distance of liking. They waxe wanton against CHRIST, having damnation, because they have cast off their first faith. Whom shall they call upon in the day of trouble? the Lord. This was the voice of Elias in his agonie, of Ionas in his furie; Lord, take away my life. Of the Apostles in their feare. Matth 8.25. Lord save us, we perish. Of the malefactor dying on the Crosse. Luk 23.42. Lord, remember me in thy kingdome. Of Stephen under the stones, Act. 7.59. Lord, into thy hands, etc. Of Saul cast downe from his horse. Act. 9.6. Lord, what wilt thou have me to doe? This is the eccho of miserie, the suppliant for mercie: but alas how shall they call on this Lord, that have denyed him, Rom. 10.14. How shall they call on him, in whom they have not beleeved: Yea, whom they have denyed? What wonder is it, if God doth not heare, where he hath not beene heard? if he shut against them, that would not open to him? complainest thou, Why hast thou forsaken me O Lord? he replies, why hast thou denyed me o servant? There is grievous punishment for them that feare not God: Powre out thine indignation upon them that feare thee not, saith the Prophet. Grievous, for them that seeke him not. Psal. 10. The wicked will not seeke after God, therefore are lost in the devices of error. Grievous, for them that call not on him; for he will be a stranger to their acquaintance. Grievous, for them that trust not on him, for they shall be left to themselves. Grievous, for them that love him not, for they shall be written in the dust. But most grievous for them that deny him here, for they shall be denyed for ever hereafter.
The use that we are to make of it, is by this consideration to fortifie our faithfulnesse and loyaltie to CHRIST. Let us not deny him, yea let us deny all things for him. For saith Hierome; if necessitie require it, Odium in suum, est pietas in deum; it is godlinesse to hate our owne delights in respect of the Lord. What good thing can be lost by our profession, which Iesus requites not in himselfe? lose wee riches? In him dwells all fulnesse. Libertie? The Sonne makes us free indeed. Wife? he is a husband. Children? he is a Father. Life? Ego sum vita, he is the true life. Therefore is he called All in all: ut qui omnia propter Christum dimiserit, (...) pro omnibus inveniat, and libere clamet, Pars mea Dominus, Hieronym. That he which hath left all for CHRIST, many find CHRIST in stead of all, and sing chearefully, The Lord is my portion. Why should wee deny him? hee never denyed us. Not to the Pharisies, Matth. 9.12. Why eateth your Master with Publicans and sinners? this was their question. I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance: this was his answer. Not to Pilate. 1 Tim. 6.13. Before Pontius Pilate he witnessed a good confession. Not to the Angels, for hee makes them Ministring spirits for our good. Not to GOD the Father himselfe, Ioh. 17. They are all mine, and thine. When he was betrayed and tken, he denyed us not to Iudas; Ego sum, I am he. When he was scourged, he denyed us not: when he was condemned, and nailed to the Crosse, loe, he did not then deny us, Though enemies denyed mercie, by-standers denyed him pitie, Angels must deny him helpe, God himselfe seemed to deny him ease and comfort; so he cryes, My God, why hast thou denyed me? yet even then he did not deny us. But he confessed us to the death, Luk. 23.34. Father, forgive them: and after death, as appeares by his charge to Peter, Feed my sheepe: and for ever, Matth. 10.32. Whosoever shall confesse me before men, him will I confesse before my Father in heaven. A way then with all excuses of denyall: there are two temptations or causes of it; Infirmity, and Infidelitie. Infirmitie rise^h from feare of paine, Infidelitie from love of pleasure. Is any paine like the separation from CHRIST? thinke of that Discredite, Matth. 25. Depart from me (...) cursed. Is any pleasure like the pleasures at the right hand of God for ever? Away with
 that coldnesse of heart, that like Northerne cloth shrinkes in the wetting, I meane in the flouds of persecution. Away with that thin-danw'd profession, that like mowen grasse withers in the sunne, with the heate of prosperitie. Let us deny our owne worth, and become nothing in our selves, that wee may bee wholly all in CHRIST. The poore man depends not upon the reliefe of others, till he find nothing at home. Vntill our hearts be purged of pride and selfe-love, we never depend on the favour of God. Be every thing denyed that is not in ordine ad Deum, and hath no relation to Iesus Christ. Let us deny our pleasures, deny our lusts, deny our wills, deny our covetous desires, deny our seducing friends, deny our selves: but let us never deny the Lord that bought us. To this blessed Lord of our redemption, with the Father of our creation, and the Spirit of our adoption, three Persons and one most holy God, be praise and glory for ever, Amen.
They bring upon themselves swift destruction. We have anatomised the fault of ^hese false teachers, in denying their Redeemer. Which haply was not with an open and manifest recusancie, for then orthodoxe Christians would have refused conversing with them, and the Church excommunicated them. But rather, because such a denyall did arise by just consequence out of their dogmaticall, stigmaticall assertions. For if we understand Saint Peter by Saint Iude; the very paralel ^nd harmonie one of the other: we find these heretickes chalenged for Turning the grace of God into licenciousnesse, Iud. ver. 4. Whereupon is inferred, that they deny the only Lord God, and Iesus Christ. So that to turne Grace into wantonnesse, is to deny CHRIST. Neither was this only exemplary in their practise, but also doctrinall in their pofession. For he that calls himselfe Christian, and teacheth that in CHRIST is granted libertie of sinning, denyes the Redeemer. Luk. 1.74. We are delivered out of the hands of all our enemies, that we might serve him without feare. That we might serve him without feare, not sinne without feare. CHRIST came to unbinde us from Satan, and to vexe him at our new goodnesse, not to make him laugh at our wickednesse: that we should sin lesse; not sinne more, and more securely. Rom. 6.1. Shall we continue in sinne, that grace may abound? God forbid. An sit, quia sit? absit. Shall there be presumption in sinne because there is abundance of grace? God forbid. This is a true position: Quicquid Christus operatur pro nobis, hoc ^peratur in nobis. Whatsoever the Lord Iesus worketh for us, that he also worketh in us. If hee hath freed us from the damnation of sinne, then also from the dominion of sinne. If with his bloud he hath quenched the fire of hell for us, he hath quenched the fire of lust in us. They are miserable men, qui luxuriantur in Christo, that are wanton in Christ: as if the Law had lost it selfe in the Gospell: and the Statutes against blasphemie, adulterie, idolatrie, covetousnesse, were now repealed, to stand in no more force: but like an Almanacke out of date, to be sacrificed to forgetfulnesse. This is a left-handed taking of Christ: Non consolatur Christi infantia garrulos, non Christi lacrymae cachinnantes, non panni ejus ambulantes in stolis, non praesepe amantes primas cathedras, Bern. Christs humility doth not comfort the proud: his patience shall doe no good to the revengefull: nor his love to the uncharitable. He was a prodigall young heire that encouraged his companions; come let us drink, revell, throw the house out at the windowes; the man in the scarlet will pay for all; meaning his father, who was a Iudge: but he adjudged the patrimonie from him to one of his younger sonnes more obedient. So say the luxurious; let us sweare, oppresse, abuse, be wanton, be merry, be mad; the man in the Scarlet hath paid for all; meaning Christ, that he is in his Scarlet and bloudy robes shall justifie and acquit them. But be not deceived; as good men as we, and as jolly they were, that stood upon the Fatherhood of Abraham. (We may put away our wifes, we may sweare, we may hate our enemies. We may kill the Prophets, subject Gods word to our Traditions, and follow our owne wayes. Why? Abraham is our Father, Ioh. 8.39.) But by their leave, Christ calls them bastards, and finds out another father
 for them. Ver. 44. Yee are of your father the divell, and the lusts of your father yee will doe. So yee prophane wretches, beare your selves so long as you will upon CHRIST, and flesh your lusts on his merits; if you thinke to take wilfull sinne in one hand, and Christ in the other, you shall find both your hands ful indeed, b^^ Christ in neither of them: the one being full of wickednesse, the other full of vengeance; you have denyed the Lord Iesus.
They bring on themselves swift destruction.] This is the punishment. The^^ are plagues enow, that wound the flesh, and fetch bloud of the soule, without perishing; but this the utter ruine, Destruction. But yet this may be farre off, and happily doth waite the succession of ages, and intervention of many yeares: and when it commeth, it shall give warning of the approch, like a Porcpose before ^ storme: nay, it comes on a suddaine, it is Swift destruction. But who shall inflict this, that they may fortifie themselves against it? Themselves: here need no e^gines, no enemies, no invasions; (...), Superinducunt sibi, Themselves bring it, or, They bring it on themselves. So that their punishment is described, by the Autho^^, Measure, and Manner. The Author, Themselves: the measure, no lesse than Destruction: the manner, Swift and suddaine.
They bring on themselves.] Very kind men! what would they doe with others, that destroy themselves? Cui bonus, qui sibi nequam? He that is evill to himselfe, (...) whom will hee be good? Every man thinkes, that he loves himselfe farre better than his enemie: yet while he affecteth sinne, he loves his enemie better than himselfe,Aug. Vnusquisque vult esse beatus, etiam sic vivendo ut sit miserrimus. All men would be happy, albeit most men take the course of infelicity. We hate our foes; thou hast no worse foe than thy selfe: hate thy sinfull selfe. If there were no harlot, no drunken associate, no theefe to cry, Cast in thy lot with us; no divell to doe his office; wicked men would beget destruction on themselves. Accersunt, so some read; They send for destruction; as a man dispatcheth messenger after messenger, because the expected partie delayes his comming. So as if damnation were leaden-heeld, they send anger to fetch it to them, after that malice, after that murder, a bloudy messenger. So worldlings send covetousnesse for it, after that lying, after that swearing, after that Vsurie, after al oppression. Lest vengeance should be too slow, and forget it selfe, these be the messengers to bring it. Hos. 4.2. By swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing, and committing adulterie, they breake out, and bloud toucheth bloud. Therefore shall the land mourne, and every inhabitant languish. Now whe^ the plague comes, and sayes, Ecce adsum, Here I am: they crie as the divell did to CHRIST, What have we to doe with thee: why commest thou to torment us before (...) time? Before your time, replies destruction? Why, did you not send for me? was not pride rapping at my doore, blasphemie thundring in mine eares, Sacriledge pulling me by the hand? all crying, vengeance come away, thou art sent for? And especially, when sacriledge hastened me, it was high time to come. As Aha^i^ three Captaines and their fifties that were sent to fetch Eliah: one said, come down: another, come downe quickly: the last on his knees intreate; loe then God saith g^ downe with him, 2 King. 11.14. Wickednesse saies, wrath come downe: presumpti^^ saies, come downe quickly: but rebellion begges it without nay: and then G^^ saith, Goe downe with it. Yea, as if sending for it were not speedy enough, and th^y would not in this businesse trust a messenger; they put off all state, and goe themselves to fetch it. They bring it on themselves, Esay. 5.18. They draw iniquity (...) cords of vanity, and sinne as it were with a cartrope. That same threefold cord, (...) easily broken, that Saint Iohn speakes of, 1 Ioh. 2.16. The lust of the flesh, the last (...) the eyes, and the pride of life; this drawes it home. But lest all these cords shall (...) hold, hard-heartednesse is the cartrope that shall fetch it with a mischiefe. W^^ then doth a man complaine for the punishment of his sinnes? Lam. 3.39. Punishment reassons with the wicked; why doest thou murmure in thy sufferings? Hast th^^
 beene so many yeares a bringing me, sent so many messengers for me: and now I am here complainest thou? I was long a comming, I will be longer a departing. Ne^o fit repente miserrimus: no man becomes miserable on the suddaine; such is Gods patience: but being once made miserable, it is long before happinesse returnes; such ^s God Iustice. Miserie comes come on horse-backe, but goes away on foote: sin quickly brings her, long repentance must drive her gone. From this point of doctrine may be deduced three collections.
1 That the wicked are the causers of their owne condemnation. Esa. 50.1. Which of my creditours is it to whom, I have sold you? Behold, for your iniquities ye have ^old your selves. I tooke no money saith God, no price of any creditors for you; ^ee have sold your selves. Prov. 5.22. His owne iniquitie shall take the wicked him^elfe: there need no ginnes nor snares, nor plots to surprise him; his owne sinnes ^hall doe it. Thou mayest say of thy sinne, (as of thy sonne:) it is a childe of ^hine owne begetting: concupiscence the mother layes it to thee, and thou must fa^her it. Psal. 64.8. They shall make their owne tongue to fall upon themselves. Let ^here be no plaintiffes to endite, no divells to accuse, their owne tongues shall condemne them. Ier. 2.17. Hast thou not procured this unto thy selfe? Selfe doe, selfe have. Procuring is a diligent labouring of a businesse: so they study to bring evill on themselves. Mic. 2.1. They meditate mischiefe; study to be nought. Let our ^rovidence be never so vigilant, our circumspection heedfull; sorrow will come: ^ut these men study for it; they beat their braines, and breake their sleepes, plot, consult, contrive; and all to bring on themselves swift destruction. It is true, that ^his is not their immediate proposed end, but it is a necessary consequent. He that ^o digge for some hidden treasure undermines the foundation of a house; his end ^s wealth; yet he knowes the whole building will fall on his head, and quash him to pieces: if he doe perish, let him thanke himselfe.
2 Observe that God is not the cause of mans transgression or damnation. Iam. ^.13. Let no man say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God. Seneca hath a saying not ^nlike of the gods; Hii nec habent, nec dant malum. But it is objected; It is Gods will that I should thus sinne, and thus fall. Rom. 9.19. Why doth he yet find fault? who ^ath resisted his will? My will is borne by the streame of his inevitable will, I sin by ^ompulsion; why doth he then complaine? o detestable speech, that charges God with our iniquity; than which the grand divell could not rore a worse above ground. Consider their dilemma: evill is done, and God doth suffer it; whether then doth ^e suffer it against his will, or with it? If against his will, this takes away his omni^otence: if with his will, than he willed it. For answer, the will of God is partly ^ecret, wholy just: it is two wayes considered. First as it is Signata, written in tables ^ublished by a trumpet, seconded with blessings, curses, Then as Reservata, con^ealed, written in another booke, wrapped up in the counsells of his owne brest. What God formerly wills, is not done alwayes, yea is done seldome: what in the ^ther respect he wills, is infallible. Senacherib is a foole to challenge to himselfe; What God can deliver out of my hand? Nero to plead; my authoritie gives me licence ^o doe all things. Rome, to challenge to her chaire an impetuous, imperious, and ^asterlesse will; to whom no man must say, as to the Lord, Cur ita facis, why doest ^hou so? Thus they ground it. Esa. 10.15. Shall the saw magnifie him that shaketh (...)? The saw must not lift up it selfe against him that moveth it; ergo let no man ^udge the Pope. But they shall find to their woe, that this is only true of God; who ^oeth whatsoever he will. If we presse further into his secrets, we are bid stand back. Adam was driven out of Paradise for affecting too much knowledge: the Israelits ^ad died the death, had they past their bounds, and climbed up to the Mount. Fifty ^housand threescore and ten men of the Bethshemites were slaine for looking into ^he Arke. 1 Sam. 6.19. There are some unsearcheable mysteries, as high as the ^ighest heavens, covered with a curtaine of sacred secrecie, not to be drawen till the ^ay come, wherein we shall know as we are knowen. Now when men have spilt
 bloud, defiled the marriage bed, provoked heaven with rapes, treasons, depopulations, blasphemies; what, have they then done the will of God? Indeed, in respe^t of his hidden purpose they have done his will, spight of all their malicious (...) sworne contradictions. For De his qui faciunt quae non vult, facit ipse quae vult. Vpon them that will not doe as he would have it, he will doe himselfe as he would (...) it. But in respect of themselves the wicked have done what God willed not, for (...) commanded the contrary; and hath expressed that will in his word.
But yet he wills their destruction, therfore they bring it not on themselves? G^^ found them revolted to sinne, indisposed to beleeve, and so he leaves them: he (...) not give them faith, he needs not, he is not bound to it. This is Gods hardeni^g Nolle emollire, when he will not soften. His making blind is Nolle illuminare, whe^ he will not enlighten. His casting off is Nolle vocare, when he will not call ho^^ Neither is this only a meere permission; for their is a degree of some forwarder disposition in God concerning the actions of unrighteousmen, than a bare toleration There is great difference betweene these speeches; Non vult, and Vult non: between he hath not a will to doe it; and, he hath a will not to doe it. The former arg^^^ (...) carelesse neglect, this a bent and resolved decree. A poore man asketh almes, so^^ are not willing to relieve him, as not waighing his necessitie: another hath a will not (...) doe it, a determinate refusall of mercie. This is then the conclusion; Multi (...) laberentur detenti, nulli ut laberentur impulsi: God lifteth many up, there are (...) whom he properly casteth downe. Ab illo est quod statur, a nobis quod ruitur: b^ him we stand, we fall off our selves. O Israel, thou hast destroyed thy selfe; if the^^ be any helpe, it is in me. Indeed it is my hand of justice that strikes, but thou by thy wickednesse didst draw out the sword, and put the arrow into my bended bow: thy pestilent and stinking sinnes have conflated the plague wherewith I strike thee. Go^ would have spared them, they would not bee spared; Accelerant sibi; They bring destruction on themselves; and still Thou continuest holy, Oh thou worship of Israel.
3 Observe that themselves bring it; therefore not any fatall necessitie out of themselves, but their owne malice within them. There be some that say, It is (...) destinie to doe this or that sin, the stars have signed it. Mercurie committed the theft, Mars the murther, Venus the adulterie. This is a barking at Gods Iustice indirectly, involvedly, and somewhat afarre off, to charge the influences of heaven. As if forsooth, God did not instigate them to sinne immediately by himselfe, yet by other instruments. Thus Adam insinuated an imputation upon God; M^li^^ quam tu mihi dedisti; The woman which thou gavest me: as if God had given him (...) woman to tempt him. Sed haec ruina est maxima, Deum putare causam ruinae: this i^ the fearefullest ruine of all, to accuse the Lord for the cause of our ruine. There i^ no fatall necessitie from above, that drives man to sinne. Saint Augustine confi^^^ them that used to charge the starres with their impietie. A woman was given to (...), and often played the harlot: which when her husband found, and objected to her she excused her selfe, and pleaded that it was Venus which caused her to doe so. H^^ upon he tooke a staffe, and cudgell'd her for it: then she complained of his un^^^^ralnesse, to strike his owne flesh: that she was his wife, deare unto him, and he o^g^^ not to beate her. He replied, it is not you, wife, that I strike but Venus: declari^^ that as it was not she that played the whore, but Venus in her: so it was not she (...) he did beate, but Venus out of her. A theefe hath stollen thy goods, thou takest (...) in the manner: he cryes, let me alone, and charge Mercurie with it, he stole^^ goods. No wise Iudge would indite or arraigne Mercurie, call a starre from ^^^ven; but cut off an ill member from the earth. Thus neither can the wicked ch^^ the starres or any other creatures with their destruction. True it is that God (...) their instrumentall meanes often in executions. Iudg. 5.20. They fought from he^^^^ the starres in their courses fought against Sisera. In the dayes of Noah the windo^ (...) heaven were opened so wide, that they drowned the world. 2 King. 1.10. Fire (...)
 downe from heaven, and consumed those that came to apprehend the Prophet. But there could be no destruction about us, if there were no corruption within us, 1 Pet. 3.13. Who, or what shall harme you, if ye follow that which is good? nothing. It is our wickednesse that makes the earth barren, the aire infectious, the influences of heaven unkindly. If Pharaohs heart had not beene hard, all those plagues had fallen besides him. Let us goe into our selves; the head akes, the members are sicke, but the stomacke is in fault. Neither man nor devill could destroy us, if we did not destroy our selves. GOD makes a wicked man Heautontimoreumenon, a selfe-troubler* it is a sore pu^ishment, when men are forced to punish themselves. The whip that must scourge the wicked, is of their owne making; every cord whereof they have curiously ^wisted. The potion of bitternesse which they must drinke off, hath all the ingredients of their owne putting in. Indeed, saith the Psalme; The Lord hath mixed it; ^e may compound it, but of their materials: hee need not put in a dramme more, ^or they afford themselves destruction enough. Psal. 109.18. As hee clothed him^elfe with cursing, like as with a garment, so let it come like water into his bowels, and like ^yle into his bones. He made cursing his clothing; it is fit he should weare his owne garment. Indeed Hell was not made for nothing, and Tophet was prepared for them: ^ut they should never feele it, till they had prepared themselves for Tophet. GOD in his Iustice would not bring them to destruction, unlesse they first by their wic^ednesse did bring destruction to themselves. Wee see the punishment of denying Christ: O let us never be such enemies to our selves, that have so good a friend as I^SUS CHRIST.
Destruction.] This is the measure of their punishment. O yet if the Iustice of God would but chide them, not beat them: or if it did beat them, yet with rods, ^ot with scourges: or if it did scourge them, yet with whips, not with Scorpions: or ^f with Scorpions, yet not with burning flames: or if with burning flames, yet not with unquenchable flames: Oh yet it any thing might serve but utter and endlesse ^uine; Destruction! This is an indefinite word, of full latitude, that knowes neither measure nor cessation; but comprehends all plagues, externall on body, internall on ^oule, eternall on both: a punishment of extremitie, of universalitie; Destruction.
God concealeth the m^nner, but denounceth the measure. Destruction is either ^emporall in this world, or eternall in the world to come. If wee first consider it ^emporally, we shall finde it heavie enough: Incerti generis, sed certissimi ponderis. ^onas 3.4. Yet fortie dayes, and Niniveh shall be destroyed. He lets them know of a de^ruction, but he tells them not how: the quantitie is plaine, the qualitie is hidden. ^iniveh might have beene plagued many wayes, and yet stood upon her foundation ^ill. With want of raine, as Samaria in the dayes of Ahab: with want of bread, ^at women did eat their owne children, as in the dayes of Iehoram: with pestilence, ^s in the dayes of David: with the siege of enemies, as was Betulia: with the ty^annie and exaction of her owne Kings, as once was Rome. But these are all too ^ght in GODS balance, and nothing will satisfie his Iustice, but her finall subver^on. So is it denounced against the wicked, Hosea 7.13. Destruction unto them, be^use they have transgressed against mee. Prov. 16.18. Pride goeth before destruction. ^hus they understand the generall, not the speciall: this holds them in suspense, ^d addes to their feare, when they know not what they should studie to prevent. ^OD hath alwayes enow to doe it; Mille nocendi artes; he speakes of foure grie^ous plagues, Ezek. 14.21. The sword, the famine, the noisome beast, and the pestilence. (...) he should particularly threaten the famine, how would they hoord up corne, like ^seph; fill their barnes, their grainars, penuaries, and store-houses? If the Beasts, ^ow would they be provided of engines to kill them? If the Pestilence, how would ^^y shift ground, and run from their countrey, as vermine from an house on fire? If ^e enemies Sword, what mustring of men, scowring of armour, preparing of muniti^^, levying of forces, exercise of armes, would there be? Cities would be victualled, ^piers repaired, Holds fortified; art and labour would study the best prevention,
 at least so far as their wisdome reached. Though indeed the best is flying to God by penitent supplication. Amos 4.12. Thus will I doe unto thee, and because I will doe th^^, Prepare to meet thy God, O Israel. Divers plagues are threatned in that Chapter; from which the prophet proves there is no evasion, but by repentance. Yet are men so averse from goodnesse, that as a guilty person before the Magistrate, seekes not (...) amend his fault, but to know his accuser, and to be quit with him. Which of these shall be it, God knowes: the least will serve, what havocke will the greatest make.
Destruction.] there is nothing to be bated of totall ruine. Ier. 49.9. If Grape-g^therers come, would they not leave some gleaning grapes? If theeves by night, they will (...) till they have enough. This justice will leave none, but the wicked shall be preyed upon by insatiate judgement, till nothing be left. Mat. 18.25. His Lord commanded him to be sold, etc. That servant ought ten thousand talents; what had he received? But to pay this debt, non habuit unde; he had not wherewithall. Nec aurum, nec arvum, nec amic^^; No workes, no prayers, nothing. Then the Lord commanded him to be sold, and his wi^^, and children, and all that he had, to make payment. He might have beene sold Hims^^^e* but his wife? Or, himselfe and his wife, but his poore children? Or, if himselfe, wi^^, and children, yet also All that he had? Nothing to be left him, not so much as bread (...) sustaine him, nor apparrell to hide his nakednesse? No, all must be sold, that all may be paid; here is utter destruction. Gods judgement like a canker on a tree, first ears (...) the leaves; but leaves not there; at last consumes tree and all.
Let this teach us how to thinke of our sins, and their violent precipitating (...) to destruction. Vnlesse we value the wealth of our country, the health of our friends, the peace of our consciences, the life of our bodies and soules, at so low a rate: as H^^^rius lying quietly at Ravenna, prised Rome. When he heard that Rome was taken, he looked pale, fearing it had beene his Hen, called Roma: but understanding it ^o be no worse than the Cities losse, he laughed at the newes. So except wee esteeme our owne lusts and vanities, more than the well-fare of the whole Land, and thinke the losse of all no more than if a Fly were taken in the web of a Spider: let us confesse and redresse our sinnes. Doe we marvell in this rebellious age, why the barren turfe yeelds pale and hungrie grasse, if the haile spoile the Vine, whirle-winds the Olive; if pestilent breaths corrupt the aire: let us looke to our sinnes, and ce^se marvelling. Not that there is destruction, but that there is not destruction, is the wonder. No marvell if miseries come, the marvell is that they stay so long. Let it not be so with us, as Iosephus thought of Ierusalem; that if the Romans had not invaded them, the very earth would have swallowed them. Let us fall to our seasonable deprecation, that the LORD destroy us not. Ierem. 3.22. Returne (...) back-sliding children, and I will heale your back-slidings. Behold, we come unto thee, f^^ thou art the Lord our God. Be our sinnes lesse, and our prayers more, that we may finde mercy.
We have yet but lightly weighed the unsupportable lode of their punishme^^, and confined it to the circle of this present world. Now this wound will be deepe enough, especially when an almightie hand shall give it. Ezek. 21.27. I will ov^rturne, overturne, overturne it, and it shall be no more. If the first subversion serve n^^, the second shall effect it: if they both leave any thing undone, the third shall acco^plish it. Overturne his Diadem, (for there it is spoken of the evill Princes cro^^^ yet hee remaines a man: overturne his life, yet there is hope of another: nay, (...) overturne his soule, here is Destruction in her extremest spoile. So vers. 14. I^ (...) sword bee doubled the third time; if the two first blowes should leave any life be^^^^ them. Ioel. 1.4. What the Palmer-worme leaves, let the Locust eat: what the Locust (...) let the Canker-worme eat: what the Canker-worme leaves, let the Caterpiller devo^re. (...) the sword have left ought, the plague shall consume it: if the glutted plague (...) any scrappes, the famine shall eat them up. So Exod. 10.15. what the haile h^^ (...) that the Locusts devoured. Punishment shall grow like a gangrene, and never rest ^^^^ling, till all be festered. Esay 1.5. Why should ye be striken any more? He smites (...)
 when there shall be no need of a second blow. Nah, 1.9. He will make an utter end: affliction shall not rise up the second time. Here destruction is like Sodome fire, that left nothing behind it: they were stricken but once, that once was enough. As Abishai said to David concerning Saul in the trench, 1 Sam. 26.8. Let mee smite him with the speare even to the earth at once, and I will not smite him the second time. Let this destruction take away their friends, yet they can live of themselves: let it take away their riches, they can beginne the world againe, and set up their trade afresh, though they were broken. Let it take away their libertie, they can begge thorow a grate: let it take away their life, they are then destroyed. This is part of their potion, one bitter ingredience of their Cup, Psalm. 75.8. In the hand of the LORD there is a cup, and the wine is red: it is full of mixture, and hee powreth out of the same: but the dregges thereof all the wicked of the earth shall wring them out, and drinke them. It is a Cuppe; well, there is a cuppe that David thirsts for, Psalm. 116. I will take the Cuppe of salvation. There is Wine in it, better: for wine cheares the heart, and puts alacritie into the spirits. That wine is Red, better still: so it should be, this argues the lustre and goodnesse of it, Prov. 23.31. Looke not upon the wine when it is red, and gives the colour in the cup: the colour addes to the pleasure. But now it is Full of mixture, alas this mixture spoiles all: it is compounded, brew'd, made unwholesome: this changeth the condition of the cup, of the wine, of the colour, of all. It is mixed with the wrath of God, malice of Satan, the anguish of soule, the gall of sinne, the teares of despaire: it is Red, that is, of a sanguine colour, the wine of bloud. But yet so long as it is in the cup they need not meddle with it: nay but the Lord will powre it out, he shall hold their mouthes to it, and make them drinke it: the rankest poison in the world, the gall of Dragons, and venome of Aspes, is pleasant and healthfull to it. Yet be it but a little of the top, let them but taste it: nay they must drinke it off, to the very bottome, the sediments, dregges, lees and all; even the very filth of vengeance. And lest any drops should be left behind, they shall wring them out, and sucke them downe to their confusion. The Cup is all bitter, and full of sorrow, saith Augustine: the godly doe often taste the top, and feele the bitternesse, but then it is suddenly snatched from them: but the ungodly shall drinke the very grounds, and extremest poison. Prov. 16.5. Though hand joyne in hand, they shall not be unpunishmed. Though head be laid to head for councell, and hand knit in hand for strength, yet shall there be no prevailing against it. Though Achitophel side with Absalom, Herod conspire with Pilate, Dathan confederate with Corah: though the drunkard joyne hands with the blasphemer, the blasphemer with the adulterer, the adulterer with the Idolater, the Idolater with the persecuter, the persecuter with the traitour, the traitour with the Iesuite, the Iesuite with the Devill; yet they shall not escape unpunished. Destruction shall sticke as faithfully to them, as the skin to their flesh. Our sinnes deserve destruction, our repentance is no satisfaction; it is only Gods mercy in Christ that gives absolution.
Yet is all this but a temporall or corporall subversion, there is more behinde, even eternall perishing. This is the sore extent, which reacheth to hell it selfe. Therefore we finde these two, Hell and Destruction, most commonly united, Prov. 27.20. Hell and destruction are never full. Phil. 3.19. Their end is destruction, that is miserable: their destruction without end, that is more miserable. If man only smarted with the dislodging of his soule; alas, she might by Iesus find a better bed: Death being to the faithfull but a busie dreame; When they awake,Psal. 17.15. they shall behold the face of God in righte^^snesse, and be satisfied with his likenesse. Like the red-sea, puts them over to the Land of Promise. There is a lake of fire and brimstone, where the beast and false prophet are,Revel. 20.10. and ^^all ^e tormented day and night, for ever and ever. This is the place of residence for ^hese false prophets: this is Destruction in her full pay, weight, and measure.
They bring on themselves swift destruction.] Swift: You see the Authours of their ^unishment, (...), Themselves: the measure, which is beyond all measure, Destruction. Two full aggravations of their unhappines: Themselves; O yet, Si aliena manu, non propria;
 that they might complaine of others, and acquit themselves! Needs must those sins be sowen like hemp-seed with curses, which must make halters for themselves. They might say to an enemy, or to their old companion in errors. Liceat perituris ^^iribus ignis, igne perire tuo; and this might seeme Cladem authore levare. But themselves bring it; not that they lay violent hands upon their owne flesh or spirit, but by con^^quent. As no man properly and immediatly calls the dropsie to him, yet by insati^e drinking of unwholsome liquors he procures it, Rom. 6.21. For the end of these things is death. Destruction is tied to the end of sinne, as Sampson tied fire to the foxes tailes. Or, as a great weight of lead is bound to a small cord; it seemes nothing to pull the cord, but the lead comes withall, and quasheth the puller to pieces. Th^^ is the vexation, when they feele extreame torments, they shall curse themselves (...) the cause. True it is, they shall blaspheme God desperately, Rev. 16.11. Curse the devill malitiously, and execrate other company: expressed by gnashing their teeth, the effect of an impatient fury: but at last they shall be convinced, and have this ^cknowledgement extorted from them; Proprijs configimur armis, we have destroy^^ our selves. Besides, the measure of this selfe-procured woe, is destruction: all the dregs of the violl, all the plagues in the store-house of Almighty Iustice; so farre (...) mans passive nature is capable; infinite in extention; what falls short in bredth, to be supplied in length; infinite in everlasting passion. Now the last ingredient to (...) bitter potion remaines: to the authour and measure, the manner, Swift. When i^ shall come, it makes no sparing; before it doe come, it gives no warning. Nothi^^ is more sure to dispatch them, nothing more quick to attach them; it is Swift destruction.
Suddaine destruction seiseth on the wicked. There are judgements that creepe on a man by degrees, every pull of paine being a warning of dissolution. These are easier. 1. Because preparation is rendered, and so the minde beginnes to bee fortified against them. The first seene Cockatrice is lesse noxious. Either wee may hide our selves, Prov. 22.3. The prudent man foreseeth the evill, and hideth himselfe. Where? Psalme 9.6. The Lord is a Refuge in the time of trouble. Vnder the wings of mercy, he hideth himselfe in the Lord, from the Lord. Or, by a well furnished and resolute opposition; Pugnent arma armis: put^ing it to a courageo^s venture for the victorie. Or, by a well-tempered patience to sustaine; as woo^ meetes iron, and turnes the sterne violences to soft embraces. 2. Because the mind is the better inured to beare or encounter those evils, to which it hath beene exercised; as with wooden weapons men learne to fight at the sharpe. Lam. 3.27. It (...) good for a man to beare the yoke in his youth. In the Fable, when the new and old Ca^ went together, the new made a creaking noise under the lode, and wondred at the silence of the old: which answered; I am accustomed to these burdens, therefo^e beare them and am quiet. This is the benefit of sustaining crosses in youth, such a one knowes how to beare them still. Thus death becomes welcome to us, because we are acquainted with his messengers. Fot when life which is held a friend, becomes an enemy; then death which is an enemy becomes a friend. It was promised to o^^ Israelite, that he should beat ten enemies: now he that conquer'd the oddes, will (...) cowardly shrinke at the equalitie. 3. Because the sense is weakened by much ^^^fering: usuall beating makes the childe lesse to feare the rod. The faithfull are (...) well acquainted with Gods gentle chastisements, that they know it is the same h^^^ that strikes still: perhaps now in death a little smarter at once, that it may ne^^^ strike them more. Thus a consumption doth so by degrees spend up the cholerick ^^mours, exhaust the spirits, and weaken the sense; that the tyranny of death is (...) in the want of our feeling. Some of the martyrs that were tumbled downe from exceeding high rockes, left the bitternesse of the pangs of death in the mid-way (...) their journey; and their soules went up to heaven, before their bodies came downe to earth. 4. Lastly, threatned punishment hath lost the nature of suddennesse, tho^gh not in the passion, yet in the person: it may dispatch with speed, but the pati^^^
 before expected it. So when God menaceth, and formerly gives notice, he meanes not to destroy. Ionah comes to Niniveh, and peremptorily threatens destruction, with the determinate limits of forty dayes: but God gave a feeling of it in the heart, that there might not be a feeling of it in the flesh. Non est eversa, sed conversa; The sinne of the Citie was overthrowne, the Citie stood. All menaces are not categoricall, some are hypotheticall: neither doth this argue in God levitie, but mercy. Novit Deus aliquando mutare sententiam, nunquam novit mutare consilium. God sometimes altereth his sentence, but he never altereth his purpose. Minatur quod faciat, ne faciat quod minatur; If mens apprehensive hearts repent, there is a retraction of the judgement. If God give not his preventing forrow, the punishment shall be new enough to the sufferer, how old soever it be in respect of the decreer. Esay 10.22. The consumption decreed shall over-flow with righteousnesse.
But this is Swift perdition: Quo celerius, eo severius; A man thinkes lingring evils swift enough, though they come the Tortoise pace, pedetentim, yea, serpentim, sliding on. Though the fabricke of his body bee as long a plucking downe, as the Temple of Ierusalem was a building up; six and thirty yeares. Yet still they say to sicknesse, as the devils said to Christ; Why commest thou to torment us before our time? Matth. 8.29. Yea, could it give us as long warning, as Noah gave the old world; a^ hundred and twentie yeares; yet Festinas Domine, Lord thou art too hasty: they finde fault with the precipitation. Let the siege to thy life be as the Grecians to Troy, of ten yeares continuance; yet still thou sayest, it comes De improviso, I did not looke for it so soone. But we know whose mouth hath spoken it. Psal. 55.23. Men of blouds and deceit; non dimidiabunt dies suos; shall not live out halfe their dayes. Not halfe those which in the course of nature, and opinion of the world, they might have run. Herod was taken away quickly, in the midst of his popular applause; and the Angell of God immediately smote him, Act. 12.23. God shall shoot at them with an arrow, suddenly they shall be wounded, Psalm. 64.7. As a man-sees not the thunderbolt, till it strike him dead, Psal. 73.19. How are they brought to desolation as in a moment, and utterly consumed mith terrours? In a moment there is nec prius nec posterius. Vers. 20. As a dreame when one awaketh, etc. All their prosperity is but a dreame, they laugh in their sleepe, but they awake howling, Psal. 37.10. Yet a little while, and the wicked shall not be: thou shalt diligently seeke for his place, and it shall not be found. Destruction shall leave nec hominem, nec locum, neither the man, nor his place. Vers. 36. The wicked spreads himselfe like a greene Bay-tree: yet he passed away, and loe he was not: I sought him, but he could not be found. Thou sawest him to day aspiring like the Cedars; Digito monstrari, and dicier hic est; Seeke for him to morrow, and thou returnest with a Non inventus. Prov. 14.11. The house of the wicked shall be overthrowne. How? Zach. 5.2. What seest thou? a flying roule. What shall it doe? Vers. 4. It shall enter into the house of the wicked, and shall remaine in the midst of his house, and shall consume it with the timber and stones of it. It is a flying roule, a winged curse, not seene till it be felt. It shall destroy, not with a lingring consumption; to dwell upon his tabernacle, and doe it by a long succession of plagues: but in allusion to Sodome; Brimstone shall be scattered upon his habitation, Iob 18.15. By the Civill Law, every mans house is his castle: no man may be dragged out of his owne doore Iudicio civili: yet in such as we call Crown-cases, Treasons and Contumacies, great houses have bin thundred downe over the owners heads. And like the House of Baal, 2 King. 10.27. And of such Idolaters, Dan. 3.29. They may bee converted into filthy draughts, dung-hils, and receptacles of excrements. When God saw his owne Temple made a den of theeves, he destroyed it: therefore how much lesse will hee spare private houses, when they are ^ade shops of mischiefe, and monuments of iniquitie? Hab. 2.11. The stone shall crie (...) of the w^ll, and the beame out of the timber shall answer it. The stones at every joynt shall weepe like marble, and the timber at every pinne shall bleed like the Vine: both joyning in a mournefull Antheme; one beginning, the other answering; Woe unto him that buildeth with bl^ud. Yet if the man himselfe might escape, more
 houses might be had for money: nay, saith Bildad, Iob 18.18. he shall be chased out of the world. But though his body be accursed like the barren Fig-tree; Never fr^^ grow on thee more: yet hee might have his estate continued to his posterity. No, Vers. 19. He shall neither have sonne nor nephew among his people, nor any remaining (...) his dwellings. His house shall be destroyed; and this in Scripture containes the whole family, Iosh. 24.15. I and my house will serve the Lord. The materials and form^^^ shall be destroyed. But though body, house, and posterity be lost; yet still he may say as Absalom said, and doe as Absalom did, 2 Sam. 18.18. He reared up for himselfe a pillar, saying, I have no sonne to keepe my name in remembrance: and he called the pill^^ after his owne name; Absaloms place. So Psal. 49.11. Their inward thought is, that their houses shall continue for ever, and their dwelling places to all generations: therefore they call their lands after their owne names. Let me build an house, and reare a monument after mine owne name: No, downe with it to the ground. Iob 18.17. His remembrance shall perish from the earth; and he shall have no name in the street. As Valeri^^^ speakes of those Romans, who besides their owne deaths, Penatium quoque strage p^niuntur. This is a fearefull destruction, to be so rooted out as Rovillas, that their very name becomes a stench. But that all this should be done suddenly, uno actu, (...) ictu; Vengeance it selfe, men thinke, can doe no more.
He shall be destroyed: might it not be said, much ruinated? As an house h^^h the windowes broken, yet it stands: the covering is stripped off, yet it stands: the walls are beaten downe, yet it stands: take away the foundation; then you may say, Hic suit domus; here was an house. Iob 8.18. If he destroy him from his place, then (...) shall deny him, saying, I have not seene thee. May it not be said of man, as of a clocke; which growing foule, the maker resumes, takes it in peeces, layes it wheele by wheele, and pin by pin; scowres it, puts it together in frame againe, and sets it going? No, alas, the wicked is destroyed, put out of tune for ever, and that as swiftly, as if a clocke were dashed against the stones. O that it had any other measure but perdition, any other manner but celerity! Iob 14.7. There is hope of a tree, if it be cut downe, that it will sprout againe, and that the tender branch thereof will not cease. Though the root thereof wax old in the earth, and the stocke thereof die in the ground, ye^ through the sent of water it will bud, and bring forth boughes like a plant. B^t man dieth, and wasteth away, and where is he? He that should reade the Chronicle of some great mans life, finde him endowed with singular gifts of nature, beautified with rare qualities of art, befriended with the successes of fortune: whom his Prince had highly honoured, the people admired, flatterers adored; where nothing wanted to the concurrence of happinesse: and thus pursuing the story, measuring the hopes of future glory by the experience of present prosperity; should now turne over the leafe to reade, and finde a blanke, no more to be read, an abrupt suspension; he would either thinke the writer had mistooke, or that some leaves were torne o^^ of the booke. No, there was an high finger that blotted it out, and broke off the history with an unexpected catastrophe. For Haman the second man in the Court, to forfeit all his glories at the galhouse! As if Destruction had the charge, th^^ CHRIST gave to Iudas; Quod facis, cito fac, Ioh. 13.27. What thou doest, (...) quickely.
The dejection of Iob was sudden, but it was not destruction, Iob 1.16. While (...) was yet speaking, there came also another, etc. As if hee might not be allowed rest (...) consider of the former wretchednesse. The fall of Iehoram was destruction, b^^ (...) was not sudden, 2 Chron. 21.19. In processe of time, after the end of two yeares, (...) bowels fell out by reason of his sicknesse: day by day, for two yeares together. But (...) it is both destruction, and swift destruction; as to Nabal; The Lord smote him, and (...) died, 1 Sam. 25.38. It is sudden, both because it prevents the expectation of na^^^^ and because the blow is like to that which David with his sling gave to Goliah, t^^^ sunke him downe for ever. Such, according to our Apostles Prophecie, hath be^^ the destruction of the Churches enemies. Pharaoh by the sea, Corah by the earth*
 the haters of those three faithfull servants by the fire, Simon Magus in the aire: all destructions, by all the Elements, and all sudden, with a fearefull expedition.
Swift destruction.] There are many swift things, none swifter than the reprobates destruction, when God will hasten it. Birds are swift, the Eagle cuts the aire, and is gone. Therefore Salomon compares the suddenest vanisher, Riches to an Eagle, that makes her selfe wings and flies away, Prov. 23.5. Yet is this destruction swifter. An arrow is swift, 1 King. 22.34. A certaine man drew a bow at a venture, sm^te the King of Israel, and rid him. Destruction is a swift arrow, that same Sagitta per diem volitans, the arrow that flieth by day, Psalm. 91.5. Surer and swifter than the arrow of Cephalus; Consequitur quodcunque petit.Ovid. Metam. 7. Or that Hercules shot into Nessus, Met. 9. When he ran away with his Deianica; he told him that though hee could not come to him, he would send after him: Vulnere, non pedibus te consequar: ^nd he made it good; Fugientia terga sagitta Trat^icit. These are not Ionathans pricke-^rrowes, to give warning: but destructive arrowes, such as God shot against Sodom, ^etherd with fire, consuming in a moment. Such, Psal. 18.14. He sent out arrowes ^nd scattered them, he shot out lightnings and discomfited them. Thunder and lightning, (...) swift and dispatching arrow. Psal. 144.6. Cast forth lightning and scatter them: ^hoote out thine arrowes and destroy them. Man may shoote and misse, or his arrowes be so slow of flight that it may be avoided: but if God shoots, he hits and kills. The Parthian arrow was so admired for swiftnesse, that Lucan saies of Cesar, he was ^orto Balearis verbere fundae Ocyor, and missa Parthi post terga sagitta. And Philoctetes ^rrowes are noted Sophocles for fatall deadlinesse; (...), fore-runners of ^eath: and habent sub arundine plumbum, headed with heavy vengeance. Yet are all these ^oth weaker in fight, and duller in flight, than Gods arrowes, which as the Psalmist ^peakes, come from the hand of a Gyant. When he shall draw them up to the head, ^hey wound with an incurable blow. Iob 20.24. The bow of steele shall strike him ^hrough, it shall come glistering through his gall. The Sunne is swift, per diem peragens cursum; he rejoyceth as a strong man to runne a race. Yet the same dayes sunne ^ath seene a man; high mounted with pompe in the morning; yet covered with destruction before the evening. But as Moses told Israel concerning the Egyptians; Whom yee have seene to day, yee shall see them againe no more for ever, Exod. 14.13. Thus swift is Gods judgement, and outrunning the Sun, flame is swift: the Poets gi^aine that she is the daughter of Titan and Terra, the Sunne and the Earth. The Sun ^ing her such an aeriall and spirituall swiftnesse by his generation, that if the mother ^y her grossenesse had not a little bated her agility; she would the first houre of her ^irth have runne out of the world. Indeed she still flies apace, and like a channell by ^ontinuall accessions, growes up to a river; vires acquirit eundo. As a little ball rol^ed in the snow, gathers it selfe to a great lumpe. The report that is but a little spark ^f fire at London, proves a great flame by that time it comes to Yorke. But alas, ^ven fame is slow-footed, and besides the invention of lies, must have intervention of space, before it arrives: and though it out-run the clouds, as Ahimaaz over ran Chushi, because he ranne by the way of the plaine: yet still Iudgement is swifter, and ^o dispatching that it l^aves none to carry the report. When Iob was afflicted, there was one reserved to bring newes to him: what the Sabeans had done upon the Oxen, the Chaldeans upon the Camels, the fire upon the sheepe, all these upon the ^ervants; Ego solus aufugi, I am alone escaped to tell thee. But destruction is surer and ^orer, when it leaves none to beare tydings. Iud. 4.16. All the hoste of Sisera fell up^^ the sword, and there was not a man left. His mother, and her wise Ladies insult; Have ^hey not sped? have they not divided the prey? Iudg. 5.30. No forsooth, for there ^as no body left to carry newes. Lightning is swift, Matth. 24.27. It commeth ^^t of the East, and shineth even unto the west: a similitude used by CHRIST him^elfe to describe the suddainesse of his seco^d appearing. The thunder is called the ^ords voice, Psal. 29.3. The voice of the Lord, is upon the waters, the God of glory th^n^reth. This breaketh the cedars, makes them skip like calves, Lebanon and Sirion caper
 like an Vnicorne. This is a sudden manner of destroying, as the Lord smote the Philistines with a great thunder, 1 Sam. 7.10. When the Lord raines this storme, he kills quickly: etiam comedentem absorbet. Iob 20.23. When he is about to fill his belly, God shall cast the furie of his wrath upon him, and shall raine it upon him while he is eating: there is another swift perdition. The ordinance charged with that salt minerall, makes quicke destruction: it bruiseth and quasheth to pieces before it gives the ^^port, and therein is truely suddaine Innumerable lives have fallen by this engine; a thing that can send the errand of death a great way off. I know not to what to compare it, unlesse to the pestilence that killeth a farre off, Ezek. 6.12. Gunpowder (...) invention of a Monke, of a divell, the daughter of salt and sulphure, the mother of deaths nimblest children; nothing maketh a quicker end.
The fift of November puts us in mind of this fatall destruction; intended by the malice of men, but prevented by the mercie of God. Those smoky locusts (...) prepared and furnished a blacke pit, the very image of hell; and had resolved o^ that desperate cry, Incendium extinguatur ruina: they had devised communem reg^^, a common bonefire, an universall combustion, both of mortall men and immortall monuments; Churches, Charters, and Records of antiquitie. Bloudy Priests that would have offered a whole burnt sacrifice, and made our sons and daughters pa^^e through the fire, an oblation to their Moloch of Rome. Thinke countrey men, and let it never die in your memories, whiles the mercie of God may find a roome in your hearts: consider a swift destruction; never was example of so facinorous an e^terprise, the Primum genus of all sinne, a crying, a roring, a thundring sinne, as our Soveraigne truly termed it: a sin not onely of bloud, but of fire, fire mingled with brimstone, such as the attempters (without extraordinary mercy) now feele in hell. Aske from East to West, from one Pole to the other; search all records under heaven, if ever there was the like. Their vault was a penuary and store house of destruction; against us in the intent, against themselves in the event. Let us say as those four Lepers, 2 King. 7.9. This day is a day of good tydings, and we doe not well to hold our peace: if we tarry till the morning light, some mischiefe will fall upon us. Consider with them. 1. The specialtie of the time, This day. 2. The occasion of that specialtie, it is a day of good newes. 3. The dutie of that occasion, not to hold our pe^ce. 4. The necessitie of that duty, lest mischiefe fall upon us. But you will say, the day is past, and let it passe with the day; Sufficit diei malitia ipsius; sufficient to the day is the sorrow thereof. I answer; Day unto day uttereth speech, and night unto night sheweth knowledge, Psalm. 19. Verse 2. The day gone reads a lecture to the day present: that day tells newes to all dayes, without which they had not beene dayes to us. In regard of the marvellous attempt, a day of newes: in regard of the gracious deliverance, a day of good newes. Newes in the Intention, good newes i^ the prevention: a privative, a positive good; for a negative is made an affirmative by reduction. Suppose you had seene it done; the King, Prince, Nobles, Senators, Priests; the flowers and ornaments of the land; without distinction of Majestie, dignitie, sex or age, degree or merit, reason or religion; tossed up with barrells and billets, piec^s of timber, barres of iron, and great stones; the murthering artillerie together with the murdered bodies, into the aire, up toward heaven, their flesh accompanying their soules so farre as that violence could send them; till their mangled carcases fell downe againe to the mother earth, to receive their remaining blo^^ crying vengeance against their butchers. Behold here the type of the deflagration (...) Sodom, the modell of Tophet, the neerest representation that earth could afford (...) that Ignitum dil^vium, the fiery deluge at the last day: yea the image of that Ge^^^ na ignis, which God hath prepared for the wicked. When father and sonne, dam^^ and young in a neast together, had beene blowen away with a blast; a whirlewind (...) destruction: the whole state of a kingdome dissolved, and that in an instant of ti^^, before they could have swallowed their spittle, or in remembrance and remorse of their sinnes have said; Lord have mercie on us. This had beene destruction in the winged
 precepice, and most desperate suddennesse. As it was threatned to the house of Ier^boam, to be cut off in a day: but what? even now in a moment, before they had leasure to thinke of it. But as the three servants of God were cast into a fiery fornace ^hat burnt them not: and as Moses saw a bush that flamed and consumed not: so the good will of him that dwelt in the bush defended us, Deut. 33.16. The Lord brought ^^s backe from death to life, and we were comforted as men awaked out of a fearefull dreame. Their destruction was swift, but the mercie of God was swifter. There wanted nothing but an actor to bring on that catholike doomsday: yet before the match could be brought to the powder, their artificiall fireworkes were discovered; their projection, prodition, deperdition, all disclosed; and seasonably returned on their owne heads.
So perish all thine enemies, O Lord.] Now the mercie of God turne destruction, ^nto salvation, and then be as swift as he please: the sooner we get home, the sooner ^ase: therefore Come Lord Iesus, come quickly, Amen.



VERSE 2. And many shall follow their pernicious wayes, by reason of whom the way of truth shall be evill spoken of.

WE have in these Heretickes contemplated their accesse to the Church, now consider their successe in the Church. Many shall follow, etc. It hath ever beene the divells aime, that seeing he must of necessitie be wretched, not to be wretched alone. Now the company he desires, is not beasts and irrationall creatures, (save where he may doe their owners a mischiefe) but his ambition flies man-height, his envy strikes at the image of God, because he hath no other way to extend his malice to the Deitie it selfe; to effectuate this, he workes man to betray man; as man makes one fowle catch another, or one beast surprise ^nother; the hawke the partridge, the hound the hare; all to make him sport. So Satan sets Ephraim against Manasseth, Manasseth against Ephraim, and both against Iudah; himselfe against all, Esa. 9.21. And because he thinke the Pagan world sure enough his owne, have at the Christian. There of all places God is glorious, there of all places he will be pernicious. The divell hath a desire to all, but especially he doves a religious soule: he would eate up that with more greedynesse, than Rachel did her Ma^drakes. He is a blacke Lion rampant in a bloudy field: CHRIST is King of the whole world; nay soft quoth the divell, I have the aire, Eph. 2.2. He is called the Prince of the power of the aire. He hath loaded Heretickes with seed from hell, ^nd sets them a sowing in the Church: that at the day of harvest his croppe may be greater in the barne of hell, than the Lord CHRISTS is in heaven. In the former verse we had him sowing; his seminaries at worke: in this verse behold with what a prosperous and lucky hand he doth it. (...), Many shall follow. Their cursed tares shall spread farre and wide, and mirifice multiplicabuntur. It is little content for them to be reprobates alone; but as falling Lucifer drew numerous Angels with him; so all his adherents and agents are firebrands to burne others with themselves. The Pharisies would travell sea and land to worke Profelytes
 to their owne inheritance, yea to procure them a double portion to themselves, Matth. 23. Verse 15. The Emissaries of Rome have that charge given th^^ to corrupt others. Like men sicke of the pestilence, they have an itching ^^sire to infect their neighbours. Here therefore behold their successe; M^^ shall follow their pernicious wayes. If we take the verse asunder, it will thus fall (...) parts; generally two.
A
Attraction; Many shall follow their pernicious wayes.Detraction; By whom the way of truth shall be scandalised.
In the Attraction or congestion of this tumult, consider
The
Ringleaders; They, that broach these Heresies.Rabble or tatterdemallion that adhere; Many follow.
In the Detraction, derogation, or injurie done to the Gospell, by these revo^^^ from the truth, let us examine.
The
Patient that suffers, The way of truth.Injurie that it suffers; Evill spoken of.
In the patient observe
The
Singularitie, (...), The way, the onely way.Sincerity, Of Truth, uncorrupted truth.
Thus here are many points, one into two, two into foure, foure into eight. N^^ you will say, as Leah of her sonne Gad, Gen. 30.11. A troupe commeth, or (...) comes a company: yet all these branches have but one roote, all these members (...) one head: they are but wheeles of a clocke taken a little in sunder to view, then (...) bee put together againe. When a wealthy favourite of the world, that (...) more livings than vertues, sent his servant before to take up lodging for him; the servant charged the hoste to provide good cheare; for here, saies hee, wi^^ come the Lord of such a Mannor, the Land-lord of such a town, the keeper of such a forrest, the Master of such an office, the lay-person of such a parish, a I^stice of peace, a Gentleman, an Vsurer, and my master: the hoste blest himselfe; alas, I have not roome for halfe so many: nay quoth the servant, all these are (...) one man. So if you distrust that you have not roome in your memories to lodge s^ many points, yet be comforted, all these are but one Text.
The first generall is the Attraction, and the first particular the Ring leader^ whence occurre two observations.
First, the necessitie of a head to every Schisme and faction: never was bre^^ made in the vineyard of CHRIST, but some principall beast-led the whole herd. There had beene no treason nor insurrection against David, but for Abs^l^^ to set it on foote. Gamaliel spake of two such factions. Act. 5.36. The^d^^, (...) whom a number of men joyned themselves: and Iudas, that drew much people after him: these Schismes had their heads. If Smith and Rob. had not led the way to Amst^^dam, how many silly soules had stayed still with their mother in England! The^ blind zeale misled them, and they others: their flight was not so much as their m^^guidance. Though the parties in sinne have their parts in the punishment, yet to t^^ principall authors be the principall plagues. If their reward in heaven be so great, (...) save one soule from death; how great shall their torment be in hell that pervert ma^^ soules to destruction? Matth. 5.19. Minimus in coelo, maximus in infer^^. He (...) be least in the kingdome of heaven, but greatest in the kingdome of hell. He that (...) damne a soule besides his owne, overdoes the divells expectation; he supererog^^^ of Satan, and he shall give him a double fee, a double portion of hell fire for (...) paines. Salus capitis, caput salutis: so error capitis, caput erroris, Mark. 6.34. Our S^^^our pitied the people, because they were as sheepe, sine pastore ullo, without any shepheard: but how would he have wept to see the poore Lambes mis-led a Pastore (...) by an exill shepheard! Non vesci omnino, miseranda defectio; sed vesci veneno, execr^^da infectio. It is miserable to want food, yet as good nothing at all as only poyson.
 CHRIST is the only head of his Church they that fall off from him, must have ^ap^^ novum, a new head, and joyne themselves in corpus novum, to a new body: thus ^hall both head and taile be cut off together, Esa. 9.14. This observation Ministers two ^sefull lessons to us.
1 That the way to suppresse a schisme, is to cut off the Head: for it will bee ^ard for a body to move headlesse. Zach. 13.7. Smite the shepheard, and the sheepe ^hall be scattered. These be strong colts, swift dromedaries traverssing their owne wayes; wild Asses that snuffe up the wind at their pleasure, and whiske it about in ^he wildernesse of their owne boundlesse fancie, and transportive furie. I doe not say Percute ferro; like Empirickes that can cure no disease without letting bloud: no, I ^referre with Tertullian, suffusion of it, before effusion of it; shame before smart: ^nowing that not onely Christianitas, sed etiam haeresis mortibus crescit: and some ^ave thought their cause good, onely because it was their happinesse to be in prison ^bout it. But howsoever, Vbi non prosint ubera, non desint verbera: supprime errorem ^^primendo errantem. If their wickednesse hath beene formerly illustrated with the ^ommentaries of the churches patience; if sternnesse hath given place to mildnesse, without successe; let now mildnesse be turned into sternnesse. Let the wheele of admiration turne about, and let the Law begin to prick them a little, that have no felt it, ^ut laugh'd at it a long time, and made connivence their warrant for contempt. Lay ^he medicine close to them, as Christ did to the creeple at Bethesda; visne sanari? wilt thou bee mended, or not? Let such wilfull revolters take heed; Restat ^verti, cui converti non contigit; if they will not bee converted, let them feare to ^e confounded.
2 Seeing there are such corrupters of our truth, and disturbers of our peace, ^et us be sure to hold the Truth in peace: leaving all heads, and cleaving to our only ^ne Head IESUS CHRIST. Col. 2.19. Let us hold the head, from which all the bo^y by joynts and bands having nourishment ministred, and knit together, increaseth with ^he increase of God. Cursed is he that seekes to seperate us from this head. The Lord ^s our God and our Guide; him we follow, but all false wayes we utterly abhorre, Phil. ^.9. That which you have learned and received, doe; and the God of peace shall be with ^ou. If we adhere to the truth peaceably, the God of truth and peace shall be with ^s. Even that God of peace, whom such incendiaries would turne out of our ^and. Psal. 120.6. My soule hath long dwelt with him that hateth peace. Doth he hate peace? then peace shall hate him. I am for peace, but when I speake, they are ^or warre. Well then, God shall be even with him, and be for war, when he speakes ^or peace. Deus pacis nobiscum; O the sweete habite of peace to appeare in! O the gracious forme of peace, for our God to present himselfe to us! Let him alwayes ^ppeare to me in that shape, alwayes present himselfe to me in that forme. Not in ^urning fire, nor tempestuous wind, nor trembling earth-quakes but in the soft aire ^nd still breath of peace; the God of peace be with us. The more busy the divell ^s to scatter dissentions, the more unitedly let us hold together. As when the enemy assaults a towne, and the men are defending it; the children meane time may not ^e allowed to keepe what coile and misrule they will in the house; but are rather to ^ive so much the more orderly. The tyrannie of the one must not encourage the li^ertie of the other; nor are these to be excused because the other are encreased. The ^ommon adversarie assaults our substance, if we wrangle one with another about ^ircumstance; it argues a confederacie, and brings on us a suspition of combina^ion; as if wee expected advantage by the thriving of the contrary faction; ^ather than fidelitie to our Mother, and vowed adherence to her husband CHRIST.
The second observation is the great force of example: these ringleaders soone ^et abundance of followers. 1 Tim. 4.1. They shall give heed to the spirits of error. Men should be led by precepts, and over-led by precedents. The eare hath put off ^er businesse to the eye, to be dispatched: and (as Cesar drowned Bibulus his consulship)
 that fetcheth in all the informations to the heart, deriving from others action the warrant of practise. As Iacobs ewes did bring forth Lambes, according to ^^e colour of the objected roddes: so the people produce workes according to the ^^^terns before them. Saint Iames saith, Estote factores verbi Divini, Be yee doers of (...) word, not of mans worke. It is preposterous for the feet to follow the toyish i^^ginations of the fancie, and not the voice of reason. The Papist would foll^^^ CHRIST in the Gospell; but for this same, First let me bury my father, kisse my ^^ther, aske my Grandame whether I shall doe so or not; my forefathers follo^^ other wayes. Wee all say that wee serve the Lord, but as the Psalmist speak^^ Other Lords rule us, Rom. 8. Verse 14. They that are led by the Spirit of God, (...) Sonnes of God. By the Spirit of God, not by the spirit of man: our natu^^^ spirit is a giddy guide, yea our sanctified spirit is in sufficient: a spirit must gu^^^ and this should bee Gods Spirit. The very heathen had their imaginary g^^ for guides; as Iupiter or Mercurie, them they invocated, them they imitated. Th^^ is no such authoritie given to sinne, as by example. Imperio maximus, exempl^ ^^jor: he that is most eminent, hath most followers. Augustus a learned Prince ^^lled Rome with schollers, Tiberius with the dissemblers, Constantine with Christia^^, Iulian with Atheists. Indeed the people will sometimes lead themselves, and r^^^ without their rulers, as without rule. As in the dayes of Iehoshaphat, though Id^latry were defaced much, yet the high places were not taken away. How was this? T^king knew it not, the Prophets condemned it, the Priests were against it; the f^^^ was in the people; they would not cleave to the God of their Fathers. But if Ie^^boam set up calves in Dan and Bethel, the people like beasts in heards goes a lowing ^^ter them. The force of imitation makes many follow Rome: and because she once sent to this land some light, they will not forsake her though she lie now in darkenesse. We were beholden to Rome for our former conversion, we will not be beholden to her for her present religion: wee will not follow her a step further, wh^ she leaves Iesus Christ. There is a double beneficiall use to be made of this doctrine.
First, let this teach men of place to looke unto their exemplary lives: lest, as they have made themselves examples of transgression, God make them examples of destruction. Qui errantes destruunt instruunt morientes: they that tempt to sinne by their life, shall deterre from sinne by their death. The life of Iulian made many i^fidels, the death of Iulian made many Christians. The pride of the wicked doth pervert many, their falls shall convert many. God will teach men to feare him, even by their ruine that taught them not to feare him. Magistratus indicat vir^^, saith Aristotle: a privat man like an empty vessell may have many flawes unseene: but in full vessells the chinkes and fissures are descryed by the leakage of the wi^^, Infirmities in Lay-men seeme Nugae, small faults; in Teachers and Governors Bl^sphemiae, blasphemies. Quanto nobilior, tanto notabilior: the more honourable, t^^ more remarkeable. Actuall precedence, or silent connivence in them, heartens an^ beardens the inferiors. The high Priests money tempted an Apostle: if the Pop^ command, commend, or reward treason; the conspirator takes it to be religio^^ Therefore in men of high place, love should bind more than Law: Minimum l^^^re decet, cui plurimum licet: he should doe least, that may doe most mischiefe. S^^^ are superiores cateris, but there is superior supremis, Eccl. 5.8. He that is higher (...) the highest regardeth it, and there be higher than they. With God there is no resp^^^ of persons: the poorest may say to the richest, as the malefactor to his fellow (...) the Crosse; Thou art in the s^me condemnation. God charged Moses, Numb. 25.^ Take the heads of the people, and to hang them up. They were Princes some of the^ and these often thinke that no Law can hold them, that they may live as they (...) but God spa^es not Princes. Yea Potentes potenter punienter: mighty sinners sha^^ (...) mightily punished. As they that carry not their light reservedly to themselves, (...) communicate it to others, in turning them to righteousnesse, shall shine as the st^^^ the brightest part of their o^bes, Dan. 12.3. Men from high places are either lib^^^
 up to a great measure of glory in heaven,Wisd. 6.5. or cast downe to a low degree of torment in hell. Against the unjust Officer of Gods Kingdome, He will horribly and suddenly appeare: an hard judgement shall they have that beare rule. The mighty shall be mightily tormented, and for the potent abideth the sorer triall. Tophet is prepared for the evill King, Esa. 30.33. Wicked subjects shall have roome enough, but the wicked Prince shall have the chiefe place. Luke 16.28. Some reading the rich man so earnestly requesting Abraham to send one from the dead, to bring his brethren to repentance; would thinke he had some charity in hell. But this was not out of love, but out of feare: he would have his brethren reclaimed, lest him selfe should be more tormented. Because his example, as being their elder brother, had encreased their wickednesse on earth; and should withall encrease his damnation in hell. A reprobate soule already swallowed into that Lake, finds his torment every day augmented, as the brood and generation of sins is multiplied by the seed of his cursed example. Take heed, the fire of hell will be hot enough for a mans owne iniquities; he needs not the iniquities of others, like fewell and bellowes, to blow and encrease the flame. Lord make them good whom thou hast made great: and reach them to honour thee, as thou hast honoured them. Psal. 45.4. They that travell in meeknesse, righteousnesse, and truth; let them ride on prosperously with their honour; thorow the Cities and Courts of the earth, to the Citie that is above, the Court of the great King in heaven, the inheritance of all those that love the LORD IESUS.
Secondly, seing we are all apt to be followers, let us seeke out the best patternes. It is the custome of the wicked to pretermit all good precedents, and to single out such as they would have, not such as they should have. As the Dorre that passeth by all the sweet flowers of the medow, humming in scorne, and ends his flight in a dung-hill. Or, as the Aegyptians, that behold the Sun, the Moon, the Stars, all the glories of nature, without admiration, yea without common regard: until they spie a Crocodyle, an ugly serpent, and then downe on their knees to worship it. It is an unhappy thing to converse with the wicked: to be a brother to the Dragons, and a companion to the Ostriches, Iob 30.29. To remain in Meshek, and to dwell in the tents of Kedar, Psal. 220.5. He that is a parasite to a great mans lust, is not a servant to the great Gods Law. Gal. 1.10. If I should please men, I were not the servant of Christ. Noah abhors the fashions of the old world, Lot of Sodom, Iob of Vz: yea, they have opposed themselves: one Reuben was opposite to the rest of his fraternity, one paire of Spies to the rest of their faint-hearted company, one Lot to the rest of the City, one Luther to the rest of his countrey, one Noah to the whole world. Suppose the example bates of multitude, and is supplied with magnitude; will it be a good answer to the Tribunall; Ego and Rex meus, the Prince and I? True, I did so, but there were better men in the company, I durst not displease? But whether is better, to follow mans humour, or Gods honour? At the day when Scepters and sepulchers shall be all one; what protection is there in thy lord against the Lord of Hostes?
Let us then looke out better precedents to follow, Phil. 3.17. Be yee followers of me, and looke on them which walke so, as ye have us for an ensample. We must not imitate every one, but such as Paul: nor Paul in every thing, but wherein hee followes Christ, 1 Cor. 11.1. That great Apostle encouraged our imitation, but gave a limitation: Doe not you follow after me, unlesse you see the tract of Christ before me. Imitemur bonos, sed in bonis: Let us follow good men, but only in what they are good. As Rhetoritians make a double imitation of Oratours; one absolutely and alwayes necessary; as Demosthenes among the Grecians, and Tully among the Latines: others but at some times, and in some things; as Poets and Historians. So in our Christian imitation, there is one example necessary; Christ, who is called the Way; Via in exemplo, veritas in pr^misso, vita in praemio: others but in some actions, and at some occasions: ^heir lives being lines so far to be followed, as they swarve not from the originall co^y, Christ. We are not bound to be good mens apes; let us follow David, where he ^ollowed Gods heart, not where he followed his own heart: if he turn toward lust and
 bloud, let us leave him there. Let us follow Peters Confession, not his abnegation: Iudas Maccabeus hearty devotion and hearty valour; not in bestowing mony to make a sacrifice for the dead, 2 Mac. 12.43. All our following hath the Quatenus; if our precedents goe out of the way, let us shake hands and bid them fare-well. Two of us are going toward Ierusalem; but saith one, I must needs call in at Rome, or goe a little about by Samaria; nay then I leave you; here our wayes part.
Thus let us cull out the best patternes: be our delight to the Saints on the earth, and such as excell in vertue, Psal. 16.3. Now every Saint excels in some vertue: o^^ excels in knowledge, another excels him in faithfulnesse, a third excels him in zeale, a fourth excels him in humilitie, another excels him in that Christian vertue, yea, Christs vertue; Forgiving of wrongs: and yet a poore man may out-goe them all i^ an admirable patience, 1 Cor. 12.29. Now as when Paul had propounded many (...) graces; he concludes; Desire you earnestly the best gifts. Take the best of every (...), and so make up an excellent man: learne of him zeale, of him knowledge, of him patience. A proud Dame will propose to her selfe the fashion of such a woman for h^^ apparel, of another for her attendance, of another for her diet, of another for her carriage, of another for her place and precedencie; of none for humility: Now as ^^e that takes the worst of every woman, will make her selfe an extreme bad woman. So she that gathers obedience from Sara, wisdome from Rebecca, chast love from Rachel, faith from Mary, hospitality from Martha, humility from Anna, charity from Dorc^^; shee shall make her selfe a most excellent woman; Delicias humani generis, the joy of men, the delight of Angels, and the beauteous Spouse of Iesus Christ. All these were the properties of that good wise Salomon speakes of; and in what woman soever you find them, you may say with him; Many daughters have done vertuously, but thou s^^mountest them all. These be good patternes to follow, as we pray for our Soveraigne, that not onely he may be like some former Prince, but have the vertues of them all: the courage of Ioshua, the heart of David, the head of Salomon, the zeale of Iosiah, the integrity of Hezekiah, etc. So al those eminences which we find in the ancient Saints, we desire to be concentred in our own heart. He that would plant a garden, borrows here a choice flower, there an herbe, there a plant; till at length his own surpasseth all the rest. But alas; whereis this imitation of goodnesse to be found among us? we are led by whom we are fed, without respect to him that feeds both them and us. Some spoile many of Gods creatures to confer all on their own creature, which is some ^^cking curre that they have drest up in high fortunes. Now, Quid non summa nequiti^ poterit in summa fortuna? What cannot extreme malice doe in a supreme place? Th^^ Absalom charged his servants concerning his brother Amnon, 2 Sam. 13.28. Kill him, feare not, have not I commanded you? Yet such Portenta temporis, prodigious Comers are followed in all their delirements and aberrations. Men wil lie by patterne, swea^^ by patterne, drinke by patterne, whore by patterne: What is this but to go to hell by patterne? There is another way to heaven, and divers have gone it before us: who now being mounted above the clouds, and trampling under their victorious feet al the vanities of this world; seeme to waft us up with their hands, and call us with their voices to follow them; saying, We have the sweet rest of peace, the rich apparell (...) glory, the society of Angels, the blessed vision of God; Follow us, O follow us (...) earth, that you may come to us in heaven: that we with you, and you with us, and a^^ together with Angels, may sing glory and honour to our God for ever.
We have considered the King-leaders; now wee come to the matter of thei^ mischiefes: which are for Pluralitie, Wayes; and for Pestilence, Pernicious or ^^^nable wayes.
Their wayes:] there is a Plurality, diversitie, number of them. Sinne is c^^led the Way of the ungodly, Psal. 1. Because of their familiaritie with it, who are c^^tinually travelling that cursed thorow-fare. Matth. 7.13. The way is broad (...) leadeth to destruction: There is roome enough for all Satans journey-men to (...) in triumph, without justling for the wall, or without a flourishing Fenser (...)
 scowre them a conveyance. The extortioner and the lavisher, the common whore and the connivent officer, the theefe and the corrupt Lawyer, the griping Citizen and the Vsurer; they have all roome. Oh it is a dancing, a capring way: they goe to hell as merrily as beggars to a Faire; but then the house of correction marres all. Wayes: Truth is but one, Errours are infinite: Truth hath but one face, Errour is a Proteus. Goodnesse is an uniforme simple, Sinne a multiforme compound. Cant. 2.2. As a Lily among thornes, so is my love among the daughters. There is one health, many diseases; one way to doe well, infinite to offend. The soule is more subject to aberrations, than the bodie to surfets. There are innumerable diseases to the bodie, when as two hundred are incident to the eye: yet are there more sins to endanger the soule. Iam. 3.6. The tongue is a world of wickednesse: Si pars, quid totum? The tongue is but a little part of man; if that be a world of sin, what is the whole? even a world of worlds. S. Paul hath twice gone about to number these wayes; yet breakes off his catalogue in both places with a silent supplement, Gal. 5.21. Adultery, uncleannesse, idolatry, etc. and such like. Here is prety store, yet lest he should never have done, he supplies all with an Et caetera, an Hujusmodi, Such like. 1 Tim. 1.10. Lawlesse disobedience, etc. and if there be any other thing of the same nature. There is an whole Hospitall, or Saint Pauls Spittle of incurable wretches: yet as if there were more behind, he concludes with a Si quid tale; whatsoever is like to these. God knowes all their wayes; they are as cleare before him, as if they were written with the brightest Sunne-beames upon a wall of glasse, Lactant. Will men flatter themselves, that God sees not all their wayes? Yes, there is not one hid from his sight: he can reade the most crooked lines that ever man wrote, and picke out the meaning of every word, yea, and make the offenders conscience reade them with horrour. We cannot reckon up Gods good deeds to us in order, but he can reckon up our evill deeds against him, in order, not we his. Psal. 40.5. Thou hast made thy wonderfull workes so many, that none can count them in order to thee. But he ours. Ps. 50.21. I wil reprove thee, and set them in order before thine eyes. His wayes are far above out of our sight, but he searcheth the wayes of the wicked, and knoweth all their paths. Si quid tale, saith Paul: no bill of Ignoto's, all come within the catalogue; if not, there is a Si quid tale to bring it in. Paul in that scroll, Gal. 5. hath neither Blasphemie, nor Perjury, nor Sacriledge: but whatsoever is left out, there is an His similia, Such like, to fetch it in. Because a man is not in extreme rage of madnesse, is he therefore no foole with God? Because hee cannot satiate his lascivious purposes, is hee therefore no adulterer with God? Shall none be shut out of the Kingdome, but those who are there precisely mentioned? Yes, Revel. 22, 15. Without shall be dogges, that is, blasphemers, scorners, lyers; which are silenced in that roll; saving that they are made belonging to the ulcerous fold by a Si quid tale. Hast thou none of those sinnes? Habes alia non fortasse minora: thou hast other, perhaps not lighter. Peccare est a disciplina aberrare, August. Discipline is one; now there is so many wayes of sinne, as deviations from doctrine. Although every particular be not reckoned, yet there is a Writ of Si quis alius, to bring the sinner in compasse.
The Devill makes much of this variety of wayes; that whom he cannot draw to hell one way, he may doe it another. There are some spirits sinfull enough, that will not yet be wrought to fetch treason from Rome: they hate Rome above Hell, ^nd will lye with any Whore in Europe before the Whore of Babylon. Well ^hen, Satan hath another way for him; hee will fetch him a little sneesing-powder ^rom Amsterdam, fire him with a Puritan zeale; and then though he dares not with ^he Iesuite discharge pistols, yet he will shoot squibs, and curse those that love his mother. Some trouble their heads about no religion at all, rather than venture the ^anger of being a party; the Devill hath another way for him; Sir still, ply your bu^inesse, take your ease; though you be not so hot as the rest, you shall be saved assoone ^s the best, I warrant you. Others are not so sluggishly minded, well then he hath ^nother way for them; that damned path of luxuriousnesse: what say you Sampson
 to a Dalila? Yes, I will venture my life for her. What say you to a knot of boote-companions, a pack of sound cards, that will leave their wits rather than the w^^ behind them? Excellent well, Drawer give us an ocean. Are you for yet another way? What say you to a tricke that will prostrate him you hate under your feet? Yes, I will hazard all my blessing in heaven, to bring a curse upon him in earth; I will undoe my selfe to beggar him. Is not this to the graine of your affection? Wh^^ say you to be a Monarchs favourite, to ride in triumph thorow the populous streets, and heare the acclamation; This is the man whom the King will honour: Vassals kiss^^g the dust your feet trode upon; but then you must be proud, and forget God; th^^^^ another way for you. Doe not all these satisfie you? Will you be rich, and pu^^ (...) gold? O there's a way indeed; will I? will I not? Aske me if I will live. He th^^ speakes to us of money and wealth, Nostras avido sovet igne medullas; Cheares (...) blouds with a tickling heat.
The Devill would be undone, but for these various wayes. All will not be a^^^terers, not all Idolaters, nor all usurers. But though it be true that by nature all si^^^ are potentially in us, yet minus servit majori, there is a predominance: and all ^^^rations delight to runne with the current of Concupiscence. It is easie for a begg^^ to be no usurer; alas there are many other wayes to he damned. Satan like the Fi^^^^ baits his hooke according to the appetite of the fish. And as Christ tooke men (...) their owne element, making Piscatores animalium, piscatores animarum, (non mut^^ piscatio sed intentio) changing in his Apostles not the condition, but the intention (...) fishing thus he appear'd to Mary in the garden, like a Gardiner. So doth Satan to pe^vert; Fit fera, fit volucris, fit toto corpore serpens; Becomes all things to seduce all m^^ Some Danat will not be wonne to play the whore, unlesse her lover appeare i^ (...) showre of gold: he hath that way for her. Another will not bow in the house^ Rimmon, crouch at a Masse, but for his masters favour; he hath that way for him. A third will not rend the Church with Schisme, but to get himselfe a name: he h^^^ (...) way for him too; he shall not be inglorious, though he be infamous. A Iesuite (...) not strike at the annointed bloud, unlesse the Pope will canonize him for a Sai^^; there's a way for him. One will have this way, another that way; so they goe to ^e^ any way; Satan cares not. One trembles at the maine ocean, that ventures to be drowned in a shallow puddle: no matter how, sayes Satan, so he be drowned.
To conclude, he studies many wayes to make you wretched, doe you study (...) way to make your selves blessed. The Devill is the father of lies, he would have shewed Christ the way down from the pinacle, but it was a false way, by a precip^e^ if thou standest in a quandary, and he should point thee a way; that is, if thine owne lust, his town-clearke, say this way; be thou sure to take the other, for he meanes (...) murder thee. If thou be in the path of obedience, and he say unto thee, as Elisha to (...) Syrian armie, 2 King. 6.19. This is not the way, but follow me, and I will bring you whi^^ you desire: answer him with an Abi in malum, Depart thou lying spirit, this is the (...) of righteousnesse which the Holy Ghost prescribeth. Now seeing that of m^^y wayes, one speciall way is hard to hit, Lord guide us the right way, open our eyes (...) see it, incline our hearts to walke it, and bring our soules to the end of it, through (...) that is the way of truth, and the truth of way, and life of both, IESUS CHRIST*
Their pernicious wayes.] Wee have done with the number, let us come to (...) nature of their wayes; which are Pernicious or Damnable. The word is diver^^^ read: by some (...), by some (...), in the later copies (...): for Luxu^^^ Lasciviousnesses, or Destructions. If understood in the former acceptions, we (...) this observation.
That the end of heresie is to make men proud and insolent, or riotous and ^^cessive; contrary to the doctrine of mortification which the Gospell preacheth. (...) that which promiseth that the flesh shall not kill us, chargeth us also to kill the (...) The one is promised, Rom. 8.1. the other imposed, Col. 3.5. Ahab was assured by (...) Prophet that Benhadad should not slay him, but withall he was commanded to (...)
 Benhadad; that proud enemie of God and his Church: but because he did not, Thy life shall goe for his life, and thy people for his people, saith the Lord, 1 King. 20.42. But now the doctrine which encourageth and flesheth the flesh, which admireth and admitteth the world; doth also make much for the Devill. His first policie was to catch the soule through the treason of her guard, the Senses. For Nisi prius deciperetur sensus, non sequeretur assensus; Vnlesse the sense had first submitted, the consent of the soule would never have followed. And still he insinuates to the soule, as the men of Tyre to Herod, by Blastus the Chamberlaine, Act. 12.20. The flesh is a perfumed fawning Blastus, that does all with the great one. Here is then the difference betweene true doctrine and false; the former only intends to make (...), to unbody the body of death: and the scope of the other, is to turne the grace of GOD into licentiousnesse, and to inlarge the jurisdiction of sinne.
The Gospell intends our newnesse of life, and peracts this through foure degrees; in allusion, yea, in conformitie to the death and resurrection of Christ. First, his body was wounded and beaten, with thornes and buffets: answerable in us there must be contrition: Trajectum vulnere corpus; When the Publican did but knock his brest, he gave this wound to his flesh. Strike it soundly with remorse of heart, set it a bleeding. 2. Christs body was pursued with incessant afflictions, so follow thy fin with continuall blowes, till thou make it so weake that it cannot creep, 1 Cor. 9.27. I beat downe my body, and bring it in subjection. Though sin wil not say, as the Prophet to his neighbour; Percute me; Smite me, I pray thee: yet God bids us smite it: and if we deny to doe it, his wrath will smite us, as the Lion slew that refuser, 1 King. 20.36. Therefore let us deale with it, as the other man did with the Prophet, ver. 37. Smite it soundly, and smite it daily: a little sorrow is not sufficient. Gemitus, quasi geminatus: Let us water our bed every night with our teares, Psal. 6.6. Doe not only blow upon it with intermissive blasts, for then like fire it will resurge and flame the more. Sinne is like a stinking candle newly put out, it is soone lighted againe. It may receive a wound, but like a dog it will easily licke it selfe whole: a little forbearance multiplies it like Hydra's heads. Therefore, Nullam labem aspergat dies, quam nocturnae lacryma non dilu^ant; Whatsoever aspersion the sin of the day hath brought upon us, let the teares of the night wash away. 3. They crucifie Christ: so when sinne is thus wounded and weakned, let us have it to the Crosse, and naile it fast, Rom. 6.6. Let our old man be crucified with him, that the body of sin may be destroyed, that hence-forth we may not serve sin. It is fit we should crucifie that enemy, which crucified our best friend, Christ. Yea, that we should kill that, Quod si non pereat, perdat; Which, if we destroy not, will destroy us. It is written of Ahaz, 2 Chron. 28.23. that he sacrificed to the gods of Damascus which plagued him: Let us never seeke to please sinne, which seekes to confound ^s. He is a foole that loves his sinne better than his soule. No, Moriatur iniquitas, ne moriatur iniquus; let the sinne die, that the sinner may live. Neither dally this execution: save this malefactour from the galhouse, and hee will be the first that shall hang thee: be sure it is dead. 4. Lastly, as CHRIST was taken downe ^rom the Crosse, and laid in his grave: so is it dead? O bury it. The Gospell will ^ot bate one degree of this proceeding, even to buriall, Rom. 6.4. Wee are buried ^ith him, etc. Mortification may beginne at some few principalls, as an arme is ^riken dead with a palsey: but Buriall covers all: therefore rest not untill all bee ^aid in the grave. Yea, as CHRIST was buried in a grave of Rocke, lest the softer ^atter of the earth should seeme easily possible: in one entire rock, lest the clifts and ^ssures should breed cavill: Yea, to the mouth of the rocke was a stone rolled, ^^at stone sealed, and that seale watched. So make sure worke with thy sinfull ^esh: bury it in a rocke: if thou finde none ready, in CHRISTS grave: there ^re no seames for Satan to steale it out, and bring it in judgement against thee. Roll (...) stone to the mouth of the Sepulcher, that is, detestation of sinne: hate it, as Amnon ^ated Tamar, more than ever thou lovedst it. Seale the stone, bind it with a vow of ^solution; I have sworn, and will performe it, Psa. 119.106. Set a guard about it, watch
 it: Cum omni custodia; With all diligence keepe thy heart from it. There are three watchmen; Fasting, Circumspection, and Prayer: Fasting is a plot to cheat iniquity, for she is no pingler, but loves pampering. By fasting keepe the body, by circumspection the soule, by prayer both. This is the doctrine of the Gospell, to kill the lu^ts of bloud and flesh: that the soule may live without the tyrannie of sinne in this world, and without the company of sinne in the world to come.
Now the aime and scope of false doctrine, is to hearten this Iezabel that bew^cheth us: that whosoever is led by it, may share the testimonie, the infamie, the penaltie with Ahab, 1 King. 21.25. He hath sold himselfe to worke wickednesse in the sight of God, whom Iezabel his wise provoked. The doctrine of Rome may here justly be i^dicted for Asoticall, the nurse of voluptuousnesse. O you wrong it; nothing is more corrective, restrictive, austere: Doth it not command fasting? No: what not Rome? No, not Rome: it commands abstaining from some kinde of food, but not fasting. A merchant is following his businesse all day, at night comes home; hee must have no flesh: but he hath his cullices, his jellies, his junkets, ten times more provoking than moderate flesh. The poore labourer, if at night he eats a peece of Bacon, O he is an heretike, but the other an excellent Catholike. But does it not forbid marriage, and commend vowes of chastity and celibate? Yes, that it may allow Stewes, and have large fees out of harlots hires. But there is a curse against them, Mich. 1.7. They gather it of the hire of an harlot, and they shall returne to the wages of an harlot. Why doe they not boast their Pauline order, founded by Ghastalia, a Countesse of Mantus: where mortification was so throughly taught, that a certaine old woman Iulia, indeed little better than a Bawd; would lay a young man and a maid in one bed together, with a Crucifix betweene them, to keepe them from scratching one another; that thus they might learne to mortifie the flesh? Doe they not commend (...), Prodigalitie; when they tempt a young landed man to part with all he hath, to u^doe his parents that depend upon him; that hee may take their order, and they ^^vide his Inheritance? Doe they not approve (...), lasciviousnesse; when they forbid marriage to a chaste wife, and tolerate turpitude with an unchast curtesan? Whether then we take it for the first or second, the third will fit all, as our translation reades it; Damnable wayes. In that Tertio they all meet: whether it be a Luxurious way, or a Lascivious way, it is still a Damnable way.
If it be taken for Riot and voluptuousnesse, that is a pestilent doctrine which shall teach a man to cast away Gods blessings like troublesome rubbish, 1 Tim. 5.8. If any man provide not for his owne, he hath denied the faith, and is worse than an Infid^^. It is Pernicious to both the estates, present, and future. First, for this world, it hastens beggary: it is the rioters phrase, when he calls for supplies to his lusts; It is but begging an yeare the sooner. Diogenes requested of a prodigall a talent: he as (...) him what he meant, to desire so much of him, and so little of others: he answered, Quoniam tu habes, illi habebunt; Because thou hast, and they will have: I shall beg o^ thee but once, of them often: give me now a talent, I may live to give thee a gro^^. Secondly, for the world to come, when the account must be given, the matter will be worse. If the servant that but hid his talent, was cast into utter darknesse, for not ^^proving it: what answer shall he make that hath riotously wasted it, Luke 16.1. Th^^ shall be more fire, because there was lesse faithfulnesse.
If it be taken for Wantonnesse, then that is a Damnable doctrine, that shall teach (...) man to goe to heaven by uncleannesse. Such a pestilence is derived from the Pa^^ faction, that Fornication is but a veniall sinne, 1 Cor. 6.15. Paul saith, Shall I take (...) members of Christ, and make them the members of an harlot? God forbid. That sa^ledge, to make the member of Christ a limbe of the Devill by the congression^ lust, is with them veniall. Paul saith, God forbid it; but Rome allowes it, and in so^^ sort commends it. But he that so taught it, shall never so find it, 1 Tim. 5.11. (...) wax wanton against Christ: What's their reward? It followes; Having da^^^^ because they have broken their first faith. Such a damnable opinion was hatched by (...)
 Familists, that a man might lie with his neighbours wife dormiente marito, while her husband slept: as if the sleepe of the innocent excused or acquitted the guilt of the waking. But let them all pretend what they will, as the woman that presumed so much of her husbands love, that if he should finde her in the bed of incontinence, he would not harme her: but it proved farre otherwise, to her shame and ruine. So there is another judgement must passe; and let them not thinke they are so sure of Gods favour, that he will not finde fault though they be lascivious: for Whoremongers and adulterers the Lord will judge, Hebr. 13.4.
To conclude, observe the horrors of false doctrine, and the inexitricable confusion it wrappes the followers in (...), Pernicious: ad verbum, Destructions, or Damnations. The wicked never rest till they meete with finall ruine. Pharaoh, though by one plague he had lost the fruites of the earth, by another the fruite of his cattell, by a third the light of his eyes, by a fourth the fruite of his loynes, even all the first borne of Aegypt: yet as if all this could not content him, he would not give over till he met with utter destruction; till he was drowned and damned. Yea, they follow it as if a man should wooe and court unhappinesse: one would thinke it were enough to say to Destruction, as Ahab to Elias; Hast thou found me O thou mine enemie? But so to pursue it, as not to give it over till they overtake it, is a desperate madnesse. Like flies that stil hover about the candle, and the burning of a wing serves not their turne; they must sacrifice their lives in the flame. So busy are the wicked about hell fire, playing on this side, and one that; dancing through it as boyes through a bonefire; yea as in the sacrifices of children to Moloch, and that with pipes and melodie in the valley of Hinnon. Never ceasing till God make an utter destruction, affliction not rising up the second time, Nah. 1.9. It is a fearefull protestation of the Prophet against them. Psal. 109.18. As he clothed himselfe with cursing like a garment, so shall it come into his bowels like water, and like oile into his bones. As he loved it, so he shall have it, and be alway girded with it. For us that love Salvation, let us never rest till we are assured of it; not suffering our eyes to sleepe, nor our eye lids to take any slumber, till we be possessed of Iesus Christ.
Many shall follow their pernicious wayes.] Thus for the Ringleaders, now view the rabble: and therein their multitude and their Aptitude, their number, Many: their forwardnesse, tractablenesse, easynesse to be tempted; Shall follow.
1 Their multitude, Many: wickednesse walkes with numbers, and is never scanted of folowers. Matth. 24.5. Many shall come in my Name, and deceive many. Paul saies, they shall draw a world after them. Goodnesse hath a few adherents, because the gate is narrow that leadeth to life; the wicked in a proud disdaine blanch heaven gate, as too straite for their greatnesse. All that the master graciously invited, disdainefully refused. Luk. 14.18. All with one mind make excuse: well, his cheare shall not be lost. Goodnesse may complaine with Paul; At my answering, no man assisted me, but all forsooke me: yet still prayes for them, that it may not be layd to their charge. Christendome is the least part of the world,2 Tim. 4.16. they that professe Christ truely the least part of christendome; and of this little part there be many that may bee called Heretickes, not so much in their lippes, as in their lives, not in their doctrines, but in their doings: they colour for CHRIST, but confederate underhand with the world. Therefore Many are called, but few are chosen. It is said. Revel. 20.12. that the bookes shall be opened, and another booke which is the booke of life. There is but one booke of life, wherein the elect are registred: but the bookes of the reprobates are many, for one booke will not hold them. But if I for beare the common customes, I shall be held singular and irregular, a by-word of the people, and as a tabre^ before them, Iob ^7.6. And what, must thou preferre fame before conscience? Remember the Philosopher when the people applauded him, Quid mali feci, he asked what evill he had done? So^^es ever suspected that, which past with the general most commendation Augustine reckons up 288 severall opinions de summo bono. Civit. lib. 19. cap. 1. but amongst
 all these we never found any so mad, as to place his happinesse upon common fame. Indeed so long as great men be good men, and the most the best, wee may follow both: but because this is rare, let us not doe as the most, but doe as we must. It is better to have good company in heaven, than great company in hell. It was a satyricall, an atheisticall answer of a Iester, when a great Lord asked him whether he would goe to heaven or to hell: he said, To hell; for there I shall be sure to meet your Lordship, and the most part of my acquaintance. But hee little loves CHRIST, that will not love him without company: and his zeale is cold to heaven, whom the example of numbers can turne another way. No, let us say as much as Peter said, and doe more than Peter did: Though all men should forsake thee, yet I will not leave thee, O Saviour. Neither magnitude of Princes, nor multitude of people, shall prevaile with me: I am thy sheepe, I will follow my shepheard. Lead mee on with the bands of love, and hold mee with the hand of mercie; knit me to thy selfe, now with saving grace, and hereafter with everlasting glory.
2 Their Tractablenesse; Shall follow. There is a pliable disposition in all (...) naturally to evill, in these a desperate and unstayable precipitation.
They need not be compelled with scourges, nor tormented to it: their owne willingnesse saves the labour of painfull coaction. It is onely a Iob that the divell delights to vexe with anguish: he knowes, an Absalom will runne laughing to hell. Luk. 22.31. Satan hath desired to winnow you. To winnow you, there are some all chaffe, he will not meddle with them. Hos. 4.17. Ephraim is joyned to Idols, let him alone. Let him alone, saies Satan; he is as safe as I would wish him. No generall wounds his owne souldiers, that march under his colours; but his enemies. Luk. 11.18. If Satan bee divided against himselfe, how shall his kingdome stand? Hee never makes reprobates feele his hate, till they feele his heate; even his fire in the burning lake.
They need not bee drawen with cords, haled with authoritie and command. Indeed if Doeg heare a Saul bid him murther the Priests, he will run upon them, and quickly dispatch them. 1 Sam. 22.18. If Nebuchadnezzar charge the people to adore his new erected Idol, they quickly fall downe; Assoone as the musicke gave warning, Dan. 3.7. Iohn shall not want a deaths-man, if Herode send for his head. The centurions servants never ran faster on his errands, than these to doe mischiefe. Such headlong followers of false teachers are the Papists, who have learned caecam obedientiam, to be so tractable as to follow their leaders blind-fold. They practise an i^ discreet surrendring up of themselves to the command of their superior. Like those uncleane beasts, Deut. 14. they swallow and never chew the cudde. It is an inconsiderate, undiscoursive applyment of themselves to anothers will, without waighing the goodnesse or fitnesse of the action. An Abbot commands one to cast his crying child into the river, and drowne it: he doth it, and saith my Author; God did reveale that he accomplished Abrahams worke, Cassian. Another was desirous to be instructed in the point of predestination: his Superior turn'd him to a place in Augustine, and bad him read There: when he came to the end of the page, not of the sense or sentence, he durst not turne over the leafe, because his superior bad him real There. This following they so commend, that if a man were dignified to talke with Angells, if his superior called him, he must come away. When one of them was in discourse with our Lady, a Fryer called him, and he very unmannerly quitted h^^, Climach. They sticke not to affirme, that it is a greater pride to doe a good worke against a superiors command, than to doe a bad one with it: because that is vice ^^der pretence of vertue. This it is better to s^one against God, than against our spirituall Father: because he can reconcile us to God, but no body can reconcile (...) him. Here is a ducible disposition indeed, a generation that will follow upon the (...) hint. If Peter should have asked them that question. Act. 4.19. Whether it is be^ter to obey God or man, judge yee: they would have answered; Man, so he be a Superior.
 Yet saith Eli, 1 Sam. 2.25. If one man sinne against another, the Iudge shall judge it: but if a man sinne against the Lord, who shall plead for him? Yea these men will follow, were they never called. They would be glad to heare it from the mouth of their Ioab; Run; and like Cushi, they would bow themselves for it. 2 Sam. 18.21. Yea, like Gehasi, they runne though they were never sent.
They need not be led on with flatteries, as Absalom stole the hearts of Israel. When a courtier, to worke Sejanus out of favour with Tiberius, had luxuriously flattered and guilded him with his owne vertues: and the Emperor found that the intention of all his designe was to overthrow Sejanus: he replied, alas you might have spared all this paines and oratory, for I meant before to ruine Sejanus. So to perswade a covetous man to become an Vsurer, and to flatter him with the safe and easy gaine; it is but labour lost: he meant to doe it, though he were never counselled to it.
They need not be hired with rewards: yet this same Dabo tibi goes farre; it tempted Balaam to curse, where he should blesse: Iudas to betray, where he should adore. Saul thought that this only would stay the Benjamites from revolting to David, 1 Sam. 22.7. Will the sonne of Ishai give you fields and vineyards? will he make you captaines over thousands, or captaines over hundreds? This engine Satan planted against the walls of eternity, Matth. 4.9. All these will I give thee. As God said to Abraham; All the land that thou seest will I give unto thee, Gen. 13.15. But these men, though they had no reward, yet insant sine munere currunt. Though the tempter sayes not as Balak to their cussen, false prophet, Numb. 22.37. Am I not able indeed to promote thee to honour? Yea though he confesse plainely, I have neither silver nor gold, lands nor vineyards to give you: yet they resolutely proceed in the satisfaction of their owne malice; We will eate our owne bread, and weare our owne garments:Esa. 4.1. only doe thou owne us, and let us be thy retainers. Though upon our owne cost, we will follow: so greedy is the wicked man of his owne ruine, that himselfe will beare the charges of it.
From this point of their Tractablenesse, ducible and easy diposition to be led onto evill, we may raise five observable deductions.
1 The greedinesse of the ungodly to sinne, that they scarce tarry for temptation. Eph. 4.19. They are past feeling, (sicke without sense) and have given themselves (without hire, or pay, or compulsion, but by a deed of gift) (not only to thinke, but) to worke (not a light kind of immodestie, but) uncleanesse (not some little, but) all uncleanesse (not with indifferent appetite, or some forward disposition, capable of disswasion, but) with unsatiable and desperate greedinesse. The Apostle sets downe here two especiall markes of their selfe violence. 1. They have given themselves: not ravished as Thamar, but they have prostituted their owne soules, like that impudent strumpet, that sits at the doore, and calls in passengers, Prov. 9.14. So Ahab sold himselfe to worke wickednesse; he had no hire. I remember Davids lamentation over slaine Abner, 2 Sam. 3.33. How dyed Abner? how? His hands were not bound, nor his feete tyed with fetters of brasse; yet he fell downe at the feete of the conqueror: yesterday a man, to day a corps. No body compelled these, no body forced them; but their owne will was their owne overthrow, their owne following their owne undoing, and the battell is fought betweene them and themselves. 2. With greedinesse: they follow as the yron adamant, by a naturall and hidden propensitie: or, as a Lacquay followes his Lord, and hath no course of his owne, but which way his master pleaseth. To be sure of not being behind, they will be before: or, as a dogge followes his master through foule or faire, thicke or thinne, whether North or South; which way soever he doubles his point; howling and questing if he be at a losse. O^, more properly according to the phrase here; as Scholers following their Master, novices their Superiors; subjected to their doctrine and discipline, without questioning what they learne, or, why they suffer. Marching like Iehu the sonne of Nimshi, driving as if they were mad, 2 King. 9.20. Hastning as a bird to the snare, or a
 foole to the stockes: as if they had fire at their heeles, like Sampsons foxes; where^^ indeed the fire is before their faces: they runne not from it, but unto it.
2 Sinne is strong when it meetes with a weake resister. How easy is it for error to dominere over ignorance! 2 Tim. 3.6. They lead captive simple women, led away with diverse lusts. Silly women are easily led captive by subtle men. The divell is called a strong man, yet the faith of the weakest christian is able to beate him backe Eph. 4.27. Give no place to the divell: for there is no place for him but where it is g^ven him. When Satan had CHRIST on the Pinnacle of the Temple, one would thinke that a child for strength might have turned him off: No, his commission extended not so farre: he met now with a strong defendant, and he is as weake as water. It is mans infirmity that sets off the glory of his strength. Iob 41.25. He is a king over all the children of pride. Satan is a tyrant, but over whom? none but the children of pride. He is called the Prince of the world, but indeed only of worldlings, yet let not this so disgrace his strength, that you become secure. Though the divell stands at Gods curtesie, let us not be fearelesse or carelesse of such an ene^^e. Sinne is strong, it could fetch Angels out of heaven, arrest Gods courtiers before (...) owne face. A whole world could not withstand the furie of it, when it came marching against them with a floud. It was strong enough to lay all the sons and daughters of Adam in the dust. The divell is strong as a Lion, yea stronger than a thousand Lions; that counteth darts as straw, and laughes at their shaking of the speare, (...) 41.20. death is strong, a stalking Gyant, that like Goliath dares all the world (...) match him with an equall combatant. Hell is strong, it can hold Alexanders, Cesars, Tamberlanes, the sonnes of Anak, sure enough for ever breaking forth. But now whence have all these their strength? Aliunde petunt, they fetch it from the life of sin, which only soules them all with their vigor: take away that, and they are as weak as a bulrush. What power hath death but by sinne? it is the sting of it: all a serpents power is in his venomous sting. Yea death had never beene, had not sinne engendred it. Iam. 1.15. Sinne bringeth forth death. It is beholding to sinne for the very being; for it is none of those positive things that God made. The divell had beene damned alone, but for sinne; and all the world had mocked his malice. Bu^ intra te, quod contra te: he fetcheth the poyson from within thee, whereby he fighteth against thee. He finds that weapon in our owne lusts, wherwith he runs through our soules. Marke the Philistines policie. 1 Sam. 13.19. to leave the Hebrewes not a Smith in all Israel; lest they should make them speares or swords. Let this be our stratagem, to disappoint the divell of his weapons: O that he had no Smith amongst us: howsoever let not us be his Smiths, to hammer, work and fashion his temptations in the forges of our owne brests. And for hell, though without sinne it have the strength of retention, yet loseth the strength of attraction: it may be powerfull to keepe those it hath, but not to draw in those it hath not. That great Gulfe may hold the prisoners from comming forth, but the gates of hell are too weake to scramble in a beleeving soule.
But alas, when sinne invades a weake naturall man, it boasteth the power in present conquest. Mans strength is wounded by an originall blow: and as when sicknesse hath gotten the better of him, and cast him downe, still as the patient growes weaker, the disease growes stronger; and the more that tyrant usurpes, the lesse able is the sufferer to resist. At first Sampson was hard enough for all the Princes of the Philistines, at last they set a boy to lead him. Abimelech was a stout Prince, yet had his deaths wound by a woman. Totylas that mighty conqueror, who vanquished Rome, which vanquished the world, was slaine by Narses an Eunuch, a Semi-vir. It is recorded of Solyman a late Turke, that having a great German brought prisoner unto him: in spite and derision of the German nation, he caused his dwarfe, a very pigmey to take him in hand after he was bound; to hacke him and hew him, to runne at tilt at him with many courses, and at last to kill him. Let little David maze Goliah with his sting, and he will cut off his head. Thus may
 ^he Lion and Leopard be tamed, and a little child lead them, Esa. 11.6. The Scythi^s had a pestilent enemie that infested their countrey: they levied a troupe, and with (...) great conflict tooke him: when they had him, they were yet troubled to hold him: ^hey then so scanted his dyet and sleep that sixe men could master him: at last by de^rees they brought him so low, that they set a dogge to lead him. Thus Satan ^rst sets on man first with troupes of spirits; and if he be unruly, they starve him by ^taining the food of the soule, the word of God: at last when he is brought low, ^hey set a dogge to lead him, his owne lust. This Naaman feared and escaped; Ha^ael scorned, yet admitted: Am I a dogge that I should doe this? 2 King. 8.13. He ^ecame that dogge, or, at least was lead by that dogge. Thus prone are we to sinne, ^nd therefore let us pray him that is the Strongest to fortifie us. If we be left to our ^elves, sin not sooner calls than we follow: all our helpe, all our hope is in the preven^ng grace of God.
3 Observe the power of evill men over their associates; whether in perverting ^e higher faculties of the soule, reason and understanding and conscience: or, in ^orrupting the lower, will and affections. There is some respondence betweene a ^hysicall and this ethicall or morall corruption. It is wrought:
Either by privation, withering the good qualities in us: like an evill North ^ind, they blow upon the buds of our grace, and nippe them. Whether the ill ^ompanion bee a white-skin'd hypocrite, or, a blacke-hided Ruffian: the one like ^ire water, the other like fowle: but any water, faire or fowle: may quench the fire ^f Gods Altar in thee? He doth worke a tabe and consumption into his fellowes ^ertues: and wasteth them from an ounce to a dramme; from a dramme to a scruple, ^o a graine, to nothing. He that hath money will beware of theeves: if thou have ^ny grace, venture it not among these rifllers. Art thou enclined to pray? he tempts ^ee to play. Wouldest thou goe to a Sermon? by his perswasion the Theater stands ^n the way. Wouldest thou relieve the poore? no saies hee, this will helpe to ^eare charges at the Taverne. Luk. 10.30. A certaine man went downe from Ierusalem (...) Iericho, and fell among theeves, that robbed him, etc. He that will goe from Ierusa^em to Iericho, shall fall among theeves, that will rob him of his good conditions. The divell hath such agents, that practise the art of debauching men. As Amilcar ^wore his young sonne Hanibal in vindictam Romanorum, to the revenge of the Romanes: and as Rome now sweares her proselytes in vindictam Anglorum, to the re^enge of the Protestants: so the divell sweares all his Instruments in vindictam Chri^ianorum to the revenge of Christians. So that a man may say with Christ ^n the crowd, Quis me tetigit? Who touched mee, for I feele vertue gone out ^f mee.
Or, by position, infusing his owne bad qualities into thee. Lot hath a little tang ^rom Sodome, that stickes by him in the Mountaine. Iacob sware by the Feare of his father Isaac: but Ioseph learned in Aegypt to sweare by the life of Pharaoh: Pe^er durst draw his sword against a whole troupe in his Masters quarrell: but after all protestations of inseparablenesse was infected with the aire of the high Priests hall: ^nd then he fell to cursing; it is likely that was their fashion, to get credite to their ^peeches. Herode was loth to give away Iohn Baptists head, but for the company, Matth. 14.9. As a musician tunes his instrument, so he will stretch all thy cords, ^ill he hath brought thee to his owne key: thou shalt be forced to sing as he will have ^hee, Psal. 137.3. Let sinne be but an embrion in thee, he will so midwife it that he will deliver thee of it by action: yea so nurse it, till he make it the darling of thy af^ection. Is thy soule thus ravished of her chast love to CHRIST? thou may^st say to her as Absalom to his sister Thamar: Hath Amnon beene with thee? hath the ^ad associate met with thee? This poyson is never more dangerous than when it ^omes in a golden cup. All the spight of Iosephs brethren was not such a Crosse to ^im, as the inordinate affection of his mistresse. Tentations on the right hand are ^ore perilous, because they are more plausible and glorious. Ioseph saw this pleasure
 would advance him: he knew what it was to be the minion of one of the greatest Ladies in Aegypt. Yet he contemnes it; How shall I doe this great wickednesse, and sinne against God? He knew that all the flouds of honour could not wash of (...) guilt of one sinne. He shunnes her societie: O that we were so wise to avoid the occasions of evill company. She impudently catcheth hold of his garment, he (...) seconds her tongue. But Ioseph wil rather lose his cloak than this fa^^h, rather be s^^led of his livery, than of his chastitie: refuse all, rather than blemish her honour, (...) masters in her, his owne in both; Gods in all. Were we all such Iosephs, the ped^^^ of hell durst not open his packe: his damned wares might lie like dead commodities stinking upon his owne hands.
Let this teach us all to flie the societies of the wicked: lest we follow them ho^^^, through their transgression to their destruction. But if I consort with them, I do^^ to convert them. Alas, there is a great deale more danger of poysoning the physician, than curing the patient. They are such as have taken the divells oath of allegiance; that what he cannot doe immediately by himselfe, he may doe mediately by his instruments. To erre Humanum, is the part of man: but to seduce Di^^^^ cum, is the part of a divell. It is ill to play the wanton, worse to play the bea^^, worst of all to play the divell. There have beene such cursed men, that delight in the murther of soules. Paul fought with such Beasts at Ephesus: the men of Nazareth were worse to CHRIST than the divell: he saies, mitte te, cast downe (...) selfe: they would violently throw him downe: and that on the Sabbath day, wh^^ they tooke exception against him for curing on the Sabbath day, Luk. 4. The C^^^rens but besought him to depart: his owne countreymen were worse, for they dro^^ him out. Cain replyed, Am I my brothers keeper? yet he could be his brothers b^^cher. These violences indeed are not alwayes in sociable fellowes, but subtle a^^ supple fomentations. Persecutio facit martyres, haeresis apostatas: plus nocuerunt hor^^ togae, quam illorum galea, Tertul. Persecution hath made Martyrs, schisme apostates: the former corrosives are not so noxious as the others balsames. Wee call sour divells, familiars. Psal. 55.13. It was thou my guide, my companion, my familiar; that didst mee the mischiefe: he that eates our salt betrayes us. There is no such speeding engine of destruction, as the friendly seducer; that damnes a man in kindnesse. As a man sinking into the deepe water, catcheth hold of him that is next him: so men diving into the bottome of iniquity, pull downe their adherents. The sheepe make the ground fruitfull wheresoever they lie: so the godly make all places blessed where they dwell. But the wicked, like the weed Gosses, make the land barres where they grow. When such a one provokes thee to sinne, though with the smoothest face; it thou say not to him as CHRIST to Peter. Get thee behind me Satan: yet take thy leave of him, as the Angell did of the divell, Increpet te Dominus, The Lord rebuke thee, Iud. ver. 9.
Oh that we could see the mischiefe that evill company doth us: the sinnes unpurposed, unthought of come thus to be committed. Let a tempter but hold up his finger, the Sabbath shall be profaned, the word relinquished, and all religion suspended. This man is a Harpy that peckes up all the good seed: a great beast (...) breakes through the sense of Gods Law; makes a vast gappe or breach; and as my Text saies, the whole heard followes him. How does Dives in hell now curse (...) flatterers! If thou knowest whose factor thy ill companion is, thou wouldest (...) him. He is such a pleasing murtherer that he tickles thee to death; and like Salomons foole, thou dyest laughing. A good man accompanying an evill, is like a l^ving body bound to a dead corps: noisome and irkesome. When God shall cha^g^ thy soule with sinne, wilt thou answer; such a one brought me to it; Adam, (...) woman gave me? Tu errando miser, quamvis ille in provocando miserior: thou shalt (...) wretched in sinning, though he be more wretched in tempting. He hath helped (...) to much of thy sinne, he shall beare none of thy torment. Be circumspect ra^^^ with whom thou eatest and drinkest than what thou eatest and drinkest, Sen. Le^^^
 them, Nunc te melioribus offer. Leave them? then must we goe out of the world, 1 Cor. 5.10. But have no fellowship (nullo modo cum operibus; in quantum potes, nec cum operatoribus) with the unfruitfull workes; and if thou canst avoid it, neither with the workers of darkenesse. Si cum malis, non tamen in malis. If we must converse with evill men, yet let it not be in evill matters. Dilige malos homines, non quia malos, sed quia homines. Love evill men, not in that they are evill, but in that they are men. Love quod fiunt, non quod faciunt: love what they are, not what they doe, as God made them, not as they make themselves. Affect virum, non vitium, the man not his fault. As in releeving an evill beggar; damus homini, non moribus; we give to the man, not to his manners. But if by admitting their persons, we cannot avoid their vices, let us deny both. How should we hope, feasting with Iobs children, the house should not fall downe on our heads! When we find our selves following evill men, I wonder we doe not tremble at their ends. Can we walke in the midst of the fire, and feele no scorching? mans nature is like the fire; if there be any infection in the roome, it drawes it strait to it selfe. Like jette, it omits all precious objects, and attracts strawes and dust. Trust not thy selfe with these incendiaries: cull out the best and follow them: Oh sweet is the communion of Saints! Worldly mirth is more talked of then felt, spirituall joy is more felt, then talked of. I appeale to any mans conscience, that hath beene softened with the unction of grace, and truly tasted the powers of the world to come: suppose thou hast tried both; beene mad-merry with thy friends at a luxurious feast, sung Psalmes with the Saints in the Church; whether of these have most refreshed thy heart? Alas, temporall mirth is like the widdowes joy, a blaze and goodnight: spirituall rejoycing leaves an impression in the soule behind it, the unspeakeable comforts of the Holy Ghost, never to be raced out.
I conclude with three cautions given by three severall Saints from one most holy Spirit. Exod. 23.2. Follow not a multitude to doe evill. Foolish birds follow the kite in hope of a part of the expected prey, when she drawes her owne guts after her, Rom. 12.2. Fashion not your selves to this world: it is a fashion that must be washed off with fire and brimstone. Prov. 28.14. Blessed is the man that feareth alway. Salvianus gives the reason; Nemo magis diligit, quam qui maxime veretur offendere. No man so truly loves, as he that feares to offend. I confesse, there be many things lawfull that the common people doe, but I will suspect that which the common people doe. The Iewes might give offenders fortie stripes by the Law, yet they gave Paul but nine and thirty. Perhaps they thought that if they had given the full number, their fingers might have itched to give one more. Qui a nullis abstinet licitis, vicinus est illicitis: he that abstaines from nothing that is lawfull, neighbours upon that which is unlawfull. Nam mala sunt vicina bonis. The note which comes too neere in the margent, will skippe into the Text at the next impression. Of all studies, let us never study to range in the borders and extremities of our libertie. As how much of this world we may swallow, and riches not choake us. How neere we may come to the skirts and suburbes of hell, and hell not wholly devoure us. How much we may drinke, and be no drunkards: how farre we may wade in usurie, and yet scape hell? The divell is crafty and watchfull; if he spy our venturous outrodes, and find us extravagant out of our owne grounds; hee will not lose one inch of his advantage.
4 Wee must not fall off from the faith and Church of CHRIST, because multitudes travell another way. He that proclaimes pleasure and carnall content to all his followers, shall have many Schollers in Courts, Palaces, Colledges, Senates, Fields, Shops, Offices: for all they love darkenesse whose deeds are evill. There are few whose faith finds a passage through the streight gate. Of sixe hundred thousand Israelites but two entred into the land of promise. Non facile invenies multis e milibus unum, virtutem pretii qui putat esse sui. The Papists fable to us of Saint Bernard, that the fifteenth day after his death he appeared to a certaine Monk: and when the Monke
 asked whether it were a difficult thing to be saved; he should thus answer him: The same day I died there died also foure thousand three hundred; and of all them Ego solus cum quodam Heremite vitam caelestem intravimus, only my selfe and one Hermite were received into heaven: there was one cast into the fire of purgatory, and all the rest went to hell. For the story, I have not so spatious a faith as to credite it: but I feare of the many thousands which every day depart this life, the greater number take the wrong way. If this be so, strive we to make sure our own salvation: that when many follow these damnable wayes, we may be found of that number that followed IESUS CHRIST. When Agelmond King of the Lumbards (be it reported upon Sigeberts credite) passed by a pond into which seven infants were cast, he thrust downe his speare, and that Infant which tooke hold of it he brought up from the poole, brought home to his house, and brought up at his house like the Kings Son; and at last he succeeded him in the kingdome; he was called Lanussio, or Lamussius, from Lama a ditch out of which he was taken. So when the great King of heaven came into the world, and the world knew him not, he found us all drenchd in the whirlepoole of sinne, and ready to be everlastingly drowned: he thrust downe his speare the saving Gospell: and Ioh. 1.12. As many (not many, scarce one of seven) as received him, (tooke hold on his speare, as it followeth there exegetically) that beleeved in his Name: To them he gave (not only obtaining for them, nor proclaiming to them, but to them hee gave) Power to bee the Sonnes of GOD, to bee repossessed of the kingdome, and to divide the Inheritance with the principall heire, himselfe.
5 Lastly, seeing there is such certaine danger in following after common copies; give me leave to avert you from all these pestilent examples, and propose to you one worth your praise and imitation. It is the glory of all precedents the life and excellencie of what is good in man; that man of God, and God of man IESUS CHRIST. Here is a patterne: the godly, like the Eagle, disdaine all objects but the Sun. Summa religionis est imitari quem colis: it is the marrow of religion to imitate him whom thou worshippest. The Italians got up all the excellent Pictures in the world, that out of them all they might make one Master-piece, or most excellent picture. The sweetnesse of all the best flowers makes most sweet honey. CHRIST in the whole course of his life was a patterne of goodnesse. In his birth a patterne of humilitie, in his life a patterne of Innocencie, in his death a patterne of patience, in all a patterne of holinesse. Si praecipienten sequi non vis, sequere praecedentem, Lactant. If thou wilt not follow him in his word commanding, yet follow him in his worke directing. Now saith Paul, Put on Christ. Hee is put on two wayes; by Imputation, and by Imitation: the first justifies, the other sanctifies. He is put on Sacramentally by Baptisme. Gal. 3.17. All that are baptised into Christ, have put on Chr^st. He is put o^ internally by faith, externally by imitation. Hebr. 12 2. Looke unto Iesus the auth^^r and finisher of our faith: looke upon him, and so eye him that you may follow him; and so follow him that you may live like him. That you may say; Sic oculos, sic ille manus, sic ora ferebat. When thine eyes be haughty with ambition, did he carry his eyes so? Like a Lambe before that bloudy Wolfe Pilate, his looke was meeke and lowly, though lovely. When thou cursest him that angers thee, did he carry his mouth so? No, Father forgive them. Thou art provoked with words, and returnest blowes, did he carry his hands so? No, being stricken, he stroke not againe. Heb. 12.3. Consider him that endured such contradictions of sinners. Against covetousnes put on the contentednesse of CHRIST: against anger put on the meekenesse of CHRIST: against wrongs put on the patience of CHRIST: against pride put on the humblenesse of CHRIST. For as he told Peter. Ioh. 13.8. If I wash thee not, thou shalt have no part with me: so he saies to every one, If I lead thee not, thou shalt never come to my kingdome. The Painter went to one Virgin for an eye, to another for a lip, to a third for a forehead, to a fourth for a chinne; to make exquisite the face of his goddesse. We need not goe to one Saint for this vertue, to
 another for that: for perfection take CHRIST, and take all. In him dwells the fulnesse of God-head: there can be no want where all is infinite. Let the Many follow their owne fancies, or the fancies of others, let us follow CHRIST. This is the praise of those Virgin-Saints; that they followed the Lambe whithersoever he goeth, Rev. 14.4. The inseparable effect of Iustification is obedience: now we follow him in following his, relieving them whether in want or prison, sicknesse or persecution. And this he will acknowledge at the last day, with a Come yee blessed. Come to me, for you have followed me wheresoever I went. I was hungry, and you followed me with meate: thirsty, and you followed me with drinke: a stranger, and you followed me with lodging: naked, cold, and sicke, and you followed me with clothes, warmth, and comfort. Whithersoever I went, I had your company; now you shall have my company for ever. Matth. 18.28. You followed me in the regeneration; you shall be with me in eternall glorification.
By whom the way of truth shall be evill spoken of.] I come to the Detraction, the cursed effect of their perversion; which is not only pernicious to their owne soules, but also derogative to the glory of GOD. Herein I considered two generalls; the Patient and the Injurie: in the Patient, the Singularity and the Sincerity.
1 The Singularity; (...), The way, that excellent way. There is only one way of Truth, and of salvation by it. There are many wayes in the world, yet but one way of Truth. Eph. 4.4. There is one Lord, one faith, etc. The Turke hath his way, the Iew his way, the Gentile his way, Heretickes their way, Schismatickes their way, though there be almost as many wayes as feete to walke in those wayes, yet the way of truth is but one. Diversitie of wayes is sought out; either for peevishnesse, they cannot abide the common rode: because most men passe through the gate, they will climbe over the wall; and if others climbe, they will creep through. They are so crosse, that if authority should command them to weare cleane linnen, rather than not rebell they would goe woollward. Or, for pride, when men scorne to goe the Kings high way, because there they have the company of beggars and base fellowes. There are some that disdaine the poorer sort, and will rather forbeare the common duties of religion. But alas, what bragge of estate should there be in the Church? there is no spirituall difference; bond or free, all are one in CHRIST. The Emperor eates of the same bread that his Lacquay doth: the beggars child is baptised in the same font that the Kings. This they disdaine, and therefore will have Sacraments by themselves, a Synagogue of their owne. Or, else for glory, that their singularity may be pointed at. Diogenes was ducking himselfe in cold water in a frosty morning: the people beheld and pitied him: alas saith a Philosopher; Depart you to your houses, and leave gazing on him; I warrant you that he will come out quickly, and keepe himselfe warme. There are many wayes, as it is said of Poland, if a man chance to lose his religion, he shall find it there, or give it gone for ever. But truth hath one way, not a second, not another. What so neere one as two, yet a Christian must not goe so farre from one as two. Luk. 11.23. He that is not with me, is against me: Whatsoever is not with this way, is against it. Now it is neere to impossibilitie, Vt res oppositas mens ferat una duas. To write with two pens together, to hunt two games together, to fight with two swords together, to travell two wayes together; is a troublesome follie. Eccl. 2.13. Woe to the sinner that goeth two manner of wayes. It is said of Salomon that he went two wayes; the way of the Lord, and the way of Ashteroth, 1 King. 11.5, 6.
Let us all seeke this one way, and all false wayes utterly abhorre. Matth. 23.9. You have but one father in heaven, and but one way to please him; which is to walke in this one way of truth. Gal. 6.16. As many as walke after this rule, peace bee on them, and mercie: all other rules are warped and out of square. Luk. 10.42. One thing is necessary. Psal. 119.9. Wherewithall shall a young man clense his way? by ruling himselfe after thy word: all other wayes defile, doe not clense. There are innumerable
 wayes to hell: you may goe thither by pride, by avarice, by malice, by hypocrisie; any way will serve to meet at the bottome of the hill, that infernall center: b^^ still to heaven there is but one way. There is a way to honour, by flattering ins^^^tions into the bosome of Princes: there is a way to pleasure, by making the flesh mistresse, and denying her nothing: there is away to be rich, by usury and oppression: there is a way to get offices and livings; by swallowing a simoniacall oath, or pu^ting out the givers eye by bribery. But there is but one way to make a man blessed, and that is The way of truth. Withall it shall make thee great enough, and merry enough, and rich enough; but howsoever, happy enough. Refuse all to take th^ way: they write of the stone Pyrrhenus, that so long as it is whole it swimmeth; b^^ being broken, every part sinketh. So is mans heart, if divided, it sinkes all to confusion; keepe it whole to the way of truth, it shall be saved.
2 The Sincerity; the way Of Truth. Which is that way? as Pilate as (...) Christ, What was the truth, when the Truth stood before him, Ioh. 18.38. There is veritas legalis, a legall truth; Gods Law is the truth. It was a custome among the Heathen, to derive the authoritie of their Lawes from their gods, that they might be received for truth; Trismegist to the Aegyptians from Mercury, Erontes to the Carthaginians from Saturne, Solon and Draco to the Athenians from Minerva, N^^^ Pompilius to the Romans from Aegeria. But we have from the true God, the truth of God. Deut. 4.8. What nation is so great, etc. Now if they magnified their Lawes so full of errour, how shall we dare to blaspheme Gods Law so full of truth? No, let us blesse it, and obey it. David in his hundred and nineteenth Psalme beats in every verse upon that one string, The Law, the Statutes, the Ordinances, Commandement, Truth, etc. of God. There is also Veritas Evangelica, the Truth of the Gospell, G^l. 3.1. But if this be the truth, then is the other excluded? No, for the Gospell is not contrary to the Law; neither delighteth in others overthrow, but both espo^se friendship in a kisse of peace. But it is said, Ioh. 1.17. The Law was given by Moses, but Grace and Truth came by Iesus Christ. But then the Law was n^t the Truth; for here seemes to bee a comparative opposition. No; Truth is not denied to the Law, but only the truth of Iustification: the Law is true, but not the true meanes of salvation to us. Non negatur Legi veritas Ligandi, sed ascribitur Evangelio veritas ^solvendi; The Law is a condemning truth, the Gospell an absolving truth. For if the Law could have justified us, God might well have spared his owne Sonne: but the Grace of justification, and the Truth of salvation is onely by Christ. If yee beleeved Moses, much more beleeve mee, saith Iesus: if you embraced your thraldome, th^^ much rather accept your freedome. Only, Vos liberabit veritas, Ioh. 8.32. You shal^ know the Truth, and the Truth shall make you free. Christ is called the End of the L^^; not Finis terminans, sed perficiens, sed complens: Not a terminating, but a fulfilling and accomplishing end. Having then received the truth, so gracious a truth, such promises of everlasting life, from a God so true; they are wretched men that blaspheme it. Thus it is the Truth both for the Infallibility and excellencie of it.
It is certaine. Esay 8.20. It is called the Testimony; because it beares witnesse unto it selfe: so it is called The Truth, because it shall accomplish it selfe. God d^^^ promise Abraham a Seed like the Starres for number: and Salomon sayes, I am in the midst of a people that cannot be numbred; here is an accomplished Truth, 2 Cor. 1.2^. All the promises of God are Yea, and Amen in Christ. Abraham in affiance of this Truth, ventured to forsake his Countrey, offered to sacrifice his only sonne, N^^^ upon this Truth layes out money to build an Arke. Moses upon this Truth forsooke the Court, to suffer affliction with the children of God. Wee must all venture on this Truth, or perish. When the soule is to leave the body, woe to him that hath no^ a firme dependance on this Truth.
It is excellent, as being the Letters patent of our salvation. The Law was a ^ling truth, this is a saving truth. Incomparably fairer is Veritas Christia^^rum q^^^ Helena Gracorum; The Truth of the Christians, than that Helen of the Grecians. Let
 my soule not be deficient in beleeving, and as sure as Christ is Truth, I shall be saved. O farre be it from me to vilipend that Truth, without which I were eternally lost! If we had an Antidote warranted to us by some Naturalist, to preserve our life temporall, how would we esteeme it? But for that Truth which preserves our life eternall, how precious is it, and beyond value? Let heaven thunder, earth reele, and hell roare, I will hold fast this Truth, and be blessed for ever.
By whom the way of truth shall be evill spoken of.] We have considered the Patient that suffers, let us looke upon the Injury that is offered to it. By whom: and herein two things. The Instruments or occasioners of this Scandall; those mis-led proselytes; and the Effect or aspersion cast upon the Gospell by their meanes, which is maledicentia, Blasphemie.
By whom.] The Seminaries of infection have poisoned them, and they divulge that pestilence, to the dishonour of Christ and the scandall of his Gospell. Nay, as if their teachers could not doe mischiefe enough, these strive to goe beyond them in wickednesse. According to that, Matth. 23.15. They make them two-fold more the children of hell than themselves. And indeed, albeit the other were originally the worse; yet these are instrumentally and operatively worse than they. For if false teachers had not store of followers, their hereticall positions would fall to the ground, and themselves slinke away with reproch and shame. Here occurre two notes to our observation.
First, that not only the Principals, but even the accessaries in Schisme are guiltie of sinne, and liable to punishment. The receiver is worse than the theefe: and the abettours of sinne doe more mischiefe than the authours. So long as the infected person is shut up, his plague doth not spread: while the evill man doth intra orbem suum furere; onely bee mad at home, his evill lives and dies with himselfe: the diffusion or dispersion of it is the bane. Let it wander like a fatherlesse childe up and downe, no man taking it in, but all shutting their doores against it; the very aire will stifle it, it will be the owne death. But when it becommeth Filius populi, and every one challengeth a part in the generation of it, the multitude fostering it; now it stands up in defiance, and (although a bastard) dares challenge the true heire, and wrangle for the inheritance. How ridiculous appeares a fantasticall fashion, while it is singular in the Inventers wearing and habite? The first apparition of an Hic mulier, was like a monster. But when it had stollen an approbation into womens hearts, and gotten a custome on their backes; now it stood on the termes of justification, called it selfe a noble accoutrement, and scorned to be dashed out of countenance. It is the many's acceptation of evill, that brings a scandall on the truth. When Theudas had gotten foure hundred followers, he thought himselfe a jolly fellow, Act. 5.36. The Pope did once send Vsurers into this Land; they were at first howted at, like Owles in a desart: but necessity forced men to borrow; and when they had store of customers, they stood upon their points for very honest men (in their owne opinions) and thus the way of truth was blasphemed. The Pope might be the father and founder of the sinne, but these executioners gave occasion of the blasphemie.
Secondly, the authours of this seducement are not discharged, though their schollers have dissipated the evill. The breeder of a sin, is the father of a bastard; and he that kindles a mischievous fire, shall answer for all the harmes it doth. Those whom thou hast taught to doe ill, encrease thy sin so fast, as they encrease their owne. Matth. 5.19. He that breaketh the Law, and teacheth others to doe so, shall be called least in the Kingdome of God. It it easie to be guilty of anothers wickednesse: for if he doth evill by thy suggestion, thou shalt answer for it. The parent that either commands, connives, or exemplifies sin to his childe by patterne, makes himselfe liable to all the iniquities which that infused habite shall produce, 1 Tim. 5.22. Be not partaker of other mens sinnes. Therefore a man may be partaker of others sinnes. This may be done nine wayes:
1 Consulendo, by counselling. Thou advisest, he practiseth, both are guiltie of
 the sinne that but the one doth. Achitophel counselling Absalom against his Liege, was guilty of treason: so was Caiaphas counselled to put Christ to death. Some advise and instigate others to that mischiefe, wherein they will not be seene themselves; thinking thus to extricate and deliver their own soules; but as the Prophet saies, They shall perish in their owne counsels.
2 Mandando, by commanding. Thus David sinned in the murther of Vri^; Saul in charging Doeg to kill the Priests; Iezabel in commanding the Nobles of I^^reel to stone Naboth. This is a sin that stickes to many tradesmen: they command their servants to lye; and their falshoods shall lye on their masters soule. Oh stay this running sore; and when thou repentest, thinke not onely on thine owne personall sins, but upon others committed at thy bidding.
3 Consentiendo, by consenting. Thus Saul sinned in keeping their garments that stoned Stephen, Act. 22.20. When the bloud of thy martyr Stephen was shed, I was consenting to his death, and kept the rayments of them that slew him: It was the confession of Saint Paul himselfe. It is Gods charge, Prov. 1.10. If sinners entice thee, conse^^ thou not. It is the reprobates brand, Rom. 1.32. That they not only do evill things, but consent with them that doe them. Sentient eandem poena^, qui consentiunt in eandem culp^^, They that consent to the same sin, shall feele the same punishment. Every mans ha^d is not an able instrument of mischiefe: but whosoever the instrument be, the conse^ter is as deepe both in the sinne and penaltie. For Quod deest operi, inest voluntati: And God values (both in good actions and evill) the will for the deed. Ioah for consenting to David, in the murther of Vriah, and numbring of the people, bore a part in those sinnes.
4 Provocando, by provoking. All they sin, that provoke others to sin. Eph. 6.4. Fathers, provoke not your children to wrath. Potiphars wife was a strumpet, because the provoked Ioseph to have made her one. Prov. 7.13. Shee caught him, and kissed him, and with an impudent face said unto him; Come, let us take our fill of love. Thus libidinous women feed their paramours high, to provoke them to lust. Drinke is given to provoke shamefull drunkennesse: offences, to provoke indignation and blowes; that the striken might be revenged on the striker. But they that thus provoke others to wickednesse, provoke God to vengeance, 1 Cor. 10.22. Doe we provoke the Lord to jealousie? Are we stronger than hee?
5 Adulando, by flattering. When we sooth up others in their sinnes; this is to make them our owne. Esay 9.16. Beatificant populum istum; They blesse the people in their errours; and cause their delinquishments by flattery, Psal. 10.3. The wicked blesseth the covetous, whom the Lord abhorreth. The flatterer thinkes to make all his, his patrons favour his, his wealth his: but withall hee makes his sinne his, his damnation his. He gets all; he gets entertainment, he gets riches, he gets respect, he gets wickednesse, he gets hell, he gets the Devill and all. Esay 5.20. Woe to them that call evill good, and good evill, etc.
6 Participando, by partaking. Ephes. 5.7. Be not partakers with the children of disobedience. If you partake of their sinnes, you must partake of their plagues. ^^v. 18.4. Aequum est, ut qui participes fuerunt in peccato, participes fiant in supplicio. It is just that they who have made themselves partners in sinning, should not be separated in suffering. The same law condemnes the receiver, that judges the theefe. They may say one to another, as that malefactour on the crosse to his fellow; Thou art i^ the same condemnation, Luke 23.40. In the matter of bribery, the taking hand, and the giving hand, shall be equally punished. As they shooke hands in the iniquitie, so they shall shake hands in the penaltie. For this sinne Iehu reproved Iehoshaphat, 2 Chron. 19.2. Shouldest thou helpe the ungodly, and love them that hate the Lord? Therefore is wrath upon thee. In this predicament they stand, that prefer bad men to good offices: the faults of that mans insufficiencie: lye upon the head of his promoter. Psal. 50.18. Thou hast beene partaker with the adulterers. To give entertainment to them we know dissolute, is to communicate with their sinnes. 2 Ioh. vers. 11. He that biddeth
 him God-speed, is partaker of his evill deeds. There are cases, wherein to give a good speed to the wicked, is said, Communicare operibus ipsius malignis: Psal. 101.7. Hee that worketh deceit shall not dwell within my house. If thou bestow on them the offices of thy friendship, thou receivest the blemishes of their fellowship.
7 Conticendo vel connivendo: by silence or connivence. When our tongues ought to reprove, and our hands to correct, the forbearance of those duties drawes us into guiltinesse of other sinnes, Eph. 5.11. Have no fellowship with the unfruitfull workes of darkenesse; but reprove them rather. Cum peecata non reprehendimus aliena, facimus nostra. While we rebuke not their sinnes who belong to us, we make them our owne. Eli concerning the sinnes of his sonnes, did not connive, nor altogether hold his peace: but because he touched them so lightly, and reproved them so slightly; this brought a temporall destruction upon himselfe and his familie. If this fault befall a Minister, it is grievous, Levit. 5.1. If a man offend in blaspheming, another hearing it, and being witnesse of it; if he doe not utter it, he shall beare his iniquity. Si non indicaverit, portabit: nothing more plaine: that sin he hath concealed, it as much as if by himselfe committed. Ezek. 3.18. When God saies to the wicked, Thou shalt surely die, and the watch man gives him not warning; His bloud will I require at thy hand. Pardon us then in our reprehensions: if we reprove not, your transgressions become our afflictions: and wee have reason to love our owne soules better than your sinnes. Not to reprove, were the way to harden your hearts, to make you thinke well of evill, and to justifie that, God condemneth. Duobus modis te non maculabit malus; si non consentis, and si redarguis. Two wayes thou mayest escape the guiltinesse of anothers evill; if thou consent not to him, and if thou reprove him. Levit. 19.17. Thou shalt not hate thy brother in thine heart, but shalt rebuke him, and not suffer sinne upon him. Not to rebuke him, is to hate him in thy heart: the originall carries it thus, That thou beare not sin for him.
8 Defendendo, by defending. When others iniquities are not considered of us in their true value, but find an estimation far lighter than the gravitie of them requires; this is a sin that God abominates.Prov. 17.15. He that justifieth the wicked (as he that condemneth the just) is an abomination unto the Lord. Iustice would punish a malefactor, but the protection of some great one delivers him; and now the law may put up his dagger. Thus a lewd person need not feare to offend, that hath a great man to his friend, or hath not a great man to his enemie. Tegunt eum umbrosa nemora umbraculis suis.I^^ 40.22. The shady trees cover him with their shadowes. The robber rifles a passenger, is apprehended and indited: the bootie he gives to some mightie one to procure his pardon and escapes. Thus the poore traveller is robbed doubly; both of his money, and all reliefe of the Law: and the protector of the lewd person is become the greater theefe. This is a common appropriation of others sins: when mens wittes are set on worke to make that good, which their malice hath made necessary. Covetousnesse begot Vsurie, unjustice doth practise it, and some are fee'd to defend it. Pride and profanesse makes tythes arbitrary; and is there no man will take paines to justifie it? This is to bring the sins of all men that transgresse in that nature, to become that mans, whose pen did patronize such sacriledge.
9 In praecedendo, in giving bad example. He that leads men to sinne, is guiltie of their sinne. An unruly beast breakes the hedge, and feeds in a forbidden pasture, the whole herd followes: the owner must answere for all these harms. The reproch of Ieroboam was, that he made Israel to sin: not only imperando, by commanding: but also exemplum dando, by leading them in precedent: and the wickednesse of Israel will not be taken off from his soule for ever. In a rebellion, the captaines intend nothing but some reformation; but the multitude is not so qualified: they breake into houses, pillage, spoile, and commit outrages, shall not the exemplary leaders be guiltie of all this? If the Master love quaffing, there will scarce be a sober familie, he shall answer for that sin in his servants. One peevish teacher broacheth a schisme ^or pernicious doctrine, presently many catch hold of it: thus the truth hath a
 wound, and suffers blasphemie. He that gave the occasion shall beare the burden, unlesse timely and hearty repentance recant it, retract it, and his soule find mercie.
Thus easy is it to be guilty of others sinnes. Indeed Credimus nulla peccata no^i^ nocere, nisi nostra: we beleeve that no sinnes shall hurt us but our owne: but by all these wayes, we make other mens sinnes our owne. Prov. 5.22. His owne iniquities shall take the wicked himselfe. His owne? why not anothers also? Yes, if he make them his owne by any of the former conveyances. Wee have all sinnes enough of our owne, wee need not attract others. Wee deserve punishment enough for what we have done in our owne persons; it were heavy for us to adde to our vengeance by participation of others wickednesse. In all this let us confesse our owne guiltinesse, and for all this implore GODS mercifulnesse in IESUS CHRIST.
The way of truth shall be evill spoken of.] Lastly, we come to the effect, or aspersion layd upon the Gospell by their means: which is Blasphemy, pessimum ge^^ maledicentiae. Be the way of truth taken for CHRIST, who is both the way and the truth; then woe to him that dares blaspheme CHRIST. Or, be it taken for the true meanes of bringing man to everlasting blessednesse; will any man blaspheme the meanes of his owne salvation? Is the sacred word of truth, which the Saints have valued above all gold and Iewels, treasures and pleasures; of so poore an esteeme with them, that they should blaspheme it?
Blasphemy] is now the subject of our discourse; and therefore first begin w^^ with the definition, next with the distinction of it. Dicitur Blasphemia (...), quia laedit alterius famam; it blemisheth the credit of another. It differs not from (...), vel (...), maledicentia. They that would derive it from (...) a fish so vile that the very dogs will not touch it, come short: for it is more tha^ a stoliditie or stupiditie; even a curst malice of the heart desiring to hurt. The contrary vertue is (...), a studie to speake well of others. It is a vice that offends in Defectu; depressing and disgracing that is good, and in Excessu, extolling and magnifying that is evill. For distinction, it is maledicentia derogans, vel contra veritatem Dei, vel contra Deum veriratis, vel contra amicos et Dei et veritatis. Blasphemie is a speech of derogation, either against the truth of God, or against the God of truth, or against the friends of both God and truth. That blasphemie which is against Gods friends and true worshippers, I will lightly passe, because it is not here within the center of the text, though not out of the circumference.
The Sonne of Rapha defied Israel, and Ionathan slew him, 1. Chro. 20.7. This sinne is interdicted, Exod. 22.28. Principi populi tui non maledices. Thou shalt no^ revile the gods, nor curse the ruler of thy people. This is the vulgar sinne of this world, for the greater sort are apt to blaspheme the better sort. The Apostles could not scape it. 1. Cor. 4.13. Blasphemati precamur: being defamed, we intreat. Such were the aspersions of the infidels against the christians in Iustines and Tertullians times; that their feasts were Thyestean bankets, that they had promiscuous mixtures etc. 1. Pet. 3.16. They speake evill of us, as of evill doers, accusing our good conversation in Christ. This blasphemie what Saint hath escaped? Because God wrought miracles by Moses, they called him a conjurer. Because Iohn Baptist lived an austere life, they said he had a Devill. Because Paul spake of Christs death and our redemption by him, Festus called him a mad man. They abused holy Cyprian, with the nickname of Caprion, when Christ himselfe cast out Devils, they blasphemed that he did it by Belzebub. Now all these maledictions offer injurie and ignominie to God himselfe: because his Saints are the organs whereby he will propagate the glory of his Name: they doe what they can to obscure his majestie. 1. Sam. 17.10. when that pr^^^ Philistine defied the armies of Israel, David sayes directly that he had blasphem^^ God himselfe, ver. 45. I come to thee in the name of the Lord of Hosts, whom thou (...) defied. Rabshaceh defied the Iewes; yet saith Hezekiah, hee hath reproved the living God, Esa. 37.4. The waight of this sinne is felt in the punishment. If it be agains^
 the magistrate, a bird of the aire shall carry the voice, and that which hath wings shall tell the matter, Exod. 10.20. If it be against parents; the Ravens of the valley shall pecke ^ut that eye, and the young Eagles shall eate it, Pro. 30.17. He that despiseth you, despiseth me, saith Christ to his Apostles. And in that you have done it to these little ones, you have done it to me saith the Lord Iesus.
Blasphemie] immediate against God is, vel non tribuendo sua vel tribuendo non ^ua, vel abutendo in malitiam, quae referenda sunt in gloriam. Either by denying God ^is owne, or by ascribing to him that is not his owne, or by abusing that malitiously, which is to be referred to his glory. 1. Such as deny his wisedome, Iustice, mercie, providence; as if he had neither care nor power to redeeme his people, Esa. 52.5. The rulers make the people to howle, as if God had forgotten them; and thus is my Name blasphemed. 2. Such as make him the author of evill, lode him with affections, charge him with injustice. Ezek. 18.25. ye say, the way of the Lord is not equall: as ^f the Lord had delt unjustly with them. 3. Such as execrate and curse the Lord, and (this is the proper acception of blasphemie, Rev. 16.11. They blasphemed the God of ^eaven,) because of their paines. Thus too many make that sacred bloud which saves the world, and washeth all our soules white; the subject of a furious oath: and for^ifie the credite of a trifle with those wounds, that cost the Sonne of God his life. What is this but lacerare Christum, to rend in peeces the Lord Iesus; and to obiect him to new sufferings, so farre as their malice can extend? For they sinne no lesse, Qui blasphemant Christum regnantem in coelis, quam qui crucifixerunt ambulantem in ter^is: that revile CHRIST raigning in heaven, than they that crucified him living on earth. Oh that we should be more insensible of this injurie, than the very ^enselesse creatures. Matth. 27.51. The vaile of the Temple was rent, the earth did ^^ake, and the rockes clove asunder. When the Iewes heard blasphemie, it was their custome to rend their garments. So Act. 14.15. When the Apostles heard the super^titious Lystrians intention, they rent their clothes. Loe now when the Son of God was blasphemed upon the Crosse, because mens hearts were so hard, the very Tem^le it selfe rent her vaile, her garment, the earth rent her bosome, yea her very ^ibbes, the stony rockes. So execrable is the sinne of blasphemie: some have observed that the greatest sinnes against God are words: obliquities in speech offend ^ore than those in action. Their blowes cannot reach God, but their blasphemies ^hall flie upon him. Therefore the sin that is never to be forgiven, is blasphemie a^ainst the Holy Ghost. He that doth a sinne, breakes Gods Law: he that blasphemes, ^trikes the person. Such offenders were to be stoned by the Mosaicall Law, Levit. ^4. By the civill Law, to have their tongues cut out: as most unworthy to have a ^ongue, that abused it to their makers dishonour. In a word, to derogate any thing ^rom God, is blasphemie, Matth. 9.3. when CHRIST pronounced remission of ^ins to the paraliticke; the Iewes said, This man blasphemeth. Why, wherein? because he forgiveth sinnes; and who can forgive sinnes; but God onely, Mark. 2.7. For ^an to arrogate that which is Gods peculiar, they call blasphemie. For other^ise, to heale both body and soule; to cure his sicknesse, and to forgive his sin, had ^ot beene to blaspheme, if they had knowen CHRIST to be God. Matth. 26.65. The high Priest rent his clothes, saying, He hath spoken blasphemie: yee have heard ^is blasphemie. Why, what was it? Visuros filium, etc. Yee shall see the Son of man ^itting on the right hand of power. This is Gods right, therefore when he chalenged (...), they say, he blasphemed. Ioh. 10.36. Say you to me, Thou blasphemest, because I ^^id I am the Sonne of God? Now which way the Romists, in giving that honour ^o the creatures, which is only due to the creator, can quit themselves from blasphe^ie, viderius ipsi, let themselves looke to it.
Blasphemie.] Against Scripturall doctrine, this way of truth. Paul confesseth that in ^is persecution of the Church he enforced men to this blasphemie. Act. 26.11. I pu^ished them oft in every synagogue, and compelled them to blaspheme. Iam. 2.7. Doe not ^hey blaspheme that worthy Name, by which yee are called? He meaneth, they reproch
 the doctrine of Christianitie. Revel. 2.9. I know the blasphemie of them which say they are Iewes and are not. This is done two wayes according to the difference and qualitie of the persons blaspheming: and they are either enemies or friends. If they be enemies, they disgrace it by their language: if friends, by their lives and conversations.
Enemies by their tongues, casting fowle aspersions on the faire chee^e of truth. They accuse the very sunne of darkenesse, and peace it selfe of contradictions. To omit the Turkish calumnies, and Iewish contumelies; even they that call themselves Christians, have not stucke to vilipend the Truth of CHRIST. The Romi^^ have called it a Shipmans house, a waxen nose: it is little beholden to them; (...) it hath heard as ill of them, as David did of Shimei, or, the living God of R^^s^ceh, God saies, it makes wise to salvation; but they seale it up under an unknow^ tongue, that the people might be fooles still. Harding called it a spirituall d^^^nesse: such a mouth should be made dumbe for ever. How doe they magnifie the writings of their owne, how vilifie the writings of God! Those, they say, will make men good Catholickes: these will make them Heretickes. O blasphemie i^ the height; that a Iesuites pen should make Saints, and the HOLY GHOST^ pen should make sinnners! What divell durst rore out such a blasphemie above ground? These are they that speake evill of the truth of God, the God of truth be their Iudge.
Friends by their bad lives. Rom. 2.24. The Name of God is blasphemed (...) the Gentiles, through you. That men should be in profession Christians, and in conversation Pagans, vident and rident daemones; the divells looke on it, and laugh at (...) The profession of faith, and operation of good workes, are the integrall parts of Christianitie: and in the children of God admit of no divorce. 1 Thes. 4.7. God (...) not called us to uncleannesse, but to holinesse. But this is to be called one way, and to (...) another: as Ionas being sent to Niniveh, went to Tharshish. Rom. 8.13. If ye live after the flesh, ye shall die: God shall render to every man according to his workes. (...) our baptisme we give a defyance to sin and Satan: shall we re-entertaine what (...) have sworne to renounce? In the Lords Supper we professe to be made one with Christ: now can we partake of the Lords table, and the table of divells, 1 Cor. 10.21. These are incompatible. Nature it selfe loves nothing simulated or counterfeit; but would have us know the veritie of things from their effects. We know the Night^^gale by her sweete notes, and can discerne the Eagles from the Vulture by the c^y: Leonem rugitus discernit a lupo: Christianum mores ab ethnico: our manners distingu^^^ us from unbeleevers. Suppose a Christian and a Pagan were together, and both should sweare and forsweare; how could a stranger tell, which was the Pag^^, which the Christian? Anacharsis approved Operum copiam, verborum persi^^am: Socrates among Philosophers, and Hippocrates among the Physicians, des^^^ practicall orations, and would have their schollers in verbis breves, in operibus pro^^as; speake little and doe much. And if any did not philosophize in his life, they ^^jected him as a blasphemer of their profession. This is a waightie point, where^^ the Scripture liberally spends it selfe: and out of that armory I will produce f^^e weapons, to convince this kind of blasphemie.
Ezek. 36.22. Yee have prophaned my holy name among the heathen, whither ye n^^. They should have converted the heathen to the true God, and they suffered themselves to be perverted by the heathen to false gods. Psalm. 106. They learned th^^r workes, served their Idols, and sacrificed their children unto divells. Thus they bec^^^ twice their slaves; their bodies conquered by their weapons, and their hearts by their vices. Thus the Iewes brought them out of love with God, and to mis^^^ his religion, which they might judge to produce such cursed effects. So the c^^ch^^ of the Spaniards to the Indians made them cry; Quis (malum) deus iste; wi^^ mischiefe what god is this, that hath such bloud-hounds and Tygers to his servants.

1 Tim. 6.1. Let the servants that are under the yoke, count their owne Masters ^orthy of all honour; that the Name of God, and his doctrine be not blasphemed. Let Christian servants honour their unchristned Masters; lest their rebellion be laid as ^n imputation upon God, and as a blasphemie upon religion. And the same Apo^tle saies that even servants may adorne the doctrine of God our Saviour in all things, ^it. 2.10. The lowest condition, blessed with an honest conversation, may grace the Gospel. Often it is true, that mundo infimus may be Deo intimus: the lowest in the worlds eye, the highest in Gods estimation. While superstition dwelt in this land, ^ow was it adorned! the garments of an Idol cost hundreds; and the appurtenan^es to some, thousands: men gave their estates, as the Israelites their eare-rings and ^ost precious Iewels, to make a golden calfe. Now the Truth is advanced among ^s, we are so far from adorning it, that we shame it.
1 Pet. 2.12. Have your conversation honest, that they who speake against you (...) evill doers, may by your good workes which they shall behold, glorifie God in the ^cy of visitation. There be many elected, that are not yet called: they are yet out ^f the fold, but they belong to the covenant by Gods everlasting decree. Now the ^ew whereby God will unwind them out of the Labyrinth of error, may be the ^anuduction of your exemplary life, Ioh. 17.20. There be some that shall beleeve on CHRIST, through our word. Now if we live as they live, how can we hope they will beleeve as we beleeve? The pagan concludes, if I saw their workes better than ^ine, I should thinke their faith better than mine. Suppose the robbed and woun^ed passenger (Luk. 10.30.) had beene an heathen; finding no mercie of the Iew, ^uch of the Samaritan; would he not have embraced the Samaritans religion soo^er than the Iewes? yet the Iewes religion was true, and not the Samaritans. As ^ur Saviour said; Salvation is of the Iewes, Ioh. 4.22. Thus as at the Barre, truth is ^ften wronged by an ill pleader, so religion is scandald by an ill professor. The ^ewes called them the sonnes of Abraham: yet they wanted faith, which was the ^ost glorious grace of Abraham. So many stile themselves the children of God, yet have not so much holinesse as should make them in any respect like their ^ather.
Matth. 5.6. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good workes, ^nd glorifie your Father in heaven. Shall that which should lighten others to hea^en, be it selfe darkened? As Naaman said, 2 King. 5.11. I thought that he would ^ome and doe something; strike his hand on the sore, etc. So Expectavimus opera, nil ^anifestum nisi verba: we looke for deeds, but behold nothing but words. Sanctum ^dio, profanum video: to mine eares he is a Saint, to mine eyes a divell. The King ^nds an Ambassador to magnifie his state in a forraine countrey, and he to contract ^omething to himselfe, by penurious and dishonourable courses, brings his Sove^^ignes Majesticke worth into question. When God put the Sun into heaven, he ^ad him shine there: when he placeth a Christian in his lower or be, he imposeth ^pon him an actuall remonstrance of that which he meant him. Every Christian (...) a Lampe that should shine to Gods glory: all sinnes dampe the light, continu^d wickednesse puts it out: and then darkenesse internall must unto darkenesse ^ternall.
Salomon saies, A wicked sonne is a griefe to his father, and a shame to his mother. ^f a man nourish the son of a stranger, and he prove rebellious, the sorrow sits as ^rre from his heart, as the offender is from his bloud. When his owne son dege^erates, the shame redounds to himselfe. If we belong to Gods familie, let us shew ^hat house we come of, not only by our liverie, but by our living. How doe the ^ivell and his limbes triumph at the falls of professors? the Saints are reproched, ^e truth disgraced, and religion it selfe scandalised: this is to shame our father. The ^lame shall be laid on the religion, whereas it is because men are not enough religi^us. Yea, our mother suffers for us, the Church is dishonoured: and if any one ^rotestant could be found a traitor, Rome would justifie her many thousand treasons
 by that singular exprobration. His life is bad, therefore his doctrine is false, I confesse, is a harsh non sequitur: yet will the world so conclude it: and it is a thousand times better that our good lives should prevent it, than afterwards be driven by our arguments to disprove it. We are but sory friends to God, that give advantage against him to his enemies. We beseech him to honour us in heaven, and he forbids us to dishonour him upon earth: how should men looke to be advanced, by that truth they have disgraced! Preserve we it from malediction of men, and it shall preserve us from the malediction of God: let us vindicate the truth from present blasphemie, and the truth shall deliver us from everlasting miserie, through him that is Truth and life, Iesus Christ.
To conclude; the Truth is not the lesse glorious indeed, but in the worlds estimation. It lyes not in the power of men, or malice of devils, to disgrace the truth: for it shall shine glorious, when heaven and earth perish, and all her maligners subjected under her conquering feete, it is of the nature that God himselfe is; whose glory is not capable of any augmentation, nor passive of any diminution. He is said to be dishonoured by our sinnes; to be magnified and glorified by our good works But let our workes be good or evill, still thou continuest holy. O thou worship of Israel, whether the Turkes despise Iesus, or the Christians adore him; still he abides, The same yesterday, and to day, and for ever. Such is the immutability of truth: the pa^ro^^ of it make it not greater, the opposers make it not lesse. As the splendor of the Sunne is not enlarged by them that blesse it, nor ecclipsed by them that hate it. That thing which may be extended, may also be contracted: if it admit addition, it may (...) suffer diminution: God and his Truth are lyable to neither. Indeed the blessed vi^gin sung, Luk. 1.46. my soule doth magnifie the Lord. This word may naturally seeme to signifie, magnum facere, to make great: but cannot there so be understood. God is so immense, that nothing can be added to him, nor taken from him. The (...) may be multiplied, the earth swollen bigger, the heavens stretched out, hell enl^^ged: but God is ever the same. There is nothing greater or more than Infinite. It himselfe he is neither magnified, nor vilefied, but in respect of others. When we blaspheme his name, we doe what we can vilem reddere, to lessen his greatnes: when we praise his name, we doe what we can magnum facere, to augment his greatnesse. Because the former teacheth others to contemne him, the latter to admire him. So magnificare is onely magnum significare: to magnifie him, is to expresse him great let men bee wonne by your good workes, to glorifie God, 1. Pet. 12. qui mal^d^^^ Domino, ipse minuitur: qui benedicit, augetur. Aug. Thy contempt of the truth mai^s not it worse; but thy selfe: thy advancing it makes not it greater, but thy selfe better. Thererefore for Maries giving her soule to magnifie God, God doth magnifie her s^^^e, Luk. 1.49. Hee that is mightie, hath magnified me. It is not wee that make free the Truth, but the truth that makes us free, Iohn 8.32. The truth shall make you free. When we professe it with our lips, and confesse it in our lives, the truth is not beholding to us, but we are beholding to it, that our testimony may be accepted. O^r grace is the Lords glory: the more we are amended, the more hee is commended. Thus we may cause the truth to appeare greater in us, though it cannot be ma^e greater by us.
So contrarily, by the wickednesse of their conversation, whose profession promiseth most holinesse; the truth appeares more inglorious to others, is no whit lesse glorious in it selfe. The truth is great and will prevaile; and how big soever they looke that blaspheme it, yet still wisedome is iustified of her children. The Lord will alwaies keepe some Defenders on foote, that shall glorifie the truth: it shall be strong enough in those weake and single adherences, to lay all the enemies on the ground. What hope was there of this event in Martin Luther, when hee disliked onely one point of Poperie: the base prostitutions of indulgences in Germanie? yet will that God (who glorifies his owne power in the disability of his Instruments) by t^^^ one man vindicate the truth from the universall blasphemies of those apostate ti^^^
 As Beza wrote of him, not without admiration.

Roma orbem domuit, Romam sibi Papa subegit.
Viribus illa suis, fraudibus iste suis.
Quanto illa major Lutherus, major et isto;
Illam istumque uno qui domuit calamo!

Rome overcame the world by her power, the Pope overcame Rome by his cunning; and Luther overcame them both by his penne. If wee now shall wound that truth by our sinnes, which God hath sent to save our soules, no wonder if wee perish by her forsaking us, that have lost our selves by forsaking her, no, let us keepe her, and keepe her from unjust aspersions: let us beare her in our hearts: weare her in our lips, and reare her up in our lives that others may see, and our owne consciences feele, we are the friends of truth. She hath made that proffer to the Romanists, that Paul did once to the Iewes, Act. 13.46. The Truth hath beene first spoken to you: but seeing you put it from you, and judge your selves unworthy of everlasting life; loe, I turne unto others. Hither she is come, and by the mercie of God hath long dwelt; let us now leave off to offend her, lest she flie to others that will give her more honour and better entertainement. Woe were it to us, if the kingdome of GOD should bee taken from us, and given to a nation that would bring forth the fruits thereof. Matth. 21.42. No, Lord give us hearts to love thy truth, that thy truth may love us: let her dwell with us while we live here, and let us dwell with her in heaven for ever.



VERSE 3. For through covetousnesse shall they with fained words make merchandise of you, whose judgement now of a long time lingereth not, and their damnation doth not slumber.

THe Apostle in this verse makes a continuation of their sinnes, and a declaration of their plagues. They extend the threed of their mischiefe very long, till hell fire burne it off: and then they shall find that they have spun a faire threed. They broach Heresies, corrupt multitudes, sell soules, as Merchants doe their wares; coozen mens consciences, colour foule natures with faire words, blas^heme the Gospell, deny IESUS CHRIST; oh how constant and long-winded are they in their wickednesse! But there is a judgement, an unsleeping judgement; a damnation that wakes while they slumber, and shall at last take them napping. The roote of their noxious intentions is covetousnesse; that make them Merchants, they trafficke in the bargaine of soules; to buy them, not for CHRIST, but from Christ. Being once cunning merchants, they get smooth tongues, milking language: and like practitioners in that legall theeverie; embrace men in their armes, ^nd laugh in their faces, while they picke their purses.
Their heart, tongue, and hand are employed in this project; all have their di^tinct offices, and they accomplish their duties. The heart dictates to the tongue, the tongue prepares the way for the hand. Their hearts covet, their tongues flatter,
 their hands trafficke. They covet your goods, they flatter your sinnes, they sell your soules. The roote is covetousnesse, the branches fained words, the fruite merchandise of men: and there followes the axe of Iudgement to hew them downe, and the fire of damnation to burne them.
In this description of false teachers consider generally:
Their
Prodition; Through covetousnesse, etc.Perdition; Their judgement, etc.
In their prodition or trecherie against the Church, observe that the metaphor of merchandizing is used; wherein examine foure concurrences.
The
Traders, False prophets.Wares; You.Ground of Trafficke, Covetousnesse.Meanes of utterance, Fained words.
In theiir perdition or ruine, consider:
The
Severity of it: Iudgement and damnation.Vicinitie of it; Lingers not, slumbers not.
First, let me spend a little time upon the generall similitude (Merchandizing) here used by the Holy Ghost. The calling of a Merchant is of great antiquity, and necessary use: the state of the world cannot well stand without it. Non omnis fert ^^nia tellus: our northerne parts have no wine for the Sacrament; Meshek King of Moah was a Lord of sheepe, Hiram had store of timber, Ophir was famous for gold, Chittim for Ivorie, Basan for Okes, Lebanon for Cedars: therefore there must be a path from Aegypt to Ashur. Merchants are the feete of the world, whereby remote and distant countreyes meet together. Yet it is a dangerous profession, not only for wracke of life and goods, but also for wracke of conscience: which is not alwayes made in their ships abroad, but too commonly in their shops at home. There be the quicksands of nimble fraud, and the rockes of perjurie. Gaine is a busy temptation, and they can neither use measures nor ballances, but the divel is at one end to doe some office. The quest of wealth is dangerous: Per bella quaerere, flagitium: per maria, periculum: per falsitatem, opprobrium: per agriculturam, vero licitum: to seede it by warre is injurie, by falshood ignominie, by sea danger, by husbandry honest and safe.Mic. b. 10. Cassian. I will not say with Chrysostome; Tu qui Christianus es, fuge forum; ut nec f^cias, nec patiaris fraudem: Come not neere the market, for feare of deceiving, or being deceiued.
It is a lawfull calling, if it be lawfully used. No man is bound to stay at home: he may visite forraine countreyes, if either authority or necessitie send him forth. A calling is a good warrant, and it cannot want danger to goe unsent. But two things are to be waighed; who must goe, and whither. Who; not a feeble and ungrounded Christian. Religion hath in it all statures, all strengths; children and men. Let a child or a foole be turned loose into the Apothecaries shop, that gallipot which lookes fairest, shall soonest have their fingers, though there be poyson in it. He that is unsettled, endangers his owne infection, he had need be a resolute Caleb, that goes to view the land of the Canaanites. Whither; not a place of enforced blindnesse, and compulsion to idolatrie: but where holy profession is free. Is there no tra^e allowed with Heretickes? Yes, but not with heresies. We may converse with men not with idolatries: civilly, not in religion: deale with them in the businesse of commerce, not communicate with them in their superstitious services. How hatefull is a Bimmonite, pretending an upright heart in a prostrate body! Trade with their persons, not with their vices: trafficke is allowed, not amitie; not friendship, b^^ peace.
All company with unbeleevers or misbeleevers is not condemned. We find a Lot in Sodome, Israel with the Egyptians, Abraham and Isaac with their Ab^^^lechs; roses among thornes, and pearles in mudde; and Iesus Christ among Publicans
 and sinners. So neither we be infected, nor the name of the LORD wronged; to converse with them, that we may convert them, is a holy course. But still we must be among them as strangers: to passe through an infected place is one thing, to dwell in it another. The earth is the LORDS, and men are his: wheresoever GOD shall find the merchant, let him bee sure to find GOD in every place.
Howsoever, it is a profession not without great danger of iniquity, it is a hard thing to keepe sin out of trading. A Merchant shall hardly keepe himselfe from doing wrong? and the very name of it doth in the common dialect Male audire, sound unhappily: when to be a deceiver is said in a phrase to play the Merchant. Nor is the suspition of it without all probable ground; for the world hath had trades-men in a continuall jelousie. I doe not derive merchants from so wicked a patrone as Mercurie; Expertos furandi homines, hac imbuit arte Mercurius; saies the verse. But certainely our Saviour would have found another name for buyers and sellers in the Temple, than Theeves; if to buy and sell had beene of so cleare and innocent a consequence. But our customers (say they) are either acquaintance or strangers. If acquaintance, they come in love, and our affections keepes us from deceiving them. It strangers, we lose our trade in losing our credite, if we deceive them. But alas, what doe men talke of acquaintance and love, where coveteousnesse admits of no friend but gaine? And for strangers, they are soone forgotten; you thinke never to meete againe, till you meete in heaven, or meete in hell, desire of profite in over-prizing, pride of wit in over-reaching; these are the principles of brokerie, that foule the fairest merchandise.
Such a conceite in a Pasquil I have read, where bringing in the states of the world, he appropriates cussenage to the merchant. He placeth together Charles the fift and the Pope reconciled. To them comes kneeling a Husbandman, saying, I feed you two. To them a Merchant; I coozen you three. To them a Lawyer; I rob you foure. To them a Physitian, I kill you five. To them a Divine; I absolute you sixe. But of all sorts of merchants, two especially would be whipt out of the State; Merchants of time and Temple. Such as fell time, which is Gods fee-simple: and such as sell Tythes, which is Christ inheritance. For us, let us only be mercants of Christ: the kingdome of heaven belongs to such a Merchant, as will sell all he hath to purchase it. Of all purchases, let us buy Iesus.Ambr. Vilem se vult aestimari Christus, ut ab omnibus ematur. Be thou never so poore, Christ will sell himselfe unto thy soule.
1 The Trades-men or Merchants are False Teachers.1 Pet. 1.19. Christ came into the world to buy soules, and he paied a deare price for them: not silver and gold, and such corruptible things: but the deare bloud of his immaculate heart. All his Ministers levell their courses at the same end, to buy soules for Christ. The price they pay for them, is their labour, vigilancie, prayers. They breake their sleepes, spend their spirits, consume their bodies; suffer infamie, povertie, miserie; and yet thinke all nothing so they may purchase one soule. No Vsurer was so gripple and pinching for moneys, as Paul was for soules. He had a banke in every place; in Macedonia, Antioch, Ephesus. 1 Cor. 16.8. I will tarry at Ephesus untill Pentecost. Why? Because a a great dore and effectuall is opened unto me: there is a market of soules. I must to Ierusalem: Why? to purchase soules.Phil 1.8. After these, he takes God to witnesse, he did greatly long in the bowels of Iesus Christ. We have a Depositum with God, God a Depositum with us. Our Depositum with him is our owne soule.2 Tim. 1.12.4, 8. I know he will keepe that I have committed to him. There is laid up for me a crowne of righteousnesse. His Depositum with us is the soules intrusted to our charge. If the depositary doe not returne what he may, he is the sonne of death.Act. 20.28. Take heed to the flocke whereof the HOLY GHOST hath made you overseers, to feed the Church of God which he hath bought with his owne bloud. The whole verse is a purchase, you shall see the good Ministers part in it. The seller is God, the buyer CHRIST, the
 thing sold and bought, the Church; the price payed, Blood; the great Steward of this purchase is the Holy Ghost: the overseers, and lookers to it, are Ministers and Pastors. Some are two lasie, not Tendentes sed tondentes: others too busy, contr^tendentes: good Pastors are superintendentes, and good hearers attendentes.
God doth not impose on us a purchasing price, that is for Christ: nor a converting power, that is for the holy Ghost: no more than one man can make another; creation is for himselfe. Paul sayes not Plus profui omnibus, I have profited more than all:1 Cor. 15. but Plus laboravi omnibus, I have laboured more than they all. God judgeth us not by the soules wee have converted, but by the paines we have taken. Hee will not call us to account for his owne worke, which is to convert soules. A great Patron who is now gone some whether, was wont to say when a Minister petitioned for a living. Can he make the drunkard sober, the covetous man liberall, the malitious charitable, then he shall have it freely; els not. But if God should give us no reward, unlesse we converted you, woe were to us. We would have cured Babel, but shee would not be cured. We can so farre testifie; we would have saved you, but you will not. Aske your soules; Who hath beleeved our saying? Still we preach, and still you continue the same. Nature is bountifull though men slight it. Flowers grow though no body gather them, rivers runne, springs fill welles though none drink of them, we doe good, though we be neglected. Indeed our preaching something shortens the hornes of sinne: though wee cannot disswade men from swearing, yet wee get them to forbeare it at the Church, in holy services.
2 Cor. 6.20.7.23.Thus we desire to buy you for Christ, these seeke to sell you from Christ. The Gospell speakes still of Christs buying; ye are bought with a price. To sell that hee bought, is to crosse the proceedings of Christ. Venditor hominis occidendus; it was Gods law.Deut. 29.7. If any steale an Israelite, and sell or make merchandise of him, that theefe shall die: though he sold but his body: what shall become of them that sell his soule and that not to man, but to Satan? God complaines by the Prophet verdunt populum meum; as the brethren sold Ioseph to the Ishmaelites: little did those m^rchants know what a treasure they had bought. As Iudas sold Christ to the Iewes for; o pieces; poorely did he value the peni-worth. Thus they sell men to sinne, little esteeming the price that a soule cost. The prodigall selling out his inheritance by parcels; now a part and then a part: a friend told him that he never knew the price of it; his progenitors paid deerely for it. His lands being gone, hee sold his goods; being asked what he would doe at the last; answered; I will sell my selfe. When they have sold you, they will sell themselves after you: as Iudas having betrayed his master, betrayed himselfe. They shall pay dearely, for that they sold basely.Mat. 17.25. When hee had not to pay, his Lord commanded him to be sold, his wife and children, and all that he had, and payment to be made. His principall Iewels must be sold for satisfaction. Haply the wicked would part with his wife and children without pitty, if he might so scape himselfe: nay, himselfe also must be sold, that the Iustice of God may be satisfied.
2 The wares, you; your estates, your liberties, your lives, your soules. They set up a marke of holy things, and with their impostures fiill their purses. As S^^^ Magus so wrought upon the mad Samaritans, that by selling them to the Divell he stuffed his coffers with the treasures of bloud. And marke his scholler so bewitch'd the noble women, that they sold their husbands to buy their sorrowes; as Ire^^ writes. Of this branne are the Romish merchants, whom we may see in this Text as pointed out by the Apostles finger. Their maine doctrins are points of merchandise: wherein the Devill is beholding to them; for they are content to enrich hi^ with soules, to enrich themselves with moneys. They enlarge his dominion in hell, to extend their owne possession on earth. What is their auricular confession but a tricke of merchandise? A man must confesse all his sinnes, or, have none of them pardoned: well, hee hath disgorged all the crudities of his stomach, what then? Then must he make satisfaction according to their prescription. You are content to buy out a pardon: yes, what must I pay for it? you shall give such a summe of
 money to such a Church; so much land to such a Colledge: such a pension to that Fryerie. Here is a cunning trafficke, a market made to purpose: thus they encrease their revenues through all Europe. Their distinction betweene the fact and punishment, is a merchants doctrine: the fact may be remitted, the punishment retained, what then? O here creepes in Purgatory, a milder fire than that of hell, to eate out the penaltie hereafter; what profit's this? Yes the Pope is Lord of Purgatory, he keepes the keyes, which he will never turne without a round fee. Indulgent hee is to them that will pay, either for merits of others, or masses of their owne. This painted fire in his parlor, maintaines the materiall fire in his kitchen. Thus are the people sold, for who would not emptie his purse to escape that burning? Yea, if he be rich, and have any charitie, he will pay the fees for all his friends, and release them out of prison. Still the Priests laugh, how for maintaining a jest, they get money in good earnest.
Their forbidding of marriage to many degrees of men, is a pretty trade of merchandise. When they on purpose forbid them, that they may dispense with them. So still the more prohibitions, the more dispensations; and the more dispensations, the more accumulations of treasure. The truth is; Policie hath quite eaten up their religion; and to make themselves great, they care not for making themselves or any other man, good. Roma dat omnibus omnia dantibus. The foundation of the Popedome was layed in pride, the building set up with rapacitie, and now it is kept in reparation with tyrannie. The Pope is Pontifex Maximus; si non doctrina, tamen pecunia maximus. Paul saies, I have coveted no mans silver or gold: but with them, no Peny, no Paternoster: they covet your gold more than your selves. Paul saies,Act. 20.33. we seeke (...) yours, but you: they seeke not you, but yours. They sell mens estates to beggarie, their freedome to slaverie, their lives to trecherie, their soules to danger of perdition.
They sell you.] An evill Pastor may sell his flocke three wayes; by flatterie, by heresie, by silence.
1 By flatterie; he that encourageth a man in his errors, sells him for his owne gaine. Magnus laudator, magnus adulator. These are they that sew pillowes, where they should quilt thornes: that proclaime peace in stead of warre; that skin ulcers with lenitives; and say omniabene, when God sees and saies, All is starke nought. There is a faithfull zeale required in ministers, but it hath many hindrances. Such are affection; when Parents (not unlike Zaledicus) put out one of their owne eyes, that they may not see their childrens faults. Corruption, when they are guilty of the same sins. The people argue thus; such a Preacher taxeth many sinnes bitterly, but you never heard him find fault with usurie; therefore certainely it is lawfull. Feare of great men; who like mules kicke when they should sucke. Bashfulnesse; which is in a woman a great vertue, in a Preacher a great vice. Now this boldnesse must not be without meeknesse.Gal. 6.1. If a man be fallen, restore him with the spirit of meekenesse. The originall implies; put him gently into joynt againe. Some are over-bold; that send much talke out of their mouthes, before discretion come ^nto their heads. Nihil ignorantia verbosius.Eccl. 5.3. A fooles voice is knowne by multitude of words. Impudent speakers are like the gaping oisters; when you open them: either they stinke, or there is nothing in them. Qui dicit se nescire quod scit, ingratus est: qui ^icit se scire quod nescit, temerarius est. He that professeth ignorance, and hath know^edge, is culpable of ingratitude: he that professeth knowledge, and is ignorant, is guiltie of a proud rashnesse. There is a difference betweene a dumbe dogge, and a ^arking curre.
Many have too cowardly spirits, a Iohn Baptist were now a great miracle. To doe well, and heare ill, is the fate of greatnesse: but to doe ill, and heare well, is the fault of greatnesse. Envie followes upon Iustice; therefore often doing well is made to heare ill. But flatterie waits upon unrighteousnesse; therefore doing ill is made to heare well. Tell my people their sinnes: there is no greater contradiction
 to that charge, then to conceale men from themselves; or in a false glasse to shew them their owne faces. Hee that forbeares to tell the people their sinnes, doth not forbeare to sell their soules. I could say something to them that controll the (...) freedome of Ministers.Am. 7.13. Prophesie no more at Bethell. And indeed greatnesse carries too strict a hand over some; that they are faine to runne at their stirrops, and come in at the least rebuke. They are mussled for barking, and dare not quest; but like silent setters, heare, and see, and keepe counsell. This is miserable, when the Preacher must stoope at the Pulpit doore, to take measure of the peoples feete.
2 By Heresie; broching schismes and factions, and erroneous opinions: as it were feeding the people with bones, or rather with poisons, in stead of wholsome meate. The Apostle speakes of such, not with malice and contempt, but with sorrow and teares:Phil. 3.18. I tell you of them weeping. They so fill their hearers heads with crotch^^^ and scruples, that they runne about like frantickes, and cry downe all plaine-so^^ with their divisions. Hee that dissolves your union, and breakes your peace, do^^ what he can to sell your soules.
3 By silence. The advocate that ought to plead, betrayes the cause by his voluntary silence. The watchman that doth not ring the alarme bell at the appro^ch of danger, betraies the Citie to the enemie. If the Minister hold his peace, when (...) sees Satan in the ^arket barganing for soules; he doth as it were make merchandise of them, and take money for them. I grant that as Demosthenes had a great see for his silence in a cause, so many have gotten preferments by rarity or rather nullity of Sermons. I envie not their purchase, nor desire a partnership in their merchandise. The Lord keepe mee from selling that by holding my peace, which hee bought by dying on the Crosse. I will sell any riches to buy a soule, I will never sel a soule to buy riches.
1 They sell you.] Perhaps they bought you first, may they not then sell you? If they bought you deare, would you have them sell you cheape? vendere j^^^ potest, emerat ille prius. One might buy a benefice haply of some unsanctified Patron, (for no hallowed man will sell hallowed things) and will that merchant live by the losse? But to buy is Simonie, to sell is Sacriledge. Christians are the Lords proprieties, sanctified and set a part from the world, for himselfe. Hee that sells them, is guiltie in some proportion of Iudas his merchandise, when hee sold CHRIST himselfe.Mat. 26.13. Hee went to the chiefe Priests, and said, what will you give me etc. First, against the custome of the market, he did not tarry in his shop or stall, til customers came to cheapen and buy: but he went to them, like a pedlar that had no standing; he sought chapmen, exposing his wares; quite contrary to the reason of modestie, which observes that proffered ware stinkes. Thus doe these merchants, keepe no markets nor ware-houses in publicke, but runne up and downe to get trading for soules.1 Pet. 5.8. Quaerunt emptores: as their master, that Seekes whom he may devoure. Many a cursed Patron and patterne of Atheisme, holds a Benefice vacant in his hands, till hee hath sounded many chapmen with a Who gives more? And then if Bala^^ Asse can but dung him silver enough, hee will sell him all the soules of the Parish, yea, they are worse than Iudas: he came to the Priests with a quantum dabitis, hee set no price on his commoditie, but left it to the buyer: not, thus much you shall give for him, or not have him; but give what what you thinke good, make your owne match. But these Patrons set a precise rate on their livings. Thus much you, shall give: it is worth a hundred pound a yeare, and I will have three yeares purchase for it; and yet say that I use you kindely: for such and such have taken (...), seven, nine yeares purchase for their meere donations. Yea they are craftier merchants than Iudas: for it is probable that hee had neither ready money, nor good assurance: but these will be sure of their moneys before hand, or, els a good pa^^e. And let the best Preacher in the Land come at such a season; Si nihil attuleris, God be with you, Homer.
2 Thus are the poore soules that CHRIST died for, sold into the hands of ignorance
 or impietie: for neither learned nor honest men will be the buyer of sacred things. But when Iudas is the patron, Simon Magus must be the priest. Yea Iudas is overdone by these Merchants: he sold CHRIST but once, and thought that once too much: these sell him often, over and over againe. As one of them thanked God, that he had turned over three Incumbents in one benefice for his time; but he was a Popish one, as it is said. Now the chapman that buyes this, purposeth to sell it again and to make a commoditie of the sheepes wooll, whatsoever become of themselves. Like the Wolfe, who suckes the ewe, while she is a little one, and devoures her when he is growne a great one. Nutritus per me, sed tandem saeviet in me. But let this be spoken to the horror of their consciences, that make merchandise of the Churches endowments. Such a patron shall find it hard enough to answer for his owne soule: but to have the bloud of so many soules required at his hands, it is a question when hee comes to hell, whether Iudas himselfe will change torments with him. It is horrible and would make any heart shudder and tremble to thinke, that poore people bought and sold on earth, should lie blended in torments with their Patrons and Priests; cursing the one for selling, the other for buying their soules.
They sell you.] You are private persons perhaps, and this Text concernes not you. Yes, strongly in another sense. Beloved, we sell not you, but you sell us: the Pastor doth not make merchandise of the flocke, but the flocke of the Pastor. Our hand is against every man, and every mans hand is against us: our hand is against your sins, and your hand is against our livings. There is no fraud or cussenage that lesse troubleth your consciences, than that wherby you robbe the Church: yea this Sacriledge is held an action of Iustice. While you had leaden Priests, you payed golden tythes and were than perswaded, that blasphemie and drunkennesse were tolerable sins in respect of sacriledge. But now those that in your owne consciences teach you the true way to blessednesse, you will be sure to make exemplary subjects of povertie and miserablenesse. You were then glad to licke up the dust that fell from their feete (no whit beautifull:) we are glad to picke up the crumes that fall from your superfluous tables. It is the pride of this sacrilegious citie, that the Minister be alwayes the poorest man in the parish.
I doe not thinke it a curse upon us, (as it was upon Eli's house: to beg a Priests office for necessitie sake;1 Sam. 2.26. that they might eate a piece of bread) for we have learned to want: and it is a^ small matter to fast a day, that we may feast the whole yeare, in heaven for ever. But it is a curse upon your selves, of your owne begetting: that you may perish in your incorrigible sins; while the poore Minister must not dare to reprove his rich benefactor: if he doe, he is sure the next quarter to lose his benevolence. Luthers observation is too true; so soone as the Gospel revived, money grew dead. Ministers shall not be both wealthy and faithfull: rich and not true, or true and not rich; both together were a miracle.
It is Satans policie, that they who maintaine the truth; should not have to maintaine themselves. I know that some Divines, transported with God knowes what, have refused the positive and unquestionable rites of the Church, to feed upon arbitrary contributions wherein they are more foolish than those Fryers, that have made themselves voluntary beggars. I know that they would retract it now, and shut the doore when the steed is stollen. Repenting too late that they have betrayed the LORDS Inheritance into the hands of impious tyrants: who laugh at the poore Minister, when hee comes to begge a straw of his owne sheafe. this fanaticall opinion is not quite dead, wee have had such transportive furies amongst us; who would perswade all Preachers to live upon benevolences; in confidence of their owne merits, and popular approbation: for so they hope the biggest share would fall to themselves. But if we appeale, as Bishop Grostead did from Pope Adrian private, to Pope Adrian publicke: or as another, from his passion as Clement, to his Holinesse as Peter: so from them then out of their wittes, to them now
 come againe to themselves: wee shall finde it concluded, that it is better for Christ to keepe his inheritance in his owne hands, than to stand at their curtesies: who had rather there were no Gospel nor Preacher in the world, than that their Heire should want a Parsonage.
That the Altar should have maintenance for her servants; none but those w^^ would give sinne a pasport to offend, can deny. Let him that is taught in the w^rs^ communicate unto him that teacheth in all his goods.Gal. 6.6. To goe close home to that place or, to bring that place close home to your consciences; would appeare harsh to the^e times. If any man does not communicate, God is not mocked: you see how it fall^ and I feare it falls heavy on many amongst us. Make him, not them: you heare ^^ny, one is your Pastor; make Him partaker. Some will give little to their o^^e Minister, but somewhat to another of their owne humour. He can tickle their hea^^ with crotchets, bring into suspition the integrity of Church Goverment, discre^^ their poore Pastor. I will tell you one marke of a Foxe though a Puritan, yet a P^ritan-foxe: such a one as disgraceth your owne minister, that he might get you (...) heed him, and feed him. If he were a Paul, he would never suffer the to doe Pe^^r any wrong. If he were a good Teacher, he would never teach thee to injure thy owne Minister. Let him communicate. Pastors have tythes, that they may have a fellow-feeling of the peoples losse, and fellow-comfort in their encrease. Th^ the Priest so well as the merchant might pray to God in a storme, and praise him i^ a calme: both alike depending on Gods providence. I know they should doe so howsoever, but we are men not Angels: the wisdome of God thought it fit by a portion to encourage us.
I know that nothing is more enviously grudged, than the livings of our Clergy. The Gentry hath gotten neere upon three parts of the spirituall maintenance, and left the Church but one quarter: and yet they could eat her with salt for having so much. The Levites under the Law, besides their Tythes, Offerings, First-fruit^s, Sacrifices, Vowes; had 48. walled Cities, with large Sub-urbes for their Catt^l, large glebes to plant and sowe in; when as their whole Land was not so bigge a^ England. Now men thinke it arbitrary; at their choise whether they will give the Minister any thing or not. You shall have a civill libertine give a Commissary more for a licence to eate flesh in lent; than to his Pastor for feeding his soule all the yeare. But thou sayest, I give him so much as the Law allowes: but the Law must needs leave something to the libertie of thy conscience, to be answered in a higher Court. Wilt thou performe no more duties to God or man, than humane Law can ex^^rt from thee? If we should preach to you no more Sabbath dayes in a yeare, than the Law doth exact at your hands; you would thinke we dealt injuriously with you. Who feedeth a flocke,1 Cor. 9.7. and receives none of the milke? You partake Preachers goods, and shall not they partake your goods? You must not only give an eare, but an earering: not onely put on their wedding Garment, but also give them garments to put on. You have read how villanously the Ammonites entreated Davids messengers cutting off their garments, etc. Wee are Messengers of the Sonne of David, but (...) Sonne of David send us not to such Ammonites,2 Sam. 10.4. as will do us no more good, tha^ stripping us of all we have. Nehemiah complained, that in his time, the Levites fo^ want of maintenance, were faine to leave the Temple, and follow the plough. Luther sayes, this was the cause why the Clergie invented such points of superstition, as were advantageous to them: Prayer for the dead, Indulgences, etc. This was not for the peoples soules, but for the Priests bodies: not for Piety, but for the belly. As Ahasuerus said of Haman;Est^. 7.8. will he force the Queene before my face? So may Christ say of these Sacrilegers; Will they force my Church before my face? If the buyers and sellers in the Temple deserved whipping; certainly the buiers and sellers of the Temple deserve hanging. Who knowes whether they therefore scape con^^ction here, that they may have the greater damnation hereafter!
Men would have fire kept in the Sanctuary, but allow no fewell: they would
 have the lampe burne without oyle. To take away the provant from the Armie, is (...) betray it to the enemie. In darknesse they did straine it, now they restraine it. ^he world thinkes we can live like Iohn Baptist, by miracle; who was in his dyet, ^abite, carriage, indeed a miracle. Liceat dicere miraculum fuit,Psal. 4.6. quamvis miraculum ^cit. Offer to God, saith the Psalmist: in stead of this Offerre, this common course is ^ferre. He that will be a voluntary minister, must be content to be a necessary beg^r. So the mendicant Fryer told the woman of her three sonnes fortunes: that ^he should be a theefe, another a homicide, the third a beggar. Which for a second ^mes he would teach her how to prevent, or, at least so to qualefie their fates, that ^ey might retaine their trades without danger. He that shall be a theefe, make him a ^awyer: so he may steale by Law. He that shall be a homicide, make him a Physitian (...) he may be rewarded for killing. He that shall be a beggar, make him a Priest, a ^yar, so he may beg by authoritie. God hath made their profession honourable, ^e world hath made their condition contemptible. Yet they bring saving truth in ^eir mouthes, which the Lawyers cannot say. A Divine can say, this is true Divi^ie; a Physician can say, this is proper physicke: what Lawyer can say, this is ^ue Law, and I will warrant it? yet we reward the latter, and disgrace the former. ^our state be questioned, we goe to the Lawyer for counsell; thank and fee him. Be^g sicke we send for the physitian, credite, thanke, and pay him. We send for the ^riest, but neither reward, nor so much as thanke him, for we hold it his dutie. How ^rely hath the minister the tenth of the others fee! yet we falsely say, that we pre^rre our soules, before our estates, or our bodyes.
Thus you sell us; and what is the event; with the price which Sacriledge takes ^r the Churches of Christ, is purchased a field of bloud. A field of bloud indeed, (...) bury their owne soules that thus merchandise, and many thousand innocents that ^re the chaffer of their cursed bargaines. The end of all these merchants alwayes ^ath bene, and alwayes shall be fearfull. For Magus the father of them; he presu^ing in a publicke theater at Rome to flie up into heaven, caught such a fall that he ^rake his legs, say some. That hee who attempted to flie, was not able to walke: ^t qui pennas assumpserat, plantas amiserat. Nay, this bold adventure broke his necke,Ambr. Epiphan. ^y others. Felix the Devils darling dyed vomiting of bloud. In a word, none ^at ever rob'd Churches, and merchandise, holy things, to fill their owne purses, ^r, fulfill their owne humours; but they were overtaken with some horrible judge^ent. As the Eagle that tooke a piece of flesh from the Altar, but a hot cole with^l that set her nest on fire. And if the rest doe so perish, no good Christian will la^ent. If they bee made like Oreb and Zeb, that say, Come let us take to our selves ^he houses of God in possession, we shall not mourne: yea rather, our mouth shall be filled ^ith laughter, and our tongue with joy.Psal. 126.2. GOD of his infinite mercie forgive Eng^ands ingratitude in this kind: and grant that the burning Lampes in our Tem^les may bee supplied with sufficient oyle, that the light of Israel goe not ^ut.
3 Through coveteousnesse.] This is the ground or motiue of their trafficke. It is ^rue of every schisme, what was said of Lucilla's faction, with a little inversion. Anger bred it, pride foster'd it, and coveteousnesse confirmed it. Here indeed, pride ^halengeth the uppermost seate: it is a high and audacious conceite, which scornes ^o goe in the common path, that begets it. Anger and impatience of contradiction ^urseth it: and what it cannot maintaine by reason, a feminine testynesse shall out wrangle. Coveteousnesse binds it up with the in dissoluble knottes; while the sweet^esse of private gaine (not unlike our Monopolists neglects all publike good. But as ^t is the humilitie of the best judgements, to apply their studies to the confirmation ^f received truths: and the meekenesse of blest understandings, to disaffect singu^aritys: and the charity of Christian teachers, rather to be loosers of their owne, ^han extorters of others, or, to presse and oppresse the unripe grapes unwilling to yield their juyce. So false hearted schismatickes, to doe themselves profite, undoe
 they care not whom. Let their bodies famish, and their soules perish, so their owne state may flourish: building up their Iericho in the bloud of all their spirituall children.
This sinne of coveteousnesse is iniquity in all men, blasphemie in a Clergie man. As our doctrines are, Thus saith the Lord: so our lives should be, (if not like God, for who can match the sanctifie residing in that pure essence?) yet like men of God. The titles we beare, the office we sustaine, the person we present, the nearenesse (...) our calling to that absolute Integrity; are remembrancers unto us that we be not covetous. We are men of God, and Oh thou man of God flee these things: the Apostle insists there upon coveteousnesse. God is a God of knowledge, and of inco^ceiveable holinesse: therefore the Vrim and Thummim, the light of knowledge (...) conscience must be upon the brests of his Aarons. The Minister is to the people, as the body is to the shadow: if the body stoope to the earth, the shadow will (...) be upright toward heaven. Our master is in heaven, not on earth: our doctrine is from heaven, not from earth: our directing Spirit is of heaven, not of ear^^^ and shall our conversation crosse all these, and be of earth, not in heaven?
There is no fault in a Minister like coveteousnesse; because there is no sin raigning in the world like worldlinesse. We may spend our spirits, and preach our hea^^ out, to disswade mens affections from this world, if we embrace it our selves, they will never beleeve us. When a Preacher, as if he had lost all his former time sp^^ in learning, and were now to recover it by a preposterous imitation of the hungrie^^ mucke-eaters: gives over himselfe to that as most precious, which he bids other (...) give over as most superfluous. Men now hearing his Sermons will thinke his doctrine possible to be taught: but seeing his life, they will thinke it impossible to ^e kept. What scholler is not ready to imitate his Masters exercise? There is nothing farther from heaven, nothing more unlike our maker, than worldlinesse. It (...) observable that those creatures which are nearest the earth, are most busy in ho^ding: those more remote are lesse carefull. What an abundant provision makes the Ante, which is a creature housed in the earth! The birds of the aire that flie next heaven,Matth. 6.26. neither sow nor reape nor carry into the barne. How unnaturall is it, th^^ they who by their vocation are next heaven, should yet by their conversation be f^^thest off. How confidently doth the Apostle draw on their affections, upon ^^s knowne unguiltinesse of this sin?2 Cor. 7.2. Receive us, we have wronged no man, we have ^^frauded no man, etc. Receive us in understanding, obedience, charity: Why? though we rebuke sin, yet we have wronged no man in his reputation. Though we preach mysteries, have corrupted no man in his conscience. Though we receive our own^ dues, wee have defrauded no man in his state and condition. False teachers are otherwise minded;Tit. 1.11. subverting whole houses, for filthy lucres sake. As Physitians given sicke men potions, that themselves may live: so all their conceptions are others consumptions. Their mouthes shall be stopped, saith the Apostle; if not with the ha^d of humane authoritie, yet with the fire of hell. They are such as the Psalmist describes. Their tongues walke against heaven, therefore the people turne in unto them, and th^^^ sucke they no small advantage.2 Tim. 2.4. But he that warreth, intangleth not himselfe with the ^ffaires of this life. Clericus in oppido, piscis in arido: what should a Priest doe in the worlds market, or a merchant in the Lords pulpit.
This vice of coveteousnesse is an epidemicall disease, the grand Cair of misch^^fe, the metropolis of wickednesse, an universall plague that hath infected all cond^^^^ of people. Therefore albeit the point here doe centrally concerne the Church, (...) such as have negotiation in ecclesiasticall businesse; yet circumstantially it fetch^^ in all.Luk. 12.15. One moved CHRIST to perswade his brother to a division of the Inheritance with him: and He said unto them. After he had given him his errand, he ^cted his speech to the whole auditory, which is said to be an innumerable multi^^^ of people, treading one upon another. So Luk. 13.22. One said unto him, Hee s^^^ unto them; applying and amplifying his doctrine to them all.Mark. 13.37. What I say unto you,
 (...) say unto all. Some sinnes are peculiar to some vocations, as to the Magistracie or ministerie alone: other to some conditions as to the rich or poore alone: but this ^estilence is incident to all.Ier. 6.13. From the least to the greatest, every one is given to covet^usnesse. But because most men are like bashfull guests, that will fast for want of a ^arver; that office falls to me here: to cut every one a morsell of this dish; which ^aply may be against his stomach, but let him well digest it, and his soule will blesse ^^e for it.
Now according to the rule of discreet and well disposed charitie, let me begin (...) home, which is the heart of my Text. In the reproving of this sinne among o^hers, God hath used to begin at his owne Sanctuarie. Let not us, that bid men ^^oke upward, cast our owne eyes downeward. They will think that we abuse them, ^hen we call them from the world, as Elisha did the Syrian Armie;2 King. 6.19. This is not the ^^ay, nor is this the Citie: like Foxes disswading other beasts from that bootie, which ^re meane to make our owne. God and Mamon are two contrary Cures, we cannot ^erve them both. Some have dispensations for cures distant many miles: but no Court of faculties can dispense with this: for they are so remote one from the other, ^hat heaven and hell scarce exceed them. Thou man of God flee this. We findPsal. 17.14. Men ^f the world, andLuk. 12.30. Nations of this world; they seeke after these things: but this (Man ^f God) opposeth those: Paul saies not as at other times, O Timotheus; but O man ^f God: it becomes not the men of God, to be men of the world.
Let me also reflect this point upon the Impropriators of Ecclesiasticall rites, be^ore I leave the Church. Whether they be Popish, that steale away our portions, to ^ive them to the Romish Emissaries: who sucke their blouds, as they sucke our ^louds; and laugh at them, as they laugh at us. They fat the rich epicures of Rome, ^nd grudge Lazarus their very crummes. Their conscience serves them, that Gods Ministers should want maintenance, rather than their horse-heeles shall want litter. ^r whether they be Puritans, or any thing, or rather nothing, (to speake most fa^ourably of them) men without God. How unpossible is it that they should not pe^^sh with that covetousnesse, which hath beene the perishing of many soules? They ^ill have the Tenth of their neighbours estates, let their salvation goe whither it will. They will sooner lose their lives than their livings; as an Impropriator once ^ebelliously and traiterously spoke, when mention was made of the Kings willing^esse in their restitution.
That which the bad servant spake to his good master wickedly;Matth. 25.24. Thou reapest ^here thou didst not sow: may be charged upon them justly; doe they not reape ^here they never sow? It is we that sow spirituall things, and they that reape our ^emporall things. They thrust their sickle into our harvest: making that prophane, which God hath sanctified to his Ministers. Putting an Egyptian tricke upon the world; to take away our straw of meanes, and exact our number of bricke, in preaching and hospitalitie. We are put to labour in our ministerie, to the care of getting ^read for our familie: while they look on us with scorne, laugh at us with contempt, ^nd dominere over us with pride. Men dissolutely proud, inordinately avarous, un^erviceably idle, are entred on the meanes of honest labourers. What if the Churchmen in those former times were corrupt in opinion: must their maintenance be gi^en to those that are ten thousand times more corrupt in conversation? This were as Cominaus writes of the French King; who having a Gallant in his army that cow^rdly ran away; he tooke all his offices from him, and gave them to one that ran ^en mile further than he. Meane time, that curse which every eye sees upon the ^redecessors before them, will continue upon themselves and their posteritie ^fter them; so long as the spoilers of IESUS CHRIST bee found with ^hem.
For the common defrauders of our poore remaining dues; as they swarme like ^ocusts over all the Land; so their principall borough is this principall Citie. For men that most plainely and impudently defraude their Pastors, of all places in England
 commend me to London. Honest, honest pharisies, you are too good to l^^e heare; for you pay just tythes! You would bee such an example of equitie, that some would quickly trounce you, and teach you to be such a president. No^ ig^^^ cano: some would, and dare not, publickely render their legall dues according (...) to bond of their conscience, for feare the Citie should punish them. They h^^e found out busie Lawyers, to question the tenure of tythes, by what right they a^^ due: and some are cunninger in this point, than in the fundamentall point of salvation. But who examines by what right Impropriators hold the Churches maintenance! Let that case bee disputed in the Court of Conscience: and if God de^^^mine on their side, we have done, much good do't them. Let God say what he will, Thou shalt pay me the Tenth; they have a tricke to withhold it: but the Devill ha^^^ tricke beyond them. And howsoever they have wit to foole their innocent mother; they shall never beguile their Almighty Father; who hathRev. 2.18. eyes (...) flame of fire. The booke whereby mans Law judgeth the Church, and the boo^^ whereby Gods Law judgeth them; have infinite difference. All this obstinate ^posing the truth, is for covetousnesse and ambition. Paul proves Melchised^^ the better man,Hebr. 7.4. because Abraham payed him tythes. Therefore by Saint Pauls argu^ent. Lawyers are farre better men than Ministers; because men are faine to pay them the tythes, due to the Ministers. Simon Magus is now justified: Sacriledge hath f^^^ a Christian patronage. And men of God looke to your selves, the Ammon^tes (...) tooke away halfe your apparrell before, now they have a warrant to turne you (...) naked. Mend them O Lord, or end them: let them be converted, orPsal. 129 6. confou^^^^ that hate Sion. Let them be as the grasse upon the house tops, which withereth before it groweth up: whereof the mower filleth not his hand, nor hee that binde^^ sheaves his bosome, neither doe they which goe by say. The blessing of the Lord (...) upon you.
For the Patrons of Church-donations, too many of them have so locked up our livings in this hutch of covetousnesse, that they cannot bee unskrewed without golden key. They looke to the gifts of the hand, not to the gifts of the hea^^. One would thinke that Iudas his halter should make them afraid of Iudas his question; what will yee give mee: what will you give me? Satan gave him a rope. Take heed, lest while you aske the same question, God do not suffer you to receive the same answer. That sinne made Iudas a theefe, and it makes you no better: a^^ what can a theefe looke for but a halter? We finde other merchants selling pearles, and purple, and scarlets silkes and but these sell alsoRev. 18.13. the soules of men. Curs^^ merchants that trafficke in the bloud of soules. These bring into Gods Sanctuary, instead of Levites to devide the word Gibeonites not worthy to divide wood. ^^t seeing they are content to venture themselves upon Gods vengeance, I leave the^^ to their Iudge.
This sinne is not here confined: Covetousnesse in diverse others, thought it do (...) make merchandise of mens soules, yet of their estates. Briberie in officers which is a Burning sinne. Iob. 15.34. It is one of those three, that are called mighty s^^^^ Am. 5.12 They sell a man and his heritage; they are very theeves, Esa. 1.23. Why Theeves? because they Love gifts, and take bribes for the widow and fat^^lesse. They are theeves, not for taking purses in the high way, but bribes in their chambers. Hos. 4.18. Their language is Give: and the theeves is but, D^^^. Now what is the difference betwixt, Give and Deliver; yet often (Give) walk^^ chaines of gold, while (Deliver) lies in chaines of iron. Evill men in the places (...) judicature make merchandise of the poore: while they spinne one cause through^^^ three generations. Like Surgions that keepe the wound raw, to draw out of it (...) more money. That often the recoverie of a mans right by Law, is as deare as if (...) had bought it by purchase.2 Sam. 15.3. Corrupt lawyers are also merchants in this trade of ^^^tousnesse, and selling of men. p Absaloms tong is in their heads; that sayes to all ^ents; Thy cause is good: so he stole away their hearts, and these steale their esta^^s.
 The buyer saies of a good commoditie with lesse sin, It is naught: than these speake of a naughty cause, It is good. Let them meditate the objection of Ioash;Iudg. 6.31. Will yee plead for Baal? But they doe it out of a good mind, to fift out the truth: yes, as Iudas did, (according to the heresie of the Cainites, as Saint Augustine relates it) that betrayed Christ out of a good and honest mind, fore-seeing the infinite good that his death should bring to the world.
All oppressors are free of this company of Merchants; they also sell men.Luk. 12.20. Thou foole: God layes the imputation of follie upon him that hoorded but his owne abundance. Whereupon Augustine inferres: if he be a foole that layes up his owne goods, vos invenite illi nomen qui tollie aliena; find out a name for him that extorts other mens. What name? Eccl. 3.18. It is found; they are beasts. What only Kine? Am. 4.1. No, they are not so kind beasts: but Lions and Wolves, that live e^ rapto, beasts of prey. Beasts they are and should bee served like beasts; Nebuchadn^zzars destinie to be turned to grasse. There is but a company of Merchants, a company of Mercers, etc. but these Merchants are not in themselves a company, because indeed they be of every company. There be personall sins, and conditionall sins, and locall sins, and nationall sins: but this covetousnesse is an universall sinne.
We are troubled about many things, but neglect that one thing most necessary. Ociamur in quibus laborandum, laboramus in quibus ociandum. Other creatures are content with a little; Non ita mortales, quos urget habendi, Tantus amor; domibus dom^s, arvis additur arvum, monticulus monti, maribus mare, Iungere mundo conantur mundum, sua dicere cuncta volentes. This sin is like a talent of lead tyed to a mans heeles, that utterly disable him to climbe up the ladder of blessednesse. Our Saviour hath described eight staires; the covetous cannot get up one step.
First, Blessed are the poore in spirit: the covetous may have a poore spirit,Math. 5. cannot be poore in spirit. To be poore in purse is his feare, to be poore in spirit is none of his desire. Per mare pauperium fugiens, per saxa, per ignes. Through the sea of deepe policie, the rockes of stony bowels, through the fire of lust, the fire of hell, he seekes riches. Nothing humbles him to the sense of his sins, but the losse of his goods: and this so despaires him, that he will be at the charges of his owne halter. Blessed are they that mourne: alas, the trolling in of riches makes his heart too merry for that blessing. If Peter will weepe he must goe out of the Priest hall. It must be some premunire or confiscation, or such a losse that brings him to repentance. Blessed are the meeke. But Avidus lucri, impatiens damni. If hee lose his money, he will trouble his owne heart, his owne house, the whole Citie, and out-sweare a ruffian. If his servant but breake a glasse, it shall be deduced out of his wages. He had rather be damned, than damnified. Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousnesse. But his appetite stands not that way: let him glut himselfe on the filthy garbage of ill gotten goods, he cares not for Manna. To lap in the foule puddles of Vsurie, he refuseth the streames of mercie that make glad the Citie of God. Blessed are the mercifull: but that stands not with his profession. For the peny which comes out of his purse, it is like a drop of bloud from his heart. His reward must be accordingly, to haveIam. 2.13. judgement without mercie Blessed are the pure in heart. what puritie can you looke for in a stable? There is no mischiefe so tetricall, but if it be covered with gold, they will swallow it.Psal. 24 3. Who shall ascend into the hill of the LORD? who shall stand in his holy place? Hee that hath cleane hands, and a pure heart. Innocens manibus ascendet, but mundus corde stabit. The covetous keepes his hands too guilty to ascend, his heart to foule to stand there. Blessed are the peacemakers: hee loves peace so long as it waites upon profit: if otherwise, he hates it; and in stead of a making it, will make it nothing: he hath a Lawyer for the purpose. All his dues to pay, he out-wrangles: if a debter fall into his hands, the divell will as soone pardon a forfeit. The last step is, Blessed are they that are persecuted, for righteousnesse sake; this he will never endure. If it should come to that choice, that he
 must leave either Martha or Mary, Righteousnesse or riches; he loves God well but his money better. What, part with a certaintie for an uncertaintie? If hee can keepe both, well and good: if not, what ever betides, he will keepe his money. It would sound terrible, to invert our Saviours termes upon him. Cursed his the covetous, for he is not poore in spirit, but proud in spirit; therefore his is the kingdome of hell. Cursed, for he never mournes for his sinnes, therefore shall not bee comforted. Cursed, for not meeke, but froward in heart: therefore he shall not inherite the co^^ he so desires. Cursed, for he longs not after righteousnesse, but after riches, therefore shall never be satisfied. Cursed; for being unmercifull, he never shall have mercie. Cursed, for he not makes peace, but breakes peace; therefore shall be called (...) Child of the Devill. for purenesse of heart, and patience of hurt for Christs sa^e: he is a professed enemie to them both: therefore must inherite the Curse.
4 The meanes of their utterance; fained words. Heresie was never found disioyned from hypocrisie. As it is said of the lyer and the theefe; shew me a lyer, and I will shew you a theefe: so shew mee a Schismaticke, and I will shew you an Hypocrit^e. Pacis verba ferunt, et caedibus omnia miscent. Their speaches are so ambiguous and equivocall,Itieron. that they seeme to hold both ours, and our adversaries Tenents. Vt ^li^^^ haereticus, aliter catholicus audiat. With heretickes they are heretickes, with catholikes they are catholickes. The cup of poison had need bee annointed with honey, to allay the bitternesse. What they cannot performe by the evidence of truth, they seeke to attaine by the eloquence of art.1 Cor. 2.4. Saint Paul affirmes his preaching to ^ee, not with entising words of mans wisedome, but in demonstration of the Spirit and of po^^^. They on the contrary, come not with the demonstration of the Spirit, but with the impostures of oratory. Thus are all those Italionated Emissaries qualified, whom the grand Cacus of the westerne world sends abroad; being first throughly instructed in the cunning liegerdumaine of their Divinitie. The fittest denomination and fundamentall principle, is1 Tim. 6.5. that Gaine is godlinesse. For their doctrine emptieth ^t selfe from point to point into the Churches treasure. They most uniustly exchange their lead for gold, which the French lawyers account no better than robberie. Hereupon their Paternoster and Avemarie have bene worthily called, the two neapolitan^ theeves.Luk. 20.47. They devoure widowes houses, and for a shew make long prayers. They are theeves in that Spirituall kind of sacriledge, that doe (...), with fained wor^^ coozen mens soules. Neither doth this art of dissimulation limit and content it selfe with the bare narration of untruths, and suggestion of errors in the credulous adherents: but it extends to perjurie; and that we call aequivocation.
Thus they doe not onely speake vainely, but sweare falsely; which is proper perjurie. Morally the end doth determine natures: and that which doth precisely crosse the good end, must needs bee most directly opposite to the vertuous nature. The scope and purpose of an oath is for confirmation, therefore none so directly crosseth it as false swearing. Whether it testifies, falsely of things past or present, as in an oath assertory. Or, undertake things De jure vel de facto, possible without performance, as in an oath promissory. Which principles of perjurie being their do^maticall positions, wee have good cause to mistrust them, For by the benefit of this politicke invention, they can say what they will, sweare what they will, agai^^ knowledge, against conscience; provided that they reserve in mind the contrary. Thinke of this you that have an itch of travelling beyond the Alpes upon you. Qu^ Romae faciam? mentiri nescio. With what securitie can you converse with them, that pervert the formall intent of wordes. As if speach had bene ordained for conce^^ment, and not for discoverie of our minds. What fruit or safety is in their societie, that poison the remedy of contention; and cancel al seales of confirmation. But they that have broken their faith God, will keepe no faith with us. When they had l^st the sincere truth of the Gospell, they determined on this doctrine of the Devill Nulla fides cum haereticis servanda. They can faine wordes, and coine distinctions, but all is their old trade of merchandise, Rev. 18.

Here the description of hypocrites; they are all words; smooth unctuous, and fained wordes. Christians in the skin, divells at the coare. Like the Armenian Dragons, that have cold and squail'd bodies; yet cast fire out of their mouthes. Such was that Diogenes Sinopensis; in opinion a Stoicke, in conversation a Epicure, a foole in both. That Apostate Iulian so wrote of himselfe; that he had an busy tongue but a lasy hand. Their rhetoricke is prety and their logicke witty, but their practicke is naughty. They gape like sea-fishes, so wide as if they would devoure the whole Ocean: rip them up, and search their intralls, and you find no water in their bellies. Crueltie that is, aperta malitia is hurtfull: but hypocrisie, operta malitia is most pernicious. A Player and an hyppocrite are all one with the Greekes: hypocrites are the divells company of players. As men sometimes play in the shapes of divells, so divells play in the shapes of men. As CHRIST to deceive the divell tooke man upon him: so diverse to deceive man take the divell upon them. Satans best trading is by metamorphoses and transformations. He once changed himselfe from an Angell of light to a divell: so now he would change himselfe from a divell to an Angell of light. What is true of every evill; Quanto interius, tanto deterius; holds strongest in hypocrisie. Pagans allow us peace, heretickes peace, hypocrities no peace. The Churches persecution by Tyrants was bitter, by heretickes more bitter, by hypocrites most bitter. There is scarce a house in the world, but it is haunted with this kind of spirits; familiars; visible and carnall divells; familiar hypocrites. Feare, and the pit, and the snare are upon thee, O Inhabitant of the earth.Esa. 24.17. Either the feare of Tyrannie, or, the deepe Pit of policie, or the Snare of hypocrisie, continually assault us. But as CHRIST said to his Apostles; He that receiveth you, receiveth me: so he that deceiveth you, deceiveth me. Ananias lyed unto Peter, Peter tells him that he had lyed to the Holy Ghost. It is well observed that many mens religion is like the adverbe Quasi: which denotes a picture not a nature, an appearance rather than an existence; likenesse than a true being. As it were. So the locusts are described, Rev. 9.7. As it were horses prepared to the battell, and on their heads as it were the faces of men, etc. They were not horses, but as it were horses: had not Crownes, but as it were Crownes: not faces, but as it were faces of men: not haire, but as it were haire of Women: not teeth, but as it were teeth of Lions: not brest-plates, but as it were brest-plates of iron. Their whole description runs upon Quasi, as it were: they had not tailes, but as it were tayles of Scorpions: but in those tailes were stings, not as it were stings, but stings indeed: the farewell of hypocrites is deadly. All their balmes are Quasi, as it were balmes; but their stings are pernicious indeed. They draw neare to God with their lips, not with their hearts: so Gods blessings may shine upon their outward estates, but it shall never come neare their hearts. An hypocrite is like the Sicilian Aetna, flaming at the mouth, when it hath snow at the foote: their mouthes talke hotly, but their feete walke coldly. With the Iewes they cry thrice over for failing, Templum Domini; without once regarding Dominum Templi. One writes of the Onyx, that about the center it is of ^n earthen colour; on the circumference, azure, or skie-colour. Hypocrites have a heavenly garbe in the out-side, but an earthly heart in the center. They think themselves so holy, that they cannot chuse but be saved: but Sicut ad justos pertinet confessio peccatorum, ita ad superbos defensio meritorum, Royard. Confusion of sins be^omes the just, and defense of merites the proud. Good men give God Fructum ^aborum, the fruite of their labours: hypocrites thinke it enough to give Fru^tum labiorum, the fruit of their lips. Foure dayes in a weeke he will spend in hea^ing, not one houre in a moneth in doing good. The Latines doe not so much call ^im Fallens as Falsus; more by the passive, than the active: he but thinkes to de^eive, he is sure to be deceived. Yet me thinkes he should not so flatter himselfe, as ^o thinke that he can be too cunning for the divell.
As Rebels make their proclamations in the name of the King: and Pyrates in^ending to rob Merchants, hang out the flags of other Nations; both to scandall
 them, and to conceale themselves. So doth hypocrites weare Christian colours, that they maybe the Devils coozeners. I would they were no worse than the nightingale; vox et praeterea nihil; nothing but voice; but they have a sweet voice, and a pestilent hand. Rome broacheth all her poison under the name of Christ: but pull of her borowed liverie, and she is a Church apostotaticall, not Apostolicall: not militant, malignant: not for God and for Gideon, but for Antichrist and for Babilon. Their Praelati, Pilati: Speculatores, spiculatores. Bern. The hypocrite loades Christ with many sinnes, therefore Christ loades him with many woes and curses. It is not enough Dicere facienda,Matth. 23. but facere dicenda: Saul was not a Saint, because hee did once prophecie: nor is every one a beleever that talkes of faith. An apparant wickednesse of life cannot be excused by pure language among wise men: that deceives the ignorant, and upon such a ground the simple man thought Pontius Pilate a Saint, because his name was put in the creed. Hypocrites refuse our Ministerie, our congregations, our societie; they scorne to be with us: but herein they doe us a kindnesse, for we are blest in being out of their companie.
Hypocrites thinke that they doe all their villanie now unseene: but the Iudge beholds, and the day of retribution shall lay them open.Zeph. 3.5. The just Lord doth bring his judgements to light every morning: but the unjust knoweth no shame. The unrighteous will not yet be sensible of shame, though the Lord bring his Iudgements to light every morning. Still he encourageth his sin with this supposall,Luk. 12 45. My master is gone into a farre countrey.Eccl. 8.11. Because sentence against an evill worke is not executed speedily; the heart of men is fully set in them to doe evill. Tush, the Lord sees it not, neither doth the highest regard it. Because thou art one of those scape-goates, in whose temporary reprievement the Iudge of all flesh doth but represent the necessitie of his last assisses: shall not thy skin of hypocrisie be pulled over thine eares, and thy f^^ned words be made an evidence against thy wicked deeds? When an architect proffered Livius Drusus an heathen, to build him an house free from the sight of all men he desired him rather; if he had any skill, to build it so that all men might see whatsoever he did. So cleane should be our hands, and so honest our hearts; as if our bodies were transparant, and men might see through us. Howsoever, God sees here, and men shall see hereafter the shame of the wicked.2 Tim. 3.9. Their follie shall be manife^^ unto all men. Now they lie, dissemble, sweare, forsweare, in a desperate madnesse: as if a malefactor should swagger at the foote of the galhouse, because there are some few rounds of a ladder betweene his necke and execution. Yet a little, and behold the Iudge in the clouds, the only visible person in the Trinitie; over a place, though not the same, yet as conspicuous as the valley of Iehoshaphat: the bookes all open, and the secrets of all hearts manifest. When that Sun of Iustice shall appeare, hypocrisie (that cold gloworme of the night) shall lose her vainglorious shining. These faining and fawning counterfeits, whose tongues are the tongues of mournebankes, their hands the hands of painters, and their lives the lives of players; which neither did what they said, nor said what they did; nor were in any point the same they seemed; they all must now appeare in their likenesse. The rotten inside shall be turned outwards, and painted sepulchers of stones shall spew out more painted sepulchers of men. Blessed soules then, in whose mouth there is found no deceit: happy Israelites,Revel. 14.5. Ioh. 1.47. in whom there is no guile. Such let us all be, that we may be redeemed from the earth, and like pure virgins be received into the bosome of CHRIST. Wh^^ as that spurious generation of Loyolists, that coozen all lawes and magistrates wi^^ their bastardly doctrine of equivocation; shall be rejected from the Lambe beca^se guile and fained words are found in their mouthes. Our God is the God of Truth, CHRIST is the word of Truth, the Holy Ghost is the Spirit of truth; let us all bee children of truth; casting out dissimulation from our habites, guile from our mouthes, hypocrisie from our hearts; that we may live on Mount Sion with the Lambe of God, our glorious Iesus for ever.
Whose Iudgement now of a long time lingreth not, and their damnation slumber^^^
 not. This is their perdition; wherein consider the severity or extremity of it; it is Iudgement, and damnation: the vicinitie or propinquitie and nearenesse of it; it lingers not, slumbers not. First for the extremitie, set downe in two termes; Iudgement and damnation. Which howsoever some referre to one and the same thing, their eternall confusion: yet because Iudgement properly and in order goes before condemnation; as the malefactor is arraigned and judged before he be executed: so I am willing to distinguish these two; Iudgement into their punishment temporall, and Damnation into their punishment eternall.
The summe is this, there are certaine plagues ordained for lyars, and the teachers of wickednesse. Be not deceived with their glorious shewes, sumptuous magnificence, mountains of honours, piles of riches, victorious triumphs (as they vaunt) over the truth: for this world will not last ever with them. If you see faithfull Ministers discountenanced, impoverished, persecuted: and these Impostors advanced, ^upported, honoured: yet totter not in your faith: their casting downe, and your lif^ing up is neare: neither shall they living escape Iudgement, nor dead damnation. God ^uffers them to riot upon his forbearance, and to grow luxurious on his mercies: but ^here is a rod of Iudgement made, and a caldron of damnation set a boyling for them. The Lord shall consume them with the breath of his mouth,2 Thes. 2.8. and destroy them with the brigh^esse of his comming. First therefore, lest any beleevers should stumble at their temporall prosperity, whereby they bluster and dominere in the world; they shall see ^heir Iudgement. And then that they may avoid them, oberve the confusion that is ^eady to swallow them. Numb. 16.26. Depart from the tents of these wicked men, lest ^ee be consumed in all their sinnes. Be not involved in their sinnes, lest ye be dissolved with their plagues. This whole discourse I will resolve into certaine extractions, observations and inferences.
1 Their judgement.] The menaces of God are not alwayes followed with an ^nfallible event: being sometimes on purpose signified, that they may be by peni^ence prevented. Consider this fearefull curse for a part of Gods counsaile, then ^olloweth an absolute ratification of it. Esa. 46.10. My counsell shall stand, and I ^ill doe all my pleasure. Who hath resisted his will? None can or shall doe it by their ^ower: if they doe attempt it, be it at their perill. For hoc ipso quod contra Dei volun^tem fecerunt, de ipsis facta est voluntas Dei, Aug. Even in that they have done against ^is will, his will is done upon them. None but the King of Kings hath right to ^he stile imperiall, (I will, or I will not) without all limitation. Because his will ^nd power be matches onely: and when his decree hath gone before, an answerable ^^ccesse doth ever attend it. Therefore for the correction of those Merchants, who ^ould trafficke without God, and resolve on voyages without his pasport: the Apo^le chargeth all humane language to observe that necessary Parenthesis;Iam 4.15. If the Lord ^ill. William Rufus proudly threatned, from the rockes of Wales to make a bridge ^ver into Ireland. But a Prince there understanding that he asked no leave of God; ^nswered, that he never feared that bridge whose foundation was not God: the Name of whom the King had omitted, in a presumptuous confidence of his owne ^rength.
If it be the Lords determinate decree, this Iudgement shall come upon them. But ^ecause God often threatens, before he once strikes; allow it not so absolute, but that may admit an intervention of repentance. When God threatens to pull downe,Ier. 18.8. ^ucke up, and destroy a nation; if that nation shall repent of the evill they have ^one, God will repent of the evill he thought to doe. But whosoever shall con^ue in this blasphemous course of disobedience, their Iudgement shall hasten, and ^eir damnation not linger. The consumption decreed shall overflow with righteousnesse.Esa. 10.22. ^o close up the passage or hinder the course of divine Iustice, will be more impossi^e than for a man to stop the flowing of the sea with his armes, or to beate backe the ^htning into the clouds with his breath. The name of God shall be famous in eve^^ sinners infamie. The wicked may as soone steale the booke of vengeance out of
 Gods hand, as steale themselves from the plagues written in his booke: Their judgement shall come. They can no more flie the power of their Iudge above them, than they could stand still if there were an earthquake under them. There is no appeale from this tribunall: no writ of error lies against this Iudge, though hee be both Iudge and party; because he can neither be over-borne, nor overseene. It is the LORD of hostes that can muster up plagues out of the dusts of the earth: that Strong man, that will breake forth in a Martiall manner against his enemies.
2 For whose sake doth God execute iudgement and confusion upon these false Teachers; and cut off the Instruments of sedition and error? For his owne glory, and the Churches good, that they may no longer cozen mens soules with their Impostures. God hath two sorts of workes; some of position, some of privation. His positive workes are those of Creation, making heaven and earth; of Supportation, bearing up all things with the word of his power; of Redemption and reconciliation, God was in Christ reconciling the world to himselfe:2 Cor. 5.19. of Restitution and reparation, the time of the restitution of all things. Thus hee giveth, maintaineth, or bettereth the being of things.Act. 3.21. Which we now clearely reade in the booke of nature, more clearly in the booke of grace, most clearely shall read in the booke of glory. His privative workes are of judgement; corruptive, destructive works; acts of desolation; destroying the annoyances of his Saints. Both these he appropriateth to himselfe, Deut. 32.39. I kill, and I make alive: I wound, and I heale. Now in these desolating actions of his Iustice, the onely end is not to marre, destroy, and deprive of being: but to further the growth of the Church; as a man rootes up the weeds of his garden, that the good herbes may grow the better.Luk. 13.7. Cut it downe, why cumbreth it the ground? why does it take up the roome where a good plant might prosper, and bring forth acceptable fruite? So that their corruptions are our generations; their desolations our consolations; their impairings our repairings: judgments upon them are creations, recreations to us. As God destroyed the Canaanites, to make roome for the Israelites.Psal. 75.7. Psal. 46.9. God is the Iudge: he putteth downe one, and setteh up another. He breaketh the bow, etc. Cutteth the speare in sunder, hee burneth the Chariot in the fire. Those instruments of spoile and murder; the bow that kills a farre, the speare at hand, those winged Chariots, with hookes and sythes to mow downe all their opposites: these doth the Lord disappoint and desolate. Those menaces against his children, and insolencies against his owne Maiestie, his Iustice doth retaile into their owne bosomes. That 88 for a yeare, and 5th of November for a day, put us in minde of such an intended destruction, and such an intervenient desolation; as that day and yeare shall bee for ever both famous and infamous for. It is the ruine of enmitie, that is the resurrection of peace: unlesse severitie be shewed to our adversaries, securitie cannot dwell in our streets. Our Redemption was a worke of this nature: sinne by the Devill,Rom. 5. and death by sinne, not onely entered, but triumphed over the world as a tyrant: like Alexander; Pervenimus ad solis ortum et occasum. Now because no man hath lived and not sinned, or having sinned should have lived, or could have escaped the second death, by reason of his universall usurpation of sinne: thefore there came a worke of destruction betweene, that disappointed the worke of death.Ioh. 3.8. For this cause the Sonne of God was manifested, that hee might destroy the workes of the Devill. He rased, spoiled, unharnessed those principalities and powers;Col. 2.15. confounding our enemies, that we might be saved. So still doth he deale wi^^ all the instruments of Satan; their Iudgement and Damnation is hastened, that deli^^rance may be to all that trust in him.
3 Though the Lord will judge these wicked persons, yet this forbids not Magistrates to execute their iustice upon them. They that are called after Gods o^^^ name, seated on his owne throne, armed every way with his owne authorit^^, let them also bring forth Iudgement, in imitation of their father. It is a cruell (...) that is shewed to incorrigible offenders: like water powred upon lime, that in stea^
 of quenching, doth enflame the furious heate of sinne.Esa. 26.10. Let favour be shewed to ^he wicked, yet hee will not learne righteousnesse. I know that the life of man is ^recious, yet is the life of the whole Church more precious. And though in ^esse important things, Iudges may proceed on by faire and not fast degrees: yet in ^ch capitall causes as indanger the whole, the expedition should be more quick and ^eremptory.Psal. 101.8. I will early, or in the morning, destroy all the wicked of the land. It was Davids morning work, let none put it off to th'evening of their declination; as the set^ng sun makes the larger shadowes. This killing preservation of notorious and insuf^erable offenders, is a discouragement to them that in the most desperate times dare ^eepe a good conscience. If Popish Incendiaries may be tolerated to make merchan^ise of mens soules, and never be iudged for this; what remaines, but that we appeale ^o a greater Court, and open our grievances to a higher Iudge! no Iudge dormant; ^hose sentence is no dead letter, but a determinate Oracle without admission of ei^her appeale or reprieve.Esth. 4.14. If they hold their peace, enlargement and deliverance shall arise (...) us from another place: but they and their fathers house shall be destroied.Eccl. 12.14. God shall bring ^very worke into judgement; every worke, not one shall escape: with every secret ^ought: not the worke onely, but even the thought, and that bee it never so deeply ^id up in the heart: to cut off all opinion of secrecie; so well as of impunitie. Sin^ers shall heare and feare; and wofull experience shall wring from them this ac^nowledgment; that when God enters into iudgement, no sinfull flesh shall be ju^ified. Iudgment, that rough hand-maide of heaven, remaines still a virgin: nei^er power can force her, not wealth winne her, nor any thing in the world corrupt ^er.Psal. 58.10. The righteous shall rejoyce when he seeth the vengeance: he shall wash his ^eete in the bloud of the wicked. So that a man shall say, verily there is a reward for the ^ighteous: verily, he is a God that judgeth in the earth.
4 Their judgement.] Their owne: as proper to them as the Inheritance they have ^ought with their moneys.Ion. 2.8. They forsake their owne mercie: the mercie that might ^ave beene their owne, to imbrace vengeance which they have made their owne. So ^s it said of dead Iudas;Act. 1.25. He went into his owne place: as the stone naturally inclines ^o the center, the proper place and home: so the wicked are never at home, and in ^heir proper place, till they be in hell.Psal. 125.3. The rod of the wicked shall not rest upon ^he lot of the righteous. It is Their rod, made for them; if God scourge his children (...) little with it, he doth but borow it from the immediate and naturall use for which ^t was ordained: Their rod, Their judgement. So it is calledPsal. 11.6. Their cup; This is ^he portion and potion of their cup. If the godly be made to tast a little of the top, it ^s but a draught lent from their cup: But the dregges thereof the wicked shall wring out, ^nd drinke off, Psal. 75.8.Phil. 3.19. Their end is damnation, such an end can come to none ^ut themselves. Theirs, it is as surely their owne, as if they already had it.Ioh. 3.18. He that ^eleeveth not, is condemned already: as we say of a sentenced malefactor, Mortuus in ^lege; he is dead in Law.
Whence inferre, that sinne doth naturally draw on punishment: and is like the ^hunder that breakes the cloud, and makes way, for the lightning of Gods vengeance. Wheresoever presumption goes before, destruction followes after.Mat. 18.25. When the evill servant had not to pay, his Lord commanded him to be sold, his wife and children, and all that he had, and payment to be made. The wife may be taken for concupiscence, the children for fruites of it. Or thus, Vxor stulti est stultitia; the wife of the covetous is avarice, the wife of the haughtie is Pride, etc. These things are very deare to them, but they must be sold.1 Cor. 10.8. The children of Israel committed fornication, and fell in one day three and twenty thousand. There is punishment of sin, 1. In the full measure, They fell; nothing bated of utter ruine. 2. In the full number. 23. thousand; a few examples would not serve the turne. 3. In the due time, In one day, no long forbearane. For the measure, it was not sicknesse, not flying before enemies, not scourging, but death; They fell: either by plague, or some other immediate Iudgement: some of them were hanged up against the Sunne.
 For number the Apostle speakes of three and twenty thousand: but (Numb. 25.9.) there is mention of one thousand more. Paul did not exceed the number; nor doth the Scripture tie it selfe alwayes so precisely. It is most probable, that the Princes with their servants that were hanged up, made up the other thousand. For time, it is in one day; no space of preperation, they presently fell. Thus if adulterie walke in our streetes, the plague will beare it company. GOD is angry with all sinne, but his wrath is most hot against universall sinne: thousands fall, a whole army of men. When God rides his circuite, hee will strike fearfully; with death, with generall death. Vniversall sinne will bring universall destruction: and it is his great mercie, if he doe not alwayes punish so generally. Error omnium, p^^^ paucorum: all offend, some only are punished; because so it pleaseth him. There is no policie against Gods judgements: Cesar Borgias is made by Machiavell, a Precedent of Policie to Princes; yet he was caught at his owne tricke. The escaping for a while, is no argument of exemption: Gods temporall plagues are but short excursions before the maine battell.
5 Their Iudgement: but is it so certaine theirs, that no repentance can prevent i^, yes, serious repentance may avert the vengeance, if their gracious God gives the repentance. For the Apostle makes a Propheticall prediction of such Heretickes, as should invade Christs flocke after his time: and threatens them with the malediction of God, if they attempt such impostures. By which if they receive warning, and lay it to heart, they may avoide the sinne, and so escape the denounced Iudgement. And this hath ever bene the mercie of our God, that he will speake before he strike: and preach the lecture of premonition, before hee pronounce the sentence of perdition. And this is a course that shall make men either preveniently thankfull, or inexcusably desperate.
Whither it be better to foreknow, or not to foreknow, the evills that will come.It is a question among Philosophers, whether it be better Praescire vel nescire mala futura; to know or not to know future evils: and this dispute is crept into the Schooles Erasmus opposing the Astrologians, held all prognostications and predicttions unprofitable: for if they foretold joyfull newes, they decrease our future pleasure: if evill tydings, they increase our present paine: the feare of danger being often more bitter than the danger it selfe:Apud Gellium. lib. 14. Pejor bello timor ipse belli. Thus Phav^rit^^ reasons; either adverse or prosperous fortunes are foretold. If they say prosperous, and those faile thee; Miser fies frustra expectando, thou art made miserable by thy vaine expecting: if adverse, and those thou scapest, yet Miser fies frustra timend^, thou art made miserable by thy vaine fearing. Howsoever, thus wretched is a man made by a false prediction. Suppose they foretell a truth: let it be calamitie; I^^ inde ex animo miser fies, antequam a fato fias: thy owne mind shall afflict thee, before fate touch thee. Let felicitie be promised and come, yet here are two incommodities. First our mind will be tyred with expectation: and our joy be abated before the object reach us. Again, hoping for a prosperous estate to come, we grow idle for the present. Men of an indifferent fortun having, (after the expiration of some yeares) a great Inheritance assured them; prodigally spend that which is, for that which shall be; yea, they spend that which shall be before it is.
But they run this argument beyond a gallop; let them take truth along with them. Whatsoever Erasmus and Favorinus have written more subtly than soundly, in this argument; it is a conclusion acknowledged by all sober men, that it is better to know a calamitie before we feele it, than to feele calamitie before we know it. Indeed, any unhappinesse that ariseth from prescience, is only incident to a weake mind. Where there is not a well fortified reason, there expectation makes an evill greater, and a good lesse. But in a resolved mind, it digests an evill before it comes, and makes a future good long before present.
First, they say; evill foretold rackes a man with as much torment of feare, as when it is present, it doth with torment of paine. Nay, but it rather pre-armes the well temperd mind, vel vincere vel ferre, and ferendo vincere: either to conquer or to
 suffer, and in suffering to conquer. He that hath already borne the burden, and overcome the extremest brunt, takes up the crosse with joy: heIam. 1.2. Counts it his joy to fall in^o tryall, and out of trouble extracts peace.2 King. 6.15 When the Prophets servant saw the hoste of chariots compassing the citie, he cryed out; Alas, Master, how shall we doe? Elisha answered, Feare not, there be more with us: he knew it before. When Satan ^hinkes to scare thee with sorrowes, and saies as Dalila, The Philistims bee upon the Sampson, there is an armie against thee; answer, I feare not, my soule knew that be^ore, and I have by prayer made my provision against them. The burden seemes ^ight, that hath beene borne before.
But then they say, suppose the threatned evill comes not, then in vaine thou hast disquieted thy selfe with a needlesse feare. Nay, but I have bettered my soule by a ^autionate repentance. Niniveh was menaced, Yet fortie dayes and it shall be destroyed. They quaked, and repented in sackcloth and ashes, turning from their wickednesse; Niniveh stood still. Did they lose any thing by their sorrow, fasting, humiliation? No, their conversion saved them from subversion: had they not sorrowed, they had ^eene destroyed indeed. No man is the worse for his repentant griefe: if the evill doe come, it is a labour well spent: if the evell doe not come, it is a labour well lost. ^f the body be not the worse, yet the soule is the better.
But would it not have doubled Sauls sorrow, if he had knowne that hee was to fall into the mountaines of Gilboah, and that his enemie should succeed him? Could ^iron the French martiall have beene so merry at the banket, had he knowne his instant arrest for treason? would Iulius Caesar have gone to the Senate, knowing his ruine there? These bee poore exceptions against the forwarning of future evills: for, as knowing them contingent, they would have sought to prevent: so knowing them certaine, they would have sought to repent. But saith Boskier, this made CHRIST himselfe Agelastum, kept him from laughter; the prescience of his dire future passion: he wept for other causes, but for this especially: he often spake of it, because it ran in his mind: and in the garden, he swet bloud to thinke of it. Grant this in part to be true: he told it to his Apostles, not for his owne feare, but to shew how much he loved them, that would suffer this for them: to strengthen their faith in him, and love to him; neither wept he so much for his owne sorrowes, as for our sins. We were more unkind and cruell to him than the thornes and nailes. That which drew bloud from his side, drew teares from his eyes: we were so guil^ie, that he could not be merry. Therefore he foretold his Disciples,Ioh. 6.10. that they should ^e sorrowfull, weepe and lament. As a learned Physitian lookes not only to the disease of his patient that afflicts him for the present, but often administers physicke to prevent a future maladie. Therefore he called together his Disciples, as Iacob did his sons; and told them what evills they should suffer for his names sake.
This then be the summe; Iudgements forewarned comes more easily on the prepared heart. Minus Iacula feriunt quae praevidentur, Greg. The wise mariner in a calme makes all his tacklings sure and strong against a storme. The fen-man mends his bankes in summer, lest his ground be drowned in winter. Howsoever these predictions may afflict the body, they benefite the soule, Therefore if the physitian perceive evident reasons of approching death in his patient, he is bound not to flatter him with hope of life: Ne dum quaerat quod suum est, perdat quod Christi est: lest seeking his owne gaine, hee lose CHRISTS purchase. But the conceit will exasperate his disease, and the dejection of mind hinders the recoverie of body. Yield it, yet is this no reason of concealement, unlesse the body were more worth than the ^oule, a life mortall than a life immortall, the company of sinners on earth, than the communion of Saints in heaven. I have seene some such physicians, (for not seldome the physitian and Divine meete in the sick chamber) that when we have beene ^t prayers to the God of life, have neither bowed their knee, nor uncovered their head: as if the name of God were but a mockerie, and they could cure a man without him. But let not my body fall into his hands, that hath no care of his owne
 soule: he that loves not God, will never love me. Alas, how should that potio^ worke health where the chiefe ingredient, the grace of God is left out? Or, how should the blessing of God be found, when the God of blessing is not regarded?
Indeed no man is worthy to know the time of his owne dissolution: God (...) ignota vestigia,Psal. 77.19. secret steps. Thy foot-steps are not knowne. Though wee dare (...) pray: Lord, let me know the number of my dayes, that I may be certified how long I (...) to live: yet still we pray, Deliver us from evill; especially from that evill; From suddaine death good Lord deliver us. Some naturallists have affirmed that sudden dissolution is the best: and seemed to desire, (if at least they did desire in heart) so to (...) Vbi non est spes futuri, nec dolor praeteriti, sola manet cura praesentis. They looked (...) backward to their sinnes past, nor forward further than death: of that they saw a necessity, therefore wished a facilitie. Now the least sense is of the shortest p^^^^ though it be violent, it is not permanent. There is no protraction of sorrows, nor extention of paines in suddaine dispatching: death doth not like a tyrant keep^ them long a dying,Esa. 38.12. racking out life to farther dayes, and cutting off with pi^ing ^^^nesse; but quickly begins and makes an end. But let it rot in the dust with them, (...) that suddennesse be suddenly forgotten.
There is a generation of men amongst us, Christians, yea the most ardent and furious Christians, that blame our Liturgie for that prayer; From sudden death Lord deliver us. These men are so sure of heaven, that let God take them where he will and when hee will, they are for him. Presumptuous men! doe they sinne, and would they in that sinne be taken away? There is a time when the dearest Saints (...) God had rather live then die.Psal. 30.9. What profit is there in my blood, when I goe down to the pit? he was sicke, but at that time had no heart to die. Elisha, when hee (...) in Spirit, that the King had sent a messenger to kill him, bade them2 King. 6.32 shut the (...) and hold him fast. Sicke Hezekiah wept and prayed to live. Ionah cryes from the dismall prison not to die yet, but to bee forborne to a longer day. These Sai^^ would not die then: they found some sinnes yet burdening their consciences, (...) scower off which they wished the conveniencie of farther time.Iob. 10 20. Let mee alone, that I may take comfort a little, before I goe whence I shall not returne. It was a violent and swift departure which David and Iob deprecated: but alas, what doe you compare David and Iob to these men; meere dwarfes to these gyants? They have cast up their accounts as well as Paul, and are every moment prepared; their reckoning is ever ready in their pockets: they know themselves chosen, the spirit told them so, and then the elect cannot perish.Rom. 8.38. It is true indeed, that not death amongst the re^^, death of what kind soever, lingring or suddaine, can separate true beleevers from Christ: yet pardon me, if I be charitably jelous of such presumers of sanctification. Do they never lie to their neighbour, never lust after forbidden flesh, never rankle anothers credit with malitious report, never pamper the grome with feeding, never covet peny of another mans, are they never puffed up with a selfe-opinion? Suppose God strike thy proud heart in this act of sinne, when thou hast not so much leas^^^ or sense as to say, Lord have mercie on me; goes not thy soule then to the Iudgement seat without a prepared answere? We leave thy censure and sentence to him that knowes thy heart: but though charitie hopes a mercie inter pontem et fontem; ^ter actum culpae, et ictum paenae: yet be not angry with me for praying; God keepe my soule from such a venture. There proceed from heaven lightnings, from ea^^ dampes, from the body palsies and apoplexies, from men those murderous engines, pistols and poinards: these make sudden riddance, and allow not the leasure and liberties of repentance.
Thinke ye secure wretches, that have promised your owne soules to repent when you are sicke: alas, the least of a thousand things can kill you, and give you (...) leasure to be sicke. Loe now if there be any hope, it is the extraordinary mercie of God in Iesus Christ. For us, vita est in indicium, mors est in judicium. We have charitie, God hath mercie.

To conclude, Deprecamur talem mortem, non damnamus taliter mortuum: we ^ondemne not him that so dies, yet we pray against such a death. We say of death, ^s David of Absalom;2 Sam. 15.14. make speed to depart, lest he overtake us suddenly. Lord, ne^er let the sin of our soules, and the end of our lives, come so neere together. Give ^s grace to breake off our sins by repentance, before thou breake off our lives by ^eath let us have time to repent, grace to our time, thy mercie to both, and the me^its of our Saviour CHRIST to all: and then come Lord IESUS, come quickly. Oh it is swift when the prayers of our hearts shall usher the journey of our soules: ^hen our faith hath unlocked the gates of heaven, ready for our spirits to enter: when by our comfortable declarements, we have testified our assurance of blessed^esse; left the perfume of a good conscience to sweeten our death-beds; and our ^ertues and graces, like fragrant flowers to sticke round about our hearse. When af^er a consolating valediction to our mourning friends, we have commended our spi^ts into the hands of IESUS CHRIST. Let the confidence of others be as bold ^s it pleaseth; let my soule pray, and let them that love their soules joyne with me, ^nd the God of mercie heare us all; From suddaine death good Lord deliver us, Amen.
6 Their judgement, and their damnation.] Observe, the proportion and aptation ^f their punishment to their sin. It holds in diverse analogies. 1. They denyed the Lord ^hat bought them, therefore the same Lord shall judge them. It is fit, ut quem fece^nt suum carnificem, inveniant suum judicem. They made the profession of Christ colour for their bloudinesse, and under the counterfeit seale of his name committed ^utrages: now therefore the same injured King shall sit upon them and condemne ^hem. 2. They acted all their villanie in secret, therefore now it shall be laid open. ^. The way of truth hath beene blasphemed by them; therefore now it is fit that it be ^lorified on them. 4. Before they sold men in covetousnesse: therefore now they ^all bee sold themselves in justice. GODS debts must bee payed: and they that ^ade merchandise of others are fit to bee made merchandises themselves. 5. Be^re they brought in the Heresie of damnation: therefore now they shall sustaine the ^enaltie of damnation. 6. Before they did pull on themselves destruction volunta^^ly: therefore now must father the child of their owne begetting, and suffer destru^ion necessarily. 7. Their sinne did hasten punishment, and make it swift: there^ore fit it should no longer tarry; it lingers not. You see with what a pro^er analogie, their sinning meetes with their suffering: and makes way for ^is note.
God alwayes punisheth De condigno, sometimes De congruo. For the former, (...) the Schoole truely saies, that God rewardeth his elect Supra meritum, above their ^eserts: so it teacheth, that he punisheth the reprobate citra condignum, short of their ^e-merits. But as he will requite any thing in mercie, that willMatth. 10.42. recompence a cup ^f cold water: so he will deny any thing in justice, that willLuk. 16.24. deny a cup of cold wa^r. CHRISTS tribunall is said to be aRev. 20.11. white throne; milke white, without any ^rop of injustice to alter the colour, or staine the seate. Morall men have com^ended Iustice: the Grecians placed her betweene Leo and Libra; courage and in^fferencie. The Egyptians in their hieroglyphickes had the figure of a man with^ut hands, winking with his eyes. And our embleme is as good as the rest; as ^e best: the picture of a man holding a balance in one hand, and a sword in the o^er. By the balance intending judgement, and by the sword due execution. The ^lance puts no difference betweene gold and lead, but gives them equall or unequall ^oise: not attributing more to the gold for the excellencie of the metall; nor lesse (...) the lead for the drossy basenesse: but with an even hand waighes the poore mans ^se with the rich. It is said of the throne of Davids house, that it was placed in the ^te of the Citie towards the Sunne rising. In the gate, that all might have accesse (...) it, poore and rich: for all sorts had egresse and regresse through the gate. To^ards the sun rising; to signifie that their judgements should be as cleare from corruptions,
 and errors, as the Sun in his glorious brightnesse. Now hee that calls upon magistrates to doe iustice, shall he not do it himselfe?Gen. 18.25. Shall not the Iudge of all the world doe right? yes certainly; as he will crowne the faithfull with eternall glory above their deserts, so he will lode the wicked with eternall torments according to their desertsPsal. 58.11. So that a man shall say, verily there is a reward for the righteous, verily he is a God that iudgeth in the earth.
For the other, as he will punish all sinne in some kind, so he will punish so^^ sinne in the owne kind. For it is just with him to recompence tribulation to them the trouble you, 2. Thes. 1.6. With the froward he will shew himselfe froward. Psal. 18.26.Gen. 9.6. Who so sheddeth mans blood, by man shall his blood be shed. But somtimes it is not so, but alwayes it should be so, and certainly the magistrate that omits it, shall find his case like Ahabs;1 King. 20.32. Thy life shall goe for his life. Mat. 26.52. They that take the sword, shall perish with the sword: they that Take it, before it be given them by lawfull authority. His punishment is qualified to his sin, that is made Gladio pe^^^, who did Gladio perimere.Prov. 21.13. He that stoppeth his eares at the crie of the poore, (...) crie himselfe and not be heard. Qui non tribuit petenti, petet a non tribuente.Iam. 2.23. Iudgment without mercie shall be to him that shewes no mercie. Frustra quaerit e^^^^ se, quod noluit habere intrase. In vaine he seekes mercie out of himselfe, that had nowe within himselfe, Esa. 33.1. Woe to thee that spoilest, for thou shalt bee spoiled. It is just that they who ruine others, should bee ruined themselves, Gal. 5.15. If yee but and devoure one another, take heed yee be not consumed one of another. If the greater serpent devoures the lesse, there is a dragon to devoure him. The fire of the Sodomites lusts flamed up to heaven, therefore heavens fire of wrath flamed downe upon them, Levit. 10.2. Nadab and Abihu offered strange fire, and therefore they suffered strange fire. Hos. 4.12. They have gone a whoring from their God, therefore their Daughters shall commit whoredome, and their spouses adulterie. Spirituall fornication shall be punished with corporall pollution. If we consider that shop of pride, Esa. 3. we shall find every ornament made an abhorment, ver. 24. In ste^^ of sweet smell, there shall be a stinke: for the girdle, a rent: for well set haire, baldnesse. Observe how the particular plagues are proportioned to the nature of the particular sins, Prov. 23.29. They loved the rednes of wine, they shall feele the rednesse of eyes. Gen. 20.18. Doe they detaine Abrahams Wife? none of their wives shall be pregnant. This Iob acknowledged to be just: If mine heart have beene deceived by a woman, then let my Wife grind unto another, Wis. 11.15. Beasts they worshiped, and by beasts they shall be devoured. That they might know wherewithall a man sinneth, by the s^me he shall also be punished, Exod. 19.24. Let not the people breake thorow unto the Lord, lest the Lord breake forth upon them. Ionas crost to the sea, therefore he was lost i^ the sea. He would needs to the water, he shall have water enough, Iudg. 8.16. Their flesh was torne with briers and thornes, that were bryers and thornes to teare others. Rev. 16.6. They have shed the blood of thy Saints, and thou hast given them bloud (...) drinke. as Tomyris gave Cyrus: to give one blood, is to put him to death, Ezek. 1^. I will cause thee to be slaine, as men are slaine in the burning rage of wrath and jelousie, ver. 39. Thou didst lay open thy nakednesse in sin, I will therefore lay open thy nakednesse in shame. To allow the sins of others, is to bee come guilty of (...) same sins: as CHRIST condemned the living Iewes for killing of Zachary, wh^^ their ancestors slew many ages before: because they approved their courses, and therefore justly inherited their fathers sins and judgements, Mat. 23.
I might be endlesse in the prosecution of this doctrine.Ier. 7.32. They shall bury i^ P^^phet, till there be no more place. In Tophet they had committed that monstrous th^ nation, burning their children in the fire to Moloch: in Tophet they shall find destruction. The Iewes report that in Tophet there was a deepe pit or ditch, called Os Inferni, never filled: in the pit that Caldeans threw their slaine bodies, Mat. 1^.25. The Lord commanded him to be sold, wife and children and all that he had. Perhaps he sinned in his wife and children, therefore was punished in his wife and children.
 He might turne his wife into an Idol, and set her in the place of God: hee might be indulgent to the vices of his children: therfore,Psal. 109.9 Let his children be fatherlesse, and his wife a widdow. How usuall is it for men to obey the will of their wives before the will of God! How just is it with the Lord to suffer the wife so luxuriously allowed, to dote on adulterous mixtures: and for anothers sak to break her faith with her husband who for her sake had broke his faith with God! Why doth such a man find fault? he doth by his servile affordments what he can to make his wife a harlot, and then complaines that she is so. Immoderate dyet, inordinate will, immodest apparell, himselfe proudly vouchsafes her: what are these but mid-wives to bring forth that shame, he is loth to heare of? what more usuall than to buy places in reversions, expectant on the lives of three, foure, sixe, to be served and expired, before theirs beare date? Therefore what more just, than to cut them short, and extend the decaying termes of the other?Psal. 109. Let his dayes be few, and another take his office. They have admitted invasions upon their owne honestie, secretly to wish that the dayes of others might be few, that they might take their office. Therefore shall their owne dayes be few, and another take their office. The Proverbe fits them; hee that waites for dead mens shooes, shall goe bare-foote. The Rivers that Pharaoh bloudied with the slaine infants, are turned into blood: that hee might read the colour of his sinne in the sanguine waters. Thus murderous men, so prodigall in slucing out bloud, have beene affronted and affrighted with bloudy visions. They thinke their eyes see nothing but bloud, their eares heare nothing but the sound of bloud, all their meate tasts of bloud, their drinke hath a bloudy colour: the very wayes they travell are sanguine, they dreame of nothing but bloud, till their heads, like Nero's, be soaked in bloud: Thou hast thirsted for bloud, of bloud take thy fill. This sufferance could not even David scape: his house was haunted with the sword. Hee sinned in a proud numbring of his people, therefore was punished in shortning the number of his people.
Herodias daughter, that like a dancing whirlegig footed away the head of Iohn Baptist, was her selfe cut shorter by the head with yee. Cesar had undone three and twenty countreyes, he dyed of three and twenty wounds. Cresus that loved gold insatiately, had of gold his throate full. Aurum sitisti, aurum bibe. Many penurious fathers are so scraping for their children, that they ravish the poore children of God:N^h. 2 13. but the hand of the LORD shall be against their young Lions. They joyn house to house, and field to field:Psal. 109.10. but their children shall be vagabonds, and beg; seeking their bread out of their desolate places. How many a covetous moale is now digging a house in the earth for his posterity, and never dreames of this sequele? That God should make those children beggars, for whose sake the fathers have made so many beggars! This is a quittance which the Sire will not beleev, but as sure as God is just the son shall feele. Now if he had but leave to come out of hell for an houre, and see this, how should he curse his follie? sure if possible, it would double the paine of his infernall torture. Bee moderate then ye that so insatiately devoure, as if you had an infinite capacitie: you overlode your stomachs, it is fit they should be disburdened in shamefull spewing. How quickly doth a worldly minded man grow a defrauder, from a defrauder to an Vsurer, from an Vsurer to an oppressor, from an oppressor to an extortioner: if his eyes doe but tell his heart of a bootie, his heart will charge his hand, and he must have it, Mic. 2.2. They doe but aspicere, concupiscere, and arripere: see it, like it, and take it. Observe their due payment. Psal. 109.11. Let the extortioner take all he hath: they got all by extortion, they shall ^ose all by extortion. They spoiled their neighbours, strangers shall spoile them. How often hath the poore widdow and orphan cryed, wept, groned to them for ^ercie, and found none! They have taught God how to deale with themselves: Let there be none to extend mercie to them.Psal. 109.12. They have advanced houses for a memoriall, and dedicated lands to their owne names: Psal. 49.11. All to get them a name, and even in this they shall be crossed. Psal. 109.13. In the next generation their name
 shall bee quite put out.
Our neighbours of Rome presume that they have the keys of heaven and hell some they bring downe from heaven to hell, as they did that blessed Queene, Eliz^beth: others they lift up from hell to heaven, canonizing bloudy Traitours: they censure as they will, not as God will. But their punishment is fitted by CHRIST, Mat. 7.2. With what judgement ye judge, yee shall be judged. When they shall find that they have mistaken the keyes, and learne what it is to condemne, by being condemned. Because they have put away sacred marriage, therefore they are given upon uncleane cloistures, stinking brothels, and preternaturall stewes.
Not to be favourable to our selves at home; what is the reason that this land (...) so defiled with bloud; and that (not feeling the sword of an enemie) a man complainesZ^ch. 13.6. I am wounded in the house of my friends? Nor is this alone in those un^^^^ly trialls of man-hood in the fields; but even in the streetes, in the houses: no place is safe, but a mistaken word is requited with a stabbe or some mortall blow. And when this comes to be censured, it is found chance-medley, at worst man-slaughter and that perhaps Se defendendo. Whereupon these homicides are so fleshed with bloud, that they make no more to kill a man, than a flie. Oh they may mend, and become good Christians, good subjects: but that sin is rarely repented off. If he had beene cut off for the first murder, the second man had beene alive. Why doe we presume to coozen God by the warrant of Law, to purloine the maintenance of the Minister, and to put our selves in Gods place! What is this, but to point God the way to plague us, and to send upon us a famine of preaching, who have brought a famine upon the preachers? Is it not just with God to take away the Lampe from that nation, which hath taken away the holy oile that should maintaine it? And Lord, that I might herein be a false Prophet! I feare that England shall want the Gospell, when the Barbarians receive it: because England had the Gospell, and would not give a penny to keepe it. We hope this nation shall live to see the fall of Rome and Antichrist, so we may, if our sins, and among the rest unthankfull sacriledge, doe not first give Rome a triumph over us. Consider how immediately upon this charge of rendring the Teacher his portion, the Holy Ghost inferres;Gal 6.7. (...) not deceived, God is not mocked: for whatsoever a man sowes, the same shall he also reape. You may deceive your selves, you shall neuer mocke God: you shall drinke as you have brewed. Thus when we see surfets doe we not point at gluttonie precedent? when a body is drowned with a dropsy, doe we not say, there hath gone an in un^^tion of drinke before? When that Neapolitane evill hath wasted the marrow, and rotted the flesh; we know this fire was f^tched from the hearth of whoredome. The matter of sinne is written with capitall letters in the punishment. God is just, he hath wayes enough to punish us, we have no way to escape him. If he doth not punish the adulterer with rottennesse in his bones, yet he can adde fire to fire; to the flame of lust, the flame of hell. If the Vsurer escape bonds here: yet he that bound others above, may be bound himselfe below. The litigious may get the better, untill God comes to enter his action against him. There is no evasion but seasonable repentance: let us punish our selves, that God be not put to doe it. Let us correct drunkennesse by abstinence, pride by humility, covetousnesse by charity, crueltie by mercie, uncleannesse by chastitie, anger by patience, usury by restitution. This is to take a congraous and proportionate vengeance on our selves, that God may spare us in the day of reckoning.
7 Damnation is principally taken for the censure or sentence condemning: as the sentence followes the triall, and the execution the sentence: here it intends the extration of the Iudgement. But if damnation be meant for the execution, how doth it preceede the sentence? Seeing it seemes very unjust to execute a man before his ju^^gement; after that old scandall of the Stanneries Law; that hanged a man in the forenoone, and sate in judgement on him in the afternoone. The day of judgement is the second appearing of Christ: now for evill men to receive their damnation before
 hand, were to antedate the sentence, and to execute persons unjudged. It is easi^y answered; Every unbeleever must passe through two Iudgement dayes: a particu^ar, when his guilty soule leaves his unfortunate body: a generall, when both body and soule having beene co-instruments of sinne, shall be made copartners in punishment. Hence the soule, as it hath beene the principall in offending, being that part of man wherein God hath placed naturall reason and knowledge of his will, shall be the first in suffering. Leaving the body a dead and insensible piece of earth, while her selfe growes under the burden of unsupportable torments alone, till the body comes ^o suffer with it.
If it bee objected; what need any second Iudgement, seeing the world stands wholly either of beleevers or unbeleevers? And the beleever.Ioh. 5.24. Shall not come into ^ondemnation, but is already passed from death unto life. And the unbeleever is already condemned, Why then any further Iudgement? Yes, for though the beleever shall not come into the judgement of condemnation, yet he must also passe the judgement of absolution: and as he is made just by Christ, so must he before all the world be pronounced. Vt justitia, qua justificatur coram Deo, ipsa justificetur coram mundo. The first justifies the person, the second justifies Gods righteousnesse. So the unbeleever is condemned already in effect three wayes. 2. Propositor Dei; God did foresee and fore^ appoint his damnation, as it is the punishment of sin, and execution of his Iustice. 2. Verbo Dei, by the word of God, which sets downe his damnation, finding him in the number of those to whom it is due, and out of Christ by whom alone he might escape it. 3. Testimonio conscientiae, by the verdict of his owne conscience; which doth so judge him here, as God will judge him heareafter: therefore it is called Vicede^us, a deputie God. But if their bee a precedent damnation upon the reprobates, why is it here said, Their damnation hastens? That cannot be called closely propinquant, nearely future, which is actually present, yea which hath beene before. If they were damned in the purpose of God for their sinne, and are damned in the word of God judging sinne, how are they said to be hereafter damned, or, Their damnation lingers not? I answer; for their former damnation in the decree of God, they know ^it not: for their present damnation in the word of God, they mind it not: and for the damnation of their owne conscience, they feele it not. Therefore the execution of this shall fall upon them, and then they shall know it, mind it, feele it.
Thus death shall execute his office to kill their bodies, and hell his office to receive their soules, and the Devill his office to infflict torments; when God hath pronounced on them the particular sentence of his Iustice. This damnation then is that fearfull punishment of sin imposed on reprobates: made up of an extremity, universality, and eternity of torments. So extreme that they refuse addition, so universall that no part hath exemption, so everlasting that they never admit conclusion. Their extremitiy is undefin'd, their universality unconfined, their eternity without hope of end.
But how doth this stand with the Iustice of God, for finite transgression to give infinite destruction? Sins are the actions of time, done in a temporalitie, limited in a certaine space. Now if the punishment be proportionate to the sin, how can the one bee temporall, the other eternall: sin transient, plague permament? I answer, this equitie and equality is observable in our civill punitions: the theefe dispatcheth a robberie in halfe an houre; hee lyes many dayes in irons for this, and at last answeres it with his necke. Adulterie is soone perpetrated, a long and infamous shame depends upon it. Treason may be a villanie of no length; yet the delinquent finds mercie if he but lie in prison for it all his life, and lose his possessions for ever. Hic non quaer^^da temporis aequalitas, sed expendenda sceleris gravitas. A man quickly gives himselfe a wound, but the Surgion cannot so quickly heale him. David was not long in killing Vriah with the sword, yet did the sword never depart from his house. A man commits murder but once, and it was soone done; yet hee is condemned to the perpetuall galleys. There was one sicke 38 yeares, Ioh. 5.14. and Christ sayes, this was because of his sin. Consider some reasons why their punishment
 is not lesse than damnation eternall.
Reasons why the punishments of reprobates are infinite.1 Because their sinnes are infinite in number. David propounds a Quoties, who can find a Toties for it? Psal. 19.12. Who can tell how oft he offendeth? No man, The haires of a mans head may bee told: the starres appeare in multitudes, yet some have undertaken to reckon them: but no Arithemticke can number our sinne. Before we can recount a thousand, we shall commit ten thousand more; and fo^^ther multiplie by Addition, than divide by Subtraction: there is no possibilitie of moderation. Like Hydra's head, while we are cutting off twentie by repentance, we find a hundred more growne up. It is just then that infinite sorrowes should follow infinite sins.
2. Because they are committed against an infinite Majestie. He that clippeth the Kings coine, or, defaceth the Kings armes; or, counterfeits the broad. Seale of England, or the privy. Seale, is adjudged to die as a Traitor: because this fact offences disgrace against the person of the King: much more doth he deserve the second death, that violates the Law of the King of Kings: seeing that breach doth not only tend to the defacing of his owne Image in us; but reflects upon the person of God himselfe, who in every sinne is contemned and dishonoured.1 Sam. 2.25. If one man sin against another, the Iudge shall judge him: but if a man sinne against the Lord, who shall (...) for him? compare Protafis with Apodosis, sequel with sequele, the former with the latter, by the rules of opposition. What doth the former affirme? no more but a civill meditation for a temporall satisfaction. What doth the latter deny? a religious or divine intercession for eternall satisfaction. Sins receive their nature from their objects in a formall consideration: to be plaine with all capacities, sinnes take their nature from their aime. When the will from within shall give the King o^ Arams charge;1 King. 22. Fight neither against small nor great, saving onely against the King of Israel: this must needs be immediate treason. According to worth, Injur^^ patientis auget culpam facientis, Salvian. That sinne is fowlest, that strikes at the fairest. Therefore the sin directed against an infinite Majestie, deserves infinite penaltie. Aske a Recusant what that servant merits, which like an Onesimus, is a fugitive from his master. What will he say, but the whipping post, or, house of correction? But what deserves he that changeth his God, his religion? yet there and be no whipping post for such a renegade, no correction-house for him; whatsoever he condignely suffers, is held persecution. Aske the sacrilegious what shall be done, to him that steales; hang him, he cries. But what shall be done to him that robbes his God? here he can see no felonie: he shall feele it. Aske a man abused in his name whether he will send his reviler: he presently curseth him, as if he meant him to hell, but howsoever he will send him to the consistorie. But whether shall he goe, that dishonours the name of God? Doth that beare no action? no, cursing and swearing inferrs no defamation. Yes, hee is (...),Tit. 3.11. damned of his owne selfe. If they could satisfie an infinite Iustice simul and semel, at once together; their plague, though it admits of no latitude or waight, being in universall extremitie; yet if should have an end. But what to the uncapable subject is defective in place, must be made up in durance. He shall not come forth,Matth. 5.26. till he hath paid the uttermost for thing. He might pay this at once if he had it: but because non habet unde, he hath i^ not; he must be paying it successive sine fine, and answer it with his owne imprisonment for ever.
3 Because they frustrate a price of redemption that is infinite. Did the Sonne of God accept their nature, shed his precious blood, and pay that infinite de^^ (...) Gods Iustice for all beleevers; and will they make voide to themselves that would of unspeakeable goodnesse? He is worthy of eternall damnation, that despiseth the redemption of him that is eternall. It is just with Christ to forsake them for ever that forsake him for ever.Hebr. 10.26. There remaines no more sacrifice for them: therefore (...) Christ die againe, they must lie in hell, that is for ever. They that fall from everlasting grace, justly meete with everlasting wrath: from salvation eternall, to destruction
 eternall. Every drop of Christs blood doth save the beleeving soule for ever: if that inestimable treasure be trode under foot, the soule is justly lost for ever. Who pitties that mans death; who having the medicine by him which can helpe him, dies and will not take it? Serjeants are out to arrest thee, the Law hath condemned thee; we may say of thee as of a sentenced malefactor, mortuus in lege; thou art dead in Law: speed then to Christ, if thou be taken before thou get to thy Suretie, thou wilt be laid up for ever.
4 Because they are unthankfull for blessings and graces infinite. God give them life while they can live: if they be ingrate, he will give them death while they can die. His mercie strove the utmost to make them blessed, his Iustice shall strive the utmost to make them cursed. If any deliverance, preferment, or content come to an unthankfull person; let him know that it is but his impropriation; God will make him pay for it. Contribution of blessings requires retribution of thankes, or will bring distribution of plagues. We have many Adeodates, but returne few Deodates. God gives freely and continually, so let us praise him: voce and corde, with the voice and the heart: not the voice alone, for then the heart is tied; not the heart alone, for then weare tongue-tied. Continually; for if thou canst find one houre wherein he doth not give thee something; take that houre to returne him nothing. Yet is there thankes enough owing for the former: but there is no new houre which is not witnesse of new benefites.Lam. 3.23. Thy mercies are new every morning. CHRIST hath bought us both in body and soule; we must glorifie him in both, or he will destroy us in both. He will be glorified either in our voluntary obedience, or necessary vengeance. Thus how easy is it for a reprobate to bring upon himselfe damnation. The more God lodes him with benefites, the more he lodes himselfe with accounts. Bee thankfull, this is the way to ease thy reckoning: flie to CHRIST, this is the way to get it quite taken off. As Alcibiades told the steward, when he complained of his trouble about making his accounts; that his care were better bestowed, Quod non reddat, quam quod reddat, how to make no account at all, than how to make his accounts even. If our faith have gotten CHRIST to account for us, wee shall make no reckoning at all. Every benefite forgotten in present gratitude, must be remembred in future servitude. Thus he that receives infinite favours, and remaines unthankfull, deserves infinite paines.
5 Because they have omitted infinite duties: the houres that are not spent in obedience against sin, are spent in sin against obedience. Wicked men thinke they commit but a single sin, when indeed they alwayes double it. For in faciendo quod non debent, non faciunt quod debent: While they doe what they should not, they leave undone what they should, and so bind two sins together. The Sabbath-ranger that is gone about the businesse of the pot, thinkes he only offends in his excesse, forgets his not serving God at the Church. It is one sin to be absent from the house of God, though, he did not admit the other, to be present in the house of sin. Doth the oppressor barely transgresse in wringing the poore? yea, at that very time he should have relieved the poore. Thinke not thy houres wast papers, to fill them up with nothing but blankes: as if God would take this for a good reckoning, When the booke of thy conscience comes to be opened, all those blankes are filled up with Indictments: and thou shalt find it a nequam, which thou thoughtst a nequicquam. No greatnesse of bloud can priviledge idlenesse, no more than much money can justifie Vsurie. When God calls thee to account, Quare te non praebuisti solertem? Why wast thou not industrious? It will be no good answer; Quia tu me fecisti divitem; because thou hast made me rich. Now that these omissions deserve eternall destruction, it is manifest, because we are bound to the duties. Therefore in the forme of CHRISTS judiciall proceeding, the wicked are condemned for sins of omission, perpretrations not being spoken of, as if there were no question of their guiltinesse: to shew that their is damnation enough wrapped up in those very omissions. Neither shall they be only punished with the privation of all joyes and peace, and no
 further for then they were meere indifferences. But with the position of torments, to declare that good workes were imposed; not voluntary, but necessary. Now if these be as innumerable as our waking minutes; how infinite must be the unrepentants destruction for them!
6 Because sin is infinite in their desires, and the desire of sinning God judgeth sin it selfe. As the desire of grace is grace, and the desire of repentance is one degree of repentance: so the concupiscence of iniquity is the iniquitie.Matth. 5.24. He that l^sts after a woman, hath already committed adulterie with her in his heart. Optans, oper^^: desiderator, scortator. Now what is more insatiate than the desires of the wicked? They inlarge themselves beyond all bounds, and are scarce limited with the world. How unsatisfied is the adulterers desire! he goes from woman to woman, as the sicke man from fountaine to fountaine, and none can quench his thirst. For woman is not the bounds of lust, but womankind. Loves number is no number, but one: he that erres from that, is incessant in concupiscence; and if it were possible, would embrace all the beauties he sees, in his luxuriant armes. Vice hath no meane, measure nor cessation; till it hath no being. One wife is the desire of love, but lust would have infinite. And though it be straitned to enjoy but one at once: ye^ it hath an infinite desire to many; neither doth all the varietie of the earth change it: whensoever his pleasure is served, hee is the same man he was before, and begins againe to desire a fresh. For lust is still a beginning, and would more common be than any one, could it, as other sins, be done alone. But age ceaseth it, therefore not infinite: thenEccl. 22.7. Desire faileth? yet many in age though they cannot desire, yet desire to desire. Now an infinite fire of lust, must have an infinite fire of hell. What limits hath the ambitious desire? what degrees of honour, though Phaeton like to for in the chariot of the Sun, would content him? Let him reduce all the kingdomes of the world to one monarchie, and possesse as much as ever the divell promised Christ: yet Aestuat infaelix angusto limite mundi, he wants elbow-roome. He calls for more worlds, or, is angry that God made this no bigger: yea erects his statute, and would be worshipped as the Lord himselfe. He thought the whole earth too little for him, and why should God thinke the whole hell too much for him? The Angell that would have all the glory in heaven, is justly damned to all the paines i^ hell. If thou be infinite in thy sinning, why may not God be infinite in thy punishing.
What confines have ever hedged in covetousnesse; who ever heard it say. Sa^^^ Domine, O Lord I have enough; A handfull of corne cast into the bushell makes it the fuller: put water into the sea, it hath by so much the more.Eccl. 5.10. But hee that love^ silver, shall not be satisfied with silver. One desire may be satisfied, but another comes. Crescit amor nummi quantum ipsa pecunia crescit. Naturall desires are finite: as the thirst is satisfied with drinke, the hungry appetite with meate. But unnaturall desires are infinite: as it is with the body in burning feavers; Quo plus sint pota, Pl^^ sitiuntur aquae: the more they drinke, the more they thirst. Now as these proceed not from naturall causes, but from diseases: so exorbitant affections arise not De s^^^ mente, sed de morbo animae: not from the temper but from the distemper of the soule. Grace can never fill the purse, nor wealth fill the heart. Here is an infinite sin, why should it not have an infinite punishment? Hence covetousnesse is compared to hell it selfe, for the neere affinitie betweene them: both alike promise at once to be satisfied.Prov. 27.20. Hell and destruction are never full, so the eyes of man are never satisfied. As the covetous enlarge their mouthes to swallow the earth, so Hell hath enlarged her selfe, and opened her mouth to swallow them, Esa. 5.14. Let not our oppressors now fla^^^^ themselves, that hell is full, and there is no roome for them: for the Lord hath made itEsa. 30.33. Large, of immense capacitie. It is Lacus magnus, Revel. 19. a great la^^ able to receive all that are cast into it. If it were not so spacious, and there seemed to want roome for oppressors: yet God would take out theeves and harlots, and drunkards, I had almost said lyars, and swearers, to put in oppressors; they must
 have roome.Esa. 14.9. Hell from beneath is moved for them to meete them at their comming. Hell it selfe will come to meete them in state, as glad to give them entertainement. Now if the usurer can keepe himselfe out of the number of oppressors, he may hap to scape. But are not their desires unlimited; thatEsa. 5.8. joyne field to field, till there be no place; They would leave no roome for others, but engrosse al the earth to themselves: therfore though there should want roome for others, they shall have all hell to themselves If sin have an infinite desire to offend God, God will have an infinite hand to punish it.
7 Gregory addes another reason of this infinite punishment. He that dies without repentance, is pr^supposed by Iustice, that if hee could have lived for ever, he would have sinned for ever. And it is just; if thou wilt rebelliously sin so long as thou livest; God should punish so long as he liveth. If thou wilt peccare in aeterno tuo, God will punire in aeterno suo. Nothing is more proportionable, than that those who will sin against God so long as they have a being, without repentance; should perish from God so long as he hath a being, without mercie. It is the Lords just Iudgment, ut nunquam mortuus careat supplicio, qui nunquam vivus carere voluit peccato;Gregor. ut nullus detur iniquo terminus ultionis, qui quamdiu valuit, habere noluit terminum criminis. They would have lived for ever, that they might have sinned for ever. Their injustice would put no date to their sins, Gods justice shall put no date to their sufferings. On earth he that will still run in debt while hee lives at libertie, shall at last bee cast into prison to lie while hee lives in miserie. Shall man have this law against his brother, and not God against his creature? yes, there will come a day when all reckonings shall be cast over, when justice must be satisfied to the full; atleast so full as the delinquent can satisfie it, not with ready money, the merits of Christ: then with eternall durance, he must lie by it for ever.Mat. 5.26. Till he hath paid the uttermost farthing; and which is lamentable, hee hath not one farthing towards it. The reprobate cannot do many things he would: the needy drunkard cannot bee an usurer: the base pilferer cannot be a rich commonwealths oppressor; no thankes, they would but they cannot. The power, not the will, is wanting in them to any wickednesse. Now it is just, velle malum et non posse, pati malum et non velle. Hee that doeth what hee will, must suffer what God will.
8 The sinner is often admonished, often threatned: dealt with all mildly, and taken up roundly: now tempted with a crowne, than terrified with a scourge: allured with the promises of heaven, affrighted with the menacres of hell: encouraged to Grace by the Gospell, thundred against for sin by the Law: offered either a cursed. Devill to torment him, or, a blessed Christ to save him. Neither is life and death set before him onely once, but all his dayes.Rom. 10.21. All day long hath God stretched forth his hands unto him. This choice is put to him so long as he lives on earth: therefore if he make election of sin, it must sticke by him so long as hee lives in hell. What could God doe more in mercie, what can he doe lesse in justice? The sinner is shewed an easie way to salvation; Beleeve in Christ the remission of sins, and endevour in thy selfe amendment of life, and thou shalt be saved. The Publican said but only. God be mercifull to me a sinner: Quid hic sudoris, quid laboris? what great labour or paines was this? Chrys. The malefactor on the Crosse declared three things; reprehension of his fellowes sins, confession of his own sins, supplication for mercie; and he was taken up into that glorious paradise. He that will not take so little paine to get so much ease, is worthy of little ease and much paine. If men make God lose all the labour of his mercie, to save them, hee will not lose all the labour of his Iustice to punish them.
9 Though it be true that every sin is finite as considered in respect of the act: as ^it is a transient action it is finite. But it is infinite in respect of the inherence in the subiect. For the foule of man is immortall, and so the sin which sticketh on it, is made immortall with it. For the guilt can no wayes be taken from it, but by imputing it to Christ. And besides the guilt contracted by the fact, there is a blot
 that doth staine the soule: as the skarlet or crimsin die doth the silke or wooll: which can no wayes be undyed or gotten out but by the blood of the Lambe. All the Saints had staines, blemishes, and polluted coulours; butRev. 7.14. They washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lambe. 1 Cor. 6.11. Such were ye, but you are washed, etc. Now those turpitudes and aspersions so died in graine by sin in the soule, if they bee not purged by him, remaine for ever inseparable: and can no more but taken from it, than the spots from the Leopard, or the skarlet can fade till the cloth bee worne out. So long therefore as this staine abides, the wrath of God abides: and as that tincture can never be gotten off, so the fire of hell can never bee bu^^^ out. There is no more extinguishing the one, than relinquishing the other; both remaine for ever.
10 There is an habite of evill in the wicked. Some thinke that sin in it selfe is nothing, because it hath no formall being or subsistence: but punishment is a thing of being and position. Now shall that which is nothing bee punished with something; Shall a creature be punished for nothing; This were, as David complained of his persecutors, a course of injustice; They hated mee without a cause. But that which is held nothing in a positive existence, will be found something in a priuative sufferance. To cleare this point, we must examine what sin in it selfe is. In its owne proper nature it is, saith St Iohn an Anomie, or want of conformitie to the Law of God: or an Ataxie, and absence of goodnesse and integritie in the thing that subsisteth. In Adam before his fall were three, not indistinguishable, yet inseparable things. 1 His substance. 2 The faculties and powers of his bodie and soule. 3 And the Image of God consisting in straightnesse, conformitie, and rectitude of all these to his will. What then was his sin; not the want of the two former, he had his substance and faculties still: but of the latter, the conformitie of Gods will. In a musicall Instrument there is not onely the substance of it, and the sound, but also the harmonie in the sound. That which is contrary to harmonie, is none of the two former: but onely the last, that is the disorder or discord in musicke, which is the absence or want of harmonie, we may call it Disharmonie. Neither is this a meere absence of goodnesse, but also a presence or habite of evill. As it is received into mans nature, it is onely a privation of good: but as being received it continues, it is a habite of evill. But it may be said, that a meere and single privation can performe no act: as darknesse, which is the absence of light, can stirre nothing: silence cannot move or produce an effect. But concupiscence drawes away the heart from Gods service, and entiseth it to evill: now this is an action, and no action can proceed of a meere privation. To answer this wee must distinguish of originall sin: as it is of its owne nature, so it is no inclination or action, no moving power, but onely a want. But as it is mixed with the subject wherein it is, it enclines, moves, compells to evill.
The like reason holds in actualls. In murder are two things. 1 The moving of the body, and exercise of the weapons: this considered as an action is properly no sin: because every action comes from God, the first cause of all things and action^. 2 The killing of a man, defacing the Image of God: this is the misorder and abe^ration of the action, whereby it is disposed to a wrong use or end; and thus it is (...).
For the summe then, the nature of sin lies not in the action, but in the manner of doing the action. So that it holds, sin is nothing formally subsisting, (for then God should be the author of it, as being creator and ordainer of every thing and action) but a want of that which ought to bee and subsist, partly in the nature of man, and partly in the actions of nature. In peccato nihil positivum; as the Schoole in thi^ truly. But now to the question; If there bee no positive thing in sin, why should there bee a positive thing in punishment; If it bee onely the want of goodnesse; why is it not revenged onely with the want of blessednesse? So here should (...) no place for damnation or the torments of hell. Certainely if it were no mo^^, this was punishment enough to bee deprived of the glory of God, Rom. 3.23. (...)
 have sinned, and come short of the glory of God. But there is more, for upon the absence of goodnesse there necessarily followes the presence of evill. And the sinner doth not only omit what he should doe, but also commit what he should not doe. And as there can be no difference inter non bonum and malum: so at the same instant when a man loseth his goodnesse, hee contracts badnesse. There is in sin foure things: the fault whereby God is offended: the guilt whereby the sinner is bound to punishment: the Punishment it selfe, which is damnation: and the Blot or staine which defiles the person. Culpa, reatus, pana, macula. Now it is not the second and third, but the first and last which make man a sinner. Hereupon it followes, that after a man hath committed a sinne, and the offence is done and gone Quoad actum twenty yeares; yet he does not therefore cease to be a sinner. Now why is he called a sinner in the time present, that did the sinne in a time so farre past? It is the Macula, or staine, as it were the fruite of the fault, that so denominates him. And this is an indisposition of the heart to all good, and an inclination to all evill. He that hath forefeited his goodnesse, is like the dropsy-patient; the more he sins, the more he is apt to sin, and the more desirous of sin. As he that turnes his face from the sun, remaines so till hee turne againe unto it. Once turning from GOD, wee continue naughtie, till we returne to him by repentance. David was not only a sinner in the very act of his adulterie: but when the act was done and past, he remained still an adulterer: because a pronenesse to sinne had got place and strength in his heart, ^ill he rid himselfe of all by unfained repentance. There being therefore in the reprobate an inconformitie to goodnesse, an unchangeable disposition to evill, and an ^ncleansable pollution by evill; there must remaine an interminable damnation for evill.
11 Gods temporall plagues are images of his eternall judgements: but the ^emporall often last all the dayes of their life on earth, why not the other all the dayes of their death in hell? There be some sins that may be called Peccata peccantia, ^inning sins: for they leave a perpetuall venome and malignitie behind them: and continuate a pestilent act without any lesse termination than the world: as oppressi^n, Sacriledge, etc. There be also publike sins, that leave a bad example behind ^hem: and such men doe sin as long as they cause sin. Such was Ieroboams making Is^ael to sin: let himselfe be dead, yet so long as any worshipped his Calves, Ieroboam ^inned. This urged the Rich man to desire one from the dead, to warne his brethren: ^ecause he felt his owne torment encrease, so long as their sin encreased, which they ^ad derived from his cursed precedent. There be sins not so manifest, and expo^ed to the common eyes or sense; not hurting others in their posteritie, nor corrup^ing them by lewd patterne: but doe Intra orbem suum furere; as private lusts: yet ^hese turne the soule into a Blacke-moore: and for mortall endevours to wash them ^u^, we may call it the labour in vaine. The sins that damnifie our brethren, without ^estitution, are perpetuall: and so is the wrath of God upon them.Zach. 5.4. It shall remaine in ^he midst of his house. This argues not only a dominering and raigning nature, which ^^rinkes not into corners, but takes possession in the middle and most honourable ^ome: media dominatur in aula. Like Princes that have chosen the middle places of ^ingdomes for their seats. According to the old similitude: the way to keep a stiffe^ed hide from rising at the sides round about, is to set your feete on the midst. He ^^at stands in the center, may the readilier see the whole circumference that envirous ^im. But it further intimates the stubborne and indomitable qualitie of vengeance; (...) doth remaine; if once admitted, it will not suddainely remove; nor yet remaining ^ill ever bee quiet. Athanasius pronounced of Iulians hot persecution; Nubecula (...), and cito transibit: it is a cloud, and will soone be blowne over. The ground of that ^roicall perswasion and confidence, was the knowledge of Gods temporary casti^^ions and tryalls of his Church. But to the unbeleever,Ioh. 3.36. The wrath of God abi^th on him. Which wordes like Ianus, have a double aspect. One backwards, as (...) it were a wrath of great antiquity: it comes not now, it was before upon him,
 Aug. Another aspect forwards, as some expound it; noting the countenance of wrath it shall not depart from him. Vpon him, as another noteth on the word upon; the intimation of advantage from an upper place: as though vengeance did stand continually preying upon him: as in the Poet, the ravenous bird upon Promethe^^; or, that other upon Titius, in hell.
If any impenitent sinner complaine; Why is my heavinesse continuall, my plague desperate, and cannot be healed: There is matter within himselfe to make him answer.Lam. 3.39. Wherefore doth a living man complaine, a man for the punishment of his sinnes? There is the inquisition of the proper cause. Let us search and trie our selves, and term^ ^gaine to the Lord: there's the application of the proper remedie. No wonder if the curse continue with them, that continue in obstinatenesse: impenitence can have no hope of mercie, Rev. 16.9.11. Though they suffer that extreme burning for sin, yet they repent of their sinne, They blaspheme God for their sores, yet repent not of their misdeeds. It is an argument of their vaine ignorance, to wonder that the terme of their heavy visitation is not yet expired: while their sins are unrepented, their lives unamended. Correct the passion of thy heart, and direct it to contrition for sin, or, expect no cessation of penaltie. As when the sinner is dead, all the while any moisture remaines, the wormes will not forsake his carcase. So while he lives in his sin, the curse will waite close upon the cause: still a sinner, and still a sufferer. Israel could not stand before their enemies, till they had put away the execrable thing. Nor will the plague forsake oppressors and sacrilegious usurpers, till their treasures of wickednesse be returned backe to the right owners. Let the example of little Zaccheus, the greatest example that ever was, for effectuall and substantiall restitution; teach them to breake off their injustice with righteousnesse, which giveth every m^^ his owne: and their iniquitie, with mercie to the poore. Lest they find this sin heavyer than a milstone, when the shallow rivers of temporary punishments, shall (...) into the ocean sea of eternall torments. Where is no restitution, there is no remission: where is no remission of the guilt of sin, no decrease of the power of sin: and where the power of sin is not lessened, there the plague of sin will be augmented. Nec desinet illi paenae sensus, cui non desivit culpae assens^s.
12 Lastly, this equity and equality of damnation to sin, is illustrated and prov^^ by the contrary. As Mark. 10.30. every good deed shall have a hundred-fold of comforts: so every bad deed a hundred fold of torments. Gods mercie is for ever to them that please him: so his wrath is for ever upon them that offend him. The faithfull finde eternall mercie, therefore the unfaithfull shall finde eternall miserie. He that endureth to the end, shall be saved: By what rule or proportion? Because God in his goodnesse doth presuppose, if that man had continued for ever living, he would have continued for ever well doing. Iosiah feared God all the dayes of his life: therefore God hath Crowned his everlasting life in heavent.Rev. 2.10. Be thou faithfull unto (...) death, and I will give thee the Crowne of life. Fidelitie for a short service, hath a ^^^dem of never ending glory. Thus as God in his good mercie doth reward pers^^rance in good with immortall life: so in his just judgement he doth punish imp^^^tence with eternall death. Thus is guilty man punished, and the just God cleared, i^ this damnation of the wicked: though it be a totall, finall, (call it what you will) (...) extreme, universall, eternall punishment. But to cease preaching of it, and (...) praying against it: Spare us good Lord, spare the people whom thou hast redeemed. For (...) death of thy eternall Sonne, let us not be the sons of eternall death. Be not (...) with us; or, if we doe provoke thee, let not thy anger be for ever. Let not (...) wrath burne like fire: but whensoever our sins have kindled it, LORD quenchi^^ the bloud of CHRIST. Let us not undergoe the malignitie of one sin, ev^^ (...) least, the shortest: for it deserves great and eternall torment. Our greatest g^^^nesse merits not the least glory: but our least wickednesse deserves great pain. A (...) leake will sinke the vessell unstop'd, a great one will not doe it, if well called. (...) weakest instrument can pierce the flesh, and take away the life, unarm'd: (...)
 our of proofe will beate off strong assaults, There is no wickednesse so weake, ^t it can destroy us without Christ: none so strong as to destroy us with Christ. As ^^chel cryed to Iacob,Gen. 30.1. Give me children or else I die: so give us our Father, or else ^e perish. Lord, behold us not out of Christ, though robbed with all our righte^^snesse: but behold us in Christ, though with all our sinfulnesse. Preserve us in him, ^^wneus with him, that we may give all glory to him; together with thy selfe, ^^d most holy Spirit.
8 Sleepeth not, lingereth not, slumbereth not.] Though it be not yet present, it is ^opinquant: if not extant, yet instant. If it be not visible, yet it doth not linger: ^t linger, it doth not slumber: if it seeme to slumber, it doth not sleepe. To sleepe ^ore than to slumber, to slumber more than to winke, to winke more than to look ^on a thing though with disregard, not minding it. Neither sleep, nor slumber, nor ^nnivence, nor neglect of any thing, can be incident to God. Because he doth not ex^^^e present judgement, and visible destruction upon sinners, therfore blasphemie ^sumptuously inferreth; Nunquid curat Dominus? Ea cura quietos sollicitat? Will ^od trouble himselfe about such petty matters? So they imagined of their imagi^^ry Iupiter; Non vacat exiguis rebus adesse Iovem. What a narrow and finite appre^sion this is of God! Hee that causeth and produceth every action, shall he not (...) present at every action? What can wee doe without him, that cannot move (...) in him? He that takes notice of sparrowes, and numbers the seeds which the very ^ugh-man thrusts in the ground: can any action of man escape his knowledge, or slip ^m his contemplation? He may seeme to winke at things, but never shuts his eyes. (...) doth not alwayes manifest Scientiam reprehensivam, a reprehensive knowledge: ^t he alwayes retaines Scientiam apprehensivam, an apprehensive knowledge. Quia (...) arguit, ergo non novit? Though David smote not Shimei cursing, yet he heard ^imei cursing. As Iudges often determine to heare, but doe not heare to determine: ^though God doe not see to like, yet he likes to see. It is only the forbearance of (...) correction, that makes sinners presume of his connivence.Psal. 50.21. These things thou hast ^e, and I held my peace; therefore thou thoughtest that I was altogether such a one as thy ^fe. Impune ferens peccatum, Deumcogitat pacatum. God holds his hands, and he holds (...) peace, but he does not hold his eyes: and he sees, whatsoever he saies. All things are ^ed and open to his eyes: not because he will observe them, but because he cannot look side them. But. The time of your ignorance God winked at? He is said to connive, ^^ause he doth not correct. It is the promise of his mercie to passe over the sins of ^^verts, as a father winkes at the error of his little child. So we pray, Adverte ^os, Turne away thine eyes from our sinnes, Psal. 51.9. Absconde faciem; Hide thy face (...) my sinnes, and blot out all mine iniquities. That is, Omitte, remitte, demitte indem^um. Still the Lord sees;Psal. 51.3. I have done this evill in thy sight. He doth observe all ^in knowledge, he doth not reserve all to vengeance. He is said not to make it, be^se he doth not punish it. But if the Lord do wink at the aberrations of his servants, ^st he therefore slumber? Doth every one shuts his eyes, presently fall into a slum^^? Or, if he seeme to slumber, can he sleepe? Sleepe is to refresh the weary, can (...) it selfe be weary?Psal. 121.4. Behold, he that keepeth Israel shall neither slumber nor sleepe. He ^o farre from sleeping, that he doth not put his eyes together. This might be Iu^ opinion of her Iupiter: whom Homer relates making an earnest sute to Somnus, ^op^rare oculos Iovis. This is for a Baal;1 King. 18.27. Cry aloud, for peradventure he sleepeth. A ^essary slumber for a temporary god.
Sleepe (such is the nature of it, that it) cannot occurre to the nature of God: ^o is an Eternitie of rest, without any vicissitude or change. There is no mutati^^ himselfe, nor mutuation or borowing from another. Phabus ab externo radios (...) mutuatur: much lesse God. Rom. 11.25. Who hath first given to him, and it shall ^compensed? Who hath laid out any thing for him, and it shall be paid him a^e? In sleepe the exterior senses are bound up, and there followes a quiescence ^n motion. As of the contrary; Vigilia est solutio and remissio sensuum, ut libere
 agant secundum suam naturam. Wakefulnesse is the remission and unbinding of the senses, that they may freely officiate the requirements of nature. But the Lord mo^ all; and created things derive their first motion from him. Aristotle saies, (...) is a retirement of the heate to the inward parts: and a confluxe of that naturall ^^^lation which ariseth from out sustenance; Compresso primo sensitorio, that is (...) but God lives not by nourishment, therefore hath no need of sleepe. Cale^^ fines it to be a remission of the soule, according to nature, ab extremis ad prin^^^^ binding up the mind, and discharging the sensitive instruments of their office (...) heate which is taken up in those organs, being recalled to the heart and lungs. Oth^^ thus summarily* Sleepe is the rest of the animall vertues, together with (...) tention of the naturall faculties, stirred by a profitable humour in the braine: (...) in the soule suspends her functions in the outward parts, to relieve the inward (...) principall, for the health of the whole. But God is not capable of any weary (...) therefore not liable to any sleepe. Nothing needs sleepe, but what is nourishe^ wearied? No spirit is subject to such a nutrition, therefore not desiderable of (...) a cessation. The sword of God may be said to sleepe in the scabberd, while he (...) beares to draw it, but he that weares it, sleepeth not.
9 This wakefull and prepared vengeance is threatned against the ungodly (...) fitly. For nothing is more proper to the nature of sin, than to sleepe in security. E^ 5.14. Awake thou that sleepest; that is, Repent thou that sinnest. The godly (...) their nappes, the wicked their sound sleepes. Continuance in sin may be compa^ to Sleepe in many resemblances.
1 For the cause of sleepe: the naturall heate drawing in his vertue, stirres (...) vapour or exhalation, which ariseth from the meate, or from labour, sorrow, ^^rinesse: this ascending, the coldnesse of the braine beates backe againe, and so co^^ sleepe. Thus the heate of concupiscence in the sinner first raignes within, and st^^^ to fortifie it selfe in a complacencie of evill: and when the conscience sends any ^^tions or considerations to the intellect, like vapours to the braine, they are re^^berated back againe by the extreme cold and grossenesse, which possesseth the ra^nal part; and thus followes the sleepe of sin. When the conscience cannot pr^^ with the concupiscence, it is rocked asleepe in sin, and all the organicall forces (...) called in to waite upon lust.
2 As Aristotle delivers the formall cause of sleepe, to be an Antiperista^^, (...) being made by a reciprocall motion: the stomach sending up fumes to the head and the head sending them backe to the heart: so by reason of this conflict (...) obstruct all the organs of sense, locking up the exterior parts as they passe in (...) journey. As a river that ebbes and flowes, is driven by her owne floods. The heate drives these vapours from the heart, the coldnesse from the braine, and (...) must needes rest some where: hinc faciunt gravedinem oppilando, and inde Somnus (...) spirituall sleep, the coldnesse of the brain is ignorance, the heate of the heart is (...) cupiscence, the exhalations are lusts. while these with a sensitive pleasure are ba^^ up and downe, the whole man becomes fast a sleepe: and sin raignes like an (...) bed Lord in al faculties of body and mind, neither feeling nor suspecting the (...)
3 As there is a difference in corporall sleepe, so in the spirituall slumber, (...) dicitur (...), Suspirare: for the lungs doe not faile their office in (...) Now some bodies are so well composed, that they send forth a soft and gentle (...) and respire an easy spirit. Others that labour of some error in the Arteriatrach^, (...) lung-pipe, Strumosi, draw their breath with such difficultie and distance, as if (...) were in danger of suffocation. That the winde being held in, breakes forth (...) troublous noise: per multos anfractus ducitur: it comes out by many circuits and ^dings, involued in the muscles: and the breath being gathered into those str^^ with a forcible eluctation opens the arterie, breaking out with an allision and (...) mure, as the pent aire at an evaporation. Thus spiritually: some take a quiet (...) an unmolested securitie in wickednesse, without the least starting or jogging of (...)
 ^onscience.Esa. 29.10. The Lord hath poured out upon them the spirit of deepe sleepe. The breath ^ey draw is Tenuis aura, such as sometimes in summer riseth from the earth with (...) insensible effumigation. Ducunt mollem anhelitum, they sin without trouble about (...) as a great part of England now sleepes in Sacliledge, and their hearts are never ^sturbed for it. Other men sleepe indeed, but unquietly; full of startings, stop^ngs, and reluctations: as if they were affrighted with some suddaine noise, and ^eir owne conscious thoughts did like Faeries, nippe and pinch them, interrupting ^eir desired repose. There is more hope of these than the former: for they that ^e often disquieted, will at last be wakened. When a man begins to stirre in his bed, ^e conceive some likelyhood that he will before long arise.
But they that can sleepe when it thunders; like the Catadupans, inhabitants of ^e cataracts, who heare not the roarings of Nilus, ingenti cum sonitu se praecipitantis: ^ummes and trumpets, and that loud rupture of the aire with Ordinance, being ^e soft musicke to their eares to play them asleepe: what hope of their waking? ^eclaration of sins, denuntiation of judgements, description of torments, no more ^rre them, than a tale moves a man in a dreame. Here is a supine stupiditie, (...) capable of excitation, as the sea-rockes are of motion, or the sea-billowes of com^ession. As Mori mortem is to die an everlasting death, so this Dormire somnum (as ^e Psalmist speakes) is to sleepe an everlasting sleepe. The Hebrewes call sleepe by ^ree distinct and graduall termes. Therumah, which signifies a light sleepe, Capitis ^tatio, quasi prima rudimenta somni. Schemah is a more profound sleepe. Tharde^h exceeds all, as it were a dead sleepe.Gen. 2.21. The Lord caused a deepe sleepe to fall upon ^^am: that he neither had his sight offended, nor his sense oppressed, when his side ^as opened, Gen. 15.12. Thardemah irruit: a deepe sleepe fell upon Abraham. So the ^reekes distinguish them; (...), which is a certaine necessitie of sleepe: (...), ^hich is Torpor, a heavinesse of sleepe: and (...), an inexpugnable appetite of ^eping. The Latines, if we consult Physitians, distinguish them into Somnum, ^orem, and veternum: a naturall sleepe, a preternaturall sleepe, and a continuall slum^r. The faithfull cannot avoid some nappes their nature is so weake; some sinnes ^ey admit: vulgar sinners have long and drousy slumbers: only the desperately ^^cked are cast into a dead sleepe; an exstaticall stupifying lethargie of sinfulnesse, ^rd even to be a little roused. The first is a naturall, the second a preternaturall, ^e last a contranaturall sleepe. A naturall sleepe is short, for sixe or eight houres, owed by Physitians, to the body; but allowed not by Divines, to the soule. The ^eter naturall is a drousie slothfulnesse, an inordinate desire of sinning.Prov. 24.33. Yet a lit^ slumber, a little folding of the hands to sleepe. The last contranaturall, is omnem ^dum exundans, beyond all measure, a lethargicall kind of death, which will never ^^ke untill it hath no more power to sleepe. The naturall sleepe of the body is for (...) reparation of natures forces, so much as may only be sufficient to absolve conco^on: but the last, as in sweating sicknesse, sleepes to death.
4 As by sleepe Cerebrum fumis obnubilatur, nervi hebetantur, venae obstruuntur, ^ist. The braine is clouded, the nerves dulled, the veines obstructed. So by cu^mary sinning, theEph. 4.18. understanding is darkened, the spirits blunted, the affections stu^ied, the receptacles of grace filled with the obstructions of lust. And there is not ^ly an Indisposition to goodnesse, but a mad and unrestrained precipice to all man^r of mischiefe.
5 As nothing is more pleasing to mans nature than sleepe; Quia perpetuus mo^ naturae inferiori regugnat. It is most acceptable, illabens animantibus amica dul^ne. Somne quies rerum, placidissime Somne deorum, Ovid. Sleepe is fained to love ^thea, because it is a common benefite to all living creatures. Quae a rerum veri^^d fabulas, Graeca levitas and Poetica vanitas transtulit, Aret. So there is no^ng more pleasing to corrupt nature than pravitie: it is a delight to the wicked to (...) evill: and sleepe is not more welcome to the body, than that is to the lust of (...) soule.
6 As sleepe is justly called Frater mortis, the brother of death: so is sin S^^^ paenae, the sister of paine. There is little difference betweene him that sleepes and the dead, save onely in time: both are void of sense, both like trunkes Vterque caecus, surdus, elinguis: both blind, deafe, dumbe. Vterque sedat c^ras, finit labores; either of them appeaseth our cares, finisheth our labours: only death is the longer and more perfect privation. Stulte, quid est somnus gelide ^is^ mortis imago? Ovid. Consanguincus lethi sopor. Medium inter vivere and mori, An^^. A certaine middle thing betwixt life and death. Dulcis and alma quies, placidaeque simillima morti, Aeneid. Death is a long sleepe, sleepe a short death. So fin is the elder brother of death: if man had not sinned, he should not have died. Sin was beene first, but The elder shall serve the younger: for death shall swallow the whole inheritance. Here, the sleepe of rebellion precedes the sleepe of damnation. They sleepe but their destruction sleepeth not. The Apostle said of Lazarus;Ioh. 11.12. LORD, if (...) sleepeth hee shall doe well: but if you sleepe, you shall doe ill. As it is with the improvident heire involved in Vsurers bonds; while he sleepeth, his interest runs o^^ Destruction takes the wicked napping, as2 Sam. 4.7. Banah and Rechab slew Ishbosheth: or, as Somnus is said to slay Palinurus; soporatum in mare praecipitavit, Aeneid. 5. He is easily subdued, whom his owne slothfulnesse hath left unarmed. As death corporall proceeds of a cold vapor possessing the braine, and oppressing the animall senses and spirits. So from the cold dregs of sin, freesing up the heart in wickednesse, comes the sleep of destruction: as Gideon slew the secure and careles hoste. When Di^genes Synopensiis slept much in his sicknesse, and was disswaded by his Physitian, he was answered, Ne mireris, frater fratrem antevertit: one brother doth but prevent another. Sampson could not be bound, till he was first got a sleep. Temporall death is ^^t the only punishment of his sinful securitie: but while the wormes are sporting among the reprobates bones, the divells will make themselves merry with his torments.
7 Lastly, as sleepe turnes a man in non hominem, so doth sin in non bonum hominem. In sleepe he neither heares like a man, nor speakes like a man, nor walkes like a ma^ So in this spirituall lethargie, he neither thinkes like a Christian, nor understand^ like a Christian, nor effects like a Christian; nor acts like a Christian, nor appeares like a Christian. There be three seasons, wherin a wise man differs not from a foole: in his infancie, in sleepe, and in silence. For in the two former all are fooles; and in the latter we are all wise. In sleep the wisedome of the wise is not exercised, and the follie of the foole is not discovered. In the 115. Psalm. ver. 5. There are f^^ impediments orderly specified, wherein the sinner differs not from the sleeper. The sinner hath. 1. Impeditum os ab actu confitendi; They have mouthes, but they spe^^e not. He cannot confesse his sins, nor professe his faith, nor powre out his prayers. (...) sin, as in sleepe he hath a mouth, but not to speake. 2. Oculos impeditos ab actu vid^^di: They have eyes, but they see not.Mat. 13.15. They have closed their eyes, lest they should see. They differ something in this from an Idol: the Idol hath Oculum fictum, a counterfeit eye: these Oculum clausum, a shut eye. See, that cannot; these can and will not. Who is so blind as he that will not see? The object is exhibited, their sight is selfe-darkened. They have eyes, but not to see. 3. Aures impeditas ab offici^ ^^diendi. They have eares, but they heare not. The blind hath eyes, but not to see: the creeple feete, but not to goe: the spirituall sleeper hath eares, but not to heare. The eare is a benefite of nature, but an eare to heare is the benefite of grace. 4. No^ impeditos ab of ficio odorandi. They have noses, but they smell not. Futura non prase^^unt. They give themselves to sleepe, and never suspect the danger that may prevent their waking. Let them come into that blessed Garden of God, where i^^^merable flowers give delectable sents; they neither smell the odours, nor relli^^ the fruites. They receive not the things of the spirit. 1 Cor. 2.14. the Naturian is not capable. They have noses, but not to smell. 5. Manus impeditas ab actu benef^^endi. They have hands, but they handle not. As that organum organorum, the instrument of instruments, the busie and active hand, is bound in sleepe. So sinne ha^^
 enervated the practise of goodnesse; and obsessed the sinner, not onely with a dedig^ation of good workes, but also with an indignation against good workers, and an ^ansatisfied delight in misdeeds. God reacheth out mercie to him, as the charitable doth an almes to the maimed; alas, he is fast asleepe, and puts not forth a hand ^o receive it. They have hands, but not to worke. 6. Pedes impeditos ab actu am^ulandi. They have feete, and walke not. Worse than that creeple, Act. 3. he thought ^e could not goe, would bee carried to the Temple: but these have feete and will ^ot goe to the Temple; they have no desire to bee brought into that vigilant and waking place. There the Preachers voice would be like a Trumpet, and they can^ot endure noise. They have feete, but not to walke.
Nothing is more dangerous than this drousinesse and securitie in sinne: when men thinke they can passe as they please; thorow the wombe to grace, ^horow grace to wantonnesse, thorow wantonnesse to glory. WithAct. 18.15. Gallio, ^hey thinke Religion onely a question of names and words, and therefore will not ^eddle with it Or, if they resolve to heare it, with Felix they can neither get (...) convenient time, nor a convenient heart for it. They are not like the Bee that ^illeth her belly and thighes with honey from the flowers: but like the butter flie, which onely dies and paints her wings in their colours, and so leaves them. They ^wimme like Dolphins, playing upon the waves of carnall delights; and are alwaies ^erriest, when destruction is nearest. Wake therefore, and learne to die before ^hou die; that when thou must die, thou mayest have no more to do but to die. While ^he foolish virgins slept, they lost their enterance into that joyfull bride-chamber ^or ever. Watch and pray: they that would keepe themselves waking, doe it best ^y talking. Hold thy selfe in a continuall conference and discourse with God, so ^halt thou not fall asleepe in sin. If thou dost fall into aslumber, yet letCant. 5.2. thy heart ^ake. But the reprobate doth sleepe soundly, Somno sepultus. Therefore let us not ^eepe as others doe, but let us watch and be sober, 1 Thes. 5.6. As Christ couples wat^hing and prayer: so the Apostle couples watching and sobrietie. Sobrietie is either ^orporall, the moderation of appetites: or mentall, the moderation of affections. Now as drunkennesse enforceth sleepe, so sobrietie keepeth awake. But as Phy^tians rid their hands of incurable patients, and send them to the minerall or me^lline bathes, or leave them Deo and naturae, to God and nature. So I remit these (...) their maker to be wakened; either by the Evangelicall trumpet here, or by the ^rchangelicall trumpet hereafter.
10 Observe that sin will not let Iustice sleepe, but sends it up continuall chalen^es and defiances: provoking him to draw that sword, which hee had rather should ^st and rust in the scabberd, than be sheathed in the bowels, or shine with the galls ^f his owne creatures. But in piety will not let him alone, nor give him over, till is righteousnesse breakes forth into vengeance. As the prayers of the Saints with kinde of prevailing importunacie, offer holy and humble violence to his mercie: ^at he descends with the flag of truce, in the milk white ornaments of peace; pardo^ng sins, and healing sorrowes. If importunate sollicitations could move an unjust ^dge to equitie,Luk. 18.7. will they not much more move a merciful God to pitie? Give him ^st till he establish Ierusalem, Esa. 62.7. As the kingdome of heaven requires and re^ites this holyMat. 11.12. violence: so the king of heaven is content to have his hands as ^nicled from executing wrath, and his sword locked up by the prayers and teares (...) penitents. Let me alone, saith the Lord to Moses, that I may smite them: as if ^e groanes of his heart did hold Gods hand. So doe the sins of the wicked hasten ^dgement, and cry to vengeance, Come away, why tarriest thou so long? Thus the ^ood of Abel murdered,Gen. 4.10. cryed for the blood of the murderer. Wickednesse is not ^oveling, but aspiring: not base, shame-fac'd and fearefull to advance it selfe; but ^elling like Iordan above the bankes.Ion. 1.2. Their wickednesse is come ^p before me. It ^s not hid in the secrecie of private chambers, not kept close in the closet of their ^ne brests; but an ascending, aspiring, climbing wickednesse^ so impudent that it
 durst presse into Gods presence. Before me: it wakens makes my justice, and will (...) me sleepe no longer. Gen. 18.20. Because the cry of Sodome and Gommorrah is great, and because their sinne is very grievous.
Peccatum cum voce, sin with a voice is sinne in action: Peccatum cum cl^^^, sin with a cry is sinne in presumption, Greg. Their wickednesse passed the bo^^^ of all moderation: the fame of it was not only spred upon earth, and blowen (...) the eares of men: but it pierceth the aire, passeth the starres, climbes like the Sun in the morning, comes up amongst the Angels of God, and exposeth her filthinesse (...) the throne of his Majestie. This iniquity here is not lesse than a theomachie, a d^^perate warre against heaven, a tower of sinne like Babel, reaching to the clouds. A sin which the Scripture calls lifting up the hand, and lifting up the heele, against the Lord. Manum in contendendo, calcem in contemnendo: lifting up the hand in opposition, the heele in contempt.
There are two Ladders wherby men climbe up into heaven, and become acquainted with God. The Ladder of Petition, and the Ladder of presumption. The Sa^^^ ascend by the one to their consolation, the wicked by the other to their confusi^^. Both presse into the Presence-chamber, both have the like accesse, both have not the like successe. The one thrusts in lik a conspirator to practise treacherie: the other (...) a petitioner to implore mercie. Wickednesse is sawcy and peremptorie, and will be notable thoug hit be notorious. It scornes to keepe low water, or live in an ^b: (...) like pride, is only to that end proud, that some notice may be taken of it. Commonly it is gone from the memorie of the offender, ere it come with so fierce an i^^^^^tion before the punisher. And that wind of rebellion which causeth justice to wa^^, rockes unrighteousnesse a sleepe. But shall our sins come up before God, and (...) first come before our selves; who dwell in the region where they were borne, a^^ were present when they were done? This is the greatest fault of our ignorance, to be ignorant of our faults. Must heaven know what is done on earth, before earth (...) selfe be acquained with it? As Tully said, he could heare at Antium what newes (...) at Rome, better than at Rome it selfe. Shall we turne our wickednesse so farre o^^ (...) our owne remembrance, that we never thinke of it till we feele it in vengeance. These be wilfull mistakings, trickes to make our selves blind. Alceus tooke a mo^^ upon ones face for a grace, it was none by his leave. The more quietly and securely sinners sleepe in the good opinion of themselves, the more certainely their dami^^on sleepeth not.
I know that some sins are not so sollicitous and urging upon the Iustice of God as being the infirmities of his children, which he passeth by with connivence. Y^^ he doth not strike at every provocation of the wicked. There is a time when Go^ is said to take especiall notice of sin.2 King. ^9.2^. Because thy rage against me, and thy tu^^^^ (...) come up into mine eares, etc. But is there any sin when the eye of his knowledge is bl^^ded? No, but this devotes to us the order of the actions of his knowledge. He (...) sin in the Booke of eternitie, before sinners hearts doe conceive it: he sees it in the^^ brests, before their hands do commit it. He sees the conception, birth, and comm^^^ment of it: but then he sees it to purpose, when being in the mature ripenes be ^^ceth it. Ier. 2.24. They that seeke her will not weary themselves; in her moneth thy shall find her. When the measure is full, God will find them out; as the wild (...) in her moneth, great with foale. Thus he sees it with fiery eyes, bent to vengean^. There are some aspiring sins, pressing unto Gods throne, like presumptuous m^^^taines darted at his owne Majestie. They arise with a vocall ascension; the (...) that mount them up so high, being the cry of their malignitie in the eares of God As oppression, Iam. 5.4. From this Iob in his appologie presented to his Iudge, ^^^sed himselfe.Iob 31.^^. If my land cry against me, Hab. 2.11. The stone shall cry out of the (...) and the beame out of the timber shall answere it, Ier. 6.7. Violence and spoile is be^^^ in her, before me continually is griefe and wounds. So the Prophet tells Israel, (...) God being displeased with Iudah, and delivering them into their hands; they (...)
 slaine them in a rage that reacheth up even to heaven. This is an outragious impudence, that is ambitious of enhauncing sin, despising the censures of men, and judgements of God. Though they have beene plagued, they change not the colour of one haire of their heads, one worke of their lives: nor adde a cubite to their statures, one inch to their Christian growths. This, this is the way to fall upon that irrevocable sentence, which God hath purposed, and he will not repent, nor turne backe from it. As the wicked cannot sleep till they have offended: so they will not let God sleep till he be avenged.
11. Long agoe. There is a preordination of plagues for reprobates, and the very moment of the execution appointed, Iude ver. 4. They were of old ordained to this condemnation. As if they were booked, enrolled, and billed to this confusion, and their particular names set downe in a booke. God keepeth a booke of Registry and Records, in which he engrosseth the persons behauiours, and eternall state of all men. Besides the booke of providence,Psal. 139.16 wherein are all our members written: and the Booke of Life, which containes thePsal. 4.3. names of the faithfull: there is also the booke of Iudgement,^ Rev. 20.12. out of which the wicked shall be judged. To thinke these materiall bookes, were a grosse conception: they are the counsell, providence, pleasure, knowledge and justice of God; which comprehend all things as if they were written in a booke. Therefore, howsoever, in respect of men things be contingent and casuall: yet in regard of God there is no chance, nor event by it; for hee hath all things written before him with their causes. Gods providence, and fortune, ^re direct contraries. Hereupon, the very actions of wicked men come not to passe without Gods purpose. He not only foreseeth, but wisely ordereth them, and even that which is done against the will of God, is not done without the will of God. He doth not command it, he doth suffer it. Albeit he esteeme not evill to be good, yet he accounteth it good that evill should be.
This serves to qualifie our impatientce, when we see some reject the meanes of salvation, despise the word, vilipend the Ministers of it, rob God of his Churches ^atrimonie, maligne the professors of the truth, and give over themselves to a resolute contradiction of godlinesse: knowing that some are of old and long agoe ordai^ed to this condemnation; and that Their judgement, (a dest ruction which is properly their owne) is long agee prepared. And for our selves, though we be confident in ^ESUS CHRIST, through the testimonie of the HOLY GHOST;Rom. 11.20. d Yet be ^ot high minded, but feare. Our fidelitie must take heed of securitie.
This point is not barren, but usefull to us in a double application; the one of ^aution, the other of consolation:
1 Seeing God doth not sleepe in his Iustice, let not us sleepe in our unjustice. When Alexander had a great battell to fight, he was found fast a sleepe in his Tent. We have listes to enter with the Iustice of God, o let not the slumber of our soules, ^nd the Iudgement of our sins, come so neere together. Ionah was gone downe into ^he sides of the ship, and he lay fast a sleepe. The aire is troubled, and sends out a tem^est, the waves roare, the winds blow, the sea is disturbed, the ship almost broken, the Mariners afraid, happy man that can pray fastest, the burden of the vessell unloden: ^nd all this for the Prophets cause, yet the Prophet alone is ignorant of the matter, ^e is fast a sleepe. It could not be but he much forgate himselfe: though he had re^used to preach at Niniveh, yet here was an auditory and an occasion that required Sermon: and the conversion of one sinner is a blessed worke: becauseIam. 5.20. he covers multitude of sins, which either the converter, or the converted hath committed. The ^try uncircumcised Master wakens him; What meanest thou O sleeper? call upon thy ^od. An infidel leads him that knew God, to his prayers. The Prophet is be^ome an auditor, and the auditor a Prophet: the sheepe leads the Shepheard, the ^atient heales the Physitian, the Gentiles are devout in their superstition, the Israe^^e cold in his religion. Truth is truth wheresoever we find it; Call upon thy God, ^as good counsell from a heathen.
It is desperate for men over shooes, to runne over shoulders; and having transgressed
 the bounds of obedience, to neglect any desire of revocation. Cyprian, who was at last a Martyr, wrote of himselfe, that being a persecutor, he was so farre i^ that he had no hope of getting out: therefore freely welcomed all vice, as resolving upon the worst that could befall him. Sleepe departeth from the eyes of distressed and anguished spirits, Iob 7.4. I am full of tossings too and froo, unto the dawning of the day.Psal. 13.2. He that is troubled in his conscience for his iniquities, will resolve with De^^^ not to suffer his eyes to sleepe, nor his eye-lids to be closed doune with slumber: as he, till he found a resting place for God: so this, till he find rest for his owne soule.
Yet how hath this sleepe possessed even Gods children! David being full (...) into idlenesse; from idlenesse hee passeth to concupiscence, concupiscence beg^^^ adulterie, adultery hatcheth murder. And when all these ingredients put together, would have troubled the strongest and most retentive stomake; he takes a sleepe with them of almost a yeere long. Thus are sinners like a man surcharged wi^^ gluttonous meale, who is apt, his belly being full, to lay his bones at rest. Ch^^^^ came to his Disciples and found them asleepe, Mat. 26.40. Hee had often incul^^^ this admonition to them; Watch: yet now in the greatest extremitie they are (...) asleepe. I know that sleepe is necessary to humane nature; all living creatures (...) earth have their sleepes. Though the Poet Salse sed false of the nightingale; T^^^tare simul nocte dreque potes; that she sings night and day; if at least he meane, with^^^ intermission: as Pliny also too confidently averres, Lib. 10. cap. 75. The credi^^ (...) Aelian is engaged for as much, that she is expers somni, without all sleepe: but by (...) leave, it was an error. Sleepe is that naturall helpe, Quod corpora duris fessa ^^^^sterijs mulcet, reparatque labori. Therefore the Pythagoreans used to play a lesson on the harpe and sing to it,Quintil. lib. 9. cap. 4. when they were going to bed: Quo citius and bl^^^^ obdormirent. The Apostles therefore having supped late, dranke wine, wea^^^, with travell, now being midnight sleepes principall season, not walking but fier^^ still: all which were valde (...), suadentia somnum, as virgil speakes: provo^^^ and attractive of sleepe. Why then doth CHRIST reprove them, for not w^^^ing with him one houre? ButEccl. 3.2. is there not a time to wake, and a time to sleepe? W^^^ in that very houre when the Lord of life was betrayed into the hands of death; (...) King ready to die for his people, the creator as it were unmade to new male is creatures, the innocent suffering for the nocent, could they not even then forb^^^ sleeping? Not one houre, ecce brevitatem, it was short: watch, ecce facilitatem, it (...) easy; not be exposed to scorne, not cast into prison, not beaten with scourges; (...) dura verba, nec duriora verbera perpeti: but onely spectare and expectare, to looke (...) waite, while their Master was finishing that great worke of their owne redem^^^. Not watch with me, Mee your Saviour; one houre, I say not a whole night. He^ 14.37. He found them all sleeping, but directs his reprehension to Saint Peter: because he before fluctuans aestu had confidently promised this, yea farre more th^^ this, to lay downe his life for Christ; Simon sleepest thou? There is a time to (...) without reproofe: Samuel slept, David slept, Psal. 4.
Christ himselfe slept, Mat. 8. Peter had often slept before without reprehensi^^ yea, and afterwards too with consolation; Angels guarding and delivering (...) Acts 12.7. But now to sleepe; Couldest thou not watch with me one houre? (...) not a thousand, nor a hundred, nor a score, but one: not moneth or weeke, or (...) or whole night, but Houre: and this not to fight for me, but to watch with me: (...) mon dormis? Simon, signifies obedience; Christ calls him not Peter, nor Ceph^ (...) Simon: arguing his forgetfulnesse, not onely of his Masters love, but of his (...) name. But if it be such a sinne to sleepe, What is it to betray? Iudas tradis? (...) worse than,Mic. 2.1. Simon dormis? It is better to sleepe with Peter, than to betray (...) Iudas. Tolerabilior est somnolentus Simon, quam turbulentus Sinon. He that sleep^^ well thinkes no harme; but there be some that Studie mischiefe in their beds. Vt^^^lent homines surgunt de nocte Latrones. We may better suffer Desidiosum Mo^^^^, quam insidiosum Iesuitam; than the Popes wakefull Iudas, Discipulum decipulum, (...)
 ^nare and gin to entrap poore soules, and send them to Rome, like Virgins taken up for the Turke, to suffer his Antichristian ravishments.
To conclude, seeing that sleepe comes from cold and moist humours domi^ant in the braine: and wakefulnesse from hot and dry raigning in the head: let us ^ast away the cold and crude humours of sin, and stirre up the holy and almost extin^uished fire of zeale. That as CHRIST at his first comming found the shep^eards by night watching over their flockes: so at his second comming whether by ^ay or night, he may find us all watching over our soules.
2 As this is terror to the ungodly, so comfort to the righteous. As Iustice is ^ver waking, so mercie is never a sleepe. He that keepes Israel, never lets his providence fall into a slumber. Yea, even in the lethargie of our disobedience, when we remit of our uprightnesse, the hand of this ever watching God preserves us. Da^id was a sleepe a long while together, but the Lord that chose David slept not for ^is good. Vpon this confidence he betaketh himselfe to rest. I laid me downe and ^lept, for the Lord sustained me. I will lay me downe in peace, and sleepe, for thou Lord ^^ly makest me dwell in safetie. As he sets his Angels to guard us in the naturall sleepe of our bodies: so his preventing grace doth keepe us in the spirituall slumber of our consciences. But let not this make us presume upon his mercie too much: nor so ^respasse upon Gods unsleeping protection, as to take our ease in our corruption. Thou sayest, others have long slumbered, and yet beene graciously awakened; as David, Paul, Zacheus; Why not I? I dispute not: God will measure out his gra^es at his owne pleasure: and though they run over to some, they are plentifull enough to all.Rom. 10.12. The same Lord is rich unto all that call upon him. My grace is sufficient for thee, was Pauls answere: and it may suffice all sutors.
God hath given us no small space, not a few mercies: if we will sleepe with Pe^er, we put it to the hazard whether we shall ever rise with Peter. We cannot expect miraculous revocations; a Whale to reduce us as Ionah, or, the Sun to stand still for us as to Iosuah, or, the sea to divide it selfe as to Israel, or, a voice heard from he^ven as to Paul. Shall we say, The armie of God is shortned, because we see not these wonders? Will we not be wakened without miracles? Must the course of nature b^ ^ltered, the pillars of earth moved, the chanels of the sea discovered; must we see signes in the Sun and Moone, and have some rise from the dead to warne us, or we will not be wakened.1 Cor. 1.22. The Iewes require a signe, and the Greekes seeke after wisedome: ^ut wee preach CHRIST crucified. Woe unto us if the open face of the Gospell cannot rouse us without a signe; and the simplicitie of CHRIST perswade us without further wisedome.1 Thes. 5.7. They that sleep, sleep in the night. But the night is past, let ^s therefore give over slumbring. The lesse sleepe we give sin in our soules, the sweeter sleepe we shall find to our bodies. Thus shall we be sure, that while the wicked are overtaken with this unsleeping damnation, wee shall bee guarded and guided with a vigilant preservation. For CHRIST dyed for us, that whether we wake or sleepe, we should live together with him, 1 Thes. 5.10. To whom be praise for ever.




VERSE 4. For if God spared not the Angels that sinned, but cast them downe to hell, and delivered them into chaines of darkenesse, to be reserved unto judgement.

THe Apostle having dogmatically confuted, and prophetically condemned, the depravers of true doctrine: proceeds to an exemplary demonstration of the judgements of God upon sinners. For God cannot be sibi dissimilis, (...) like to himselfe: nor doth tolerate that in one, which he doth punish in another: b^^ hates iniquity wheresoever he finds it, and preserves one immutable tenor of his Iustice. Whensoever sin goes before, punishment shall certainely follow after, no lesse seasonable repentance come betweene. Of this he makes A
Relation, to Vers. 8.Illation, Vers. 9.
The Relation considers two generalls; Gods Iustice in punishing offenders, Mercie in sparing his servants. This holds in three Histories. 1. Of the Angels, they that fell, are confounded; there's his Iustice: they that stood are conserved, there's his mercie. 2. Of the old world; when the impenitent were swept away with a floud; there's his Iustice: and righteous Noah with seven more for his sake, were saved in the Arke; there's his Mercie. 3. Of Sodome and her sister-cities when fire from heaven burnt up the reprobates; there's his Iustice: and righteous Lot was delivered; there's his mercie.
Now upon all these premises comes the Illation, Ver. 9. The Lord knowes hea^^^ deliver the godly out of temptation, and to reserve the unjust unto the day of Iudgement (...) be punished. If our faith be as much, his mercie is not lesse: if their rebellion be t^ lesse, his Iustice is as much. The first Iudgement takes hold on altitude, the second on latitude, the third on plenitude. For height and excellencie the Angels were glorious in heaven, yet some are cast into hell. For breadth and numerous amplitude, no lesse than a whole world were drowned. For fulnesse and opulencie, the Sodomines lived in a second Paradise, yet were they burned. There is no wickednesse so high none so broad, none so rich; but Gods Iustice can overthrow it. Let men be as hi^^ as Angels, as many as will make a world, as rich as the Sodomites; yet if they be unrepentant sinners, they shall perish.
W^e begin aloft first, and behold the Angels revolting from heaven, and for their fault turned out of heaven. Wherein we have considerable Their
Excellencie; by nature Angels.Apostacie, they Sinned.Penaltie, were not spared.
In the former I will touch upon foure points:
1 Their creation, which though it be not precisely specified by Moses, is most certainely included, Col. 1.16. By him were all things created that are in earth or is heaven. who were created in heaven but the Angels? Whether thrones, or domin^^^^, or principalities, or powers. Which though some understand of Empires, orders, and
 governments: others, the Palaces of Gods Majestie, and seates of immortalitie. But the opinion approved of the most, and the most approved opinion; conceives all there spoken of Angels. Creat Angelos spiritus, Psal. 104.4. He maketh his Angels spirits. Some Philosophers conceited that Angels had their beginning of the soules of men. Ex bonorum animabus nasci bonos daemones, ex malorum cacodaemones. That good soules became Angells, and bad soules divells. And some would father this opinion upon Plato but inconsiderately. Plato, indeed thought and taught a metempsychosis, a transmigration of soules into new bodies; more Pythagorico. Such was that Homerical fiction of Vlisses his companions turned into Hogs and Beares. But he said never, that of soules were made Angels.
But why was this omitted by Moses in his historie of the creation. 1. Some thinke it was to avoid idolatrie in the Israelites; Quibus si innolesceret Angelus; who if they had knowen Angels, would have fallen to their adoration. Chrys. Theodor. But they could not be ignorant of the Angels, which had so often appeared to their Fathers, and done them so many ministeriall kindnesses. 2. Others thus; Moses treated of things that had their beginning with the materiall world, but Angels were created before the visible world. Basil. Damasc. But this is a false supposition; for before the world there was nothing created. 3. Others thus, their creation is comprehended under the names of Heaven and Light; Quia omnibus praesunt coelestibus; because they are set over all heavenly things. Aug. Bed. But this were to leave the literall sense, and to divert it unto Allegorie, which may not be admitted in so plaine a historie. The best opinion is, that their creation is omitted for two reasons. 1. Because Moses applieth himselfe to the simple capacitie of the people, and describeth the creating of visible and sensible things; leaving spirituall as above their understanding. Ieron. Ep. 139. ad Cyprian. 2. Lest men should thinke that God needed the helpe of Angels, in the production or disposition of the other creatures. As if the fabricke of the world had beene too great a businesse for himselfe alone to undertake: and therefore should bee required the ministration of those Angelicall powers.
That they were created is undeniably plaine, now the next Quaere is, when. 1. Some thinke they were made long before the world. Origen. Tract. 35. in Matth. Damascen. lib. 2 cap. 3. de fide. But the Scripture testifies that the evill Angels apostated so soone as ever they were created. Ioh. 8.44. Non mansit in veritate; Hee abode not in the truth. And our Text infers, that so soone as they sinned, they were cast into hell. But before heaven was made there was no hell. Nulla talis distinctio loci, priusquam constitutio mundi. Before the constitution of the world, there could be no distinction of place: for there was nothing but God. 2. Some from the first verse of Genesis would prove, that the Angels were created together with the world; the Heaven comprehending Angels, as the continent doth the content, the house doth the inhabitant. And whereas it is said, Darkenesse was on the face of the deepe; Origen thinkes this deepe to be that place whither the divell and his Angels were cast. But the HOLY GHOST shewing the eternitie of Wisedome, saith: Prov. 8.23. I was from everlasting, from the begining, or ever the earth was. When there was no depthes, before the mountaines were setled, before the hills was I brought forth. The Angels therefore were not before the earth and hills: for then this should be no good argument to prove the antiquitie and eternitie of Wisedome, which is the Son of God. 3. It is most probable, that they were created upon the fourth day, when the starres and other ornaments of heaven were made. Iob, 38.7. When the morning starres sang together, and all the sonnes of God shouted for joy. They are said to rejoyce and praise God together with the starres; therefore then it seemes they tooke their being and beginning: for questionlesse immediatly upon their creation they praised God. Besides, the heavens were that day perfected, the matter of them being only before prepared. It is fitte that the house should bee formed, before the inhabitane be produced. And this may satisfie any honest inquisitor, unlesse hee rather
 desires to wrangle than to learne. But these be the Lords owne secrets, whereof we may be ignorant without danger. Howsoever, we have proved that the Angell is Condita substantia, a created substance: which confutes that Pythagorean dotage of philosophers with this Duo principia, two beginnings; one of good and another of evill. Together with that Manichean heresie among some Christians, of which ranke were the Archoniticke and Caiane heretickes, of whom we read i^ Epiphanius; that the Angels were from everlasting, and Deo cooeterni, coeternall with God; whereas it is plaine that they are creatures of his making.
2 Their nature; an incorporeall substance, subtle and powerfull, created after the Image of God, resembling him as they are spirituall and immortall, but especially as they are holy and just, and full of divine created perfections. They are substances, though invisible, that have being, life, sense, understanding; and not mee^e qualities. Pure qualities can neither sin nor be capable of punishment: but my Te^ proves both these concurring in the reprobate Angels. But how can an incorpore^l substance be capable of punishment? yet who would aske that question, that find^ a soule within himselfe troubled with passion; even when no offence or distemperance riseth from that grosse and corporall part: yet is his soule vexed with the sense of sin, with sorrow, care, and perturbation of conscience. Though the Angels be spirituall, they are capable of punishment, for the torments of hell are spirituall. This confutes the Sadduces of our times, who thinke Angels to be nothing but motions, and melancholy passions: or, those that take evill spirits to be only evill qualities and dispositions inherent with us: or the Libertines, that thinke good or evill Angels to be nothing els but good or bad fortunes and successes. But quibus non cavent in pecc^^, hos sentient in supplicio. Whom they would not beware off in their sins, they shall feele in their torments. As they that live like Angels on earth, shall bee made like Angels in heaven: so they that will not beleeve any devils, yet live like devils, must have their portion with Devills. And Stultus in culpa, will bee made sapiens i^ paena.
3 Their office: Angel is not a name of nature, but of office. Greg. Ex eo q^^d est, Spiritus: ex eo quod agit, Angelus, Aug. They stand round about the Lord as a^^endants, and execute his imposed hests like ready servants. A quo dominatio, ab eo denominatio: this name is given them for some supereminent qualitie.Psal. 18.10. Hee rode upon a Cherub, and did flie. They are said to have wings for their speed of obedience. Therefore Gregory sayes, that their titles are according to their messages. They that are sent on businesse of lesse moment, are called Angels: they that of greater importance, Archangels. The Angel sent to contract that sacred match betweene the King of heaven, and the Virgin Mary, was called Gabriel. Luk. 1. Gabriel signifies the power of God: a fit Ambassador for such a message; because the conception of Christ, and by it the redemption of the world; is called the Strength of Gods (...), Luk. 1.51. Gabriel was sent. 1. I doe not thinke with Hierome, because Virgins are as Angels: as Isidor. Caelibatus, quasi coeli beatus. Indeed CHRIST sayes, that i^ heavenMat. 22.30. they neither marry, nor are given in marriage, but are as Angels of God. But so all the faithfull are Virgins to CHRIST, and shall bee made as Angels by CHRIST. 2. Nor yet so much to shew that he was a high Angel, because of his high and glorious message. 3 But indeed, as Aquinas in this truely, That our ^^mane nature might be repaired, after the same manner it was ruinated. As a serpe^^ was sent to Eve by the Devill, to worke our woe: so an Angel was sent to Mary by God, to bring newes of our blisse. Ad Evam Angelus malus accessit, ut per cam (...) separaretura Deo: Ad Mariam Angelus bonus venit, ut in ea Deus untretur (...), Fulgent. By Eve man was separated from God, in Mary God was united to m^^ an evill Angel was the worker of the separation: a good Angell was the messenger of the conjunction. So great is their office, that CHRIST himselfe accepted the name, Mal. 3.1. Angelus faderi^, the Angel of the Covenant, Popish writers d^^y that CHRIST was ever called an Angel in the old Testament. For that, Gen. 48.
 16. they would thence prove prayer to Angels. The Angel that redeemed mee from ^vill, blesse the lads: but no Angel redeemed us, but IESUS CHRIST. They ^y, if at any time the Sonne of God appeared, it was most likely to bee in mount ^^nai, at the giving of the Law; that being the most noble apparition of all. Yet saith ^^ephen, Act. 7.53. Ye received the Law by the disposition of Angels, and have not kept it. ^ngels then appeared, not CHRIST. But the Angels there were ministring spirits, giving their attendance, and executing their office. It is no good argument; be^^use the Law was given by Angels, therefore not by CHRIST. St Paul cleares ^ Gal. 3.19. The Lord was ordained by Angels in the hands of a Mediatour. The ^inistery was of Angels, the authoritie of Christ. They further object; if Christ ^d appeared at any time before his birth, it was most likely then when word was ^ought to Mary of the incarnation of Gods Sonne: both for the dignity of the ^erson to whom, and of the Ministery what. But the messenger was Gabriel, not ^hrist. Answ. 1. Mary was not yet so great a person, as to be preferred before all ^e Patriarches, Christs Progenitors. Her dignitie came not by her owne worthi^esse, but by Gods speciall grace: (...), Freely beloved. 2. There was grea^^r reason that the same Angel Gabriel, the first revealer of the prophecie to Daniel ^oncerning the Messiah; should also be the messenger of the accomplishment of it. 3. (...) was not fit that the Sonne of God himselfe should bee the messenger of his owne ^^mming into the world, Princes send their officers before, to give tydings of their ^^mming: and should not that great Prince send his Angels before, that it might ^peare he was Lord of the Angels?
This is their office, wherein they are patterns to us.Psal. 103.20. Blesse the Lord ye Angels ^his, that excell in strength, that doe his commandements, hearkening unto the voice of his ^ord. For this we pray, that the will of God may be done by us on earth, as it is done ^y the Angels in heaven, Mat. 6.10, Our obedience cannot be like in perfection, ^ust be like in proportion: for qualitie here, for equality hereafter. We must Pa^ere sicut Angeli, if we desire Fulgere sicut Angeli. In life we are men, in hope ^ngels: now quamdiu non habemus perfectionem Angeli; non habeamus praesumptionem ^iaboli, Aug. While we want the perfection of Angels, God blesse us from the ^resumption of Devils, Luk. 12.9. Let us confesse Christ before men, that he may ^onfesse us before the Angels.
4 Their glory: when the Scripture attributes the highest praise to inferior ^eatures, the comparison is drawen from the glory of Angels.Gen. 33. Iacob commending ^e countenance of his reconciled brother saies, I have seene thy face, as the face of an Angel, Psal. 78.25. Man did eate Angels food; which was Manna: a most ex^ellent meate, that if the Angels needed sustenance, they could wish no better, 1 Cor. ^.1. If I spake with the tongues of Angels; Si quae sint Angelorum linguae: if the ^ngels had tongues, they must needs be admirable, Act. 6.15. They looke sted^stly on Stephen, and saw his face as it had beene the face of an Angel. David admiring ^ans creative glory, with incontained passion breakes forth; Thou hast made him ^tle lower than the Angels, Psal. 8.5. Man in his greatest glory is inferiour to An^els. Famous men in the Church are called Angels. So Ioh. Bap. Mat. 11.10. I ^nd my Angel before thy face. Esa, 33.7. The Angels of peace. Rev, 2.1. To the ^ngel of the Church. Iudg, 2.1. The Preachet of repentance was called the Angel of ^^e Lord, Hag. 1.13. The Prophet is called the Lords Angel, Mal. 2.7. He is the Angel of the Lord of Hostes, Ezek. 28.14. The King of Tyrus is called an Anointed ^^erub. The widow of Tekoah put the terme upon David, 2. Sam. 14.17. My ^^rd is as an Angel of God, to discerne good and bad. This was their happy estate, unto ^hich Nihil defuit, nisi quod non immutabilis fuit; there was nothing wanting, but ^e unchangeablenesse of it. But optimi corruptio pessima: they were the best of all ^eatures, they are the worst of all creatures: being not content to remaine Angels, ^ey became devils.
The Angels that sinned. I come to their Apostacie; wherein consider
 foure circumstances: the Persons, the Cause, the Manner, and the measure of their fall.
1 The Persons that fell; some of the Angels, not all, They that sinned. For they that sinned not, stand for ever conserved by the mercie of God. Servat i^^ruptos aeterna charitas. This is Saint Pauls distinction, 1 Tim. 5.21. I charge thee ^^fore God, and the Lord Iesus, and the elect Angels. Some are elected, and because electi^^ presupposeth refusall, the rest are rejected. Vpon this falling, they are not properly any more Angels, but divells and spirits of darkenesse. Satan in Hebrew; (...) enemie, or detractor. Salomon acknowledging his peace saith; Non est mihi wo^^ 1 King. 5.4. I have not an adversary. The Princes of the Philistines put the (...) upon David; Ne sit nobis Lessatan. 1 Sam. 29.4. Lest he be an adversary to us. S^ David to the sonnes of Zerviah; Cur estis mihi Lessatan? 2 Sam. 19.22. Why (...) you adversaries unto me? So Christ to Peter. Matth. 16.23. Get thee benihd me S^ The Greekes have, Diabolus, (...), insidiose capere. His whole exercise is to ^^ceive man, and to reduce him to his owne ruine. Thus he is called The Fathe^ lies, the Prince of darknesse, etc. all corruptive, destructive names. Beelsebub, D^^^nus muscarum; the god of flies, or the master-flie. Flies though beaten off, will (...) turne againe; so doth Satan after many repulses. The red Dragon; dy'd into (...) sanguine hew with the bloud of soules. The Tempter; Immundi spiritus, ^ncle^^ spirits, Matth. 10. Which discovers their follie that proverbially; Damon (...) adeo niger, ut eum fingunt pictores: the divell is not so blacke as painters make (...). But by their leaves let us not trust him; but endevour by a good life, and a holy (...) to keepe our selves out of his clutches.
Proclus, and Psellus a Greeke writer, makes many kindes of divells. Some (...) spirits, Lelurion, conversant about the orbe of the Moone: some acriall, in that p^^ of the aire next us: others watry, earthy, subterrane, metalline spirits, which obsesse the covetous and metall men. And the Scripture in some sort alludes to (...) which calls them Powers of the aire, and wanderers through the earth, Revel. 12.11. Woe to the inhabitants of the earth, for the divell is come downe among them: Do^^^ as if before he had beene hovering in the aire. They delight in filthy places, des^^^ and Sepulchers, and hogs. They drove one into the wildernesse, Luk. 8.29. A^^ther amongst the tombes, Matth. 8.28. From whom being cast they entred (...) swine, and drove them into the sea; as if they delighted in the waters, sporting (...) the Leviathan in the Ocean. They make some deafe, other dumbe, other furious, (...) miserable whom they possesse. They insinuate themselves into men by flie temptations, and therefore are called familiars. The best and blest Angels seeme also (...) have their distinctions, Col. 1.16. Thrones, dominions, principalities, powers. I doe (...) speake of those nine orders, as the bold Dyonisius, and the overventurous Pap^^^^. But they are so called, because God by them governs the Nations, moves the heavens, restraines divels, workes miracles, conveyes Prophecies, protects his serv^^^ and executes judgements upon his enemies. Yet so as these names may be give^ (...) all Angels, by occasion of diverse employments; or to some for a time and (...) for ever.
2 The cause, which was indeed wholly in themselves. For either God or (...) must be the cause of their sin, or themselves; but neither man, nor God, there^^^ themselves. Not man, for had not the Angels falne first, they could not have b^^^^ the cause of his fall. That nature continuing good it selfe, would never have (...) cured evill to others. But now their whole endevour is spent upon hindring (...) Ascent to that glory, from whence they are justly dejected. Man either was (...) then made, when the Angels revolted: or if he were, how could be living o^ (...) ruine the spirits in heaven? The divell cannot challenge man, but man may (...) the divell, for this perdition. He first tempered the cup for himselfe, and then ^^^^ted man to drinke: but he had better never have pledged him.
Not God, for then that were injustice, to condemne them for that which (...)
 ^^lfe caused. It were unrighteous to make them fall, and then punish them for ^lling. But he did foresee it and would not prevent it: and in not hindring it he see^ed to cause it. Indeed, this holds in the creature: who is bound, foreseeing an evill, (...) doe his best in preventing it; and otherwise is made accessary to it. But God is (...) absolute Lord of all, and not bound to any of his creatures, further than he bin^eth himselfe. In CHRIST he hath bound himselfe to beleevers, and all his Pro^^ses are Yea and Amen; and he will keepe his word. But shall any creature ch^^^ge him for not doing that he never promised to doe? But God did not confirme ^^em in their created grace, therefore caused their fall. Answ. GOD did not ^^rpose their confirmation. Dedit potestatem velle, non voluntatem stare: he gave them ^ower of willing, not will of standing. He is not tied to conferre more grace up^^ his creature, than himselfe pleaseth. It was enough that hee created them righ^^ous, without addition of their confirming. Nec tenetur agere quicquid potest, nec ^^tionem reddere quicquid facit. He is not bound to doe whatsoever he can, nor to ^^ve account of whatsoever he doth.
In a word, the Angels had in themselves the proper cause and beginning of their ^wne fall: which was a free and flexible will. They might will good, and perseve^^nce in good: and that will being mutable, they might also will evill, and so fall ^^om God. The same kind of will was in innocent Adam. But good trees cannot ^^ing forth bad fruite: therefore the Angels being good, could not sin of themselves, Answ. Those words must be construed Sensu composito, non disjuncto. Indeed a good ^^e remaining good, cannot produce evill fruite: but being changeable, it may. ^ut God foresaw it, therefore the Angels could not escape it. Answ. Yet is not his ^rescience any cause of their fall, but only an antecedent. Because we sin, therefore was foreknowen to God: not because it was foreknowen to God, therefore we ^^nne. God saw Iudas his treason in the glasse of his Prescience before Iudas had member composed, or the world was formed: yet was not this the cause why Iudas ^trayed CHRIST. Praescivit, non Praedestinavit, Aug. Vidit non coegit, scivit non ^^xit, praedixit non praescripsit, Lip. He foresaw it, he did neither compell it, nor com^and it, nor allow it. Prescience is to God, as memorie is to us: memorie presents (...) us things past, prescience to God things to come. Our memorie is not the cause ^hy things past were done: nor is Gods foreknowledge the cause why things to ^^me shall be done. We remember some things we doe, we doe not all the things we ^^member. So God foresees all he does, he does not all he foresees. We remember (...) orchyard such a time planted, that now yields good fruites, by nature, not by vio^^^ce, so God foresaw it. We remember a murther done, by will, not compulsion; (...) God foresaw it. Neither our memorie, nor Gods prescience caused these: but ^cy come to passe, naturall by nature, voluntary by will, contingent by hap, ne^^ssary by necessitie. But did God only foresee it? No, he also decreed it: why ^en how could they avoid it? Answ. He decreed to leave them to themselves, that ^^ey might fall if they will, and then to give them no grace of rising. But then as ^od hit me, as throw me: it is all one to thrust an old man downe, as to take away (...) staffe that should keepe him up. Nay, but the old man throwes away his owne ^ffe and God doth not reach it him: they did forsake their owne grace, and fall by ^^eir owne folly. But here let us fall from disputation to admiration. Oh the depth the wisedome of Godhow; unsearchable are his judgements, and his wayes past finding out.
3 The Manner, this was by sin, saith our Apostle. But what was this sin? ^ough it be no where precisely expressed in the Scripture: yet from two places it. ^y be collected, that it was a rebellion against God arising from pride. Gen. 3.5. (...) shall be as Gods. He tempted man to this sin; an ambitious pride of bettering (...) estate. Now it is probable, that he sought to overthrow him by the same way (...) fell himselfe. Iob 4.18. He charged his Angels with folly. The sin whereof Eli^as would accuse Iob, was a justifying or lifting up himselfe before God. From this ^pothesis or supposition he reasons: that if God so plagued pride in those Angelicall
 natures, how will he dissemble it in man, who dwelleth in a house of clay, whose foundation is in the dust! Some say; God subjected the world to man, not to Angels. Psal. 8.6. What is man, that thou hast put all things under his feete! This the reprobate Angels could not endure, therefore rebelled and fell. Yet still the ma^ner and matter of their revolt appeares to be pride. An insinuating sinne: it crept into Paradise, and robbed us of our birthright; we may curse it to this day. It c^^bed into heaven, and robbed Angels of their glory, they may curse it for ever. It is an impudent and stupid sin, more in sensible than Salomons drunkard. We have (...) onely thrust thornes, and needles, and goades, but even swords and spea^^ into her heart to make her bleed; and yet she is proud to bee spoken against.
I speake not of pride in the huske, but in the heart. Her Taylor, Fashion, is now held an honest man; I am sure a powerfull one. How ridiculous soever a ga^^e appeares, fashion can perswade men to it. O that our preaching were in fashion too; then we should hope to perswade you. We tell pride, that as the freshest rivers (...) into the salt sea; so all the honours of the world shall end in basenesse, all the pleasures of the world in bitternesse, all the treasures of the world in emptinesse, all the garments of the world in nakednesse, all the delicates of the world in rottennesse. If Christ bids us cut off, and cast away the offending eye, hand, foote; all which are needfull members tied with joynts and nerves to the body: we may well spare these unnecessary dependants, no parts of our flesh, but flags of our shame, Luk. 18.12. The Pharisie prayes not for supply of defects, nor acknowledgeth a defect of supplies: but tells his owne fulnesse, and that great difference which his mistaken eyes saw betweene himselfe and the Publican; swelling with his owne wind till he burst. They plow with the Oxen of their owne imaginary righteousnesse; and contemplate the Farme which their owne workes have purchased; and Marry themsele^^^ to merite as to Wife: therefore in the pride of their peremptory stomachs they scorne the Lambes supper. Therefore Christ refuseth them in his call, but seekes sinners: not sinners in perversenesse, but sinners in sense and conscience, in plea, action, confession, and condemnation of themselves. It is a needy and acknowledged emptynesse, that lies at his gate, who is rich in mercie, like Lazarus with all his ^^cers open, and begging the very crummes of commiseration.
Humilitie is the hardest of all vertues: all vices are against it, yea all vertues (...) against it: men are proud of their wisedome, proud of their beneficence. Yea, ^^mility it selfe is against humility, and by a strange prodigious birth brings forth pride: as Diogenes, and that worse Cisterian, is proud of his very patches. How co^mon is it for men to disclaime vaine glory vainegloriously! making a remonstrate of that within them, whereof they studie a renouncement from them. But the (...) things are alwayes most humble: the boughes of trees, the more laden with fruites the nearer they hang to the ground. The best gold goes downe in the ballance, (...) lighter stayes above. Good corne lies in the bottome of the heape, the chase keepes aloft. The good Angell lifts him up that would worship him;Revel. 19.10. See th^^ (...) it not, for I am thy thy fellow servant. The bad Angell affects it,Matth. 4.9. All these (...) give thee, if thou wilt fall downe and worship mee. Timent boni Angeli adorari^ (...) natura, quam vident in Christo sublimatam. Good Angels are fearefull to be w^shipped of that nature, which they see exalted in Christ: evill Angels desire t^^^ worshipped of that nature, which they know is made after the Image of God. Satan isIob 41.34. a King over all the children of pride. Pride turned Angels into divells, ^^militie shall turne men into Angels. Of all sins let us blesse our selves, yea the Lo^^ keepe us from pride; that humbling our selves, we may bee exalted by Its (...) CHRIST.
4 The measure; they left their condition totally and wholly: they quite ^sooke God, his Image, heaven it selfe, and the office therein assigned them. I^ 44. He abode not in the truth: by this Truth is meant the Image of God; which (...) saies,Ephes. 24. consists in righteousnesse, and the holinesse of truth: It is called Truth. 1. Because
 it never deceived any man, as unrighteousnesse doth; which promiseth pleasure, profite, content, and performes nothing but griefe and shame. 2. There is no Hypocrisie in it, it makes no shew of other than it is. This originall condition the Angels voluntarily left, forsaking their place, as Saint Iude speaketh. God in the be^inning appointed most excellent places for his severall creatures; wherein they were ^o performe their required homage and service. Heaven was the proper place assigned to the Angels: to man in his innocencie, Paradise: after his fall, the families ^f the Patriarchs: before and in Christs time, the Temple; now the congregrati^ns of the faithfull. These were our appointed places to set forth the praises of our ^aker. This place the Angels left, forsaking the presence of God, and their owne ^ffice wherein they should have beene for ever employed.
But doe not the divells keepe in the aire? Some doe by Gods permission; but ^ot as in their proper place and first habitation: for that was in the comfortable pre^ence of God in heaven. But wheresoever they are, they carry a hell about them: if ^hey be not in hell, yet hell is in them. As the militant Saints have in them the ^ingdome of heaven, though the kingdome of heaven doe not yet containe them. ^nd the blessed Angels protecting us on earth, are still in a heaven; by reason of ^e gracious and glorious presence of the infinite God that is with them. So the ^ivells are never remote from their hell. Ioh. 8.44. He was a murtherer from the be^inning: whereupon Maniche grounds; Diaboli malitia non habuit initium: the ^ickednesse of the divell had no beginning: hence came that conceit of two beginings. Ans. 1. He was not so from the beginning, as Christ who had no beginning. ^he latter confutes it; It is not said, In the beginning; but From the beginning. (...) Neither was he made so in his owne beginning of being: as some sottishly draw ^hat literall Leviathan into an allegorie. Psal. 104.26. There is that Leviathan whom ^ou hast made to play therein: as if God had made him a divell. 3. Nor yet so from ^e beginning; that in eodem instanti caepit esse a Deo, and malus esse a se; in the same ^stant, he tooke of God a being, and of himselfe an evill being. As it is said of our ^ule, Cum infunditur, inficitur; the infusion and infection meete together. For he as first made good, and therefore must by intervention of space become bad. (...) but Because there was a little time betweene his creation and Apostacie; Hee a^de not in the truth, Esa 14.12. How art thou falne from heaven O Lucifer, Son of the ^ormng! He was a son of the morning, not a son of the day; he stood not so long. (...) Especially, Homicida ab initio, non suo, sed generis humani. He was a murtherer ^om the beginning, not of himselfe, but of mankind. And Saint Austens reason is ^od; Non posset occidi, nisi factus fuisset homo: man could not be murthered before (...) was made: the divell could not be a murtherer before he had something to kill: ^lesse we say, he was Homicida in se, his owne murtherer. But from the beginning (...) murdered us; and we should never have recovered that wound, unlesse it had ^ene by a second murder, the killing of Iesus Christ.
But if the Angels in their innocencie and excellencie fell wholly and utterly ^om God: then much more may weake man rend himselfe from God by sin, yea ^d also from Christ. Answ. The grace of Creation came far short of the grace Redemption. There was a power to stand or to fall; but that power was in it ^fe. Here is a power to stand, none to fall; but this power is not of our selves. ^^e power stands in the promise of God, and gracious covenant in CHRIST. (...) will make an everlasting covenant with them, and they shall not depart from me.Ier. 32.40. We (...) stand as never to fall. God doth not trust our salvation in our owne hands: but We are dead, and our life is hid with Christ in God.Col. 3.3. If our portion were in our owne ^^d, we would quickly spend it, as that Prodigall did his patrimony. We are the ^^lish children of Adam, and would part with our salvation for an Apple: and (...) nature the brothers of prophane Esau, that sold his Birth-right for a messe ^pottage. But it is there laid up, where we can never spend it, nor the divell ^^d it. There is a difference betweene the state of nature, and that which is above
 nature: betwixt a Created, and a Regenerated will: not that the latter is not also created; but because the former is in the will by creation, so is not the latter. 1. The created will had a freedome to will that is good; so hath this. 2. The created will had a power to will perseverance in goodnesse, so hath this. 3. The created will (...) not the will it selfe, nor the act of perseverance; the regenerate will ha^^ both these.
Here the doctrine of the Romish Schoole erres, which teacheth; that in conversion the will hath a freedome to receive grace, or not to receive it: so mans po^er of faith and salvation should be in his owne hand. But the unconverted will refuseth grace, yea rebelleth against it: andIoh. 6.44. No man can come unto Christ, unlesse the Father draw him. It is not the will it selfe, but the conversion of the will, that mak^s it willing to goodnesse. The will of regenerate man is not as the will of crea^^ Angels, able to stand or fall: but God hath conformed it, and confirmed it; (...) will the own standing for ever. True saving grace is never lost: without Christ (...) could never get it, but when Christ hath given it him, he shall never lose it. Some Schoole-men say, that God doth Creaturis dignitatem causalitatis communicare; (...) Austen seemes to favour it: but man could as well make himselfe, as make h^^selfe good. And if he were naturally worthy to have grace, where had he t^^^ grace to be naturally worthy? Sure, this makes him little beholding to God, th^ gives him but the grace whereof he is worthy. As we say, God could doe no m^^ in mercy: so this saies. God could doe no lesse in Iustice. But they for the l^^^ object, Revel. 3.11. Hold fast that which thou hast, that no man take thy Crowne. N^^ Si alius potest accipere, tu potes perdere. If another may take it, then thou mayest lo^^ it; and so fall from grace. Indeed common graces a man may have and lose: b^^ not that grace which makes him accepted with God: hee can as soone lose the being of Nature, as the being of this grace. The Romists, as they establish a free will (...) get grace, so they confesse a power to lose it: on both sides they run into grosse errors. As August. contr. Tul. Vt statueret liberum arbitrium, negavit praescienti^^ futurorum: itaque dum vult facere liberos, facit sacrilegos. But our seed is immor^^^ whereof we are made holy; therefore our holinesse is immortall. Three things (...) never be lost; the love of God in Christ, the Grace of the Spirit, and our Inhe^itance in heaven. We are in Christ; and unlesse Christ could be severed from Go^ we cannot be severed from Christ. Indeed for Pagans, that are not in Christo, sed (...) caligine; not in Christ, but in darkenesse. And for Iewes, that are Non in Christo sed in lege; not in Christ, but in the Law. And for Libertines, that are non in Christ^, sed in carne; not in Christ, but in the flesh; these all may perish: but they that (...) united to Christ, never. There is a Cordiall union of friend to friend; a Ca^^ union, of man to wife: a Vitall union, of soule to body: these may bee parcel^ but a Spirttuall union never. As Christ is in God, and God in Christ; so are (...) in him. Prove it, Ioh. 17.22. That they may be one, as we are one: I in them, and th^^ in me. But, Revel. 2.4. Thou hast left thy first love. Not fallen from love, but f^^^ such a degree of love. Besides, there is a counterfeit charity, but true can never (...) lost. To conclude, we stand not of our selves, but by the Grace of Christ, (...) mercie of God.Psal. 142.4. We may looke on our right hand for comfort, on our left (...) supportance; and find refuge to faile us, no man caring for our soule. But if we (...) unto the Lord; Thou art our refuge; thy mercies faile us not. The sea hath no ^^^cie, the fire hath no mercie, the earth hath no mercie, beasts have no mercie, (...) hath no mercie, the world hath no mercie, the Divell least of all hath mercie; (...) The Lord hath mercie. David by experience gives it, the children of God (...) it; and let no man at the perill of his owne soule deny it.
Thus we have considered the Apostacie and fall of these Angels; a point so^^^ what intricate and thorny; and would have beene much more confused, had I f^^lowed all the perplexfull, barren, and unnecessary questions of the Schoole; w^^^ have in them more subtilty than doctrine, more doctrine than use: full of Sch^lasticall
 yea Sophisticall doubts. One charged a Painter to draw him Equum volt ^antem, a trotting or pransing horse: and he (mistaking the word) drew him Equum volutantem, a wallowing or a tumbling horse, with his heeles upward. Being brought ^ome, and the bespeaker blaming his errour; I would have had him pransing, and you have made him tumbling: if that be all, quoth the Painter, it is but turning the Picture the wrong side uppermost, and you have your desire. Thus in their quod-^ibeticall discourses they can but turne the lineaments, and the matter is as they would have it. I speake not this to disgrace all their learning; but their fruitlesse, ^eedlesse disputes and arguments; who findes themselves a tongue, where the Scrip^ure allowes them none. It speakes of the Angels sins generally, without particula^ising what it was: hereupon say the Papists; it is an insufficient Iudge to decide all doubts and controversies. But because it doth not answer punctually the curiosity ^f their idle braines, can it not therefore decide all profitable questions, and satisfie ^ll just doubts? Yes, it determines all things that concerne our consciences, and ^verlasting salvation. In unnecessary things it is silent, as if it forbad us to enquire. For use to our selves.
1. Seeing the fault for which God confounded the Angels, was the leaving ^f their being and first estate: this should humble us to bewaile the same sin in our ^elves; for we have also left our beginning. The Image of God was imprinted on ^s, so well as on them: they defaced it in themselves.Iohn 8.44. When the divell telleth a lye, ^e telleth it of his owne. A se habet, nullo alio suggerente: no man suggested it to him. To this they also tempted us, so that we lost our beginning: a thing that few of us ^ruly lament; our Originall corruption. Sometimes men sorrow for their actuals, ^ut seldome for their originals: as if that should not trouble them, which they ^rought into the world along with them; or as if that were their parents fault, none of their owne. But the royall Prophet confessed;Psal. 51.5. I was conceived and borne in sin. ^antillus puer, tantus peccator, August. When a little child, I was a great sinner. I ^ispute not problemes; whether this comes to us by imitation, which was the Pe^gian heresie; for certainly it comes to us by propagation. The good man may ge^erate, cannot regenerate, the children of his flesh. August. Nor is it materiall to ^ee decided, whether the soule be infected by the contagion of the body, as good ^^nction is by a fusty vessell: for the soule is infected so soone as ever it is infused. Or whether in the very moment of infusion God did forsake it. Onely let our care ^e, as in a common fire; not to question or examine how it came, till first we hav^ ^ut it out. A Passenger brought to a pit, by the cries of one fallen into it, fell a won^ring how hee came there: to whom the poore man replies; forbeare marvelling ^ow I fell in, and doe thy best to helpe me out. Miserable Parents, have brought ^orth a miserable childe into this miserable world; Nec citius tulerunt natum, quam ^amnatum, Bern. We are sure we have it, O that halfe so sure we were all delivered ^^om it! How should this humble us, to looke unto the rock whence wee were hewen, ^nd the pit whence wee were digged. Te maculatum non nega, sed lava. Deny not thy ^ollution, but cleanse it. All our teares are few enough to wash out our Originall ^aines: what are left for our actuall and continuall aspersions? Men raile on for^ne, challenge the starres, blame bad company, curse the divell, for their sinnes: ^ill they misse the proper cause, their originall apostacie, and corrupt beginning. ^iabolus te non faceret perversum, nisi tua te origo fecisset pervertibilem. Satan could not ^ake men profane rebellers, unlesse their uncleane nature had first made them sin^ers. From this impure beginning, comes all iniquity: for naturally the seeds of all ^^nnes are within us: and it corruption preceed, eruption will easily follow. And ^od will smite him that sinnes, though (as Saul said) it be my son Ionathan. Indeed ^e smote his owne son IESUS for our sake, not for Angels. Christs side was laun^^d, to let out our impostume. It is his grace alone that reduceth us to our begin^ing; yea to a farre better beginning, such an one, as shall never have ending.
2. Seeing the Angels sinned; Let him that thinkes he standeth take heed lest hee
 fall. No height of man can match the Angels; if justice spared not sin in them, how will it forbeare us? no strength of man can match the Angels: if they were not able to resist the judgement, what can we doe? Heaven is a great way further from hell, than is Earth: if sin could tumble downe Angels, how much more easily the sons of men, from so low and conterminate a place? Adam was excellent in Paradise, yet short of the Angels in heaven; their beauty and glory, was far greater: b^^ if God punished sin in the Angels, how will hee dissemble it in men? The Iewes thought it a high priviledge to say, we are the sons of Abraham; yet Abraham was but a man. Wee goe further, and say, Wee are the sonnes of God: but how? by creation only: so were the lost Angels: we must have a better title than so, or else sin will confound us with the Angels. God forbore not sin in those his selected and eldest sons on earth, the Israelites; not in his celestiall children, the Angels: yea hee is so far from sparing it in any, that to save some he spared not his own Son. What then is our Title? In Christ: indeed there it is onely good; a blessednesse which was not granted to the lost Angels. But then let us walke worthy of this Christ, that we may confirme an argument of comfort to our owne soules.
But cast them downe into hell, and delivered, etc.] I come to their penalty; the first branch whereof is their Dejection; He cast them downe into hell. Herein is Locus a quo implied, the place from which they were cast, Heaven: and Locus ad qu^^ expressed, the place into which they were cast, Hell; there is Poena damni in the form^r, Poena sensus in the latter. The one privative, a losse of all blessednesse: the other positive, an infliction of all cursednesse.
Cast them downe.] This implies some place from whence they were cast, and that is heaven: the place of their creation, the seate of blessednesse, the palace of glory, the eternall mansion of joy. Lift up your hearts a while, to contemplate that place from whence they fell, and whither we desire to rise.
First take it generally; there is a heaven wheresoever Gods gracious presence shineth. Yea as the Father said; I had rather be out of heaven with Christ, than a heaven without Christ. So we had better be on earth with Gods favour, than in heaven without it. For as the Sunne makes a day, so the countenance of God makes a heaven, wheresoever it shineth. Absence of light causeth darkenesse; if God turne away his face, nothing remaines but wretchednesse.Psa. 16.11. In thy presence is the fulnesse (...) joy. If the fulnesse of joy be in his presence, then the fulnesse of sorrow is in his absence.Psa. 30.7. Thou didst hide thy face, and I was troubled. For the light of Gods countenance David often praises; nothing was so terrible as the hiding of his face from him: especially if it bee true what the French Nightingale sung; That hell is every where, where God is not. If the Kings favorite be for ever decourted, and banished the royall presence; this more afflicts him than those that never saw it. Ignoti null^ amor, an unknowne good is uncared for: many men little affect heaven, because they never apprehended the sweetnesse of it. But that which is retained with great sensible joy, cannot be lost without great sensible griefe. Had these wicked Angels ne^^ knowne the delectablenesse of Gods presence; their owne expulsion out of heave^ had beene lesse plague unto them. Now they may name all their thoughts, tho^^ children of their mindes; Idiabods; For1 Sam. 4.21. the glory is departed from them. It w^^ Absaloms extreamest discontent to be kept from the Court; therefore in passion ^e sollici^es Ioab;2 Sam. 14.32. Let mee see the Kings face.
This is their eternall misery, never to see Gods pleased countenance. Darknes^e is the more intollerable to them, because they were created children of light: Their dismall plaints, extorted by flames, more irkesome, because they once bore a part in the musick of heaven, the melody of Angels. As Elisha said to that great Lord;2 Kin. 7.2. Thou shalt see it with thine eyes, but thou shalt not eate thereof. There is good cheere, and they for whom it was provided, must never taste it. Luk. 14.24. None of th^^ that were bidden, shall taste of my supper. Thus miserable are they that live out of the orbe of mercy, drawing their unhappy breath without repentance; upon who^
 fury and indignation waites, the length and bredth whereof cannot be measured; with a diligent traine of unsufferable plagues, that will never cease to punish, so long as there is a will of God to bid them. It is a question whether the rich mans owne positive and sensible torments more afflicted him, or the sight of his once despised Lazarus in the bosome of rest. Psal. 112.10, The wicked shall see it, and be grieved; he shall gnash with his teeth, and melt away. What so vexeth him? The horne of the ^ighteous exalted with honour. Luk. 13.28. There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, ^hen you shall see the Saints in the kingdome of God, and your selves thrust out: when you shall See it.
We may also consider this point at home; and thinke how it afflicted our first Parents to see that Paradise, out of which they were cast and kept with a flaming sword. Every earth was not fit for Adam, but a Garden, a Paradise. Excellent pleasures have beene found in Gardens planted by men: yet is the least leafe, twig, ^r pile of grasse past all mens making. When he that creates the matter, undertakes ^he forme, this must needs be transcendently perfect. No tree, herbe, flower, was ^here wanting; that might be for ornament or use, for sight, sent, or taste. The ^ountie of God extended it selfe further than to necessitie; even to delight and recre^tion. Yet for all this, if Gods gracious presence had not shone there, no abun^ance could have made him blessed. Yet behold, God offered him all fruites there, ^nd restrained but one; Satan offered him but one, and forbore all the rest: and ^an chose rather to be at Satans finding, than at Gods. Then did the Iustice of God turne him out of his gates with a curse: why should he feed a rebell at his own ^oord? That God from whose face he fled with feare in the Garden, now makes ^im flie with shame out of the Garden. The Angels that should have kept him, ^ow keepe Paradise against him. It was easie to have kept happinesse, easi^r to ^ose it, but most hard to recover it. That very cause which drove man out of Pa^adise, hath also with-drawen Paradise from the world. Now as when man was ^oiling in the cursed and weedy earth, what a vexation must arise in his con^cience, by the sight of his discharged Paradise! So terrible is it to the divells ^^iling in the aire, to contemplate that heaven from which they are banished for ^ver.
Secondly more specially, and in a stricter acception; heaven is the locall re^eptacle of infinite and interminate joy. In thy presence is the fulnesse of joy, and at ^hy right hand there are pleasures for evermore. For qualitie they are Pleasures: for ^uantitie, Fulnesse: for Dignity, at Gods right hand: for Eternitie, For evermore. There shall be no feare to have the eyes dimmed with teares, or the soule surprised ^y death, or the heart dejected with sorrow, or the eares disturbed with cries, or the ^enses distracted with paine. There are possessions without impeachments, king^omes without cares, length of yeares with strength of delights, greatnesse of state ^ithout conscience of corruption, love of all without jelousie of any. There m^n ^hall be good and not persecuted, happy and not envied, rich and not robbed, kings ^nd not flattered. The Inhabitants are at the same instant ravished with seeing, sa^^sfied with enjoying, and secured for retaining. There is the glory of God whose (...) rightnesse they behold: safetie from foes, whose ruine they rejoyce at.Psal. 58.10. (The ^ighteous shall rejoyce when he seeth the vengeance, he shall wash his feete in the bloud of ^^e wicked.) The company of Saints, whose comforts they participate: the receit ^f a kingdome, and with it the full possession of the Fee-simple of life, the tenure ^hereof is inviolable. Ioy so tempered, that it shall satisfie and not glut: persons so ^^blim'd, that what makes them everlastingly happy, shall never make them weary. ^here is a river, and the Spring, the Throne of God; the water Chrystall, the bankes ^^t with the trees of life. There is a Citie, the gates of it Pearle, the streets of it Gold, the Walls of it precious stones, the Temple in it God, the light of it the ^ambe, the vessels to it Kings of the earth. The cheare of joy, the exercise sin^^ng, the Citie praise, the subject God, the Quire Angels.

Such is heaven, which alas mans parvitie is as farre from comprehending, as his armes be from compassing. Heaven shall receive us, we cannot conceive heaven. Quid mors est rogitas? si scirem, mortuus essem. Doe you aske what death is, fact one: if I could shew you, I were first dead. Doe you aske what heaven is, when I meet you there I will tell you. Could this eare heare it, or this tongue utter it, or this heart conceive it; it must needs follow, that they were translated already thither. Howsoever what hath beene spoken may remonstrate this; how great an infelicity the privation of heaven is. One spake truly; that the teares of hell are not sufficient to bewaile the losse of heaven. This fully appeares by that judicatory sentence, Mat. 25.41. When the wicked shall haply reply; though we may not ascend with thee unto glory, yet let us have thy presence on earth: let us be any where so thou, O Christ, be with us. No, Depart from mee; from peace, from joy, from comfort, from my presence, from my salvation, from my glory, for ever. O wretchednesse, that disdaines all comparison; if there were no hell, this were enough to wring out everlasting teares.
Applicat.Seeing both these Angels and also men, were cast out of their original and proper residence by sin; and God hath made ours recoverable by Christ, which is not gr^^ted to them; let us studiously seeke an entrance into that eternall rest, we transgresse daily, yet the Lord shutteth not heaven against us: we finde more mercy than our forefather. His strength was worthy of severity, our weakenesse findes pitty. We lost a Paradise that cannot be found, but we may find a Paradise that cannot be lost. Here is no fiery sword to keepe us out; we care not to seeke where that Paradise is which we lost; but this we both care to seeke and hope to finde. As man is the Image of God, so was that Paradise the Image of heaven: both the Images are defaced, both the first patterns are eternall. The first Adam was in the first Paradise, and stayed not: the second Adam is in the second Paradise, and there abides. Th^^ day shalt thou be with me in Paradise; was his promise to the penitent Malefactor. Paul was there and heard, and saw what he could not utter. By how much the third heaven exceeds the richest earth; by so much doth that Paradise which Christ ha^^ found, exceed that which we have lost. Now if we desire to have our saluation perfected above, we must begin it below. The gate of heaven is opened on earth. The place where God manifested his favour, Iacob called Bethel, heaven gate.Gen. 28.17. This the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven. As a man cals that the Court, where he was first brought to the presence of the King. Now this is done by a holy expectance, hearty affection, patient forbearance, prepared assurance, constant perseverance, and ravished exultance.
By a holy expectation, and a life expressive of such hope. He that lookes to weare a Crowne, habituates himselfe to royall affections. Our conversation is to heaven, whence we looke, etc. They that hope to carry earth up to heaven, strive first (...) bring heaven downe to earth.
By a hearty affection: if we cannot get in, yet let us get so neere as we can; a^ keep about the gates of the Citie: where the faithfull are congregated, there heaven it selfe is opened. Cain thought it not the least part of his curse, to be cast (...) from the face of God; from Adams family, where the face of God was seen in his holy worship.
By a patient forbearance and withdrawing our affections from terrene things. This World is but viaticum; and no man seekes for his inheritance in his Inne.
By a prepared assurance armed for all encounters. No Prisoner feares the Gaoler, looke he never so sterne; who knowes that his commission, is but to bring him to the Court safe. To the Saints, Mors non poena, sed remedium, death is not a penalty, but a remedy. Nec tam mors naturae, quam malitiae, quam miseriae. It is (...) so much a death of nature, as of corruption and calamity.
By a constant perseverance, resolving upon the worst disasters not to turne back. Knowing, that if the Gospell takes away riches, it will require them: if it take
 away life, it will restore it better. Patience shall never be a loser by it.
Lastly, by a ravished exultance and joy, that ariseth from the meditation of heaven. Which so transports us, that for the time we thinke our selves there: and conceive of former sorrowes, as men awaked from a busie dreame. What shall be ^he possession of that place, whereof the contemplation is so sweet! Dulce est in lit^ore stantem Dicere naufragium. It is a pleasure to sit on the quiet and secure shore, ^nd discourse of escaped wrackes. This is our true Paradise; the lower remaines Quoad locum, non quoad Paradisum; as it is a place, not as it is a Paradise. On earth we lost it, in heaven we shall find it. There faith shall be turned into beatificall visi^on; expectation lost in possession. There we shall know the truth of things we argue here below. How sweet now would the knowledge of some secrets be unto ^s; yet are many not worth the knowing: there those deepe and glorious mysteries ^hall be made plaine, and we shall discourse them one to another. Discourse them I ^ay; for now the soules in heaven have the language of intelligence; and when their ^odyes are joyned they shall have the language of utterance. And because Dura^io est affectus entium; the perfection of all shall be a blest everlastingnesse. I will give you the kingdome of heaven, saith CHRIST; this disgraceth all earthly kingdomes. I will give you an incorruptible Crowne, this disgraceth all corruptible crownes. I will give you eternall joy, this disgraceth all momentary pleasures. Eter^all life is the gift of God through Iesus Christ.
Downe into hell.] This is Locus ad quem, the next part of their punishment; a ^ensible paine; the position of intolerable and interminable plagues. In handling whereof consider three circumstances. Quod sit, quid sit, ubi sit. That it is, what it is, where it is.
First, that there is a Hell, is plaine: for they could not be cast into a place that had no being. Yea, it is manifest that it had a being before sin; and God made it before he had present and actuall use of it. It was constituted ere the Angels fell, that it might receive them when they fell. Hell was made before sinne was hatched, as Heaven was formed and fitted before the Inhabitant was produced. For we must observe that God created Angels and men after his owne Image; Ratione sapientes, vita innocentes, dominio potentes; wise, innocent, powerfull. But withall he gave ^hem naturam flexibilem, a mutable condition; which had power of standing, and possibilitie of falling. Power to stand was of God the creator: possibilitie to fall was of themselves the creatures. Immutabiliter esse bonum Dei solius est proprium, Aug. To be unchangeably good is onely proper to God. Augustine in his con^essions gives the reason. Because God created man ex nihilo, of nothing: he left in him possibilitie to returne in nihilum, unto nothing. Si Deus dedisset illis naturam im^utabilem, deos potius quam creaturas condidisset, Basil. If God had given them an immutable nature, he had created them gods, not creatures. Now out of the whole ^oste of Angels he kept some from falling: and when all mankinde was fallen, he ^edeemed some by his owne Son. And as he shewes mercie upon some in their sal^ation, so it is fit he should shew justice upon others in their just damnation. Now because there must be distinct places for the exercise of both these, which are in God equally infinite: by an irrevocable decree from the foundation of the world, a glorious habitation was ordained for the one, and a terrible dungeon for the other. These shall goe into everlasting punishment, and the righteous into life eternall. So cer^aine are both these places, that they were of old prepared. Matth. 25.34. Inherite ^he kingdome prepared for you from the foundation of this world, Ver. 41. Depart ^e cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the divell and his Angels. Esa. 30.33. To^het is ordained of old: non paranda, nec parari certa, sed parata. Of old, for the Lord that beholds all things, past, present, future, Vno actu, uno ictu, at once; simul and se^^el: as he foresaw the different estates of men and Angels, so he provided for them different places. That there is a hell.
First, the Scripture plentifully testifies, Mark. 9.43, etc. I know that many have
 wrangled against it: Danaeus reckons up 19 severall sorts of heretickes that deny of it. But say what they will, the wicked would give much to be sure that the Scripture was not true. Credere nolunt, and non credere nequeunt: they will not beleeve; and yet they cannot chuse but beleeve; their case is fearefull.
The Heathen affirmed a hell and place of torment for bad men: they retained so much light, as to know of that future darkenesse. Some of them have beene terrified with their owne inventions, and distracted with horror of the torments described by their owne pens. As Pigmalion doted on his owne picture, so were they a^^zed with their owne comments. How much more, if they had knowen these intolerable horrors, as they are, not as they were described. Par nulla fig^^ Gehennae.
Besides, many wicked men are punished, and many as wicked escape. Now Iustum est, ut qui pariter peccarint, easdem paenas luerent. It is fit that partners in ^inne should not be severed in torment. God doth not punish all here, that he may allow some space of repentance: nor doth he forbeare all here, lest the world should deny his providence. Parcit ut puniat, punit ut parcat. He spares that he may punish, and he punisheth that he may spare. He afflicteth some in the suburbes of hell, that they might never come into the citie it selfe. But Quos malos fert incruciatos, refert ^^ciandos. The evill he now suffers uncorrected, he referres to be condemned. Sinne knowes the doome, it must smart, either here or hereafter.
Further, in all things naturall and supernaturall, there is an opposition and contrarietie. There is good, there is evill: light and darkenesse: sorrow and joy. Now as there be two wayes, so there must be two ends. Heaven, whither the good Angels shall carry the Saints; Hell, whither the blacke and grisly spirits shall hurry the reprobates.
Againe, all men naturally doe honour the good, and punish the evill. The Barbarians themselves have lawes of castigation, and executions to cut off irregul^^ persons. Shall the Lord in his Iustice come short of creatures, of barbarous creatures? The Law of Nations requires that malefactors, if they scape with life, ^e banished for ever. And shall not God banish rebells on earth, from his glorious presence in heaven, into that fearefull Iland of hell? If this were not, Stabit cum Ne rone Paulus, Nero was as good a man as Paul. Esau should still have his birthright i^ blisse, and Cain be a Saint as well as Abel. As beleevers say,1 Cor. 15.19 If in this life ^^ly wee have hope in CHRIST, wee are of all men most miserable. So might the wicked say, If in this life only we have sense of sorrow, we are of all men mo^t happy.
Lastly, every Prince is allowed this concurrence to his State: that as he hath a pleasant palace for himself and his servants, so he hath a Gaole and prison for rebels and traitors. That heaven is glorious where the high King keepes his magnificent Court; the outer side of whose pavements we delight to behold, and admire for beautie. So is that hell a dismall dungeon where he puts his enemies, the outsid^ whereof men are not suffered to see, lest they should die with horror of the sight. They that have seene the flames, and heard the roarings of Aetna, now Monte G^^^lo, the flashings of Vesuvius, the thundrings and burning flakes evaporating from marine rockes; have not yet seene the very glimmerings of hell. A painted fire is a better shadow of these, than these are of hell torments.
I am sure I speake to no Atheists; I could say; doest thou thinke there is no hell? Quis daemonum hoc asseret? What divell will so affirme? they know it, and feele it. Why art thou come to torment us before our time? Shall not men tremble (...) deny, what the divells confesse? Chrys. What, eate, drinke, and play, Epicu^e; Post mortem nulla voluptas? no pleasure after death? None indeed to reprobates; there is nothing but hell for them, and they shall find small pleasure in that. C^^^^, sed fuge: credendo fugies. Beleeve it, and avoid it: by beleeving thou shalt avoide it. We are sure God hath made it; let us be but halfe so sure that we shall escape it. A
 good king having ordained positive Lawes by which he would governe; caused In^^^uments of execution to be made; gibbets, wheeles, rackes, and such torturous ^gines. And being made, he commanded them to be brought forth, and exposed (...) open view: and upon every one was written, Ne noceat, ne noceat: that it may doe (...) harme: observe it, that you may never feele it. So God admonisheth us of hell, ^e noceat: he doth as it were shew it us, that it may never hurt us. Ostendisti populo ^avia,Psal. 60.3. Thou hast shewed thy people grievous things: but shewed them, not inflicted ^^em. Minatur verbis, ne utatur verberibus. By threatning us, he would save the la^^ur of plaguingus.
But shall God menace this, and we not be moved? Is the hand-writing on the ^^ll, and Belshazzar still merry? God loves him thatEsa. 66.2. Trembles at his word. Doe (...) not tremble at it? how should we then escape it? We read of a bird of Paradise, (...) called for her excellent beautie: that being taken in the fowlers net, she doth grone ^^d weepe night and day, and so languish away. We were once such Birds of Pa^^dise, but by sinne taken in Satans nets; captived in wickednesse, and condemnable (...) this hell of wretchednesse: O how should we grone and weepe till we get out of ^is Prison where we are, into the libertie where we would be! Plangite plangenda: (...) must have sorrow; either hereby attrition legall, and contrition evangelicall, or ^reafter by destruction infernall. Estote tam proni ad lamenta, quam fuistis ad pecca^ Isidor. Let us be as ready for repentance, as ever we have beene for disobedience. (...) is too common for men to put farre away from them the evill day. Procul volunt ^e, quod juxta est. They injuriously oppresse others, and luxuriously riot themselves; ^hy?Luk. 12.45. My Master deferres his comming. Quasi tarde venturus sit, qui nunquam (...) nusquam ab est. As if it would be long before he be present, that is, in no place at (...) time absent. Whereas the shadow doth not more diligently waite upon the bo^^, than doth confusion upon sin. Therefore so live to day, as if thou wert not to ^e to morow. Seeing for the wicked is prepared a hell, let us seeke for heaven. ^orrupt nature prepared us all for the former, let holy grace prepare us for the o^er. It is said of heaven, Imparatis clauditur janua, paratis patet: it is open to the pre^^red, shut to the unprepared. The contrary is true of hell: to the prepared it is ^ut, to the unprepared it is open. God shewed the Prophets many fearefull visions, (...) their terrror, and astonishment; but withall he encouraged them, that the judge^ents should light upon others, and he would deliver their soules.Ez^^. 12.18. Ezekiels quaking ^d trembling was but for a signe: Israels should be in sense and anguish of heart. If ^e tremble at these torments while the wicked laugh and are joviall; we shall put (...) our feare to them, laugh and bee merry when they tremble. As Daniel said (...) that Monarch;Dan. 4.19. Let not the dreame trouble thee; the dreame shall be to them that hate ^^e, and the interpretation to thine enemies. Let our hearts repent and beleeve, and (...) not this terror trouble us: the terror be to the divells that hate God, and to the probates his enemies.Psal 1 32.18. His enemies will I cloth with shame, but upon himselfe shall his ^^owne flourish. For tormenting cares, we shall have flourishing Crownes, in the ^^mmunion of Saints and Angels.
The next question is, what is Hell? It is that place where the Iustice of God ^nfineth reprobates to their eternall punishments. The plagues thereof are inter^^ll, externall, eternall. Internall, that consists in a plenary desertion of God; so ^^t they are continuall sinners, and continuall sufferers. Two contrarities being re^^nciled in them; extreme presumption, and extreme desperation. Presumption, (...) with bitter malice and curst heart they shall perpetually blaspheme, and sinne a^^inst the Holy Ghost, Revel. 16.11. Desperation, without all hope of mercie, or ^^itting one thought of peace. The one being a sinne against Gods Iustice, the ^her against his mercie. Externall, that consists. 1. In a deprivation of all com^rt; that they doe feele, being not more bitter, than the thought of that they can^^t feele, Chrys. A privative cause hath a positive effect. Tully banished from Ita^^ though it were into Greece, wept bitterly when he remembred Rome. Exiled
 Demosthenes, though hee found much kindnesse amongst his enemies, yet wo^ld weepe when he looked towards Athens. The captive Iewes hung up their harpe^, when they remembred Sion. Another laments that Roma relinquenda est: but wh^^ he considers, Scithia est quo mittitur; bursts out into teares it is the most unhappy part of unhappinesse, to remember former welfare. Dura satis miseris mem^^^ prisca bonorum. 2. In a sensible passion of universall anguish: as a brand in a gr^^^ fire, no part free from burning. Eternall, not determinable with time, for th^^ Time shall be no more: everlastingnesse shall make absolute their sorrowes: (...) arme may be weary of smiting, not Gods: it is fabled of Iupiter, that if he shou^^ spend his artillerie as fast as men sinne, Exiguo tempore inermis erit, his quiver wo^^^ soone be empty: Vulcan could not make his thunderbolts fast enough. But the d^^ned are punished in hell, so long as there is a God in heaven.
The Scripture speakes sometimes of hell figuratively; Gehinnon, Tophet. Which was a valley by the Fullers field neare to Aceldama, on the South-side of Si^^ Call'd Gehinnon, because it was in the tenure of a man named Hinmom, Aret. Th^^ the Iewes, after the example of the Ammonites, sacrificed their children to Mol^^ in the fire. An Idol which they worshipped for Mercury, Montan. Others (...) for Saturne, whom the Poets faine a devourer of his owne children. It was of br^^ or coper, with hands stretched out to receive the Infants that were to be sacrifice^ His Priests were called Chemmarim, because they were reesed or smoked with t^^ Incense offered to the Idol. It was defaced and defiled by good King Iosiah, 2 King 23.10. and made a draught or common sewre for the filth of Ierusalem. The Ca^deans cast the slaine Iewes into that place, Ier. 7.32. Therefore it was called Os Inf^ni, the mouth of hell, that could not be filled. For further description of hell, the Scripture useth three principall termes; the Worme, outer darkenesse, and unquench^^ fire, Mark. 9.44.
First the Worme: this we must not understand a corporall Worme, which were terrible enough; for a man to live alwayes dying, and die alwayes living, with (...) adder sucking and stinging his vitall parts. Eccl. 7.17. The vengeance of the ungodly fire and wormes. But we must know that after the worlds dissolution, there shall remaine no mixt body, but only mans: no generation nor corruption in the revi^^ bodies. Therefore the worme cannot be corporall, but spirituall: the stinging o^ a vexed conscience. As from the corruption of dead bodies breed the worm^ that devoure them: so from the corruption of sin riseth this worme of conscience. Some understand it to be the memorie of past sinnes; which shall so long gnaw their soules and bodies; like a vulture pr^ying on their hearts, as the remembrance of committed iniquities continues, which will be for ever. Ob. But if the memorie be so p^^fected, then the recognition of former joyes shall be some ease. An old souldier after his exhausted strength, glories in the battells he hath wonne. Ans. Nay this (...) rather be matter of sorrow: to remember the evills they have done, bitter: the goo^ they once had, more bitter: the good they might have had, most bitter.
Object. The torments of hell are farre beyond any paines of this world: (...) a man here, lying under some lethargicall and stupefying pressure, cannot confide^^ those intelligible conclusions, as he might being abstracted from his paine. A^^^ The soule is here joyned to a corruptible body, straightned by the Organ: so th^^ while the body is afflicted, the consideration of the soule is hindred. But there (...) soule cannot be inclined by an incorruptible body: but while the flesh suffers according to the capablenesse thereof, the soule is prostrated to all the paines she can ^^dure. Object. But the damned are the subjects of time, and time causeth forg^^^lnesse. Answ. Time is the cause of forgetting, but only by accident: because moti^^ which is the measure of time, is the cause of transmutation. But after this (...) there shall bee no more motion of the heavens: and even the soule that is now s^parated, is not changed from her disposition by the motion of heaven. Luk. 16.2^ Sonne, remember: this is a gnawing worme: which if it hath made some ackno^ledge
 (Infernum in mundo, qualiter sentient in inferno?) a hell on earth, what shall it ^e to their sense in hell it selfe? Oculos quos culpa claudit, paena aperiet, Greg. The eyes which sin hath shut damnation shall open.
Therefore it is good counsell now; Praevidete mala futura, ne recordemini bona ^^aterita. Foresee with feare the evill that shall be hereafter, lest you remember with griefe the good that hath beene heretofore. O that our foresight were but halfe ^o sharpe as our sense? let us now consider seriously the paines that shall be, that we ^ever be put to remember grievously the joyes that have beene.
Secondly, Outer darkenesse, Matth. 22.13. Cast him into outer darkenesse. But it (...) objected, that the sight of their miserie shall aggravate the sense of their miserie; ^ut nothing can be seene without the light, therefore not outer darkenesse. Againe, ^^e damned shall have a visory power after the resumption of their bodies; which were superfluous if they should see nothing with it. They shall see, and without ^^ght they cannot see; how then, outer darkenesse? Answ. Though that fire doe ^ot shine to any comfort; tamen ut magis torqueat, ad aliquid lucet; yet for their ex^remer vexation, it shall give some light. So much, as to shew their fellowes their ^orments, and them the torments of their fellowes, Greg. Basil in Psal. 29.7. The ^oice of the Lord divideth the flames of fire. Gods power shall separate the clarity of ^^re from the adustive vertue. Vt claritas sit pijs in gaudium, and ustivum damnatis in ^^rmentum. That the clearenesse may delight the righteous, and the sharpenesse af^ict the wicked. So Theodor in Psal. 96. The shining propertie shall be extracted to ^omfort the Saints: the burning propertie remaine to punish reprobates. But then ^nsion it selfe is some delight: as Aristot. in his Metaphys. Sensus oculorum maxime ^iligibilis: the sight of the eyes is pleasant; and to the same purpose Salomon. Yet ^y accident it becomes afflictive; as when men are forced to see what they would ^ot see. In hell there shall be nothing diaphanous, perspicuous, cleare; but a shady, ^oggy vision; like a distracted dreame. Erit quod videant, non erit quod videre cupi^nt They shall see that, which to avoid they would wish themselves to have ^o eyes.
Let us therefore decline the workes of darkenesse, as we desire to escape the ^lace of darkenesse. Interior darkenesse must be doomed to inferior darkenesse. What is more just, than that they who refused the light when they might have it, ^hould be denyed the light when they desire it? many now nuzle themselves in ig^orance, as if they meant to make their owne beds in hell. Voluntary blindnesse ^^all be confined to necessary blindnesse: and they that might now see if they would ^pen their eyes, shall there open their eyes and not see. Let us be children of the ^^ght, not of the night: and as we wish to see that glory without us which may make (...) happy: so let us strive to see that grace within us which may make us holy. Now ^e Father of lights defend us from that Prince and place of darkenesse.
Lastly, fire, unquenchable fire. It hath beene much controverted, whether in hell be ^^ue substantiall fire, or only fire allegoricall. Calvin is only for the allegory; and (...) some others, that give this reason. There is mention of Wood and of Worme, as ^ell as of fire: now these are allegoricall, why not therefore the fire? But in Scrip^^re things spoken together are not alwayes taken in the same nature and manner. Christ is called the Rocke of our salvation: the rocke is allegoricall, is our salvation ^^erefore allegoricall?Luk. 22.30. Yee shall eate and drinke at my table in my kingdome. Eating ^^d drinking is allegoricall, is therefore the kingdome allegoricall too? It is then (...) be concluded that there is true and substantiall fire in hell.Esa. 66.15. The Lord will come ^^th fire, to render his anger with fury, and his rebuke with flames of fire. Si in igne dam^^it reprobos, quare non in igne cruciabit damnatos? If he will judge them in fire, why ^^t condemne them to fire.
Grant it substantiall fire, then it is questioned whether it bee materiall, cor^^rall, or spirituall. It is not materiall, that is fire nourished with fewell. ^^na, and other places of the earth burne continually without fewell: much more
 that infernall fire. He that makes the damned live without food, is able to maintaine this fire without wood. Not spirituall; indeed Gregory calls it an Incorporeall f^^^; but it passeth the nature of fire to be spirituall: and he that makes it sprituall onely, goes about to make it no fire at all.
It is therefore a corporall fire: but being so granted, there arise some exception, Object. If it be corporall, how can it diversly torment diverse reprobates? There i^ but one fire in hel, but it doth not cruciate al after one manner and measure: as every one hath beene more wicked, he shall be more wretched. Answ. But we must kn^w that this fire is the instrument of the Divine Iustice: now no instrument works onely by it owne vertue, and after it owne measure; but is regulated by the vertue of the principall Mover. The fire in a furnace is encreased or quallified according to the will of the kindler: so is this disposed by the power of God;Esa 30.33. the breath of the Lord like a river of brimstone doth kindle it. We know that one and the same fire do^^ otherwise burne iron, than wood or straw. Secundum duritiem vel durationem ^^^riae: according to the nature of the incensed matter is the rage of the fire. All (...) on earth are under one Sunne, yet doe not all equally feele the burning of that S^^^ one is hotter than another, a Moore than a Brittaine. So in that one fire there is (...) one manner of burning: Quod hic diversitas corporum, illic agit diversitas peccator^^, Greg. dial. lib. 4. That which is here wrought by the diversitie of bodies is there by the diversity of sinnes. There may be a severall degree of paine to every one, and yet one common fire to all.
Object. But if it be corporall fire, it must be maintained with fewell, or el^^ will goe out: but there is no fewell in hell. Yes, the bodies and soules of the damned shall be Loco carbonum and lignorum, in stead of fewell. And because th^se materials are everlasting, therefore it followes that hell fire can never goe o^^, for it is against the nature of fire to cease, so long as it hath cumbustible matter to feed it. Object. But if it be corporeall, then is it of the same species with our fire, now man knowes the nature of this, but not of that. Answ. Fire is found in two places and manners: vel in materia propria, vel in materia aliena. Either in the proper matter, as it is in the owne orbe or sphere. Or in another matter, whether earthly as appeares in a coale, or airye as apppeares in the flame. But howsoever or wheresoever it is found, it is alwaies in respect of the nature in specie, fire. In the bo^^^ which are the matter of the fire there may be difference; as lignum igneum and ferr^^ ignitum, burning wood and burning iron differ. Still is it fire, though diverse fro^ ours in certaine proprieties which are unknowne to us, and may wee never know them.
Gregory upon Iob, 20.26. Ignis non succensus, a fire not blowne shall consume (...) objects, that if it be corporall fire, it needs fomentation. Nec valet esse nisi succe^s^^, nec subsistere nisi refotus. Indeed our elementary fire must bee kindled and nourished, because it is brought artificially and by violence upon the combustible subject. (...) hell fire needs not, because it either subsists in the proper matter, or in an alien s^^ject, not by violence, but by nature a principio intrinseco. Flatus Domini sicut to^^^ sulfuris succendet eum: the wrath of God makes it unquenchable; so that it neither needs feeding, nor wants raging. But our fire is corruptible, that eternall, how (...) of the same nature? So are the reprobate bodies now corruptible, then made inc^^ruptible: therefore the same nature of fire shall become everlasting, to torment (...) same bodies become everlasting. Object. But the nature of our fire is to shine (...) give light, which hell-fire doth not.Iob. 18.5. The light of the wicked shall be put out, and t^^ sparke of his fire shall not shine. Answ. The fire doth not shine in the proper ma^^^ of existing: non lucet in propria spha^a, saith the Philosopher; it shines not in the owne orbe. Besides, grosse and foggy smokes, and thicke darknesse may keepe (...) from giving lustre; yet still it remaines fire. The conclusion then is for corpo^^^ fire in hell. 1 Because there is not onely the punishment of losse, which answers (...) the aversion from the Creator: but also the punishment of sense, which answers (...)
 conversion to the creature. Now what plague so terrible to the sense as fire? 2. (...) Wherewithall a man sinneth, by the same shall he be punished: but by sensible things ^hey sinned, therefore by sensible things punished.
But lastly, if it be corporall fire, then it torments onely the body: for how can (...) corporall fire worke upon a spirituall substance? Bernard thus; there is a double ^unishment, the Worme, and Fire. Altero roditur conscientia, altero concremantur cor^^ra. The one gnawes the conscience, the other burnes the carcase. The one exte^^us comburens, the other interius corrodens. And Meditat. cap. 4. In carne crucia^^ntur per ignem, in spiritu per conscientiae vermem. So Isidor. de sum. Bon. lib. 1. cap. 31. The paine of the damned is double: Mentem urit tristitia, corpus flamma. So Bed. (...) Marc. 9. lib. 3. Ignis erit paena extrinsecus saeviens, vermis dolor interius accusans. These seeme to restraine that fire from working on the soule. But it is plain, Mat. 2.5.^1. The fire is prepared for the divell and his angels. But the divell hath no body, yet ^^e burnes in fire. Luk. 16.24. The rich man cried out, and shall cry for ever, I am ^^rmented in this flame. Yet was his body in the grave, and his soule onely in hell; ^either is that altogether a Parable: for then Tacuisset nomen, and solum posuisset ex^^plum. Christ would onely have propounded the example, and concealed the ^^me. Hee that denyeth spirits to be tormented in fire, let him take heed lest his ^wne spirit feele it. But how this corporeall fire shall torment divels and damned ^^irits, who knowes? I do not doubt but that rich man was in the burning of paines, ^^d the poore man in the refreshing of joyes: but how to apprehend that flame of ^ell, that bosome of Abraham, that tongue of the rich, and finger of the poore; ^^la sitis tormenti, illa stilla refrigerij; that thirst of torment, that drop of comfort, ^^all hardly be found of them that seeke humbly, never of them that seek curiously. Melius est dubitare de ocultis, quam litigare de incertis. It is more safe to doubt of ^^at is secret, than to dispute of that is uncertaine. It is miserable by seeking what ^OD hath secreted, to lose what GOD hath granted. Seeing then this is sub^^antiall and corporeall fire; wherein differs it from our elementary fire? In five ^^spects.
1. In regard of heate. The fire in a lantschip which is Ignis pictus, or their ^^rgatory fire, which is Ignis fictus: is a better representation of elementall fire, than ^^ementall is of eternall fire. That furnace whose heate was septupled, and the ^^mes lick'd up them for whom it was not meant; was raging, but not a glow^^g sparke to hell.
2. In regard of light: our fire comforts in shining, that is oppressed with hor^^ble darkenesse. Cremationem habet, lumen non habet, Greg. Vim comburendi reti^^, illuminandi amisit, Basil. It retaines the property of burning, it hath lost the ^^operty of shining. Therefore it is called Hades sine sole domus: Iude cals it the ^ack darkenesse. The darkenesse of Aegypt was strange and fearefull, so thick that it ^as palpable: yet a meere holy day to hell. The Poets described it by Cimerian ^^knesse; an Italian territory betwixt Baiae and Cumae, where the Cimerij inhabite: ^environed with hils, and over-shadowed with supercilious and hanging promon^ries, that the Sun never comes at it.
3. Elementall fire burnes the body onely, eternall also the soule. The passion (...) the body, is but the body of passion; the soule of paine is the paine of the soule: ^t if a consumable body be not able to endure burning flames for a day; how will (...) unwastable soule endure them for ever.
4. Elementall fire as it burnes, so it consumes: hell fire rageth more and wa^^th lesse. The reprobate shall have the punishment vri, to bee burned; not the ^^ppinesse exuri, to be wasted. Poenae gehennales puniunt, non finiunt corpora, Pro^^. Iron will hold burning long, yet consumeth: in hell there is neither cessati^^ of fire burning nor of matter burned. It is a fire of consummation, not of con^^ption: Ignis absolvens non disolvens. If it were terminable, it might be tollerable: (...) being endlesse, it must be easelesse.
5. Our elementall fire may be quenched, that never goes out. This is maintained with wood, and put out with water: that as it hath nothing to maintaine it, so nothing to extinguish it. There shall be weeping of eyes, no mitigation of flames: if there be any teares, they shall rather be like oile to feed and nourish it, than like water to put it out.
These are three principall expressions of hell; but is there nothing of paine besides these? It seemes they suffer nothing else but fire, because CHRIST doomes them only unto fire, Matth. 25.41. Indeed fire is the principall, but there are other accessaries and concomitances. Basil. In the last purgation of the world there shall be a separation made in the elements. Whatsoever is pure, refin'd, sublim'd, and perfect, shall remaine above for the solace of the blessed. Whatsoever is feculent, sordid, and ignoble, shall be cast downe to the punishment of the damned. That as every creature becomes matter of the Saints joy; so every creature be made matter of the reprobates sorrow.Wis. 5.17. God shall make the creature his weapon for the revenge of his enemies: and the world shall fight with him against the unwise. As they have departed from that one God, one good, by sinne in many materiall thing^ which are variae and vanae: so that one Iustice shall by many materiall things confound them. But Iob 24.19. Ad calorem nimium transibit ab aquis nivium; as the vulgar Latine reads. Now the varietie and vicissitude of passions yields some refreshing. As when a man passeth from extreme cold to extreme heate, there is a mediate intermission: but there is no refreshing admitted in hell. Answ. The damned may passe from extremitie of cold to extremitie of heate, without any re^^^shing: because the passure shall not be by any transmutation of the body from the former naturall disposition, nor by reduction to any equalitie of temper: but ^^^^ble paines working upon the sensible parts; secundum esse spirituale, non secundum ess^ materiale, in organum, Aquin. The summe is this; the torments of hell are comprise^ under fire, because that is most violent, vehement, and sharply afflictive. Wa^^ doth only kill: fire doth vexe also, and torment: yea which is worse, this fire doth never kill. It shall be so extreme, that the damned shall prize a cup of cold wa^^ above ten thousand worlds. The use.
As we desire to escape the fire of hell, let us avoid the fire of sin. Praeparant i^nita peccata in ignita supplicia. There be certaine fiery sins, which shall find fiery punishments; as Nadab both offered and suffered strange fire. There is Ignis nec ardeus (...) lucens: Ignis and ardens and lucens: ignis lucens non ardens: ignis ardens non lucens. The^^ fire is properly neither burning nor shining, but only stinkes and makes a smothe^ sin, a spirituall fire. There is fire both burning and shining; that we call elemen^^ fire. There is fire burning and not burning, as the Sun. There is fire burning and not shining, and that's the fire of hell. Thus Paul calls lust a burning: It is better (...) marry than to burne. Who then would burne in lust, that feares to burne in hell? (...) read of a man, that when he was tempted to lust, would lay his hand on bur^^^^ coales, concluding; If I cannot endure this for a while, how should I endure (...) fire for ever? Rage and malice are burning sinnes. Iratus non vides legem, sed lex ^det iratum. The angry man beholds not the Law, but the Law beholds the a^^^^ man. Therefore is anger called Excandescentia. They that nourish that fire within them, are nourished for a worse fire without them. Blasphemie is a burning (...)Iam. 3 6. The tongue is a fire, that fireth the whole course of nature, and is fired of hell. Let th^^ whose mouthes flame with oaths, feare these flaming torments. The rich (...) tongue was tormented in fire, because it was used to spit fire against heaven. Drunkennesse is a burning sinne:V^itur igresuo. Esa. 26.11. too much wine is the oile of hells owne Lampe. They inflame the reckoning, till they inflame their braines, inflame their blouds, infl^^^ their bodies: buy as much sicknesse, as will make up a burning fever; and (...) much sinne as will serve to inflame their owne hell. In the German p^^verbe, Fire is of all the genders. Hic ignis, that's fire: Haec ignis, that's a^ whore: Hoc ignis, that's wine. the first Chapter of Iohn Verse 5. Mundus pos^^^
 est in maligno, that is in igne malo: all the world is on fire with sin, to make worke ^or the fire of hell. Deut. 32.22. A fire is kindled in mine anger, and it shall burne ^nto the lowest hell. Psal. 2.12. If his wrath bee kindled but a little, Blessed are all they ^^at trust in him. Cant. 8.6. The Coales thereof are coales of fire, which have a most ^chement flame. Wildfire may bee tamed, streames of fire have beene quenched: ^^ely that fire can never be extinguished in the subject it hath possessed. One thing ^^ely now can put it out; the water and bloud that came out of CHRISTS owne ^de. Onely that water can quench the fire of lust in us, and that bloud quench the ^re of hell against us.
Downe into hell.] Let me a little further enlarge this discourse of hell: wherein you do not finde a due method, know that the nature of the place denies it. Who ^n speake methodically and orderly of that; Quod nec modum nec methodum novit; ^at knowes no method, no order. Ibi ordo nullus, horror sempiternus.Hugo. If any expect (...) absolute description; I excuse my selfe; Non mihi si c^ntum linguae. But as Pi^agoras ghest at the stature and pitch of Hercules, by the length of his foote; and ^e say in the proverbe, Ex ungue leonem: so by shaddow and resemblance, we may ^ittle conceive what it is in sufferance. This is a cup of the deadliest wine that ever ^as tasted: those deepe graves in the Psalme, from whence there is no rising againe. The gates of that infernall prison being kept from egresse, as the gates of Paradise ^e rewarded from entrance: not by Cherubins with a flaming sword, but by the ^ngels of Satan, with all the instruments of death, and the seale of Gods eternall ^ecree set upon them. This is that outer darkenesse, to comprehend and wrap up the ^^mned. Outer, because in extremity, without the limits of any mercy to be exten^ed: where no light of Sun, Moone, or Starre, much lesse the face of GOD shall ^^er shine. Where the eyes shall distill like fountaines, and the teeth clatter like ar^^ed men, and the minde muse on nothing but sad desperation. Many and fearefull agonies have wrung and wrested the spirit of man, since the spirit of life was first ^eathed into him: yet if all were put together, to answer the measure of hell tor^ents amongst them; the hand of Tophet hath an unmeasurable portion left be^^nd to destribute to her children, and enlesse patrimony of howling and gnashing (...) teeth. Balance them together, and the least paine of hell is greater than the greatest of this world, Aquin. Horrible torments have bin inflicted on mortall dilin^ents; they are all but ticklings to those torturings. Rev. 8.13. There is a three^ld woe: Woe for the bitternesse; Woe for the multitude; Woe for the everlasting^^sse of those paines.Mat. 26.34. It had beene better for that man never to have beene borne. A ^^e, ten thousand times more than can be imagined by any heart as deep as the Sea. ^hese are those waters of gall, viols of unmercifull plagues; pestilence and bloud, ^d huge hailestones, fire and brimstone. Not such as fell upon Sodome, the wit^^sses whereof, for many succeding ages, were heaps of ashes, and clouds of pitch. (...) fire and brimstone from a bottomelesse minde, which burneth in the lake of ^ath, and shall never be quenced.
Of all these torments there are two dire and dismall effects. Mat. 8.12. Wee^^ng and gnashing of teeth. Fletus de ardore, stridor dentium de frigore. Raban, Fletus ^^gnem qui non extingitur, stridor ob vermem qui non moritur. Fletus ex dolore,Fletus a causa intrinseca, stridor a causa ex trinseca. stri^^ ex furore, Bern. They are cast into darkenesse, for the inordinatenesse of their ^cupiscible: weepe, for the inordinatenesse of their Irascible? gnash their teeth, for (...) inordinatenesse of their irrationall part, Corrh. This manifesteth two extremi^^ in hell; incomparable cold, and intollerable heate, Greg. in Mat. 8.
Weeping: here are some questions moved, whether this be a corporall weeping. ^me affirme it; because the sorrow which is in paine shall answer the pleasure that (...) in sinne.Revel. 18.7. As shee hath lived deliciously, give her so much torment and sorrow. But ^robates in their sinning had both an inward pleasure, and an outward delighting: ^efore they must have in punishment both an inward grief and an outward weeping. ^usu. But then damnation being eternall, this effusion would also be eternall: and
 so the teares would make an inundation larger thn thae ocean, able in time to p^^ out the fire of hell. Therefore we must distinguish; In corporall weeping the^^ are two things: a resolution of teares, and a commotion or perturbation of the (...) and eyes. This weeping is not the resolution of teares, because then the motion of the first mover ceasing, there is no generation, nor corruption, nor alteration of the body. But there must bee a generation of that moisture which distills it selfe (...) teares, if that weeping were corporall. Yet there shall remaine a weeping, which ariseth from the perturbation of the soule, and anguish of the body. There (...) be here a howling like dragons, when as yet no teares fall. It is observable (...) the expence of teares outwardly mitigates the sorrow within, and easeth the he^^ the burden of indigestible griefe emptying and venting it selfe at the eyes: but (...) eternall teares could never qualifie eternall paines.
It is further objected; weeping is the effect of sorrowing, and sorrow of reputing: therefore it seemes if the damned weepe in hell, that they repent in hell. W^^^ 5.3, And they repenting, and groaning for anguish of spirit, So Aristot. They (...) be grieved for that wherein they were delighted. Answ. To repent may bee understood two waies: either ratione peccati, or peccato adjuncti: in respect of sinne, and the punishment annexed to sinne. To repent of sinne for it selfe, is to hate it for (...) other cause but because it is sinne and displeasing to God: thus they doe not sorrow. To repent of it for the punishment bound to it,Bern. is a sorrow by accident; that ariseth not from their evill doing, but from their evill suffering. The will of the dam^^^^^ never bettered by their torment. To wish they had not sinned, without further ^^lation, were a good will: but a good will and they are everlasting strangers. The will of the Devill is still invertible: nor doth hee grieve for his pride, but for the punishment of his pride. Agains, there shall bee a greater perv ersnesse of the damned in hell, than is of sinners on earth: but diverse sinners here, through blindne^^ of minde, and hardnesse of heart, doe not repent of their sinnes: though the (...) savage beasts through griefe and paine are restrained from their sensuall pleasure. On earth there may be repenting without weeping, in hell there shall bee weeping, without repenting.
But is their no recoverie of originall good in hell? If the damned are sorry for their sinnes, this argues repentance. If they were re-admitted to life, they would (...) their life in obedience; this argues a will to goodnesse. That rich man had (...) care of his living brethren; this argues charitie. No, there is no repentance, (...) rectified will, no charitie. Haply some remanents of naturall light, none of (...) naturall grace.
There is no repentance, Revel. 16.9. They are scorched with heate, and blaspheme Gods name: but repent not to give him glory. Ver. 11. They curse him for their paines and sores, but repent not of their deeds. True repentance ariseth fr^^ faith and hope: but there can be no faith of releasement, where is certaine knowledge of eternall punishment: knowledge and sense exclude faith. There can b^^^ hope of termination, where be chaines of desperation. There shall be a desp^^^ sorrow for paine, no penitent sorrow for sinne. None are now saved but by the bloud of the Lambe: but when the world is ended, that fountaine is dried up. The worme of conscience shall gnaw them with this remorse, bringing to their (...) the cause of their present calamities. How often they have beene invited (...) heaven, how easily they might have escaped hell. They shall weepe for the losse of the one and gaine of the other, not for the cause of either, which were repentance.
There is no will to good, or at least no good will. As the will of the bless^^^ wholly set upon good: so the will of the damned is wholly set upon evill. Neither can the Saints in heaven will that which is evill, nor the reprobates in hell will (...) which is good. This we perceive in the divels, who have bene so long damned, ^eaven to this day their unchangeable will is totally bent to wickednesse. But (...)
 est omnio involuntarium, Dionys. Evill is altogether against the will: if therefore they will any thing, it is good either in existence, or in appearance. Ans. There is a double will in them: Naturall, which is not of themselves, but of the founder of nature: Deliberative, that is of themselves; which being wholly averted from the supreme end of goodnesse, cannot be but evill. So that if naturally they could will good, yet the forme of that will being so corrupted, it must necessarily be bad. Indeed evill as it is properly evill, moves not the will: but as it is an estimative good. Such is their malice, that they never will any thing but evill, though they esteeme it good. So that if they were now repealed againe to this world; they would neither repent their sins, nor amend their lives, nor glorifie God, nor seeke IESUS. Let us now labour to rectifie our wills, and order them to the seeking of good: lest we there lose both the good it selfe, and the very will unto it. For In Inferno erit stimulus paenitudinis, nulla tamen correctio voluntatis: ita culpabitur iniquitas sua, ut nullatenus possit diligi vel desiderari Iustitia, Aug. They shall curse their owne wickednesse, yet neither love nor desire righteousnesse.
There is no charitie; not so much as any love to God, the infinite good; much lesse to man. None to God. But Omnibus diligibile est pulchrum and bonum: goodnesse and beautie is every ones love: therefore much more God, the cause and fountaine of it. Nay, they shall hate God, Ps. 139.21. Doe not I hate them that hate thee? Indeed if God could be seene of them in his goodnesse, mercie, bountie, they could not hate him: but they no further apprehend him but by the sense of their owne torments, the effects of his Iustice, and so hate him, Revel. 16.9.11.21. They suffer, and they blaspheme: there is in them a furious malice against him: being cursed of him, they recurse him. They curse him for making them, curse him for condeming them, curse him because being adjudged to death, they can never find death. They curse his punishments, because they are so unsufferable: curse his mercies, because they may never tast them: curse the bloud of CHRIST shed on the Crosse; because it hath satisfied for thousands, and done their unbeleeving soules no good: curse the Angels and Saints in heaven, because they see them in joy, and themselves ^n torment. Cursings shall be their sins, blasphemies their prayers, Lacrimae their ^otes, lamentation all their harmonie. These shall be their evening songs, their morning songs, their mourning songs for ever.
No charity to man, for they rather wish all damned with themselves, than any ^o be freed from their owne prison. As in the blessed there is perfect charity, so in ^he damned perfect envy. Now nothing is more repugnant to charity than malice and hatred. But it is objected, that inordinate affections are not taken away from ^he damned: therefore they would not have them condemned in hell, whom they ^nordinately affected upon earth. Ans. The love that is grounded upon vertue, is constant and durable: such charity we shall beare with us to heaven, and bee made ^erfect in it. But the affection grounded upon lust and sinfull passion, a disease that ^uns in the bloud, doth quickly vanish: like fire in wet straw, that onely makes a mother, and goes out in stench. Therefore the adulterer, though he so dotes on his Mistris, that hee is content to venture his soule for her embraces: yet having lost ^hat soule, hee doth as heartily wish her in the same bed of torment: that as they ^ave beene delighted together, so they might be afflicted together. Object. But as ^y the multitude of participants the joyes of heaven are enlarged, so are the sor^owes of hell encreased: how then will they desire more company, when thereby ^hey inhaunce their owne penalty? Ans. Yet such is their unchangeable malice, ^^at it contents them not to suffer their owne singular torments; but had rather en^ure more grievous misery, to have a more numerous society. And for the rich ^ans prayer for his brethren, Luk. 16. It proceeded not from a charitable soule, but ^^om feare and horror of more torments to be multiplied on himselfe. Non fratres ^^exit, fed seipsum respexit: he desired not their salvation, but his owne lesse dam^^tion. He knew that being the elder brother, his vicious example might draw on
 their greater disobedience: and as their sins encreased, so he felt his owne tortures enlarged. Therefore no grace in hell but everlasting sin, no devotion, but extreame damnation.
The wicked in hell still remaine sinners. So Christ saith; All that came before me are theeves and robbers: Are; in propriety of speech he should have said; Fu^runt, they were theeves: no, Sunt, they are still, they remaine so. Luk. 13.27. Depart from mee all ye workers of iniquity: Operarij, and ab actu praeterito, and habitu presenti, Chrys. Workers, in reference both to the act past, and present habit. For he doth not say, yea that have wrought, but workers: quia iniqui nec post mortem des^nunt esse iniqui. They that dye sinners, remaine sinners even dead: although they cannot sin, yet they retaine the desire of sinning: and he that is a lyer in purpose, ceaseth not to be a lyer in practice. Mors separat animam a carne, non peccatum (...) anima. Death separates the soule from the flesh, it separates not sin from the soule.
Seeing the effect of those horrors is weeping, which shall never be comforted; let us prevent them, by weeping where we may be comforted. The time of living, is the time of repenting. If a man dies without repentance, repentance is dead to him forever. If we compare, Mat. 5.4. with Luke 6.25. we shall finde, that the decree of God hath disposed, Flentes ad risum, ridentes ad fletum; weepers to laughing, and laughers to weeping.
Gnashing of teeth;] This is the effect of an inexpressible sorrow. A just and s^ punishment, that they who once gnashed their teeth at others in contempt, should gnash their teeth at themselves in torment. The Psalmist complaines; They gnashed their teeth at me; and the IewesActs 7.54. gnashed on Stephen with their teeth. ThereforeRevel. 16.16. they shall gnaw their tongues for paine: their tongues gnawed their neighbours, now they shall gnaw their own tongues. They shewed their teeth in derision, they shall gnash their teeth in damnation. No part of the damned shall be free from anguish, the memory afflicted with pleasures past, the apprehension with terrors present, the understanding with torments to come and continue, the eye with darknesse, the eare with hideous scriechings, the smell with killing stenches, the tast with gall of bitternesse, the very teeth with such an anguish, that the extreamest tooth-ach here is but a pleasure to it. Such is the extremity, universality, and eternity of those paines: if they bee so universall in all parts, O that they were not so extreame! if so extreame; O that not so universall! if both so universall and extreame! O tha^ not so everlasting; each torment easelesse, endlesse, remedilesse! There be Ignit^ lacrymae, and frigidi anhelitus. Therefore called Avernus; absque vera temperatur^ where the freezing cold shal not mitigate the scorching heate, nor the scorching he^ qualifie the freezing cold. Avernus is a lake in Italy, that Caesar purged; evaporating such a mortall steame, that it killed the birds which flew over it. Therefore called Avernus quasi avibus adversus.August: Profundus sine fundo; full of incomparable heare, intollerable stench, innumerable griefes. Hugo, Vermis cum tenebris, flagellum, f^gus, and ignis; Daemonis aspectus, scelerum confusio, luctus. From all these must needs arise the gnashing of teeth. Two things would seeme to mitigate the terror of hell, Patience and Hope: this gnashing of teeth excludes them both.
For patience; many grievons extremities have the Saints of God digested o^ earth by patience: that universall antidote against future evils, and qualification of present severities. It hath blunted the edge of tyranny, and made the sufferers sm^le in the midst of those pangs, the very sight whereof hath astonished the beholders. Whatsoever the damned suffer, let them have but patience: nay, there shall bee (...) patience in hell: this gnashing of teeth, is the effect of a most impatient furie. M^^ commonly say, in necessitated sufferings; what remedy but patience? Patience therefore is a confessed enemy, but all remedie is denyed to the reprobates the^; even that poorest succour which the anguished heart can imagine, Patience. O the universall privation in that dismall place! where Omne aderit quod cruciet, om^^ (...) quod relevet. Everything is present that may vexe them, everything absent th^^
 may comfort them. Where they must suffer everlastingly, and cannot suffer pati^ntly.
For Hope, there is none. The proper object of hope is Arduum bonum, saith ^e Schoole: a difficult good. A good of difficulty not of impossibility: where no possibility can be no hope. There nulla spes boni, nulla desperatio mali, Hugo. ^o hope of good, no despaire of evill. Men say in extreme passions; If it were ^t for hope, the heart would burst: there is no hope, yet the heart must hold: the ^isery is, that it cannot burst; but lyes (like a tormented Malefactour) upon the ^heele, ever dying, yet without all hope to dye. Dissolutionem cupit, and dissolutio^n non capit damnatus. There is no hope in hell, no hope with us on earth, for them ^t are in hell. We cannot hope for the devills; they are condemned to hell, and ^st hope: nor can we hope for the dead, because there is no purgatory. Indeed ^ncerning the dead, there may be hope of their happy condition, but none of their ^rmutation. This is a double torment; neither deliverance, nor hope of delive^nce. Sad and heavy despaire absolves their infelicity: comfort they neither feele, ^r have hope to feele.
Seeing only hope is confined to this life, let us make much of it, that it may en^th us.Rom. 5.5. Hope makes not ashamed, because it is never disappointed: for if it could illuded, it would be ashamed. Spes vitae immortalis est vita vitae mortalis, Aug. ^he hope of life immortall, is the life of our life mortall. The Poets faine, that all ^^e gods and goddesses, that is, vertues and graces, did once dwell upon the earth. (...) finding all things so corrupt, and men so bad company, they all went up to ^aven with Iustice; Terras Astraea reliquit. All but onely Hope, and shee stayed be^nd still. But now if we hope well, we must doe well. Hee tempts God, does not ^pe in God, that hoping doth nothing for himselfe,Luk. 13.8. Aug. Though there be hope of the ^^ren figtree, yet still the dresser labours in the manuring of it. It is in vaine for a ^n to hope his children shall doe well, when he teacheth them ill. The meanes ^ust be used, where hope is nourished. Hope is onely for the present: the Saints in ^aven have no hope, for they are in full possession of joy: the damned in hell have (...) hope, for they are in full possession of torment. Onely the living have hope, and the living GOD is their hope: which himselfe blesse and answere in IESUS ^HRIST.
The last question is, ubi sit, what is the place of hell, my text saies. It is Downe ^rd. S^ doth the Scrip^ure frequently. Let them be cast into the Deepe pits,Psal 110.10. that ^^y rise not up againe. Bring them Downe into the pit of destruction.Prov. 9.18. They are in the ^epth of hell. The way of life is above to the wise, that he may depart from hell ^eath. So the termes declare it, and the word describes it. Sheol,Prov. 15.24. which is taken (...) a pi^, grave, or hell,; all Downewards. Mercer. in Gen. 37. sayes that Sheol sig^es all places under the earth. It must be below, because it is every where opposed heav^n which is highest of all. Abyssus, which is a great deepe, a vast gulfe under ^e earth, a bottomlesse pit: the devills intreated Christ not to send them to that ^ee. Luk. 8.31. Into the Abysse. The Apostles that preached to the Iewes, used ^e word Gehenna, Iam. 3.6. It is set on fire of Gehenna Hell. They that preached the Gentiles, used Hades: which they tooke to be a place under the earth ordei^d for punishment. The word here used is Tartarus: Hesiod affirmes it to be so ^re under the earth, as heaven is above it. So the Rabbines ^eld; Sheol is absolute below, the very center, Esa. 14.9. Hell from Beneath is moved, Deut. 32.22. I ^ll burne ad Infernum inferiorem to the lowest hell. Nic. de Lyr. affirmes is Circa ^trum terrae. Tertull. in Apologet. Hell is a subterrane treasure of hidden fire. The ^ets so tooke it; Facilis descensus averni; Sed revocare gradum etc. Quicquid perit ^sum fertur. All things perishing, sinke downewards.
But against this it is objected, that Dives in hell saw Abraham and Lazarus ^ich he could not doe; if hell was so deepe and remote a bottom wherein he lay ^er whelmed. And albeit hell is below and downeward in respect of heaven, yet
 happily it is not so in regard of earth, Rev. 12.12. Woe to the inhabitants of the earth, for the Divell is come Downe amongst you: yet hee was then cast no lo^^ than the superface of the earth. There be diverse arguments on both sides. First (...) they that live, know not the state of the dead: so the dead know not the state of the living on earth, much lesse of the Saints in heaven, Greg. So August. As the rich man had a care of his brethren living, yet he knew not what they did: so h^^^ men a care of their dead friends, yet know not how they speed. Against this is opposed, that if they in hell had not the sight of heaven, their owne sufferings wo^l^ lesse afflict them: for their most grievous torment shall arise from the vision of wh^^ joyes they have lost.Wisd. 5. Wisd. 5.2. When they shall see it, they shall bee troubled with ^^rible feare, and be amased at the Saints salvation. So Bern. The faithfull shall h^^^ a sight of hell, and the unfaithfull a sight of heaven. Vt illi magis laetentur, vide^^ quid evaserint: and hi gravius crucientur, videntes quid amiserint. That the one (...) be rejoyced, by seeing what horrors they have escaped: and the other may be a^flicted, by seeing what comforts they have forfeited.Psal. 112.10. The wicked shall see it, (...) grieved: he shall gnash with his teeth, and melt away. Barre the sight of their e^ and you ease the griefe of their hearts. Luk. 13.28. That weeping and gnashing (...) teeth proceeds from sight; when you shall see Abraham etc. in the kingdome of God. (...) is the exile from the presence of the Lambe, from the societie of Saints and Angels from the felicitie and joyes they see; that most bitterly scourgeth them. The (...) knowing of earthly affaires never troubles them: but heaven they must in part (...) and know, else they cannot be tormented with the losse. But on the other side (...) said, that the sight of heaven is never afforded to Saints in the flesh but as an in^mable favour. It was Pauls greatest grace, and that which had like to have enda^ger'd him unto pride, to be wrapt up into the third heaven, and behold the life which the blessed live with God. But what extraordinary grace was this, if it be (...) granted to the reprobates? Answ. Saint Paul saw it experiendo, by tasting it: (...) hoped againe to see it Participando, by possessing it: such a sight is not permitted (...) the children of perdition. They onely see it to the griefe of their hearts, that they cannot enjoy it.
The Schoole gives this conclusive summe; that the damned shall behold (...) glory of heaven before the day of Iudgment, but not after. Neither shall they know it as it is in it selfe; but onely by a kind of luscous and glimmering sight perceive i^ be an invaluable glory. And this shall vex them, both that they can no better (...) it, and shall never tast it. Afterwards they shall be deprived of that vision, and (...) up in everlasting night, neither shall the withdrawing of this vision diminish (...) tortures: because the remembrance of that once seene, shall for ever sticke by th^^ Hence they shall continually grieve, finding themselves unworthy, Gloriam t^^ videre, quam Sancti permittuntur habere: even to see those pleasures, which the go^ are vouchsafed to inherite and inhabite for ever. But how could that rich m^^, (...) can the damned spirits be said to see the glory of heaven, when as they want th^^ luminary organs of the body, the disposition of sight; besides the thicke interp^^ darknesse? Answ. This is no reason, for even spirits see, and have the eyes of ^^ligence and apprehension, able to distinguish betweene light and darkenesse. T^^ apprehend this glory either universally or particularly. An universall appreh^sion they have, whereby they perceive the Saints to be in great glory; in partic^^ what this glory is they know not. At a great feast, the beggar at the doore se^s (...) part the joy and cheare of the guests; but not so well as the guests themselves (...) are banketing. And as this must needs grieve the beggar, to see it and not (...) tast it: so shall the damned vex, Tam propter invidiam alienae faelicitatis, (...) propter carentiam illius qutetis; for envie both at others plenty, and their (...) want.
Thus if we grant that the damned shall see the glory of heaven, then it will (...) bably follow that hell is in the aire; onely separated with an unpassable gulfe. If (...)
 ^e not see it, then is it likely to be in the bowels of the earth. Howsoever, it is be^, Downewards, in the inferior parts of Gods workemanship. But precisely to (...) where; whether in the aire, water, on the face of the earth, or, in the center of ^e worlds center; Tegitur, non legitur: periculose disquiritur, tuto ignoratur: we may safely be ignorant of it, wee cannot but dangerously dispute it. Only, as just ^rits dissolved from their bodyes, presently ascend to the Empyreall heaven: so ^e soules of the lost tarry below, confined to the inferior Elements, there to be ^nished. If any aske further about the locall place of hell, I answere with Socrates, ^ever was there my selfe, nor spoke with any that came from thence. When ^e demanded what the gods did and loved, Euclides answered; whatsoever ^ey doe or love, I am sure they hate all curious examiners. Many doubt Vbt (...) where it is: none can describe Quid sit, what it is: but all agree Quod sit, ^at it is.
Seeing hell is a descent, and a bottome downewards, let us keepe our selves so ^re as we can from it while we live, that it may never devoure us when we die. (...) doth naturally sinke downeward, and separate from God who is above. A sin^^r ever descendeth till he come to the lowest that may be: his affections are downe^ards, and sure his hope and inheritance is not above. But as we bury dead flesh un^r the ground, so it is not unlikely of dead soules. And as the heaviest bodies ^aw to the center of the earth, so doe the saddest and heaviest spirits which the ^ercie of God hath forsaken, Luk. 13.11. We read of a woman bowed downe with a ^^rit of infirmitie 18 yeares, and could in no wise lift up her selfe. A wofull estate ^^ed by the Evangelist: Egritudinis manifestas, behold: aegrotantis fragilitas, a woman: ^seriae acerbitas, it was a spirit of infirmitie: morbi diuturnitas, eighteene yeares: cor^is curvitas, bowed together: elevandi impossibilitas, could not lift up her selfe. Such the estate of wicked sinners; that if their bodies were like their soules, incederunt ^drupedes, they would grovell like beasts. And indeed Bestialior quam ipsa bestia ^homo, ratione vigens, and non ratione vivens. They cast themselves downe, and ^^e but IESUS CHRIST can helpe them up, Luk. 10.30. A certaine man went ^ne from Ierusalem to Iericho, and fell among theeves. From Ierusalem downe Iericho: hell is downe a hill. Iericho signifies the Moone, Ieron. He that walkes ^er the Moone of this inconstant world, must needs fall among theeves. Sin brings man easily downe to Iericho: Sed revocare gradum, superasque evadere ad auras, Hic ^or, hoc opus est. The rule of Philosophy is, that levia surgunt, light things a^nd upwards: yet is nothing lighter than vaine thoughts, and they sinke downe^rds: sinne is hells high way.Col. 3.1. If ye be risen with CHRIST, seeke those things ^t are above.
First, understand the things, then undertake the search. Though we cannot ^roughly see them, yet let us throughly seeke them. This is (...), to be wise: but ^^udacious curiositie to measure every foote in hell, and dispose every cabinet and amber in heaven; this is (...), to be wise beyond sobrietie. Fidendo, non dendo apprehendimus. 2 Cor. 5.7. We walke by faith, not by sight.Lam. 3.41. Let us lift up our ^arts with our hands unto God in the heavens. The Lord in all our holy services ^^ites the heart: in his Temple, at his Table, My Sonne give me thy heart, Psal ^1. Vnto thee o Lord, doe I lift up my heart, Revel. 12. There was a woman clothed ^th the Sun, and the Moone under her feete, and upon her head a Crowne of twelve ^res. The head of the Church is wrapp'd in the starres, and the world is under (...) feete. She forgets the land wherein she was borne, and the home-stall wherein (...) was bred, and seekes Ierusalem above, where Christ sitteth on the right hand of ^od.Psal. 62.10. If riches encrease. Nolite cor apponere, set not your heart on them: they are ^^vy things, and will sinke you downewards. Animus velut pondere, amore fertur, ^qunque fertur, Aug. If our love be to things downeward, our soules canno^e to God upward. We never minister the blessed Sacrament, but we tell you of ^^rsum corda, lift up your hearts: you then answere us, we lift them up: but it is to be
 feared, that many hearts are so heavy that they cannot be lift up. The Philosopher being asked which was the heaviest part of the earth, answered; that which beares (...) ignorant person. How little a piece of flesh so ever a wicked heart be, a talent of le^^ is light unto it.
The merry wanton that dissolutely lives, being asked how he scapes sicknesse, lives so long and so joviall; answers I have a light heart. But when this man co^^ to feele the waight of his sinnes, let him tell me then whether he be light hearted Naba could be drunke in his health; but when he is sicke, his heart lies and (...) him like a stone: nothing in the world can lift it up. The heart cannot raise it selfe, it is the Lord thatIoh. 6.44. drawes it up. Iohn 12.32. When I am lifted up from the earth, I will draw all men unto me. The Apothecary hath no drugs so cordiall, the sy^phant no jest so joviall, the Vintner no Wine so sprightly, the Musician no stro^e^ lusty; that it can lift up a sinfull heart. Downe, downe it sinkes without the ani^^tion of Gods holy Spirit.
But if CHRIST be our delight, our hearts are with him. Dominus ascend^ (...) coelum, ascendat cum illo cor nostrum, Aug. His body doth not descend downe to (...), we must ascend up to it. Indeed if in so large a quantitie it be presently reall in the Sacrament, as it was on the Crosse, in full dimensions; what need any man lift (...) his heart, to that he holds in his hand? No, he is above, contained in the heavens, (...) the time of restitution: and if he be our joy, thither we also aspire: Vbi amor, (...) culus: ubi dolor, ibi digitus: ubi cor, ibi thesaurus. The finger points to the griefe, (...) eye followes the pleasure, and the heart followes the treasure. God hath given (...) both a face to looke, and a faith to climbe upwards. Si sit sursumos, quare den^^^ cor?Aug. Ascendamus interim corde, ut sequamur corpore. Let us send up our hearts before, that our soules may follow after. How preposterous and mis-match'd is (...) erected countenance, and a groueling spirit.
Things nearest heaven take least care for earth: the foules of the aire nei^^^^ plow, nor sow, nor carry into the barne. But men most love what they must le^^ and thinke seldome or never, of the place where they should be for ever. Some (...) too precise for publike prayers, without a Sermon: as if God were only to se^^ them, and they not bound to serve God. Are there not many that will bef^^^ more upon a licence to eate flesh in Lent, than upon their soules all the yeare? (...) are their thoughts upward? the poorest piece of garment they weare; their has, their cuffes, their shooes, their shooties; cost them more than their foules: and (...) not their thoughts downewards? They will rather lose their inheritance in hea^^^, than let Christ have his inheritance on earth: and what, are their desires upwards (...) Downe, downewards they sinke, like the trash that God blesseth not: their (...) buried in their coffers, as dead bodies are naild up in their coffins. And when t^^^ have dejected themselves so low as they can, then must this bottomlesse bottome ^^ceive them, and overwhelme them with everlasting pressures. A materiall (...) stone hung about their neckes, cannot sooner or surer carry them into the depth (...) the sea. For us, let our hearts be upward, that our soules may never sinke do^^ ward. Saint Bernard mentions foure degrees of ascending. Primus ad cor, sec^^^^ in corde, tertius de corde, quartus supra cor. The first ascent is of knowledge, (...) second of faith, the third of love, the last of glory. Let us know God, this (...) first step to blessednesse: knowing, let us beleeve on him, that's the next: belee^^^^ let us loue him, that's the third: and loving, we shall live with him, that's the (...) and perfection of eternall joy.
And delivered them into chaines of darkenesse, to be reserved unto Iudgement. (...) are two things; the measure of their present confusion, and the time of their (...) damnation. As a malefactor is first cast into a dungeon, at the Assiles brought (...) to Iudgement and then led to execution. Now they are overwhelmed with (...) ^^sertion of favour, then shall be confounded with imposition of plenary tort^^e. (...) be chained in a blacke and confused vault, seemes an unsufferable plague to the (...)
 quent: yet had he rather abide there still, than come forth to the light when he is ^ure to be punished with death. Therefore theyRevel. 6.16. cry to the mountaines and rockes, ^o fall on them, and cover them: the reprobates rather desire the loades of rockes, ^nd pressure of mountaines, for concealement, than be summoned unto judgement. Their punishment is just; theyPsal. 2.3. broke Gods bonds before, now they shall have chaines ^o hold them. Ruperunt vincula gratiae, damnantur in vincula poena. Lucifers Ero si^ilis Altissimo, hath made him Inferiorem infimo. The highest seate in heaven could ^ot content him, the lowest bed in hell must containe him. Not pleased with the glo^ious light above, he is cast into the hideous darkenesse below.
Tradidit in catenas caliginis. Where we must suppose God sitting as a just Iudge ^n his throne, and having summoned the revolting Angels before him, doth here ^entence them to present sufferings. Not but they shall also passe under another ^riall, at that day of universall retribution. When Christ shall sit on his Tribunall ^dging quicke and dead. But as a Iusticer finding a transgressor, makes his Mtiti^us, and sends him to the Gaole, there to lie in chaines till the Sessions. So we have ^ere three answerable circumstances. The Mittimus, He delivered them. The Gaole, ^to chaines of darkenesse. The Sessions. To be reserved unto Iudgement.
He delivered them:] but into whose hands? Indeed he delivers guilty mortals ^to the hands of guilty Angels. Matth. 18.34. He delivered him to the tormentors: ^hat he might be their slave in suffering, whose subject he had beene in sinning, Luk. 2.20. This night they shall fetch away thy soule: they to whom I have given com^ission to doe it; divells. They shall require it, that did defile it. This was part of ^aint Pauls excommunication. Tradere Satanae, to deliver unto Satan:1 Cor. 5.5. 1 Tim. 1.20. who is the hang^an. So he writes of Himeneus and Alexander. Whom I have delivered unto Satan that they may learne not to blaspheme. To Satan, that executioner of condemned ^oules. But Cui Satanam? to whom doth the Lord deliver Satan himselfe? Some ^swer, that themselves are the Instruments to torture themselves. Invicem torquent (...) torquentur. After a sort, every transgressor is his owne tormenter: and wicked^esse is a vexation to it selfe. Ambitio angit ambientes: ambition rackes the aspiring, ^nvie eates the marrow of his bones that envieth: the covetousnesse which would be ^ost rich, keepes the affected with it most poore: ebrietie begets the head-ach, lust ^fflicts the body that nourisheth it: and we say of the Prodigall, he is no mans foe ^ut his owne; therefore we grant that he is his owne foe. It is a foolish powder, ^at thinkes to blow up the house, and to scape it selfe from burning. If it were but (...), that Se sibi tradidit, he delivered him over to himselfe: such is the power of Gods ^ustice, that without the least trouble to himselfe, he can make an offender his owne ^flicter. How many impious wretches; after obstinate presumptions against God, ^ave wrought desperate executions upon themselves.
How should this teach us to hate sin: we thinke our selves certainely our owne ^iends: No, by sinne we become our owne enemies. That which makes us at en^itie with God, will make us at feud with our selves. Though the Lords hand ^ould not touch us, nor were any malicious divell to racke us, nor any other crea^re to scourge us; Propriis lacerabimur armis, we should thus punish our selves. If ^od speake the word, the hand shall rebell and strike the head, the nailes teare the ^inne, the teeth gnaw the flesh, the feete precipitate the shoulders, the stomach fa^ish the members. These that are made to take one anothers part, and to assist the ^hole in a peaceable communion, shall become mutinous like the Midianites, and ^eath their swords in their fellowes bowels. It is a plague woful enough, when God ^all deliver a man over to himselfe.1 Sam. 24.14. Let me not fall into the hand of man was Davids ^sire: No, as I am man, not into mine own hand. There is not lesse mercie in all Ne^'s enemies, then in desperate Nero's owne heart to himselfe. But every man will ^e good to himselfe? Yes, Quamdiu suus; so long as he is his owne man: but ^hen he becomes Gods Instrument, Timeat se, let him feare himselfe. When the ^rophet had told Hazael the tyrannous massacres he should doe to Israel; he replies.

2 King. 8.13.Am I a dog that I should doe this? No, he was not yet a dogge: but afterwards God forsooke him, then he became a dogge, and did it. Libera me a malo homine; that, is as Augustine glosseth it; a meipso. Deliver me from the evill man; O Lord: and because I am an evill man, and there is no worse, deliver me from my selfe. Such a deliverie should have beene to us all, but for another deliverance that came betweene: a Liberavit, not a Tradidit. Luk. 1.74. He hath delivered us out of the h^^^^ of all our enemies. Tradidit daemones, Liberavit homines. He delivered his owne S^^ to death, that he might deliver us from death.
Into chaines of darkenesse.] Into darkenesse, there's their Miserie. Into ch^^^^s, there's their Slaverie. Darkenesse signifies the wrath of God, and is opposed to th^^ favour of his, which is called Lux vultus sui; the light of his countenance, Psal. 4.6. There is true light where the Father of lights shineth: and his absence causeth dark^nesse.Rev. 21 23. That Citie hath no need of the Sunne or Moone to shine in it: for the glory of God doth lighten it, and the Lambe is the light of it. Such a glorious light, that the very Sun is obscuritie to it. Created lights, which now so comfort us, and whi^^ some worship for Deities, shall then resigne their honours. Mat. 24.29. The Sun (...) be darkened, and the Moone shall not give her light. Shall not then the Sun shine at (...) day? Yes, it is not darkened Diminutione luminis, sed comparatione majoris lu^i^^ not by losse of the owne light, but by the comparison of a greater light: as a (...) is of small benefite, when the Sunne appeareth. Otherwise,Esa. 30.26. the Light of the M^^ shall be as the light of the Sun, and the light of the Sun shall be seven-fold, as the light (...) seven dayes. But then these lights shall be overshined; as the Moone that rejoyc^^^ travellers in the night, gives place when the Sun riseth; and men doe not mi^^^ Lord when the King appeareth. Therefore it is called Lumen inaccessibile,1 Tim. 6.16. a lig^^ which no man (in his mortalitie and sin) can approch unto. In heaven there is all light and no darkenesse, in hell all darkenesse and no light. As the joy of the Saints (...) Angels in heaven, so the wretchednesse of the lost in hell, is so great that is cannot enlarged.
This is an unspeakable terror, to be coped up in everlasting night. If D^^^^ calls the grave a tetricall place because of this darkenesse, where the Organ of seeing is not yet excercised. Iob 10.23. A land of darkenesse and the shadow of death, where (...) light is as darkenesse: How intolerable is the darkenesse of hell! But how agreeth (...) with other Scriptures, that allow the divells vagari per orbem, and versari per (...), to wander about the world, and to be conversant in the aire? 1 King. 22.22. I^^ ^.7. Luk. 8.31. Eph. 2.2. Rom. 16.20. Shortly, therefore not yet troden downe. H^^ then are they shut up under darkenesse? Answ. It was the divells censure to be (...) into hell; yet so that before the day of Iudgement, the wisedome of God hath ^^^posed a permissive egresse into the world; and that for some of them: that (...) great number of them are in hell, there tormenting the damned soules, so the (...) wander in the world to tempt sinners. This is manifest, Revel. 9.3. Where the b^^tomlesse pit being opened, there came out of the smoke innumerable locusts upon the (...) and the purpose of their comming is expressed, that they might hurt those that (...) not the seale of God in their foreheads. So Revel. 20.2. Satan is bound for a thous^^^ yeares, at the expiration whereof it followes that he be loosed. Vntill the Iudge^^^^ day God doth lengthen his chaines.
Let us love the light, that darkenesse may never swallow us. All sinnes (...) therefore called the workes of darkenesse; not only because the evill doer hates the (...) but also because Satan the Prince of darkenesse is the founder, and shall be the (...) founder of them.1 Thes. 5.7. They that sleepe, sleepe in the night: and they that be dr^^ke, (...) drunke in the night. This was wont to be the custome, sin durst not shew her (...) face by day. But now men are growne so impudent, that they make opera (...) rum, the workes of darkenesse, become opera lucis, the workes of light; co^^ting them in the sun-shine. So2 Sam. 16.22. Absalom had a Tent spred upon the top of the (...) and went in unto his fathers concubines, in the sight of all Israel, Num. 25.6. Z^^^
 brought a whore to his tent in the sight of all Israel, even when they were weeping before the Tabernacle. Vice was once like the Owle, only a night-bird: now proud of her borrowed feathers, she dares out-face vertue at noone day. These be the ^trange Epiphanies of the time: as one observed on Matth. 2.2. We have seene his ^arre, and are come to worship him: there were two blessed Epiphanies; a manifestati^n of CHRISTS starre to them, and a manifestation of their pietie to him. In ^tead of these, Pride struts in pompe, homicide stands on termes of Iustification, ^runkennesse reeles up and downe the streets.Gal. 5.19. The workes of the flesh are manifest. These be monstrous Epiphanies; yet still the workes of darkenesse, and precipitate ^nto the place of darkenesse, to the enlargement of Satans kingdome. The Pope ^catters his Emissaries abroad, to augment Idolaters, and augment his Suprema^ie: the Turke amplifies his territories; and other Princes expatiate their dominions: ^ll these kingdomes are extended, but the kingdome of darkenesse surmounteth them ^ll. For, though never was more light in mens braines, never more universall dark^esse in their hearts.
The streame of wickednesse is so violent, that many (who had some inceptions of ^oodnesse) are even content to run with it, rather than swim against it, or especially ^eprove it. Vsurie and Sacriledge scorne to be reprehended, and he is taxed of in^iscretion that meddles with them: whereupon some let all alone, resolving to sit ^owne and hold their peace. A Fryer that had beene for his boldnesse decourted, ^fterward admitted to preach to the King of Spaine, told this Fable. The Lion ^as faulted by the Lionesse, that his breath stanke. Being mad angry with this im^utation, he traverseth the forrest, to be more certainely informed. The first sub^ect beast he met withall was an Asse, and breathing upon him, he demanded the rel^sh of his breath: the Asse plainely told him that it was very unsavory. Thou art ^oo bitter, quoth the Lion, and tore him in pieces. Next he met with the hound, and ^^t the same question to him: who answered, It is very sweet. Thou art a flatterer, ^uoth the Lion; and tore him in pieces. Last he lighted on the Foxe, and exami^ing him concerning his breath: the subtile villaine replied; Indeed I cannot tell whe^her it be sweet or sowre, for I have caught such a cold that I cannot smell. If we ^ould commend the times for devout and holy, you might justly condemne us for ^wning flatterers. If we should say, they are starke naught, full of impietie and dark^esse: then we are held too cynicall and censorious. What then? shall we answere ^e have caught a cold, and cannot smell or tell? No, we are bound to love our own ^oules, better than you can love your owne sinnes. In a word, let us receive the light ^f grace, that the light of glory may receive us.
Into chaines.] These cannot be understood litterally, for materiall chaines: but ^etaphorically, and so they are two; the Powerfulnesse of divine Iustice, and the ^uiltinesse of their owne conscience. The divels are bound, like mad men or ban^ogs, in the chaines of eternall damnation. Wheresoever they are permitted to ^ander, their owne guilty consciences are those chaines which bind them over unto ^^dgement. Such are the horrors of that place, that the damned are bound to in^fferable torments: they must endure what they cannot endure, without being able (...) remove a foote. These chaines shall so hamper them, that not one part of body, (...) facultie of soule, shall have the power of activitie to gratifie their owner withall. The mind is bound to cotemplate nothing but endles infelicity, the memory bound (...) recount nothing but fearefull sinnes, the fantasie bound to present nothing but ^orrid visions, the eyes bound to see nothing but offensive objects, the eares bound (...) heare nothing but howlings and roarings, the nostrills to smell nothing but the ^ench of brimstone, the hands to catch hold of nothing but flames, and the feete to ^alke no further than these chaines will give them leave. Delivered them into chaines (...) darkenesse: the collections, and inferences here observable are diverse.
1 Conclusion, that there is certainly a God, for how else should Satan be bound? ^ee is that Strong man, and therefore there must bee a stronger than hee to bind him.
 If there be a destroying power, without question there is a preserving power, superior to it, and correcting it. For if the divells were not curbed, they would confound us all in a moment. It is not more naturall for fire to burne; nor for heavines to finde downeward, than for Satan to destroy. He is a King over all the children of pride,Iob. 41.33. Vpon earth none can match him: but there is one in heaven that chaines him. (...) there be a roaring Lion that would devoure us, certainely there is a blessed power that preserve us.
Let this teach us to get so close as we can to God, that Satan may not reach (...) The chickens be safe under the wings of their mother, and we under the providence of our Father. So long as we hold the tenor of obedience, we are the Lords subjects: and if we serve him, he will preserve us. But when a man is fallen to the (...) of an out-Law or rebell, the Law dispenseth with them that kill him, because the Prince hath excluded him from the benefite of his protection. All the feare of Satan ariseth from the want of the due feare of God. The more a man feares God, the lesse he feare every thing else. Feare God, Honour the King: he that feares God, doth but honour the King, he need not feare him. It would affright a weake Christian, to consider the presence and number, malice and power, of wicked spirits. But when with the Prophets servant, he sees those good Angels on his side, as present, as diligent, more able to helpe than the other to hurt, he takes heart againe. He knowes that God (most good) bounds the temptation of the one, and directs the protection of the other. Though there be many legions of divells, and every o^^ stronger than many legions of men, and more malicious than strong; yet Chri^^^ little flocke lives and prospers.Mal. 3.6. I am the Lord, I change not: therefore yee so^^^^ of Iacob are not consumed. The divell would doe it, and doth attempt it; but God^ unchangeable mercie prevents it. That we here meet, pray, worship, is against the divells will; onely our gracious GOD maintaines it. That every moment (...) perish not in the jawes of that Lion, let our hearts acknowledge, and our tong^^^ praise the Lord our maker.
2 Conclusion; that Satan can doe nothing but by Gods permission: he is bo^^ in a teddar, and cannot goe one inch beyond his chaine. Christ tells Peter, th^^ Satan had desired to winnow them:Luk. 11.22. Desired, he must begge an ill turne before he c^^ doe it. Whatsoever he doth, is limitata potestate, and by dispensation from God He could not seduce a Prophet, nor take one poore sheepe from Iob, nor enter a h^g without licence. It is an Ethnical error of our times, in strange accidents to give the honour of God to Sorcerers and conjurers. If a tempest arise beyond commo^ experience, presently as if the God of heaven were fallen fast asleepe, and minde nothing; the judgment is given, there is some conjuring: there must needs be a pest^lent convention and stipulation betwixt men and devills. As if God were not (...) to raise as great a storme, as the Devill. Looke upon the witches of Egypt: (...) rum potestas defecit in muscis, Aug. Their cunning failed in the most contempt^^^ creatures; and they are forced to cry, This is the finger of God. Though the circuite of Satan be very large, even to compassing of the whole earth; yet he hath his dayes assigned to stand before the Lord for the renewing of his commission, and there is a chaine tyed to his power that he cannot move beyond his allowance. Yet hath he^^ little liberty to tempt; for the probation of some, for the reprobation of others, i^ all for the glory of God. He is the basest of all creatures, a slave, a scullion: n^^ how is that person shamed, that is given up to a base slave to be corrected!
So little he feares to tempt us, that he ventured upon Christ himselfe, Ma^ 4. As we read Rev. 12.7. There was a great battell in heaven, so here was a mo^^machie or single combate on earth. It was a dainty sight to behold little Da^^^ grappling with great Goliah, and great Goliah groueling under little David. A La^^ matched with the Wolfe, and the wolfe overmatched by the Lambe. First, the Devill tempts him to diffidence. Art thou hungry? Turne these stones into bread: not into quailes, feasants, dainties; but into Bread, without which man could (...)
 live. Then to presumption, ver. 6. If thou be the Sunne of God, cast thy selfe downe. That he might get credite to his ministerie, he would have him shew the people some strange device. Lastly, to apostacie, ver. 8. which was the sinne that turned himselfe out of heaven: wherein first he propounds Promissum, All these will I give ^hee: and indents Pactum, If falling downe thou wilt worship me. He is like an old bitten ^urre, that being fleshed to the game, will not be stay'd off: hells bandog, fed with ^he livers of Gods cast-awaies. He tries all courses, like Balaam, or some superstitious ^amester on the losing hand; shifts places; still in hope to winne. Hee tooke him up ^nto a mountaine: Cyprian sayes, he went on foote with him: for Christ would not ^se him pro vehiculo, quem novit praecipitatorem. This opinion is not against the Text, ^or the Text against it. For (...) doth not imply portage: no more than, Matt. 17.1. Christ tooke them: it were grosse to thinke that he carried them on his ^acke. But that he carried him is the most received opinion, because it is said that he ^et him on the pinacle. This was no disparagement to Christ: no more than to suffer ^pprehension, ligation, crucifixion of his enemies.
He reserves the old malice to all Christs members: why should any serve him? ^here is no goodnesse in him. He is the greatest sinner of all: for Quicquid efficit ^^le, ipsum magis est tale. Wicked Pharisies may make their Proselytes two-fold more ^he children of hell than themselves: but the malice of the Devill cannot be matched. ^e never gives man any thing, but as Michol was given to David, to ensnare him.1 Sam. 18. St ^eter calles him Contra litigator, an adversary at Law:1 Pet. 5. he wrangles with God a^ainst us. Augustine brings him in thus pleading. They were thine by creation, ^hey are mine by prevarication: they were thine per gratiam, they are mine per culpam: ^hey were thine by redemption, they are mine by defection. They left tua Sacra^enta, thy Sacraments: and accepted mea Blandimenta, my allurements. He pleads ^any things against us, but we have one argument to confute him; our Faith, 1. Pet. 5.9. Whom resist stedfast in the faith. And all our defects are supplied by an Advocate in heaven, Iesus Christ the righteous. I know that God casteth his som^mes into the sieve for tryall, but the Lord Iesus strengthens them.
Satan is called a Lyon, and that fitly; for he hath all the properties of a Lyon: ^s bold as a Lyon, as strong as a Lyon, as furious as a Lyon, as terrible as the roar^ng of a Lyon. Yea worse: the Lyon wants subtiltie and suspition, herein the Devill (...) beyond the Lyon. The Lyon will spare the prostrate, the Devill spares none. The Lyon is full and forbeares, the Devill is full and devoures. He seekes all: let not he simple say, he will take no notice of me: nor the subtle, he cannot overreach me: ^ot the noble say, he will not presume to meddle with me: nor the rich, he dares ^ot contest with me: for he seekes to devoure all. He is our common adversary, ^herefore let us cease all quarrels amongst our selves, and fight with him.
Seeing the Devill is bound with chaines, and cannot range further than his bonds ^low him, let us not come within his reach. The bandog is tyed up that he may ^ot hurt the passenger: but how if the passenger will come within his compasse?Eph. 4.24. Give no place to the Devill: for the Devill hath no place unlesse we give it him.Iam. 4.7. Re^st the Devill, and hee will flee from you. He cannot come in, except we open him ^e doore: now who would open the doore to let in his enemie? yet many doe: by wearing, they open the doore to let him in at their mouth: by lustfull lookes, they ^pen the doore to let him in at the eye. Pride admits him into his wardrobes, cove^ousnesse into our purses, adultery into our beds, Schisme into our Studies, ^runkennesse into our stomachs, Idolatrie into our devotions, hypocrisie into our ^earts. As if his chaine were not long enough, wicked men put themselves in his ^ay. Thinke when thou art about to commit a voluntary sinne; now I am running ^ithin the Devils chaine. I durst not so venture within the chaine of a Lyon, ^^are (...) other savage beast, which can but teare my flesh. Hath God tyed him up from ^e, and shall I runne unto him? shall I trust his mercie, that is nothing else but ma^ious crueltie. O but the hand of God holds his Chaine: but say the hand of God
 let goe his chaine, for thy presumption? what remaines then but ruine? As we h^^e the Devill, let us hate those workes that lengthen his chaine. Doe we pray to be delivered from the gates of hell, and yet frequent the gates of hell? we reade of a bea^^ that being too unwildly to hunt for his prey, stands still and enticeth the rest unto him with his glorious spots and colours, and so devoureth them. But Satan (...) quicke and nimble enough to pursue men, they need not wilfully runne into the^^ owne ruine.Psal. 55.6. O that I had w^ngs like a dove, then would I flee away and be at rest. Le^ us flie from him so fast as we ca^, and so farre as he may never overtake us. Which is done by turning to God with faithfull repentance, and devout obedience: so shall his chaines be shortned: our soules delivered, our Creator glorified, and our selves everlastingly saved, through the merits of Iesus Christ. Amen.
3. Observe, that Satan is punished everlastingly, without all hope of recovery: bound with chaines, and as St Iude calls them, Everlasting chaines. There was (...) deliverance ever ordained for the Devils: forHebr. 2.16. Christ tooke not the nature of Angels: he tooke not their narure, therefore was not their Saviour. Now there are diverse reasons, why Christ should seeke lost Adam, rather than the lost Angels.
1. The Angell sinned without instigation; Non ab alio tentatus, nec ab alio servatus. As there was none to tempt him, so there is none to save him, Ioh. 8.44. When he speaketh a lie, he speaketh of his owne. A se peccatum rapuit, nullo alio suggerente: he tooke sinne of himselfe, no other suggested it to him. He fell alone, nothing cast him downe: he must rise alone, there is nothing to helpe him up. The winde blowes out the Torch, we light it againe: bat if the winde blow out it selfe and cease moving, who shall raise it? If Satan hurt man, Christ heales him: but (...) Satan hurt himselfe, let him heale himselfe.
2. The Devill was the party seducing, (man onely seduced) and still endevo^^^ what he can to destroy all: therefore none stands up to preserve him. Because (...) hand is against all, therefore all hands are against him. Being throwne out from t^^ presence of God, in spight he wounded his Image, that he might doe him all the mischiefe he could: therefore he perisheth without redemption.
3. The Angels were more excellent and glorious natures by creation, and ne^rer to God than men: more subtle, more powerfull: their dwelling in the hig^e^^ heaven. Whereas one halfe of man was but refined dust, and his mansion the ear^^ more remote from the glorious presence of God. Angelus ergo quanto sublimi^^ (...) gloria, tanto major in ruina, Aug. The higher the Angell was in glory, the deep^ in misery. Homo autem quanto fragilior per naturam, tanto facilior ad veniam. (...) man, the more fraile he was by constitution, the more easie he is to redemption. Therefore God tooke pity on man, who was but dust: and pitied not the divells, because they had once beene Angels.
4. The whole humane nature fell with Adam. 1 Cor. 15.22. In Adam all die. All mankind was lost, and unlesse the humane nature had beene repaired, man had bee^ wholly frustrated of his end. But all the Angels did not fall with Lucifer, but only some: and so none were partakers of his punishment, but such as had beene pa^^^kers of his sin. Innumerable multitudes of Angels stood in heaven, as well as a gr^^^ company sunke to hell. Dan. 7.10. Thousand thousands stand before him, (...) thousand times ten thousand minister unto him. Some of that nature stood by conser^^tion, without redemption: for redemption presupposeth losse. But if our nature (...) not beene redeemed, not one man could have beene saved.
5. Man was distinguished into sexes; male and female: because they were (...) generate their like: as Adam begate a sonne in his owne likenesse. But Angels (...) no sexes; as CHRIST confuted the Sadduces. Matth. 22.30. In heaven they ^^ther marry, nor are given in marriage, but are as the Angels of God. They ca^^^ beget a generation of spirits. Every divell sinned in himselfe, and is punished (...) himselfe only. But Adam having sinned, and being to multiply his kind, (...) needs convey his sin to his seed. Therefore was the Lord Iesus made of his fee^
 ^hat the guiltynesse which Adam to all his seed had propagated, by one of his seed ^ight be expiated.
6. Satan immediately upon his fall was cast into hell. Ioh. 8.44. He abode not in ^e truth. But so was not Adam; for howsoever he was cast out of Paradise, yet ^ot out of the world, but had space and grace given him to repent. And albeit that ^enace, In the day thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die, Gen. 2.17. Yet God spa^d him 900 yeares: indeed presently he became mortall, and fell into a consumpti^; as the originall speach is, dying thou shalt dye. And for the second death, the ^ed of the woman excused him; he died not that death at all. Indeed August^ne ^entions the Tatian heresie, which held that Adam was damned. But Wis. 10.1. ^he preserved the first formed father of the world that was created alone, and brought him ^t of his fall. Which is agreeable to the Scripture, Luk 3.38. Which saith that ^dam was the sonne of God: therefore he was not the child of death and hell. God ^^lieved him with a promised Messiah, a newes that never came to the apostate ^ngels.
7. If the whole humane nature had perished, to what purpose had beene this ^orld? The world was made for man, not for Angels: either heaven or hell was ^dained for them, this middle walke for man. Now why should either the Sunne ^ine, or the earth fructifie for man, if he were not redeemed? Spirits have no use (...) these things, man hath the benefite: and man should not have the benefite of any ^eature, but for Gods favour in CHRIST. For he did forfeit his patent, and ^ne but a Saviour could renew it. But for the El^cts sake, the raine should not fall, ^r the earth stand. Therefore if man had perished, all this world had beene in ^ine created. Man is the summe and abridgement of all creatures, and containes (...) him more generalitie than the Angels. Stones have being, but not life: plants ^ve being and life; but not sense: beasts have being, life, sense; but not under^nding: Angels have being, life, sense, and understanding. Now man partici^tes with all these; a being with stones, a life with plants, a sense with beasts, an ^derstanding with Angels. He is the compendious Index of Gods great booke in ^^lio. Mark. 16.15. Preach the Gospell to every creature: no creature hath part in ^e Gospell; but only man is called every creature, as having in him the chiefe per^^ctions of every creature. Some hold, that man beares the Image and superscrip^on of God more fully than the Angels: and hath something more; an organicall ^ody united to his spirit, which the Angels have not. He is the common end why is world was made: therefore, Esa. 9.6. To us a child is borne, and to us a sonne is ^ven. To Vs, not to Angels. Luk. 2.14. To us is borne a Saviour; To Vs, not to ^e lost Angels. There is enmitie put betweene the Seed of the woman, and the seed of ^e Serpent, Gen. 3.15. Therefore the seed which saves man, shall be at enmity with ^e divell.
8. Lastly, the principall reason of all is the free mercie, and gracious decree of ^od. Who made both men and Angels good in creation, and finding both men ^d Angels, lost in transgression, vouchsafed to men not to Ang^ls a Redemption. ^hat did we deserve at his hands, that he should pitie us dust and ashes, passing by ^ose celestiall spirits? Psalm. 8.4. Quis homo, what is man that thou art mindfull of (...)? For the wonder had beene lesse to say, Quis Angelus, what is the Angell that ^ou art mindfull of him? That we should find him a Saviour, whom they find a ^st revenger: that we should be loosed from the chaines of our sinnes, and they de^ered into chaines of plagues: that the same CHRIST should with his owne ^oud free us, that shall with his word sentence them: that the same Almighty hand ^ould lift us up to heaven, that casteth them downe to hell! Oh the riches of that ^ercie, which even to tast will keep a man from ever being poore! Of all mixt crea^es men are the best, for they have reason: of all men, Christians are the best, for ^ey have religion: of all Christians, holy beleevers are the best, for they have salva^n. In the sorest troubles, men have some hope, Christians have good hope, beleevers
 have sure hope. Let us blesse God for making us men, but most of all, for making us Christian men: for in that he gives us his Son, he gives us himselfe. He gave the water to fishes, the earth to beasts, the aire to fowles, the heaven to Angels;Heb. 6.13. but he gave himselfe to man, Having no greater to sweare by, he sware by hi^selfe: so, having no greater to give, he gave himselfe. Whom have I in heaven but thee? saith that royall Prophet. The Romists in 88. cried out, whether maliciously or blasphemously; God shewes himselfe a Lutheran, and the God of Lutherans: but indeed he shewes himselfe a Christian, and the God of Christians. By how much we finde more mercy than all creatures, let us bee more thankefull than all creatures. It is an harmonious sweetnes, to have Gods bounty, and our gratitude meeting in that middle way, the hand of Iesus Christ. Without whom neither could we receive his goodnesse, nor would he accept our goodnesse.
4 Observe that the punishments of hell are eternall: these chaines can never be broken: were they of cords, of wreathed trees, of iron, they might bee bu^^ asunder, but the chaines of vengeance never. Binde him hand and foote, and cast (...) into utter darknesse.Mat. 22.13. i Now if a man were bound hand and foote, and throwen (...) a Well five thousand fadome deepe, what hope could he have of comming forth? But how doth this stand with Gods justice, to punish temporall offences with eternall scourges? It was the rule of his owne law, that Poena non debet excedere cul^^, Deut. 25.3. Ans. There is a double quantity considered in punishment: the o^^ according to the intention of paine; the other according to the duration of time. (...) respect of the former, the quantity of punishment, must be answerable to the quantity of sinne, Rev. 18.7. How much sinne, so much sorrow: the more pesti^^ iniquity, the more torturing fire. For the other, we must not thinke that the co^^nuance of punishment is limited with the continuance of the fact. Among men, a^^^tery is but a short pleasure, yet often persued with a long pennance. But the dura^^^^ of torment respects the disposition of the delinquent. Poenae singulorum inaeq^^ intensione, poenae omnium aequales duratione, Aquin. The paines of all are equall i^ continuance, unequall in grievance.
But a good Iudge will make his penalties, medicines and corrections, rather than destructions. Ans. So doth the Lord in all corrigible offenders: but those he cannot mend by chastising, his Iustice must satisfie it selfe by confounding, (...) God delights not in the death of a sinner. EZek. 18, What profit is there in my bl^^^ when I goe downe to the pit? Psal. The Lord hath no use, of their eternall dam^^on. Ans. Yes, as mercy hath had her place and day; so must justice have hers. Wh^^ mercy saves, shee saves for ever: though their workes were short, and u nothing ^^to God, yea, the very effects of his owne grace. Therfore, whom justice condem^^, she condemnes for ever: not respecting so much the persons that have sinned, as the person against whom they have sinned, Greg. Almighty God as hee is good, (...) not delighted with their torments: but as he is just, he is not satisfied without the^^ torments. Factus est malo dignus aeterno, qui hoc in se peremit bonum, quod esse (...) aeternum, Aug. He is justly plagued with an evill, that is eternall, who hath co^^^^ted in himselfe a good that might have beene eternall.
But if Gods justice must be satisfied upon those sinners, for whom Christ ^^tisfied not; why is not this rather in reducing them to nothing? Seeing the un^^^^full deserve to be deprived of all benefits; now one especiall benefit is Being; the^^fore ipsum esse amittant, let them not be. Ans. It is true, the creature that disobey^^ the Creator, deserves to lose his Being: but because it was given him to this purp^^^ that he should serve him, therefore it shall never be taken away. For God will (...) his homage and service out of that Being; whether of grace and salvation to (...) praise of his mercy, or of punishment and confusion to the praise of his Iustice.
But one would think, that the mercy of God should terminate their sorro^^ Wisd. 11.23. Thou hast mercy upon all, and Thou lovest all the things that are. (...). 11.32. God hath concluded all under unbeleefe, that he might have mercy upon all. Sed ^^^usit
 and daemones: hee hath also concluded the divels under sin. Neither will his ^oodnesse suffer that, which he made for blessednesse, to perish for ever in torment. ^hese be the plausible conceits that over-mercifull Origen, hath brought for the re^overy of lost spirits And whereas Christs doome is; Depart yee cursed into ever^^sting fire, prepared for the divels: he would have these words rather Minaciter quam ^raciter dicta, spoken by way of threatning, than by way of truth. But the Scrip^^re delivers it plane ac plene. Rev. 20.10. The divell shall be tormented in the lake of ^^e day and night, for ever. Besides, his opinion doth both Extendere and extenuare mi^icordiam: as it straineth, so it restraineth mercy. It extends it to the future deli^erance of the damned, so it extenuates it in regard of the blessed. For if the lost be ^er to be taken out of hell; then will it follow that the Saints also are one day to be ^ut out of heaven. And so what the bad should gaine, the good should lose: yea, the ^ery mercy of God cannot get more glory by the one, than it shall lose by the other.
But though the divels be everlastingly chained, is there no mercy for reprobate ^^en? shall they never get loose? Gen. 6.3. My spirit shall not alwayes strive with ^^an: therefore his indignation shall cease. Doth he not often threaten, and not doe ^^to Ninive? Ans. God doth sometimes menace and not strike, because our repen^^nce steps betweene: but when everlasting burning hath wasted all the moisture repenting, will hee doe so then? Here indeed we may speed as well as Ninive: ^versa est quae mala erat, aedificata est bona quae non erat, Aug. Wee shall stand if our ^ines fall: but we shall fall, if our sins stand. But at that day the date of repen^^nce will be out. But such is the charity of the Saints in this life, that they pray (...) their enemies: now this charity shall be more perfect in heaven, therefore they ^ll interceed for them in hell: and God hath promised that their prayers shall bee ^^ard. Ans. Here they pray for them that they may be converted: for if they know at such were (in Gods decree) reprobates, they would pray for them no more ^n th^y doe for divels. Their present suite is x that they may be recovered out of the ^^re of the divell. Now they may be recovered, not hereafter: there may be present ^nversion, no future permutation. For that objected out of the Psal. 77. Will the Lord ^^t off for ever; will he be favorable no more? There i. meant onely the temporary af^^ction of the Church. Still as the joyes of heaven, so the paines of hell, are eter^^ll. Death is to men, as the fall was to Angels: as lost Angels after their aposta^^, so lost men after their death, can never be recovered. Hell is made y Deepe; so ^^epe, that there is no hope of crawling out. Ex inferno nulla redemptio. Therefore (...) called Infernus, ab inferendo, of casting in: for the wicked are so cast in, that they (...) never get forth. From earthly Gaoles and dungeons there may be some tricke escape: but hell is so deepe, that nor earth nor heaven can helpe out one poore ^^le. That rich man, Luk. 16. sollicited for his brethren: why did hee not beg his ^^ne deliverance, who was able to have taught them by his owne experience? O saw Ingentem hiatum, a vast interposed Gulfe: he must let that alone for ever.
One deepe calleth another: the depth of hell calls for our answerable humiliation. (...) that will not be humbled for his sinnes here, must be tumbled into that depth ^^^eafter. Psal. 130. De profundis clamavi Domine; out of the depths have I tryed un^^^e O Lord. God will heare the voice that comes de profundis. The deeper we ^^e beene in the Law, the higher we are in the Gospell: the deeper in hell, the ^^her in heaven. The deeper a bucket dives into the well, the more water it brings the lower a man is humbled with sorrow for sinne, the higher he shall be exalted ^^^h the grace of salvation. Never came prayer, sigh or groane de profundis paeniten^^ from the depth of repentance; but it was heard in Excelsis misericordiae, in the ^^ght of mercies. Of Davids propheticall imprecation against his enemies, (Psal. 15. Let them goe downe quick into hell) we may make a good apprecation for our ^^es. Let us goe downe quicke into hell by meditation, that we be never sent ^^ke thither by condemnation. Let us descend every day while we live, that we ^^er come there when we are dead.
5 Observe, that God punisheth sinne wheresoever he finds it, though it be (...) the very Angels. For all the men and Angels in the world are not so deare to him, (...) his owne honour: and what dishonors him but sinne? For this cause 1 He made a Law against it, Gal. 3.19. The Law was added because of transgression. Non s^^^sisset mandatum, nisi abhorruiset peccatum. He could not have written the Law w^^^ his owne finger, if he had not so abhorred sinne, 2 Gracious are the promises (...) hath made to obedience: grievous the plagues he hath to threaten disobedience, (...) His owne hands have smitten it, the whole world is a bleeding witnesse thereof: (...) man may say, Quorum pars magna fui: the whole creature groaneth in expecta^^ce (...) his pacification. He hath drowned the world in a flood of waters, and he (...) burne it in a flood of fire, because of sinne. The sentence shall stand unchangeable, so long as heaven and earth endureth;Rom. 2.9. Tribulation and anguish upon every soule (...) man that doeth evill: Be he Iew or Gentile, learned or simple, Poore or Peere; y^^ man or Angell. 4 So doth he hate sinne, that he spared not his owne Sunne, whe^^^ appeared in the similitude of sinfull flesh. If the Iustice of God could ever (...) swallowed sinne, or dismiss'd it with impunitie, he would have forborne it i^ (...) owne bowels. Yea, such a Sonne as never knew the least thought of disobedien^^ the Sonne of his love, the Sonne of his joy, the Sonne of his light, the Sonne of (...) delight: a Sonne fully as good and as great as his Father. Yea because he stoo^^ (...) the place, and bore the person of sinfull man, he plagued him as the most deadly e^^my that ever he had. Vt Peccatum occideret, Filium crucifixit. That he might (...) sinne, he slew his Sonne.
How should this make us all hate sinne! He doth hate, not love God; that lo^^ what God hates. Let us be content to meete our afflictions, as Peter and A^^^ met their Crosses, as their dearest friends; embracing them in our armes, and ^^ting them with the kisses of peace. Or as the Martyrs welcomed their deathes, ^^ing to the stakes as if they had runne for a garland. But for sinnes, were they as d^^^ to us as the sight of our eyes, the children of our bodies, the spouses of our boso^^ because they are traitors to our Father and Maker; let us deale with them as A^^^ham did with Hagar and Ishmael, put them out of our house for ever.
6 Observe, that great offenders meete with great punishments: and accor^^^^ to the condition of their place, is the nature and proportion of their fault. The (...) glorious the Angels excellencie, the more damnable their apostacie. If the light b^come darknesse, how great is that darknesse! The more notable the Person, the (...) notorious the corruption. The freshest summers day doth soonest taint the (...) some carcasse: and fester'd lillies smell farre worse than weeds. If vertue turne (...) vice, the shame is trebble. For many Iewes to deny Christ, was not so m^^^ for one Peter: the adulteries of many Israelites lesse infamous than one Davi^^. (...) all the Cities of the world had done filthily, it were short of this wonder. The ^^gin daughter of Sion is become an Harlot. If Iudas become a traitor, how great i^^ treason! If Achitophel prove a villaine, how mischievous is his villanie! If Al^^ rebell, how unnaturall is his rebellion! The least mote that flies in the Sunne, ^^tweene our eyes and the light, seemes a greater substance than it is. Deepe are (...) blowes made by a mighty axe. Sinne in a Magistrate is not onely sinne, but sub^^^tion. Q^^ in vulgaribus nugae, in magnatibus blasphemiae.
There is no dispensation for sinne, no protection from Iudgement. N^^^ rich mans opulencie, not Belshazzars monarchie, not Adams perfection, (...) Angels glory; could abscondere culpam, vel abscindere poenam, countenance sinne, ^^ward punishment. No place, no robes, no riches, no excellencie, can give it ^^^ledge. Cloath an ape in tissue, and the beauty of the robe addes but more sco^^^ the beast. The richer colours, or bolder countenance is set on wickednesse, (...) more ugly it appeares. Therefore as they that govern well in high places, shall (...) with a higher degree of glory in heaven: because they being instrusted with th^^sures of God, enrich his Church. So they that are in good offices evill men, (...)
 ^^schiefe of both their actions and examples, shall be cast deeper into hell. Potentes ^^enter punientur. Wisd. 6.5. A sharpe judgement shall be to them that are in high places. ^ercy may soone pardon the meanest, but mighty men shall bee mightily tormented. ^^a. 30.33. Tophet is ordained of old, even for the King it is prepared. Kings are not ^empted from judgements; Pessimus in Imperio, maximus in Inferno. What made ^^e damned churle move for his brethren, but that every step they followed of his ^^^ding, he felt encreasing the pile of his torments. 1 Sam. 12.25. If yee doe wickedly (...) shall perish and your King. For the Lord freeth none according to place, but ac^^rding to grace; not for outward condition, but for his owne free favour.
Nor yet let the poore and ignoble clap their wings, as if they were the onely ^^en that God loves.1 Cor. 1.26. Not many rich, not many wise, not many noble, are called. Non mul^^ed non nulli: not many, but some; and not many after the flesh; but many wise, rich, ^^^ble, after the spirit. The gate of heaven is narrow, and but few enter of any con^^tion: yet certainly the noble sooner than the rabble: more wise men are admitted ^^n fooles: for morality is the first step to christianity. And at the last dreadfull ^^y, it is theRev. 6.15. Bond-man so well as the Great man, that cals upon the rockes to cover (...). But doe any of the Rulers beleeve on him? Ioh. 7.48. Yes, Christ had his Church ^^en in Caesars family. Acts 17.11. They were the Noble men, and Honourable wo^^^ at Berea, which received the word: it was the people that persecuted it. Acts. (...). 14. There was one Lydia a seller of purple converted: God saved a purple seller, ^^^y not then a Purple wearer? The poore that is Blasphemus in Deum, and tu multuo^^ in divitem, murmuring against God, and sedicious against the rich; is in more ^^nger of judgment, than another that hath not more opulencie than charity. Wealth ^^^^th not damne the rich, but when the getting or keeping of it doth damnifie the ^^ore. Rich Abraham is in heaven, not because he was rich, but because hee was ^^od. Poore Lazarus is there, Non propter meritum paupertatis, sed pietatis, Aug. ^ot for his poverty, but for his piety, howsoever, let them that must be patternes, (...) good patternes: the life that cannot be but exemplary, should not be but holy.
7 Lastly, inferre, that if God spared not the Angels, so neere to his owne Per^^^; (a thing which the very children of God tremble to thinke) how much lesse ^ll he spare dust and ashes?Iob 4.19. Hee put no trust in his Angels, how much lesse on them ^^t dwell in houses of clay, whose foundation is in the dust? What is the manliest prow^^ on earth, when the loynes be girded up with strength, and decked in the greatest ^^^ry, to encounter with the fortitude of God?Amos 3.8. The Lion hath roared, who will not ^^re? The Lord hath thundered from heaven, in casting downe Angels to hell; ^^ll not flesh and bloud quake for feare? The Scripture as well acquainted with (...) pride of mans nature, hangs talents of lead at the heeles to keepe it downe. The (...) Psalme, which is a circular Psalme, ending as it began; O Lord our Governour, (...) excellent is thy Name in all the world! that whithersoever we turne our eyes, wee ^^^y see our selves beset with his glory round about. How doth the Prophet dis^^ntenance man, by his disdainfull interrogation; What is man? Then still as the ^^^lmes goe in order, they grow in strength to deject the haughtinesse of man.Psal. 9.20. A^^ Lord, let not man prevaile: let the Nations know themselves to be but men. We are ^^^n, and the sonnes of men, not the generation of Angels; to shew our descent. ^^en in our knowledge, grosse and dull brain'd; not quick, free, subtle, and celesti^^^ spirits: the conscience of our owne infirmity doth convince us. Men of the ^^th, not of the aire, fire, Starres, Sunne, Heavens; much lesse of the substance of ^^gels; but earth is the matter whereof we are framed. The disgrace is yet dee^^^, Psal. 22.6. Vermis sum, non vir. The prophet either in his owne name, regar^^^g his personall contempt: or in the name of Christ, whose figure he was: or in (...) representation of all mankinde: as if it were a robbery and presumption to take ^^^n him the name of man, he sayes, I am a worme, and no man. Thus Abraham con^^^ing with GOD, fifts himselfe to the coursest branne; I am but dust and ashes. ^^ny of the children of Abraham, that have succeeded him in the faith; or any of
 the children of Adam, that succeed him in the flesh; thinke otherwise, their (...) catastrophe shall confute them.
Man is an excellent creature, if we compare him with the fairest flower of (...) Garland, the tallest Cedar of the Forrest, the stateliest Beast in the wildernesse. N^^ the Sunne, and Starres are not so excellent, for they want sense, and man hath (...) son: not one of them was formed after the Image of God, there are no spark^ Divinity in them. But if we look up to the Angels, there is a large and ample ^^ference: we have bodies, and they are full of grosse corruptions; so many (...) that who is Physitian good enough to number them, I say not, to cure them? T^^^ is in the soule uncleannesse, in the understanding blindnesse, in the will perverse^^^ in the affections wantonnesse, in the whole man sinfulnesse. The Angelicall (...) is subject to none of these infirmities. If thou wert a sinfull angell, thou shou^^ be punished; therefore if a sinfull man, what hope to be spared? It was the (...) note to King Philip of Macedon every morning; Remember thou art a man: for ^^membring this, we remember all unworthinesse.
If any soule be humbled with this meditation, (and indeed who are fit for so ^cious seed but the tilled ground? comfort is well bestowed on a broken he^^^:) (...) this cheare them. God that spared not offending Angels, neither hath spa^^^ (...) fending men: but he punished one man for many men, he spared not the man C^^ Iesus. All beleeving men have answered his justice in that one man: hence (...) faith is bold to say, Lord thou art just, and hast not spared me: but thou art (...) full, and hast not spared him for me. Thou hast punished our sins through his (...)
To be reserved unto judgement.] This is their binding over to the Assises: (...) summe wherof is: That the fulnes and extremity of their torments is not yet (...) but there abideth a more fearefull and finall condemnation for them. They are (...) entred into divers degrees of penalty, but the plenary wrath of God is not p^^^ on them till the last judgement. They are already damned, and they know it, (...) 2.19. The divels beleeve and tremble. It is so certaine, that Iustice admits no ^^tion of it, nor doe themselves study any evasion from it: and yet there is st^^^ ^^servation of greater plagues. But they have no bodies, and therefore are not ^^^ble of receiving more by addition. Ans. Their punishment ariseth from the (...) of God, which then shall in a greater measure empty it selfe upon them. The (...) of man while he strikes, can make his blow heavier or lighter as himselfe ple^^^
They are now suffered to tempt men, which is a pleasure to their malice, th^^^ing themselves by this meanes somewhat revenged on God: as he that defaceth (...) picture of his enemy, when he cannot come at his person, easeth his spleene a (...) So the dog gnawes the stone, that cannot reach the thrower. In a word, (...) are suffered to wander abroad, then they shall be confined to their prison. (...) prisoner that is allowed to walke abroad though with his keeper, is not so (...) as the dungeon'd. Now they containe their hell, then their hell also shall (...) them. Now they seeme to rejoyce at our sinning, then they shall have eno^^^ gr eve at their owne suffering. Now the bottomelesse pit hath bin opened for (...) egresse of those Locusts: then it shall be locked up for ever with the eternall (...) Iustice. But he is judged already, Ioh. 16.11. The Prince of this world is judged. (...) still he is reserved to another Iudgement. There is a double Iudgement, (...) Discussion, another of Retribution. For the discussive Iudgement, these (...) ^gels come not under it, their rebellion is so apparant. What need a Iewry (...) on the malefactor, that confesseth his fault? For that of Retribution, they (...) receive it in the view of the whole world; that the justice of God may (...) be acknowledged, when he shall render to every one according to his (...) Cor. 6.3. Know ye not that you shall judge the Angels? Good men shall have the ^nour to judge bad Angels. For this they challenged Christ, that heMat. 8.29. C^^^^^^ment them before the time. They confesse that there is a time designed for the ^^^tude and perfection of their torments.

He is reserved; but till the Iudgement come, let us watch him, for he watcheth us. There is no corporall enemie, but a man naturally feares: the spirituall foe appeares ^esse terrible, because we are lesse sensible of him; we talke of Travellers, that have ^eene the world over; none ever saw so much as hee. Hee hath seene earth, seene ^e sea, seene hell, seene heaven. Hee compasseth; as the hunter that makes ^s though he would raile a mound about the deere to preserve them; when indeed ^e layes a toile to destroy them. Great conquerors have beene chronicled for vi^ories, and extention of their kingdomes; Satan is beyond them all. Saul hath slaine ^is thousands, and David his ten thousands; but Satan his millions. He that fights ^ith an enemy, whom nothing but his bloud can pacifie, will give him no advantage. (...) we know that we have an adversary at the next doore, that pries into all our cour^s, and upon the least error will sue us on an action of trespas, we will be circumspect (...) disable him of advantage. Satan no sooner spies our wandrings, but he presently ^nnes with a complaint to God, bills against us in the star-chamber of heaven; ^here the matter would goe hard with us, but for the great Lord Chancelour of ^eace, our Advocate Iesus Christ. As God keepes all our teares in a bottell, and ^gistreth the very grones of our holy passion in a booke: so Satan keepes a Record (...) our sinnes, and solicites Iustice against us. Were God like man, subject to pas^ons, or incensible by the suggestions of the common barretor, woe were us. But ^e will heare one Sonne of Truth before ten thousand fathers of lying. No matter ^hat the plaintiffe libelleth, when the Iudge acquiteth. We have forfeited our e^ates by treason, and the busy Devill begges us: but there is one that steps in, and ^eads a former graunt, and that both by promise and purchase.Psal. 35.17. Lord rescue my ^le from destructions, my darling from the Lions. Lord Iesus chalenge thine owne; ^t not Satan enter upon by force or fraud, what thou hast bought with thine ^wne bloud.
Thus in generall, the particulars here considerable are two, (for I purpose no ^ommon place of the day of Iudgement.) First the necessity of it, in that they are ^eserved to it. Then the Severity of it, in that it is a Iudgement. These be inherent (...) the words; there be some short adherent circumstances which I shall salute as I ^sse; they may be within the circumference, these are in the heart and Center.
The necessity. As the Creation was that Principium, which did produce things (...) their being: so Iudgment is that conclusion, which shall perduce things to their ^ding. There is a double operation of God, one that wrought the production of ^ings, the institution of nature, and distinction of places; from this God rested the ^venth day. Another of providentiall goverment, whereby he conserves and ^poseth things; from this he resteth not.Ioh. 5.17. Hitherto my Father worketh, and I worke. ^ccording to both these there is a double Iudgment: one at the departure out of ^is life, which answers to Gods disposition: that they which kept not the appoin^d rule of their maker, might undergoe the Iustice of their avenger. The other at ^t day, when God to all things determines an end, as immediately of himselfe he ^ve them a Beginning. But it is objected, Nah. 1.9. Iudgment shall not rise up a ^nd time: there is one Iudgment at the end of life, if there be another at the end (...) the world, then there is Iudgement a second time. I might answer, that the Pro^et speakes there of a temporall destruction, which shall make an utter end, that there ^ll be no neede of a second blow; Affliction shall not rise up the second time. But ^take it in their reading; Every man must be considered, as he is an individuall per^, and with relation as he is part of mankind. So there is a double Iudgment pro^rtioned; one at his death respecting the singularity of his person: the other at last ^pecting his partnership of the world: and thus as he is a member of the universe, (...) Iudgement must be in the universall.
But Iudgment is the determination of doubtfull things, and every one before ^t day shall be put past doubting of his future estate. Yet there must be a generall ^gment, that the equity of every ones sentence may be approved, and the Iustice
 of God glorified. Object. But it is against the proper forme of Iudgment, to let execution goe before sentence: now every soule as she departs, receives her reward, and is presently possessed of joy, or punished with sorrow, If therefore there be a future Iudgment, here is execution befor sentence. Answ. The first is but the effect of the latter: by that they presently feele, they know what they shall eternally feele. Besides, but one part of man onely passeth that censure, the soule alone is blessed or cursed: therefore a generall Iudgment must passe upon the re-united body: which as it hath served the soule in holinesse or sinne; so must accompany the soule in bl^^^^ or paine. Object. The body is but an Instrument of the soule: so the Philosophers, Physicum corpus organicum statuunt; because the soule doth use it as an organ. Therefore it is for the soule alone to suffer: corpus ab anima separatum non dolet: the body feeles no paine when the soule is departed from it. Answ. Let it be but an Instrument, yet was it a living Instrument: as therefore the soule being the Mistresse i^ sinning, shall be no lesse in suffering: yet the body must have his due share in being punished, as it had the full part in being delighted.
Ioh. 3.18.But, He that beleeveth not is already judged: what neede then any more Iudgment? Answ. He is judged Per divinam praescientiam per propriam conscientiam, non per ultim^ sententiam: judged by Gods prescience, judged by his owne conscience, not by the last sentence. There is a five fold Iudgment. 1 The judgment of Disposition; so a^^ unbeleevers are now judged. 2 The judgement of Comparison.Mat. 12.41. The men of Ni^^^^ shall rise in judgment with this generation, and shall condemne it. Evill men shall th^^ judge them that be worse; Non secundum censuram dictaminis, sed secundum mensur^^ criminis,Ezek. 16. So I^rusalem is said to Iustifie Sodome, yet were the Sodomites then in (...). 3 The judgment of Approbation;1 Cor. 6.3. so the Saints shall judge the Angels, judge the n^^ions, Wisd. 3.8. judge the tribes of Israel, Mat. 19.28. judge the whole wo^^^ 1. Cor. 26.4. The judgment of Difinition; so Ioh. 5.22, The Father hath ^^^ted all judgment unto the Sonne. 5 The judgment of Remuneration, which shall re^^^ every man according to his practise.
That there shall be a judgment, is universally granted:Rom. 7.1. I speake the Law to th^^ that know the Law. Though there be a particular judgment precedent, this hinders not the generall subsequent. Here the wicked condemne themselves, there God shall condemne them. Qualis conscientia, talis sententia. As is their conscience, suc^ shall be their sentence.1 Ioh. 3.20. If our owne heart condemne us, God is greater than our hea^. Besides the common reasons that be given, 1 That the godly here suffer for we^ doing, therefore shall be crowned for well suffering. It is fit that they whom (...) world hath uniustly condemned, shall by the Lord be iustly acquited. Vt app^^^^tam patientis innocentia, quam persequentis injustitia. If there be Iudas to censure M^^ and not a Iesus to Iustifie Mary; Truth shall be utterly lost. 2 That many notor^ous sinners are punished here; which is but the little Image and earnest of the general Sessions hereafter. God strikes some, ne ipsi pereant, to save themselves: and so^^ againe, ne reliquos perimant, lest they should destroy others. Gracelesse sinners e^boldening themselves to riot by the remotenesse of judgement, are often cut off before hand.1 Tim. 5.24. Some mens sinnes are open before hand, going before the judgement. Th^^ have not the patience to tarry so long for their owne damnation. As when the desperate Pirat, ransaking and rifling a bottome, was told by the master, that tho^^^ no law could touch him for the present, he should answer it at the day of judgment: replyed, nay, if I may stay so long ere I come to it, I will take thee and thy Vessel too. A conceit wherewith too many land-theeves, oppressours, flatter themsel^^^ in their hearts, though they dare not utter it with their lippes. These God judg^^^ before hand, as he did Herode immediately upon his elevation: the people called (...) a god, but the wormes soone confuted their ridiculous deity. That as when M^s^^ had powdered the calfe, he might upbraid Israel, behold your God: so when the Ang^^^ had worm'd that Idoll, he might say, Behold your king. Beside these, and (...) other beaten arguments, I fasten upon two instances.
1 Many perverse sinners are forborne here: they transgresse in health, Psa. 73. (...) They trouble others, tremble not themselves: all feele their plagues, no plagues ^o they feele. They sinke others eyes into their heads with leannesse, while their ^ne eyes stand out with fatnesse. What, shall they never be called to an account for ^is? Shall a man covet and take, take and keep, keep and devoure, devoure and never ^ew it up again? Shall an Extortioner make every houre advantageous, laugh at ^e grones of the oppressed, dance to their lacrymae, and yet scape? Every sinne is ^metimes suspended, saving only the usurers: others sin by day only, or by night ^nly, and the most violent ague of wickednesse hath some intermission: but he sins ^ay and night continually: and is there no day nor night of answer? Shall a man ^te the bread of sacriledge, drinke the wine of sacriledge, sleepe in sacriledge, cloth ^s family with sacriledge, leave to his children an inheritance in sacriledge, and no ^ckoning? what though no Iudge, no Court, no Parliament question or medi^ne this disease; shall not the Iudge of all condeme it.
Many sinnes have bin punished, that are now forborne; becauseAct. 17.31. The Lord hath ^pointed a day to judge the World in righteousnesse. The wickednesse of the old world (...) as abundant in the new world; yet is not the world drowned with water, bceause ^od hath ordained for it a deluge of fire. The sinnes of Sodome are practised every ^her e; yet doe the committers scape fire and brimstone on earth, because they are ^served to fire and brimstone in hell. Doe not many persecute the Church as vio^ntly as Pharaoh, with Charriots and Armies, who yet scape drowning? There is a ^servation of a deeper and bottomelesse sea for them. Diverse murmure at God who ^e not stung with fiery serpents as the Israelites: because they are reserved to a fiery ^rpent in hell. Many take bribes like Gehesi, without a leprosie; because of that eter^ll leprosie which waits for them. How many a deceitfull Trader sayes and swears, with a little inversion of Ananias his lie: I sold it for so much.) It cost me so much, yet (...) not stricken with death temporall, because he is reserved to death eternall. Are not ^any monopolists amongst us, as bad as theseActs 16.16. Philippians, that got a patent of the ^ery divell? It is plaine that they did monopolize the Damosell, and the Damosell ^d monopoliz'd the devill. Satan was wont to be a spirit latent; now he durst be spirit Patent: it is time that this Patent-devill were cast out.
But there is a reservation of all to judgement: Mercy now stretcheth out her ^ings like a hen; then Iustice shall stretch out her wings like an eagle. Gods hands ^eme now so fraught with mercies, that judgement hath no roome to be grasped in ^em. But shall wicked men live, sin, dye, and there an end? No, the Lord hath ^orne the contrary. Heb. 3.18. Hee sweares that unbeleevers shall not enter into his ^st. An oath among men is the end of all strife; and shall not faith be given to ^od when he sweares? The lesse evill they feele, the more let them feare. If ^ercy allowes a tolleration, Iustice hath a reservation; there will come a day of ^ckoning.
2 To omit the demonstration of the prognostick symptomes, forerunning ^is judgement. That same trumpet of warre in every corner, the divulgation of ^e Gospell; not only by the Antichristian Seminaries, who at once have named it ^d shamed it: the revelation of Antichrist, whereof all Christendome is a blee^ng witnesse: the incorrigibility of sin, that it is even dangerous to bee good; and ^ods reproofes doe not weaken, yea scarce weaken sinners. The generall decay of ^ture assure us this Iudicial conclusion of the world. That which David said should (...), now is: the world is waxed old like a garment: so old that most men are turned ^tchers, spending their times and studies to patch it. The lawyer talkes of a te^e called a perpetuity, that's his patch. The Vsurper thinkes to amplifie his domi^ons by fire and sword, that's his patch. One saies the world is naught, yet hee a^res to be a great man in it, that's his patch. The covetous saies, it is but ransito^ and short, yet he hoordes as if it were everlasting, that's his patch. Another ^ould dip it in new colours, make us beleeve it is an honest world; this is like painting,
 of an old, wither'd, and worme eaten face. Some as old as this garment is, would still bestow lac^ and gardes upon it, as if they meant to make it a fooles coate these are the proud and haughty, who only seeme to effect new clothes, and new fashions; yet love the world that is so old a garment, and quite out of fashion.
If we see a man whose eyes grow dimme, his eares deafe, his face furrowed, his haires white, his legs doubling under him; wee say, his living date is almo^^ expired. Such a dotage doth the world labour of, yet men covet as if there were a thousand generations to provide for. As a man that is dying, hath many fantasies: so the declining world is troubled with many delirements and errours. In a surf^^d body the corruption labours downewards, to the feete, and makes an issue there: so the putrefaction and turpitude of all times is sunke downe to this latter age; and one extremity answers another. Faith is rare, though there be many Christians: and charity so cold, as if a continuall February of in-devotion had frozen it. There was lately a great frost, and we called it a hard time: the rivers were crusted, the ^^ming earth obstructed, and the conveyances of water lock'd up: yet it is tha^^d and dissolved by the imperious and friendly Sun. But there is still a spirituall fro^^, a hardnesse of mans hearts, that extinguisheth the heate of zeale, the warmth of charity, the sparke of faith. q Out of whose wombe came the Ice? And the hoary f^^ of heaven, who hath gendred it? out of whose wombe comes this sinfull Ice, but the divels? It is not a frost of heaven, but the hoary frost of hell. The fruites of pie^y are withered, the springs of grace dried up, and the waters of charity that should make glad our citie of God, are congealed to covetousnesse. Who can loose these (...) of Orion? The Son of grace shineth, yet this frost melts not: it is reserved unto judgment, to be melted with the fire of hell.
Thus truly is the world growen an old man. 1. It stoopes like an old man, as (...) the head were too heavy for the shoulders; sinkes downeward with ponderous cares. 2. It is full of raw humors like an old man; the stomach is so opppre^^^ with crude and unwholsome vanities, that it is mortally feverish. 3 It is cold like a^ old man; that the bloud cannot be warmed, no heate of zeale can be got into it. 4. ^^^testy like an old man, weary of his owne desires, angry at the doing of that he commands to be done: desires, obtaines, and then despises; nothing can please him. 5. Piddling with the fingers like an old man; scratching all together into heapes it defyance of any future dissipation. 6. It hath lost all the senses like an old man: (...) eares so deafe that he cannot heare the Gospell, his eyes so blind that he cannot (...) the evill of his sinnes, his tongue so faltering that he cannot utter his prayers, (...) feete so lame that he halts with his best friend: even ready to close up his lights, the Sunne and Moone, be put out: the great spirituall Court is breaking up, all offices discharged; and he that takes their accounts, ready to appeare in the cloudes, the Iudge of all, Iesus Christ. We see the necessitie of this generall Iudgement: (...) is necessary for the Iustice of God, necessary for the good of man, necessary for the glory of him that is both God and man.
The Severity of it followes; it is such a Iudgement, as shall leave nothing unexamined, uncensured. He that was Salvator verus will be Iudex severus. Iudex ^^^o^lis, Deus universi. There are many gods, many kings, many priests, innumerable men. Now he that is God shall judge all those gods: he that is King, shall judge all these kings: he that is Priest, shal judge al those priests: he that is man, shal judg all men. The Apostle Iude calls it the great day; Great, for there shall be. 1. A great congregation, never did so many meet together before, never shall after. All shall be summo^ed, and all must appeare; though they were resolved into dust many thousand yeares before; and this citation shall be made by the sound of a Trumpet. 2. A great e^^mination; when not only visible and actuall workes shall be revealed; but even (...) most secret thoughts, reserved intentions, and scarce borne conceptions. Nothing is so hid, Vt Iudicis vel lateat scientiam, vel effugiat sententiam; that it can bee kep^ from his sapience, or escape his sentence. 3. A great Iudication, giving sentence (...)
 absolution unto the faithfull; and sentence of condemnation upon the wicked. And ^is shall be done suddenly: no Subpaena's to fetch in witnesses, they are all ready: no ^peale, for there's no higher court: no tedious pleading, for then all sinners are ^ruckeMat. 22.12. dumbe: no demurre, for the Iudge is perfect in the Law, it was of his owne ^aking: no writ of error, for he must needs Iudge wisely and truly, that is wise^ome and truth it selfe: no reprieve, for their is no hope of pardon: no Psalme of ^ercie; that day is past, this is the time of Iustice. 4. A great retribution, every ^an shall receive his reward according to his worke: to the godly there is the free ^ward of life and glory, to the ungodly deserved death and torment. This king ^th treasure enough for all; not one of the faithfull shall want mercie, not one re^obate shall scape without penaltie. Great was the lamentation of the drowning ^gyptians, and no lesse the rejoycing of Israel safe on the shore: but O the unspeak^le joy with the sheepe of CHRISTS right hand, and the unventable sorrow (...) the goates on his left? When both the songs of good men and Angels, and the ^ies of bad men and devills, shall eccho to the glory of one most holy God.
A great resignation, when1 Cor. 15.24. CHRIST shall deliver up the kingdome to God ^e Father; and cease to raigne, not as God, for so he is equall with the Father, but (...) mediator. For then all his redeemed ones are embraced with the everlasting ^mes of blessednesse: and for the rest he shall never make intercession, for they had ^ver part in his redemption. Vp goe the Saints and Angels in their eternall Quire, owne sinke the reprobates and devills to their eternall fire, where the one shall live ^ging, and the other live burning, so long as there is a God in heaven.
Thus Power had her day in creation, Providence hath her day in Preservation, ^ercie had her day in redemption, and Iustice must have her day in retribution. That ^^at Sonne of righteousnesse appeareth in foure signes of his Zodiacke. In his ^onception he came through Virgo, he was borne of a Virgin. In his Birth, through ^emini; two natures being united in one Person. In his Resurrection he was found (...) Leo, triumphing like a victorious Lion over all his enemies. When he comes to udgement, he shall appeare in Libra the Balance; justly waighing out to every man ^portion of reward, according to the proportion of his worke. This is his second ^omming; the first was of Grace, this is of Iustice. The first was to propiciate, not (...) judge. Ioh. 3.17. God sent not his Sonne to condemne the world but to save it. The ^cond shall be to judge, not to propiciate. Ioh. 5.22. The Father judgeth no man, ^t hath committed all judgement unto the Son. In the first he came a Physitian to ^ale, in the next an Avenger to punish that would not be healed. Then a Lambe to ^ffer, now a lion to triumph and conquer. His first comming was soft, as the dew ^on the mowen grasse: his second shall be terrible, in lightning and fire.
Seeing there must be a Iudgement, and we must all be judged, let us prepare our ^ules for a good answere. CHRIST bad his Disciples, when they were brought ^efore mens Iudgement seates, to study no answere: but let every one study an an^were before he comes to this Iudgement seat. Yet alas, what answere can be made? If God contend with us, we cannot answere him one of a thousand.Iob 9.3. Quae verba ^alent contra verbum? CHRISTS word must stand. Iob 31.14. What shall I doe ^hen God riseth up? and when he visiteth, what shall I answere him? If great men ho^ur themselves more than God, Quid facient, what shall they doe? If covetous ^en love money more than Christ, what shall they doe? If men have robbed the ^ord of his Patrimonie, what shall they doe? Here is a Quid facient for all. Men ^ve now their colours, reasons, pretences, and qualifications; but then what shall ^ey answere? The wicked shall plead to Christ; we are the worke of thy hands; ^ut he will reply, you have lost my Image and superscription. But Lord, remem^er thy Passion; Yes, but this is no time of compassion. The sentence is terrible. Matth. 25.41. Depart yee cursed into everlasting fire,Mat. 25.41. prepared for the devill and his Angels. When they shall cry; Lord, though we may not ascend with thee unto ^ory, yet let us abide still on the earth, statu quo prius; nay goe, Depart. If we must
 goe, let it not yet be farre, not out of thy sight and gracious presence; nay depa^^ from me. If we must goe, and goe from thee, yet let us have a blessing with us: nay, depart yee cursed. If we must goe, and from thee, and with a curse, yet somewhat qualifie thy anger, and let our curse be but easie: nay, depart yee cursed into Fi^^ If we must depart from thee, cursed, and into fire; yet let not that fire burne long suffer it to be soone extinguished; nay, but goe into Everlasting fire. If there be (...) remedie, but we must goe from thee the God of glory, and with a Curse, the character of infelicitie: and into fire, torment in extremitie: and that everlasting, without hope of recoverie: yet let us have some pleasant and loving company; nay, (...) the very devill and his Angels. A heavy doome, which if we desire to evade, let (...) before the day of tryall make sure the Iudge: if we can get him our friend, we (...) speed well in the Iudgement.



VER. 5. And spared not the old world, but saved Noah the eighth person, a Preacher of righteousnesse; bringing in the floud upon the world of the ungodly.

THis is the Apostles second exemplary argument against the indemnity of (...) his first instance was, how it sped in heaven; now he expresseth the mischiefe it did upon earth: after the expulsion of Angels, the submersion of terr^^ creatures. The first Iudgement tooke hold on altitude, this prevailes against multitude: for sublimitie, they were Angels: for universalitie, this is a whole world There God used his owne immediate power, in the dejection of those revolting sp^rits: here is the same offended power working by a mediate instrument. The A^gels were above the elements, therefore no element was exercised in their punishment: here is element against element, water against earth: that man, who was (...) elements composed, and by elements preserved, might also by elements be destroyed. When man forsakes his owne end, which is to glorifie his Maker: the creatures also forsake their (lesse principall) end, which is to serve man their master The Elements rebell against man, when man rebells against God: becoming a trator to his Creator, they owe him no more service: but in stead of serving him, they serve God against him.
Deepe calleth unto deepe at the noise of the water-spoutes: Psal. 42.7. the del^ge of sinnes called for a deluge of waters: deepe iniquity, for deepe calamitie. The world was growne so fowle, that God saw it was high time to wash it: yea so was the ^^cleanesse dyed in graine, that when the polluters were washed away, the poll^^^^^ stuck on still: as the plague cleaves to the house, even when the infecter of it is dea^. And as a sordid cloth lies long a soaking before it be clensed: so deepely had imp^^tie siz'd it selfe into the earth, that God saw it meete to steepe it long under the waters; even an hundred and fifty dayes, Gen. 7.
Gods blessing did not more multiply, than Satans curse: there came a Cres^^^ and multiplicamini from them both. God spake it to his creatures, men: Satan (...) his creatures, mens sinnes. Mankinde began but with one: yet he that saw the fir^^
 ^an lived to see the earth peopled with a world of men. Men grew not halfe so fast ^s sinnes; As they were encreased, so they sinned against me, Hos 4.7. One man could ^one multiply a thousand sinnes, never man had so many children. So that still ^e number of transgressions exceeded the number of persons: when the earth was ^arce sprinkled with men, the whole world was filled with sins. So that the top ^f the conspiracie bore up to heaven, and carried ill newes to the Maker of all. Whereat offended, he sent downe a watry messenger of destruction: which as it ^me from heaven, so swelled up back againe to heaven; with tydings, that Gods ^stice was now glorified on them, whose mercy would not be glorified by them ^he corruption of the world is not lesse now, yea more: it is past all pu^ging by wa^r, therefore hath God reserved it to fire. Onely as the Arke did save Noah in the ^y of water, so Christ will preserve us in the day of fire.
And spared not the old world, etc.] Here is a double act; of Iustice, of Mercy; ^at of Iustice on a whole world, the other of Mercy upon eight persons. It is of^n, Poena paucorum, terror omnium; God doth strike few, to save many: here hee ^ikes many and saves few. His judgements are sometimes particular, that his ^ercy may be generall: here his Iudgements are generall, and his Mercy particular. ^o the whole may be distinguished into the
Vengeance; Spared not the old world.Deliverance, Saved Noah the eight person,
In the vengeance or execution of wrath consider, the
Matter passive, Sinfull world.Instrument executive, The Floud.
The subject suffering is described, by the
Vniversality, the whole World.Antiquity, the Old World.Impiety, the Vngodly World.
For the penall instrument let us meditate;
1. Whence it proceeded.2. How farre it prevailed.3. How long it continued.
In the deliverance are two speciall things, the
Maner implied, by the Arke.Number expressed, Eight Persons.
Thus are our meditations fetch'd a great way backward, that our soules may (...) set somewhat further forward: let us consider the old world, that we may be^me the better for it in the new. History is delightfull to all, and gives us meanes (...) travell former times: that we may in some sort know what is done before us, ^ough wee cannot see what shall be done after us. In all this plentifull discourse, ^ur good apprehension must be my best perswasion; your capacity, my oratory. ^cure we our selves first in the Arke, and then lanch into this Ocean of water: th^ ^irit of God direct us in our voyage, and bring our soules to the haven of eter^l peace.
To begin with the uengeance, God was angry with the whole world because sin: neither was this a slight or easie wrath; but a fire long a kindling. It repen^h mee that I made man: here is a displeasure indeed, when the Lord shall repent (...) owne worke.1 Thes. 2.16. The wrath of God came upon them to the uttermost. (...), that is, ^h an one as consumes either totally or finally. The wrath of God is either in re^ution or execution. In resolution, it is either suppressed in his bosome, or ex^essed in his threatning. In execution, it is either temporall in body, or spirituall ^oule: as Peter said; Behold two swordes, or rather one sword with two edges. This (...) The wrath: God hath armies of afflictions, but if the wicked scape them all, (...) same Great wrath will surprise them. Neither must wee thinke here God sub^ to passions: what be affections in us, are perfections in him. But lippientibus
 etiam singularis lucerna numerosa est: to the pur-blinde one candle seemes many. As God is said to have an arme, because the arme is the instrument of our power: (...) eye, because he discernes all things: a foote because he is present every where, etc. And that he will preserve unharmed, is called theZach. 2.8. Apple of his eye. His essenti^^^ substance is called his Soule. Am. 6.8. Benephesho, by his life, or soule, that's by himselfe. And Psal. 11.5. Wicked men his soule hateth. Thus he is said to be a^gry, and to repent. But as man repents by retracting his purpose, so God by cha^ging his sentence. When GOD is said to alter his will, that he becomes offended with the man, with whom he was formerly pleased. Ille potius quam ipse mutatur: the man is changed not the Lord.August. He repents not as man does, for he cannot de^^^ and erre as man does. He is not angry, but all his actions proceed from a per^^^^ love of vertue, and hate of vice. We cannot properly Grieve the Spirit, nor C^^cifie Christ: but our sinnes doe all that is possible to it; and so much as in us (...), we bring melancholly into heaven, that Court of joy. If the King lose a subject (...) is so much the weaker: take a drop from the Ocean it hath the lesse: but what^ the losse of thee or thy harlot to God; he is never the poorer nor are they mu^^^ But when he repents of all the generation of men, this shewes sinne to be exceed^^^ hainous. In a word, mans is a passive repentance; Gods is an operative repentance. Let this teach us.
1. To glorifie God, lest he repent that he made us.Psal. 139.14. I am fearefully and ^^derfully made; (all Gods workes are admirable, man wonderfully wonderfull) ^avellous are thy workes, and that my soule knoweth right well. What infers he o^ (...) this? Therefore I will praise thee. If we will not praise him that made us, will (...) not repent that he made us? Oh that we knew what the Saints doe in heaven, (...) how the sweetnesse of that doth swallow up all earthly pleasures: they sing h^^^ and glory to the Lord: why? Because he hath created all things. When we behold (...) exquisite peece of worke; we presently enquire after him that made it, purposely (...) commend his skill: and there is no greater disgrace to an artist, than having perfected a famous worke, to finde it neglected, no man minding it, or so much as casti^^ an eye upon it. All the workes of God are considerable, and man is bound to th^^ contemplation. Psal. 8.3 When I consider the heavens, etc. I say, What is man? (...) admires the heavens, but his admiration reflects upon man; Quis homo? There (...) no workeman, but would have his instruments used, and used to that purpose i^ which they were made. The Cutler hath made thee a knife; to cut thy own me^^, not thy neighbours throat. If thou like the envious man will keep^ thy (...) in thy hand, and swallow thy meate whole: or like the foole, cut anothers me^^ and thy owne fingers: this is to abuse that instrument, and pervert the end (...) which it was framed. Man is set like a little world in the midst of the great (...) glorifie God; this is the scope and end of his Creation. If he shall apply hims^^^ to proud desires, base designes, covetous courses; here Gods meaning is mis-^^derstood, his worke mis-applied. He is created for the service of God, if be ca^not be wrought and brought to that, he shall be beaten in peeces. As the Po^^^ turnes and workes a peece of clay; frames it for such a vessell; it will not doe; (...) tries to make another fashion of it, yet it fadgeth not: till at last, after many (...) trials, he dasheth it against the walles. Gods spirit will not alway strive with (...) world, more than it did with that: but if we still strive against him, let us see wh^^ the end shall have the worst of it. Ariosto going through the streets, and hea^^^^ (...) Potter basely sing his odes; tooke a cudgell and broke his pots; answering (...) complaint: Thou hast marr'd my verses, and I have marr'd thy vessels. If (...) abuse Gods creatures, he will spoile our pleasures.
2 Let us repent of our sinning, lest God repent of our making. O that for (...) of a little sorrow, we should hazard the losse of such a joy, as the delight of our C^^ator. When we sinne, we give him cause to grieve at our doing, but while we c^^tinue impenitent, we give him cause to grieve at our being. Shall our Maker rep^^
 wee are, and wee not repent that wee are so evill? Did hee not make us of ^hing? and is hee not able to reduce us to nothing, to worse than nothing; yet doe we provoke him, and put him to it by our rebellions? Repentance is a ^ee of continuall use, because sinne is a thing of continuall practise. It is better ^ng to the house of mourning, than of mirth; saith Salomon; more expedient for (...) soules health: through his owne experience, he taught us this expedience. In ^e we patch our clothes, in repentance we rend them in pieces. It unmakes a ^n that which sinne made him; whereas impenitence keepes him for ever the same. ^ey that lived unconverted sinners on earth, remaine the same in hell.Ioh. 10.8. All that ^e before me are theeves and robbers: in congruitie of speech he should have said, ^e theeves; yes, not onely were, but Are so still. Saul is still a homicide, you can^ say so of David, that he is still an adulterer; because he repented, and by that (...) tenewed.
Our repentance is said Pacare Deum, to appease God: now appeasing presuppo^ anger, and Gods anger is two fold; Iudicis and Patris. As he is a Iudge, offen^ with his enemies, and this wrath is onely appeased by Christ. As he is a Father, (...) so our repentance may please him in Christ: not Ratione subjecti, in respect of selves; but Ratione Principij, Gods Spirit. Thus our repentance through Christ (...) pacifie his paternall wrath. This is an excellent remedy, but not so easy: the ^g of Niniveh and his people put on sackcloth, and fasted: yet but,Ioh. 3.9. Who can tell ^ether the Lord will turne to mercie: we are not sure of it, it may be so, but Who ^tell. Though the Iewes rent their hearts, yet it is but Quis novit,Ioel. 2.14. Who knoweth ^ether God will returne? Though they gnaw their tongues for paines, yetRev. 16.10. they ^nt not of their deeds: so hard a taske is repentance.
Neither is repentance without amendment, any more than continuall pumping ^hout mending the leake. The bird fighting with the serpent, ever anon flew to ^erbe, which was her medicine, and cured her of the poison: but at last, the hearbe ^ng wasted, the bird dyed. Repentance is that herbe, which while opportunity ^s, will helpe the poison of sinne: but that once gone, and it will not be ever pre^ to presumtptuous sinners, what remanies but perishing. The medicine is made (...) the wound, not the wound for the medicine. The argument of our liberty is ^entance: the bonds of servitude are broken with a broken heart Auditurne vox ^uris, Is the mourning voice of that Dove, the Holy Ghost, heard in thy bosome? ^mosthenes would not plead for his client, till he cryed to him; and then answered (...) sorrow, now I feele thy cause: let our penitent contrition cry unto Christ, and ^n he will plead for us.
God spared not the old world. Thus in generall, now more specially to the parts. ^ld hath diverse significations: it is taken. 1 For this whole visible engine,1 Ioh. 2.16. the ^icke of all things contained under heaven and earth. 2 For the vicious and ^erable condition of it, contracted by sin, and inherent in all things.2 Cor. 5.19. 3 For the ^lest and most excellent part of it, man and thus somtimes only for the Saints; ^d was in Christ, reconciling the world to himselfe. Commonly for the wicked,1 Ioh. 5.19. (...) whole world lyes in wickednesse. So the world is opposed generally, vel numero ^atorum, vel numero electorum. The first circumstance we light upon, is the uni^sality of this destruction, which seiseth on a whole world. Wherin the answer ^hree questions may satisfy us.
Why the creatures were punished with mans ruine, that were not guilty of ^s sinne. This was just with God. 1 Because they were all made for mans use, (...) therefore man suffers in their losse. Terra propter hominem producta, terra propter ^inem maledicta. As a foule traitor being executed, hath his house fired, his very ^d harrowed with brambles, and sowen with stones. 2 Seeing they were made (...) mans use, he being taken away, they were of no further use.Chrys. The generall being ^ne, the army perisheth: the head being cut off, the members die. 3 Such was (...) greatnesse of sin, that it brought destruction, not only upon the sinner, but on
 all that belonged to him. 4 Because brutish men had abused the creatures by t^^^^ filthy riot and excesse; therefore God saw it just to punish the Instrument wit^^^^ principall:Rom. 8.20. so that there is not a Creature, which is not Subject to some vanity. (...) that requites his Princes favours with treason, not onely suffers in his owne pers^^ but every thing about him feeles the smart. His followers are suspected, his (...) ^rits disgraced, his children disinherited, his friends discomforted, his house (...) all things droope with him, his gardens are over-run with weedes, his orchy^^ lie uncouth, man and beast is made sensible of his judgment. Adam, that was (...) holding to God for his very selfe, apostating into treason; his house grew out of ^^shion to him, his pleasures were turned to thornes, the armes of his nob^^ were defaced: and he that was made a Master of living bodies, breaking his all^^ance with God, became despised of his owne servants: some of them shaking of (...) yoke of our goverment, when we shooke off our makers. Especially the greatest, (...) the smallest of them: the greatest, as Lions, Tygers, Panthers, are hardly (...) but the least, as bees and gnats, not at all. In a generall destruction when the ene^^ triumphs, not only men, women and children lose their lives: but the houses (...) fired, the trees cut downe, the walls rased, the horses slaine in fight, the cattell (...) in the stalls:1 Sam. 15.13. as Saul had his charge for Amalek; Spare neither man nor beast. (...) there not rottes of cattell, and murraines of beasts, so well as mortalities of m^^ In a spoiling warre or plague, who remaines to fill the empty cribbe or marg^^ Doe they not suffer with their Masters? Doe not the very beasts of the rich fate^^ better for the prosperity of their owners: whereas the poore mans cattell partake (...) the poore mans want?
I doe not thinke that all manner of creatures perished in the waters; for be^^^^ them preserved in the Arke the fish escaped, Gen. 7.22. The Rabbins conc^^^^ that the fish also perished, growing hot in the flood, as in a caldron; but Moses ^^^fines this destruction to things on the dry land. The fishes were spared. 1 M^^ (...) not so abused them, as the other kinds: and herein our sinfulnesse exceeds theirs; (...) not onely the delicacies of the land, but neither can the rarities of the sea satisfie (...) riot. They were then more separate from mans sin, therefore from his punish^^^^ But in the fiery deluge, to shew that even thither our excesse hath reached, the (...) fishes shall not escape. 2 They lived in that element wherewith God purposed (...) overthrow the world: so that the same thing that was ordained in ruin am, for (...) version, was to them in tutelam, rather for preservation. 3 They were not p^^^^kers of the earth, now the earth was cursed, not the sea: because Adam did unlaw^^^ eate the fruite of the earth, not of the sea. 4 Such was the good pleasure of C^^ that among other creatures he would then spare the fishes: then I say, for at (...) times he hath bothHos. 4.3. threatned andPsal. 105.29. destroyed them also; he slew their fish.
Further from the number of those preserved in the Arke, divines have pro^^bly exempted. 1 those Amphibia, creatures that live as well in the water, as on (...) Land; as otters, sea-wolves, water-serpents, and water-fowles. 2 Such as co^^ corruption, and doe not breed by generation; as wormes of dung, mothes of p^^^fied hearbs etc. 3 Such as are of a mixt kind, ingendred by male and female of d^^^^ kinds; as the Mule commeth of the Horse and Asse: these needed not come in^^ (...) Arke,Aug. Sed parentes eorum ibi fuisse sufficit; it was enough that the breeders of (...) were there. Some of the Rabbins have conceited, that the seeds of hearbs (...) plants were kept in the Arke; but they might by Gods providence grow in the (...) under the waters; as did the Olive which the dove found at the sinking of the (...) Yea some of them more ridiculously, amongst the living things preserved, (...) thrust in the spirits of the aire to the Arke. But neither are they male and fe^^^^ nor subject to the submersion of waters; and it were better for man to have (...) kinde destroyed than conserved. For the Phenix, amongst many ambiguit^^^ (...) yeeld to their perswasion, who thinke there is none; and that by the disagree^^^^ of her most justifying reporters. For her countrey, some make her of Ar^^^
 others of India. For her life, some five hundred yeares, others six hundred sixty. ^r her death some say shee sings and dyes; other, that motu alarum, with the mo^n of her wings she sets her nest afire. Pliny, and Pompon. Mela write, that of her ^es comes a worme, and of the worme another Phenix: which takes the bones of ^e old Phenix with her nest, and carries it to Heliopolis, the Citie of the Sun in ^gypt; there laying it on the altar, and solemnizing the Funerall. But who would ^t smile at the non-sense of this fixion? For if the Phenix be burnt to ashes, where (...) her bones left for this transportation? But on, say they; and what creature is ^thout sex, among Beasts, Fishes, or Foules? Gods (Increase and multiply) had (...) a vaine and superfluous charge to her. If there were but one before, then cer^nly that perished in the Floud; for none were preserved in the Arke but by paires ^d couples. So that if formerly but one, now consequently there is none. The ^ing of S. Ambrose is objected: Phaenix cum mortua sit, reviviscit: solos non cre^us homines resuscitari. We answer, he doth not deliver his opinion, that the ^enix being dead reviveth: but Ex concessis, by that which the heathen affirmed, (...) of their owne grounds, he proves the Resurrection which they denied. Let not ^s first question passe without a double meditation.
It instructs our understanding what the horror of sin is, whose contagion hath in^ted all the creatures that belong to us. Cursed be the earth for thy sake: the earth ^u treadest on, the earth meriting no curse, the earth made before thee, made for ^e, and thou made of it; cursed be this earth for thy sake. Quid meruistis oves, what ^e the poore creatures done? We are not content with their rule, without their ^ne: though they be ad usum and esum nostrum; yet we tyrannize over them, and (...) scarce satisfied with their spoile. O that the guilty should thus dare to domi^re over the innocent; and hold himselfe more absolute lord over his beast, than (...) thinkes God over himselfe! He that shewes no mercy to his beast, (which yet ^not his creature, but bought with his money) teacheth God how to deale with (...), who is his creature, and bought with his Sonnes bloud. The Prophets, when (...) Lord hath beene angry, and the plague heavy, and no excuse for the peoples ^quity; not knowing what to say for themselves, ashamed in their owne name to ^ve pardon: have put him in minde of the bruit creatures. How doe the beasts grone,Ier. 4.6. Ioel. 1.18. (...). Not that God is more respective of beasts, than of men; Hath God care of Ox^ But when men become bruiter than beasts, God will pitty beasts sooner than ^n. The penitent Ninivites imposed a fast upon their very flocks and heards with ^mselves. Hath God care of beasts, or have beasts care of God?Ion. 3.7. Are they not ^hout religion, yea, without reason? O pardon repentance, a greater absurdity ^n this! It was a glasse to reflect their owne estate: the bellowing of halfe fami^d cattell, puts them in minde how themselves ought to be starved. Such an use ^s of the Leviticall Sacrifices: to see them slaine, their bloud exhausted, their flesh ^nt to ashes; might well strike them at heart with the survey of their owne de^rits. It teacheth the young Lion obedience; when he sees the dog whom he loves (...) playes withall, cudgell'd before him. When the Princes garment is beaten, he ^ne conceives himselfe blame-worthy by that representation. The moane and ^ery of the dumbe thing schooles us, as stripes on our garments, to tell us we have ^ts in that bargaine. That which wants reason is punished: that we who have rea^ might be humbled. Bestialior quam ipsa bestia est homo ratione vigens, and non rati^ vivens. We are little better than beasts, if we finde no other use of beasts, than ^erve our owne riot: they may teach us as well as serve us: the looking-glasse ^n insensible thing, yet it reflects to a man his owne forme. This is the first ^on.
It also informes us to moderate our affections, and not to surfet on this world ^ich we have made so corrupt by our sins. What creature is there, on which our ^iety hath not stuck some blemish? what doe we use, whereon we read not en^ ^ven the characters of our owne obliquities? Our apparrell is but the cover of
 our shame: by our bravest accoutrements, we may take measure of our delinqui^^ments. Adam was more glorious without raiment, than all his posterity can be (...) it: neither can the glory we seeke in our clothing, conceale or countervaile the i^nominy that came by our sinning. For our meate, is not our life maintained by (...) death of other creatures? Our preservation, by their destruction: sin brought (...) necessity; without that no creature should have lost his life to become our fo^^ This was not from the Creation, creatures were not made to this end. Innoce^^ would have preserved all to a higher and more excellent use. We should have (...) meate farre sweeter; and such as should haue cost no creature the life. Let my (...) thus meditate; this creature dieth not for it selfe, but for me; not for it's owne f^^^ but mine: if I had my desert, I should rather dye than it. Do we not read, our ^^ming and sordid lusts in the infected aire? Our blasphemies in the blemished Moo^^ Glimmering Stars, and blushing Sun? Our oppressions in the harrowed and wo^^ded earth? Our impieties in the groning of all creatures? If a rich man sho^^^ heape all his wealth together, and then set his house on fire; hath he cause of joy (...) see this? There is an ataxie and disorder in all the world wrought by our sins: (...) trees must fall under the wounding axe, the bowels of the earth be rent, to buil^^^ a dwelling: and shall not this move us? Can we glory in our shame? with that i^sulting Monarch, This is my Babel. We had a better mansion, once, without (...) of this violence; Paradise. Thus as he that rifled the poore scholler, rob'd ten me^^^ once: he having borrowed of one his horse, of another his spurres, etc. O^^^ when Esops jay was stript of her brave plumes, there were twenty birds undone, (...) had lent her their feathers. So when death deprives man of his life, he finds ma^^ creatures to have spent their blouds and beings towards his maintenance. Our co^fort be it, that our Patent is renewed in Christ; the second Adam regetting (...) the former had lost. And he that was content to become a creature, and to proo^^ his bloud to us; thinkes now no creature too deere for us. For his sake they (...) our servants, let us become his servants: to us the use, to him the thankes and glory for ever.
2. Gen. 7.19.In the next place we are to examine, whether no other creatures escaped the ^^luge, besides the fore-excepted. The waters prevailed, untill all the high hils that (...) under the whole heaven were covered. Yes, saith Cajetan, those under the airy heave^ nay, saith Moses, under the whole heaven. Some have wrangled about the mo^^taines: as Athao in Macidonea, so high, that it casteth the shadow to Myri^^^ towne in Lemnos, eighty six miles off. Atlas is said to have a top higher than (...) cloudes: and Tabor, to rise up thirty furlongs: Caucasus to be lightened with (...) Sun above,Ioseph. when daylight is shut in below. But Moses affirmes expresly, that (...) these high mountaines were surmounted, and covered by the waters. Cajeta^ e^cepts the mountaine of Paradise from this inundation: but where doth he find (...) Paradise was situate on a mountaine?Gen. 2.10. Out of Eden went a River to water the G^^den; but Rivers doe not use to run upon hils. His vaine feare was, lest then E^^^ should have beene drowned in the floud, whom he supposeth to be in Paradise. (...) indeed Enoch was taken up into heaven, a higher Paradise; where no floud (...) reach him.
Bellarmine thinkes that all the mountaines were not over flowen, but onely (...) where the wicked dwelt. And Iosephus reports a hill in Armenia, where all (...) fled thither for succour, were saved from the deluge. But what speake we of f^^tasticall dreames, against evident scriptures? Thus the Hebrewes fable, that Og (...) King of Bashan, who lived till Moses his time, was one of those Gyants before (...) floud. When I read in Pliny of a Gyants body found in Crete, forty six Cub^^^ length; I beleeve it, as I doe the Ballad of Gargantua. The waters being fif^^^ Cubites above the greatest mountaines, those Gyants must needs be of incre^^^ height, that escaped.
But then say they, the floud seemed to ascend unto the middle region of (...)
 a^re: for it was so many cubits higher than the mountaines, and som mountaine tops ^scend to the middle region, yea above the clouds. As Olympus, which Zinagoras by ^athematicall instruments found to be ten stadia high: insomuch that the ashes re^aining of the sacrifices, are neither dispersed by the wind, nor dissolved by the ^ine. So the waters should seeme to rise higher, than the place where the raine is (...) gendred. Answ. The report of Olympus is found to be untrue,Ludovicus Vives. by the testimony ^f Philadelphius, who went up the hill on purpose to make experiment. Besides, no ^ill is above foure miles in height: and the middle region is at least 50 miles from ^^e earth. Againe, diverse inhabited those places, who are said to live halfe as long ^gaine as other men. This shewed it to be a wholsome scite for aire, which could ^ot be the middle region, full of clouds and foggy mistes.
The Conclusion then goes strong for the universality: a whole world perished, ^^ve onely what the Arke preserved. The day of vengeance is come, the guests are ^^stred their wodden castle, the doore of the Arke shut, and the windowes of heaven ^pened. Now those deriders, seeing the violence of the waters; some rising up, ^^her comming downe, both joyning their forces to drowne the earth: come wa^^^ng middle-deepe; and bitterly crying out for safety in that vessell floating, which ^^ey had flowted in making. But now they are justly rejected, and find no roome in ^ods mercie, whose word could find no roome in their hearts. Others hope to ^^x-run the destruction; and being clambred up to the tops of the highest mountains, ^^ey looke downe upon the waters with some transient flattery of hope. Still the ^aters rise, and their hills appeare to them like floating Ilands: they give many a ^^oke when the heavens will cleare up; and those bottels of raine be exhausted. O ^ow would one houres Sun-shine have cheared their hearts! And yet suppose it ^ould cease spouting downe, where was the provision which should keepe life and ^^ule together; till the chanels of the sea, veins and hollow ventricles of the earth, ^ould sucke up that inundation? The beasts and fowles hovering in those mountains, ^ere rather ready to prey upon their carcases, than become their food: hunger will ^ake those devourers of men, which before yeelded to be devoured by men. There ^ere Wolves howling, Dogs barking, Lions roaring, Owles screeching, Cranes ^attering, Serpents hissing; men, women, children crying; all in one forlorne place.
Still their death comes neerer, and overtakes the refuges of their confidence. ^hen from the drowning hills they clime up to the highest trees, and there with ^^lenesse and horror behold their threatning death which they would strive to avoid, ^^d know they cannot. From the tops of all they descry afarre off the Arke floating (...) the waves: and now looke on that with envy, which they formerly beheld with ^orne: cursing their impenitent hearts, which God must needs kill ere he could ^aken.
But in vaine they flee, whom God pursues: there is no mountaine so high but (...) hand can reach it: no depth so low, but his eye sees it, and power rules it. There (...) no way to scape him, but by comming to him. Fugimus a manu vindictae, cum ^urrimus ad manum misericordiae. At last their destruction surpriseth them, poore ^iserable creatures, halfe dead with feare and hunger, and now wholly dead with ^ater. Loe here the ful conquest of Iustice, and the whole world overwhelmed ^ith an universall ruine. God hath fetched backe againe all that life, which he had ^^ven to his unworthy creatures: and the world was reduced to that forme wherin it ^^od in the third day of the Creation; Waters being over the face of the whole earth.
Let this ^ontemplation bee usefull to us: the season of repentance is before ^^e beginning of vengeance: but if Iudgment be gone out, men cry too late. While ^^e Gospell moves us, the doores of the Arke are open: if we now neglect it, we ^^y seeke it with teares, and not find it. Mercie to impenitence, would be injury (...) Iustice. Let every soule take this very time to redeeme the time: for hee is so fu^^^ive, that he will not tarry the pleading of his owne cause.
Lastly, we are to examine,  how in all this the righteousnesse of God may be
 justified. What, all the world? might it not have bene satisfied with a family, a^ the monstrous children of Lamech? Or with a City, as Sodome? Or with a Co^^trey, as Canaan? Or with a fourth part of the world, as Europe? but all? Because a mans garden, that hath beene fruitfull, is ove^ ^^n with cankers; will he therefo^^ destroy it?Luk. 13.8. Doth not God threaten only the Barren Tree, such a one as cumbers (...) ground: not the whole vineyard. The husbandman feeles not all his greene and ^^ripe corne, because some weeds are growne up in it: yea Christ himselfe forbid^^^ with a Sinite crescere.Mat. 13.30. Nor because a mans servants have abused his house, and le^^^ sluttishly noisome, will he therefore strait pull it downe: but rather see it cle^^^ and air'd, the rubbish swept out, and the uncleannesse washed away. The Lord (...) no more here; he punisheth the defilers with due destruction, washeth and scowre^^ this great house of the world, but then lets it stand: he makes it cleane, he doth (...) make it nothing. But to cleare this point, two subordinate questions must (...) scanned.
1 Whether all that were temporally destroyed, also everlastingly perished. (...) so, then Abraham could object,Gen. 18.25. Farre be it from thee to destroy the righteous (...) the wicked: shall not the Iudge of all the earth doe right? Shall Infants and innoce^^^ share in the same confusion with obstinates? 1 Some say, that all were tempor^^^ punished, that they might be eternally saved: as St Ierome of the Sodomites, (...) received in this life their full punishments. But if Rreprobates might scape thus, (...) would not be so full. 2 Some extenuate their sinne, as Cajetan; that they were (...) wholly void of faith, but beleeved not Noah in this particular. But it is not saf^ (...) man to extenuate, what the Lord does aggravate: that the wholeGen. 6.11.12 earth was (...) with violence, and all flesh had corrupted his way. They were not only full of inc^^dulity, but foule with all manner of impiety. 3 Others say, that they were conde^ned to hell, yet redeemed thence by Christs descension: who1 Pet 3.19.20. Went and preach^^^ the spirits in prison, which were disobedient in the dayes of Noah. Thus the Pontif^^ans have conceited, that Plato at Christs Preaching in hell, beleeved; and was (...) many others, delivered: as the soule of Falconilla, by the prayers of St Tecl^, (...) Traians at the intercession of Gregory. But these imaginations crosse Gods denominations, who hath interposed aLuk. 16.26. great gulfe: their worme never dieth, and o^^ (...) hell there is no redemption. 4 Others, that they were not cast into hell, but ma^^ of them into Purgatory, and from thence delivered by Christs descending. B^^ answere both these errors, so falsely grounded on the Apostles words. (...) quickned in spirit, he went etc. Christs soule could not be said to be quickned, for (...) soule never died: therefore by his soule he did not preach either in hell or Purgatory. Christ hath two spirits; one as man, another as God: so the holy Ghost (...) called the spirit of Christ. But the spirit here is properly neither of these, but (...) Divine power: by which he preached in Noah, in all the Prophets before him, (...) the Apostles after him. But if it be not meant of Purgatory, what is then this P^^son? Augustine sayes, this prison was the Body: and the men were called spi^^^ from the better part; mens cujusque, is est quisque: but we seldome find living (...) called Spirits. Montanus sayes, this Prison was the Arke; but then there had be^^ in the prison too few spirits, for in the Arke were but eight. Some will have (...) prison to be Ignorance, according to that Prophecie of Christ; that he was (...) preachEsa. 61.1. Liberties to the Captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are (...) But to those Christ could not be said to preach in spirit, but in Person. Some (...) have this prison, the Grave: but then soules should lie in graves by that consequ^^^ Others, to be hell: and that is indeed a prison, without light, without liberty, (...) out comfort. Let us keepe our selves free men, and beware of multiplying our del^^^ that we be never cast into this prison. But certainly there is no Preaching in (...) because there is no repenting in hell.Psal. ^8.11. Shall thy loving kindnesse be declared in hell (...) To conclude, the Scripture never called the receptacle of beleeving soules a pri^^^ to thinke therefore, that first they were condemned, and afterward redeemed, i^
 point of contradiction. The same Christ that came in his flesh, and preached the ^ospell to the world; came to them in the dayes of Noah by his Spirit, and in ^^ah preached repentance to those unbeleevers: who because they repented not, but ^^ntinued in disobedience, are now damned spirits in hell. This I take to be the true ^^se and orthodoxe exposition.
Charity may seeme to except from everlasting ruine, Innocents and Ignorants. ^^nocents, as Infants, that were not capable of faith and repentance. Ignorants such (...) did not here of the forewarned vengeance. The one could not beleeve for want (...) discretion: the other, not be called unbeleevers if they had no premonition: on ^^ese our charity hopes there was mercy. In the first judgment, when the Angels ^^l: in the last judgment, when Christ shall come; onely the elect shall be saved, ^^d onely the Reprobate condemned. In this middle and intervenient judgment, ^^c soli electi conservantur, nec soli reprobi suffocantur: some were preserved, that were ^^t elected, as Cham, cursed of his father: so we thinke, some were drowned, which (...) were saved. Our probable reasons ten.
1 It is not likely that the whole posterity of Methushalem and Henoch, and of ^^er holy Patriarchs, were condemned: for the Lord hath promised to be good to (...) children for their Fathers sakes.
Howsoever they beleeved not Noah at the first, but thought him a fantasticall fel^^w: yet when they saw the event answering his prediction, and death climbing up to ^^eir latest refuges; their soules might be humbled to repentance. Many having learned ^^t godlines in on dais misery, which many yeares prosperity could not teach them.
^ The Apostle resembles1 Pet. 3.21. Baptisme to the Arke but as all dying without Baptisme, (...) not damned, so neither all that were without the Arke, eternally perished. They ^^ght be drowned in the deluge on earth, yet escape the abysse of hell.
4 If God had meant to destroy their soules with the confusion of their bodies, he ^^uld not so have lingered the execution. It wasGen. 7.4. Fourty dayes a comming, wheras ^od could have dspatched it in foure houres: that by degrees their hearts might be ^^tned with sorrowes, as the earth was soaked with waters.
But if they repented, why is it not recorded in Scripture? So neither is Adams ^^pentance, nor Salomons: it expressely sayes they sinned, not expressely they re^^ted: though of their repentance their is no question to be made. But it is con^^led to deterre us from the like rebellion, least it become so doubtfull of our con^^^sion. But if they did repent, why then were they not saved from the deluge? Be^^use they repented not in time, at Noahs preaching. Repentance is never too late to ^^^e the soule, but it may be too late to deliver the body.
Let us repent betimes, before the Iudgment come: for if it be once come, we ^^^y save our soules, but our bodies must perish. They that were even a kinne to ^^ah, because they repented not at the preaching of Noah, could not be saved with ^^ah: but losing this opportunity, they too late wish themselves in the Arke: al^^^ mercy shall never be denyed to true repentance, yet speed well their soules, they ^^st lose their lives. When the Lord strikes a City with his Pestilence, many sin^^^s begin then to relent, and bleed in contrition for their offences: this shall happily ^^liver them from hel and the wrath of God: yet this exempts them not from death (...) that plague. Men commonly feare Gods temporall blowes, more than his eter^^^l: yet of both they neglect the antidote and prevention. This will make him ^^ke, if not home. A wise man will not be drunke, if only for the head-ake: nor a ^od man sin, if only to avoid the heart-ake. If we have not repented so early, but (...) he will punish us: yet let us not repent so late, but that he may save us.
2 How was this just, to punish the Infants and Innocents for the sinnes of their ^^^ents? Doth not God say,Ezek. 18.20. The sonne shall not beare the iniquitie of the father? ^^th not he not make this to the inraged Prophet, an argument of sparing Niniveh; (...) many thousand little ones,Ion. 4.11. That cannot discerne betweene their right hand and ^^r left? That cannot speake, cannot helpe themselves; that sticke to their mothers
 brests, as apples to the tree; if you plucke them away, they perish. Is this (...) babes welcome into the world, the milke to feed them; when they cry, to quiet the^ with death? Is this the nursing of their tender and ungrowen limbes, to wrap the^ up in waves of swadling clouts, and to rocke them asleepe with pitilesse destruction? Whose eares can endure the lamentable and confused cry of so many infants, (...) not cry for company? The Midwives of Aegypt had more mercy; Ph^^^^^ daughter was moved to take up weeping Moses. It is the property of a cruell Na^^on,Deut. 28 50. Not to shew favour to the little ones. When the Prophet foretold Hazael of (...) crueltie,2 King. 8.13. in dashing infants against the stones; he asked, if he thought him a D^^^ so brutish he held such a villaine: men have more yeares and sinnes, but what (...) infants done? The Scripture hath many circumlocutions of their ignorance (...) simplicity.Deut. 20.14. God gave a speciall charge concerning them, in the bloudiest vic^^^y of warre, unlesse for some nations which he had accursed. Christ tooke them (...) his armes, blessed them, and placed one in the midst; proposing them as pa^^^ for the imitation of riper yeares. Whose eyes can behold the shrinking of their (...) members at every pull of griefe, their limbes sprawling on the ground, their (...) scorched with heat, as a scroll of parchment, or sinking on the waters, without per^
Thus justly concerning little ones, doth God expostulate with men, but (...) may not thus expostulate with God: for to him alone they are not innocent. Ma^ rule is to punish him only that offends; andDeut. 24.16. not to put the children to death for (...) fathers. Yet so farre as afflictions goe untouching life, children oft suffer for th^ parents; being deprived of liberty, goods, honours; as in cases of treason. T^ Lord threatens to visite the sinnes of the fathers upon the children,Exod. 20.5. even unto (...) fourth generation. So long, that (by the course of nature) their parents may li^^^ see their wickednesse plagued in their posterity: yet if the sonne repent, the s^^ God hath promised that hee shall scape. And howsoever this judgement be not ^^wayes verified, yet it is enough to terrifie us all. But it never misseth, where the parents sinnes are become the childrens by imitation. They are then called their Fathers sinnes; because they were by their age the Founders, by their example (...) Teachers, and in their owne persons the beginners of those sins. As it is com^^^ly said; We may know what house such come of, by some tricks of their Ancestors.
Iew and Gentile have excepted against the Divine Iustice for this. Bio^ tooke on against the gods, that the parents demerits were devolved and translated upo^ the progenie: which he scornefully matched, as if a Physitian for the fathers (...) ease should minister physicke to the sonne. The Iewes had such an ungracious proverbe;Ier. 31.29. The fathers have eaten a sowre grape, and the childrens teeth are set on (...) But the Lord answers them,Hos. 2.2. Plead with your mother: for the husband may ^^^fully put away his prostituted wife, and her adulterous brood, because they are (...) of his children?Ezek. 18.4. All soules are mine, the soule of the father, and the soule of the sonne mine. If it were as Horace sung to his friend; Delicta majorem immeritus l^^: (...) who can say, My heart is cleane? Is it possible to be borne Morians, and to have (...) of their tawny and swarthy complexions? Againe, is it not just with God to p^^ our fond indulgence, in the very object of our idolatry? Wee hope these you^ plants shall succour us with their fruits, when we are growen saplesse: but doth a^ the staffe we so nourish to beare us, become often a cudgell to beat us? Devil ^^sed the wicked both wayes; in their Descent,Psal. 109.10. Let his children be vagabonds, and (...) their bread in desolate places. In their Ascent, Let the iniquitie of his father be (...) remembrance,Vers. 14. and let not the sinne of his mother bee blotted out. We have seene (...) bloud of the Church exhausted by sacrilegious parents, required at the hands (...) their posterity with ruine: God so cursing their generations, that we might reade (...) nature and quality of the sinne, in the visible characters of the punishments. T^^ whole world was so foule, that the very fruit of their bodies (without contrac^^ of actuall sins) seemed odious to God: and in his Iustice he punished those innoce^ babes with a death temporall, whom he migh yet deliver from the wrath (...)

But some haply were not so hainous transgressours, but would have belee^^d had they beene informed; Why should they suffer? They had all sinne enough (...) drowne them in one deepe, if some found the mercy to save them from the other ^^epe. God doth not punish many for the sinnes of some; but all men are sinners. ^lthough one be not principall in respect of the fact presently enquired; as David ^as in numbring the people: yet none fall but for their owne offending. He may be ^^cessary in consenting, or concealing: if he be neither principall nor accessary in ^at, yet hee may bee culpable in a thousand others; secret, perhaps to men, but ^owne to God. The Serpent hath a sting, though he doth not alwayes put if forth: ^d man hath malice, though he shew it not.
Who then can say, I have paid the things that I never tooke? Ionah is the of^^der, the whole ship is in danger: but he that had not sinned with the Prophet, ^d sinned in somewhat else. They had all offended at sundry times, what wrong ^t if they were all whipped at once? Here is all the difference; their faults had se^^rall places, their punishment shall have but one. All Israel smarts with David, (...) for Davids, but their owne disobedience. The Lord need not beat his braines, (...) breake his sleepe, to invent an accusation against us. We have no thought, word, ^orke, but yeelds him cause and matter enough. It cannot be denied, but the sins (...) sever in our conceits, according to the distance of time or place; some of old, ^me late; some in one quarter of the world, some in another: these the knowledge (...) God unites, and viewes all at once. In France one hath followed incontinence; ^ay not that Countrey-disease overtake him in England for it? A young man is a ^^uptuous rioter, shall not his old-age rue it? Will any time or place exempt him ^^m diseases incident to that sinne? Thou art the same person still, unlesse repen^^ce have made thee new.
It is true that some are more noxious than others; as Bias said to a savage crew a dangerous storme, when they cried to their gods; Silete, ne vos hac dii navigare ^tiant; Doe not speake so lowd, lest the gods should heare you. Intimating them wicked, that is, was the hazard of a worse vengeance to have them taken notice (...) But the best of all have sinnes enough; and Optimus ille est qui minimis urgetur; ^^eeves are brought out of divers quarters, have trespassed at sundry times, com^^ed severall offences: yet are all imprisoned in one Gaole, punished in one day, ^nged upon one and the same tree. A company of men makes a body, and the ^^ole body is punished for the fault of one member: The tongue talkes treason, the ^^ole man is plagued for it. In felony (which is Contrectatio rei alienae invito domi^ animo furandi, as the Law defines it) the hand only takes, and beares away: but (...) feet are clapt in iron, the belly pinched with famine, the bones lye hard, and the ^ke is in danger. The eye may before, and a veine pricked in the arme to cure it. ^^e hoofe of the beast is tender and weake; the top of the horne annointed for re^dy. Besides, God hath severall intentions in one Iudgement. The principall he ^gues, the same punishment shall teach a second obedience, trie the patience of a ^^d, prevent some grievous sin in a fourth, humble another, call home another to ^ce and repentance. In all, he judgeth some, bettereth others, honoureth himselfe, (...) gets glory to his blessed Name. But to conclude the generalitie of this ruine.
Vniversall sin brings universall punishment: Quot in culpa, tot in pana. If all (...) be corrupted, all flesh must be destroyed. Finde me one just man in the Citie, ^h God,Ier. 5.1. and I will spare it. How great had bin this mercy, if there had not bin ^enerall apostacy? Sodome had bin spared for ten, Ierusalem for one; and yet he ^ght rather have looked for ten in Ierusalem, than for one in Sodome. By swearing, (...) they breake out,Hos. 4.2. Vers. 3. till bloud toucheth bloud: their sins were rounded into a ring, ^roome for piety to get in amongst them. Therefore the whole land shall mourne, (...) every one therein languish: universally wicked, universally punished. If the ^d should make such a judiciall scrutiny, and strict inquisition for sinners, as2 King. 10.23. Ie^ did for true worshippers, who could plead not guilty? Lactantius reports a prophecie
 of Sibylla; The Fishers hooke shall take the Romane Empire. If they meane b^ the Empire, all the soules in the Empire; I could wish that Saint Peters (...) caught and brought more to heaven than it hath. But if by Empire they (...) the imperiall dignity, titles, priviledges, honours, and royall august^ity; I could (...) for their owne sakes (that now usurpe that office) they had caught lesse tha^ (...) have. For when the Majesty of a Prince came in, the piety of a Priest went (...). But will you heare the Hook that hath caught them and all; the hook of covetousnesse, baited with riches. Doubtlesse there are some elect, otherwise the w^^ could not stand: but major pars vincit meliorem, the greater part drownes the be^^ part. Is the feare of God amongst men? Who would aske such a question? But if (...) feare God; we will serve him: if we love him, we will obey him: Now the quest^ growes bitterer and bitterer; from wormewood to gall. The devout man is even ^^ted out of his holinesse, and zeale counted an irregularity. Hypocrisie is the wo^^^ apparell, malice his diet, pride his wife, greedinesse his dog: and thus he so^^^ himselfe in a wilfull rebellion. We have all run into a Praemunire against our (...) Soveraigne, and deserve confiscation of all we have, of all wee are.
But I am willing to leave this spittle of incurable sinners: for who can en^^^^ to looke long upon ulcers? Therefore to touch at Methodum medendi: the way (...) cure universall wickednesse, is by universall repentance. We may perceive (...) willing God is to save us: for all this while, Dum non cessavimus a scelere, Deus o^savit a verbere; We forbore not sinning, yet he forbore plaguing. None can be (...) bad as God is good. Sin raigning in men is a tyrant, Satans possessing them, wo^^ Christ threw them out both. Man may be will to forgive a mite, the Lord a (...) on: three hundred pence, and ten thousand tallents, are all one to his mercy. Satan hopes well of our sins, but let Christ hope better of our repentance. Tent^^ (...) sustentat iste. Let us all disappoint Satan, and answer the gracious mercy of our Redeemer. He made us in the world, he made us not for the world, but chuse us before the world, and came himselfe into the world, to call us out of the world, that (...) might not perish with the world, but live after the world, in a blessed and glorious world, his owne immortall kingdome in heaven. This for the universality, the (...) the antiquity of it.
The old World.] Old? It rather seemed to be the young world, and this (...) old: according to Davids prophecie;Psal. 102.26. They shall wax old as doth a garment. A (...) of twenty is young: he of eighty, old. The world of a thousand yeeres standing (...) young in respect of the same world growne up to five thousand yeeres. The more time upon the back, the more aged a thing is. That then seemed to be the wo^^ infancy, this the veterity: that the non-age, this the dotage. The world then bro^^ forth Gyants; now in comparison, dwarfes: and it is the youth of a woman, (...) makes her beare the goodlier children. In age2 Esdr. 5.54. The wombe faileth, and brings (...) of a lesse statute.
Old is like Ianus, and lookes two waies: to the time longe praeteritum, and (...) futurum; long since passed, and long hence to come. SO Olim among the La^^ extends both to past and future times. That which hath bin, is called Old; as (...) old: that which shall be hereafter, is said in older dayes, Psa. 102. It is used (...) wayes verse 25. Of old thou hast laid the foundation of the earth; where old si^^^fies a thing done long agoe, verse 26. They shall wax old like a garment; (...) old is a quality hereafter to be fulfilled. If we take the World in respect of the ^ter and structure of it; that was the young world, this is the old. If for the (...) who are daily borne into it, that was the old world, this is the young. This is (...) cleere, as that the child is younger than the father. From those that were in the Ac^ is the whole world of men descended: therefore it is so called the Old world. Wh^^ gives us three observations.
1 That Antiquity, if found in impiety, is no priviledge of impunity. Inde^^ arguments of commendation are often derived from ancientnesse; and men (...)
 love the things, wherewith time hath made them long acquainted. It com^endeth Rivers, as in Deborahs song;Iudg. 5.21. That ancient River, the River Kishon. It com^endeth Customes;Pro 22.28. Remove not the ancient land-marke, which thy fathers have set. It ^ommendeth Friends;Pro. 27.10. Thy owne friend and thy fathers friend, forsake not;Eccl. 9.10. Forsake (...) an old friend, for the new is not comparable to him. It commendeth Wine;Luke 5.39. No man ^^ving drunke old wine desireth new: for he saith, the old is better. It commendeth an ^heritance;1 Kin. 21.3. The Lord forbid that I should give the inheritance of my fathers unto thee. (...) commendeth Wisdome;1 Kin. 12.8. Rehoboam forsooke the counsell of the old men, and that ^^ned to his ruine. Concilia Senum, hastae juvenum. It commendeth Truth, Id ve^ quod prius.Eccl. 39.1. Seeke out the wisdome of the ancient: andIer. 6.16. Enquire for the old way. (...) commendeth service in the Field; as Clitus to Alexander; despisest thou the ^ouldiers of thy father Philip? Hast thou forgotten, that unlesse this old Atharius ^nd called back the young men refusing to fight, we had yet stuck at Halicarnassus.
Yet if Age be blended with naughtinesse, the older the worse. An old Ri^^ without water quencheth not our thirst. An old Custome without warrant of ^^odnesse, is as authenticall for practise, as an old totterd garment is for handsome^sse, or an old cough for wholesomenesse. An old friend, that hath lost his ho^^sty, is worse than an old picture that hath lost the colour. Old wine no man com^ends; when it is turned to vineger; let them take it that like it. An old house is no (...) harbour, when it is ready to fall on the inhabiters head. An old man that hath ^st his experience, is like a boulter: much good flower hath grone thorow it, but ^ere is nothing left in it but branne.Iob. 32.7. Dayes should speake, and multitude of yeeres ^uld teach wisdome, saith Elihu. But geat men are not alwayes wise, neither do the aged ^^derstand judgement. Gravity should speake first, but if it speake worst, better hold ^e peace.Eccl. 4.13. Better is a poore and wise child, than an old and foolish King. Who will no ^ore be admonished. If an old man speak lies with the same confidence, that knowen ^ths; and so vehemently praise former customes, that are ridiculous; and teach ^e younger as scornefully, as he would doe a dog to fetch; here age hath lost the ^edite. The hoary head is only thenPro. 16.31. A crowne of glory, when it is found in the ^ay of Righteousnesse.
Custome is a second nature, an Old habit is not easely forgotten. Natura non ^itur repentinas mutationes, say Physicians: nature endures no suddaine alterations. ^herefore for a man Consenescere cum vitiis, to grow old with his errors, is to bee ^ad to all vertues. And he will find it as hard to become good, as to reenter the ^ombe, and be new borne. And Old Dog bites sore, an Old ulcer is hardly cured, ^d an old vice within a degree of impossible to be amended. Age therefore hath no ^viledge; look backe uponIer. 7.12. Shiloh saith God. Shilohs antiquity could not coun^ance Shilohs iniquity. Indeed with us, gray haires require reverence, though ^xed with some infirmities;Levit. 19.32. Thou shalt honour the face of the old man, and feare thy ^d. And they are wretched dayes, when Puer tumul tuabitur in senem;Esa. 3.5. the child ^ll behave himselfe proudly against the ancient. Yet no wounder, if the children de^e the parents; when the parents despise God. That world might say to the Lord, Esau to Isaac;Gen. 27.32. I am thy first borne. Aetate primus, impietate summus. Like a tree ^rew crooked from the first planting, no art could straiten it, therefore the axe ^st hew it downe. But whether we the younger children, or that world the eldest, (...) and Lamech the first borne; all have sinned, and all must have perished, but for (...) sufferings of the first begotten of God.
2 In this glasse we may behold the state of the world before us. Even the for^ times abounded with sins: they had their aberrations and delirements as well ^e. It is the fashion of people to admire former dayes.Eccl. 7.10. Laudamus veteres, What ^e cause that the former dayes were better than these? But Salomon taxeth that en^y of folly. Because we feele not our forefathers evils, therefore we think they (...) no evils at all The deluge of Popery in this land is still commended by divers ^me-affected, Rome-infected spirits. Why? O then men lived neighbourly together,
 without quarrels and suits of contention. Did they so, and is the Gospell the cause why men doe not so now? Is it not the Gospell of peace, teaching us to love others as our selves? Shall men be litigious furies, and lay the fault on God^ mercies? Hath the Lord opened our eyes for no other purpose, but to see to sc^^^ and wound one another? But then were men merry and joviall, and not tro^bled with melancholy cares? If they rejoyced in Dolio, non in Domino, in their riches and not in their graces; it was a mirth for the Devill. If it were in the Lord, (...) the Gospell sad us?Psal. 19.8. The Statutes of the Lord rejoyce the heart. Is any mirth like the meditation of our peace made by Christ? Cannot wee answer the join^^ world (as the grave Musician being called into company, that sang wanton ca^^^, and expostulated why he did not beare his part) I am as merry as they that s^^^ (...) is God that putsPsal. 4.7. more gladnesse in our hearts, than all their abundance can fill (...) withall. Shall men bait of their mirth, because God is neare them in his favour? Or a man be afraid to walke abroad, because it is faire weather?
Pleasure is not gone, when sinne is gone: it is not Isaac which is sacrificed, th^ is,August. our Laughter and mirth; but the Ramme, that is, the bruitishnesse of it. Yea, ^ther let us count it our chiefest delight, that we have lost our former delight. Because our fore-fathers sate uncontrollably at the Pot; and had Priests without (...) vertue, than to take up differences at the Ale-house; were those the better ti^^^ But then, say they, was more plenty of all things, to demonstrate that God loved (...) Corne was cheape, and men were charitable, they kept good houses: and well s^^ the Religion that made us fare so well. Deo gratias, qui nos satias, etc. As if God had no better blessings in store for us, than Acornes. This was the argument of t^ apostate Iewes,Ier. 44.17. Wee had plentie of victualls, and were well, when we burnt in^^^^ the Queene of heaven: But since we ceased that sacrifice, we have wanted all things. Part of their reasons strength they fetch from Antiquity, Thus did our Fathers: (...) from their owne prosperity, Thus sped we. But how easily doth the Prophet (...) and dissolve this ridiculous Sophistrie!Vers. 22. Therefore, for this cause, is your Land a ^^lation, and a curse without an inhabitant. Did this bring you a blessing? No, (...) a curse and ruine. Our Fathers bestowed their Cakes on the Queene of Hea^^, but did not the King of Heaven plague them for it? Say hee fed their bodies w^^ Quailes, did he not put leannesse into their soules? Shall we call Nabals Sheepe-^^ring a blessing? All their superstitious peace was no better than the very Revels of Bacchus, and an holy-day to the Devill. Shall we seek Christ no further than amo^^ theIoh. 6.26. Loaves? IESVS was in the ship, yet Panem non habemus,Matth. 16.7. Wee h^^^ bread: IESVS was at the Marriage, yet Vinum non habemus,Ioh. 2.3. We want wine. W^ may want bread and wine, and yet have Christs company. If food faile, it (...) because Manna is to come. If Wine be absent, yet Grace and Salvation is pre^ If God take away Flesh, and give Manna: deny Sunne and Moone, and giveRev. 21.23. H^selfe, hee does us no wrong. As the Israelites repined for a King, when the L^ was their King: so our Ancestours refused Christ for their Head, and chose (...) Pope. But God answered, Dedi in furore,Hos. 13.11. I gave them an Head in mine (...) He fulfilled on them what was written; this Head tooke away their fields and v^yards, and1 Sam. 8.13, etc. gave them to his servants, Monkes and Friers: he tooke away the (...) of their sheepe and seed, and put their goodliest young men to his worke; and made t^ all his Servants: that they were forced to crie out, because of their King which they (...) chosen. Such have they found their Romish Heads; that like ill Physitians, (...) purged away the good humours, and left the bad behinde them.
Loe now the praise of Antiquity, when it hath swarved from the rule of Piety^ Where is now the validity of that Pontifician argument, concerning the ancien^^ of their Church? This plea might the Iewes still make; We are the sonnes of ^ham: but Christ told them of another Father. As much say the Turkes, We (...) the sonnes of Abraham by Sara, so called Saracens: but they were none of (...) sonnes. It hath beene un-answerably proved, that the fundamentall Heads of (...)
 present Romish faith, had their severall births; some two hundred, some foure hun^red, some eight hundred, some a thousand, some a thousand and foure hundred ^eares after Christ. But say they were old; yet wanting the warrant of sacred ^ruth, they are no better an argument of purity, than the old world was of innocen^e. Consuetudo longa sine veritate, vetustas erroris est: Truth is not to be rejected,Chrysost. ^or meere novelty: for old truths may come newly to light, and God is not tied to ^is times for the gift of illumination. Yet is this the foundation, whereon they reare ^eit Babel, their Bable; whose top must reach up to the firmament, and command ^f Earth only, but Heaven it selfe: and thus they meaneGen. 11.4. Celebrare nomen suum, ne ^ssipentur: The world was good when God framed it, must it therefore be good ^hen he drowned it? Isaac was strong when he married Rebecca, must he therefore ^taine the same corporall strength when he blessed Iacob? The Cathedrall Church ^f Saint Paul two hundred yeares agoe, might haply be in good case, may it not ^erefore now want reparation? The Church of Rome was pure when Paul plan^d it; must it now be so when Antichrist hath corrupted it? Shew us the same in^grity that Rome then had, and we are of the same faith that Rome then was. O^erwise, not how old a thing is, but how good it is, should be the enquiry of Chri^tians. The Old man is corrupted and lost; hee must become New that will ^e saved.
3 If that was an Old world, how old is it now? Have not the accession of so ma^ hundred yeares made it somewhat weaker? Yes, Rerum atque hominum nunc sunt ^crementa: The world is sicke at the heart; not only in some superfluities, as warts ^d swellings, but in the integrall and essentiall parts. The Aire like a prodigious ^other, produceth strange and abortive births. She was lately delivered of a bur^ng childe, a portentfull Comet: which divers have tooke the altitude of, but God ^ely knowes what it meant. The Springs, in stead of nourishing the young Plants, ^ove sepulchers to bury them. Nature is so preposterous, as if her braines were ^n'd, and she knew not what she did. But the God of Nature knowes, and tells us (...) these tokens, that the world is old. As a tree, it was greene in the Spring, yellow Summer, white in the Autumne, is now starke and cold in the Winter of his age. (...) man which is the little world, so the world which is a great man, had his Infan^, Youth, Middle-age, Old-age. From Adam to Noah was the worlds Infancie:Aug. ^^m Noah to Abraham, the Childhood: from Abraham to David, the Youth: from ^vid to the Captivitie, the Middle-age: from that to Christ, the Old-age: from (...), to the end of all things, the Dotage.
God hath made mans life shorter, that his sinnes might be fewer. From nine ^ndred, it is fallen to seventie; and how few see halfe those! Methushalem lived (...) one day to God; he saw not a thousand yeares, which with God is as one day: (...) we scarce live one houre in respect of his day. Of nine hundred and sixty, our ^htie is but as the twelfth part. If a man live to the tenth part of Methushalems age, ^is a childe againe, when the light is sent to his windowes, and the glasses there ^mbred cannot receive it: when the hollow receptacles of sounds are shut up: (...) the faltring discourse is interrupted with harsh parentheses, coughes: Wee are ^w old in as short time, as they were scarce past children:Iob 8.9. We are but of yesterday. ^d as our lives are abridged from a fadome to a span, so are our bodies contracted. ^en the age was long, the proportion was great: that a man could grapple with a ^ge beast on some termes of equality: as Sampson coped with a Lion, David with ^are, and came off with victory. These were bred in the worlds prime and youth^esse; we now in the withered and decrepite age. We are scarce the shadowes of ^fore-fathers, whether in length or strength of life, whether in stature or force ^ature. We are not sooner growen up to be men, but straight we are none; death ^es so quicke a riddance of us, as it will doe of all things. The worlds stomacke ^g old, is weake of retention; and the crudities of sinne are so hard of digestion, (...) the vessell must soone bee broken. Magistrates are the armes of the world,
 Counsellers the braines, Lawyers the tongues, the Rich the stomachs, the poore the backes, Merchants the feete, Officers the hands, and Divines the hearts. Now there is a generall corruption in all these, (Let it not be understood de singulis g^^^rum, sed de generibus singulorum; not all of every kind, but every kind of all) this epidemicall distemper witnesseth it is Old, and neare the dissolution.
Now the greater the corruption, the vaster the destruction. Some thinke the the Igneum diluvium, fiery deluge shall descend no higher than did the watery; It may be the earth shall be burn'd; that is the worst guest at the table, the common sewer of all other creatures: but shall Calum transire, the heavens passe away? It may be Coelum aereum, the airy heaven; but shall Sydereum, stellatum, the starry heaven, whe^^ God hath printed such figures of his glory? yes, Coelum, elementum, Terra, when Ig^^ ubique ferox ruptis regnabit habenis. The former deluge is called the worlds wi^^, the next the worlds summer. The one was frigido elemento, with a cold and (...) element: the other shall be calido, with an element hot and dry. But what then (...) become of the Saints? they shall be delivered out of all; walking like those that servants in the midst of that great furnace, the burning world, and not be scorc^^^, because there is one among them, to deliver them,Dan. 3.25. The Sonne of God, their R^d^mer. But shall all quite perish? no, there is rather a mutation, than an aboli^^^ of their substance.Psal. 102.27. Thou shalt change them, and they shall be changed: changed, (...) abolished. Transit mundus and concupiscentia egus; the concupiscence shall passe, nor the essence: Figura non natura. In the altering of an old garment, we destroy it not, (...) trimme it, refresh it, and make it seeme new. They passe, they do not perish: (...) drosse is purged, the metall stayes. The corrupt quality shall bee renewed, (...) all things restored to that originall beauty wherein they were created.1 Pet. 4.7. The (...) all things is at hand: an end of us, an end of our dayes, an end of our waies, an (...) of our thoughts. Qui ab universalitate te excipit, te decipit. If a man could say (...) Iobs messenger, Ego solus aufugi, I alone am escaped, it were somewhat; or might find an Arke with Noah. But there is no Arke to defend from that heate, but (...) the bosome of Iesus Christ.Psal. 119.96 I have seene an end of all perfection: if perfection (...) earth have an end, imperfection cannot long continue. una dies dabit exitum, e^^^. There shall be an end of our eating, an end of our building, an end of our cove^^ scraping, an end of our workes, and end of our selves, but no end of our soules: an^ if we be found in the faith, no end of our blessednesse, for then begins a w^ without end. Of these three observations, I desire to make three application.
1 Let us turne good with all the speede we can, for how farre off soever the ge^^rall end may be, our particular, end is neere. I know that long life was Gods ^^mise to his servants: but when long life ceaseth to be prosperous, it ceaseth to (...) his promise. He shortens our life. 1 That we be not aflicted with evils; the right^ are preventedEsa. 57.1. of the evill to come. 2 That we be not infected with evils, cor^^^ by the times, as Ioseph was caught with the Aegytptian oath. 3 Their me^ lives though they die: Discessus volito viva per ora virum. If the good name^ preserved, a man is alive though he be dead. 4 If God take away temporall, (...) gives eternall life for it, there is no hurt done us. He that promised ten piec^ silver, and gives ten pieces of gold, breakes no promise. When Herod pro^ halfe his kingdome, if he had given it all, he had broke no promise. Gods pro^^^ shall stand, when the mines of India shall faile. All mens lives are short, why (...) I thinke mine long?Lam. 4.18. Our end is neare, our dayes be fulfilled, for our end is come.
O then let not the end of our dayes, and the strength of our sins, come (...) together. It is said of St Chrysostome, that Nihil finivit praeter peccatum, he ma^^ (...) end of nothing but of sin. Let it not be said of us, Omnia finivimus praeter pecca^^ that wee have put an end to all things except our sinnes. A man hath be^ build, hee would faine end: begun to travell, hee would faine come to (...) joureneys end: Commenced a suite, hee desires an end. Before all, let us (...) to end our sins: if we end them by repentance, though the end of our lives (...)
 (...) end of our other businesses, we shall never find cause of sorrow. It is a saying Schooles, Ex malis praemissis sequitur non bona conclusio: From evill seeds come ^ll plants.1 Cor. 15.43. The body is sowen in dishonour, it is raised in glory. If we would reape a ^rious body, let us sow a gracious body. Let us not be of their number, Quorum (...) est interitus: Whose end is a destruction without end. Let repentance make an (...) of our sinnes, before death make an end of our dayes; and then our end is not ^perly an end, but a better beginning. Seeing the world must be changed, let us (...) have corrupted it, first change our selves. If fire must purge the elements, let us that celestiall fire of the Spirit to purge us. That when all the drosse and fecu^^ie of the world shall be on a light fire, we may be found pure, and presented ^re at the appearing of IESUS CHRIST.
2 As this teacheth all this old world, so it specially directs it selfe to all that be ^n the world. I know that age is subject to infirmities, and hath endangered (...) Saints to a relapse. If all must once erre, errour falls lesse unhappily in youth, (...) image. Covetousnesse, pettishnesse, sluggishnesse, pride, are incident to old ^res. This David knew, when he prayed so earnestly;Psal. 71.9.18. Cast me not off in the time ^ld-age, forsake me not when I am gray-headed. Some strive to keepe themselves ^n any need of that prayer; either by artificiall tinctures, dying their haires into ^er colours. So though they cannot make white blacke, yet they can make it ap^re blacke. They study Colorare capillos mendacio, as a Father speakes. Or by ^d and wanton lusts they prevent the baldnesse of age, and leave themselves not so ^ch as one haire of an honest man.
Apostacie in old-age is fearefull: He that climbes almost to the top of a Tower, (...) slipping backe, hath the greater fall. The patient almost recovered, is more ^dly sicke by a relapse. There were Starres strucke from Heaven by the Dragons (...); they had better never have pearched so high. The place where the Israelites (...) into that great folly with the daughters of Moab, was in the Plaine, within the ^spect of the holy Land: they saw their Inheritance, and yet fell short of it. So ^tched is it for old men to fall, neare to their very entry of heaven.2 Sam. 2. As old Eli ^is Indulgence; old Iudah in his Incest; old David with Bethshabe;2 Chron. 16.12. Gen. 38. old Asa ^ting in the Physitians more than in God; and old Salomon built the High-places. ^e have walkedEzek. 28.14. like Cherubs in the middest of the stones of fire, yet beene cast as ^hane out of Gods mountaine. Thus the Sea-man passeth all the Maine, and suffers ^cke in the Haven. The corne often promiseth a plenteous Harvest in the blade, shrinkes in the eare. You have trees loaden with blossomes, yet in the season of ^ectation, no fruit. A Comedie that holds well many Scenes, and goes lamely ^in the last Act, findes no applause.Luke 17.32. Remember Lots wife: thinke on that pillar ^alt, that it may season thee.
Old-age is best in three respects: 1. Because it hath past the follies and disor^ of youth, which Iob callsIob 13.26. bitter things to the memory. 2. Because the in^veniences of it, albeit numerous, are but corporall: commonly bettered with good estate of the minde. 3. Because it is nearest to dissolution; within a short (...) of blessednesse. Yet of all, it is then most miserable, when it desires to spin out ^ger threed. When it is farre from Elias minde, Let me die, Non sum meltor pa^^ meis; I am no better than my Fathers. There is nothing more pitiable, than ^ld man that for his pleasure-sake would be young againe. We can scarce say of (...) an one, that he hath beene a man in his dayes. Art thou young? looke for^d, propound goodnesse to thy life. Art thou old? looke backward, be sorrow^ ^or sinnes past. Art thou middle-aged? looke both forward and backward: ^nt the past, amend the present, be armed for the future.
Let the life of man be distinguished into three ages, the last is fully in proofe, good or never. First, all is in hope: a woman hath an Embrion in her wombe, ^it be borne living? shee hopes so. It hath life, will it have proportion? shee ^s so. It hath proportion, will it have the exercise of reason and understanding?
 she hopes so. In processe of growing, reason appeares, will he have grace and f^^ she hopes so. He professeth, is his profession sound at the heart? she hopes so. H^^ hath all these, will he live long? she hopes so: all is in hope. Now middle (...) halfe in proofe, and halfe in hope: in proofe, how good it is; in hope, how much better it may be. Old-age is all in proofe, it is then seene what good a man (...) what interest in heaven, what contempt of the world is in him. Let us bew^^ ^tergiversation in our old-age.Galath. 5.7. Yee did runne well, who did hinder you? Let our ^pha and Omega be good, our first and last alike gracious: that we may comes with (...) to him, who is Alpha, and Omega, first and last, the beginning and end of all co^^^ IESUS CHRIST.
3 Let the terrour of this parallel destruction humble us all. Lord, what a ^rible day will it be, when Christ shall appeare in the clouds, all the world rise (...) their graves, and the whole heaven and earth burning with flames! If ever (...) could sample it with a day,Novemb. 5. it was the intended Gunpowder-treason day. Gu^^^^der invented by a Monke, taught by the Devill, that great master of Fire-wo^ It hath beene said, that Affrica brings forth every yeare a new Monster: it (...) brought forth such a one as this, to which nihil nisi nomina desunt. Herod slew (...) the children of Bethlem, yet there was some mercy in that, for the men esc^ Hamans plot was damnable enough, even the ruine of Israel; yet they had a mou^ day of preparation. But this was worse, with suddennesse it would have prev^ Doomesday, and sent up bodies before the Resurrection. It was crosse to all (...) kinds of death: that at other times sends the soule upwards, the body downw^^ this would have sent the soule downward, and the body upward. Let the m^^ of it live to their shame and our thankfulnesse. Shame, said I? Alas, they mak^ their glory! O but the Papists condemne it, and call the plotters Vnfortunate ^tlemen. Vnfortunate, because the fortune did not succeed as they would have i^. (...) is the successe they blame, not the villany. But the Papall Chaire never app^^ it: and who can say the Papall Chaire ever disliked it? The actors are see^^e, (...) ever the Poet lies hid: and the Pope hath not to this day Iudicially condem^^^ Powder-treason. It should have beene a dead day, let it be a Red day in or K^lendar. Their rage was without measure, so let our thankfulnesse be without end.
That was a little Image or figure of the generall firie Deluge to come. If the ^rour of the former be able to shake us with the remembrance? thinking how (...) it had beene, by a sudden blast to have our soules sent upward with our bodies; (...) perhaps both to come downe againe with the waight of unrepented sinnes: (...) then was no thought or time to retract. How should the meditation of this (...) make us tremble; which as it shall be more sudden for the time, so more univer^ for the ruine. Shall we still slumber in our old security? The Apostles said of ^zarus,Iohn 11.12. Lord, if he sleepe he shall doe well: but Lord, if we sleepe we shall doe (...) ill. Worldly men are like Nichodemus; they would faine come to Christ, but (...) are loth to goe till it be Night;August. that is, till death sends them. But, Poenitent^^ (...) moriene petitur, timeo ne ipsa moriatur: The repentance that is wrung out by death (...) may feare it wil be dead sooner than he that lyes sick. Now, now let us break of (...) sins, by the contrition of our soules: for now repentance is a Supersedeas to disc^^ all the bonds of sin. And lay hold upon IESUS, who as he saved Noah in the (...) Water, is able to preserve us in the day of Fire. Sampson found honey out of (...) Lion which himselfe had killed. Our sins have killed the Lion of Iudah, O let (...) faithfull prayers sucke honey out of him: there is no honey so sweet as his mercy.
Thus having considered the universalitie, that it was a whole world; the A^^^ty, that it was the Old world: I come in the next place to the Impietie, that it was (...) Vngodly world.
The world of the ungodly.] The sinnes of that world were very grievous, (...) too heavy for the supportation of the earth: nec medium in malo, nec remed^^^ ^lo. These sins began to multiply with the multiplication of men: the seeds of (...)
 ^ischiefe were sowen before the birth of Noahs sons: at their birth, like ill weeds, ^ey sprung abundantly: at last they were so ranke and ripe, that God could forbeare ^em no longer. But it seemeth that the great defection was about the seventh age: ^en Lamech, of Cains race, fell to bigamie; then was Henoch translated, that his soule ^ight be no longer grieved with the wickednesse of the times. Then the righteous ^horring the filthynesse of Cains posteritie, separated themselves, and began to call (...) God. At length the very righteous seed declined, by falling to folly with the ^^ghters of the wicked.
Some Hebrewes thinke that this pregnancie of sinne began with the encrea^ of women; whose number gave more occasion of lust, Genicis 6.1. But this ^gues no speciall multiplying of that sexe more than the other: but when both were ^creased together, both were corrupted together. If any aske how the world could (...) so soone peopled; I reply, how was it after the floud? Ninus King of Assyria, ^ho raigned some 230 yeares after the deluge, is reported to have in his army 700 ^ousand footmen, and 200 thousand horsemen. TheGen. 6.11. earth was corrupt with their ^hy sinnes: and they are said to be all flesh: not only their bodies for that is com^on to all, but even their soules were carnall. For flesh is taken vel secundum naturam,Chrys. ^l secundum culpam. Man is called flesh, when he is subdued to carnall sense. All ^e imaginations of his heart continually evill. Wickednesse is enlarged by these re^ects. 1. Ratione universalitatis, for generalitie; all flesh was corrupt: so Adams ^ne did spread over all. 2. Ratione durabilitatis, for continuance; they were ex^cised in it a thousand yeares. Continuall habite had made it so alimentall, so ele^entall to them, that they could not live without it. 3. Ratione inseparabilitatis, for ^hesion: as covetice cleaves to a man, even while he sleepes, or wakes, or walkes, (...) workes, or lives: waxing younger, when all other sinnes decay with age. 4. Ra^me Superfluitatis, for abundance: not only addicted to some speciall vices; but to (...) wickednesse which their prophane hearts could conceive. If their fancies could ^t imagine it, their hands were ready to doe it. 5. Ratione Securitatis, for supine ^elesnesse: let Noah preach what he will, and build as he will, let it raine how it ^ll, they are the same men still. 6. Ratione impudentiae, for shamelesnesse: they ^re growen to such presumption, that they durst sin God in the face:Esa. 3.9. They de^e their sinne as Sodome, they hide it not.Gen. 6.11. Therefore their corruption is said to be ^efore the LORD. Thus in generall, now for the particulars.
The first act of degeneration was unlawfull marriages:Gen. 6.2. The sonnes of God (...) the daughters of men, etc. Some thinke these sonnes of God were Angels, and ^t they fell for their intemperancie with women. But. 1. God destroyed the ^rld, not for the Angels sin, but mans. My spirit shall not alwayes strive (he saies (...) with Angels, but) with man. 2.Ioh. 8.44. Chrys. The devill was a murtherer from the beginning: (...) if the Angels had fallen for the love of women, then they had not sinned untill ^housand yeares after the creation. 3.Matth. 22.30. In heaven they neither Marry, nor are ^en in marriage, but are as the Angels of God: therefore Angels are not subject ^carnall lusts. Some have thought these were divells who companying with wo^^n, begate Gyants. But this is ridiculous, for the divells have not generative fa^ties: and if they could have, yet they are none of the sonnes of God. We read (...) a wholeLuk. 8.30. legion, sixe thousand divells in one man; this could not be, if they ^re corporall. If elementall was their nature, then were they subject to mutabi^e, to mortalitie: as Plutarch writes of the death of Pan, a famous devill among (...) Pagans. And how should mans soule be immortall, if these more subtile spi^ were mortall? Others thinke that they were Incubi, who assuming aery bodyes, the act of generation are called Succubi: and so they imagine that Merlin was be^ren of a spirit. Indeed spirits may assume Male and Female shapes; but are not ^e bodies. They appeare so to the eye, not to the feeling: visible, not palpable. ^andle me, and see, for a spirit hath not flesh and bones. But it is objected,Luk. 24.39. that Abra^ washed the Angels feete, and discerned them not. For answere, this is the difference
 betweene the apparitions of good and bad Angels. Vnto the good God gave the use of true bodies during that ministerie: so that they did eate and drinke. The other are not so allowed, therefore are called Phantasmata, Visions, fansies.
Others thinke that these Sonnes of God were men tall, and of a great stature: as things excellent in their kind are ascribed to God. Great cities, the Cities of God. Tall Cedars,Psal. 104.16. Secundum naturam, non secundum opera. Ieren. The trees of God. But indeed, they were called the Sonnes of God, because they were of the righteous seed: and the other, the daughters of men, because they descended of lewd parents. Even the wicked are the sonnes of God according to nature, according to their workes they are not.
Now see the issue of this unhappy conjunction; Gyants: which as they were men of a monstrous stature, so of a fierce and tyrannous nature. Thus they were called Nephalim, mighty oppressors: Enim, terrible: because of their pride, Ha^^^kim; as it were, in chaines of Gold: for their strength, Gibborim: for their naughtinesse, Zanzummim.Deut. 3.11. Such were Goliah, Ishbibenob, and Og. Here they are called Nephilim, of falling: both because of their terror, they made men fall to the ground: and for their error, falling themselves from vertue and goodnesse. These were not from the commixtion of spirits with women, but procreated of men: which is no more against nature, than for dwarfes to come from well constituted parents: who are as admirable for their smalenesse, as the other for their tallenesse. Not were all thus, but only those borne by this unlawfull conjunction. For as the roote, so was the branch: the marriage impious, and the issue ungracious.
Observ.That which was the first occasion of sinne, was the occasion of the encreased sinne. A Woman seduced Adam, women betray these sonnes of God. The beautie of the Apple betrayed the woman, the beautie of these women betrayed the holy seed. Eve saw, and lusted, so did they: this was also a forbidden fruite. They looked, liked, lusted, tasted, sinned, dyed. Sinnes first creepe in at the eyes: except we have made a covenant with them, there is no safetie for our soules. This marriage did not beget men so fast as wickednesse.
Observ. Aug^Consider here how dangerous it is for the beleever to unite himselfe to an ungratious spouse. I know that marriage is honourable: Bonum nuptiarum semper est ^^num. The wife before man sinned, was for his societie: after he had sinned, for a remedie. Man in himselfe was only but begun, in woman he was perfected and made up: till then a great part of himselfe he had in vaine and uselesse. And they that have placed in Virginitate culmen, the chiefe glory in virginity; could never fi^^ in Connubio crimen, any fault in matrimonie. Man and wife are Primum Par, and (...) damentum parium; the originall match of all others. All other relative paires are couples, as father, and sonne, Master and servant, King and subject; come from this. When God made Adam, he made only one. When he made Eve, he made not only her, but in her all the world to come. While man was alone, and had both sexes in himselfe, what could he doe to fill the earth? Therefore in his body he bred a She-man: Adam being the mother of Eve, as Eve is the mother of us all. Therefore she is called Mater viventium, because she is a meanes to continue a kind of immortalitie among the mortall sonnes of men; and in some measure to shadow ou^ that immortalitie which is in heaven. Families, Cities, countreys, the whole habitable world, the militant, yea triumphant Church, no small part of the kingdome of heaven, ariseth from marriage. Mater matris Ecclesiae. Laudo connubium (...) generat virgines. Saint Ierome himselfe praiseth marriage, because it begets virgins. The wife being no virgin, is the mother of Virgins that be no wives. No marriage, no Saints: no generation, no regeneration: no encreasing below, no multiplying above: if the earth be not replenished with men, how should heaven be so furnished with Saints?
But as the blessings that come by good marriage, are innumerable: so be the curses by ill matches, many and mischievous. For marriage is a new foundation,
 whereon men build the future state of their mortalitie. A man cannot chuse himselfe, he may chuse his wife: and in her choise it lies much to mend or marre himselfe; and which is more, even his posteritie.2 Cor. 6 14. Be not unequally yoked with unbelee^ers. From hence follow an Iliade of evills, and the whole infelicitie of life; when matches are made of such as match not; when plants are set together of an unhappy conjunction, malevolent effects must needs issue from them. But it is objected; that1 Cor. 7.14.16. the Vnbeleeving husband is sanctified by the beleeving wife, and the wife by the husband: and what knowest thou, O wife, whether thou mayest save thy husband? and, O man, whether thou shalt save thy wife? This may be; and was not in those times a sufficient of cause of divorce. But are not the good perverted by the bad, sooner than the bad converted by the good? Often have you heard how much a superstitious wife, by her certaine lectures, hath wrought upon her Christian husband: when did you heare a b^leeving husband prevaile with his misbeleeving wife? marryDeut. 7.14. not thy son to a Canaanites daughter, for she will turne away his heart from following the Lord: he is not so likely to turne her.
This hath beene full in examples: the Israelites were wonne by these forbidden matches, to serveIudg. 3.6. other gods.1 King. 21.25. When Ahab sold himselfe to wickednesse, it was Iezebel his wife, that stirred him up. Thus wasIudg. 16. Samson the strongest,1 King. 11.4. and Salomon the wil^st, beguiled. His wives turned away his heart after other gods. This was Ieho^am's ruine;2 Chron. 21.6. his wife, the daughter of Ahab, undid him. When water and earth are tempered together, they make but mire and dirt. What crueller tyrant was ever begotten then Mahomet, who was yet the Son of a Christian Lady? As the sons of Iacob said of Dinah,Gen. 34.14. We cannot give our sister to one that is uncircumcised: so let parents say, we may not give our daughter to a person unchristen'd. Albeit irreligion be not a cause of divorce, yet it is of restraint. We may not marry with all those, with whom we must live being married. If Adultery may separate a marriage consummated, may not Idolatrie hinder a marriage not begun? L^t no man separate whom God joynes, so let no man joyne whom God separates. We would not have our children marry without our will and consents: and shall they marry without the will, liking, and consent of our Father in heaven?
This was Rebecca's care.Gen. 27.46. If Iacob take a wife of the daughters of Heth, what good shall my life doe me? Manoahs for Samson,Iudg. 14.3. Is there not a wife among thine owne people but thou must goe to the Philistines? Is there no friend but an enemy? no tree, but the forbidden? no helper, but a tempter? no wife but the Canaanite? can none please us, but such as displease God?1 Cor. 7.33. He that is married to such a wife, careth more to please ^er, than God. Of all the guests bidden to the great feast, he that was married, (like^y to such a wife) desired not to be excused; but impudently protests, that he cannot come. If from Ish, and Isha, you cast out Iod and He, there remaines to that couple nothing but fire; say the Rabbins. So wretched is it to couple without God. When the eye makes the match for beautie, or the eare by hearesay, taking a wife upon trust ^or the hand for money; marrying (though not by picture, yet) for pictures. The^^stocles being consulted, whether it were better for a man to marry his daughter to an honest poore man, or to a rich of small vertue and goodnesse; answered; I had rather have a man that wants money, than money that wants a man. How base is that love, which hath no other waight than riches! How doe parents breed an A^gue in the bones of their children, that shall shake them to their very graves! When the tie of their loves is either portion or proportion only, without regard of either ^eligion or conscience. One said truly; He that weds for state or face, buyes a horse to lose a race. There is Cesars stampe, and Gods stampe: most men marry for Cesars stampe, and these are worse than the old world; for they married for Adams stampe. Gods stampe is grace, Cesars money, Adams beautie.
The motive of the old world to this unfortunate conjunction, was Beautie; They saw that the daughters of men were faire. This is the common attractive; men place their loves upon Adams Image in the face, rather than upon Gods Image in
 the soule. Yet what is that same goodly frame of flesh and bloud, but onely a naturall colour which the Creator hath laid upon dust and ashes? but the effect of well digested sustenance, not much above that we behold in pictures. A thin weake ve^^ drawne over a corruptible body: a transient delight of the eye: a glory that fades with life, yea, often before life: a piece of fine glasse, that sicknesse or old-age will soone breake; yet is this the snare that hath caught many soules: to enjoy this, David lost his peace for a while, Sampson lost his eyes for ever. Thus the Midianites intrapped Israel with their dancing whirlegigs: and the wisest King was wrought to folly. I doe not lay the fault on Beauty, Gods admirable workmanship upon clay: for who blames a cleare and crystall river, because some melancholy distracted man drownes himselfe in it? And when this outward ornament is joyned with inward lustre, it graceth all actions. Gratior est pulchro veniens e corpore virtus. But it is the minds beauty, that keepes the other sweet and delectable: a fixed and constant goodnesse, which as it disdaines all the tinctures of painted hypocrisie, so is farre beyond ^he ruine of time, sicknesse, or any other mutabilitie. Like Heaven, which is fa^^e outwardly to our mortall eyes, but shall appeare fairer within to our immortall ^oules. Without this, all affection is ill placed, and will soone perish. He that loves for no other end, but to please his senses, hath a sensuall love, little better tha^ brutish.
It is the soule that requires love; and for that only cause which makes it lovely, Vertue. The outward worth of Beauty is nothing, it is the Soule within that makes it precious. When grace and holinesse have beautified the principall, then admit the other circumstances and additions, as Beauty, Birth, or Wealth. For these indifferents, by goodnesse are made good, as fire turnes all the objects into it selfe. The love built upon Beauty without this, is not long-lived: but running mad with extravagant desires,Bern. rests still unsatisfied. Hence it comes, that Quos conjunxit Ecclesia, disjunxit camera: yea worse, Conjungit Dominus, disjungit Diabolus: God and the Church puts them together; the Devill and lust puts them asunder.Eccles. 5.10. He that loveth silver, shall not be satisfied with silver: So nor, he that loveth women, for one is no^ lusts limits. H^ that affecteth many, shall be satisfied with none. Vnus, unam, u^: One God ha^h ordained one woman for one man. One is Loves number, he which trespasseth upon plurality, and loseth that content, may be all his life seeking it, b^ shall never find it. To the reproofe and reproch of them be it, that walke the streets. ^ea, frequent the Church, for no other purpose but to feed their eye with such spectacles. When a Gallant had the name of a brave souldier; one observed how (...) in his walking, he would turne about to gaze upon women: concluding, that the man could not have a valiant and constant minde, whose head every weake woman could turne and wryth about with her very looke. Let this breed in our hearts (...) abhorring of carnall lusts; a sin the very Devill does not commit: Pride he knowes, malice he knowes, flattery, hypocrisie, murder, treason he knowes: but inco^^nence of fl^sh he wonders at. Let no beauty that sticks upon mortall cheeke, so (...) prevaile over our affections; as to prostrate those bodies to the service of Harlots, that are the deare bought members of Iesus Christ.
The next Apostacie of the old world, was by Sensuality:Luke 17.27. They did eat, they dranke, they married, etc. But were these sinnes, or matter of reprehension? Nature hath made them necessary, discretion voluntary, and only some circumstances arbitrary. Did God drowne them for this? No, but their sensuality and security in these brought destruction.Luke 12.19 Soule, thou hast much goods laid up for many yeares, eat, drinke, and be merry. This was not his fault, that he thought he had enough, but that he meant to lye downe and wallow in it. Lawfull actions depraved by bad circumstances, become damnable sinnes.2 king. 5.26. Is this a time to receive money, and garments, (...) vineyards, saith the Prophet to his servant? All which at another time, and in another manner, had beene approved. Things beneficiall in their use, are dangerous in their abuse or mis-carriage. Without a woodden conveyance we cannot crosse the
 Seas: yet if that vessell sinke, all the passengers are lost. That worldly things are good, is easily perceived by our care to get them: that their abuse is deadly, many soules feele, that cannot returne to complaine.Matt. 19.24. It is easier for a Camel to enter a needles-eye, than a rich man to enter heavens gate. It is not certaine, it is not easie, it is not likely, and (it may so fall out, that) it is not possible for a rich man to be saved. Riches commonly coole all heavenly heats, force away the Divine meditations of spirituall causes, as too melancholy fits: and bring a man to such a fooles paradise, as one among Penelopes suitours, that went so oft with his friend, till he was caught himselfe.
It is likely, that more go to hell for abusing lawfull things, than for using things simply unlawfull. Crosse sinnes appeare in their owne ugly formes, terrible as deformities and devils: but who suspects his eating, his drinking, his common discourse? Who feares that his building should be laid in the foundation of sinne? Or that his marrying a wife should unsaulder his conjunction with Christ?Eccles. 2.24. But there is nothing better for a man, than that he should eat and drinke, and let his soule enjoy good in his labour. And doth not Saint Paul call the forbidding of meates and marriage,1 Tim. 4.3. The doctrine of devils? Wee grant it; neither would we have any man make the way to heaven harder, and more rugged than God himselfe hath made it. This is the libertie (and indeed of whom else, but) of Christians.
Pleasures have their allowance, with two limits. The one of Qualitie, they must be good and lawfull: for God that hath given leave to be merry, hath not given leave to be madde. There is a good mirth, if men could hit on it; called, To be merry and wise. It is no praise to be sparing of a vicious delight, for the very t^ste is deadly. Admit the Serpents head, his body will aske no leave. The other of Quantiti^; for measure God hath hedged in mans appetite, like that fo^ming element: if he breake over those dammes, the inundation is perillous. As delights ^ave their warrants, so also their termes: and it is no hard matter to fault in this indulg^nce. Is the worke of our salvation effected, our common duties performed? We may then eat, drinke, and be merry. Non nascimur in Ludum, we are not borne for play; but for labour, as the sparkes fly upward. Our recreations should be like our physicke, not our diet: the latter wee take when wee are well to keepe us so: the other when we are sicke to make us well.
Some things are to be avoided, not because they are ill, but neere to ill: Et mala sunt vicina bonis, errore sub illo, etc. Saepe prohibetur licitum, propter proximitatem illiciti: it is good to leave something that we may take, for feare of taking that we should leave. There should be difference betwixt a beast, that devoureth all within his teddar: and a man, to whom God hath given reason to rule his app^tite. It is Sinnes policie, to steale in by the Law; when men range in the borders and extremities of their freedome. And even from that takes an argument for us to allow it, which was made on purpose to condemne it. The Iewes might give fortie stripes: yet Saint Paul confesseth hee received but nine and thirtie: their reason of forbearing the full number, was lest their fingers should itch to give another. What folly is it, when a man hath field-roome enough, to ride on the brinke of a River? The note that comes too neare in the margent, will skippe into the Text at the next Impression. It is a dangerous Quaere, how neare a man may goe to hell, and yet scape the Devill. Will any wise man trie how neare hee may come to the infected house, and yet scape the Plague? Or holding by the rotten railes of a Turret, presumptuously vault over, in a proud glory of his venturousnesse? Israel had roome enough in the Plaines of Moab: but venturing too farre, they were snared with Midian. Let no man cast with himselfe, how old ^ee may be before he needs returne, lest he reckon without his host.Psal. 137.6. If I forget Ierusalem in my mirth, etc. It is easie to forget heaven in our mirth. If God allow an handfull, men are apt to fadome an armefull. Pleasures are like the Popish Relikes; the Interest is more than the Principall.

Through all creatures let us looke to their maker: through all delights to their giver, Phil. 4 4. Rejoyce in the Lord alwaies: then mutata materia delectationis ^^m^nae, non mutatur causa delectandi: in the midst of all the changes and chances of worldly contents, there will be an immutabilitie of joy in God. There are two sorts reprehensible.
First, they that avoid all lawfull delights for feare of sin. As if it were not possible for a Christian to separate the gold from the drosse, but he must needs cast away the oare! Will any simple Iew condemne the cleare streames of Iordan, because they run into the dead sea? We see some proud of their fantasticall clothes, drest up like childrens puppets, or Antickes in a Pageant: must we therefore goe naked? Some are drunke with wine, may not therefore a sober man drinke it? Is there no physicke, but Opium? must we either be sensually wicked, or senselesly stupid? why did God place man in Paradise but to solace himselfe? why hath he given us such variety of creatures, but for use? Doth the Lord invite us to this feast, and we depart (like sullen guests) from so rich a table hungry? This pretence of mortified strictnesse doth injurie; and nostrae libertati, and creatoris liberalitati; both to our libertie, and our Makers liberalitie. Every good gift comes from above; there is nothing but good from heaven: he that rejects the gifts, wrongs the giver. God cannot abide such a discontented answere; Dan. 5.17. Keepe thy rewards to thy selfe, and g^^e thy gifts to another. Many great Kings have beene blessed Saints: they could not have beene Kings without a number of earthly pleasures: they could not have beene Saints with earthly affections. If God therefore have mingled us a pleasant cup, let us chearefully drink it, and give thankes to Iesus Christ. Charitie is not strait-laced, but yeelds much latitude to the lawfull use of indifferent things. These are fit for those that are fit for them.
Next, they are to be blamed, that with neglect of better things, settle and fixe themselves upon these. It is the heart that makes all evill, when that lying speech of Satan is borrowed, All these are mine. Christ teacheth us, first to seeke the kingdome of heaven, then shall the rest be cast upon us. When the bargaine is made for salvation, the rest come in like lumber. When you have fed heartily on the body of your Saviour, and gotten assurance to drinke the wine of heaven, then eate, drinke, and be merry. First marry thy sonnes soule to CHRIST, then his body to a vertuous wife. The Factor employed in forraine parts, first dispatcheth his Masters businesse, then his owne. How preposterous is it, to omit that onely thing in this world, for which we came into the world; to serve our maker!
The last sinne of the old world, was Security. The Lords forbearance did so little stirre them, that they were scarce waked with his vengeance. The savaged creatures, Lions, Tygers, Beares, by Gods instinct came to seek succour in the A^^ men did not seeke it. Even brutishnesse is more sensible than corrupted reason. The Sybarites, that no disturbance might come neere their beds of violets; banished al^ cockes and clockes: the former must not breake their sleepes, nor the other vex them with report of the fugitive time. Epimenides the Cretian slept fourescore year^ in a Cave; some say but forty, and that was enough in conscience; beyond a miracle, and doubtlesse beyond the truth. But the old world slept a hundred and twenty yeares, and all Noahs hammering about the Arke wakened them not. O that the conscience of man, in the midst of so many sinnes povoking God, so many temptations assaulting his owne soule, so many enemies against him, so many dangers about him, should still be secure! She is observed by her owne eye, when none else marke her: chased by her owne foote, when none else follow her: hath a thousand witnesses within her, when there is no outward stir against her: and yet the wicked sleepe.
Satan, like Iael to Sisera, or Iudith to Holofernes, watcheth till a man be a sleepe and then kills him. Preachers cry, but sinners will not waken: and as in places of Iudicature they often determine to heare causes, but do not heare to determine causes:
 so men commonly remember to heare, but doe not heare to remember. Pliny writes of some Beares so sleepy, that they are hardly rowsed with blowes and wounds. Many discourse of religion, as men talke in their dreames: they speake wonders of goodnesse: yet are no such manner of men; neither the one working, or the other waking. Formall hypocrites are like the Cocke,Suid. and meriting Papists like the Dormouse. Gallus bibit and non mingit, Glis mingit and non bibit. The Cocke drinkes and never pisseth, the Dormouse pisseth, and never drinkes. The former drink much preaching but there is no good deeds come from them: the other vent some almes, and evacuate their superfluities, but they will not drinke a drop of the water of life.
Let us take the Apostles caution; Bee sober and watch: Bee sober, for Ebriety is a drinke-offering to the Devill. And watch, for a Security is Porcpose before a Tempest: Keepe your soules waking, then shall your bodies sleepe in quiet. As there may be a corporall watching when the mind sleepes, so there may be a spirituall watching when the body sleepes. Temptations, like Dalila, tells us a faire tale, but their end is to bring us asleepe, and plucke out our eyes. But if in all our earthly businesse wee still carry an heavenly mind, the Iudgement of God shall not, as it did the old world, ever take us napping. The house doth every day get some dust, therefore let it every day be swept: the soule contracts some sinnes, the bee some to sweepe it is made of examination and repentance. At night ere we shut our eyes, let us open our hearts, and cleanse our consciences: before we shut the doore let us cast out the dust. He never breakes his sleepe for debt, that payes as he takes up. Let us watch in righteousnesse, this is the way to sleepe in peace. When the stomach is obstructed, the body takes but ill rest, and the slumbers are broken off with distracted dreames. If the conscience be oppressed; in vaine the soule lookes for quiet. If hardnesse of heart, like Opium, shall consoporate it, that sleepe is mortall. The shepheards were, Luk. 2.8. Watching over their flockes by night. As Christ found the shepheards watching over their flockes at his first comming; so may he find us all watching over our soules at his second comming, in the glory of his kingdome.
I conclude; in this glasse let us see the present state of this world. Certainely we may vie sins with them, and stand upon comparisons, without bating them one ace for hainousnesse. If the world were then fowle, it is now fowlenesse it selfe. Some things are so cleare, that they refuse tryall: and some so filthy, that they abhorre purgation. Nor doe I confine this corruption to some parts of it: as there be nationall sinnes, peculiar to age, to countrey, to constitution: Mores sequuntur humores. But all the world is sicke and rotten: paganisme possessing a great moitie of the whole, and heresie perverting the halfe of that is left. We may say of it,Aug. as Tully to Anthony; Miser si sentis, miserior sin non sentis: it is wretched if it feele it, more wretched if it feele it not. Ideo pereunt, quia nesciunt se perire: ideoque magis pereunt, quia nesciunt se nescire. Men perish because they are ignorant of their perishing: yea they more perish, because they are ignorant of their not knowing.
Let us heare Saint Paul delivering the state of our old world, and see how our experience accords with his prophecie, 2 Tim. 3.2. Men shall be lovers of their owne selves. Have we not seene this selfe-love stalking in the garbe of impudence, vomiting disgraces against all men, and arrogating to it selfe? fly-blowing good things to deterre others, that himselfe might devour them? Covetous; O they swarme like the frogs in Egypt: that as a shrewd censurer said, stand where you will, and of every 10 men that passe by, nine and three quarters are covetous. When the uplander wondred to see a white Crow, the Fen-man answered, In our countrey we wonder to see any black ones. It is no marvell to see one covetuos, it is marvell to see one not covetous. Boasters; a great rabble. Some boast their portion, others their proportion: rather than want matter of ostentation, they will boast their vices: as if one should ^rathroud of his scabbes, or make a scarfe of his halter. Proud; an universall disease: ^e pich display it in their wearing, the poore in their swearing. I will not tell you,
 that this Idoll goes in strange and phantasticall dresse: that is indeed an inseparable signe, yet but one, you shall have her sit as pertly under a broad Felt pull'd downe to the eyes, as upon a Bever: and finde her as soone in a little Geneva-set, as in a great Spanish Ruffe.
Blasphemers: men have sworne themselves hoarce with oathes.Eccle. 23 12. There is a Word that is cloathed about with death; and that Word is too frequent in the jawes of men, till the fearefull Name of God be made as vile as common aire. Disobedient to parents: This is so arrogated to the young, and so tolerated by the old, that for this cause God shortens their dayes, and sets parents a weeping for the losse of their childrens bodies, that regarded not the losse of their soules. Vnthankfull: this vice hath usurped a propriety of that, which is onely borrowed: customary fruition hath made men scarce thinke themselves beholden to God. Otherwise, why doe not rich men aboun^ in praises, as God hath made them abound in riches? Perhaps they doe not thinke their riches came in Gods name, and therefore cannot with a good conscience thanke him for them. Vnholy, or prophane: God hath made all us, and all ours: hee reserves but the Tenth of our goods, and the Seventh of our time, but Totum hominis, our whole selves. We are hisTitus 2.14. Peculiar: now shall we make that virgin common, prostituted to every base Gypsee, pride, lust, avarice; which the Lord hath redeemed and required holy and peculiar to himselfe?
Without naturall affection: when men wilfully transgresse against Grace, God suffers them to sinne even against nature. They that have lost the love of their Father, shall lose the love of their children. It is just, that for being false to their best Friend in heaven, they should neglect their friends on earth, and be neglected of both. Truce breakers: There is a faith that knits us in a covenant with God, and a faithfulnesse that ties us in a covenant with man. We are Foedi-fragi in both: have broke the vow made in our Baptisme, and are so full of levity, that there is more credite given to the print of our seales, than to the faith of our soules. If any Nation breake truce with us, who wonders when we have broken truce with God? False accusers: This was wont to be the Devils office only; but now as if men grudged Satan the honour of calumniation, they monopolize it into their owne hands. The Make-bate runs from house to house, and carries the burning coales of contention, till he sets them all a-flame, and then warmes his owne fingers at the fire. Incontinent: The Devill hopes that this vice in the next age will be held a vertue; for it is gotten already out of the dis-reputation of a sin. Drunken-houses and Brothels v^^ for number, and it is thought the Stewes will get it. Vrbs est jam tota Lupanar. Fi^^^ The violences of former times were courtesies to ours. Then it was a friendly imposition, you shall stay and eat with me: now it is a friendly enforcement, you shall stay and drinke with me: and if there be any failing in the quantity, they are as Fier^ as Tygers. Despisers of those that are good. It is the honest mans commendation, toPsal. 15.4. contemne a vile person, but to honour them that feare the Lord. And Davids delig^Psal. ^6.3. was in the Saints, and such as excell in vertue: To honour vertue: To honour vertue in ragges, and to loath vice though in a Robe of State. But now let in the Ies^^ Ibis Homere for as: They like him worse, that goes about to make them better. Tr^ters: Who because they cannot warpe a Princes Iustice to their owne humours, will strike at that sacred bloud. If the former world had any actours to doe it, this world hath more, even Patrons to defend it. Headie. That whereas God hath made mans reason to goe formost, his hand after it: these doe first, and thinke afterwards; and then beat their wits to make good, what their wils hath made necessary. High-minded: That are like chimneyes; they over-looke all the house, yet are the foulest part of it. They thinke that neither God nor man knowes their worth, not rewards them to their merits. Lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God. After the long Catalogue of particulars, as if the Apostle were weary of the enumeration; it gives you this, the summe of all prophanenesse. God did forme them, pleasures deforme them: God would save them, pleasures would destroy them: they are m^^^^ men to love pleasures more than God.

Thus I have shewed you some representation of these evill times; the workes of the old world, the workes of the old man. They are old in your practise, old in ^our remembrance; O that so old, that they were dead in your performance. Novus ^uus, novus animus: let me tel you of a new lesson; indeed more truly old than the o^er. For goodnesse was before sin, truth ancienter than falshood. But new to your ^llish, new to your apprehension, new to your approbation, new to your practise. WhatsoeverPhil. 4.8. things are true, that doe not savour of hypocrisie: honest, not of vanitie: ^st, not of iniquity: pure, not of obliquitie: lovely, not deformity: of a good report, ^ot of infamie: if vertue hath given them worth and waight: and praise, an orna^ent of grace and beautie: receive, heare, learne, thinke, doe these things, and the God (...) peace shall be with you.
Such is the fearefull estate of the world by reason of sin! O that we might see (...) end of these things, before we see an end of all things!Psal. 12.1. Helpe Lord, for the godly ^ile among the children of men. When ungodlinesse so raignes, that pietie is almost ^uite lost, it is high time to cry, Helpe Lord: and indeed, Quid jam nisi vota super^^t? O may the vertue of that bloud, which is able to buy off all our sinnes; mor^^fie sin in us, and purge sin from us: that our remaining dayes may be spent in a due ^reparation for our great Audite, at the second appearing of IESUS CHRIST. Amen.
Bringing in the floud upon the world of the ungodly.]Psal. 145.15. The eyes of all things ^^oke up unto thee, O Lord: not only expecting their conservation by thy provi^ence, but also attending thy direction for their obedience. The winds from their ^ves, the raine from their bottels, the waters from their chanels all answere the Lord, as the Israelites did Ioshua:Iosh. 1.16. All that thou commandest us, we will doe: and ^hither soever thou sendest us, we will goe. We are ready to be charged, what shall we doe? He saith, cloudes powre downe, seas breake loose, smite the world, drowne (...). Loe, how they concurre in their ready execution, and unite their forces to an ^niversall floud. The points I insist upon, are three: How this deluge was caused, ^ow farre it prevailed, how long it continued; with some usefull observations de^ived from them.
First, how it was caused: It was a worke of Almighty power, which also used ^he concurrence of some naturall meanes.Gen. 7.11. All the fountaines of the great deepe were ^oken up, and the windowes of heaven were opened. The Hebrewes have called foun^nes Gnaiim, which signifieth an eye: eyes being like fountaines to destill teares. This eruption of the great Deepe, was not the Tartarean waters about the center of ^he earth: they could not surge so high. But either the Sea, which some thinke to ^e higher than the earth, and restrained only by Gods providence from overflow^ng it.Iob 38.11. Hitherto shalt thou come, but no futher: and here shall thy proud waves be stay^d. In nature it is acknowledged, that the place of waters is above the earth: there^ore Aristotle calls it a strange thing, Vt levius sit graviore inferius. Indeed the wa^ers were created higher, but depressed by Gods command. At first thou didst Cover the earth with the deepe, as with a garment,Psal. 104.6. and the waters stood above the moun^aines. But at thy rebuke they fled, at the voice of thy thunder they hasted away. They goe up by the mountaines, and downe by the valleys, unto the place which thou ^ast founded for them. Thou hast set a bound which they shall not passe over, nor ^ne againe to cover the earth. The sand is this bound byIer. 5.22. a perpetuall decree: though ^hey tosse, and roare, they shall not prevaile. And it is fondly imagined, that the ^^a is now higher than the earth.Psal. 107.23. They that goe downe to the sea in shippes, Downe, ^herefore not higher.Psal. 24.2. Thou hast founded the earth upon the seas, and established it up^ the flouds. Super maria, upon the seas, therefore not under them: and so founded, ^ot so only forced.Psal. 136.6. He stretcheth out the earth above the waters; therefore not the water above the earth.Eccl. 1.7. All the rivers run into the sea: but the naturall course of the waters is downeward. But how then find we springs in the tops of mountaines? ^ot by miracles, but naturall: God so disposing them to exercise their naturall motions.
 Not that they come of some vaporous sweat or distillation of the earth; for then they could not so vehemently boile up. Nor by the transcendent height of the sea; as a spring rising in a hill, and conveyed in pipes, will force the ascent to the same height it beares at the fountaine. But the sea doth so violently rush into those receptacles of the earth, which she finds hollow, that it forceth springs even upon mountaines. Most interpreters by this Deepe, understand the deepe heads and springs of waters within the earth, which were opened and inlarged to this inundation: those Exod. 20.4. Waters under the earth, the rivers and deepe gulfe gushing forth.
The windowes of Heaven.] This signifies not an eruption of any waters in the Chrystall heavens, as they call that above the starry skie. Some have conceived waters to bee above the firmament to mitigate the heate of the starres But.Basil. Ambros. Bed. 1. the waters are an heavy substance, and should bee kept there against nature. 2. If these waters had come from thence, there must have beene a dissolution of the starry heaven. 3. The watery heaven should then be a vacant place. 4. The celestiall bodies have no need to be refrigerated: for they are of no fiery and elementall nature, they admit no qualities: the Sun it selfe not being hote formaliter, sed effective. But it is objected;Psal. 148.4. Yee waters that be above the heavens: By heaven is understood there the lower region of the aire. So it is said,Psal. 18.13. The Lord thundred in the heavens, hailestones and coales of fire: but thunder, lightning, and haile, come not properly from heaven, but from the aire. There be three heavens; A^^um; so we called the fowles of heaven, that is, of the aire; Sydereum, so the Firmament is called Heaven; Empyreum, the fiery heaven; so called, not for the hea^, but for the glory. If the aire be so comfortable, that is but lightened with the Son, what is the heaven, where the Sun it selfe is? If that be so refulgent, how glorious is the heaven where God himselfe dwells!
This opening of the windowes, is the breaking of the cloudes, wherein the waters are contained.Iob 26.8. He bindeth up the waters in his thicke clouds, and the cloud is not (...) under them. Here he unbound those vessells, and made vents for the raine like windowes. Seneca writing of the generall deluge, which he thinkes not past but to come, gives these reasons. 1. The swelling and over flowing of the seas. 2. The earth itselfe putrifying and resolving into waters. 3. The conjunction of celestiall bodies: as the world shall be drowned, saith he, when such starres concurre in Cancer: so (...) shall be burned when the same company meere in Capricorne. But indeed, these seeme to be true causes. 1. The issuing forth of waters from the earth. 2. The violent eruption of the seas. 3. The continuall raine from the cloudes. 4. Which were encreased by the liquefaction and distilling of the aire into water.
But the Principall Agent here was the Lord.Gen. 7 4. I will cause it to raine upon the earth. It was his ^peciall worke, by the ministerie of Angels, after no ordinary manner. There was no fatall necessitie in it: for seeing God created the world in such wisedome and order, that one part should concurre to the preservation, not to the destruction of another: it is vainely imputed to the constellation of the starres. For they can have no generall operation over all the earth, but only in that place wher^ their influence worketh.
The Instruction we collect is this; that all Gods creatures are at his becke: (...) the greatest Lions on earth, Whales in the sea, devills in hell. What is greater that the heaven? Yet this ever-wheeling body shall suspend his swift diurnall motion, (...) his command, to doe service to his servants;Iosh. 10.12. Sun stand thou still in Gibeon, and that Moone in the valley of Aialon. The Sun commeth forth as a Bridegroome out of his chamber, and rejoyceth as a strong man to runne a race. Yet to confirmed the faith of Hezekiah, he shall flie backe as a coward,Esa. 38.8. tenne degrees at once in the diall of Ahaz. What is more huge, firme, and unfit to be dealt withall, than the earth? yet he makes it tremble, and open the jawes to devoure his enemies; if he touch the bu^^, they smoke for it. The Whale wallowes up and downe the sea like a mountaine, yet was he tamed to become the Prophets chariot, and bring him to land. The fa^^shed
 Lions forbeare Daniel, they dare not touch the dish which God had reserved ^or himselfe. And for Ionas, how hee should lye in the bowels of that Leviathan ^ree dayes, not concocted and stifled, is no wonder to them that contemplate the ^ower of God. The belly of the fish could not be hotter to the Prophet, than the ^ty Fornace was to the three Servants; neither is it more, to bring a living man ^fter three dayes from a fish, than to raise a dead man after foure dayes from ^he grave.
The Angels are of a powerfull nature: yet the good are madeHebr. 1.14. ministring spirits ^or the heires of salvation: the bad God tyes in chaines and mussles their malicious ^orces. Those that had prepared themselves toRevel. 9.14. slay the third part of men, were ^ound up in the great River Euphrates, till he loose them. He needs not the Postes of Persia, which Haman used; nor the Dromedaries of Aegypt, to signifie his will; but (...)Psal. 147.15. Word runneth very swiftly. The day is his, and the night is his; the open place ^nd the secret; the very wings of the wind shall carry his Precepts. Ion. 1. The sea ^nd a charge for the Prophet, as the Prophet had a charge for Niniveh. God said ^o the one, Arise and goe, and he went not: he speakes to the other, Arise and goe, and (...) went; fulfilling the Makers command with all diligence. Thus all creatures have ^mes and legs, when God bids them goe; spirit and life is put into them, activitie ^o use them, wisdome to direct them, when they should punish.Ioh. 1.13. The Marriners ^ere trying a chaine of delayes, with a number of shifts, desirous to save or reprieve ^he guilty: but in vaine they labour to evade the Councell of God. While the men ^re in advise, the winds and seas are in action: the men are backward, the other goe ^orward with their service: the men lose time, the other admit no dilation.
It is the Lord of Hoasts to whom all these obey:Psal. 148.8. Fire and haile, snow and va^our, stormie wind and tempest, fulfilling his Word. There is no Neptune, Admirall of ^he Seas, nor Aeolus Master of the winds, nor Mars Generall of the warres, nor Iu^iter King of thunders; but onely the Lord. Who divided and diverted Iordan? ^his retrogresse was no ordinary thing: we might well say,Psal. 114.5. What ailest thee, O Ior^an, that thou wast driven backe? Many being crossed by the creatures, fall to bla^pheming them: but let us reprove them, as the Prophet did Sennacherib;2 King. 19.22. Whom ^ast thou blasphemed? and against whom hast thou exalted thy selfe? even against the Holy One of Israel. Whom are you angry withall? Doe the raine and waters di^please you? Alas, they are servants, if their Master bid smite, they must not for^eare. They may say truely,Esay. 36.10. What Rabshakeh usurped; Are we come without the Lord? he said, Goe and chastise them. Thus was it in this Deluge; the Lord brought ^he Floud.Psal. 77.16. The waters saw thee, O God, the waters saw thee, they heard thy voice, ^nd came streaming out of their cells. We are placed on the earth, as in the middest ^etwixt swallowing pits; the waters of the sea below us, and the waters of the ^rmament above us, if the one were not kept downe, and the other held up, by the ^ower of God, they would drowne us every moment. But if it be easie for Him, to ^lter the course of Nature for the destruction of his enemies: he can with more ease ^eepe the course of Nature for the preservation of his friends.
The next circumstance is, How farre it prevailed. This was even to the over^helming of the whole earth; that not the tallest Cedars, nor loftiest buildings, nor highest mountaines could appeare: even fifteene cubits upwards. Some moun^aines are said to be of an exceeding height; therefore cavillers find impossibilitie in ^hese naturall causes, for the waters to transcend them fifteene cubits. So neither the ^apings of the sea, nor the sluces of the earth, nor the Cataracts of heaven, with the ^elpe of all those Signes which they call Aquatilia; as Cancer, Pisces, Pleiades, Orion; ^nd among the Planets, Venus and Luna, could doe it. We need not here answer, ^hat the superiour and inferiour waters did meet together: as the Mists, which are waters above; and the Springs, which are waters below; meet often on the tops of ^ountaines. But what need arguments from naturall causes, when every beleever of ^he Scriptures perceives here the supernaturall finger of God? So he commanded,
 so the creatures obeyed, and so the wicked were destroyed. From hence wee may collect foure meditations.
1 That no power of man is able to withstand the will of God: it must be accomplished, though an whole world perish. It shall stand firmer than the Firmament;Psal. 135.6. Whatsoever the Lord pleased, that did he in heaven, in earth, in the seas, and all deep places. What can a Fly do against abulwark? or man against God? unlesse he could fee and corrupt the heavens, with all that therein is; the earth and sea, with all that therein is there is no rescuing of that which the Lord wil smite. This the damned prove in he^^ by woful experience: alwaies willing what is and shal be ever absent: and alwaies nilling what is and shal be ever present.Born. In aeternum non obtinebit quod vult, and in ^te^num sustinebit quod non vult.Ion. 1.13. The men rowed hard, to deliver the Prophet; but the s^^ was tempestuous against them. Man roweth, and God bloweth; there be armes for the one, winds for the other; which is likelyest to prevaile? How much, against how little! The Ocean with his fury, against one woodden Vessell: great waves against small strokes. Such are all devices and endevours against the Lord. Oenus tor^^^, in the proverbe: Oenus weaves a rope, and an Asse stands by and bites it off.
How impossible will it be for the wicked to stand in the day of Iudgement? If all the sinners on the earth, with all the devils in hel, oppose the Iudge; it is lesse th^^ for one unarmed man to set upon a legion of well appointed souldiers. There is no fortification against, no evasion from the Lord. Fugitive Ionah gotten to I^ph^, and thence to sea, might thinke all safe: but loe, presently a pursuivant is dispatched fro^ heaven to attach him: Vengeance is ship'd in a Whirle-wind, and sailes aloft in the aire to overtake him. If a still spirit cannot charme sinners, God hath a turbule^^ spirit, which is Severior Magister, to enforce them.Eccl. 39.28. There be spirits that are created for vengeance, which in their fury lay on sore strokes, to appease the wrath of him that made them. If they deny appearance in his Court of Iustice, there be P^rsuivants enow to fetch them in: his Writ of Attachment must be served. There is no dealing with God, but by Prayers and Peace-offerings. How vaine were their shifts in this deluge: could they have laid mountaine on mountaine, and upon the to^ of all erected a Tower higher than Babel was ever meant: yetPsal. 2.4. He that sitteth in the heavens would laugh, the Lord would have them in dirision: and smiling at their folly make an end of their ruine.
2 That strange sinnes meet with strange punishments. The monstrous and Giantly sinnes of those monstrous Giants we have heard: they were wonderfull, yet the plague is of no lesse wonder. A continued raine of forty dayes, a prevailing Deluge of fifteene cubits; this was without example before it, nor shall any m^^ch be after it, but the Deluge of fire at the last. Sodome was guilty of a strange and unnaturall sinne, therefore destroyed with a strange and untranaturall plague; hel^ out of heaven. Nadab offers strange fire, and suffers strange fire. Cain committed a strange murder, in killing his brother, the fourth part of the world; and stran^^ was his punishment, to be a runnagate in his owne Land; till he findes that he kille^ himselfe more than his brother. O how bitter is the end of sinne, yea, without (...) bitter! Ionah admitted a wonderfull neglect, the chastisement comes little short of wonder. Pursued by a Tempest, discovered by a lot, condemned by himselfe, throwne over-boord by his friends, wrapp'd in weeds, in the bottome of a dep^^, devoured by a Whall; without light, without food, without company, without comfort: drowned, and not drowned, devoured, but not digested; alive, and yet as dead: so terrified in conscience as if a reprobate, his soule in a swoone, his like a^ the last cast, the gaspes and pangs of death upon him, the very throbs of desperation oppugning him, that his hope of eternall life was in his sense exiled: here was a punishment to the admiration of all the world.
The monstrous sinne of this Land, Drunkennesse, (and we may so call it, for it turnes men into monsters) is answered by as strange a punishment. What living man ever saw such a Summer?Ann. 1621. All eyes behold, all tongues confesse, that it hath (...)
 strange weather for the season. But their hearts consider not, how strange the sinne is that procured it, Act. 11.28. There was an universall dearth,Gualt. and it came to passe in the dayes of Claudius Cesar. The worlds Emperour bred the worlds estate. The vices of Princes infect the people, that Qualis Rex, talis grex. This Claudius was an insatiate drinker: his owne mother called him a monster, a worke of nature begun, not finished. No marvell if dearth comes in the dayes of Claudius: if God deny fruites to a drunken generation. We may justly feare a famine, and expect (not as CHRIST said, The harvest is great, and the labourers are few; but) that the harvest should be small, and the labourers many. If the Lord thus forbeare to smite us, it is not propter paenitentiae nostrae meritum, but misericordiae suae beneplacitum. Howsoever, let us abhorre the sinne, whereupon follow so many mischiefes. As murder and outrage; Violentia in vinolentia. Povertie; the children come to weepe for bread, because their prodigall fathers have drunke it. Scandals; the honours of the noble are traduced, while the drunkard sits like a Cesar, taxing all the world. Blasphemies; for such are the graces that come by the inspiration of the pot. Impudent demeanors; for sumptuous potations inflame presumptuous actions. Vncleannesse; Ebrietas castitatis naufragium: Bacchus is but a Pandar to Venus. Discovery of secrets: Noah being drunken revealed those secrets that lay hid 600 yeeres. Wicked fellowships: for such a tricke or qualitie of insatiate drinking, the devill himselfe was once called Robin Good-fellow. There was a streete in Rome call'd Vicus sobrius, the sober streete; because there was never a drinking house in it: find such a street in London, and Chronicle it. I have no thought of invecture against the creature: drink wine ad mensam, sed ad mensuram. Only let me tell you of better wine out of Gods owne Celler, Cant. 2.5. There be inebriated, Psal. 36.8. O faelix and paucis nota voluptas! CHRIST hath begun to us, let us pledge him, Psal. 116.13. a health indeed:Psal. 67.2. A saving health unto all Nations.
3 Gods favour and anger changeth the use of the creatures. The raine from above, and the fountaines below, are things we cannot lacke: yet did his wrath make these the instruments of the worlds desolation. He can turne principall helpes to principall plagues. The wind is a fanne to purge the aire, as the lungs lie by the heart to doe it good: it is the only meanes of sailing; yet how often hath it brought the vessell to ruine? Children, the dearest jewels of love, the living pictures of their parents; are often made their heaviest scourges. The wife, one halfe of mans selfe, the best of temporall blessings, becomes not seldome the fearefullest Crosse. The Quailes, so daintie flesh, were Israels rats-bane: and the children of the Prophets dyed by a bitter hearbe in the pot ordained for their sustenance. Fire, so unspareable an element, consumeth a whole Citie in Gods anger. The earth that firmely supports us, hath swallowed the wicked; the bread that nourisheth, choked them. All which should make us fearefull of offending, lest our comforts become our corrosives; the delight of our eyes, our eye-sores: our tables a snare, and that which should have beene for our wealth,Psal. 69.22. an occasion of falling. Gods displeasure upon our sin, is able to turne nature upside downe, that like Senacherib, wee become the spoile of owne bowels.
There is no confidence to be put in worldly things: for if the earth it selfe be destroyed, what shall become of the temporalities it beareth? The foundation being ruined, the building cannot stand. What became of all that gold and silver, which in hoords and heapes the covetous had gathered? what became of their houses so stately and sumptuous? What, of the curious guardens, delightfull arbors, the spacious bounds of oppression extorted from the poore? who was the richest man, when all found one swallowing grave? The trees grow different in the forrest; some greater, some straiter, some broader, some taller, some younger, some older, some fruitfuller, some doated. But when they are hewen downe by the axe, and cast into the fire who can distinguish them by their ashes: and say, this was an Oke, that a Cedar, the other a poplar? So in death and dust, who can say, this was the skull of a
 King, that of a Lawyer, this of a Clyent; that of a polititian, this of a foole; that of an officer,Sen. this of a beggar? Dives es, sed multum debts. Such a one is rich, but he owes much: tarry till he hath payed all his debts, what is he then? As a man that hath his house of Cedar, but owes for his fine and rent. Worldly riches are like the rivers in Iob.Iob 6.16.17. In winter there is water enough in them, when there is no need of it. In summer, when we expect it, and should use it to quench our thirst, they are dry.
The Devill, like the Pope, forgeth a donation.Luk. 4.^. All is delivered unto me, all is mine. But question him like a theefe at the barre; how is it thine? Delivered to me: but by whom? Nay, by whom he cannot tell, the time he remembers not, the place he hath forgotten: as much to say, as they are none of his.Prov. 23.5. Riches make themselves wings, and flie away as an Eagle toward heaven. All riches have wings, and f^ie away: the evill gotten, like Noahs Raven, come backe no more: the good and well gotten, like Noahs Dove, returne with an olive branch of peace. They are called Riches of this world; would you have them goe out of the world, and follow you past the grave? The dogge will goe with you so long as you goe with his master; but if you leave him, he will leave you. They are seldome profitable, often perticious, alwaies dangerous. All those be good arguments, which are from the proper cause to the proper effect: yet they may faile by the intervention of a miracle. It is proper unto fire to burne, yet that vehement fire did not burne the three servants of God. It is proper to the sea to drowne those that be cast into it, yet it did not drown^ the Prophet in the very depth of it. It is proper to the Sunne to move, yet it stood still at the prayer of Ioshuah. Proper for it to goe from East to West, yet for Hez^kiahs confirmation, it went from West to East. This was proper to them, and that they did not produce such effects, it was by miracle. So it is proper to worldly riches to ensnare soules; If they doe not, it is by miracle. Adoratores seculi, adulatores diaboli: they that worship the world, will flatter the divell.
Let this teach us to contemne the world, which we are sure shall be destroyed. Indeed, we may desire temporall things, according to our condition and requisite measure: but still with the Saints estimation of them, thatAct. 4.35. Threw them downe at the Apostles feete. Calcandumque docent, dum ponunt gressibus aurum. Saint Peter forsooke all, yet the Pope in his rightengrosseth all. The Rabbins say, that Moses being a child, had Pharaohs Crowne given him to play withall, and he cast it downe to the ground, and kicked it about. As it were a signe of his future vilipending temporall things, that he shouldHebr. 11.26. Esteeme the reproch of Christ, greater riches then the treasures in Aegypt. CHRISTS counsell is, Sell all that thou hast, and give to the poore: sell it, or if no man will buy it, give it: or if no man will take it, leave it: it is not worth thy keeping, especially not worth thy carking: do thou part from it, rather than it should part thee from Christ. He that impoverisheth his soule, to enrich his body; is more mad than he that kills his horse to loose his money, at a race. But alas;Obad. ver. 6. How ^re the things of Esau searched for; the things of this world sought after! by oppression, fraud, Vsurie; as if this were the only end of getting, to have. But when a^^ the poore members of Christ are clothed and filled, then put they money to the banke. Howsoever the covetous for one scruple of gold, will make no scruple of conscience: yet let us love temporall things, as poore people begge; for Gods sake. Thus in the destruction of the world by fire, as it was once by water; when the wicked shall loose all, we shall loose nothing: because we reserve what we had, the favour of God, the kingdome of heaven, and the glorious riches laid up for us in Iesus Christ.
The last circumstance is, how long this floud continued. The exact time hath much pusled Interpreters: I will not perplexe you with it. Only the plaine Text saith thus; It rained forty daies, the waters prevailed a 150 dayes, then they began to abate, but so slowly, that it was the Tenth moneth before the very tops of the mountaines did appeare. In all, the continuance seemeth to be upon a full yeare. Divines
 observe, that it began then the Spring, the Second moneth, which answereth to our May. 1. The world is then supposed to have taken the beginning: the plants then sprowting, beasts engendring, the ground aptest for tilling. Now that this was the time of the overflowing appeares because from the creation to the floud, are reckoned just 1656 even yeares. 2. The first moneth being Nisan, which answereth to part of our March, part of Aprill; and this being the second; proves clearely that it fell out in the spring. Howsoever this reckoning was discontinued in Aegypt, (for the Aegyptians began their yeare from the moneth Ptho, which answers to our September) yet Moses here makes no new institution, but reneweth the old account. 3. That this floud might not be imputed to any naturall causes, but only to Gods power: the waters encreasing in summer, which is a time for drought: and decreasing in Winter, when naturally they doe swell and rise. 4. That it might be more griefe to the wicked, to perish in the midst of their pleasure, and abundance:Matth. 24.38. eating and drinking, making marriages, and merriments: they were taken away in the height of their jollity. At this time the floud ceased; for in the eleventh moneth after the floud, the Dove brought an Olive leafe, the signe of the spring. And at the comming forth of the Arke they presently began to multiply: now the aptest season for ingendring is the spring, especially for fowles. Besides, if it had not then beene a growing time, hearbs and plants putting forth; where had beene food for their sustentation.
Thus long it continued; at last in the midst of wrath God remembers mercie: and as he corrected with hisPsal. 23.4. Rod of affliction, so he upholdeth with his st^ffe of consolation. As in the Arke he kept some seed alive to replenish the earth, when the rest perished: so he ceased the deluge, and at last delivered them out.Gen. 8.1. God remembred Noah, and every living thing: he remembred the very beast.Psal. 36.6. O Lord, thou preservest man and beast. Xenocrates an heathen Philosopher is commended for his pitifull heart, who succoured in his bosome a poore sparrow, that being pursued by a hawke came flying to him; and afterward let her goe saying, Se supplicem non prodidisse; that he had not betraied his poore supplyant.
Thus God sustained Noah and the rest for his sake, in a darke place, a whole yeare; being even then his light and comfort.Psal. 11^.4. Vnto the upright there ariseth light in darkenesse: a light shined to Peter, when he lay bound at mid-night. Indeed what darkenesse can there be, where the Father of lights shineth? now he delivers them againe to their long desired aire, and causeth his Sunne to send forth comfortable beames upon them. It was time for a renovation to succeed this destruction: to have continued this inundation long, had beene to punish Noah who was righteous. After forty dayes therefore the heavens cleare up, after 150 dayes the waters sinke downe. How soone is God weary of punishing, that is never weary of blessing! The Arke though it were Noahs fort against the waters, yet was it also his prison: he was safe in it, but pent up. Now therefore the LORD that gave him life by it, thinkes it time to give him libertie out of it. The Iustice of God is satisfied, the wicked punished, the waters diminished, the creatures delivered, the world againe revived. After so long a storme there comes a calme: that he, who for his judgments ought to be feared, might also for his mercie be magnified. This world is as strait a prison in regard of heaven, as the Arke was in respect of the world: and our preservation is as wonderfull, if wee could see it. Desire wee therefore (in feare and faith) that day; that as they went out of the Arke into the world, so wee may goe out of the world into that blessed Kingdome of IESUS CHRIST.
And saved Noah the eight person, a preacher of righteousnesse. What a wonder of mercie was this? one poore family called out of a whole world: eight graines of corne fanned from a whole barne full of chaffe: eight lilies growing amongst a whole forrest of thornes. For these few, was the earth still preserved under the wa^ers, and all kinds of creatures upon the waters: which otherwise, had all perished.
 Still the world stands for the Elects sake, for whom it was made and preserved: else the last fire should consume that, which the former water could not purifie.
Here, first, let us consider the Person saved, Noah; and Him both by his condition, that he was a Preacher: and by his conversation, which was in Righteousnesse: for in that Center both his doctrine and practise met; both verbally and actually he preached. He was ordained into this Ministry by the Lord: and as his whole l^fe was an actuall Sermon, that taught obedience by precedent: so he continually incited the people to repentance, and forewarned them of the threatned vengeance. The observations are manifold.
1 That Noah had his calling immediately from God; whereas we are mediately ordained by the imposition of hands; which is a most reverend symbole in the Church. ForHebr. 5 4. no man taketh this honour to himselfe uncalled. Christ is said to be a Priest after the order of Melchisedech: but we have Priests without any order at all; refusing to be ordered; What warrant have they, that they are sent? I know, there be different sorts and places: as Bishop Iewel, or the Iewell of Bishops observes; All have Idem Ministerium, though Diversam Potestatem. A Bishop and an Archbishop differ not in Potestate Ordinis, sed in Potestate Regiminis. Nor doth a Bishop differ from a Minister; Quoad potentiam Sacerdotii, sed quoad potentiam Iurisdictionis. Indeed the Apostles, as they were immediately sent by Christ, so it was their prerogati^e royall, ministerially to give the Holy Ghost by imposition of hands; which Power died with them. Yet still Ministerium est indelebilis character: and the Bishop may suspend from execution of his Office, but not put him out of the Ministry, who^ God hath put in.Ioh. 20.22. CHRIST breathed on them, and said; Receive yee the Holy Ghost. The furniture and provision for the Ministers, is the HOLY GHOST. We heare in every place vocem Serpentis, the hissing of the old Serpent: let the world heare from us Gemitum Turturis, the groaning of that Turtle, the Spirit of GOD.
2 That the Lord honoured Noah in conferring this office upon him. When he made him a Preacher, hee gave him this dignity, that hee should be saved himselfe, and all those whom his Ministery converted: that he might say,Hebr. 2.13. Here am I, and the children that God hath given mee. I will but transiently touch at the honour due to Preachers.
Certainely, a Ministers life is full of honour here and hereafter too: so it is full of danger here and hereafter too. Vnicuique in sua arte credendum and cedendum: We beleeve Physitians, when they give us prescripts: we beleeve Lawyers, whe^ they give us counsell: we beleeve even Carpenters, in their Rules: we beleeve not Divines, though they bring nothing of their owne Invention: but may say of their Sermon, as Iacob did of his Venison,Gen. 27.20. The Lord hath brought it to our hand: So downe and eat, that your soules may blesse us, yea, blesse God for us. Yet is every braine full of distraction about us, every mouth full of detraction against us, every hand full of retraction from us.
Men are so sicke of Preaching, that not the best and most honest Divine c^^ scape malignant tongues: and rather than the ungodly will be saved, their very exceptions against the Preachers, shall be their colour for going on in the wayes of hell. Men sucke their milke, like Mules; and then kicke them with their hee^^s. Cominaeus sayes, he that would be a Kings Favourite, must not have an hard name; that so hee may easily be remembred when preferments are a dealing. It seem^s that Preachers have hard names, for few remember them, in the point of honour or benefite. The world regards them, as poore folkes doe their children: they would bee loth to have any more, because they are troubled to maintaine them they have. In Ieroboams time, the lowest of the people were made Priests, and now Priests are made the lowest of the people. A Lay-man, like a Mathematicall line, runnes on ad infinitum: onely the Preacher is bound to his Competencie; thus much, and no more. Never let him be rich, lest hee be too
 bold, and tell us home of our faults. If he stoope not at the Pulpit-doore, to take measure of the peoples feet, let him fast when he comes downe; they will soone shorten his commons. Therefore, the Gentry to the Court, and the Countrey to the Cart, and the Vniversitie is universally despised. We aske not Secular honours, and eminent places: the Minister, like the Fig-tree, will notIudg. 9.11. lose his sweetnesse to be preferred over the trees. Onely, finde wee honour in your consciences: we are ambitious of no preferment, but to be instruments of your salvation.1 Thess. 2.19. For what else is our hope, or joy, or crowne of rejoycing? Are not even ye in the presence of Iesus Christ at his comming? Yes, yee are our joy and glory.
3 That Noah faithfully executed this Calling, and continued Preaching an hundred yeares. In all which space, hee declared to men the future Iudgements of God, reproved their iniquities, perswaded them to repentance, and upon their amendment of life, prophetically assured them of mercie and forgivenesse. And this he performed, not onely by verball, but by actuall preaching: the very building of the Arke daily preached to the world. So that both in his doctrinall instructions, and exemplary life, he was a Preacher of Righteousnesse. Such is a Ministers office; (...), and (...): as they deliver their Sermons, with what brevitie they can, and with what fidelitie they ought: so to order their conversation, that their societie may delight the good, and their very absence convince the lewd. CHRIST gave Peter a three-fold charge of Feeding: and those three kindes are distinguished into Precept, Patterne, and Beneficence. Wee doe Pascere verbo, wee should Pascere Exemplo, wee are not able Pascere Subsidio. Wee are faineEsay 4.1. to eate our owne bread, and weare our owne apparell, onely wee desire to live with you: wee spend our owne meanes, onely let us Preach to you.
What Solon told Croesus, Of one of the happiest men living; Pauper and justus, in tuguriolo, etc. sic mortuus: Is true of the Preacher; no notice taken of him. They are truely called Ministers or Servants; not onely CHRISTS servants, but even yours for CHRISTS sake. One of their titles is Diaco^os, a Minister of speedie labour: as a Page runnes by his Lord, or as Eliah girded up himselfe and ranne by Ahab; like Ahimaaz, so fast that you cannot see him for the dust. Hee is indeed a Minister, for he doth not worke for himselfe, but for another. But as hee is a Servant, so hee hath some speciall place in the house among the servants of God.Luke 12.42. A faithfull and wise Steward, whom his LORD maketh Ruler over his houshold, to give them their portion of meat in due season. He is a servant, but none of the inferiour; a Steward. He hath a pettie dominion over the rest of the family, his Lord hath made him a Ruler. This is for his Dignity: Now for his Duty. First, he must give meat to all the servants; young and old, rich and poore, weake and strong. Secondly, In due season, that is, when their ^ppetites call for it: yea, he must not evermore stay till they desire it. Thirdly, Pro^rtis manibus, he must doe it with his owne hands: he is but a Deputy, and therefore must not alwayes doe it by a Deputy. Yet the Lord doth, and the people must, al^ow him some vacation. He is an ill fisher, that never mends his net, a bad mower, ^hat never whets his sithe. Yet such is the madnesse of the multitude, that they thinke ^is body to be of iron, and his spirit of Angelicall nature; that he can preach as easi^y and often as they would have him. And are in an hot anger, with Saul, who because David would not come at him, lying sicke;1 Sam. 19.15. Bring him, saith he, to me in the ^ed, that I may slay him. Such is their pity to the Minister; Bring him, though he ye sicke on his bed; spare him not, though his heat and heart be spent. Yea, would (...) please God that our lives were made such a sacrifice, so they might be instruments ^f his glory, and your salvation
4 That he had not such happie successe of his Preaching, as his owne, soule de^ired, and he might in reason have expected. A man may be lawfully called by God ^nd his Church, and yet not turne many soules. Let him never so plainly denounce
 the Iudgement of God against sinners, tell them that the Arke was made to preserve beleevers, when all out of it should be drowned: though he wrought that with his hand, which he taught with his tongue; yet still they beleeved not. Appeares it not strange, that in an hundred and twenty yeares he should not convert one: not onely of the wicked race, but not one of the righteous seed? O, it is the Lord onely that speaks to the conscience! He is that flexanimous Preacher, whose Pulpit is in heaven. Christ is the Physitian, wee are the Apothecaries: and as wee doe not put into the compound one dramme more than his prescript and allowance: so we cannot c^^^ one soule, but He must doe it.Hebr. 5.9. He is the Authour of eternall salvation to all that ^hey him. We have no power of our selves, to move an heart: Non omnis qui dicta ^^da, and audita credit, continuo illa faciendo obtemperat: God makes a Minister to have more sorrow in bringing forth a Christian unto the world to come;Iohn 16.21. than a woman hath in her travell of bringing forth a childe into this world.Gal. 4.19. My little children, of whom I travaile in birth againe, till Christ be formed in you. Who can expresse the throbs and throwes he endures? they are only knowne to the anguish of his owne sensible heart. Yet after all paines, he is glad at last that the childe of grace is borne: this so sweetens all, that he forgets his sorrow. Thus like Iacob, he catcheth a mai^e, but a Blessing withall. But alas! It isEsay 37.3. brought unto the birth, and there is no strength to bring forth.
If they came to Noah while he was building the Arke, and demanded of him, as the Iewes did of the Prophet; Wilt thou not tell us what these things meane? Loe, the voice of his tongue interpreted the worke of his hand, and the worke of his hand expounded the voice of his tongue; yet they repented not. When God is pleased to convert, he can doe it by the weakest meanes. For illumination of the minde, he often lights a great lampe of the Sanctuary by a little wex-candle; as he did Paul by Ananias. And for moving affections, he often by a puffe of wind, stirres up the waves of the Ocean-sea. In the meanest booke, a deepe judgement shall finde somewhat it hath not formerly seene; though it see not all it hath formerly found. Deus non est parvus in parvo: God is not straitned according to the smalnesse of the organ.August. And when he with-holds his contemned grace, Paul himselfe cannot move a soule.Es^y 6.10. and 49.4. Ezek. 3.7. Act. 28.24. 2 Cor. 12.21. Chap. 2.15. I know that nothing is more discomfortable to a good Minister, than this, yet hath it beene the lot of many holy Prophets. This is fearefull; when Preachers sent for mens salvation, shall become meanes of their deeper confusion. There is nothing so humbles and abaseth them as this: but whether in them that are saved, or (...) them that perish, we are still unto God a sweet savour of Christ.
It is the measure, not the successe, that God lookes to: our reward shall be according to our workes, not according to the fruit of our workes. Which is our comfort; though we cannot convert men, yet we have laboured their conversion: and our labour (how ever fruitlesse among men)1 Cor. 15.58. shall never bee in vaine with the Lord. Saint Paul doth not say, Plus profui omnibus, sed plus laboravi omnibus: Not, I did more good than the rest;Vers. but, I tooke more paines than the rest; I laboured more abundantly than they all. If we should have no reward but according to the number of the soules we have turned, woe were us! For mens hearts are so yoked with their owne wilfulnesse, that they will beleeve no Preacher in the world further th^^ their owne fancies. But this must not discourage us; it is enough that we would ha^^ cured Babel, though she would not be cured: and2 Cor. 4.3. If our Gospell be hid, it is hid to th^^ that are lost. If the Lord should examine us, what soule we have converted, where should we point him?1 Tim. 6.17. Charge them that be rich, etc. It was Gods charge to P^^l, and Pauls to Timothy, and Timothies to the people. Command implies obedience, but we may command and goe without. We have the keyes, and they doe not ru^^ upon our hands; but the power is lost in the peopl^ hearts. Men have pick-lock^^ of their owne forging; Presumption and Security: with these they can open heavengates, albeit double-locked by our censures. The Father could have brought o^ the best Robe himselfe, or sent his Sonne into the Wardrobe: but he commands h^^
 servants, Proferte stolam;Luk. 15.22. Bring forth the Robe, and put it on him. Wherein he did grace the meanes, and bring that into credite: the Lord will have his sonnes beholding to his servants for their glory. It is a bold truth; you shall never weare that ^long garment of honour, unlesse it be brought and put on by the Minister. He that can save you without us, will not save you but by us. If our words have lost the power in men, they have lost their right of heaven. But though we cannot save you, yet our desire to doe it, shall save us. We give God what we have, he desires no more: this is enough to honour him, and crowne us.
This should teach all, with faith and feare to submit themselves to the power of Gods word; lest every Sermon become one day a bill of inditement against ^hem. There is no dallying with it; if it cannot save, it kills; like fire, what it may not soften, it will harden. This is enough to make the wicked tremble: who have gone away from so many feasts with hungry soules; heard so much, and practised so little. As every good turne aggravates the unthankefull mans plague: so ^very good instruction enhanceth the reprobates torment. O now let us redeeme the time, heare to learne, learne to doe, and doe to live for ever.
5 Lastly, observe that so long as Noah preached, the world was warned. God needed not to have given them any warning of his Iudgements, they gave him no warning of their sinnes, no respite. Yet, that he might approve his mercie even to ^hose, upon whom he meant to glorifie his Iustice; he gives them long warning, that ^hey might have space enough of repenting. O how loth is he to strike, that threa^ens so long before he executes! He that takes pleasure in revenge, suddenly surpri^eth his adversary, and apprehends the speediest advantage: but the Lord is pleased they should be often warned, to shew how willing he is to be prevented. God is so ^acient, that if sinners were not desperate, they should never smart. He doth first ^ummon a parlee,Deut. 20.10. proclaime peace, hang out his white colours of pitie; before the ^ed streamers of bloud be seene. He useth the commination of hell, as well as the promise of heaven: and both equally commend his goodnesse. The sharpenesse of ^he one, and sweetnesse of the other, working together like Oile and Wine; make men wise to salvation. Niniveh had not stood, if the Prophet had forborne to say, It shall not stand. The message of their overthrow, overthrew the message: the prophecie fell, and the Citie fell not, because her fal was prophecied. The denuntiation of death wrought life: the sentence of destruction made a nullitie in the sentence. They ^eard that their houses should fall; and they forsooke not their houses but them^elves: and both themselves and their houses stood.
Thus let us take the warnings of death, and turne them into inspirations of ^ife. When it is threatned, we shall die in our sinnes: let this make us live to righ^eousnesse. If the summons of vengeance shall waken us to repentance, we shall no ^ooner change our minds, but God will change his sentence. If a mature and reverent consideration of those fearefull judgements, plagues, death, dearth, hell, terrors of conscience, can truly humble us: we shall heare an Angell sing, Grace, mercie, ^nd peace, favour and eternall blessednesse in heaven to us. God deales not with us, ^s one did with Diogenes; who first broke his head, and then bad him take heed: ^ut he beats his drumme, before he drawes his sword. He does not as the Canon, first kill, and then make the report. But admonisheth usRevel. 2.5. to repent, or else he will come against us.
There is not a soule among us, but hath beene often warned: happy they, that can find this assurance in their soules that they have repented. Let not God continu^lly loose his labour: would we have him doe nothing but premonish us? we are ^ound to take hold of every caution, to make use of all motions and monitions: he (...) not bound to follow us up and downe with unregarded sollicitings. Semel monitus ^hould be Semper munitus. As1 King. 2.41. Salomon to Shimei, did not I forbid thee to goe o^er Kidron on paine of death? so God hath warned us to keepe home, confined us to ^erusalem, the Citie of obedience: if we passe the brooke Kedron, the limits he hath
 set us, to seeke our stragling servants, riches or pleasures, as did Shimei: he may justly punish us, and answere all our expostulations; Did I not give you warning? This seemed to be the rich mans care in hell, for his brethren on earth; that one might bee sent from the deadLuk. 16.28. to give them warning. Wee have warnings every way; LORD, let some of thy admonitions bring us to repentance; let thy commandement worke us to amendment: that hearing what thou teachest, fearing what thou threatnest, and beleeving what thou promisest; wee may find thy eternall mercies.
And saved Noah.] Gods Iudgements are never so universall, but some he spareth. Though Israel be reduced to a Tenth, yet God will not loose his Tythe. Though they be as the scattering grapes after the vintage, yet destruction shall lea^^ here and there a berry. Though he have few names in Sardi, yet he hath some. In every losse that Iob had, one still escaped to bring him newes. Noah findes grace, whe^ the world found perdition. Nec enim convenit mortuum mundo, perire cum m^^do: he that was dead to the world, shall not die with the world: as he consented not to their sinne, so he partooke not of their punishment. No streames of water shall drowne him, whom the deluge of sin hath not overwhelmed. Now because the Lord hath set him forth as a precedent to aftertimes: that he who will scape as Noah did, must be such a one as Noah was: let us contemplate his Righteousnesse in these foure passages. The warrant of his practise, His faith in this warrant, The perfection of this faith, The issue, event or successe of all.
1 The warrant or ground of his obedience, was the word of God.Hebr. 11.7. He (...) warned of God of things not seene as yet. This revelation came not by a Prophet, we find none at that time, but Noahs selfe: but either by the ministerie of an Angell, o^ immediately from the Lord himselfe.Gen. 6.13. God said unto Noah, The end of all flesh i^ come before me. Thus doth he single out the righteous, and acquaint them with his owne counsells.Gen. 18.19. Shall I hide from Abraham the thing that I doe? The Sodomit^s lie sucking in the aire of securitie, but Abraham knew the neerenesse of their calamitie.Am 3.7. Surely the Lord will doe nothing, but he revealeth his secret to his servants the Prophets. Neither is this the prerogative of the Prophets only; butPs^^. 25.14. The secret of the Lord is with them that feare him, and he will shew them his covenant. We dote on nothing more than secrets; all are sicke of an Athenian humour: yet is there no secret which carnall desires affect, worth the knowing. Would we participate that Secret, which no affordment of nature, no mysterie of arte, no Secretary of state, to witte of Man, no cunning of Devill, can find? Let us feare God: this is the key to open those supernall and supernaturall secrets, which shall fill the heart with unexpressible, unexhaustible joy. Christ calls us more than servants;Ioh. 15.15. for the ser^^^ knoweth not what his Lord doth; even friends, because he hath made knowne to us the things of his Father. God makes all his friends of his Counsell, and communicates all things conducing to their blessednesse, as one friend imparts his mind to another.
Prov. 3.32.His secret is with the righteous: the just man shall be ignorant of nothing that concernes his salvation. But in our times there are no such revelations; therefore the state of the Church before Christ, seemes to be better than this? No; for albeit GOD doe not now reveale particular and personall events: yet the assurance of salvation, the comfort of remission, the very feeling of reconciliation; these he declares to us, which are infinitely sweeter. Why should I enquire,Ioh. 21.21. Lord wh^^ shall he doe? it is enough for me to know what shall become of my selfe. Besides, we are requited in the complete Scriptures, we have the substance of their shadowes the performance of their promises. How should this encourage us all to become Gods faithfull servants: for we serve not such a Lord as is strange and austere to us; one that will not give us a good looke, or a faire word. Yea, he is so far from denying us these favours, that he calls us to his holy counsell, makes knowen to us his secrets, and communicates himselfe to us by his blessed Spirit.

This is a sweet comfort, if we apply it: especially considering the different e^tate of the wicked; whoMatth. 13.13. seeing, cannot perceive; and hearing cannot understand: ^s Zebul mistooke armies of men for shadowes of mountaines.1 Cor. 2.14. The naturall man ^eceiveth not the things of the Spirit. Nature is not here the Schoole-master, but Grace: nor Athens the Schoole, but Ierusalem. They areMatth. 11.25. hid to the wise of the ^orld, and revealed to babes. It is revealed to us, that God is our Father, the Church ^ur mother, Christ our brother, the Holy Ghost our Comforter, Angels our at^endants, all other creatures our subjects, the whole world our Inne, and heaven ^ur everlasting home. That the joyes of the wicked doe scarce ever begin; and ^hen they doe, their end borders on their beginning: one houre sees them both ^erry, and miserable. But our pleasures are eternall, millions of yeares being not (...) minute to everlastingnesse, and this house of the world a meere cottage to heaven. ^hese things as God reveales, so we must seeke. When the Shunamite would needs ^oe to the Prophet, her husband questioned her;2 King. 4.23. Wherefore to day? it is neither ^^w Moone nor Sabbath. It seemes that at least on those dayes they consulted the ^rophets. O let not us neglect Gods clearer revealings in the Gospell nor be ^rangers to the businesse of our owne salvation.
2 His faith is this warrant: the things that God revealed, and he beleeved, were ^hese three. First, the great and just wrath of God against the sinfull world. This ^e sincerely preached, and this they scornefully derided. But as the franticke ^^ughes, when the Physician weepes, and knowes his end is neere: so the wicked con^mne the righteous, yet to them is knowne their miserable state. 2. That GOD ^ould save him and his familie, and this he beleeved, not only in the principall ob^^ct of faith, his salvation by the Messias: but even in the inferior and particular; ^is personall deliverance from this inundation. 3. The meanes of his preservation; ^y an Arke which himselfe must make: that every stroke might put him in mind of ^e gracious promise; and still as that was builded, his faith might be confirmed, ^^mb. Ibi Deus plus est auxilii, ubi plus est periculi.
This faith wrought in him a feare;Hebr. 11.7. Being moved with feare, he prepared the Arke. ^et carnall reason might object; What cause is there either to beleeve or feare? (...) The Iudgement was farre off, 120 yeares to come: and who would feare so re^ote a thing? 2. The world was full of wise and mighty men: they all heard of ^is, not one of them feared. Shall Noah being one single man, against all those ^ong examples, expose himselfe to derision by a needlesse feare? 3. The judge^ent was of such a nature, as it had no precedent: for would any man in common ^^ason thinke, that God would drowne all the world with water? That by water, (...) element so easily avoidable: and of such a quantitie and measure as to over^helme the whole world.
But loe here the invincible power of faith! it is fixed on Gods word, and ^ough heaven thunder, and earth shake, and hell roare; it will not be removed: ^ight of all contradictions Noah beleeves, that he shall be saved; why he above (...) the rest? even this he beleeved with feare.Psal. 130.4. With thee, O Lord, is mercie, that ^ou mayest be feared. Even the mercie of a father, makes a reverent sonne. He ^ight say with David; Lord, thou hast spoken good concerning me and my house, ^or a great while to come. What am I, and what is my house,2 Sam. 7.19. that thou hast done thus ^r me? That the Lord hath led us out of spirituall Aegypt, first by a child, then by woman, saved us in the deluge of superstition; gives us just cause to say; What ar^ (...) what are our people, that he should be so favourable to us?
It was strange enough, that God would take so weake an element as water, to ^owne those mightie Gyants. Strange enough, that he would save Noah by an ^^ke: why not take him up into heaven, as Enoch: or build him a house on the top (...) some promontory? By an Arke? alas, what safetie is here? may not the tem^sts cast it on the hard rockes, or dash it upon the Gyants castles, and breake it in ^^ces? No, Noah must lye and swimme on the waters, and yet the Arke must save
 him from the waters. Thus shall he be safe in the sight of dying sinners: when they are expecting death on the tops of the mountaines, they beheld him secure to their greater vexation. As the paines of hell are aggravated upon the damned, by se^ing their once despised brethren in the joyes of heaven. When the rich that have (...) away from the poore in coaches, shall see the poore carried from them by Angel^. All this God delivered, Noah beleeved and feared.
Let this teach us to beleeve Gods judgements, and feare them.Psal. 119.120 My flesh tr^^bleth for feare of thee, and I am afraid of thy judgments. God foretold of a flo^^ and Noah looked for it a 120 yeares after. There is no man living, but within lesse than 120 yeares he is sure to die, and to be in danger of a floud of wrath: for Q^^ les egredimur, tales praesentamur and Dilatio proves often Dilatatio supplicii: the def^ring of punishment, is the enlarging of punishment. Yet who trembles at it? who sends this holy feare to his heart, that his heart may send forth prayers for mercie? If men cry, fire, fire; we stirre, run, tremble: but let the fire of Gods wrath, and the fire of hell, be cryed; we move not, care not, feare not: as if this were a thing quite unconcerning us. And as the fantasticall musician was so transported with (...) owne raptures; that when the people cryed to him, that his house was on fire: he returned them no other answere, but that either they should hold their peace, or cry in tune. So when Preachers forewarne men of these judgements, they thinke that we are quite out of tune.
There is no Iudgement comes, but Naturians will find out other causes for it, than God. Ill weather is from the clouds, famines from ill weather, plagues f^^^ famines, or ill aires, or by apparant infection from other places: as if they con^^ded, as that scoffer subcribed on Adrians Colledge; Deus hic nihil fecit; God h^^^ here nothing to doe. But cannot nature have her place, unlesse she have Gods pla^^ He overthrowes not naturall meanes, why should naturall meanes overthrow him? Shall wee give the Souldiers honour to his sword? Certainely, if men beleeve^ God, they could not thinke, nor speake, nor looke upon his workes, but with reverence.
And as our feare of God is, so is our faith: little feare, little faith: no feare at al^ no faith at all. Iudgement may be threatned; but the stubborne souldier Mari^^ will not heare the lawes for the clattering of armour. The great things of the L^^ are drowned in some clamor; Satan that cunning silver-smith, raising an uprore mo^^ agreeable to mens humours; Great is Diana. The scriekings of Moloch, and the pitifull lamentation of burning infants, were not heard, because they deaffed themselves with the instruments of musicke. After the massacre of many Christian vertues, steps in conscience, in the phrase of Iobs messenger; I am alone escaped to (...) thee. We like not the message, and imprison the bringer: and if the subsidiary gra^^ of God come to succour and relieve this crying and dying conscience; men fl^^^y to stupefie their owne hearts.Esa. 37.3. Thus the children are come to the birth, and there is (...) strength to bring forth. Strength enough, but it is to strangle the birth, not to bri^^ it forth. The midwives of Aegypt feared God, and preserved the children alive but the still-borne motions of Gods Spirit may often testifie to our faces, that w^ are bloudy mid-wives. The frownes of men we feare, as duckes use to doppe at every stone throwen into the water: we feare an Ague, an enemie, a danger; yet (...) the Lord, who commands all these. Let us feare God more, and we shall fe^^^ all other things lesse: if could turne all our feare into the feare of God, we sho^^ then turne all our workes unto the praise of God: and he will honour them, (...) honour him.
3 The integrity of his faith; for this he is said to be Righteous;Gen. 6.9. A just (...) and perfect in his generations. Not in respect of Gods Iustice,Rom. 3.23. For all h^ve (...) and come short of the glory of God: And,Psal. 130.3. If he marke iniquity, who shall stand? N^^ in respect of thatPhil. 3.12. perfection which is appropriated to the Saints in heaven: (...) no mortall man hath attained. Nor yet so perfect, that he was without sinne:Eccl. 7.20. F^^
 there is not a just man upon the earth, that doth good, and sinneth not. Nor for super ero^^ting, and going beyond his duty: in not onely obeying the Legall Rules, but also (...) observing the Evangelicall Councels; as say the Rhemists. But either Compara^^e, compared with others: therefore it is added, In his generations. Or, Inchoative, ^hich rather consists in the desire of perfection, than in the perfection of his desires. ^r, Reputative, so esteemed; because he was without scandall to the world: But ^pecially Imputative, by way of imputation:Gon. 6.8. Hee found grace in the eyes of the ^^rd: and this is the perfection of faith, which cloathes the person with the Righ^^^snesse of Christ.
There is a legall perfection, such as was in Adam, is in Christ: none are thus ^^rfect.Iob 9.21. Though I were perfect, yet would I despise my selfe; saith Iob.1 Cor. 4 4. Though know nothing by my selfe, yet am I not thereby justified, saith Paul. They durst not ^^st themselves upon Gods Iudgement. There is also an Evangelicall perfection, ^d this is two-fold. It consists partly in the apprehension of Christs righteous^^sse, which is our Iustification: partly in the holinesse of life, which is our Sancti^^cation. The former is absolutely perfect, for our Iustification admits no latitude: ^e latter is not so, for Sanctification is perfected by degrees: and is here but parti^^l, as in a childe are all the parts of a man, though it want growth, stature, and ma^^ritie. The difference is not in the truth of being, but in the measure, degree, and ^^antity. There is Perfectio Conformitatis, to be perfect in all points; so are none ^re below. And Perfectio Synceritatis; to be perfect in all good endevour, and in ^^ne good measure. Vltra posse viri non vult res ulla requiri: Man is indeed bound (...) keepe all the Law, (and all those for whom Christ did not fulfill it, shall have it ^^^filled on themselves in the penalty) and that for good reason. A man in a rich ^ate borrowes a summe of money; he is then able to repay it: but afterwards by (...) riotous living he growes unable; now shall his present and wilfully contracted ^verty excuse his non payment? Adam was of sufficient strength to keepe the Law: ^he would forfet that grace and naturall sufficiencie, shall his selfe-incurred weake^^sse excuse his disobedience?
Perfection, now, consists not in a justifiable goodnesse of our owne: and that ^e can attaine, is not in lectione, sed in dilectione; not in great learning, but good ^ing. Paul was perfect Expectatione muneris, imperfect Fatigatione certaminis. It is ^d of Chrysostome; Nihil finivit praeter peccatum; He perfected nothing but the mor^cation of sinne. The Inner man may be perfect, not the whole: but then here is (...) comfort; Quod sit, accipitur: quod non sit, ignoscitur: What we have,August. is accep^: what we have not, is pardoned. Pulchrum est Index sui and obliqui: That which ^erfect, both justifies it selfe, and shames all imperfection. He that will be per^^^t, must have understanding, quid agendum, what to doe: Will, quomodo agendum, ^w to doe it: Memory, quando agendum, when to doe it. Thus is a Christian per^^ct: First, in purpose of heart, as Abraham is said to offer up his sonne Isaac, because (...) had a minde and resolution to doe it. Secondly, in Inchoation;1 King. 6.1. Salomon began ^uild the house of the Lord; The originall is, He built; The beginning is called the ^^^formance. Thirdly, in comparison, weighed with the condition of others: as ^^v. 11 3. where Integritie is opposed to Perversenesse: Walke before me, and be per^, saith the Lord. The way to be perfect, is to walke before God. It was Heze^^s comfort;Esay 38.3. I have walked before thee in truth. Looke that the inside be not rot^ this is the way to have a perfect heart.
Now because Noahs faith was the thing, that wrapped up his soule in the favour God; the ground of all his perfection and righteousnesse, the vertue whereby he ^d, when all the world was drowned: how precious should this Iewell be to us, ^hout which we can neither live in this valley of teares, nor escape in the day of ^nes! There is no life but in the Sonne, and he that hath the Sonne hath life, and he ^t hath faith, hath the Sonne. Iustus ex fide vivet: Faith like Eve, Mater omnium ^entium, is the Mother of all that live. God himselfe is content to divide his
 praises with Faith: whereas the can doe nothing but by him, she shall doe any thin^ with him. She can worke wonders:Hebr. 11.33. Subduing kingdomes, strangling Lions, ^ching violent fires, with handfuls conquering huge armies, dividing seas, turning (...) streames, yea, commanding mountaines to remove, overcomming the world; (...) call you these but wonders? Such wonders can faith doe. Yea, God is plea^^^^ doe nothing for us without her, that doth all things of himselfe. True faith is (...) lesse than miraculous in the sphere of her activity, and with the warrant of G^^ truth. It is no Praemunire, nor offence to Gods Crowne and Dignity, to say, It is (...) owne arme to the saving of men. There is a kind of omnipotencie in Faith; w^^ it shall say to the Sunne and Moone, Stand still, and be obeyed. But as Christ co^^^ doe no miracle in Capernaum, because they had no faith: so where men want faith (...) must be a miracle, yea, beyond a miracle, if they be saved. I know it is easie to (...) I beleeve: there is a titular faith, but it shall never save any, untill saying Be fi^^^ gives a man his dinner: or Be warmed, makes him hot. But he that can beleeve, wi^^ Noah, in a storme of indignation, in a deluge of destruction, when the arrowes (...) vengeance flie about, and the Lord raineth coales of fire like haile-stones; in ^^^ming trials, and strongest temptations: then to beleeve, shall bring a glori^^^ Crowne in the day of Iesus Christ.
4 The event or successe of all; which was Noahs building of the Arke. G^^ that decreed to save him, ordained also the meanes of his preservation. Now (...) end of building it was double; one for the further conviction of the world, (...) other for the saving of him and his family. For the world, the Lord did not (...) give them time, but a faithfull and righteous Teacher. It is happie for him that ^^^cheth others, to be himselfe righteous. It is absurd in him that flammers, to tre^^ others to speake plaine. Great learning and good living, are a faire couple, a (...) match, it is pitie to part them. Let the mountaines of learning so preach, that the little hils and valleyes may receive benefit.
Noahs hand taught them, no lesse than his tongue: his businesse in building th^ Arke, was a reall Sermon to the world. For this cause God set him a building ^^score yeares before the Floud: why so, when hee might have done it in three (...) foure yeares? But because the Lord would give them space to repent, every stro^^ on the Arke for all that long time, being a lowd Sermon of repentance to the^1 Cor. 6.2. Thus doe the Saints judge the world, not only by their faith, but by their fact: (...) examples of holy men, are bills of indictment against the wicked. Thus the N^^vites are said to Iudge the unrepentant Iewes; and the Queene of Sheba those un^^leeving children of Abraham. Noah being told of a miraculous thing, and bele^ving it: being commanded an unreasonable thing, and obeying it: condemnes (...) them, that will not beleeve Gods ordinary promises, nor obey his knowne prece^^ Malos mores mundi si pietas nostra non superabit convertendo, superabit convinc^^ Many despise those that sincerely professe Christ: but their sincere profession (...) be the despisers condemnation.
Haply those monstrous sonnes of Lamech came to Noah, and asked him (...) he intended by that strange worke; whether he meant to saile upon the dry (...) To whom he relates Gods purpose, and his owne: they goe laughing away at (...) idlenesse, and tell one another in sport, that too much holinesse hath made him (...) that in stead of a Palace, he was building a prison; and because other men deligh^^ in Castles of stone, he (to be crosse to the world) would have an house of wo^^ Yet cannot all this flout Noah out of his faith: still he preaches, and builds, and ^nishes. And when all they, like ghastly wretches, lay sprawling on the merc^le^^ waves, he lyes safe at the anchor of hope and peace. The faith of the righteous c^^not be so much derided, as their successe is magnified. How securely doth he (...) out of this universall uprore, of heavens earth, waters, elements! He heares (...) powring downe of the raine above his head: the shriking of men, women, and c^^^dren, roaring and bellowing of beasts on every side: the rage of the waves (...)
 him: he saw the miserable shifts of the distressed unbeleevers. And now in the ^idst of all sits quietly in his dry cabbin, not feeling evill. Hee knew that the ^reat master of the world, whose judgements now overflowed the earth, would ^eere him in these deepe waters: and that the same hand which shut him up, would ^reserve him.
Let me here againe commend to you the blessednesse of faith: what a sweete ^ecuritie and heavenly peace doth it worke in the soule, in the midst of all the inundations of evills! This is the Adamant which nothing will break: the palme that ^^okes not under the waightiest burden: the oile that ever over swimmes the g^ ^est quantitie of water can be powred on it: the sheate anchor that holds when all ^^^er ^acklings breake. The day of fire shall be more terrible and universall, t^^^ was ^he day of water: this defaced earth that shall melt the heavens. Yet stil^ ^aith ^inds an Arke, not of cumbustible wood, but of indissolvable strength: it is the ope^ed side of Iesus Christ. There, when the earth is burning under her, heaven a^ove her, the elements about her, reprobates scrieking beside her, death and hell ^rembling below her: she shall find assurance and peace, and at last be metamorpho^ed into ths blessed vision, and eternall fruition of such joyes, to which his mercie ^ring us, that they then maybe knowen unto us. Amen.
And saved Noah the eight person.]Psal. 121.^. Aug.I will lift up mine eyes unto the hills, from whence ^ommeth my helpe. De montibus, non a montibus: from the mountaines, not of the ^ountaines, but of the Lord which hath made heaven and earth. While the Iustice of God was decreeing confusion to the world, his mercie was contriving a safetie for his servant. And as his majestie was glorious in so weake an element for the ^uine: so was his mercie, in so weake an instrument for the preservation. Here was omnipotencie in both: he speakes to the creatures; clouds make raine, and let that ^aine make a floud, and let that floud drowne the world. He speakes to Noah, make ^hee an Arke, and I will make that Arke save thee: doe thou as I bid thee, and I will doe as I promised thee.
Generally two things occurre to our consideration: the Building of the Arke, ^nd the Preservation by it: the vessell it selfe, and the Fraught. For the former, my ^urpose is not to declare the matter, measure, proportion, or fashion of the Arke: ^ut to borrow so much of the story as is pertinent and instructive to us. This summarily consists in two things; Noahs tryall, and Gods Disposall. For his tryall, God ^n building the Arke did exercise three vertues in him; his Patience, his Confidence, ^nd his obedience: let us consider them.
For his patience: why did God set him about it an hundred and twenty yeares, when a small time might have finished it? This was for the tryall of his patience. Thus he led the Israelites in the deserts of Arabia fortie yeares: whereas a man may ^ravell from Ramesis in Aegypt to any part of Canaan in forty dayes. This God did toDeut. 8.^. prove them, that he might know what was in their heart. He promised Abraham a Son in whom he should be blessed: this he performed not of thirty yeares after. He gave David the kingdome, and annointed him by Samuel: yet was he not possessed of it in many yeares; an so much that he said,Psal. 119.82. Mine eyes faile for thy word. Ioseph hath a promise that the Sun and Moone should doe him reverence; but first he must lie bound in the dungeon. This God doth to trie us, for in these exigents we shew our selves and our dispositions. Thus did he leave2 Chron. 32.31. Hezekiah in the businesse of Babylon, to know his heart. When he had made such a probation of Abraham, ^n the sacrifice of his Sonne, he concluded,Gen. 22.2^. Nunc ego scio, now I know that thou fea^est God. Did not God know before? Yes, he knowes the very thoughts of men: ^t is not for his instruction, but ours. The Lord knowes all, but thus he would have ^s to know our owne hearts.Ier. 17.9. The heart of man is deceitfull above all things. The worldling knowes his owne house, his owne horse, his owne garment, he knowes ^ot his owne heart.Iob 9.2^ Non novi animam meam, saith Iob: though I were perfect, yet I
 know not mine own soule. Ab occultis munda me Domine.Psal. 19.12. Clense thou me from my secret faults.Luk. 9.55. Ne scitis, Yee know not of what spirit you are; saith CHRIST even to h^^ Apostles.
We know not what patience we have, what courage, what zeale, till we be p^^ to't. A man is that he is, when he is tempted. Some presume more than they c^^; so did Peter, Though I should die with thee, I will not deny thee: alas, he knew not his owne weakenesse. Others doubt of that they can, as Naaman; God be mercifull to me when I come into the house of Rimmon: here I can serve God constantly, but when I waite on my master to the Idolatrous Temple, what shall I doe then? Lord (...) mercifull to me in this. Goe in peace, saith the Prophet: God will strengthen thee. E^^ry Cocke-boate can swim in a river, every sculler saile in a calme: every man of a patient temper or cheerly disposition, can hold up his head in ordinary gusts. But when a blacke storme rises, a tenth wave flowes, deepe calls unto deepe, nature yields, spi^^t faints, heart failes; here is the tryall, how dost thou now? Accedit tentatio, quasi ^^terrogatio.Aug. When our hopes are adjourned, our expectation delaied, and instead of pleasing contents, we find bitter sorrowes; this will discover our hearts. If th^^ faith prevaile above sense, and hope against all naturall reason and feare; our grac^^ shall shine like orient Pearles, in true and perfect beautie. After all the prorog^^ons of promised ease, still to stand erect and triumph: here is the assurance of faith, that hath the word for compasse, CHRIST at the helme, and the voyage is salvation.
For his confidence; many obstacles might seeme to stop him in the course of his proceeding, and to keepe him from attempting this strange edifice. 1. The great quantitie of the Arke, amounting to many thousand cubites: a worke of great labour, and no small charges. If this had beene imposed on the sluggard; what shall I spend all my dayes in building? As Florus, an idle fellow, would evenmore say, Ego nolo Caesar esse, I would not be Caesar, alwaies marching in armour: to whom Caesar replied, Et ego nolo Foru^lesse, I would not be Florus, alwayes drinking in a Taverne. Or on the covetous; he would have answered, It is too chargeable: shall I exhaust my estate to set up a fantasticall house? he will not doe it, to have a house in heaven. 2. The length of his labour, it was to have lasted sixe score yeares: now it is tedious to mans nature, to be alwaies doing, and never to have done. 3. The Building of it was a matter of mockerie to the world: for it signified to the rebellious destruction, to himselfe preservation.
Now that either the world could possibly be drowned, or that hee should separably be saved; this they laughed at.
Lastly, it was a thing most harsh to naturall reason. 1. It had no precedent; and to credite new and strange things, requires a new and strange faith. 2. It seemed no^ likely, that Gods mercie should be so wholly swallowed up of his Iustice. 3. To live in the Arke, as in a close prison, without light, without fresh aire, and comf^^^ of libertie; among beasts of all sorts, and that he knew not how long! Rea^^^ might say, it is better to die with men, than to live with beasts: better to die a f^^^ man, than to live a prisoner: better to die with company, than to live alone. Th^^ if God had purposed to save him, he could have devised meanes more direct, (...) easie, more safe than this: therefore his deliverance was to be doubted of. Thus i^deed, he might make himselfe a derision and ridiculous story of the world, all this while: and if the wicked should alter their practise, God would alter his purpose, and so there would be no floud. If there were, yet the Arke might dash against the mountaines, and so he perish with the rest: and then he might with the same succ^sse have saved all this labour: therefore the best course is to let all alone, and to take my venture with the world.
All these had beene strong perswasions in a naturall man: but Faith dissolv^^ these impediments, as the Sunne doth deawes: with resolute courage it break^^ thorow all difficulties, and flies over these carnall objections with celestiall wings.
 As Abraham begat Isaac, so faith begets Hope: and as Isaac begat Iacob, so Hope begets obedience: he beleeves, hopes, and buildes. It is grounded on the knowledge of Gods nature; Scientia is the roote of faith. Presumption ariseth from the ignorance of Gods nature; that he is just: desperation from the ignorance of his nature; that he is mercifull. Some are of the error, that God will not be so cruell as to damne his creature, but he will not bee so kind to the wicked, as to bee unjust to himselfe.
Let this teach us to fortifie our faith: doctrines that are plausible to our naturall affections, we can formally obey: but that which is above our reason, beyond our apprehension, or against our disposition; we call that into question. The Scripture saith, that Christ is in the Sacrament really exhibited to the soule of a Christian: carnall senses deny this, reason askes with the Capernaites, Will he give us his flesh to eate? faith beleeveth this, and the soule findeth it with unspeakable comfort. God saith, that a poore good man is in better case than a rich sinner: reason and ocular experience deny it, but faith beleeves it, and feeles it. For never did the poorest child of God wish to change his estate with the wealthiest worldling upon earth. God saith, our bodies shall rise againe, how strange dissolutions, or how many alterations soever they suffer: this is a wonder to nature, an amasement to reason; but the faith of a Christian rests upon it, and the soule of a Christian shal have comfort in it.
3 For his Obedience: though Noah understood by direct revelation that he should bee saved, yet bee used the meanes, hee made an Arke. Hee might have said, GOD hath bound himselfe by covenant to preserve mee: his word is his word, and he will stand to it: let me labour or lie still, his will cannot be altered: though I bee false, hee will bee true: though I omit what belongs to me, hee will not forget what belongs to him, let mee therefore spare the paines of so much labour, cost, derision. No, Noah is of another mind: the promise of safetie, and the meanes of safetie, be to him inseparable: he dares not but beleeve that God will doe it, he dares not but use the meanes whereby he will doe it. The Pontificians thinke to flout us with our assurance of salvation: if we be sure of it, what need we then so trouble our selves about it? I answere, though we be sure of it, not only in the certaintie of faith, but, if it could be, by immediate revelation from God: yet still let us worke out our salvation with feare and trembling. If God should say to a man by his very name, Thou shalt be saved: it is no more than here was said to Noah for his temporall deliverance. Yet Noah concludes, If I make not the Arke, I am to looke for no preservation, this was Noahs Divinitie. And for those that thinke they know a shorter cut to heaven, let them take heed they be not cut short of heaven. If we be elected, no matter how we live; desperate presumption! Noah would not trust his mortall life upon those termes, and shall secure men thus venture their soules? No, God hath decreed the meanes unto the end, and hath promised the end unto the meanes: and those things which God hath joyned together, let no man put asunder.
Rebecca had Gods Oracle for Iacobs life; yet she sent him away out of Esau's reach. It was impossible for Herode to hurt the child Iesus, yet he must flie into Aegypt. The Lord hath promised his children supply of all good things; yet they must use the meanes of impetration; by Prayer.Psal. 50.15. Call upon me in the day of trouble. Voco te, ut invoces me.Psal. 147.9. He fee^s the young Ravens when they call upon him. He feeds the young Ravens, but first they call upon him, Deus non dat nifi petenti,Aug. ne det non cupienti. God withholds from them that aske not, lest he should give to them that desire not. David was confident, that by Gods power he should spring over a wall; yet not without putting his owne strength and agilitie to it. Pro quibus orandum,Aug. pro tis laborandum. Those things we pray for, (...) must worke for. The Carter in Isidore, when his cart was overthrowen, would needs have his god Hercules come downe from heaven, to helpe him up with it. But whilest he forbore to ^et his owne shoulder to it, his cart lay still. Abraham was as rich as any of our Aldermen,
 David as valiant as any of our Gentlemen, Salomon as wise as any of our deepest Naturians, Susanna as faire as any of our painted pieces. Yet none of the^ thought that their riches, valour, policie, beauty, or excellent parts could save them: but they stirred the sparkes of grace, and be stirred themselves in pious workes. And this is our meanes, if our meaning be to be saved.
Thus for Noahs triall, now for Gods disposall. And herein we must consider two things; His Direction, and Selection: he was both the Pilot of the Vessell, and the chuser of those should be in the Vessell.
For his Direction; the Vessell was great and huge; resembling a Ship, yet so unlike it, that it is called an Arke; capacious of all kinds of living creatures, with sufficient provision for them. This must float above the water, be laden with an heavie burden, without sterne to guide her, without anchor to stay her, without mast to poise her, without Master to governe her. Noah was an husband-man, a Preacher, but (without question) he had no skill to be a Sailer; the Art of Navigation being not then found out. Therefore this unweildy Vessell must in all reason, be cast upo^ hils and rocks, by the violence of tempests, and so split in peeces. No, but when heaven and earth seeme to conspire against it, it shall preserve him. How so? beca^^^ God himselfe was the Master and steeres-man of it, his providence was with it. It was indeed too vast a bulke to be governed by humane skill: therefore, when by ^o mans art it could be set a float, it was lifted up by the waters, and left to be guided; Non humana prudentia,August. sed Divina providentia.
As the Lord ordained it, so he directed and disposed it:Gen. 7.16. the Lord shut him i^. He himselfe shut the doore of the Arke upon Noah, and made it fast after him, that no waters might get in unto him. God was his Porter to shut him in, Keeper to preser^^ him, and great Master of the Vessell during that whole voyage. Such is his presence and providence over his children in all distresses. He forgets nothing that he hath made, but his speciall eye is over his Elect. As the master of a family hath an eye over meanest servant, yea, over his very cattell; but his care night and day is for ^is children. They are beset with no danger of water or fire, but there is one among them,Dan. 3.25. In the forme of the Sonne of God, to deliver them. When Israel was in so ha^^ a strait, as either to be drowned in the Sea, or slaine by the sword; how miraculously did God provide an evasion? When Noah was to enter the Arke, and to have the doore shut after him, here was an hard exigent. It was so large that Camels and Elephants might enter into it; therefore shut it himselfe he could not, or at least not sufficiently close it up against the waters. Nor would any of the world doe it for him, they did not owe him so much love and service, but rather laughed at his vaine endevours. Himselfe could not, others would not, the Lord with his owne hand that it for him. Being thus closed up, he was in danger to be throwen upon the rockes, having no anchor, no sterne, no Pilot: loe, God was all these unto him.
In the deepest destitution of all earthly comforts, so powerfull is his hand, so loving his eye, to those that serve him! Elisha had an hoast of men sent against him; How should one man escape from an whole armie?2 King. 6.17. His man cryed, the Master beleeved, the Lord protected. When men refuse to helpe Noah, the Angels are ready. When the whole world expected him to perish with themselves, then the Lord is his Pilot, and the last thing their eyes must see, is Noah safe.Ps^l. 27.1. The Lord is (...) light, and my salvation, whom shall I feare? David found God to be his Vice-Ad^^rall, and to carry the light before him, in the darkest stormes and most violent wa^^^ of his trouble. There is no calamity so potent as is our Deliverer. Therefore as the Legend moralizeth of St. Christopher, that he would serve none but the greatest that was, and still as he found one more powerfull, he would change his master: till a^ last from man to man, and from man to the Devill, hee came from the Devill to Christ, who was the strongest of all. So if any thing in the world, yea, the whole world were more potent than God, there was some colour for demurring upon o^^ choice. But seeing thatPsal. 135.6. He only doth what he pleaseth, in heaven, earth, sea, all pla^^:
 and what he will doe, all the rest must doe: and that his Majesty is not more infinite ^han his Mercy: that he is not so ready to strike the obstinate, as to spare the prostrate: Lord, let us love thee above all things that be, that thou mayest deliver us ^rom all things that be hurtfull.
In that the Lord was here Master and Pilot of the Arke, wee may observe the Antiquitie and dignitie of Marriners and Saylers. For antiquitie, it is as old as Noah, older than the second World The dignity is great; for God himselfe was the first Authour and first practiser of it. First Authour, for Noah made not this Arke of his owne head, but the Lord instructed him. First Practiser; for he performed all those offices unto Noah, else it had not saved him. This is one of those ^ew callings, which may say, God himselfe was the first deviser and exerciser of ^t: all Callings cannot say so. Why then doe Sea-farers forget that Master whom ^hey succeed? There is now no vocation so abased and abused as it is, lighting into the hands of the most lewd and licentious persons. No generation of men more notoriously dissolute! How little doe they remember that God made the first Ship, that he was the first Master, the first Marriner, the first Pilot of it; that their dispositions are so utterly unlike to his! The strange things of the Sea they behold; ^ut those monsters are rather their play-fellowes, than occasions of their feare and ^iety. Although their very sleepes be but so many reprievals of their dangers; and when they awake, they know not whether they shall ever sleepe againe, save in death; yet they are not mortified. There is nothing but extreme danger, or extreme hunger, can soften them. That tottering Vessell is more safe at Sea, than many of them ^are on Land: for that hath an Helme to guide her, but these have cast off not onely Religion, that makes them good men, but even reason that makes them men: and saving only on the Sea, they live without all Compasse. As their Ship on the water, so they on the Land;Psal. 107.27. Reele to and fro, and stagger like a drunken man.
One would thinke, that the terrours of the Ocean, the wonders of God in the deep,Vers. 26. should melt their very soule, and humble them. Where the winds domineere, and the waves roare, volvuntur ut aequora montes: where they lye, Digitis a morte remoti Qua^uor aut septem: Where no mercy is to be hoped. Qui nescit orare, discat navigare: Hee that hath not learned to pray, let him learne to faile. Yes, haply they will pray and crie too, while the tempest beats, cast up their eyes, and send their prayers to the offended heavens: but is not their pietie blowne over with their misery? Yes, the GOD of their Supplications, is on Land become the object of their blasphemies: and they seldome thinke of him, but when they borrow his Name to sweare by. The LORD is our preserver by Sea and Land, there be dangers enow in every place: therefore by Sea and Land, in every place, let us humbly serve, and confidently trust in him.
Thus for Gods direction and providence over this Vessell, we come to his election of the company for it. The whole world being his, and he absolute Lord of all, made choice according to his Divine and inscrutable pleasure. In the most generall Iudgements, those that feare God, find deliverance. When Sodome must be destroyed, Lot and his family are singled out: the Angels can doe nothing till he be safe. When Ierusalem must bleed, the Mourners are sealed to redemption. When the destroying Angell rides circuite in Aegypt, the doores sprinkled with the bloud of the Lambe are past over. The deluge of wrath will one day come, what shall we doe then? Sprinkle our hearts before-hand with the sacred bloud of the Lambe; then thousands shall fall on our left hand, and ten thousands beside us, and the Lord shall provide one way or other an Arke of safety and deliverance for us.
The number preserved, consisted both of reasonable and unreasonable creatures: of unreasonable, for mans sake; of reasonable, for Gods owne sake. First, let us looke upon his election in the accessary, the irrationall living creatures.
The Lord that would have feed kept alive on the earth, to ^^e into his preservation beasts both cleane and uncleane. Some were even at th^t timeGen. 7.2. Vncleane; for
 Moses wrote not this by anticipation, as respecting the time wherein he wrote, the Law having then distinguished them; but respecting the time when the Floud c^me. Certainly this difference was knowne to the Patriarkes by Divine revelation, and continued to their posterity by tradition: as was the use of Sacrifice, offering of Tithes, and observation of the Sabbath, before the Law. Now they were not V^cleane by their owne nature and creation, for God made all good; nor in respect of mans use only, some being more fit for food: but by Gods institution, some bei^g more fit for sacrifice, therefore called Cleane. Of the Cleane God chose Seven; of the Vncleane but Two: he would have the former to multiply, and replenish the e^^^^ by a speedy encrease; that man might have sustenance, and himselfe sacrifice. The other, he knew, would annoy them with their multitude: and albeit he would h^^^ the kinde of hurtfull beasts preserved, even for the punishment of sinfull ma^, for theEzek. 14.21. noysome beast is one of his foure great plagues: yet would he have their number abridged, that they might not grow too fast upon him. These would h^^^ him, the other enrich him: therefore the mercifull God provides most of them, whereof we have most use.
But why Seven? three male, three female, and the odde one for sacrifice? Not that we conclude with their Canon, that the double number is not good, because the V^cleane came in by two: and that Impar numerus est mundus, because the odde was f^r sacrifice. For this is false. First, because bothGen. 7.9. cleane and uncleane came in by paires and couples: how many, or how few soever, every male had his female. Secondly, they are not said to be uncleane for their Number, but for their kind. Thirdly, then Noah and his sonnes had beene uncleane, because they and their wives were into the Arke by couples. But Seven; that God, who created seven dayes in the weeke, and chose one of them for himselfe, did here preserve of Seven cleane beasts one for himselfe, for sacrifice. He gives us six for one in worldly things, in spirituall things let us give him all. Here are two things observable.
1 God is pleased that some noxious creatures should be reserved, for the correction and exercise of man. He hath use even of those fierce and cruell beasts, and glory by them. They being created for man, must live by him, though to his castigation and punishment. The Manichees object against Gods goodnesse, that he made many things pernicious, as some evill weeds and venemous serpents: and many things superfluous,August. whereof we have no use; how then were all Good? It is answered: First, God made nothing superfluous, though we know not the use thereof: as in an Artificers shop, wee being ignorant of the tooles and instruments, condemne them not, though by our medling they cut our fingers. Secondly, wee have no cause to complaine; for whether they be profitable, they doe us good: or superfluous, they doe us no hurt, if we let them alone. Thirdly, the harme of any creature ariseth from our selves; if man had not offended God, nothing should have offended him. Fourthly, they are not altogether fruitlesse, for even those things that are not fit for food, have their use for medicine. Venime it selfe well qualified, hath beene physicall to our recovery.Vsurpa utilia, fuge perniciosa, relinque superflua. August. Fiftly, even by those that are hurtfull, we are either corrected to humble us: or exercised, to trie us; or terrified to worke in (...) the feare of God. Therefore use the creatures commodious, beware the pernicious, forbeare those thou thinkest superfluous. In all things where our knowledge c^^^, let our admiration begin: though we cannot understand the creature, let us glorifie the Creator.
2 Though mans soveraigntie be abridged, yet he exerciseth still a Lords^ip over the creatures. Subjecisti pedibus ejus. For first, there is a naturall instinct (...) obedience in them, especially those that are for mans use, as oxe and horse. Though his authority extend not to the absolute command over those wilde and savage creatures, Lions and Tygers: yet the more necessary and serviceable ones stoope to (...) yoke. Secondly, Man sometime by his strength subdueth the fiercest beast, as Sampson the Lion, and David the Beare. And when strength faileth, his wit and
 policie often prevaileth.Iam. 3.7. Every kind of beasts, Birds, Serpents, sea-inhabitants, hath ^eene tamed of man kind. All other have beene tamed of man,Aug. himselfe is tamed of ^one but God. 3. Though this dominion be lost by Adam, it is restored by Christ.Iob 5.23. Thou shalt be at peace with the beasts of the field. But lastly and especially, ^his is done by the miraculous power of God: for besides the strange reports of ^lutarch and Herodotus, concerning their Hesiod and Arion, Evalus and the Virgin, ^orne upon Dolphins backes, and brought safe to shore: And Ierome relates, or some ^ne under his name; how a Christian being pursued by his heathen Master, fled in^o a Cave where was hid a Lionesse and her whelpes, which never harmed him: ^ut when the Pagan came in with his other servant, she devoured them both: we ^now that Daniel was preserved in the Lions den, Ionah in the belly of a fish, and the Viper had no power to hurt Paul. So here, the cruellest beasts come tame unto Noah: they offer and submit themselves to their preserver renewing that obedience ^o the repairer of the world, which before sinne they yielded to the first storer of ^he world. He that shut them into the Arke when they were entred, did also shut ^heir mouthes while they were entring. The fierce Lions fawne upon Noah and Da^iel: what heart cannot the Maker of them mollifie: Let us feare him that commands ^ll, and no created power shall be ever able to harme us.Luk. 12.7. Feare not, the very haires ^f your head be all numbred. Illi solliciti erant de animabus, Christ secures them de Capillis. ^ORD, we will feare no danger, so long as thou undertakest to be our Keeper. Now ^o him that keepeth us from evill, and evill from us; that keepeth heaven for us, and ^s for himselfe; be praise for ever.
In the next place, let us meditate further of Gods election, and the fraight of ^oules preserved in the Arke: Eight persons. It was a familie of foure men,Eight persons. and foure women: not men alone, nor women alone, but both, and consisting of as many women as men. The beginning of the first world, was by one man and one woman: of the second world, by foure men, and foure women; but alwaies equall. This ^s the fundamentall terme of all man kind, hence began the world: man was made of ^ust, the woman of his ribbe, the world of this woman. Woman takes her being ^rom man, man takes his well being from woman: therefore Eve was at the first ^reated a Wife: no sooner a woman, but presently a Wife: and the first voca^ion of man was Maritari, to bee an husband. Mulier propter virum; there^ore the Hebrewes have a proverbe; Cui non est uxor, is non est vir. And for ^oman, as at first shee tooke her essence, so she takes the perfection of her essence ^rom man.
But to reduce the manifold observations here offering themselves, unto some ^ead; we must consider two things; the Qualitie of the persons, and the Quantitie of ^he number. For qualitie of the persons, they were all Male and Female, Husband and Wife: and God so disposed it for three causes; Societie, Proprietie, Paritie.
1 For societie, it had beene uncomfortable for man to have lived there alone: ^ae soli.Gen. 2.18. It is not good that man should be alone, I will give him a helpe meete for him. Marriage is called a Yoke; too heavy for one alone to beare: therefore each had a ^utuall helpe; a wife. In the participation of good, compassion of evill, in health ^he best delight, in sicknesse the best comfort: the sole companion to whom we may ^ommunicate our joyes, and into whose bosome we unlode our sorrowes: thus are ^ur greefes lessened, our joyes enlarged, our hearts solaced.Eccl. 40.23. A friend and compani^^ never meet amisse; but above both is a wife with her husband. Duo in carne una, one (...) body and soule, as the stocke and the graffe are but one tree. God when he made ^an, made but one: when woman out of him, he made two of one: when marri^ge, he made one of two. Two parties and but one love, two soules compacted in^o one body: both one in affection while they live, both one in their posterity when ^hey die. Where is conjugall faith, an indissolvable covenant, an unalterable af^ection; here is a blessed match, not to be matched by all the treasures of Nature.
 The faire take no pleasure in the beautie of their owne face; but by the reflection of that which others derive from it. Our eyes are not set to behold our owne countenances, nor can our lippes take delight in their owne kisses, nor our armes in their owne embraces: but in the societie of a wife, by exchange, they have their use and perfection. She is mans similitude; so like him, as bone to bone, flesh to flesh, Is^^ to Ish: where face answereth face, as did the Cherubins, both looking to the mercie-seate: and heart answereth heart, as a glasse that returnes upon a man his own Image. Ipse coram se, himselfe before himselfe, another that is himselfe, his adopted selfe: that loves what he loves, wills what he wills; that, as she wills his love, so loves his will: there is no societie on earth that affords the like comfort.
2 The proprietie; Noah and his Wife, every man had his owne wife. Not one woman for many men, nor many women for one man: as wicked Lameth had before. This is the LORDS combination, Take thy wife: not Vxor and non uxor, to take and leave, contract and divorce, put on and off like a garment: but one woman for one man, no more, no fewer, no other. In the creation, God made them Male and Female: not both males, or both females; then had they beene unfit for generation: not male and females, nor female and males, much lesse adulterer and harlot; but two in one flesh; two, not three or fower. Every wife should be to her husband, as Eve was to Adam, the whole world of women. For this cause God gave her to man, as the center wherein his desires might rest. Lust is a runnagate, as if it had Cains curse, to be a Vagabond upon earth: it runs like a mathematicall line, ad in^^^^tum: still covets and still remaines unsatisfied. Nor is it confined within the bounds of Wife, but of woman-kind: that which should be for physicke to cure it, encreaseth the disease. The delight is transient, the guilt everlasting: before the sense c^^ sit downe, and say, it is pleased: the conscience riseth up, and saies, it is afflicted. Marriage is therefore ordained to qualifie desire; as fire is appeased with fewell; a medicine of the same doth mitigate: nor doth it forbid, but rectifie mans affection. But lust, because it cannot be stinted on earth, the Iustice of God co^fineth to hell.
3 The equalitie or paritie: that men may learne to forbeare despising of that weaker sexe, behold here as many women saved as men. Not one man more, not one woman lesse: of the eight, women make up the just halfe, yea, whereas one of the foure men was an Hypocrite, and after cursed, the Scripture speakes no such matter of any woman among them. Howsoever Poets in their Satyres, songsters i^ their drunken rythmes, and too many men in their unrellishing jests; spend their wits in invectives against that sexe: yet the Lord loveth them equally with men; and IESUS CHRIST shed his bloud, and by his bloud, (I am perswaded) saveth as many women as men. As she is theMal. 2.14. Wife of thy covenant, so she is the child of Gods covenant:1 Pet. 3.7 the daughter of Sara, so well as thou art a Sonne of Abraham. St Peter saies, they are coheires of the same grace: and St Paul, they are coheires of the same glory.
If the body of either sexe be made of the better materiall, it is the womans: Adam's was made of dead dust, Eves of living flesh.Gen. 2.24. She came out of m^^ side, and God hath made her cleave to his side. By such a derivation, he fitted such (...) adhaesion; that she might not be a moveable, to be departed from. From taking a bone from man, who had a bone too much, he closed it up with fl^sh, to mo^^^^e his nature. And this bone he added to the woman, to strengthen her that was to^ soft. Thus he made a sweete temper betweene them, like harmony in musicke, (...) for concord. This bone was taken out of the midst of man, a ribbe, a bone of his side. Not a superior part, as the head; the wife is not made to governe: not of (...) inferior part, the foote; she is not a servant to be trode upon: not of an anteri^^ part, as the breast; she is not to be preferred before the man: not of a posterior p^^^, the backe; she is not to be set behind in contempt: but of the Side, a middle and i^different part; ordained to be his companion and equall; they that walke side (...)
 side, are fellowes. She was fetched from under his arme, that he should defend ^er: not farre from his heart, that he should love her.Psal. 128.3. A vine by the sides of his ^^^se. Not in fastigio, vel pavimento: not on the roofe, nor on the floure: the one (...) too high, she is no ruler: the other too low, she is no slave: but in the sides, an e^uall place betweene both.
Neither must this embolden the wife to usurpe: she was taken from the left side ^hewing that she stands in need of both Protection and Direction from her husband. ^y Gods ordinance, man hath the preheminence. Subdita eris sub potestate viri, (...) Thy very desire shall be subject to him.2 Cor. 11.3. The husband is the Head:Gen. 3.16. therefore if a wo^an murther her husband, she is judged by the civill Law a Parricide; by the Sta^utes of the land, a Traitor.Numb. 30.13. The man had power to allow or disanull his wives ^owes. The edict of Ahasuerus differs not from the law of nature.Esth. 1.20.22 That every man ^^ould beare rule in his owne house. Vbi tu Cajus, ego Caja, was some equalitie among the Gentiles: but Ego caja, ubicunque cajus; I am Mistresse, and will rule all; is poste^ous among Christians. Cardinall Wolsey's stile; Ego and Rex meus, I and my King, ^as intolerable in the Politickes: so the wives; Ego and maritus meus, I and my husband, (...) insufferable in the Oeconomickes. The blessed Virgin had a more humble carri^ge towards her husband Ioseph: as Saint Augustine notes from the order of the ^ordes.Luk. 2.48. Thy father and I have sought thee sorrowing. Not Ego and pater tuus I ^nd thy father; but thy Father and I. The wife must give place to her Ioseph on earth ^hat will have place with Mary in heaven.
Eight persons.] Thus much for the Qualitie of the persons, now for the quan^itie of the number; Eight. Wherein wee must consider, first why so many as ^ight, then why so few as eight. Why so many; for the speedyer encrease of mankind. Why so few, because this was the whole number of the righteous and ^eleevers.
Eight.] This was one cause why God reserved so many, that they might fru^tifie to the multiplication of mankind. But why were not Noah and his wife suffi^ient for that end? No, they were old, for Noah was sixe hundred yeares old when ^he floud came: and though he lived three hunred yeares after, yet we read not of a^y more children hee had. But the first world was begun and peopled by two ^nd no more: why then were so many to begin the second world? I answer. (...). God did so at the first, to shew thatAct. 17.26. All mankinde came of one bloud, and that there ^as no originall difference betwixt man and man. Neither is this unobserved in the ^econd beginning: for though the world was multiplied by three men, yet were ^hey all brethren, and the sons of one man. In effect, as at first by Adam and Eve, so ^y Noah and his Wife, came all men in the world. 2. To begin the second world ^here were requisite more lines than one: because now the blessed seed was promi^ed, and his line and kindred must be kept distinct from all other till his Incarnation. (...). There was more cause why the world should be more speedily replenished, than ^t first. For the earth had some beauty and glory left it after the former curse; so ^hat (though farre short of Paradise, yet) it was still to Adam a delightfull and plea^ant habitation. But this second curse in the floud wash'd off all the remaining beau^ie, and made it a rude and unpolish'd desart. Nor was only the surface of it thus ^aimed, but the vertue almost quite perished, as land by long sugging under the waters, hath the heart of it eaten out. Therefore it is said,Gen. 9.19. that the earth was di^ided among the three sonnes of Noah: they lived not all together, but overspred ^e earth: for it required many hands and much labour to the recoverie of it. 4. Otherwise the beasts, which were then many, would have overgrowen the world, (...) it had not beene speedily replenished by their Lords.
For this cause were foure paires admitted into the Arke: not that Noah and his ^ife did there company together. Ambrose notes that they were not noted together (...) the going in, but in their comming out. Non commiscetur sexus in ingressu,Maeroris tempus, non laetitiae, Ambr. sed com^iscetur in egressu. But indeed, that was a time of sorrow and abstinence: as the Hebrewes
 note, that Ioseph in Aegypt had not his children in the yeares of famine, but before.
Here then wee see the end of Marriage, which is Proles, Issue, to people the earth, which is the meanes to people heaven. Therefore is it called Matrimo^^^^^; because the married propose to themselves the titles of Father and Mother. Man i^ but a part of time, and therefore should not die till he hath left the world some i^ his roome. Cui non sunt Liberi, is reputatur quasi mortuus; in the Hebrew proverbe. Mans best art can only make dead things; there is no worke of his head or h^^d, whereinto he can put a life: saving onely in this; when he begets a son in his own Image, he is then said to make a living creature. Herein he doth not onely supply a place in Gods Church militant while he lives: but he also provides a souldier (...) the same field against he dies. Our bodies have no eternitie on this earth, but onely in respect of those fruits they produce. The Thracians used to rejoyce at the death, and to weepe at the birth, of their children:Ioh. 16.21. Gen. 5.29. But God teacheth us to rejoyce when a child is borne.Gen. 21.6. Leah bare one sonne, and called his name Reuben: a second, (...) called him Simeon: a third, and called him Levi: but when above expectation (...) bare the fourth, she purposely calls his name Iudah, and expressely protesteth, I (...) praise the Lord.
It is the most perfect worke of all living things, to bring forth their like; to leave a seed behind, to preserve their Species, to continue their name and posterity upon earth, and to shadow out in some sort immortality it selfe, by perpetuating (...) from the father to the sonne, and sonnes sonne, for many generations to come. We can scarce say that man is dead, that hath left his living image behind him. A Reverend Divine compares those two trees in the hundred and twenty eighth Psalme, the Vine and Olive, to the two trees in Paradise; the Vine is the Wife, the Olive plants the Children. The one as the Tree of Knowledge of good and evill, for both these be in marriage: the other as the Tree of Life, for a man liveth in his children. Quid dulcius in humanis quam gignere sibi similem,Aen. Sylv. quid beatius in terris quam ^^^^s v^dere natorum? A wreath of children about the boord, like a round of Starres abo^^ the North-pole, or a Garland of Courtiers about the Throne. They are the walking-pictures, and speaking images of their parents: the wealth of the poore man, the honour of the rich. It is said of the Ostrich, Induratur in pullos tanquam non s^^s:Iob 39.16. Shee is hardned against her young ones, as though they were not hers: Parents unnaturall to their children, want the mercy of Sea-monsters;Lament. 4.3. who draw their brests, (...) give sucke to their young ones. Grant it true, that children be certaine cares, uncertaine comforts: and that the poore man calls them his Bills of expences: yet the trouble of Infants are sweet injuries to the mother; Injuries, but sweet. Deo and Parenti non redditur aequivalens.Ierome. They are Vincula, the bonds and pledges, to ratif^^ and confirme love betwixt man and woman. Alcibiades asked Socrates, How (...) could endure the scolding of his wife Xantippe: Socrates asked him, how hee co^^^ endure the cackling of his Hennes: Because, saith Alcibiades mine Hennes bring me forth chickens: but faith Socrates, my wife brings me forth children: this (...) amends for all.
Eight Persons. We have heard the reason why so many as Eight were preserved: now consider, why so few. Even all Noahs Family, for Noahs sake. The righteous man procureth blessings, not onely to himselfe, but on all that belong to (...). In the destruction of Sodome,Gen. 18.32. Ten had saved ten thousand.Gen 39.5. Potiph^^ was (...) Heathen, yet his house shall be blessed, because Ioseph is there. The Angels pro^^^^ Lot, whomsoever he brought our, should escape for his sake. Among two (...) threescore and sixteene soules there was but one Paul; yet loe,Act. 27.24 God hath giv^ (...) all that saile with thee. Zaccheus alone beleeved, yet this broughtLuke 19.^. Salvation to (...) whole House.
I make no doubt, but Noahs Family were more orderly and religious, th^^ (...) common inhabitants of the world. For he that was a Preacher to the whole (...)
 would not omit this duty to his owne house: and they that come into the Perfumers ^hop, shall (though against their wills) beare away some of the sent on their clothes. He that was carefull to provide an Arke for the preserving of their bodyes, would ^ot neglect the provision of grace for the saving of their soules. Indeed carnall pa^^ents, to shew that they begat not their childrens soules, but their bodyes; provide ^sually for their bodyes, not for their soules. But as he that provides not for their ^emporall estate,1 Tim. 5.8. is worse than any infidell: so he that provides not for their eternall ^ate, is little better than a Devill. When a great portion is readied for them, diverse ^^rents thinke they have done enough, and so they may turne them off. Indeed the ^orld may take them thus, but the Lord will not take them thus, at their hands. ^oseph and Mary brought CHRIST to the Temple, when he was but a little one. Augustine professeth of his mother Monica, that with greater pangs of care the ^ad laboured of him in her spirit, than in her body. Carne, ut in hanc lucem tempo^alem nascerer: Corde, ut in lucem aeternam renascerer. She travaild of him in her flesh, ^o bring him unto this light temporall: in her soule, to bring him unto the light ^ternall. Such mothers as Monica, will make such sonnes as Augustine. The Affricans did present their children, in their early yeares, before Serpents: if with ^heir sight they scar'd away the serpents, they held them legitimate: if not, bastards. Too many parents trust their children with such impious society, that like Serpents ^ucke out their soules, without scarring their skines. Zeuxes having artfully painted (...) boy carrying grapes in a hand-basket, and set it abroad; the birds came and pecked ^t them, as if they had been true grapes. Whereat he being angry with himselfe, ^nd his art, said; If I had drawne the boy, which was the principall of my worke, ^o well as the grapes, which were but a by-accident; the birds durst not have been ^o bold with them. Were parents as carefull to forme their childrens manners, as ^o fill their purses; those ravenous harpyes, the fowle spirits of the aire could not so ^iolently seise on them. I say to every father, as Paul to Timothy; Serva depositum; ^ooke to thy child, the pledge of Gods goodnesse; thy comfortablest Image in life ^nd best monument after death. I commende guarding their persons, and regar^ing their estates: but howsoever those things succeed, let me so love my childrens ^odyes on earth, that I may one day meete their soules in heaven.
Eight.] Among all these there was not one servant. What, none of Noahs ser^ants? Some thinke he had none; and that the simplicity of those times required ^o attendance, but every man waited on himselfe.. This they collect from Gods ^harge to Noah;Gen. 7.^. Enter thou and all thy house into the Arke: and because not a ser^ant entred, therefore conclude, that he had none in his house. But here is the won^er, that Noahs owne servants would not beleeve his preaching. They will rather ^in and die with the world, than repent and be saved with their Master. Perhaps ^hey did Noah service, and he might thinke well of them, because he could not dis^erne the heart: but they served not God, and were therefore lost. It is the good mans will, that all which serve him, should truly serve the Lord.Psal. 101.^.7. The faithfull ^hall dwell with me, and the upright shall serve mee. Hee that worketh deceit, shall not ^well in my house. It is an ill mixture in a family, when God shall have the Parlor, ^nd Satan the Hall: when Saints pray in the Chamber, and ruffians sweare ^n the Celler: when Noah is calling upon GOD, and his family doing sacrifice ^o Bacchus. I confesse, that governors are but men; they have but two eyes, and can^ot see into all places. But when their care is that God be honoured, their houses ^ell ordered, and all Christian offices solemnely performed; though the successe ^nswere not their endevours, in bringing their servants to heaven; yet their owne ^oules shall be saved in the day of Iesus Christ.
Eight.] What then became of those that built this vessell? Certainly, as Noah was no sailer to guide it, so no carpenter to build it. The Smith, the Carpenter, and ^any cunning workmen, were hired to frame it: nor Smith, nor Carpenter, nor any ^ther workman was saved by it.Gen. 6.21. It must be exceeding labour to bring in sufficient
 provision, for the innumerable kinds of creatures there reserved; and not a few were imployed in this service; not one of them tasted this prouision. More hands went to this worke than Noahs: many wrought on the Arke, that found no safety by the Arke. Outward works cannot deliver us, without our faith: men may helpe to s^^e others; and perish themselves. And as diverse hearers are like the Pinacles on t^^ Belfrey; when men begin to ring, they begin to quake; but continue ringing, they stand as still as stones, their feare is past. So some Preachers may be like the be^^^, that ring others to Church, and come themselves no neerer than the steeple. O^ like high Spires and Pinacles, that point upward, and poise downeward. God will shut up beleeving Noahs in that Arke, which others have built: who are like foo^^^^ porters, that have the keyes, and open the gates to let in others, and never mind going in themselves. It is happy so to build up Sion, that we may dwell in Sion: so to set others forward to heaven, that we be not behind our selves. As Theodosius said, he had rather be a true member of the Church, than Head of the Empire: it is better to be one of the Eight saved in the Arke, than one of the hundreds commended for their admirable skill in building it.
Eight.] Among these few there was one hypocrite; Ham: yet was he preserved with the rest for Noahs sake. Such is the mercy of God, that not one good man shall perish with the bad; yet one bad man shall be spared with the good. The righteous shall never be swept away for company, yet the unrighteous are often forborne for company. The ship may be in danger because Iudas is there: but Iudas shall scape because Iesus is there. O that of a perishing world but Eight should be selected, and that one of those Eight should prove a wicked man! That Ham after all this should so profanely offend! That neither the wrath of God in destroying the world should humble him: nor the mercy of God in his deliverance should better him! There i^ nothing to be said, but the Lord chuseth whom he will; and when the unrighteous perish, yet Thou remainest holy, O thou worship of Israel.
Eight.] Of the whole world, no more saved? a miserable spectacle! See what sinne can doe; bring many millions to Eight persons in a short time. Though Israel were as the Starres in Salomons dayes, yet brought to aEsa. ^.12. Tenth. David would number them, but the Lord soone decreased them. Let us never glory in our multitudes, for if our sins provoke him, God can easily make us few enough. Though our streetes were sowne with men, and our children grew up like young plants, or grapes in unnumbred clusters: yet the Lord can melt them as snow in the sunne, mow downe the flowers, empty the Land of fathers, and leave no widowes to make lamentation for them. So thatEsa. 13.12. a man shall be more precious than the gold of Ophir. But if we f^^le in our numbers, yet we hope for supply from our neighbours? No, let not our adherence with man, endanger our conjunction with God. He can reduce many thousands to few, as he did toIudg. 7.4. Gideon; that the glory might be his. He that could narrow up a whole world to Eight, can bring a kingdome to two, to one, to none. (...) thousands runne on the course of disobedience, they shall quickly enough (...) diminished.
Eight.] Lastly, heare is figured out to us the paucitie of soules that shall be saved. Many are called, few chosen. The gate of blisse is narrow, and few enter into it. My (...) is a little flocke: little in respect of the number drowned in the deluge of (...). Questionlesse, as small as it is, every one hopes well of himselfe: and if Noah (...) foretold this definite number to that world, all would have presumed, I am (...) of the Eight. When blacke and ravenous ruine spreds her dismall wings to sweepe away the wicked; few tremble: for they conceit themselves to be none of the forlorne crew. Yet what is the common religion of the world? To say the Creed i^ all their faith; to pay what they must needs, all their equity: to say Be filled, all their charity: to take their owne, all their mercy: to give faire words, all their bounty: (...) carry a formall profession, all their piety: to cry God mercy, all their perti^^^^: and to come to Church, all their conscience: but will all this bring them (...)
 number of Eight? None belong to the Arke, but the members of CHRIST: none are his members, but they be in the body of his Church: none are of his body, but they live by his Spirit: none have that life, but they walke after the Spirit: none so walke, but their consciences be clensed: none are thus pure, but they have repented: none have repented, unlesse they forsake their sins: and none forsake their sins, but they must needs have amended lives.
Haply each thinkes, I am in as good case as others, I shall speed as well as my neighbours: so might the old world tell their fellowes; and they all sped alike indeed, in one common destruction. But it is not good to venture all our estate in one uncertaine bottome, to hazard our eternall being upon the exemplary practise of the multitude. Noah beleeved alone, when all the world contested against him; and Noah was saved alone, when all the world perished without him. Who would not rather affie Gods word with one singular Noah, than be incredulous with the whole world, and perish? Magna plenitudo hominum, sed magna solitudo bonorum. Sinners so swarme, that there is scarce elbow-roome for the righteous.1 Pet. 8.18. But if the righteous shall scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and sinner appeare? The righteous are scarce, and even their salvation is scarce; and shall not sinners tremble?Matth. 7.13. Strive to enter in at the straite gate. There is a Difficultie, it is strait: but a Possibilitie, it is a gate; and a gate was made for entrance. O then let us get assurance to our consciences, that we are some of those few. Doe we groane and bleed for our errors? do we strive to rectifie our lives? doe were solutely detest our sins? doe we implore grace by our prayers? doe we consecrate to God our hearts? doe we rest upon CHRIST by our faiths? doe we follow after holinesse with our endevours, and love the Lord with all our soules? We shall then feele, what no tongue of man can expresse; the sweet testimonie of the Holy Ghost to our consciences: that we are wrap'd up in the bundle of life, sealed to the day of redemption: and how few soever escape destruction, wee are of the number that shall find salvation; through the mercies and merits of IESUS CHRIST.

The Mysterie of Noahs Arke.
THis miraculous preservation hath also a mysticall sense; and serves for the Instruction and consolation of the militant Church unto the worlds end. There is in a Text, as in a Tree; the bud, blossome, fruite: a literall, a spirituall, and a morall sense.Cant. 4.16. Awake O North-wind, and come thou South, blow upon my garden, that the spices thereof may flow out: let my beloved come into his garden, and eate his pleasant fruites. In a literall sense, Salomons Queene desires a pleasant garden to delight her husband. In a spirituall sense, the Church intreats the Holy Ghost, that wind which blowes where he pleaseth, to blow upon, and enlarge her graces, that CHRIST, her husband, may take pleasure in her. In a morall sense, she would have all her children bring forth store of fruites, good workes that they might be blessed of their father.Psal. 45.10. O daughter, forget thine owne people, and thy fathers house. Literally, it is spoken to Pharaohs daughter, to forget Aegypt wherein she was bred and borne, and to adhere to her husband Salomon. Mystically, it speakes to the Church, to forget this world, wherein she was borne an Egyptian, blacke with sins: and cleave faithfully to her beloved CHRIST, who had now with his owne bloud washed her faire, and greatly desired her beautie. So that under the title of Pharaohs daughter, heare what the Spirit speaketh to the Church.Cant. 4.9. Thou hast ravished my heart with one of thine eyes, with one chaine of thy necke. Literally, corporall beautie is commended; chaines, jewels, ornaments allowed: spiritually, graces, the beauties of the soule; and good workes, the beautie of graces, are required. Only here is the difference betweene other Trees and the Tree of life. They first bud, then blossome, then send forth fruite:Kevel. 22.2. but the tree of life hath all these at once. Yea further, as in a tree there is
 the barke and the pith: so in a Text are Quaedam adjacentia, some things that lie on the upper face: and Quaedam in haerentiae, some things in the bowels of it. Thus Noahs Arke literally served for the temporall deliverance of their bodies: spiritually it taught them the eternall deliverance of their soules: mystically it presignifies to (...) the deliverance of both our bodies and soules from the vengeance due to our sinnes. As a Musician therefore, first tries the sound of his Instrument, before hee playes the lesson: so now having delivered the literall sound, I come to the mysticall sense.
Herein let us observe first what it taught them, next what it must teach us. It i^structed them in two things.
First, it was a pledge of Gods love to their soules: for he that was so carefull to save their bodies from the floud of water, gave them certaine hope that he would save their soules from the fire of hell. The preservation of that which was mortall and inferior, was a strong argument that the other should be safe, which was immortall and farre more precious. When a house is on fire, he that redeemeth the Cabinet, will not lose the Iewell in it. Let it be granted, that God doth sometimes reprieve the wicked from temporall plagues, and binds them over to the Generall Session: yet is Davids inference good;Psal. 41.11. By this I know thou favourest me, because mine enemie doth not triumph over me: from mercie to his body, he argues grace to his soule. We cannot conclude by inversion, that whom God doth not free from temporall judgements, he will not free from eternall: none are to be judged for outward miserie.2 King. 4.27. Let her alone, for her soule is troubled, and the Lord hath hid it from me. The cause of their troubles is hid from us.Iob 16.4. If your soule were in my soules stead, I could heape up words against you, and shake my head at you: I could, but I would not. Quod nos in malum, Deus saepe destinavit in bonum. But from a lesse benefite to a greater, is a good collection of faith. When the faithfull of Israel saw the LORDS arme in delivering them from Aegypt, they beleeved that he would bring them into Canaan. He that hath freed us from superstition, certainely meanes us to salvation.
Secondly, it was a confirmation of their faith and obedience. Without obedience in building the vessell, without faith in beleeving the promise, they saw no hope of preservation. This taught them for afterwards, what precept soever was imposed, to obey it: what promise soever was made, to trust upon it. And what could bee strange to their confidence, that had of miraculous mercie so late an experience? Some professe they beleeve the pardon of their sins; yet feare the want of bread, or sinke under some light burden of sorrow. Is any load so heavy, as the pressure of sin? O the waight of one sin is too much for the supportation of one man. Now hath CHRIST borne the talent, and can he not bare the dramme? Shall we trust him with our wounds, and not with our medicines? Hath he given us the bread of life, and can he not give us the bread of earth? Shall we say with the ^^sting Iewes;Psal. 78.20. Hee gave us streames from the rocke, but can he give flesh to his people? Consider, will Christ deny flesh to our bodies, that hath given his owne flesh to our soules? Hath he performed such Soveraigne pieces of gold, and will he sticke at farthing tokens?Rom. 8.32. He that spared not his owne Sonne for us, what good thing will be deny us? Doe we trust in the Lord for the remission of our sins, the resurrection of our bodies, and the everlasting salvation of our soules: and distrust him in a feaver, in a scandall, in a fit of want? Certainely if he have vouchsafed us that great mercie to make us his own; he hath given the whole army of afflictions more inviolable charge concerning us, than David gave his hoste concerning Absalom; See ye doe the young man, my Son Absalom, no harme: looke you never hurt them whom I have adopted.
Thus for them, now for our selves. This Arke hath also a symbolicall sense, a spirituall use. It was a Type and figure of Christs Church: out of which there is no hope of salvation, as out of the Arke was inevitable destruction. Examine we the resemblances.
1 All that were preserved, were within the Arke: all that shall be saved, must
 be of the Church. In that great deluge, when Omnia Pontus erat, deerant quoque littora ponto, there was no other possibility of escaping: in the huge pond and vast sea of this world, there is no hope of redemption but by Iesus Christ. Either we must ^he incorporate into Christ, or reprobate with the world.Acts 2.47. The Lord addes to the Church daily such as shall bee saved: to the Church militant, all soules that shall bee crowned in the Church triumphant. As for them that were out of the Arke, no gold could buy their preservation: no holes could hide them, no hills helpe them, no houses hold them, nothing in the world, not the world it selfe could save them. So for them that be out of Christ, no riches can bestead them, no honors secure them, no policie can deliver them, no refuges can shelter them, no friends, no favour can doe them good; but they must perish in the flood of GODS eternall vengeance. What succour had they by the mountaines, or by taking hold on the highest Cedars, whom the Arke received not? Such helpe shall men find in those worldly things wherein they have trusted, when God shall find them out of his Church. What reliefe in their honours, upon whose foreheads the sunne of promotion wantonly playes: As if that arme should never ake, that weares a silken sleeve: nay as if the highest hills were not most subject to the lightning-flashes. For the covetous, that like a spider eviscerates herselfe, spends her owne bowels in making a webbe to catch a flie; how foolish is his confidence in that, which he knowes will never faile him but when he hath most need! Alas, he cannot buy Christ with it; and therefore must expect Simon Magus doome; Thou and thy money perish together.Acts 4.12. There is no other name given to men under heaven, to bee saved by, but the name of Iesus. Nothing in nature, nothing in art, nothing in the world, no other creature, no other Name. In vaine they thinke to saile in their cockboates, or swimme with their windy bladders: every heresie is a little barke by it selfe, and while it is not troubled, it goes on with proud sailes like a Merchants ship: but vexed you shall find it a man of warre. Every factious and discontented humour is like a bladder, which the peevish refractary puts under his arme, and he will not be beholden to the Arke for passage, he can swimme to shore. Let such sullen spirits heare and feare: as a man will not admit that person to his house, who loves not his family: so they that forsake the Church, must be forsaken of Christ.
2 As God was the Pilot of the Arke, so CHRIST is the Governour of the Church. The superstitious Romanists have their severall Saints for severall services; for the Teeth, Apollonia; for Souldiers, Saint Maurice; for Sea-men, Saint Nicholas. As those grosse Idolaters in Heathen times, marshalled their gods into severall rankes; allotting Heaven for Iupiter, Hell for Pluto, and the Sea for Neptune. But the Lord is all in all to us: our Pilot on the Sea, our Captaine on the Land. Wee tender not our petitions to the no gods of the Gentiles, or ot the moe gods of the Papists: we doe not trouble the blessed Virgin for every thing, as if her Sonne Iesus were still a Babe, and not able to helpe us: but we goe to Christ for all. That same Ship in the Prophet,Ioh. 1.5. Every man calling upon his god; is a map or module of Rome: one calling on Saint Francis, another on Saint Anthony, etc. But if wee love learning, the Lord is our Gregory, the God of Wisdome: if Souldiers, hee is our Mars and Maurice, the Lord of Hoasts: if Marriners, he is our Neptune and Nicholas; thatMat. 8.27. commands the winds and seas, and they obey him. As Caesar said to the trembling Marriner; Confide nauta, Caesarem vehis: Be not afraid, thou carriest Caesar. So, O Church be comforted; He that is in thee, for thee, with thee, that guides thee, that will save thee, is the Invincible King IESUS CHRIST.
3 The matter of the Arke was not every kinde of wood, but the Pine: nor is every one admitted into the Church, but such as the Lord hath chosen:Ioh. 1.13. Which are not borne of bloud, nor will of the flesh, but of the will of God. Ex quolibet ligno non fit Mercurius: the Lord often leaves the loftie Cedar, that over-lookes the rest with an imperious top: and the sturdy Oke, him that will not stoope to his Word: the melancholy Ewe, the hollow-hearted Elderne, the intractable Thorne, the hypocriticall
 Ivie, that by embracing the tree, suckes out the heart of it. He chuseth the Vi^^ for his Orchard, the Pine for his Arke: he first hewes us out of the wildernesse of Sinne, takes away the ruggednesse of our nature, and having planed us by grace, puts us into his Church,Epiph. where we fit with the rest in unanimous obedience.
4 The Arke consisted of many pieces of wood joyned together: Non ex (...) ligno constat navis: Nor doth the Church consist of one man, or one sort of men; butRev. 7.9. of every nation, and kindred, language and people. Many soules compacted (...) one body, many Christians into one communion of Saints. And all these make b^^ one Arke, one Church. One World shewes that there is but one God: one God that there is but one Church: one Church, that there is but one Truth. Therefore is it called Columna Veritatis, and Columba unitatis: The sweetest musike consists of many well-tuned voices:Aug. if there be any jarring and contentious spirit, he is out of tune, none of the Christian consort. Let us live as we sing, and our hearts goe with our voyces; this is the Concent of the Church. God doth seldome divide his graces among divided spirits: if we will not beat one with our selves, he will not be (...) one with us. A shieveld threed is hardly got thorow the needles-eye. The Spirit is one, and said to speakeLuk. 1.70. by the mouth of all the Prophets; not Per ora, sed Per ^s; as (...) all the Prophets had but one Mouth; to shew the singular harmony of their concord. That Spirit which came in a Dove will not come but upon a Dove. When wee delight in discord, our assemblings are dissemblings, our convocations provocations, every man vultuous, wedded to a wife that fooles him, Selfe-will: here is as little argument of a Christian congregation, as the confusion of Babel was like the harmonie of the Temple. An unsquared stone, a warping boord, a jarring spirit, must not be put into the building of Christ.
5 The Arke was pitched within and without, the better to keepe out the water. So must every Christian be joyned into the Body, with Profession and Sinceritie: sound-habited without, sound-hearted within. Nor profession, nor sincerity, are sufficient asunder; both doe well together. Iericho was pleasant of situation, but the2 Kin. 2.19. Springs were naught: many mens profession is faire, but the fountaine, the heart is infected. Laish was a barren turfe, but the heart of the ground was good, had it beene tilled: so some have a little religion hid in their consciences, but for want of husbanding their graces, it perisheth. But God cannot abide a wanton Christian: A wanton Iew, Turke, Pagan, is bad enough; but none so intolerable as a wanton Christian, As in many things we sinne all; so in some things we may obey all: b^^ one line makes no Geometry, nor doth one act put Christianity. Neither the timber rotten at the heart, how faire soever to the eye, nor the timber crooked and ill-favoured to the eye, how sound soever at the heart; shall be put into Christs Arke. To be good, and not to appeare: to appeare good, and not to be; is not the way to glorify God, or for him to glorify us.
6 In the Arke were diverse roomes, so in the Church are diverse places and gifts, as in heaven there be diverse mansions. Many distinct offices in a ship; the Pilot, Captaine, Boat-swaine, Marriners; concurre all in one care for the preservation of the vessell.1 Cor. 12.28. Eph. 4.11. In the Church be Apostles, Prophets, Pastors, Teachers; ye^ all tend to the Edification of the body of Christ. There is nothing more endangers confusion, than for one to intrude into anothers roome: displacing the members from their proper faculties and functions. When the rude hinde will be a counsellor of State, the ignorant sectary be made a Bishop, and Iack Cade a Iustice of peace. It is no easie wisdome, rightly to distinguish our owne office: all parts have their severall functions; and Tractent fabrilia fabri. The foote must not usurpe the office of the hand, nor the hand intrude upon the office of the head. Aliud plectrum, al^^d Sceptrum. So looke to others vineyards, that thou be sure toCant. 1.6. keepe thine owne. If we be Christs faithfull souldiers, let us keepe our station, and fight it out with victorious courage. What roome in the ship soever is assigned us, let us make that good. In Gods Arithmeticke there be no cyphers, we must be something on earth, or we shall be nothing in heaven.
7 In the Arke were beasts cleane and uncleane: in the Church are sinners blended among the righteous:Mat. 13.25.The Lord did sow good seed in his field, whence then hath it ^^ares? The divell hath no ground of his owne, but he soweth in Gods field, and upon Gods seed: so the corruption of the good, is the generation of the bad. These ^ares are not of Gods sowing; it is none of his fault.Gen. 1.31. All that hee made, was exceeding good. The Church militant is an heaven, but on earth; therefore not without the fire-brands of hell. Let no man leave Gods floore, because there is some chaffe, nor breake his net because there is some baggage: nor run out of his field, because there is some cockle: nor depart from his house, because there be some vessels of dishonour. God would have spared a Citie forGen. 18.32. August. ten good ones, and shall wee refuse a Church for ten bad ones? Fugio paleam, ne hoc sim: non aream, ne nihil sim. I avoid the chaffe, lest I become chaffe: I keepe the floore, lest I become nothing. This their accusation of the Church is vaine; if men cannot prove it, they shame themselves: if they do prove it, they deny Christ: for his cleare answer was a Sinite ^rescere, Let both grow together till the harvest. Either because the bad may turne good: God can make a Luther of a Monke; a St. Augustine of a Maniche. Or because the good are exercised and tried by the bad. If Arrius had not held a Trinity of substances with a Trinity of persons: and Sabellius, an Vnity of persons with an Vni^y of ess^nce; the mysteries of the Trinity had not beene so cleerely explained by those gr^at lights of the Church. If Rome had not so violently obtruded her merits, the doctrine of justification by faith in Christ onely, might have bin lesse digsted in mens hearts. We may say here, as Aug. doth of Carthage and Rome. Magis nocuit Romanis Carthagotam cito eversa, quam prius nocuerat tam diu adversa. If som enemies had not contested against the Church, it might have gone worse with the Church. But let them, beare the rack of their own fancies, whose schismatical torn opinions are stitched together with a skain of sisters threed, and rounded with the bobbin-lace and selvedge of reformation. Criticall quarrels argue hypocriticall hearts: and if they prevent it not by humility and unity, the Arkeholds none so uncleane as themselves.
8 The Arke was tossed of the waves, and all the stormes of the world spent their furies upon it, yet could it not be overwhelmed. When the windes, waters, weathers, had done their worst, still Noahs preservation was sure. The more the water rose against it, the more the Arke rose above it: and the higher it was raised by the floud, the safer it was from the danger of hils and rockes. In the midst of water it was saved from water, and the danger it selfe was made a defence against the danger. Thus sure of salvation is every one in Christ, nothing can crosse it. The deluge of calamities may assault us, but they shall exalt us. The more they seeke to presse us downe, the more they shall lift us up: the neerer they would sinke us to hell, the higher they shall advance us to heaven. Through all the gusts of tentations, and flouds of afflictions, wee shall be borne safe in Christs Arke.Iohn 10.28. Nothing shall pluck them out of my hand. Satan cannot, he is cast out: tyrants cannot, for if we suffer, we conquer: sinne cannot, for grace abounds above sin: sicknesse cannot, God is strongest when we are weakest. Death cannot, that serpent hath lost the sting. Indeed Non minus vita sine luctibus, quam mare sine fluctibus. All our voyage is a tempestuous navigation: the shore from which we lanch, is our nativity: the Port whither we are bound, supernall felicity: the sea we must passe, full of raging calamity: the ship wherein we saile, full of sweet security. There will be crosse windes, but let us rest in the Arke, the Church; and trust in the Pilot, Christ: and our danger is not halfe so sure as our deliverance: we may faile of grievous afflictions upon earth, we shall not faile of glorious salvation in heaven.
9 Noahs body being entred into the Arke, seemed there a dead man: that vessell being a grave or tombe unto him, wherein he was buried. Yet was that by Gods appointment, the meanes to save him, which in all reason seemed to bury him. And if Noah will be safe, he must goe into this sepulcher, and be buried in the Arke, as the Arke in the water. So must there be in us a mortification of lusts, and buriall of our
 corruptions: and there is no way to everlasting life but this. The soule cannot live, while the sin doth live: one of the two must die, the corruption or the person. Thus is death the way to life; and mortification of lust, to the resurrection of blisse. He that thus dieth not, never lives: and he that is not thus buried, never riseth againe with comfort.
In how wretched an estate then are many, that scarce know what mortification meanes; unlesse it be to mortifie grace, and to bury all holinesse. The old man raignes, and the new man serves: corruption lives, and grace is dead. To mortifie goodnesse by our sins, this is common: but to mortifie our sinnes by goodnesse, this is rare. What a preposterous change is this? Christ should live in us, and we cr^cifie him againe: sin should be crucified in us, and that liveth. But this is a true saying; He that will live when he is dead, must die while he is alive. Proceed we then after this spirituall death, to the buriall of our sins. It was the manner of the Iewes, to bury their dead with odors: bury we sin with the Incense of our prayers against it, that it may never returne upon us. Only two things let us avoid in the buriall of our sinnes, which we observe in the buriall of our friends. 1. When we bury our friends, we doe it with mourning, to testifie our loves, that we are loth to part with them. Our sins must not be so buryed; no sorrow at their departure: no man weepes to lose an enemie, nor grieves to be rid of a Tyrant. Shall we sorrow, to lose the proper cause of our sorrow? It was good newes for Israel, that Sisera was dead i^ the Tenths of Iael; and Deborah sings; So perish all thine enemies, O Lord. Sepelu^tur cum gaudio, quae non retinentur sine periculo. Let them be buried with joy, that cannot be kept without danger. 2. When we interre the bodyes of our friends, it is done in hope that they shall rise againe: by no meanes, so bury we our sins; let there be no desire of their resurrection: wrong not the Sepulchers of the dead, let them sleepe for ever. Otherwise, like Iudas, and Demas, and such hypocrites; they bury them not in their forgotten graves, but in their owne hearts. And so Cum s^^gent corpora, resurgent and peccata; their sins shall rise with their bodies, and goe with them to judgement.
Lastly, the Apostle compares is to Baptisme: that which was Noahs Arke to them, the same is Baptisme to us: the Arke saved them, Baptisme saveth us.1 Pet. 3.21. The like figure whereunto, etc. The particular Instance, or point of reference is Baptisme; the Generall is the Church. For Baptisme no otherwise saveth us, than as it is a seale of our admission into the Church, and incorporating into Christ. Therefore i^ is a Synechdochicall speech, the part for the whole, the doore for the house, Baptisme for the Church.
Baptisme is the doore of entrance into this Arke; therefore the sacred Fo^t (...) commonly placed neere the Temple doore. As in Salomons Temple were three roomes, the Porch, the Body, and the Holy of holies; and they must passe thorow the one into the other. So in Christianitie, we cannot enter the Holiest of all, b^t by the Church; nor into the Church, but by the Porch of Baptisme. There mu^^ first be shipping, then sailing, last of all arriving: we must be shipped with Christ by Baptisme, saile with him the Pinnasse of the Church, or else not arrive at the co^^ of eternall blessednesse.
The end of Baptisme is double; Principall and lesse principall. The principall is to assure us of two things. First, the remission of our sins;Act. 2.38. Be baptised (...) the name of Iesus, for the remission of sinnes. And next, that wee are within Gods covenant, partakers of his grace here, and of his glory hereafter. The lesse principall consists in three things. 1. To note a distinction betweene Christians and Infidels: a cognisance or liverie to tell the world, whose servants we are; the Colours of that Generall under whom we fight. 2. To be the bond of Christian societie.Eph. 4.5. Keepe the unitie of the Spirit in the bond of peace: Why? Because there is One faith, One Baptisme. We are all baptised into one Christ; the remembrance of our Baptisme is enough to stay contention. 3. It is a profession of homage to that God, even
 those three persons, in whose Name we are baptised. And it is a holy memoriall of Christs baptising in the sea of his Fathers wrath for us.
Ioh. 3.5.Except a man be borne of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into heaven. As ^he Spirit is an inward necessary cause, so Baptismall water is an outward necessary ^eanes, of our regeneration. It incorporates us to Christ; Vt susceptus a Christo,Leo. and Christum suscipiens, non idem sit post lavacrum, qui fuit ante baptismum: sed corpus ^^geniti, fit caro crucifixi: so that the body of the baptised, is become the flesh of him ^hat was crucified. The day of the Infants baptising, is the day of his marriage; wherein he is made the Spouse of CHRIST by the union of the Spirit. As Christ was made our flesh Nascendo, by being borne: so we are made his flesh Renascendo, by ^eing new borne. The Spirit being in the new birth instead of a Father, and water ^n stead of a Mother.
As there is a long Antiquitie of Sacraments, so a speciall necessitie. For Antiquity; in Paradise was a Tree of knowledge, and a Tree of life: both Sacramentall ^rees. For necessitie; as a man consists of two parts, one visible, the other invisible: so respondent be the meanes to draw him to heaven, the Word and Sacra^ents: and a Father calls the Sacrament, Verbum Visible, a visible word.Aug. We fell ^rom God to Satan by visible things; God brings us backe from Satan to himselfe ^y visible things. Wherein we may see the infirmity of our natures; the Lord is ^aine to stay us up by many helpes: the word for our eares, the Sacraments for our ^yes. If we see a house held up by props, pinnes, columnes and supporters; we say, ^t is certainely old, sere, and weake of it selfe.
I doe not enforce an absolute necessitie of this, as if God could not save us with^ut it. Of it owne vertue it hath no such power to salvation; water of it selfe be^ng readyer to drowne, than to save; especially the Infant being dipped into it. No ^an concludes the Innocents out of the Arke to be damned and cast into hell; so ^or the Infants of Christians that die unbaptised. It pleaseth the Lord to admit Infants to baptisme, though they be not able to answere for themselves. And as it was ^n his Iustice to impute my sin to my child, to make it guilty: so it pleaseth his mercie to take my faith for my child, to make it holy.
Prov. 31.8.Open thy mouth for the dumbe, in the cause of all such as are appointed to destructi^^. Still the Lord requires our speech for those speechlesse little ones; whom the ^loudy Papists appoint to destruction. They cannot answere for themselves; but ^he Lord Iesus, when he was on earth, spake for them; and he hath sent us to pleade ^heir cause. They have those great Dukes and Peeres of heaven for their Patrons,Mat. 18.10. The Angels: and shall we be silent.
Parents love to heare well of their childrens states in this life, much more ^hould they enquire of their state to come. The greater their joy in them, the grea^er their sorrow for them; especially when they fall sicke in the field, and die at ^ome; as the2 King. 4.20 Shunamites sonne: but more especially if like2 Sam. 12.18. Davids son, they ^ie without the Sacrament. Then their ignorance and distrust puts them into a hope^es griefe: as if they were of the stocke of Ismael, and not the seed of Israel. And ^ven those that will not keepe their houres with God and the Church, in respect of ^tate and outward complement; yet take on with God and man if their children ^misse baptisme. I would they did thinke of that womans speech to Elias;1 King. 17.18. Art ^hou come to call my sin to remembrance, and to slay my son? that God in slaying their ^ons, brings to remembrance their sins. But that good Lord, who punisheth our ^eglect, shewes mercie to those little ones. They often vanish from us in a night, be^ore we have scarce looked on their faces: but the God of compassion, who pities ^hem in Ashur and Niniveh, will he forget the seed of Christians? We misse them ^n our armes, behold they are in the armes of God. They are plucked from the mothers bosome, but unto Abrahams bosome: translated from a cradle below, to a Throne of immortalitie above. How oft doth a friend among men, take a babe from the poore feeble mother, and bring it up as his own; as Pharaohs daughter did Moses!
 And shall not God take a child from the wombe, or waine it from the brest, to have it nursed in heaven, lest it should finde ill bringing up here?
Let this comfort parents against that unmercifull doctrine of Rome; teaching that if children dye on earth without baptisme, they must dye hereafter without mercy. That infants who cannot speake or doe ill, whose flesh is but new quickned in the wombe, or bones scarce gristled out of the wombe; should passe from the darkenesse of the wombe, to outer darkenesse for ever; this is the voice of the Deagon goared with bloud. The Lambe of God speakes better things, and gives his bloud to these little lambes. David grieved for the child sick, but desired not respite of life for circumcision: and though the child dyed on the seventh day, (which had beene terrible, if the want of a day had lost it for ever) yet hee then ceased mourning.
Iosh. 5.5.The children of Israel forbore circumcision forty yeeres, during all their journey in the wildernesse: will they pronounce damnatory sentence on all them? If not, why then on ours? Hath the state of the Gospell less^ mercy and pitty than the Law? Goes it harder with the infants under Christ, than under Moses? They had a set day for circumcision, the eight: we have none defined: hath not the Lord in this left it freer? Those infant Martyrs, to whose memory they observe a feast as to Saints; desired nor Baptisme, nor their friends for them; much lesse that baptisme of bloud; but their hearts rather bled for it: yet are they glorious in heaven. Iohn Baptist seemes not to have beene baptised himselfe, by his answer to Christ,Mat. 3.14. I have need to be baptised of thee, and commest thou to mee? Gods love is no fancie that the want of baptisme may breake off. It were heavy for the poore child to be lost for the Parents or Ministers negligence.
To say that Baptisme even the most ritually and formally administred, saveth of it selfe, is to deifie it, and to make a god of the water, with the Gentiles. But the Lord saveth, and when he pleaseth, without thatLuk. 19.9. This day is salvation come to this house; he is also the sonne of Abraham, saith Christ of Zaccheus. This day, and yet that was not the day of his baptisme: he was made the son of Abraham, yet was not washed in Iordan. The Eunuch by faith, Cornelius by devotion, Lydea by obedience, received grace before baptisme. Mary Magdalen, that scowred on to sin as if seven devils drove her, with tyde, winde, and saile; found mercy before baptisme;Luk. 7.50. Thy faith hath saved thee, goe in peace: Thy faith, not thy baptisme.
True sanctification may be without the visible signe, as the visible signe may be without true sanctification.Alzim. One of their side saith, Necessity is two fold. 1. Absolute, as meate is for life. 2. Or convenient, as a horse is for a journey: Baptisme is necessary this last way. Yea, a great peale of their owne voyces doth repeale that mercilesse sentence; which like Herod, hath sent out a decree against young infants: who because they enjoy but a little of this life, must lose all the next: IndeedMar. 16.16. Hee that beleeveth and is baptised, shall be saved: but it is added withall; Hee that beleeveth not, whether baptised or no, shall be damned.
To conclude let us make a double use of this; the one for obedience, the other for faith. The former is a direction for our obedience, that we use the appointed meanes, Baptisme. The other for our faith, that we build not our salvation upo^ Baptisme, but upon Gods election and grace.
1 For Obedience; Baptisme cannot be wilfully neglected without great sinne. Let us neither with the Papists make it absolutely necessary: nor with the Ma^chees, wholly unnecessary: nor inconvenient with the Anabaptists, because they are children and cannot professe. But seeing children have sinne they ought to be washed; and seeing they belong to God they ought to be sealed. Seeing the Lord hath commanded it, let us performe it. Seeing he hath promised the washing away of sin, by powring on of water: let us powre on water for the washing away of sinne. Otherwise. we despise not the Minister of the Signe, but the God of both S^^e and Minister: and for those that refuse the Signe, it is a signe they refuse the grace:
 and deserve the reproofe of Ahaz,Esa. 7.13. Is it a small thing to grieve men, but you will grieve God also? This was the condemnation of the Pharisies and Lawyers:Luk. 7.30. They rejected the counsell of God against themselves, in this very point of not being baptised of Iohn. It is not onely the bare element, but the power of GOD with it, his wisdome to establish it, his constancie to maintaine it, his holinesse to sanctifie it, and his mercy to blesse it.
When Time, Place, Minister, all things concurre, let not us be wanting. They are young flowers, soone nipped by deaths cold hand. Perhaps some humane additions we dislike, yet know that this overthrowes not the ordinance of God. The foundation is sure what stubble soever be built upon it: fire shall purge that, Gods institution shall save thee. If thou maist have i^ pure and uncompounded, so take it: if otherwise, doe not refuse it: let no ceremony of man prejudice the ordinance of God.
And as we honour the Sacrament, so let us honour the word: for that must goe with the element, to make a Sacrament. The word hath saved some without baptisme; what men hath baptisme saved without the word? The promise of the Gospell is the writing, baptisme the seale. The certainty of the writing is from the Seale, but the validity of the Seale is from the writing. Indeed, neither writing nor Seale can save, without the Holy Ghost to apply them. In Baptisme, as inIoh. 5.4. Cypri. Bethesda, if the Spirit move on the face of the waters, then there is healing. The serpent prevaileth against us in Sicco, in the dry ground: but in Aqua, in the water, hee loseth all his venome: satans malicious power is lost in the Sacramentall waters.
2 For faith, depend wee upon the election of GOD, which shall stand with meanes, if he afford it; without meanes, if he deny it. Among men, first the conditions are agreed upon, then the seale is annexed: so God first receiveth into covenant, and then sealeth. Men first possesse their sheepe, then marke them: first we muster up souldiers, then levy out some, and give them presse-money. The father being a good Land-lord, after the grant of a Tenement to a poore man, dies without sealing it. Yet the right dies not, seeing an honest son commeth in place, who will be a confirmation to his fathers promise, a seale to his grant. God the father hath granted a covenant of grace to the beleever and his seed, promised them an estate of life in his Son Iesus: though haply the young seed be prevented of this outward seale, Baptisme; yet the good Son Christ will performe to them his Fathers promise, and seale them up to eternall life. The claime of the proprietary is good ^lbeit no actuall marke be set upon his goods. The marke of God is invisible;2 Tim. 2.9. He ^nowes them that are his, andIoh. 10.28. my sheepe shall never perish, nor shall any man pluck them ^ut of my hand. Not a sheepe not the least lambe of a day old, yea, not that which ^s scarce eaned and brought into the world.Rev. 12.4. The Dragon stood before the woman, ^hich was ready to be delivered, for to devour her child as soone as it was borne: he watch^d upon the very birth, yet the child was caught up to God, and to his Throne. If the sin of the first Adam could bring an everlasting taint upon them, why cannot the bloud of the second Adam wipe it out for ever? The infant cannot reason, yet hath it ^he seed of reason: it hath a soule, though it know not so much; why then may it ^ot have faith? Children must come to Christ: what children?Mat. 19.14. little ones, that ^ave but little reason; yet Theirs is the kingdome of heaven. If so, then are they cleane, ^orRev. 21.27. No uncleane thing shall enter that holy Citie: now what clenseth but faith? This ^aith then they have after a miraculous inspiration, by that blessedIohn 3.8. Wind that blow^th, it selfe pleaseth where, and gets in no man knowes how. Draco's lawes altogether ^oncluded in death: death for this, death for that, nothing but the fatall noise of ^eath. But Christ is no Dragon, he is rather a Lambe that takes away the sins of the ^orld, a world of sins: much more will he heale these little lambes of his flocke.Heb. 12.24. The bloud of Abell crieth for vengeance, but Christ crieth with a stronger and more ^racious voice; my bloud for all bloud, my body for all sin, even of mine enemies: ^f he were an Herod in his butcherly doome, Rachel might weepe and make lamentation
 for her little ones, and refuse comfort, because they are not. If the grave and hell, those Ministers of vengeance, were to devoure those unbaptised little ones; then every mother and father, sister and friend, might howle and mourne, answering one another with dolefull plaints and remediles moanings, and have no comfort, because they are not: yea which is worse, because they are, that is, they are in endlesse sorrow. B^^ blessed be God, that hath sealed us a better covenant: praised be he, that hath given us better assurance and comfort, through the Sonne of his love IESUS CHRIST.




VERSE 6. And turning the Cities of Sodome and Gomorrha into ashes, and condemned them with an overthrow, making them an ensample unto those that after should live ungodly.

THis is the third instance of Gods severity and mercie; severity to the obstinate, mercie to the penitent. First, he confounded the Apostate Angels, and preserved the obedient. Secondly, he drowned the secure world, and saved the faithfull Noah. Here he burned the ungodly Cities, and delivered the ju^t Lot. He begun with honour and sublimitie, casting downe Angels; to shew that no Celsitude can priviledge rebellion against his will. He went on with multitude and universalitie, drowning a whole world, to shew that no numbers, legions, or armies of sinners can prevaile against his Iustice. He concludes with opulencie and worldly estate, in this overthrow of Sodome, to shew that no riches and prosperity ca^ availe in the day of wrath.
Sodome was a second Eden, the garden of the world yet he that for transgression did throw Adam out of Paradise, did also for the same reason overthrow Sodome with all her pleasures. There only eight were saved out of the whole world, and here are but halfe eight delivered from this ruine. And as one of those eight was after cursed by his father, and became a precedent for all rebellious children: so one of these foure was punished by the Father of all, and for her tergiversation or retrospection rather, was turned into a pillar of salt, and became a monument of Apostacie to all succeeding ages: this was Lots Wife.
Only this latter exceeded the former destruction in some things. 1. For generalitie, it was more universall and impartiall: eight there escaped, here but fou^^. 2. In regard of the Instrument, that was by water, this by fire; an element of greater furie and torment. 3. For the suddainesse, the water drowned them by degrees, so that by the continued ascending it might soften them to repentance. The fire consumed all those quickly, without giving them leasure to thinke of their (...) save with a desperate consideration. 4. The water choked their corporall lives, and killed only that was mortall; there is hope that some of their soules escaped. (...) here the elementary fire sent them to eternall fire; and their destruction was followed with damnation.
Two Principalls in the verse.
The
Punishment, Turning the Cities, etc.Monument, made them an ensample.

The punishment is described by three termes, which are
Burning.Overthrowing.Condemning. ^ome would have them all signifie one thing, as if they were diverse characters of ^he same destruction; but this doth not sufficiently honour the pen of the HOLY GHOST. We may better resolve it thus; referring the burning to the vastation of ^heir cities, the overthrowing to the spilling of their lives, and the condemning to the ^erdition of their soules. Their cities were burned, their bodies subverted, their soules ^^ndemned. Wherein the Lord, like some angry warriour, not only contents him^elfe to ransake the houses of their goods, but fires their Cities: nor is so pacified, ^ut puts all to the sword; as Saul had a charge for Amalek;1 Sam. 15.3. Vtterly destroy all they ^^ve, slay man and woman, infant and beast. Yea, he goes further than any mortall ^onqueror; for they can punish but temporally and corporally; but the Lord eter^ally;Iud. ver. 7. They suffer the vengeance of eternall fire.
The Monument hath two things
In it
What; an ensampleTo whom, To those, etc. ^o that if we avoid their sins, we shall escape their plagues. Here are various obser^ations deducible.
First, the number of the Cities; but two are mentioned in the Text, but cer^^inely moe were involved in the ruine.Gen. 19.25. All the plaine; likely that more cities on that ^laine than two. It was a great circuite of ground, as appeareth by the dead sea there, ^hich Iosephus, who was brought up in the countrey, gives to bee threescore and ^elve miles in length, and nineteene miles broad. The number of them is most like ^o be foure, so many rehearsed by Moses;Deut. 29.23. Sodome, Gomorrha, Admah, and Zebo^. But it is objected,Wis. 20.6. That the fire fell downe upon the five Cities: therefore five^ome thinke that Zoar also perished, though for a time it was preserved by the inter^ssion of Lot. But this supposition is false, for it was knowen by the name of Zo^ inEsa. 15.3. Esay's time; His fugitives shall flee unto Zoar. Before it was called Bela, now (...) Lot changed the name, so God changed the condition; little in quantitie, great in ^e favour of mercie. And for that of the Five cities, the word is Pentapolis, that (...) the place where those five Cities stood. Two more cities perished, but Sodome ^d Gomorrha are only mentioned, because they were the capitall cities, and metro^lies both in the sin and punishment. Where observe,
The force of example prevaileth strongly to produce the likenesse of manners. ^acile transitur ad majores, ad plures. The authoritie of greatnesse doth often cor^pt the integrity of goodnesse. The bad conditions of popular persons are like Ia^s speckled rods, which make the sheepe, the beasts of the people, bring forth the ^e parti-coloured actions. The ill custome of an eminent place is drawen up like ^me pestilent exhalation, and corrupteth the aire round about. The proverbe speaks (...) bad customes, bad opinions, and bad servants; that they are better to hang then (...) hold. If Ieroboam worship calves, how easily will most Israelites become such ^asts! We may say of an exemplary sin, as Ioab of Rabba, it will be called after ^e founders owne name. A stone throwen into the water, makes of it selfe but one ^cle, but that one beges a hundred. Though few men will confesse their sins, yet ^ny mens sins will confesse their Masters. To beget a precedent of vice, is like the ^ting a mans owne house on fire: it burnes many of his neighbours, and he shall ^swere for all the ruines. A sicke head makes a disordered body, a blind eye endan^s all the members. A rulers unrighteousnesse, like the late blasing star; it hath ^ong taile, drawes a traine of mischiefes after it, and is ominous to the whole land. ^hereas pietie in a P^ince, like Aarons ointment, runs downe to the skirts of his gar^nts, blesseth all his subjects.
An exemplary offender, is like a malicious man sicke of the plague, that runnes
 into the throng to disperse his infection. Vrbis ad exemplum, etc. Sodomes filthinesse is not confined at home, but runnes like Nilus, over all the Plaine; not a village but glories in the imitation. When a publike person is tempted to sinne, hee should answer as Nehemiah, when he was tempted to flee:Neh. 6.11. Should such a man (...) I flie? Should such a man as I thus grossely offend? To sinne before the face of God, is to dishonour him; but withall to sin before the face of men, is doubly to dishon^^^ him. Many an Israelite committed fornication, and yet upon repentance got pardon but Zimri, that would wilfully do it in the face of God and man, was sure to peri^^ This aggravated Davids errour, that it made the enemies of God to blaspheme.
Such a bitter roote shall answer for it selfe, and for all the corrupt branches: (...) sin that is done abroad, ceaseth to be single: it is many sinnes in one. Let us therefore give good example: when Christ told that noble petitioner,Ioh. 5.50. Thy sonne liveth; (...) the first hearing he beleeved: but when he came home, and weighed the matter; (...) onely himselfe, but by his meanes, the whole houshold beleeved. And for those th^^ take advantage to sin by precedent; Tutum est peccare authoribus illis; let this be their terror. Other Cities followed Sodomes lust, and they were all consumed wi^^ Sodomes fire. It is a common plea, our fathers did thus before us, and the whole world doth thus about us. But what comfort is it, to fulfill the measure of o^^ forefathers, or to perish with our neighbours. The high Priests servants can make Peter deny his Master. Quanto calescebat igne Sacerdotali, tanto frigescebat amore Divino. Let Corah kindle a fire of conspiracie, two hundred fifty Captaines will bri^^ wood to encrease it. A lewd man drawes vengeance on others, by the punishme^^ of his sin, or by the inf^ction of it.
Secondly the matter: they were Cities, not Hamlets or Villages, but pop^l^^ and walled Cities. Famous Cities, not lesse than kingdomes:Gen. 14.8.13.10. The kingdome of Sodome, etc. Fruitfull Cities, as the Garden of God: Cities lent to men, but better beseeming the Majestie of God: so glorious that they tempted a Saint. Lot seeing th^ goodly plaines of Iordane, the commodious springs, delightfull rivers, richnesse (...) the soile, situation of the townes: without enquiring further, is in love with ^^dome. Observe,
1. That the strongest Cities are not shot-proofe against the arrowes of God but even things ordained for refuge, are by his justice made destructive. There is ^^thing peaceable, where God is an enemie. The wind is a meteor whereby in so^^ sort we live, a fanne in the Lords hand to purge the aire: yet how often doth (...) make it carry infection on the wings, and ruine buildings with violence: Child^ are comfortable fruites; yet was David scourged, and Senacherib butchered, by th^ owne bowels. Sampson is betrayed by the wife of his bosome: and the Israelites (...) of quailes provided for their sustenance. In vaine we build, unlesse the Lord lay (...) first stone: or plant, unlesse he say, let it grow. Blessed is the CitiePsal. 147.13. whose (...) God barreth up with his power, and openeth againe with his m^rcy. There is (...) thing can defend where his justice will strike; and there is nothing can offend, (...) his goodnesse will preserve.
2 Sinne can bring downe the most magnifique Cities, and lay them eve^ (...) the ground. Can Sodomes pompe of state, confluence of pleasures, abundan^ riches,Nah. 3.8. pride of inhabitants, secure her life? It was Gods challenge to Nini^^^ Art thou better than No? Let it be a challenge to London, Art thou richer th^^ ^^dome? It is written of Tyrus, that herEsa. 23.7. Merchants were Princes, and her trafiq^^ the Honourable men of the earth; yet God makes disport at her overthrow; B^ that glorious Citie, etc. Babylon, a little world in it selfe; Ierusalem, the pride of (...) whole earth; both found wickednesse to undoe their composition. Rome, stiled (...) Eternall Citie, shall feele the immortality of her soule, supremacie over Kings; ^den under feete. Greatnesse of sinne will shake the foundation of the greatest ^ties, though their heads stood among the clouds, and lay their honour in the (...)
3 None of these wicked Cities escaped: Strabo thinkes that some fled (...)
 but Gen. 19.25. Men, women, children, houses, plants, monuments, all that grew on the earth, were destroyed. And who will wonder that their ungodlinesse brought destruction upon the harmelesse creatures; that considers, how we nocent wretches caused innocence it selfe to be crucified for us? not onely were the plants and herbs smitten for the time, but cursed into everlastingPsal. 107.34. See Esa. 34.9. and Wis. 10.7. Ioseph. Barrennesse. There now runnes the salt and dead sea, whose bitternesse is such, that no fish can live in it. Aristotle. Other that have viewed the Countrey affirme, that no grasse groweth there, and that it still smoketh: that the fruit appeareth faire; but within, it is nothing but embers and rottennesse. Insomuch, that the Proverbe makes a Sodome apple, the embleme of an Hypocrite. So universall was their corruption, that some thinke they brought up their children to their owne beastly conditions, Gen. 19.4. Young and old, a concourse of all the Citie. With fury, envie, and lust provoked, they dare attempt that in troupes, which to act single had beene too detestable: to imagine, unnaturall. Continuance in evill makes wicked men worse; but company in evill, worst of all.
Therefore God destroyed them all; the communitie of their sin preceded the universalitie of their ruine. H^re is the difference betwixt Gods people, and Idolaters; the latter are destroyed utterly; but of his Church the Lord alwaies leaves a number; some seeds to encrease his harvest.Esa. 1.9. Except the Lord had left us a seed, we should have beene as Sodome, and like unto Gomorrha. In this we shall not be like Sodome; which is our speciall comfort: though this whole land grone under sinnes, and all the foundations be out of course: yet there are some that feare God in sincerity of heart, and CHRIST hath his number of Elect among us. And so long as that number remaines, we shall not be made as Sodome, the matter of fire, and brimstone; a stinke to our neighbours about us, and a scorne to all succeeding generations. But disclaime we our own merites, and honour the true cause of all our happinesse; the mercie of God,Lam. 3.22. whose compassions faile not.
5 Great is the danger of living in opulent and delightfull places. That Sodome abounded with all varietie of pleasures, it is plaine: being watered with the river Iordan, as Paradise with Euphrates, and Aegypt with Nilus: Yea, Aegypt was watered with more difficultie; asDeut. 11.10. appeares. Iordan was the noblest of all rivers, rising out of two fountaines; Ior, and Dan: from both the heads, united in the valley, it was called Iordan. It was famous for foure occasions. 1. For the passing of theIosh. 4.18. Israeli^es over it, the waters being miraculously divided: and a monument set up in the middest of it. 2. For the parting of the streame againe by2 King. ^.14. Elisha, after that Elias was by the same river taken up in a fiery Chariot. 3. For the healing of2 Ki^g. 5.12. Naaman the Syrian of his Leprosie: he thought as well of Abanah and Pharphar; but the Lord was with Iordan. 4.Matth. 3.13. For the baptising of our blessed Saviour above all other waters he seemed to honour Iordan.
This noble river serving so ignoble a countrey, made it fruitfull; that Lots heart was fixed on it. Outward appearances are deceitefull guides, and it is no hard thing for the affection to coozen the Iudgement. He is worthy to be deceived, that values things as they seeme. He payes deare for his rashnesse: warre spoileth Sodome, and Lot is taken prisoner with all his substance. Now that Abraham, whom he forsooke, must rescue him: and that wealth which made him leave his Vncle, is become a prey to mercilesse heathens. The place which his eye covetously chose, betrayes his life and goods: how easie is it for men, while they looke at gaine, to lose themselves.
Such was the richnesse of Sodome, full of magnificent building, gardens, vineyards, pastures; a concurrence of all earthly commodities; therefore the more likely to run into all licentiousnesse. The people of Laish, because they wanted nothing, would haveIudg. 18.7. businesse with no man. Where is no want, is much wantonnesse: and to be rich intemporalls, hastens povertie in spiritualls. What should humble them, that doe not find themselves to stand in need of God? Cyrus would not suffer
 his Persians to change a barren soile for a fruitfull: because dainty habitations make dainty inhabitants. If we consider Sibaris, and Campania, the store-house of Rome, Sicilie; the Stove of luxurie, Capua: where can we looke, that the rankenesse of the soile hath not betrayed it selfe in the rankenesse of sin? Men have naturall inclinations according to the Genius of their countrey: and it is rare to find Gods pietie, where is Gods plentie. In a scantnesse, the things themselves doe sti^^ and restraine our appetites: but where is abundance, and the measure is left to our owne discretion, our discretion is too often deceived.Esa. 28.1. The valley of them that bee f^^, and overcome with wine. They that live in fat valleys, are soone overcome with wi^e. To apply it.
Ilands are the richest soiles, therefore Ilanders are held the most riotous people. We lie at the dugs of a most fruitfull mother, repose our selves in her indulgent bosome: we live in as dangerous a place for prosperity as Sodome: and as the fattest earth is most slippery for footing, we had need of speciall grace at every turne, and urgent cause to pray for that grace, that in the midst of all abundance we may not want temperance.Prov. 39.8. Agurs prayer is no Paradoxe; Give me neither povertie, (...) riches: both extremes are dangerous, but the greater perill is in the excesse, than defect. Let us pray with Saint Paul, that we may know how to want: but especially that we may know how to be full and abound in all things. The Prayers of our Church have it, let our understandings marke it, and our hearts implore it, And time of our wealth good Lord deliver us. When God himselfe tells us, how hard it is to bee made happy, by being made wealthy; and we see by experience, how common a precipice it is to destruction; we find cause to redouble that petition, In al^ time of our wealth good Lord deliver us.
The pride of apparell, excesse of cheare, and superabundance of ebrietie, agre civitatis indicia,Sen. are the effects of an opulent kingdome. Have we not seene that make artificiall conveyances of sinne to posterity, that labour to purchase vice a perpetuitie, that have leasure to study arguments for the Iustification of evill? Thrice happy he that can be chast in Sodome, that can be temperate in England. Thus high are we growen in prosperity and iniquity; Summisque negatum est stare diu. Let us all look backe upon Sodome: me thinkes we should rather wish to learne at the charges and by the stripes of others, than that the Doctrin of destruction should come to our owne doores. We see great Cities, mighty kingdomes, and the fairest flowers of all histories, trampled under foote: they should learne us to beware. Peace we have, and the God of peace continue it, to his glory and our good: the bees may hive themselves in our helmets, and our horses of warre have little use, save to draw our Co^ches up and downe the streets. It is the eye-sore of our enemies, and let envy looke her selfe blind. Yet let not all this secure us, lest we be forced unto that forlorne crie; O that our feare had looked forward to the prevention, before our sorro^ constraines us to looke backward upon this desolation. Let repentance cure our sins, and procure mercie to our soules, and bring us to that citie above; where i^ plentie of riches, plentie of honours, plentie of pleasures, plentie of knowledge, love, joy; plentie of all blessings, without all abuse of plentie.
5 We are sent to the Author of this dire overthrow, the Lord: He turned, the Cities, etc.Gen. 19.14. The Lord rained fire and brimstone from the Lord out of heaven. It is not enough to say, the Lord rained from himselfe: nor doth it only signifie a miraculous raine, beside the course of nature: but well have the Fathers urged this place to prove the Eternitie of CHRIST; to whom the Father hath committed (...) Iudgement: the LORD CHRIST did raine, from IEHOVAH the LORD his Father.
Those wonderfull events, which the ignorant ascribe to fortune, the Atheist to nature, the superstitious to their Idols, the polititian to his plots, the proud to his o^^ power, too many to second causes: in all these the servants of God looke higher, resolving all such effects to their first principle; Digitus Dei. The fame of Alexander,
 the renowne of Caesar, have beene much applauded for their victorious triumphs: Vlysses for policie, Hector for valour. The best of them have their matches in the Booke of God. Ioshua fought as magnanimously, as successefully; yet (when he had conquered five Kings and kingdomes) the glory is the Lords,Iosh. 10.42. God fought for Israel. The Ethiopian army was a thousand thousand; Asa vanquished them: yet said,2 Chro. 14.12. The Lord smote the Ethiopians. Chusai was politicke, and taught the Traitor a tricke to overthrow himselfe: yet is it said,2 Sam. 17.14. The Lord destroied the counsell of Achitophel. Salomon was magnified for his wisedome; yet in that admirable proofe, the derision betwixt the two harlots; it is called1 King. 3.28. the Wisedome of God. It will suffer no glory to cleave unto earthen vessels: let the principall and first mover have it; The Lord did it.
Psal. 9.16.The Lord is knowen by executing Iudgement; upon Sodome and all the world. If Pharaoh will not know him at Mose's mouth, he shall feele him to his cost in the bottome of the Sea. If Herod will not know to honour him, he shall be loathed of his flatterers: they ran to him as a deitie, they shall run from him as carrion. If Sodome will not know God by Lots preaching, they shall know him by the fire about their eares. God is knowen by his Iudgements: his almightinesse is knowen by the creation, his mercie by our redemption, his wisedome and goodnesse by the worlds conservation: so his Iustice is knowen by the wickeds destruction.
That this is the Lords doing appeares, in that he spares others that have beene as guilty: for his mercie every where matcheth his Iustice. He confounded Sodome yet he hath converted many as wicked as they: his free grace hath brought those to heaven, who have deserved as deepe a place in hell. Manasseth broke his covenant with God, yet his repentance found mercie. As therefore we should feare to sinne, lest we perish as Sodome: so turne we to God in hope of savour, for he hath spared some as sinfull as Sodome.Esa. 1.10. ver. 18. Heare the word yee Princes of Sodome, and people of Gomorrah. They are compared to Sodome, yet mercie is offered, if it be penitenly and faithfully accepted.
6 Lastly, yet more to justifie this Iudgement of God, that is, to make it appeare just; as sinfull as Sodome was yet the Lord destroyed it not without premonition. First, hee sent among them a bloudy warre; which, whom it left not dead on the earth, it tooke alive into bondage. Here was one warning: yet in how few yeares hath Sodome forgot that she was spoiled and led captive? Had she beene warmed by the sword, she had escaped the fire. Yet did not that ill successe either make Lot leave Sodome, or Sodome leave sin: he still loves his commoditie, and she her impietie. Wicked men grow worse after afflictions, as water growes more cold after a heate.
This was not all, but according to the stintlesse vicissitude of their sins, God followes them with a succession of plagues. Yet after all these warnings, they become worse; so bad, that there were not ten good men to be found in five cities. This heape must needs be fit for the fire, that was all chaffe. Besides, God is said toGen. 18.21. Come downe from heaven about this examination. Which is a figurative speech; for he that filleth all things, neither goeth nor commeth: and he that knoweth all things, needs not inquire. But to shew that hee does not proceed in the extremity of Iustice, without such a precedent scrutiny as may leave them without excuse.
Lot continually preached to them, by his perswasion to holynesse, by his regu^ar and exemplary life: here was still further warning. He had fire in his tongue, but they had a sea of water in their hearts to quench it. His conversation was as great a vexation to them, as theirs was to him. He reproved them the very night before their ruine: but such as be bent upon villanie, are more exasperated by disswasions: ^ike violent streames that, when they are resisted by floud-gates, swell over the bankes. Not being able to reclaime the multitude, he singles out some: and when the rest of the night was short an^ dangerous; he being sought for by the Sodomites, and newly puld in by the Angels: yet he ventures abroad to seeke his Sons in
 aw. They were but betrothed to his daughters, yet such was his charity, that he hazards his owne safety to preserve theirs: faith would never be saved alone, but win all she can. He did admonish them like a Prophet, and advise them like a father; but both in vaine. He seemed to them as one that mocked, and they did more than seeme to mocke him againe. Why should to morrow differ from other dayes? Who ever saw it raine fire? No Almanacke ever spake of such weather. Or how should brimstone be ingendred, or exhaled into the aire? The clouds are bottels of waters, not of flames. Or if such a shower should fall, why must it not burne all the earth, as well as the valley? Why not as universall as was the deluge? Or grant it doe come, yet it cannot be so suddaine, but we shall have time to call for mercy: it will be as long a dispatching us, as the flood was a drowning them. Thus carnall men count preaching foolishnesse, devotion idlenesse, and Prophets mad men. Certainly these mens unbeleefe was as worthy of the fire, as the others uncleannesse: hee that beleeveth not, is already condemned.
Lastly, in the attempt of that horrid impiety, the AngelsGen. 19.11. smote them with blindnesse: now this being so miraculous and immediate a worke, might have warned them enough, that the businesse they undertooke was damnable. They smote not the Medium, which was the aire: nor the object, which was the doore: but their sight with such a blindnesse, that they could not discerne one thing from another. As the Aramites, that they could not descry the Prophet, nor the way, nor the Citie. Both their outward and inward discerning faculty was dazeled. Yet doth not this sensible warning better them: they go groping up and downe the streets, cursing those men whom they could not find: and yet they bethinke not themselves, that vengeance must needs be neere them. All this while Lot and the Angels be in light, and see them stumbling, and foresee them burning. God first stroke them with blindnesse, whom he will after consume with fire: it is his use to besot them he meanes to destroy. This darknesse was a forerunner of eternall darknesse, as the next mornings flame was an enterance to their ever-burning fire in hell.
Let this teach us to admire Gods patience, that will not destroy a Sodom without some warning and forbearance. If we wormes and dust should be so used of men, as God is used of us, we should quickly shew our corrupted stomachs. We have vengeance in our will, but not in our power: God hath vengeance in his power, but forbeares it in his will. We are commanded while we breath, to pray the Lords prayer; Forgive us our trespasses: which teacheth us that there is mercy in God without wearinesse. Sodome cracked the earth with the weight of her sins, and made the aire stinke with her loathsomenes; yet the Lord was long-patient. And will that God be furious and hasty against that soule that groones, weepes, bleeds for her offences? If it were not for this, how could we scape being sacrificed to destruction, to expiate his Iustice?
God chargeth Israel, that they had seene his glory, yetNum. 24.22. Provoked him ten times.Luk. 13.34. How often would I have gathered you! his mercies exceed all numeration. We have beene aIer. 31.31. Provocation to him ever since we were made, as Ierusalem was ever since it was built. But though the LORD be pleased at some times, and to some sinners, (...) enlarge his patience; let not us be bold to enlarge our disobedience. He punished the Angels in heaven for one fault, Achan for one sacriledge, Miriam for one slander, Moses for one unbeleefe, Ananias for one lie: he may be as quicke against our offences. How often soever he knockes, our safest course is to rise at the first call. Many are prevented by his Iustice, their spirits departing from them, as Iacob from Laban, or Israel from the Aegyptians, without taking leave, carrying away their Iewels and dearest treasures. Let us feare the price of angring so dreadfull a Majesty, and abusing so rich a patience: he now lookes for our fruite, or we must looke for his fire.
Next, be we taught here to take the hint of Gods warning; and not to let hi^ that is the breath of the Father and the Sonne, spend his breath upon us in vaine.
 He deales with sinners, as David with Saul: who tooke away his speare, and his waterpot, and somtimes a piece of his cloake; as it were snatches and remembrances, to let us understand that we are in his hands, and if we take not warning, he will further punish us. We call, and he heares: we aske, and he grants: we knocke, and he opens: cannot all this prevaile with us to deale so with him? Which of us can say, he hath not beene warned? It is Gods charge to his Prophets;Mat. 21.5. Tell my people; Diximus, we have told them:Esa. 58.1. We have shewed his people their transgressions, and the house of Iacob their sins. Hath death given us no warning, did we never find stitch and convulsion? did the head never ake? the stomach never refuse nourishment? All these are warnings of death, as death is a citation to Iudgement.
There is scarce any thing in the world, but it may serve for a monitor to us: as the messengers of Iob came one after another, to informe him of his unhappinesse; every one saying, Ego solus aufugi, I alone am escaped: to what purpose? To tell thee; Some of the Iewes are delivered from that raging destruction: to what end?Ezek. 12.16. To declare their abominations among the heathen, that they may know the Lord. But many are like the Sodomites, hardned by the warnings of God. Instead of embracing the counsell, they rage at the counceller. But when men are growne to that passe, that they are not better by afflictions, yea worse with admonitions, God finds it high time to strike. Now they have done sinning, God begins to plague. Wickednesse hath but a time, the punishment of wickednesse is beyond all time. Even the good Angels shall be the executioners of this judgment; and having first delivered Lot in Sodome, then from Sodome, they let drive at Sodome. There cannot be a more noble art, than to do Iustice upon obstinate malefactors. God doth not often punish for impurity, but impenitency.
Thus farre we have walked in generalls, such usefull observations as the story affords us: now to the particulars wherein consider principally two things; the measure, and the manner. The measure was a totall ruine, the manner, by fire. Frst for the measure.
Overthrew them.] It was a plenary and universall destruction. Their outward happinesse was so great, that like rotten fruite they could no longer cleave to the tree. It is said of the wicked,Psal. 73.5. They come in no misfortune like other men. No misfortune? now therefore all at once. It is not good to be too happy for this world: there is danger in being without dangers. The very heathen were loth to surfet on pleasures, and tooke it an introduction to further mischiefes. When Philip heard that his Army had got the conquest, that his Son Alexander was borne, and that his Chariots wonne the prize at Olympus, all in one day; he called on fortune to spice his joyes with a little bitternesse, lest hee should forget himselfe. The Aegyptian King blest himselfe from Policrates, because he was over-fortunate: when he would ^ry an experiment in despight of fortune, throwing a rich jewell into the sea, and finding it at his house in the bowels of a fish. It was a heathen curse, to wish all good ^ucke to their very enemies. It is not good for a man to engrosse prosperity, lest like (...) wasted candle, Extremum occupet fumus, faetor, and caligo. Belshazzar had no ^ooner drunke his voluptuous health in the Cup of the Temple, but a new Cup was ^eached unto him, the Cup of vengeance, and he must drinke off that too.
Here was a suddaine alteration: this houre a land flowing withall delights and ^iches; whithersoever they looke, beholding nothing but pleasures; and a few ^inutes have determined all this. Now nothing is visible but ruine, not a house, ^ot a tree, not a plant, not a pile of grasse standing: smoke and sulphur, and stench ^nd barrennesse possessing all the Plaine. When Amalek was destroyed, the trees ^ood: when Iericho was burnt, the gold was preserved: though the foundations of ^roy cannot be seene, yet grasse growes in the streets. But heere, silver and gold, ^lants and trees, grasse and beasts, houses and monuments, all consumed. This is such (...) overthrow, as the like never went before it, nor shall ever any match come after it; ^^t that one universall combustion of heaven and earth. Therefore the Scripture,
 when it speakes of an utterAm. 4.11. Overthrow, points at Sodome. She might have endured many plagues, yet still stood upon her foundations: but this is such a ruine as admits of no reparation. Such a one, as Sodome did only beare it, and may it please God that none but Sodome may ever feele it.
Condemned them.] The spoiling of their houses was much: yet had only their cities beene demolished, they might have built others, or lived in caves, or fled into forraine countreyes. The spoile of their goods was more: yet grasse that is trod^^ downe, may grow againe: the world hath more wealth. The maiming of their limmes had beene greater: yet life is sweet, and their coaches, and couches, and c^^ches, artificiall legges; and hospitalls, charitie is not quite dead. The killing of their bodies, and consuming their lives, yet neerer: the merchant will lose his provision, lose his wards, lose his vessell, to save his life. Yet if life be lost, is there not a day of reviving? Let death crumble the body to dust, shall not the resurrection restore it whole? Or if they must perish, yet let it not be by fire, the extremest of all torments. But what if fire turne the body to ashes, may not the soule ascend the heavens, and live in peace? O but what ransome shall a man give for his soule? D^^navit, he condemned them; this the most insuppportable burden.
To turne such goodly buildings into ashes, will not this satisfie his Iustice? To slay the beasts, wither the plants: not this? To sluce out the blouds and lives of so many thousands; mothers having no leasure to cry for their infants, because it is their owne turnes to suffer: not all this? No, the soule must answere for the soules offenses; He condemned them. The traveller yields to the theefe; take my purse, my horse, my garments; only spare my life. And man beseecheth God; take goods, and pleasures, and honours, and libertie, and life; only spare my soule; let not that be a prey to Satan. Miserable wretches! if they knew the worth of their soules, they would bespeake destruction, as the King of Sodome did Abraham;Gen. 14.21. Da nobis animas ^^stras; Give us our soules, take all the rest. Let us save our houses, if we can, and save our goods, and save our lives: but howsoever, let us save our soules, though we lose houses and goods and lives.
All was sharpe enough, but as our Saviour said to the man sicke eight and thirty yeares (a long and hopelesse torment)Ioh. 5.14. Sinne no more lest a worse thing happen (...) thee: there is a worse behind: all extremities are light and slight to Condemnation. Innumerable are the curses of God against sinners: but the last is the worst, comprehending and transcending all the rest; Damnavit; a Condemning sentence. The Sodomites felt a dismall Iudgement; fire and brimstone scalding their blouds to death: but what a slight spark doe they Iudge it to that they now feele in the fornace of hell. This is the Lords finall sword, when all his rods be worne out, and the wicked (...) the better. A smart blow comes, and the sinner is sensible, cryes out for case, and hath it granted: now he thinkes this punishment hath pacified Gods wrath, and (...) hath payed his owne debt. Another Iudgement comes, and he beares it with imp^tient sorrow, humbles himselfe, like Ahab: that once removed he hopes now God hath done with him. A third succeeds, now he grumbles under the load, thi^^^ that God doth him wrong; that he takes more than he should, and plagues him beyond his desert. But all this doth not better him: at last the Lord comes with^^^ Damnavit; Condemneth him: and then if all his riches, all his pleasures, the obl^^^on of his son for his sin, the racking of his joynts, tearing of his flesh, the b^^^^^ of his body for the ransome of his soule, could serve, he would make a joyfull ^^der of them all: but then they will not bee accepted. If any thing but d^^^^tion could excuse the reprobates, their condition were not so fearefull: (...) this Descendere ad infernum, condemning to hell, is the perfection of all ^^^chednesse.
Let us prevent Gods Iustice, by doing to our selves what he threatens to doe (...) to sinners. Let us overthrow our sins, that he may not overthrow our houses: ^^^demne our selves, that he may not condemne our soules: turne our iniquities to (...)
 that his fire may spare our Cities. As Niniveh by taking to heart the message of ^^eir overthrow, did overthrow the message. Their walls and buildings stood, by ^^ting their transgressions fall. They turned to deprecation and repentance, and ^^od turned to commiseration and forbearance. The subversion was threatned, the ^^nversion effected. Thus let us save God a labour, that when he comes to correct (...) he may find it done to his hand. Let us be selfe-afflicters, as we have beene selfe-^^pters: and set repentance to doe what God threatneth. Have we sinned in intem^^rance, let us punish our selves with abstinence: then God will not inflict on us fa^^ne. If in uncleannesse, chastise we the flesh by contrition, and clense it with reso^^ion against all unchastitie: so may we escape the diseases both of body and con^^ence. Let us breake off our covetice by mercie to the poore: so in stead of being ^^poverished on earth, we shall find riches in heaven. If in anger, let us returne to ^^tience: so when the Lord comes in anger against us, we shall move him to be pati^^t toward us. If in pride, come we downe to humility: when he lookes to find us ^^the chaire of presumption, let him see us in the humble dust: then instead of cal^^ng us downe to hell, he will lift us up to heaven. Thus with the fire of grace from ^ods Altar, let us consume our naturall, unnaturall corruptions; that the fire of ^^ngeance may never touch our houses, nor bodyes, nor soules. Lord, overthrow ^^r sinnes, and let our selves stand: teach us to condemne our errors, that thou ^ayest never Condemne us. That so serving thee with purenesse of heart, wee ^ay bee brought to the brightnesse of thy glory, through the greatnesse of thy ^ercie.
Turning the Cities into ashes.] I come to the manner of their destruction, which ^as by fire: wherein consider foure circumstances. The strangenesse, the sharpe^esse, the suddennesse, the destructivenesse.
1 The strangenesse; it was a miraculous raine; brimstone mingled with the ^^re, as a fit matter to disperse it: and, it is very likely, salt too:Deut. 29.23. It shall burne with ^rimstone and salt. Yea, and that water was powred downe also, from which was ^athered the dead sea remaining to this day. This Raine came from Heaven, the up^er region of the aire, the place for fiery meteors. And haply the nature of the ^oile being full of pitch, slime, and other combustible matter, did much encrease ^he burning.Gen. 14.10. The vale of Siddim was full of slime pits, and the Kings of Sodome and Gomorrha fell there. This was strange indeed, that fire and brimstone, the materialls ^f hell, should come downe from heaven: or that flouds of water should grapple with streames of fire: and that all, as water does set lime a burning, should helpe ra^her to enflame.Psal. 11.6. Vpon the wicked shall the Lord raine fire and brimstone, and stormy ^empest. That brimstone, a minerall of the earth, should be found in the aire, draw^n up by an extraordinary exhalation, to be sent downe after an unexampled confu^ion! But this was the Lords doing, and it is marvellous to our thoughts.
2 The sharpenesse. It is said of fire, that it is the best friend, the worst enemie: no element is more noble when it is our friend, none more terrible when our foe. God himselfe is a consuming fire: and he maketh his Angels a flame of fire. As the fire lies hid in the hard flint, so God is in every thing: it is quicke and shining, like the Trinitie. Fire consumeth wood, and purgeth gold: so doth the Lords grace con^ume our creature, and refine his owne creature. We desire not to be too farre off from the fire, lest we be too cold: nor too neere, lest it burne us. If we be too farre off from God by our Apostacie, we soone perish with cold death. If we dare come ^oo neere him him by our presumption, we are swallowed up with his infinite and inaccessible glory.
There was Ignis sacer in the Temple: that holy fire went out in the captivitie: but some of the Iewes say, it was hid in a pit. The Holy Ghost came downe upon the Apostles in the shape of fire. The fire concurres to the generation of things with the other elements, yet is it selfe child-lesse, it hath no fruit of his owne. So
 doth the Spirit worke with the other Persons in our Redemption, yet hath no p^^son Proceeding from him.
Thus excellent is fire while at peace with us: it heates, purges, enlightens, c^^sumes: so doth grace heate our hearts, enlighten our minds, purge our affecti^^ consume our corruptions. But when it is at warre with us, the rage is terrible things most beneficiall in their use, are most pestilent in their enmitie. The^^^^ graue to swallow Corah, water to drowne the old world, a sword to fall upon (...) a plague to slay Israel, a scourge for the backe of fooles; but nothing so sharpe (...) fire? The heathen have worshipped it for a god: for which choice being repu^^^ they demanded any thing that could overcome fire, and they would adore that. (...) Image was made by a cunning Artist, the substance whereof was clay, full of (...) which were so done up with some liquid matter that they were not seene. The ^^vincible God of fire was put under this Image; which quickly hardned the (...) and was put out by the melting liquor. But here was a stupid ignorance, to slip o^^ (...) one Idolatrie to another: and instead of a naturall element, to give over thems^^^ to an artificiall Idole. Fire hath over-mastred stronger Images than ever (...) made of clay, and left their ruines shamefull reproches to all their superstitio^^ Idolaters.
There is no element in the extremest fury more afflictive to the sense, (...) fire. Water doth only drowne, and soone choake the breath by stopping the ^^^sages of respiration: so Pharaohs destruction was in this respect farre short of Sodomes. The aire doth only stiffle the spirits, and by infecting the bloud, do^^ (...) more than a pleurisie or plague, dispatching if not with like speed, yet with lesse ^^ture: thus the Israelites in the plaines of Midian, sped not so ill as the Sodomites i^ the plaine of Iordan. The swallowing earth that opens her jawes with a quaking m^tion, devoures men alive, but it soone with a falling closure makes them dead: (...) Corah and his confederates suffered easier than Sodome and her inhabitants. But (...) killeth not only with the rest, but tormenteth above them all: scorching the limbes puckering the skinne, enflaming the bloud, enraging the sense, torturing the whol^ man. The sword is a sharpe executioner, armed with hostilitie, it hath unprison^^ millions of soules. The teeth of wild beasts roaring for their prey, are mercilesse, as the enemies of Daniel felt. The neerest of all plagues that comes to the torme^^ of fire, is famine: and the very anguish of famine ends in a kind of fire: when for want of vivid moisture the radicall heate is inflamed, and burnes up the vitall spirits. Gunpowder,Novemb. 5. the most damnable minerall that ever hell begat, or Rome made use o^ (for those worshippers of the Successor of Saint Peter found much emploiment fo^ salt-peter) yet can doe nothing without fire: it is but a speeding messenger that f^^^ sendeth.
All manner of deaths murders have in them some more mercie, or at least le^^ crueltie, than his fiery massacres. It is reserved in humane Iustice for the most horrible offenders; murderers, witches, denyers of CHRIST, Atheists; of which last number we have too many, but that the cunning Devill dares not be so bold (...) to professe it. But there is another fire for them, which shall quickly burne out Atheisme; for they shall feele eternally that there is a God; and their flame must be so much the hotter, because they would not beleeve in their offered Saviour. Thi^ is the incomparable torture of fire so powerfull, that no other element shall have the honour of purging heaven and earth, but fire: none able to burne this universall machine but fire. None other ordained to be the speciall matter of the reproba^^s torment in hell, but fire: whether in figure to shadow, or in realitie to performe, the extremest tortures, fire must doe it. That hath the most searching propertie, and can onely refine what is substantially good, and consume what is quali^^^ively evill.
Beside all these expressions comparatively, the sharpenesse of this punishment by fire, is aggravated by three gradations.
1 By the quality; it was not onely fire, but a deluge of fire.Gen. 19.24.The Lord rained fire: not sprinkled by drops, like a gentle shower, but Rained, as it were whole sheets of fire, the flashes of lightning are nothing to it; but flakes and streames of fire; The highest gave his thunder, hailestones and flames of fire. Not a little kindled, as fire in a house, that gathers force by degrees, and from small sparkes riseth to a violent cumbustion; but the very beginning was a raine of fire. They had rained on the earth great cataracts of sins, and heaven rained on them great cataclismes of flames.
2 By their indisposednesse to beare it; men quite destitute of the grace of God, ^nd forfeited to all discomfort. Flesh and blood, in either valour or desperatenesse, ^ave endured many strange torments in this world; lancings, searings, rackings, all ^o protract a miserable life. Divers martyrs have leap'd into their beds of flames, as ^eds of downes. But the sense of the torment hath been qualified by Gods assistance ^nd their patience. But he that could cooleDan. 3.27. the burning fornace by the will of his mercy, did inflame this fire by the breath of his fury. There was fire for doing well, here is fire for doing ill. There was the fire of man against the love of God, heare ^he fire of God against the lust of man. There was grace to allay it, here was sin ^o enrage it. The punishment was the more sensible, as the patients were more ^ensuall.
3 By the addition and mixture of it: not fire alone, but fire mingled with Brim^tone; a matter fit not to allay it, but encrease it. Extendit, non extenuat flammam ^ulphur. The perplexing properties of Brimstone are three: to burne darkely, sharpe^y, loathsomely. Darkely to grieve the sight, sharpely to afflict the sense, loathsomly ^o offend the smell. The Scripture, to describe the extreme tortures of fire, addes often Brimstone.Esa. 30.33. Fire and much wood,Ezek. 38.22. Psal. 11.6. Rev. 19.20. and the breath of the Lord like a river of brim^tone to kindle it. Where is both a Prosopopoia in the Breath, and a Topographia in the Brimstone: both figures to expresse the furious indignation of the Author, and fierce ^everity of the Act. For the Allegory of Breath, to denote the rage of Saul against ^he lambes of Christ, he is said toAct. 9.1. Breath out slaughter. To signify the Lords wrath ^gainst sinners, he is said to breath out fire. For Brimstone, it makes fire more terrible; darkening the splendor of it to the sight, sharpening the ferve^ of it to the sense, and ^ugmenting the stench of it to the smell.
This discovers to us the nature of sin, how stinking and loathsome it is to God, ^hat burning Brimstone is not more offensive to us. Fatidius Deo peccatum, quam ^omini sterquilinium. No perfumes are more pleasant to the sinner, no dunghills more noisome to the Lord. Absalom thought his pride sweete, Zimri his adultery, Nabal his wealth sweet: the usurers gold, the lascivious mans harlot, the defrauders ^gaine; all fragrant smells to them; because they breath no other aire but such pesti^ent corruptions. And the very sent of goodnesse would set them hard, as fen-men ^re sicke with a subtle aire, or the soile-man swooned when he passed through Buck^ersbury. But if their hearts were unstop'd, and clear'd from the cold and congeald ^atarres of sin, they would be sensible of the stench; and there is no worke of dark^esse but they would smell Brimstone in it. Our blessed Saviour feedeth among the ^ilies, lodgeth in the beds of spices, the sweet graces of his Church: let not us like Dor^es, love the dunghills: or like Scarabees, passe over all beauties, to light upon sores ^nd ulcers. O that we could but discerne sin as it is in it selfe: how should we then ^ate our lusts, our lies, our oathes, our covetous desires and practises; smelling the ^^inke of Brimstone in them all! Indeed we are all unsavowry of our selves, odious ^o that God, who hath pure eyes and pure nostrills: onely our hope and comfort ^s, to be sweetnedEph. 5.2. with the perfume of Iesus Christ.
3 The Suddennesse; the fire was not long a dispatching them: but as it fell be^ore their expectation, so it destroyed them before their recollection. When the ^un did rise, then began the raine to fall; now this was just atGen. 19.15.23. Lots entring into Zoar: ^t breake of day he went out of Sodome, at sunne-rising he came into Zoar: betweene which spaces a man may goe foure miles, say the Hebrewes. NowGen. 19.27. Abraham rose
 up early in the morning, yet he saw not the falling of the fire, but the rising up of the smoke onely. This must needs be done suddenly: in all likelyhood, lesse than halfe an houre determined all the glory of Sodome. The Prophet sayes, In a moment:Lam. 4.6. Sodome was destroyed in a moment. Why then should not men beleeve the same power of the last fire to consume the world, and our changing even in a moment?1 Cor. 15.52 In a moment, in the twinckling of an eye, at the last trumpet. That fire gave the Sodomites no time of remembrance, nor shall the last fire give the world any time of repentance. Vita brevis, and ipsa brevitas incerta: that may come suddenly, which wee know will come certainely. Wee have no more Patent of forbearance th^^^ had Sodome: it is said of the wicked, In momento ad infernum, In a moment they goe downe to hell. Death doth not alwaies creepe upon a man by degrees, likeEzek. 47.3. Ezekiels waters; from the ancles to the knees, from the knees to the loynes, and so (...) the heart: but swallowes some ere they can swallow their spittle.Iam. 5.9. The Iudge standeth before the doore. Would the theefe breake into the house, if he knew the Iudge stood at the doore? We may say of our sinning and dying, as Physitians of their criticall dayes; the first is Index, the second Index. Our sins shewes we shall die, our death judgeth us for our sinne. But betwixt both these there is Me^^^, remedium, a gracious helpe, the intervention of our seasonable amendment, and applying the satisfaction of Iesus Christ.
4 The destructivenesse; Turned them to ashes. It is a fearfull degree in punishment, in cineres redigi, to be reduced to ashes. God went farre with Israel, wh^^ they were Titio ereptus,Am. 4.11. a brand snatched out of the burning. He proceeded further, when he set the whole Forrest of his people on fire; yet stil a remnant was preserved, some did escape, even thorow the fire. The Prophet by theEzek. 37. Dry bones, shadowes out a desperate estate. A man is sicke, there is danger: panting for life, great feare: dead, no hope: buried, despaire: the flesh consumed, nothing but bones l^ft, here is the utmost extent, saving onely his wholly mouldring to ashes.Iob. 14.7. There is hope of a tree if it be cut downe, that it will yet sprought againe: but cut downe, cast into the fire, and converted to ashes, no hope.
Yet is this the end of all flesh: the innumerable army of Xerxes, all become as^es. Herod that was honoured as a god by men, was proved to be a man by wormes; turned to ashes. The Roman Palace, the Spanish Escuriall, all the glorious Cities and buildings of the earth, shall meet in this catastrophe; bee turned to ashes. Salomon from his royalty, Achitophel from his policy, Caesar from his monarchy, Plato from his Philosophy, even Moses from his humility; all good men from their sanctity, all bad men from their impietie, must descend to make ashes. Death is that impartiall metamorphoser, that turneth all secular glory into ashes. Where are they that credits this Temple wherein we pray, that built those houses wherin we dwell, that founded the Citie wherein we live, that begun those societies whereof we are? ye know, all turned to ashes. Not turned to birds and beasts, as the Poets fain'd, much lesse to stars; neither to plants nor planets; least of all to celestiall Angels, but to dust and ashes.
There is difference of estates while we live; Cinerum sub pulvere nulla. Yee (...) gods; there he considered their pompe and dignity: but yee shall die like men, there ^e minds their end, that with the change of his note, they might also change co^^nance. He tells them their honour, but withall their lot. In power, wealth, tra^^e, titles, friends, they differ from others: in death they differ not from others. They are cold when winter comes, witherd with age, weake with sickenesse, and melt away with death, as the meanest: all to ashes,1 Pet. 1.24. All flesh is grasse, and the glory of m^^ as the flower: the glory, that is the best of it, but a flower. No great difference, the flower shewes fairer, the grasse stands longer, one sithe cuts downe both. Beasts f^^ and leane fed in severall pasture, kild in one slaughter. The Prince in his lofty palace, the beggar in his humble cottage, have double difference; locall and ceremoni^^^ height and lownesse: yet meet at the grave, and be mingled in ashes. We walke i^ this world, as a man in a field of snow: all the way appeares smooth, yet cannot ^e
 be sure of any step. All are like actors on a stage, some have one part and some ano^^er, death is still busie amongst us: here drops one of the Players, we bury him ^^th sorrow, and to our scene againe: then falls another, yea all, one after another, (...) death be left alone upon the stage. Death is that dampe, which puts out all the ^^mme lights of vanitie. Yet man is easier to beleeve that all the world shall die, ^^n to suspect himselfe. Though we be older than those we follow to the grave, yet ^^l we hope for a longer reprieve. If any thing could have hired death to spare, ^^r fore-fathers would have kept our possessions from us. But ashes must to ashes: ^^st was our composition, and to dust must be our dissolution: only we looke for a ^^ter resurrection.
From all this observe the fit proportion of the punishment to the sin. They ^^ich burned with the fire of lust, are consumed with the fire of vengeance. They ^^ned against the rule of nature, and they perish against the course of nature. They ^^d conjured up hell to earth; and God sent hell out of heaven. For their unnatu^^l lust, unnaturall fire: there is a loathsome stench in their wickednesse, and there ^s the stinke of brimstone in their confusion. Such is the Iustice of God, not onely (...) strike for offending: but also the wisedome of God to strike according to the man^^r of offending.Psal. 9.16. The Lord is knowen by executing Iudgement: makingPsal. 73.15. Their sword ^^er into their owne heart. The Gibbet which Haman built for Mordecai, shall hang ^^mselfe. Pharaoh made away the Hebrew males, and was requited with the death (...) his first borne. Herod slew the infants of Bethlem, and was punished by the ^^rder of his owne children. Hildebrand suborned a villaine with a great stone on ^^e Churches roofe, to braine Fredericke the Emperor doing his devotions after his ^onted manner: and the same Traitor tumbled downe, and was quashed in pieces ^^th the same stone. Thus was Alexander the sixt poysoned with the same liquor ^^ich he had ordained to make away some of his Cardinalls. Three of those fie^^ conspirators were maimed and disfigured, by the fiering of powder at Holbecke (...) Worcester shire; who had meant by powder to blow up a whole State. Let all ^^ese examples terrifie the wicked: God will meet with them in their owne kinds, ^^d fill them a cup with their owne tempering. As their tongues have walked a^^inst heaven, so they shall be confined to hell: Propter solutas linguas, they shall ^^ve Catenatos pedes. For drunkennesse, want of a drop of water: for covetousnesse, ^^erlasting povertie of comfort.
Two things are yet further to be looked into. 1. how the Iustice of God may (...) justified in this universall confusion of the Sodomites. 2. what was the utmost ^^ent, or what followed the ruine.
For the former; it is the Atheists exception against the Iustice of God, that he ^^founded the innocent with the guilty. The men indeed were given over to licenit^^snesse, but no such thing is testified of the women: and if the women were also sin^^, yet the infants were not capable nor culpable of such faults. For answere, first let ^^hold this undenyable Tenent; The judgements of God are often secret, alwaies just (...) will shew mercie to whom he will, and he does us undeserved favour. He will execute ^^^gement on whom he will, and he does us no wrong. That he saves any, the cause ^^n himselfe: that he condemnes many, the cause is in them.
God is absolute Lord over all his creatures: and as it was his only pleasure to ^^e life, so also to take it away. Neither are we more to demand a reason of the ^^ter, than we are able to conceive a reason of the former. Whether he gives, or ^^akes, still blessed be the Name of the Lord.
Children are parts of their Parents, and therefore may bee justly infolded in ^^^ir fathers punishments. They are guilty of originall sin, a filthynesse that they ^^ve by propagation from their parents: for their soules were infected, so soone as ^^r they were infused. Before the Iustice of God there are none innocent. They ^^t have sinned from their parents, may justly bee inrolled with their parents. ^^ough they be not guilty of their fathers actualls, yet they have by nature so much
 corruption, as may deserve sharpe correction. How frequently hath God chastised the children for the fathers offences. Davids child begotten in adultery must dieIoh 9.2. Who did sinne, this man, or his parents, that he was borne blind? This the Apostl^^ could easily see,Chrys. howsoever they undescreetly asked: Quia antequam nasceretur, p^care non potuit ut cacus nasceretur.Ezek. 18.20. But the Sonne shall not beare the iniquity of the Father; a good sonne shall not answere for a bad father. But the child is a sinner, (...) parvulus unius diei: and when it hath the fathers sin with the owne it is punished (...) the owne sin, not for the fathers.
Thus doe many children suffer for their parents beeing conceived in offence, and deriving their diseases from their birth: there is Morbus haereditarius, as Physicians speake.Iob 14.4. Who can bring a cleane thing out of an uncleane? Both the trees and fruite were corrupt, the spring and chanels uncleane, therefore involved in one ge^^rall ruine. So fully did the Iustice of God triumph over them, that he left none ^^maining; but even the very seed and off-spring of the Sodomites perished.Esa. 1.9. Vnlesse the Lord had left us a remnant, wee had beene as Sodome? they had no rem^^^ left. The very little ones infected with their parents sins, were wrappd up in their parents flames.
Nor only fell those Sodomites for the present but for ever; suffering the v^^geance of eternall fire. A Iudgement so fearefull and singular, that it is able to strike a horror into our hearts with the very thought. This God did. 1. To shew hi^ perfect detestation of that wicked people; so apostate from all goodnesse, that their very seed was accursed. Because the fathers blaspheme against heaven, the childr^^ goe to hell. 2. To encrease their sorrow and torment in seeing the destruction of their children: for if nature were not quite extinct, and they had but as much affection as beasts to their young; it must needs wound their hearts to see the lamentable ruine of their children. Who can heare the confused cry of so many Infants, and not cry for company? to see their tender and ungrowen limbes wrapp'd up in st^^^s of fire, as swath-bands: the shrinking of their soft nerves at every pull of griefe their flesh scorched like a scrole of parchment; sprawling on the ground, and rock'd a sleepe with dire destruction; would melt a heart of Adamant.
God himselfe, at other times, had a speciall regard to Infants: excepting only some places that were execrable in his sight,Deut. 20 17. as Iericho,osh. 6.21. Edom, andPsal. 147.9. Babylon, and here Sodome. Now the sight of such a Iudgement among the little ones, that knew not the right hand from the left, that cleaved to their mothers brests, as apples (...) the tree; to be snatched away with death, and death in the frightfullest visage, b^^ning and tormenting death: this did aggravate their plague, and it had beene much easier for them to have suffered alone. There is nothing more naturall to us, tha^ (...) love our children; those living monuments of our selves, that piece out morta^^^ with succession, continue our names and Images upon the earth. These if we (...) affect with our loves, let us not infect with our lives: let us hate our sins, lest th^^ also perish with our selves. Why should we destroy those, whom we have in a ^^ner made? we brought them into the world with paine, up in the world with c^^ let us not send them out of the world with sorrow. Repentance and amendme^^ (...) life helpe us to prevent such an unhappinesse; that wee may neither smart f^^ the wickednesse of our forefathers, nor make our children everlastingly sma^^^ us. Let us obey our Father in heaven, that hee may blesse our children up^^ earth.
For the other consideration; the extremitie of their punishment was not (...) temporall death, but everlasting torment:Iud. ver. 7. Eternall fire. Their present fire (...) not buy out the future. Run they into the fields, it raines fire: into the houses, (...) flame with fire: into holes and caves, all places burne with brimstone. Mise^^^ men, whether they fly or stay, struggle or lie still, fire possesseth them. Sc^^^ sulphure, and burning stench, universally racking them. Yet is not all this enou^^^ purge out their corrupption, but a worse torment succeeds, and the judgement (...)
 earth doth but deliver them over to the condemnation of hell: which continually burnes their soules, and shall never turne them to ashes; a fire neither tolerable nor ^erminable. The breath of the Lord, like a river of brimstone doth inflame it, and the breath of ten thousand reprobates shall never be able to blow it out. When a drop of water shall be allowed, to coole the tongue that boiles with unsufferable flames. Where heat doth follow smoke, and fire heat, and stench fire, and torment stench, and burning shall be added to burning. Thus are they cast into utter darkenesse, where neither light of Sun nor Moone, much lesse the light of heaven, and Gods glorious face shall ever appeare. Where their eyes must distill like fountaines, and their teeth clatter like armed men.
These are those fearefull vialls of wrath, when God gives bloud to drinke unto them that boile with heate. Who can expresse their horrors, nay what horrors cannot they expresse? Sorrowes are met on their soules as at a feast: feare, despaire, and anguish leape upon their hearts as a Stag, and the furies of hell divide their spirits among them. Torment calls to desperation, horror to paine, come and helpe us to torture these wretches. Lust sends one plague, and pride another, and covetousnesse a third; till they run thorow a thousand deaths, and yet cannot die. All their ^ights are put out at once, they have no soules fit to be comforted. Thus they lie, as if they bore the weight of the whole earth: and so let them lie, saith the LORD, for ever.
Heare him that spake by experience.Luk. 16.23. Being in hell in torments, hee lifts up his eyes, etc. He looked upward, for he was low enough: he lift up his eyes, that could not lift up himselfe. Retrusus in locum imum, qui affectavit locum primum. He would not look down to Lazarus in his miserie, he must now look up to Lazarus in his felicity. Oculos quos voluptas clausit, acerbitas aperit. Where remembring his pleasures past, considering his joyes lost, sensible of paines present, and fearefull of greater tortures to come: he sees Ad cumulum suae paenae.Greg. Lazarum in sinu Abrahae: Lazarus in Abrahams bosome. (Every beleever is a child of Abraham, and whither should the child goe but to the bosome of his Father?) Now he begges with more flouds of scalding teares, than ever Esau sought the blessing, to have some comfort from Lazarus; send Lazarus, etc. His envious pride doth not yet forsake him. Non potuit ad Lazarum duci, sed Lazarum ad se deduci. He would have Lazarus come from the rest of heaven, to the terrors of hell. And what craves he? not an Ocean, not a river, not a pond or some small fountaine, not a bucket or spoonfull; but a drop. And what if all the rivers in the South had beene granted him, his tongue would still have withered, and he never have cryed in the language of hell; It is enough. Or had his tongue beene eased, the rest of his parts would still have fryed. Water might be by him, but Vinctae sunt manus, he hath no hand to reach it. O bitter day! when not the least finger (I say not, of God, but) of the meanest Saint in heaven, shall bring the least drop (I say not, of the waters of life, but) of the waters of the brooke to give him comfort. He fared as delicately as the Sodomites, in the fulnesse of all rare viands: he went not in sacke-cloth, or common garments, nor with a diseased body as Lazarus: but in purple and fine linen, not on the best day of the seven, or when he went to the Court, where it is somewhat tolerable; but every day. But now, like the Sodomites, he is snatched from his libertine surfet to famine, from a table of viands to a Table of vengeance, from boules of the lustiest wines to drinke sulphur, from beds of downes to beds of flames, from bravery to misery, O here is the embleme of wretchednesse! He would have one sent to his brethren, let this calamitie give warning to us all. Flame torments him, not a moderate fire. In a flame there is Ardor and Splendor: but in hell there is burning without sight, as in the Empyreall heaven there is light without burning.
Thus had the Sodomites their portion on earth, and from the want of all miseries, were driven to the miserie of all wants. God does not damne men because they be rich, for himselfe is infinitely rich; and Abraham that rejected the rich man,
 was on earth richer than he. Nor because they are Great, for himselfe is the greatest of all. But because they abuse these to the dishonour of his glorious Name. And to conclude; their torments are eternall.2 Cor. 4.17. As our short affliction causeth to us an excellent and eternall Glory. so their short pleasure causeth to them an exceeding and eternall paine. Their sorrowes are infinite, ratione finis: they lie pressed under an unsupportable load, and still call for more weight to dispatch them, but cannot have it. What the Psalmist sings of Gods mercie, is true also of his Iustice, that it endure^^ for ever.Bern. Greg. Horrendum incidere in manus mortis viventis, and vitae morientis. Fi^^ semper incipit, and defectus deficere nescit. If after so many millions of yeeres as there be drops in the sea, there might be deliverance, they had some hope. Men may comfort themselves in temporall sufferings, Dabit Deus his quoque finem: but there is no limitation in hell: when the Lord shall give over his being, they shall have ease and not before; which is Never. An infinite Majesty is offended, therefore an infinite penalty imposed. In hell they shall ever remaine sinners, therefore in hell they shall ever remaine sufferers. Sin is like oile, and torment like fire: so long as the oile lasteth, the fire burneth, and that is for ever. This is a long confusion, and therfore not to be passed over with a short meditation. Let us thinke againe and againe of it, and so feare it, that we may never feele it. It is a desperate madnes, for the pleasure that one houre determines, to incurre those paines that are capable neither of ease nor end. Thus I have insisted on the Sodo^ites punishment, that we being terrified with it, might learne by their example to prevent it. Which is the next point considerable, the Monument.
Made them an ensample to those that after should live ungodly.] This example of Gods Iudgement is one of the most conspicuous and remarkeable in all the sacred History, and set out for a speciall precedent by the pen of the Holy Ghost; with a note of recordation, like a hand in the margent that directs to some observable thing in the Text; with a Marke this, as a thing of great consequence. Where collect foure observations.
1 The right use of all Gods mighty wonders, is when we take them for wonders: trembling at the sight of the workes, and fearing the omnipotence of him that wrought them. When Israel saw that migh^y worke upon the Aegyptians,Exod. 14.31. They feared the Lord. They are drowned in a sea of water, and the other doe not drowne it in a sea of forgetfulnesse.Ion. 1.16. The sea was troublous, and the mariners feared: the sea was quiet, and yet they feared: this may seeme strange; but the first was the feare of nature, the second of Grace: then they feared the creature, now the Creator. When Ananias and his wife fell suddainly dead,Act. 5.11. feare came upon all the Church. The Iudgement was upon some, the feare came upon all. When the earth opened her jawes to swallow Corah, the people opened their mouth to cry;Numb. 16.34 Let us flee.1 Cor. 10 11. These things came unto them for ensamples, and are written to admonish us. These things they might have suffered, and their calamities have died with themselves, never beene knowne to posterity: but they are written for us. God made a record of them, and if there be any faith in us, they be as present to us, as if they were done before our eyes.Luk. 16.31. If they heare not Moses and the Prophets, nor will they beleeve one from the dead. Where faith makes a doubt, there sense will never be satisfied.
But if we trust not our eares; in all this ample theater of Gods Iudgements, did we never see any fetched away from a prosperous estate by strange accidents? were not they precedents for us? Cannot all make us afraid of overlaying Gods patience. Did the blasphemer never heare how Rabshaceh sped? Did they that blush not to be called the roaring crew, (therein sentencing themselves) never reade what beca^e of the Sons of Beliall? Did the secure worldlings never heare of the generall del^ge? Nor murmurers of those fiery Serpents? Nor uncleane persons with their catam^^s, of the condemnation of the Sodomites? Shall not al this make us to breake forth into those acclamations,Psal. 118.23. this was the Lords doing, and it is marvellous in our eyes.
Indeed these may work with the wicked to admiration, not to repentance. The very Iewes beholding the wonders of Christ, could say, wee never saw it on this fa^^^:
 and, The like was never done in Israel. Herod desired to see Christ for a miracle, as Faelix to talke with Paul for a bribe. But God doth not worke miracles for miracles, but for us. The gratious Lord hath so done his marvellous workes, that they ought to bee had in remembrance.Psal. 118.17. I will live, to what end? to declare the workes of the Lord: hitting the right end and use. The workes of his Providence are miranda: of his Iustice, miranda and metuenda: of his mercie, miranda, and diligenda.1 Sam. 12.18. The thunder should waken our secure hearts, the raine soften our stony bowels, the lightning mind us of the comming of Christ to Iudgement.
These things hath God left as memorials to the world, to be read and preached. We have the bookes, let us not be strangers to their contents. Our forefathers could once have said;Psal. 74.9. Wee see not our signes, there is not one Prophet among us, nor any that divineth: or if any did divine, they divined lies. Though this sacred Booke was not hid in a corner, as when2 King. 22.8. Iosias began to raigne: nor cut with a penknife. and throwne into the fire, as in the dayesIer. 36.23. of Iehoiakin. Yet the comfortable use was interdicted, the knowne language concealed, and men bound with a curse not to read it. It now lies open in our Churches, in our windowes; God grant we shut ^t not to our owne hearts. Preaching applies it, and this helpe we have also: may we never know the want of it: yea we shall not, unles we voluntarily put it from us, ^s a matter not worthy the keeping, and (with the Iewes) judge our selves unworthy of the kingdome of heaven. Diverse fearefull calamities are threatned to the Iewes, such ^s shall turne their feasts into mourning etc. But if their eyes do not yet dazle, nor their eares tingle; behind is a woe, that is beyond all woes;Am. 8.11. the famine of the word of God. Famine of bread is a sore plague, when a1 King. 17.12 wofull mother for herselfe and sonne, is dressing their last provision. The extremity harder, when2 King. 6.28. mothers by turnes eate up their owne children. But this is nothing to a dearth of holy knowledge. It is better not to be, than not to know: better unborne, than untaught.Sen.
2 God without all exception to the honour of his Iustice, might enrole all the wicked at once in universall confusion: but so it pleaseth his goodnesse to single out some, and propose them as bleeding witnesses to the world: that their vengeance might bring many to repentance. Perit unus, ne pereat universus. Such an execution of his Iustice doth more magnify his mercy; when he punisheth some, that he may spare many. As when many souldiers have faulted in a mutiny, the Generall executes martiall law upon some, to strike a terror into the whole army. So doth the Lord; Nobis fit misericordia, illis non fit in juria. We have deserved, what they have suffered, they have suffered, that we might be delivered. If we make not use of this mercie, we deserve the greater penalty.
3 There is no sin which man can now commit, but God hath declared his wrath against it, in his punishments for it: we can doe nothing without a precedent. ^s any sacrilegious? there be precedents to forewarne him; Gehesi, Iudas, and they ^hat kept a market in the Temple. But these men feare nec lepram Gehesi, nec suspendium Iudae, nec ejectionem e Templo per Christum. Will the Iesuite be a traitor? there (...) precedent. Absalom rebels, what was the end? His huge army defeated by a few, ^he wood devouring that day more than the sword: twenty thousand lost. A sens^esse oake performes the part of a good subject, and apprehends the traitor: his beast ^eft him to the gal-house, who was turned beast in renouncing his allegiance. The ^arth refused to receive him, heaven was shut against him, none of his troupes left to ^uard him; who had so unnaturally wronged the maker of all in his annointed vice^erent. The King gave charge for his reprievall, but the King of heaven had other^ise determined of him. And he that had ambitiously provided a stately monu^ent for his corps, a Pyramis or Pillar in the Kings dale; was tumbled with infa^ie into a ditch, like carrion under a heape of stones.
Can any be covetous without precedent? did he never read of Nabals base pe^^riousnesse, and accursed end? Hath not the adulterer, Zimri for his example? ^an he thinke of his suddaine end, and not tremble to embrace his harlot? And for
 the factious, that are subject to their owne lusts, but will be subject to no lawes; observe they not the conspiracie of Corah against Moses; whom the earth buried alive, and stayed for neither executioner to dispatch them, nor sexton to make a grave for them? Can a man exact upon his brother by a biting interest, without a Iewish example? Or throw his unable debter into prison without a precedent? The Vs^^^ is a legall theefe, the unmercifull creditor a legall murtherer: they doe nothing but by Law, and by Law they may goe to the Devill together. The fraudulent trafficker cannot abuse his simple customer, but there is precedent for him, in Ananias; Did you sell the land for so much? cost your commoditie so much? Yes, what followed? the lie he told before men, he was suddenly sent to answere before the God of truth. Doe tyrants now persecute the Church, without example? So Iulian sent his subjects to heaven in earnest himselfe went to hell merrily and in jest. Homicides have the example of Ioab, whose gray haires went not to the grave in peace. There is no profane libertine but had the example of Esau before him: who lost the blessing of heaven, for the pleasures of earth. They cannot tell a lie but by precedent: not sweare an oath, not breake a Sabboth, nor worship an Image, but by example. All these sinnes, and what other we can Imagine, have beene committed in former ages, and plagued by former judgements. Non tulit nos sine exemplo, ut inveniat sine def^cto, vel tollat sine patrocinio. These iniquities if we admit, they retaine not in so meane a qualitie, as before. Fratricide is now worse than in Cain, because it h^^^ Cains ensample. Apostacie now worse than inLuk. 17.32. Lots Wife, because her example hath forewarned us. Adulterate painting worse now than in Iesabel, because we understand her fearefull end. Vncleanesse now worse than in Sodome, because the Lord hath made them ensamples to those that after should live ungodly.
4 Gods Iudgements are so many reall Sermons against the sins of men. He doth not only preach vocally by the ministery of his servants, but also actually by the execution of his Iudgements.Psal. 62.11. Once hath God spoken, twice have I heard it: once in his word written, a second time in his worke done; his actions being so many declarations of his will. So Elihu in Iob.Iob 33.29. These things will God worke twice or thri^^ with a man, to bring his soule backe from the pit. Once hee spake it, another time performed it, a third time redoubled it. There is no people can plead ignorance, or exuse themselves by wanting meanes of Instruction: for the whole earth is filled with the Iudgements of God. When the fire devoures a mans estate, or the sea wrackes the Merchants hopes, or suddaine death takes away our neighbours life, God preacheth visibly to us. Though we pronounce nothing by a peremptory rashnesse, for feare of CHRISTS objurgation:Luk. 13.4. Doe you thinke they were greater sinners? For the cause is not revealed to us, as the Prophet spake of the troubled Shunamite;2 King. 4.27. (...) soule is vexed, and the Lord hath hid it from me. Yet let us take them to heart; we cannot discerne them, they all concerne us.
Let us be the better for all this, lest we become the worse. It had beene easier for us never to have heard of Sodomes ruine, than not to mend our lives by the e^sample. Gods hand would have beene lighter upon impenitent soules, if such precedents of his Iustice had never beene set before them. Lege Historiam, ne fias His^^ria. Let us raise our selves out of their fall, and make their subversion the matter a^^ meanes of our conversion. Exempla observemus, ne exempla simus. Let us be wa^^^ by examples, lest we be made examples. If we will not learne by others, others (...) learne by us. There is no learning so cheape, as that which comes at anothers co^^. If their poison by good allaying, be made our physicke: if the sword of vengea^^^ that devoured them, amend us with the very sight and shaking of it: we shall escap^^ Gods fury, and become the blessed examples of his mercy.
Now there are three impediments which frustrate the good use of this doctrine, Contempt, neglect, and mis-interpretation.
1 Contempt, which is a proud and presumptuous humour in men; whom th^ most palpable judgements, and evident executions, shall never deterre from their
 damnable projects.Psal. 10.5. The Iudgements of God are high above his fight: tell him how ^thers have perished, he answers; Tut, I shall never be moved.Cypr. But this is the grea^est Iudgement of all; Non intelligere delicta, ne sequatur panitentia: not to under^tand their errors, lest they should be brought to repentance.
2 Neglect and a forgetfull slighting of such terrible things. It is to them but a ^ang, or a transient stitch, a nine dayes wonder, or newes that is quickly out of date. ^haraoh was no sooner quitted of the plague but presently his heart was hardned. While God thundred, he trembled: but then as if the Lord had spent all his pow^er and shot, he is the same man he was.Hos. 6.4. Like Ephraims goodnesse, a morning dew. While the weather is cloudy, they are melancholy: but when the Sun of prosperi^y rises, and the storme of affliction cleares up, their moisture is dryed. Such a dew ^ou shall have stand upon the stones of the Church against raine, but the stones are ^ever the softer for it.1 King. 21.27. Ahab hearing the denunciation of wrath, was humbled: the ^and of judgement did but crush his heart like a piece of clay, till the moisture was ^ressed out, leaving it then but more hardned earth. All Israel was affrighted at the ^earefull end of Corah; yet even the very morrow after they fell upon Moses and ^aron, murmuring;Numb. 16.47. Ye have killed the people of God. Such small impression doth ^he miserie of others leave in us; as if we had, a protection from all arrest, a super^edeas against all suites. And what plagues soever we see inflicted on others, we think ^hey have deserved them, never reflecting upon our owne merits and mutable condi^^ons. We come short of the circumspection that is in birds and beasts: for they can ^void the places where they see their fellowes have miscarried, and are sensible by ^^at token to remove.
3 Mis-interpretation, by soothing our selves in our owne courses, and turning ^^e streame of Gods Iudgements another way. Some sport with these examples: ^nd being set forth as Crocodiles in terrorem, they make them their play-fellowes, ^nd the subjects for the exercise of their wits. As to respect the conversion of ^ots wife, no better than one of Ovids Metamorphoses; Niobe into a Stone: as if ^^ere was no difference betwixt Gods actions, and Poets fictions. So they ascribe ^oahs floud to some extraordinary aspect of the Moone, or concurse of watry pla^ets: and thinke not that God opened the windowes of heaven, and fountaines of ^^rth. The drowning of Pharaohs Hoste, to the inconsiderate venturing over upon high Tyde. It shall be imputed to any thing rather than the true cause; Gods an^er: these ensamples working no more upon them, than meere casualties. But woe (...) those that shall not so understand them, as God meant them.
Here I have just cause to declare against three sorts of mistakers: with whose ^^rors I will deale, as the venerable Iudges doe with seditious Attourneys, call them (...) the Bench, pitch them over the Barre, put out their names from the Roll and let ^^em goe.
1 The Impeachers of Gods providence, among whom there are sixe errors, ^. Of the Stoickes, who call providence by the name of fate or destiny: which runs ^^orow a ranke of causes, so bringing in an absolute and inevitable necessitie, that pini^^s the armes of God and man. Theodoret beates the nose of this error flat to the devi^^rs face. 2. Of such as tie Gods providence only to celestiall things, exempting (...) sublunary and corrupt matters. Ierome saies,Averroes. this error was crept into the hearts ^f the Iewes; as he collects from Ezek. 9.9. The Lord hath forsaken the earth, and ^^th us not. Therefore the LORD answers, mine eye shall not spare them; to shew that ^is power is also upon the earth. 3. Nicenus, with others, held that Gods provi^ence extends it selfe to corruptible things only in a generall manner: ad rerum gene^^ vel species, non ad singularia, non ad individua. But our Saviour comprehends un^er it not only the haires of men, but even the feathers of birds. 4. Aquin. speaks of ^^e error of Rabbi Moses the Iew; that among corruptible things, man only apper^^ineth to the divine providence. This Ieremie confutes. Deus universae carnis;Ier. 32.17. I (...) the God of all flesh; both of men and beasts. 5. Of the Platonists, that distinguish
 three kinds of providence First, of the supreme God, that stretcheth primarily to spirituall things, in a second degree to all the world. The second, of separated substances, that move the heavens Circulariter; Intelligences. The last, of certaine Damones, powers, which they place in the middle betwixt God and man. Such are those that worship Devills for a Ne noceant. 6. Of Atheists, that deny all providence, and admit only fortune. Lactantius hath confuted it by many arguments; b^^ Davids conviction is the best disgrace to it, who sets a Cockes-combe on the head of it; The foole hath said in his heart, There is no God. In his heart he hath Said it, but i^ his heart he never beleeved it. Looke upon all creatures; they make one glorious army, marshalled into their severall rankes, and marching to the will of their great generall. Why doe stones, plants, and insensible things, tend to the end for which they were created, when as yet they have no knowledge of it, but that they are directed by God? Young ones are no sooner borne, but they turne their mouthes (...) the brest of their mothers: yet man, against nature, reason, religion, doth not turne his mouth of confession, to acknowledge that God who made him. Wee see birds to come of egges, and living things engendred of dead seed: why should we^ as well beleeve the resurrection of our bodies, and the last account of all our actions?
2 As mis-construing perverters of Gods Iudgements. That the Iewes after a curse of fifteene hundred yeares, and a vagabond dispersion like Cain, should not bethink themselves of their murder of the Lambe of God, is the stupefying spirit of error. One of them is driven to confesse that as this plague so far exceeds all their former, captivity so the sin that caused it must exceed al their former sins. As much may justly be said of our Italianated fugitives; who seeing the terrible Iudgements of God upon them, will not yet know the Lord. The powder plot is passed over with An unfortunate attempt; and the Instruments no further blamed than for their rash and ill lucke: as if they confessed that it wanted nothing but successe to make it lawfull: worse than the sorcerers of Aegypt; they could cry out; This is the finger of God.
They call for a Iudge of controversies betwixt us, yet will not see that God himselfe is the Iudge: declaring his sentence and derision by helping the side which he favoureth. All his judgements upon the conspirators, cannot learne them how much he detesteth such practises. Still they will not gather the unwarrantablenesse of their designes, though they have beene forced in indignation to blunder out, that the Iudge of all the world is become a Lutheran. Still they are mad to be made t^e wretched engines of his ambition, that sells the soules of men to buy himselfe reputation. Cannot the Catholicknesse of their doctrine, and the infallibilitie of their director, make their plots successefull, and still are they blind? Such palpable demonstrations of Gods wrath so directly against their proceedings; might at least make them suspect that something is amisse, and examine where the fault resteth. To have their Infallibilitie so deceived, might cause them to recollect themselves, if they were not drunke with the wine of Sodome. Though they smart with the vialls of fury, yet they will not leave their sorcerie,Revel 9.20. according to the prophecie of them. They will ratherRevel 16.9. knaw their tongues for paine, than acknowledge Gods judgements for sin. If we were such damnable heretickes as they would make us, how comes it to passe that the Lord so takes our part? That they so often tempting us by flatterie, and attemtping us by fury, have not yet prevailed against us? Th^^ ^^^ther the Popes Bulls nor curses have wrought the intended effects? Certainely if the LORD did not favour our cause; hee would never so protect our S^^^e. Yet all these ensamples worke not upon their consciences, nor will they confesse their pernicious courses. Though many hundred of their trecherous Emissari^^ have miscarried, yet still more follow on, as if no Precedent had bid them take heed. But Antichrist deales with them, as Amnon did with Thamar: first ravisheth them, and then turnes them out of doores. But because they would not take example by whom they should, they shall be made examples to whom they would not: even (...) reproch to all posterity, and a stinke to the succeeding generations.
3 All profane persons that misapply these ensamples: what plagues soever come to others, they conceit of themselves no such desert: Quod perit, pereat: and no further mind it. In stead of a serious application, to make a jest upon others misery, ^his is common. We shouldRom. 12.15. Weepe with them that weepe: woe to such as laugh at ^heir brothers teares. Whereas, Ille hodie, ego cras, was Saint Bernards use: and we ^re, have been, or may be, as miserable as they; was Saint Augustines. The seaman that sees another ship split on a rocke, will avoid it. Passengers feare to travell ^hat way, where they heare of continuall robberies. Yet cannot these iudiciall pre^edents humble them; as if they had their salvation by Patent. Yea, they are but ^emporally sensible of their owne plagues: nor doth the thought outlast the smart. As that Father speakes of the afflicted Pagans; Perdiderunt utilitatem calamitatis: ^iseri fiunt, and pessimi permanent: worse in body, and no better in soule. Either they ^hinke they need no affliction, or so sure that they are above affliction. As if God,Aug. ^^ke some skill-lesse Chirurgion, when he comes to let bloud, could not find a veine; ^^t were not wise enough to chuse that veine which is fittest to bleed.Esa. 1.5.
They are lethargically secure, no ruine but their owne can stirre them. But ^hat which could not Instruere, must Destruere: if they be not deterred by others ^hey must be destroyed themselves. Thunder proceeds from a vapour lifted up from ^he earth, and compassed with a cold cloud: in the agitation or struggling it takes ^^re, and then breakes out where the cloud is thinnest: and being out, sometimes it ^^rikes the clothes, not the body: sometimes the body, not the clothes. So doth ^reaching; it is the vapour or breath of the Spirit, surrounded with the cold and ^atrish humours of our sins: it struggles with them, and in the strife catcheth fire; ^nd so vents it selfe to the terror of the world. Somtimes by menaces and examples, (...) strikes our garments, not our selves: sometimes it goes farther, and strikes also our ^wne hearts. Oh then let us feare Gods Iudgements upon others, that we may ne^er feele them our selves.
To conclude with application, albeit indeed the whole discourse is but a doctrine ^f Application: for wherefore is an example propounded, but to be applied? ^ypocrites are sicke, and will not be knowne to stand in need of physicke; they can ^^ve no remedy. Profane ones are sicke, and will accept of no physicke; they will ^ave no remedy. It is hard to say, which case is worst: now God have mercy on ^hem both! Can we thinke, God will not deale with us, as he hath dealt with others ^efore us? Iesabel suborned false witnesses, and had her necke burst for it: is there no ^udgement for such offenders? Achan for Sacriledge is stoned, our Church rob^ers hope to scape. Miriam was proud, and became leprous: our plaisterd popin^yes feare not. Israelites distrusting in the Lord, die by a plague: how many want ^^ith, and yet looke not to want mercy? Esau seemes to say unto all profane wretches; ^ake warning by me: Ahab to al superstitious Idolaters, Saul to all malicious persecu^^rs, Absalom to all unnaturall sonnes, Gehesi to all false servants,Numb. 14.37. Nabal to all cove^^us churls, Shimei to all blasphemous railers Take warning by us. And the Sodo^ites here are made to speake in the language of sorrow, to all secure wantons, Take ^arning by us.
Such measure is to be expected from Gods hands, if such wickednesse be found (...) ours. If men like it well, to have their buildings on fire about their eares, to see ^^eir infants dashed against the stones, or scorched with flames, to feele a bloody ^^emy triumphing in their streets, to have their names a derision, their Cities a deso^^tion, their carcases exposed to fowles, and perhaps their soules to furies and tor^ents: they may then run on their impious courses without any repentance or de^recation. It is Gods mercy, that we were not made the first fruits of his wrath, ^nd examples to all the world: but how great is our unthankfulnesse, if having thus ^scaped, we are not bettered? Or if we scape all this, yet the Lord will strike when ^e sees his time, perhaps when we are in worse case to beare it. He can make our ^eath-beds smart for this; he may reserve all horror and amasement to that desperate
 houre, and then lay on us the burden of all our sins. There is one thing, if we heare it, and heart it, enough to fright us all: Tolerabilius erit Sodomae:Mat. 11.24. It shall bee easier for them of Sodome in the day of Iudgement, than for thee: and yet the Sodomites are now in hell. If we receive not the blessed Gospell with faith and feare, Sodome and Gomorrah never sinned as we sin; and Sodome and Gomorrah were never plagued as we shall be.
But as it is a happy alarme that brings in the straggling souldier to his Colours: and a good chance for the wandring sheepe, by seeing the wolfe prey on a goate, to be gathered home to the fold. So let the destruction of Sodome, be the instruction of England; let their curse become our blessing. It is a good compassion of nature, that shall bring us to the compunction of grace. So instead of fire and brimstone from heaven, or in hell; the Angels shall lift us up from the vale of mortality, and the brightnesse of glory receive us in the Paradise of joy; through the mercy of GOD that hath promised it, and the merits of CHRIST that hath purchased it for us.
To those that after should live ungodly. What Saint Paule sayes; Lex non est p^sita justo,1 Tim. 1.9. The law is not made for the righteous man: so nor here is the Example set for the holy. But the law is for the lawlesse, and the example of the ungodly is for the ungodly. Ex malis moribus oriuntur bonae leges. He that freely obeyes the truth, finds no adversary of the law:2 Cor. 3.17. it serves to chastise the bad and backward, not to restraine the good and forward. The horse that reineth well, needs no bitte: nor ^e that runneth freely,Chrys. a spurre.Gal. 5.23. Against the righteous there is no law. There is (...) Condemning law, for they are in Christ: there is no Compelling law, for the Spirit is in them; and they doe as willingly obey God, as if there was no law. Were the^^ no hell, and God would not punish transgression with eternall death; yet would they avoid all sin because it displeaseth CHRIST Yea further, if CHRIST would not give them eternall life, yet would they love him, and desire the advancement of his kingdome. So these examples are not for the righteous, but for the ungodly.
1 Let us consider what this ungodlinesse is in the proper nature of it: for it seemes to consist both in the privative or negative, excluding somewhat, and coming short of what is required: and in the Positive, committing somewhat that is prohibited. Vngodlinesse is a sin, which many defie in their mouthes, and embrace i^ their hearts: so much greater than the seven Popish deadly sins, as it is indeed the ground of them all. More dangerous; because being rooted in the heart, it is not so visible to the eye, nor discernible to his reason that owes it. More hainous, because it is more spirituall, immediatly directed against God himselfe; being a brea^^ of the first commandement of the first Table, robbing him of his due honour. (...) consists, either in the true worship of a false god, or in a false worship of the (...) God, or in the true worship of the true God with a false heart. Whereas Godlin^^^^ is a true service of the true God, in a true religion, with a true heart.
First, it gives him not his honour: secondly, it gives it to another: thirdly, (...) doe give him due honour, yet not after a due manner.Psal. 14 1. The foole sayes in his (...), There is no God: not but that his conscience is convinced of the contrary: but on the least temptation his heart is willing to acknowledge none. Said, ot beleeved: examine him according to his Creed, and never foole beleeved in his heart, there is (...) God. If he must confesse his being, yet he renounceth all subjection.Iob. 21.14. They say (...) the Almighty, Depart from us etc. This is too outragious to be the speech of th^ tongue, it is the rebellion of the heart; not vocall, but actuall.Luk. 19.29. They will not (...) him raigne over them. They scorne to beg a blessing of him,Psal. 14 4. They call not upon (...) Lord. They that will crouch and attend the Court for a Lordship on earth, wi^^ not so much as be petitioners for the Kingdome of heaven.Zeph. 1.12. They say the Lord (...) doe neither good, nor evill: they sleepe, and dreame that the Lord sleepes too. O^ they not onely deny this tribute to their Creator, but give it to some creature; (...)
 David tooke the land from honest Mephibosheth, and gave it to Ziba a varlet. Or ^^se they resolve to honour him, with that he hath declared to offend him: as Paul ^n persecuting, and the Iewes in executing CHRIST; thought they did God ^ervice. Lastly, even in their best workes, that may carry some shew of devotion, ^hey have a false heart: halting betwixt God and Baal; a mixed service. So Demas, ^hough he forsooke Paul, yet turned not to his Idols againe.
But he that will admit the service of God no way but his owne, shall find the mer^ie of God no way at all. There may be a denyall of God in reall fact, even when ^here is a confession of God in verball faith. A disease which this age labours of: in ^reat ones it is a Noli me tangere; Physicians and Divines call it incurable. Yea our ^ulgars are not exempted, and the Pulpit can prove nothing so appositely and direct^y by Scripture, but if it displease the people, it shall never come in their Creed. Let ^eligion and the Gospell goe whistle, if they speake not as this people would have ^hem. When Gods word and this ungodlinesse meetes, you shall heare a ratling and ^^ssing, as in the encounter of fire and water. Paul casts fire at Ephesus, Demetrius ^oares: in comes the Towne-clarke with the magnificence of Diana: alas, that was (...) painted fire, no noise nor tumult at it. If we stroake your splene, and tell you that ^ou are predestinated to goe to heaven in a Coach, or that a wherry shall gently waft ^ou to Canaan; this is a painted fire that never troubles you. But when we speake ^f denying your covetous lusts, abjuring your sacriledge, bleeding for malicious lies ^nd slanders; here is presently an hissing, a mutinous mad rebellion.
The word in us labours to destroy ungodlinesse in you, and ungodlinesse in you ^^bours to destroy the word in us. But consider what the Prophet told Amasiah; Qua non acquievisti consilio meo;2 Chron. 25 16 Because thou hast not obeyed my counsell, I know that ^od hath determined to destroy thee. The Sonnes of Eli would not hearken,1 Sam. 2 25. because ^he Lord meant to slay them: their hearts must be hardned, that they may be destroyed. Alas, the scholer is but the patterne of his master, and our knowledge but a beame ^f Gods knowledge: while ungodly men refuse us, (Truth hath said it) they reject God himselfe. They got Zechariah to be made away2 Chron. 24 21. by the Kings command: he said ^o more at his death, but videat Dominus, The Lord looke upon it; what followed? While ungodly men are whetting a knife to cut our throtes, God is whetting a word to cut their throtes. One singular proofe of ungodlinesse, is a contesting against ^he preachers of Iesus Christ.
2 This example is set downe for the ungodly; but it is rare to find any that ^ill confesse themselves ungodly: now men that have no sense of being ill, will ^ever care for any medicines to make them well. And though the fruites of it were ^ever more visible and notorious, yet the roote lies buried in the ground, and boasts ^f a concealement. We have some to whom the very Church is a shadow of death, ^nd they have earnest businesse, which they love above God and their owne soules. ^xamine your fields, streetes, waters, in the times of devotion; is not this ungodli^esse? And for them that make as though they would be saved, doe they not sue for ^heir inheritance in heaven, Forma pauperis; refusing to give the least scrap of their ^uperfluitie for eternall life? Yea, doe not they even pull downe that kingdome, ^hich they seeme to crave? Is not this ungodlinesse? If they heare, is it not with ^ontempt, splene, censure, and (if they durst) with controlment? How few, when ^he Sermon is done, thinke either the worse of themselves for the present, or become ^he better afterward? How manyPsal. 94.8. brutish men find we, that continually mistake ^he soule for the body?Luk. 12.19. Soule, eate, drinke, etc. his meaning was, body eate. He ^hought his soule was delighted with sensualls, whereas it is the lay-part, the very ^^ast of man, that is thus pleased.
Lust is with the affections, as Iesabel with her chamberlaines; she paints and ^^eases: grace comes like Iehu, who is on my side? O that she were hurled downe. If ^ealth encrease, there is a dish added to the table, a set to the ruffe, a tie to the shooes: ^^t not a dramme to devotion, not a mite to the Church, not a scrap to the poore,
 not a grace to the soule. Not to speake of the profest enemy to all goodnesse, the engines of hell, and deputies of the Devill, whose soules are nothing els but moving anatomies: such as are yet to chuse their faith, and thinke religion an humour or fancy following the complection. Like a condemned wretch, that Explet ventrem, damnatus effundere sanguinem; jests away his soule. (Pardon all holy impatience: ^^ruly patients make sharpe physitians.) Men that thinke all we preach to be but fables: yet on their death-beds, if their lethargiz'd conscience be suffered to wake (...) it goe to hell; they would give all the world to be sure what we say were not true: are not these ungodly?
To omit those hypocrites, that are shufled among professors, as Saul was among the Prophets: for there is no cure of an unknowne griefe. To omit those swearers and adulterers, who are out of the reach of civill Iustice, but God puts them in his owne kalendar:Hebr. 13.4. Iudging the one, and;Exod. 20.7. not holding guiltlesse the other. And those Toes of the land that rot with Idlenesse; lasy beggars: as it hath beene observed;Sr Thomas Mores Vtop. Great men make theeves, and then hang them up: make them, by suffering sloth to slide into villany. And all those capitall oppressors, that like Faelix, when they can get no money, will bind Paul, if it be but to curry favour with the Iewes. They grew rich by the undoings of men, yet under the shadow of power and authority,Mic. 7.3. They wrappe it up. Wrappe it up, as mud in Chrystall, or a fowle thing in a faire clout. Which was detested by a very Tiberius, chiding his polling officer; Tonderi volo pecus, non deglubi. This is ranke impiety: but to come closer home, and happy is the bosome which is not conscious of these evils.
Have we any more than a meere forme of godlinesse, reserving the pride and choise allowance to our owne lusts? As our trecherous Romists, that give their liege their complements, but to a forraine Prince their hearts. Doe not men spend ten houres about Mammon, before one minute about devotion? doe they not thinke of their last account, as the last thing to be thought of? Is not covetousnesse chiefe commander of the Fort, and nothing done without her permission? Where did the bad servant bury his tallent, but in the Earth? earthy affections, covetousnesse buries all. This is that which eates out the heart of grace, by eating grace out of the heart. Is not this ungodlines got into the midst of that execrableRom. 1.29. rable? The Devil may seeme to take example by covetous worldlings, to chide his spirits, and upbraid their sloth: mortall men in so few yeares can heape up so many thousands, and g^^ abundance into their hands: and you that should in quicknesse outstart them, lie sleeping like drones by the hearth of hell, and seeke not to people our kingdome.
And who can wonder that those men disregard their Ministers, that have cast away all respect of their owne soules? Or what marvell that St Anthonies vision, which is said to be two years before the Arrian heresy arose; should now be palpable Beasts about the Altar, kicking it with their heels, dashing it with their hornes, and trampling on it with their fowle hooves; till like Iob, it be made poore to a proverbe. Covetousnesse makes ungodlinesse flourish. Yet is not this all: for where is the subjection of heart to the will of God? Who suffers that supreme law to rule his actio^^ and affections? who trembles at that thing which may offend his maker? Men little thinke of their conscience, when they are going about to please their concupiscence: they study their ends, not their End. And how hardly will they preferre God^ glory before their own soules, that will not prefer it to a piece of artificiall clay? Is not this ungodlinesse? Innumerable be the fruites of an ungodly heart, whereof the fewer we see in our selves, the more they be, and the more to be lamented. If we be not evill, why doe we pray, Deliver us from evill? Wretched are they that stat^^ themselves, and blessed are they that can prove themselves, to be out of the ranke of the ungodly. The omniscient eye can find ungodlines enough in the best. To us the^^ is this Ensample applyable: let it make us confesse that we are as they were, and repent that we may never be as they are. Lord, take away our ungodlinesse, and th^^ shall find none.
3 Lastly, consider the state of ungodlinesse. To be ungodly implies two things; ^ickednesse and wretchednesse. He is mortall, yet covetous: poore, yet proud: ^olish, yet head-strong. He takes great paines to build an house on another mans ^^ound: he seekes for sweet water in the midst of the salt sea. He studies more to be ^^vanced, than to be worthy of that advancement. He hath lost himselfe, and de^^erately cares not what he does, to find his will. Nor his goods, nor his honours, ^^r his friends goe with him, but his sinnes: so he departs to torments boundlesse, ^^dlesse.
The Scripture sayes of him, that he is1 Cor. 15.17. in sinne: it is one thing to have sin in (...), another thing for us to be in sin. Sin is in us all; Saint Paul conf^sseth it of him^^lfe;Rom. 7.20. sinne dwelleth in me. But all are not in sin, drowned, captivated, dungeon'd. ^e say, such a man is in drinke: drink may be in him, and yet he sober: but for him (...) be in drinke, argues him drunken. The ungodly doth hunt after sin: the eye and ^^e eare being a couple of beagles to put up the game, and the whole man turn'd in^^ a beast to follow the course. Only here is the difference: there the hart or hare ^^at is chased dies, and the hound lives: here the sin survives, and the hunter peri^^es. He is slaved to sin; whatsoever lust dictates, he subscribes to: there is no base ^^ficer in his familie of wickednesse, but let him come with the most unnaturall suite, (...) writes Fiat.Prov. 5.22. He is holden with the cords of his sins: God helpe the man thus ma^^cled: this is a case, wherein a King may be pitied by a galley-slave. Here is no fly^^g, no changing his master: sua mutare potest, non se: he may change his place, e^^te, repose; lodging, repast; he cannot change himselfe. Whethersoever he goes, (...) takes himselfe along with him.
He hath latam and expansam conscientiam, a broad conscience; which is like a ^^rne doore, it can take in a whole load of corne: he can swallow a camell. All ra^^nous fishes have large and wide mouthes: the divell will never mince this mans ^^eate, he is able to swallow it whole. (Whereas the good conscience is like the lit^^ doore to the Sanctum sanctorum, that lets in none but the high Priest, IESUS ^HRIST.) He confirmes his heart in evill a by voluntary custome; till he can wi^h ^ore ease digest the heardest offence, than the stomach of an Ostrich can digest yron ^e is pleased with the successe, vexed with the prevention of any sinfull purpose. If ^s plot be crossed, and his hand cannot act that wickednesse by day which his head ^^th devised by night; he is taken with a fit of melancholy, sicke of the sullens; as ^^s Ahab and Haman. He thinkes it a death that he cannot be suffered to die, it is a ^^l to him, that the gates of hell are shut against him.
If he be punished, he can grieve at the smart, not at the cause: in sicknesse he can (...). My head, my head, or my belly, my belly: but my sin, or my soule, is none (...) his complaint. To waile some small effects, and never to thinke of the cause; is (...) be curious in healing the clifts of skin at the roote of our nailes, never minding (...) corruption that is in our heads or hearts. His whole businesse is sinne, he hath ^^thing else to doe in the world. He may tast of the waters of life by chance, as a ^^gge laps at Nilus; but his voyage is bound for mischiefe. And like a fire^^rke on a line, he runnes on while his matter lasts, then goes out with stinke and ^^racke.
Though I cannot say to all men, be not sinners: yet let me say, be not ungodly ^^ough you admit sinne, doe not intend sin: doe not seeke it, though it finds you. ^ould men know what is in their hearts, and distinguish betwixt rebellions and in^^mities? Pyrates forrage on the seas, rob Merchants, refuge themselves at Dun^^ke or Argiers. They complaine to the Spaniard or Turke for redresse: No, say ^^y, they are none of ours, we give them no such allowance, we owne them not. ^ell, if yet secretly they receive them to land, helpe them with fresh water, meate, ^^kling, provision; and thus under hand releeve them; sure these doe allow them. ^^^n professe pietie, yet admit, of lusts in themselves, injuries to others: whose acts ^hese? none of ours, alas! against our wills, we cannot but sinne, yet we consent
 not to it. Nay, but if concupiscence be in the meane time fostered, purveyed for by the eye, battend by riot, armed with approbation, justified by dissembling; this is not weakenesse, but rank ungodlinesse. It is a habite; every act doth not make a habite, diverse have fallen into incontinence, soone repented, and avoided the sin; this cannot be called ungodlinesse. Transient escapes doe not denominate an ungodly ma^, because the sins committed are now loathed. But avarice, injustice, malice, etc. These are ungodlinesse: because here is a continuance of will, and a will of continuance. Now as the Orator said, when he had declaimed against drunkennesse, it was but to keepe men sober: so this discourse of ungodlinesse is intended to t^^^^ mens hearts to pietie. But this may be planted by Paul, and watered by Apellos, (...) encrease can be but by the Spirit of Iesus Christ.
This was their ungodlinesse. God often spareth the wicked for the righteous sake: such as are either allied in bloud, as Cham was in the Arke: or by cohabitation and proximitie, as Paul had all the soules in the ship given him. Sapiens est stulti redemptio: as a Physician is an antidote against sickenesse, and a valiant man a muniment against enemies. When Augustus had conquered Anthonie, and taken Alexandria, and the Citizens expected nothing but present massacre: the Emperor proclaime^ a generall pardon, for Arrius sake, a philosopher of that Citie, and his familiar friend. Thus doth God forbeare men for men, one for another, but all for IESUS. B^^ where all apostates, all perish. Noah could deliver but eight out of a world, and Abraham beginning at fifty, went no lower than ten, lest hee should have beene (...) bold with God. He doth stay at ten, not as though God for a lesse number will not spare a citie: for as sometimes for more than fifty he will not suspend his Iudgements; as Samaria and Israel found, when seven thousand good men were among them: so for fewer than ten he will sometimes shew mercie, as he promised to spa^^ Ierusalem for one.Ier. 5.1. Find but one man that seeketh the truth, and I will spare it. B^^ here all were ungodly, onely one familie shunned their filthy conversation, and s^ escaped their fiery conflagration.

The sinnes of Sodome.
TO take a short catalogue of their ungodlinesse, principally their sinnes were fix: foure whereof bee mentioned, Ezek. 16. Verse 49. a fift by Saint Iude. Ver. 7. following strange flesh: the last, Gen. 19. Verse 9. contempt of all holy admonition.
1 Pride will ever be formost: it seekes the highest place in preferment, it sh^^^ have the uppermost place in torment.Psal. 115.1. Not unto us O Lord, not unto us, but to (...) owne Name give the praise: this pride contradicts; To us, to us, and to none but (...). We may say of Humility, as of that good woman;Prov. 31.29. Many daughters have d^^^ vertuously, but thou excellest them all: but of pride, other sinnes doe vilely enough, but that surmounts them all. God resisteth the proud, for the proud resist God: (...) piece of rotten dust, so soone as it is made, recoileth against the maker, oppos^^^ that Majestie which the Angels adore, the Thrones worship, the Devills feare, a^^ the heavens obey. But hee gets nothing by it, for if GOD resist him who (...) d^fend him? If against the proud, he sent his Law with such thunder, how will hi^selfe come?
The world is apt to admire pride, her words are held oracles, her workes ^^racles, her garments true ornaments. This so flesheth and flusheth her, that she thi^^^ no more of God, except it be with Saul, Honour mee before this people. As ^^^^chadnezzar built much for his owne honour, nothing for the honour of God. Th^^^fore the Lord will grace humilitie, and give her the glory. When the ambiti^^
 promoter of himselfe shall be fetched downe, God will say to her,Luk. 14.10. Friend sit up higher. Pride is like smoake; Est quod videas, non est quod teneas. But humilitie is a substantiall grace, so that pride it selfe is proud of her mantell: as Absalom so ranke with pride, yet put on a shew of humblenesse, in complement. And this is the glory of humility, that proud men are glad of her liverie. But pride must learne better manners or if she scape the Sodomites fire on earth, she must feele the Sodomites fire in hell.
2 Fulnesse of bread.] But is this a sinne? Is not bread the staffe of life, and the fulnesse of it a blessing? Yes, but that good mother brought forth two bad daughters; Pride in habite, and excesse in diet. It is not the fulnesse of bread, but our fulnesse of belly, that is the sin. Charge the1 Tim. 6.17. rich that they be not high minded; no sooner rich, but presently high minded.Esa. 28.1. The fat valleys of such as are overcome with wine: they that dwell in fat valleys, will fume with wines.Psal. 69.22. Let their table be made a snare: the most riotous table is the most dangerous snare.Zeph. 3.12. I will leave in the midst of thee an humble and poore people, and they shall trust in the Name of the Lord! They that have nothing to trust unto in the world, will sooner be brought to trust only in the LORD. Hamans abundance made him proud, and his pride advanced him fifty cubites higher than the earth, to a stately gibbet. If our gold become our fetters, wee had better have lived beggars. The Israelites fared daintily on their Quailes, fed with meate of Princes, and bread of Angells: but their sawce was two sharpe, when that they put into their mouthes, GOD fetch'd backe at their nostrils.
It is better to want necessaries and iniquities, than to have with the fulnesse of bread, the fulnesse of pride and ryot.Prov. 30 9. Lest I be full and deny thee. If full, deny thee, presently followes. It was the Lords caveat to Israel; Take heed, lestDeut. 8.14. When thou hast eaten and art filled, thou forget the Lord.Psal. 22.29. All they that be fat on earth, shall eate and worship: thus it should be.Deut. 32.15. They waxe fat, and spurne with their heeles:Hos. 13.6. They were filled, their heart was exalted, therefore have they forgotten me: thus it is. We all desire plentie; but as when one wished the son to be like the Father, Cato replied, is this a blessing or a curse? would our plentie doe us good, or harme? The wicked have their desire, Yea,Psal. 73.7, 9. more than their hearts can wish: what's the issue? They set their mouthes against heaven. CHRIST did not teach us to begge variety of dishes, nor abundance of wines, but Bread; and that but for the day, Daily bread It is emptinesse that values Gods providence, not fulnesse. When the LORD deales with us, as Fredericke Duke of Saxonie with his servants: who in hawking had rode over much corne, and carelesly spoiled it: gave charge that their messes of meate should not bee abridged, but not one bit of bread should bee allowed to their supper.
Plenitude breeds many diseases, I am not Physician good enough to number them: not only pride, that worme of riches; which naturally begets another worme that never dyeth, the worme of conscience. But surfet and drunkennesse, the sinnes of this Citie. Call your wines by what names you will; French, or Greeke, or Spanish; it is Vinum Londinensium, the Londoners wine. Where there is such immoderate feasting, the world must needs beleeve that it is not maintained without sin and deceit: and for such meate you had need of strong wine to helpe digestion. Here it is, and here it is unmeasurably taken, abused, urged; as if our brothers fall were not the Devills victorie. Some have thought that martyrdome and Christs passion was called by the name of a Cup, from the loathsome filling and violencing the appetite with drinke. The youngest daughter of this fulnesse, is wantonnesse.Ier. 5.8. They rose up like fed horses, neighing with lust. But of that anon: this is the dependance of Pride and Riot: one would thinke that they had no acquaintance, but they are very neere. He that exalts himselfe above his creation by pride, falls below his creation by drunkennesse. It is the voice of pride, all is mine: then riot answers, I may doe what I list with mine owne. Both are contraries to sobrietie, one of the
 mind, the other of the body. They are often coupled and united:Hab. 2.5. The proud ma^ and he that transgresseth by wine. Pride turned Nebuchadnezzar into a beast, so doth drunkennesse: their union in sin shall find no separation in punishment.
3 Idlenesse;] this is another effect of fulnesse: they that flow with abundance, never mind any diligence.Luk. 17.28. As it was in the dayes of Lot; they did eate and drinke, they bought and sold, they planted and built. These were all Otia, rather than Neg^^^a, as they used them: even that labour was Idlenesse. To Marry, is honest and honourable; yet was the old world taxed for this. Not because only, as some answere they married not with any conjugall love, but with a voluptuous lust: for this is a remedie, not an iniquitie that God so severely punisheth. They minded their lo^^s, they minded not Gods Lawes, here was the sinne. So in the dayes of Lot, as if Lo^ was only in the day light, all the rest in night and darkenesse, They ate and dranke, this is natures necessitie: and is not reprehended in quantum naturae subsidium, sed i^ quantum nequitiae fomentum: not the conveniencie, but the superfluitie is fa^^ed. They bought and sold, this was a lawfull negotiation: therefore not the mutuall commercement, but the unjust defraudment, is taxed. They built and planted; both i^ themselves allowable. CHRIST blames not their felling of trees, nor building of houses, but the basenesse of their desires; who sought eternitie upon earth, and had no heart to the God of heaven. In eating and drinking was their Saturitie: i^ building and planting, their securitie: in buying and selling, their covetousnesse. The^^ were all superfluous to that one necessary thing, and therefore Idlenesse. They feared not the Lord, but lay drownd in their own sensualitie; this was their invincible stupiditie. Thus rotten were they in their lees of sin, that unlesse they had ani^^ pro sale, they had beene all stinking carcases.
Here wee see, it is not enough to forbeare evill, but it is damnable not to doe well. CHRIST pretermits the enumeration of their horrible delinquishments, and speakes of their acts lawfull in appearance; censuring them. If they were condemned for feeding, what is the wages of surfeting? If they for necessary trading, what shall be for fraudulent deceiving? If they for building their owne houses, what shall become of them that pull downe Gods house? If such a judgement fell upon marriage, what is the curse of adulterie? Matth. 25. CHRIST mentions not the sinnes of commission, as if they were damnable enough by concession; b^^ the omitted duties: Yee did not feed mee, etc. Not that the other shall passe (...) judged, but to shew that there is damnation enough wrap'd up in these to destroy the world.
Thus easily doth fulnesse degenerate into idlenesse: and where is no need of gaines, there no vouchsafing of paines. To many a man will God say; I made thee an husbandman, who made thee a Gentleman?Gen 2.18. I will make man a helper meete for him: this intends that neither should be idle. The man is compared to the Sun, the wife to the Moone; that borrowes light of him, yet hath some of her owne. M^lier fulget radiis mariti. But when the Sun shall shine only by the Moone light, th^^ is preposterous. He is a Sodomite that will eate none but anothers bread, and wea^^ no coate of his owne weaving.Prov. 20.4. The slothfull will not plow because of winter: th^^^fore shall he begge in summer, and no man shall give him. He shall begge, that's bad: and no man shall give him, that's worse. But yet a man may be busie enough, and b^i^^ labour on himselfe with a vengeance: when he shall labour in that he hath no tha^^^ for, and be idle in that should doe him good: thus a man may goe to hell for hi^ paines. Sodome thus laboured in sin, and now labours in torment. Let us so worke on our Eve, that we may rest on our Sabbath; worke up our salvation on earth, an^ reape our salvation in heaven.
4 Contempt of the poore.] This is an execrable sin, a thing that hastens before the time. If he be condemned that saies no more, but God helpe thee: how sore i^ his Iudgement that saies in heart, I despise thee? That omission is culpable, that go^^ no further than Be warmed: but that damnable, that saies, be starved. It were fa^^^
 enough to passe by them, like the Levite, without succour: but horrible, not to passe by them without disdaine. Cast thy bread on the waters, that is, on the watery eyes, which doe weepe for want: but if we cast not our morsells, let us forbeare to cast our scornes. How basely soever we esteeme them, they are the members of Christ, and such as he honours, and sets neare him: taking notice of every benefit, and recording every wrong, that is done them. It will be no light or slight offence; to con^emne the brother of the Son of God.
Some thinke that the Sodomites would admit no strangers to come among ^hem, as they speake now of China; and that this made them so furious against the Angels. There be foure termes among men. 1. Mine is thine, and thine is thy own. ^. Mine is mine, and thine is thine. 3. Mine is thine, and thine is mine. 4. Thine is mine, and mine is my owne. The first is of Saints, the second of Moralists, the ^hird of Populars, and the last is the voice of Devills: of this ranke were the Sodomites. For this speciall cause they hated Lot, for his hospitalitie. When they came ^n troupes to breake into his house, he pleads the lawes of hospitalitie: For this ^ause came they under my roofe. And when he sees their head strong purpose of vil^anie, he chuseth rather to be an ill father to his owne children, than an ill host to ^trangers. Therefore is heaven called Abrahams bosome, because of his hospitalitie: ^nd thither the Saints goe; it is fit that hospitable men should goe to their Father.
Let us make the poore our friends by our almes, not our enemies by our scornes. We had better have the eares of God full of their prayers, than heapes of money in our owne coffers with their curses. Worldly men thinke themselves wise in getting wealth, and the Scriptures folly: therefore throughout the Scriptures God calls them fooles for their labour. Thou foole. There is a tale of an Abbot that gave his foole a painted staffe, willing him to bestow it on the veriest foole he could meete. This Abbot fell mortally sicke, the foole was a visitant among the rest: and hearing him say, I must leave all and be gone, asked him whether he would goe. The Ab^ot answers, into another countrey: but I hope, replies the foole, you will carry all your gold and Iewells and treasure with you: No, I must leave all. But sure you ^ave sent great store of preparation, as rich hangings, coverings, beds, plate and fur^iture before you: No, I muust leave all behind. All? I hope at least you have sent ^nough to furnish your owne roome, provision enough for your selfe; No, not the ^east pillow. Hold, saith he, take your Staffe againe; you are the veriest foole that ^ver I met. It is easily applyed: they that of so much under their custodie on earth will make no provision for themselves in heaven, by giving to the poore; are well ^axed of the extremest follie. Let us relieve them by our good deeds, that they may ^elieve us by their good prayers; so shall wee find mercie in the day of IESUS CHRIST.
5 Following strange flesh.] This was not only fornication or adulterie; a mans wife is his owne flesh, and she that is not so, is a stranger. But even an offence against ^ature, for the Sodomites were not content with the common way of sinning, but were mad with a prodigious and preposterous lust.Gen. 19.5. Bring forth the men that we may know them. Shall we say, herein the very Sodomites spoke modestly, though ^heir intention were villanous? I doe not thinke they meant any manerly concealement, but it is the dialect of the Scripture; which by an honest name sets downe a most dishonest thing. It hides the sinne of Sodome, as the painter hid the scarre in Agamemnons face. Certainely their impudence was monstrous,Esa. 3.9. declaring their ^inne; Bring them forth. Wherein they would make Lot, a father; not only a witnesse to the constupration and ravishment of the Angels, but even the very bawd ^^r Pandar; Doe thou bring them out.
Questionlesse, those heavenly guests were of an excellent forme, and most sweet ^avour, surpassing the sonnes of men: and the sight of this enflamed their more than ^eastly lust. Such a naturall desire hath wicked man, to marre what God made, to corrupt his most admirable workemanship: and where he hath imprinted the most
 faire characters of his glory, there they have most ambition to fasten: like cankers, that had rather be about one rose, than a thousand weeds. Beauty, meant for a mirror wherein to admire God, they turne into a snare to confound themselves. And so sucke poyson from the flower, that would yeeld them honey. Happy man, whom the temptation of beauty, cannot make to forget his duty!
This was the extremity of Sodomes sinnes, for whose sake it shall be called Sodomy to the worlds end. Whether the first excogitation of it begun, or the received practise was infamous, among them; it is still the sinne of Sodome. So abominable, that fire from heaven was the reward of it. As against nature was the transgression, so against nature is the destruction. It is naturall for fire to ascend upward, but here contrary to the course of nature it is forced to come downeward. Christ himselfe is said to raine that deluge from Iehovah his Father: why he? why not, as in other punishments,Aug. The Lord, without any further distinction? Quia Natur^^ quam assumpturus erat, corruperant. Because they had corrupted that nature, which the Son of God was to take. Videns Dominus hoc peccatum in carne, paene defij^ inc^^nari. The Lord seeing this sin in the flesh, had almost forborne to take flesh; or at least so long deferred it before he came. Some have written, that al the sinners in that kind, dyed the very same night that Christ was incarnate. This sin was infamous among the Gentiles;Rom. 1.27. They burned in lust one toward another, and man with man wrought filthines. For this horrid uncleannesse in masculine venery, Socrates is branded among the Philosophers,Aug. and Nero among the Roman Emperors. As by lawfull marriage, Two are made one, so by this turpitude, one is divided into two. But let this sin s^^le into hell with the Sodomites, and never more be remembred on the face of the earth. I now expell it out of my discourse, the Lord banish it out of all our hearts for ever. Yea, not onely that, but all manner of uncleannesse; lest we be given over, like the Gentiles, to our owne lusts, by a just retaliation. Who, as they had dishonoured God, were suffered to dishonour themselves. And as they had turned Beasts into gods, so they turned themselves into beasts.
But this following of strange flesh hath a greater latitude and further extent, and fetcheth in all carnall pollutions. A sinne that is aIob. 31.12. Burning, wheresoever it hath a being. The Apostle in one chapter hath sixe invincible arguments to diswade (...) from it.
11 Cor. 6.13. The body is for the Lord, and the Lord for the body. If the body be for the Lord, it is not for uncleannesse. If the Lord be for the body to glorify it, then he is for the body to rule and sanctify it. The husband is one with the wife, and the wife with the husband, while both are chast: but if the bed be defiled, that concorporation dissolves.
2Ver. 14. He that raised up the Lord, shall raise us up by his power. If we desire our body to be raised with incorruption when we are dead, let us keepe it without pollution while we live. Let us sow a gratious body, that wee may reape a glorious body. How deformed and ugly will the fairest creatures looke, when their bodies shall be raised with the markes of uncleannesse upon them? Optimi corruptio pessima: if pro^^itution, maugre all the art of plaistering, can turne beauty into deformity, and make despisable on earth, how loathsome will it appeare in the day of vengeance?
3Ver. 15. Shall I take the members of Christ, and make them the members of an harlot? God forbid. Suppose a king sitting in his Chaire of Estate, his temples crowned with a golden Diadem, his body adorned with royall robes and jewels: how ill favouredly would a torne shooe, or a leprous toe appeare? It is our glory, to be parts of hi^ that is the King of glory: let us not dishonour him by defiling our selves. He is mad that forsakes a Saint to admit a Devill into his armes; that for the odious connection with a harlot, leaves the delicious embraces of Iesus Christ.
4Ver. 18. Every sinne that a man doth, is without the body: but he that commits fornicati^^ sins against his owne body, Other sinnes are extra corpus, this is contra corpus. In these of all members the hand is principall, and blasphemy the tongue: but this above the
 rest, secundum plus and minus, leaves a sordid inquination upon the whole body. If ^hen not for the love of God, whose the body is by creation: nor for desire of per^ect beauty at the resurrection: nor for hatred of the highest sacriledge, robbing Christ of his members by a carnall impropriation; yet for love of thy selfe, and re^pect to thine owne body, flee fornication.
5Ver. 19. Know you not that your body is the temple of the holy Ghost? It is a great profane^esse to abuse the materiall Temple, made with mens hands: much worse to violate ^he Spiritual Temple, made by the hand of God. s I have heard of som depopulators, ^hat of the Quire of Saints have made a kennell for their dogs; that was nefarious ^nough. Yet so farre as God loves this corporeall Temple better than that, this ^dulterous profanation exceeds the former. To turne the Holy Ghost out of his ^hamber, and to make it the Devils stie and stewes; most fearfull! O thinke in ^^ticulo tentationis, it is the Temple of God I now profane, defile, abuse: what fire ^^nnot this meditation quench?
6Ver. 20. Ye are bought with a price, therefore glorify God in your body and spirit, for they ^re Gods. By this token keepe thy body intemerate, saith Christ; I shed my bloud (...) redeeme it. What I have beene at such cost to clense; doe not thou carelesly ^efile. No gold or jewels could ransome our bodies, but the bloud of Christ: let (...) value them according to the price, and we shall not doe amisse. Doe not for a ^oments delight, make frustrate an eternall purchase. Most enormities of life pro^eed from an error in the understanding; We may doe what we list with our owne. We may speake what we list; why?Psal. 12.4. our tongues are our owne. We may spend ^hat we list why? our riches are our owne.1 Sam. 25.11 Shall I take My bread and My meate, ^ith churlish Nabal? He is deceived, for even of life it selfe man is not Dominus, ^^d custos, saith Law and Case-divinity.Gen. 14.19. The Lord is the possessour of heaven and ^^rth, man but the Farmer. Our bodies are our owne, therefore doe with them ^hat we please? It is false, they are none of ours: but in a true propriety, The Lords. We have but a right of favour from the true Proprietary, and that liable to an ac^ount. He lends them us for our use, but his owne service. Therfore answer all temp^^tion to lust; This body is not mine owne, but His that made it, and bought it:Gen. 39.9. I ^are not alienate it from the owner, and remove the markes he hath set unto it. My ^ody is Thine, Lord keepe it, and save it for ever.
6 The lastGen. 19.9. sinne of Sodome was contempt of heavenly admonition. Lot charged ^hem from God, and they like a rusty or ill-wrought piece, recoiled in his face; Who made thee a Iudge? wee will deale worse with thee, than with them. They had all ^ony hearts, and Lot could doe small good in preaching to a heape of stones. O that ^his sinne of Sodome did not cleave too fast unto this land and time. They had but ^ne Lot for foure Cities, we have for one Citie foure hundred Lots. What nation ^nder heaven hath so many learned Teachers? Our Church lookes like the Firma^ent in the glory, when a cleare night shewes it bespangled with starres of all lustres ^nd diversity of lights. And if in some places they appeare thinner, and shine lesse; ^s the starres are thinne to them that live under the Southerne Pole, and there bee ^^ttle sparkles in the Galaxie, scarce discernible: it is onely for want of competency, ^here is no provision to feed them. But to this Citie the Bees come in swarmes, Crura thymo pleno, to empty their best honey in this glorious Hive. This honey ^ou sucke, and at last send them downe againe poore miserable drones. The number ^f Preachers about the Citie, exceeds some whole Country in Christendome. For ^ught I know, in the benefits of nature, and commodities of life, it may be equall ^o others: in this it excells the rest. If Rome have the gayer Roods, and Spaine ^he richer Images; yet certainly we have the happyer Pulpits.
Thus great is our blessing, but how small is our estimation of it! Formally men ^ome to Church, to heare a man talke, but it is no matter to them what he sayes. We ^ay preach our selves hoarse and dead, and yet doe no good: the reason is, mens ^earts are heardned in contempt. When Christ preached,Luk. 4.20. The eyes of all were
 fastned on him; our eyes are turned another way.2 Tim. 4.3. The time will come, when they will not suffer wholesome doctrine: the event hath sealed this Prophecie. To carpe at the phrase, method, voice, or gesture; this is nothing: such exceptions be like a flourish before a fight. The worlds quarrell is against the substance of Preaching: if we threaten, we are cruell: if we promise, we flatter: if mild, we dreame: if bold, we raile: if we prove by arguments, it is called sophistry: our affability is held lightnesse: our austerity, madnesse: nothing can please them, that resolve they will not be pleased. For our personall disgraces, we armed our selves for them whe^ we tooke the Profession. We knew that we should be stared on as prodigies, hissed (...) as ridiculous, shunned as infectious: endure all the reproches, that the Divels scavengers can rake out of the kennells of hell, to throw on our faces. The worst language that hath beene dip'd in the fire, or tip'd at the forge of hell, is as good as God morrow, if they meete a Minister.
But here it is, though the contempt light upon us, it is meant at the Gospell; and CHRIST is wounded thorow our sides. To speake truth, here is the very head and heart of the controversie: the Word will not let men alone in their s^^^s, therefore they must be revenged on some body: from hence proceed the sacriledge robbing,Aug. and the aspersions wronging the Ministers of Iesus Christ. Palato (...) s^no paena est panis, qui sano est suavis.Am. 5.10. They hate him that rebukes in the gate. Ama^^ ^^^tem, oderunt redarguentem. Alas! what can worke upon a hard heart? Take a ba^^^ new come out of the fire, and the Smith can worke it though it be iron: let him strike on his anvile never so long, there is no impression made, but rather a rebo^^^ of the stroke.
Eccl. 12.11.The words of the wise are like goads, but men have Leviathans skinnes: They estee^^ iron as straw, and brasse as rotten bavins. They are nailes, but driven upon marble or iron, and so turne againe. This is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men love darkenesse better. They excuse themselves from the sins of Sodome, Pride etc. but there is a sin within them, which makes them as farre off from salvation. While you that see the light which Sodome never had, despise it more than Sodome ever did;Mat. 11.24. It shall be more easie for Sodome in the day of Iudgement than for you. Le^ (...) men flatter themselves from being obnoxious to those execrable enormities: while they doe not humbly and obediently honour the Gospell, their estate is worse: and Sodome shall be saved sooner than these men.
Let Rome tremble, that hath too truely deserved this name.Rev. 11.18. Spiritual Sodome. Roma amor est: qualis? praeposterus. Vnde? Roma mares. It were no sla^der, to taxe Italie of Sodome. By their allowance? God forbid. Yet Ieroni^^^^ Mutius set out bookes of purpose, to defend this filthinesse; and (it seemes) they were allowed by the Bulls of Pope Iulius the third. Casa the Archbishop of Benventum joyned himselfe as a copes-mate to second him. They bestowed praises o^ that sinne, whereof Sodome it selfe would have beene ashamed. But this must be no imputation to their doctrine, for that teacheth otherwise. And for our selves, though in this we touch not upon Sodomes filthinesse, let us beware lest by other sinnes we bring our selves to Sodomes wretchednesse. Let us hearken to the Gospell and love it, love it and beleeve it, beleeve it and obey it, obey it and so hono^^ it, honour it and so be everlastingly saved by it. Amen.





VERSE 7. And delivered just Lot, vexed with the filthy conversation of the wicked.

THe time is come at once, when Sodome must be burned, and Lot delivered. Zoar is preserved for Lot, as Lot was for Abraham. If Sodome had not beene wholly wicked, he had not changed his dwelling: he could have procured ^ercie to it, as well as to Zoar. Now at once the Sun rises upon Zoar, and fire falls ^owne upon Sodome. Abraham stands on the hill, and beholds the Cities smoa^ing. Lot is secure in his new habitation, and neither feeles nor feares the Iudgement. (...) is faire weather with the Saints, when it is fowlest with the wicked. When ^armes of hornets sting and wound the Egyptians, not a flie must touch an Israelite. ^hat such a winged army came not from nature or fortune, it is plaine; but from (...) offended God: because the very flies shall make a difference betwixt Aegypt and ^^shen. He that gave them a being, sets them a stint: they can no more sting an Israe^^e, than spare an Aegyptian. The wings of those small creatures are directed by a ^rovidence, and confesse their limits.
The fire can goe no further than the plaine, not a sparke shall reach to Zoar. But ^hen Sodome hath never a Lot left in it, what should hinder the destruction? If God ^eete with a very good field, he pluckes up the weeds, and lets the corne grow: if ^^ith an indifferent, he lets the corne and the weeds grow together: if with a very ^^d one, he gathers the few eares of corne, and sets fire on all the rest. When he tur^ed Sodome into ashes, he delivered just Lot.
There are two principals in the verse; a Freedome, and a Thraldome: for So^ome was a Gaole to Lot wherein he was tormented, Zoar a refuge wherein he was ^uieted. There is a prisoner and a Preserver: Lot is the prisoner, God the pre^^rver.
In the Freedome consider foure circumstances.
The
Matter, What; A Deliverance.Manner, How; Eripuit, a violent deliverance.Time, When; the fire being ready to fall.Place, Where; by sparing Zoar for his sake.
For the Thraldome, the Prisoner is described by His
Grace, he was a just man.Place, among the wicked.Case; he was vexed with them.
First, for his Freedome; here was a Deliverance, and God was the author of it. ^^deed, who else can deliver?Psal. 34.29. Deliver me O God, for vaine is the helpe of man. Ma^y are the troubles of the righteous, and the Lord delivereth him out of all. Man can^^t deliver out of one, God out of all.Rom. 11.26. The deliverer shall come out of Sion: An^^ls or men may be Instruments, CHRIST is The Deliverer.Psal. 25.22. Deliver Israel, (...) God, out of all his troubles. It was Rabshacehs blasphemie;Esa 36.20. What God can deliver ^^t of my hand. What God? he found it to his cost. Can he deliver on the hills, ^^d not in the valleys, O yee foolish1 King. 20.28. Aramites!Psal. 116.8. Thou hast delivered my soule from ^^ath, etc. To me the mercie, to thee the glory: thou hadst no partner in the designe, ^one shall share with thee in the honour.

Till Lot be delivered, not a sparke must kindle: the impartiall sword must not touch Rahab, nor the destroying Angell offer a blow to the sprinkled doores. Those Ministers of Iustice have an Inkehorne as well as a Sword: anEzech. 9.4. Inkehorne to marke the chosen first, then Goe and smite.Psal. 18.51. Great deliverances giveth He unto his King; a quantity of both kinds; multitude and magnitude: be they never so many, never s^ mighty, against us; the LORD will deliver us. Saint Paul confesseth a Delivera^^^ past, present, future:2 Tim. 4.17, 18. He hath, He doth, and he will deliver me. God doth not only deliver his out of the fire, but he puts out the fire too.Psal. 124.7. The snare is broken, and we are delivered. He doth not stand to untie it, but breakes it a pieces.Psal. 42.7. O^e deepe ca^^^^ another: the depth of our misery for the depth of his mercy. Our lownesse is Gods height: the lower we are humbled, the higher is he exalted: the more grievous o^^ exigent, the more glorious his advancement. We are more sure of our deliverance, than the Devill can be sure of our persecution.
Seeing the faithfull shall be delivered, and God only doth it, let our confidence know no other refuge. All concurre in him that make a perfect Deliverer, Power, skill, and will. There may be power and will, where is no skill to use it. If the ho^^ were privy to his owne strength, he would not suffer a boy to ride him. The Lord hathIob 12.13. Wisedome with power: the Schoole sayes that he knowes Non entia; which they ground upon the Apostles words;Rom. 4.17. He calleth those things which be not, as thoug^ they were. These are of two sorts; Either such as are not now in act, but have beene in time past, or shall be in time to come. Or such as neither are now in being, (...) ever were, nor ever shall be. Now seeing foolish man often feares what never was, i^, nor shall be: it is best to feare God, that is, that was, and that shall be: who only knowes, the things we feare shall never happen to us.
There may be power and skill, yet no will to use it. The Levite wanted neither ability nor knowledge, to unbind the Samaritan: he wanted will, a heart of pity. Diverse have money in their purses, and wit in their pates, when they see poore wretches: it is the want of compassion, that takes no compassion of their wax. I^ this commiseration were not in God, he was lesse kind to his children, than man and beast to their young.
There may be will and skill, yet a defect of power: no such want can be in the Almighty. Philosophy saies, that is most active which is most elevated a m^v^, separated from earthly parts. The Physician distills his simples into waters, thereof he makes extractions and quintessences, which are operatively strong: still the more elevated a materia, the stronger and more active. Water is stronger than earth, aire than water,Pic. Miran. fire more active than aire or water, as appeared in Eliahs sacrifice: Angels stronger than men, God stronger than all: above earth, above water, above aire, fire, men, Angels, over all Actus purus; no weaknesse can be in him. It is a principle, variante materia forma manet eadem: according to the alteration of the aire and climate, our blouds, humours, complections may change; but the soule is the same still. Cut off a leg or an arme, you cut off no part of the soule. Many p^^fessors may be lop'd off by martyrdome, yet Religion stands; to shew that it is maintained by a Forme and Soule that cannot vary. God is unchangable, all c^^^^ hopes of deliveranee deceive us: men vary, times vary, weapons vary, policies o^ warre vary, advantages and successes vary: therefore it is best trusting to an obje^^ that cannot vary; which is onely God himselfe.Hos. 24.3. Ashur shall not save us, nor (...) we ride upon horses, nor say to the workes of our hands, ye are our gods: for in thee the fatherlesse findeth mercy.
Animalia multa agunt and patiuntur per Phantasiam: so it is fancy in me^ (...) makes them feare where no feare is; dreading the danger, not trusting the Deli^^^. The sheepe at first sight of the Wolfe, apprehends him for a terrible object, ^^^rally feares and flies him: the Lion feeles no terror, but passeth by him with^^^ honourable scorne. A Malking frights a child, a man contemnes it. Elsha's ser^^^^ quakes at the Syrian army, no feare invades the Prophet. He saw, and caused hi^
 man to see a greater Deliverer above. In the street we see men walke in there equall ^ature and dimensions, they on a high turret appeare little to us. Stand on a pro^ontory, they with you are great, they beneath you seeme small: the situation of ^^e eye makes or marres all, So it is with men in the time of trouble; if their eyes ^e fixed on earth, their enemies appeare great, and God that is so high seemes little. ^et our eyes be in heaven, and from thence looke downe upon our enemies, God ^ill then appeare mighty, our foes weake and contemptible, This was Iehoshaphats ^onfidence; there is no strength in us to stand against this multitude;2 Chron. 20.12. but our eyes ^^e toward thee. The returning Spies brought such bastard newes;Num. 13.33. We saw Giants, ^^e sonnes of Anak, compared with whom we appeared like grashoppers. alas, their ^^yes were fixed upon earth. Caleb had his eye in heaven, fixed on Gods power and ^romise, he apprehends no terror at all. Ioshua had a Lions eye, that passed by all ^^ese high Gyants, and their higher walls, with an overlooking disdaine.Num. 14.9. They are ^^ead for us, feare them not, for the Lord is with us.
Samaria had a strong enemie without, a sore famine within: a Nobleman, the ^ings owne favourite, looking on the present miseries, tooke them to be greater than ^od could cure;2 King. 7.2. Though he should open the windowes of heaven, and raine victuals. ^ut the Prophet had his eyes in heaven, and knew that the LORD would doe this ^ithout windowes. The flattering Courtier extolledEsdr. 4.6. the King, made him the ^ightiest: his eyes were upon promotion. The Prophet saw no such matter;Psal. 82 7. Yee ^^all die like men. Even when they ride in chariots, millions attending, guards defen^ing, they are butEsa. 40.22. Grashoppers and Crickets to the Lord of hostes: Domini terrae, ^^t but Terra Domini. As Moses Serpent devoured the Inchanters, so Gods pow^^ swallowes up all mens. We are all weake, in this mighty Deliverer be our confi^ence. When little children first learne to goe, feeling their owne feeblenesse, they ^^rust out a hand to the wall to stay them. Our strength is but like childrens; Our ^^lpe standeth in the Name of the Lord.
2 The manner, how: Eripuit. It was not a Tradidit, as Iudas delivered Iesus to ^^e Iewes, the Iewes to Pilate, and Pilate to death. Not only a Liberavit, as Peter ^as delivered, his bands falling off, and the prison doores ready for his Exit. But ^^r puit, snatch'd him away, delivered him by a holy kind of violence.Gen. 19.16. Make hast, ^^r I can doe nothing till thou come thither. Cannot? Is any thing unpossible to God? ^o it is said of CHRIST;Mark. 6.5. He could doe there no great workes. It is not because hee ^^nnot, but because hee will not; he had decreed the contrary. Here observe three ^^ings.
1 Lot would not have hastned out of Sodome, had not the Angels pulled him ^^rth by the hand. Thus impossible is it for us, to free our selves from the bondage ^f sinne, unlesse theIoh. 6.44. Lord draw us. Through many graduall motions we are deli^ered from the wickednesse of this world, as Lot was from Sodome. The Angels at^^ined their end with one motion, one conversion to God; in the very instant of their ^^eation blessed. But man may be compared to a Watch; he hath many gimmols ^^rtaining to him, to move him; like a coach, he runs on many wheeles. His head (...) understanding is one principall wheele, his heart or will another, and that next the ^pring: his affections are the minutes, his memorie the little recollective wheele ^^t winds up the rest: his life is the hand of the dyall, which shewes how the day ^^es with him: his conscience is the striking clocke: only the Primum mobile, the ^^ring that sets all a working, and keepes every wheele in due motion, is the grace of ^hrist. The string that unites the whole watch to the springs government, is faith. ^^r est in peccatore, anima in corde, mens in anima, fides in mente, Christus in fide. There (...) a heart in the sinner, a soule in his heart, a mind in his soule, faith in his mind, ^hrist in his faith. The act of his intellect gives him one motion, his sensitive ap^tite another, and that contrary for Caro concupiscit adversus spiritum: his owne ^^ll another motion, the eternall object another: so was Eve coozend with the for^^dden fruite. God that hath the heart in his hand, and turnes it as brookes of waters,
 gives it another motion. Some of these be regular, some retrograde, some forward, other oblique: O what a doe there is to keepe this watch in tune! it is no hard matter to tune the Virginals or Organs, though every string and pipe bee out of frame. But man is a creature so proud, so subtle, so wedded to his owne opinion, and rolling upon so many wheeles: that to put all his strings and pipes in tune, to make all his motions concent in goodnesse; hic labor, this is a worke for the finger of God only, a child can sooner conceive it selfe, than a man can convert himselfe: or wee may say, This man made himselfe, as well as that hee made himselfe good.
We wonder that after all the warnings by Angels, those Ministers of Christ; sinners will not leave their Sodome. The Citizen will not forbeare his sacriledge nor be afraid to coozen God to his face. The malicious will not cease practising mischiefe, seducing to perversenesse, and overbearing goodnesse with a blustering authoritie. The covetous will still love their gaine above their salvation. But this is no wonder; God hath not yet taken them by the hand; Non eripuit Domin^^, ^ill then the politicke foole, the proud mad man, and he that makes his pew the Scorners chaire, deriding Christ in his Gosp^ll and Ministers; cannot be humbled. Eripiat Deus, the Lord snatch them out of their filthy Sodome.
2 How loth even a Lot is to leave Sodome! For all his vexation by their filthinesse, their violence against the Angels; the prediction of their instant ruine, and his peremptory charge of departure: yetGen. 19.16. He prolonged the time. Therefore the Angels, that thirsted at once after vengeance on Sodome, and Lots safetie: that knew God would not strike Sodome till Lot was gone out, and that Lot could not be safe within those walls; are faine to breake off his tardy neglect with a gracious violence. They caught him by the hand, with his wife and daughters, and brought them forth, and set them without the Citie. We are so naturally affected to Sodome, and so delightfully linger in it; that without great mercie we should be condemned with the world. Therefore is it added; The Lord bee mercifull unto him. I was upright, saith David,Psal. 18.23. and kept my selfe from mine iniquity, mine iniquity; it is likely that he had some speciall sin of his owne, whereunto he was most inclined. O how gracious a victorie is this; I have kept me from mine iniquity!
Many being reproved, answere; Alas, you must beare with me in this, it is my fault: as if every man were allowed his owne fault. There is a private Sodome within us, we are loth to part with that. Men say of their sins, as Iacob said of his sonnes; Goe all but Benjamin. Other vices we will not so much sticke for, bu^ O th^^ Ishmael might live. There is still some worme in the roote of the tree, that will spo^e the fruite. We extenuate it; It is not a little one? But a little haire in the pen makes a great blot in the paper. It is said of the Lord, that heEsa. 40.12. Weighes the mountaines i^ scales, and the dusts of the earth in a ballance. We should no only waigh the mountaines, our hainous rebellions, in scales; but even in the dust, our smallest escapes in the ballance. Nor let our wits strive to make that good, which our wills have made necessary; grieving to leave what we love. But when God willEzek. 24.16. Take (...) the delight of our eyes, the pleasant Sodome of our affections, the sinne that we most joy in; then say wee resolutely; Pereat ne perdat, perish it, lest I perish by it. L^^ us not higgle and dodge with God, as Pharaoh did to retaine the service of the Hebrewes: nor linger upon a dismission of that he calls for. But without any demurre,Am. 4.12. Prepare to meet thy God, O Israel: save him a labour of fetching, prevent hi^ with a free-will offering. Covetice, malice, uncleannesse is our Sodome: how then hath God called us forth to the Zoar of kindnesse, charitie, chastitie! This world is a Sodome, and by death the Lord calls us out; yet how many delayes doth mortall life make ere it be willing to goe!Cant. 2.14. O my dove that art in the clifts of the rocke. Where we find a birds nest: O my Dove, that's the Bird: in the clifts of the rocke, there's the nest. The soule may be compared to the Dove, the body to the nest or Rocke; wherein are many clifts, vents, and fissures to let out life. This soule like
 Noahs Dove, goes out by suspiration, returnes in by respiration, at last by expiration ^eparts for all together.Psal. 55.6. O that I had wings like a Dove, than would I flie away and be (...) rest. If our soules had Davids wings, we would not desire to stay in Sodome, ^^t Mount up to Sion; they being borne up, as Lot was brought out by Angels.
3 Lots guests were his best friends: he had entertained Angels, and they now ^eliver him: he would have preserved them, and they did preserve him. Where ^ould the Angels lodge, but with Lot? The houses of holy men are full of those ^eavenly spirits, though they be not seene: their protection is comfortable, though ^ot visible. In our tents they pitch their tents; and when divells would mischiefe ^s, they turned them out of doores. It is the honour of Gods Saints, to be atten^ed by Angels while they live, and to be exalted by Angels when they die.Luk. 16.22. Laza^^s was carried by Angels into Abrahams bosome. As in a familie, the greater chil^ren carry the lesse: so God hath charged his elder sons, the Angels to beare up our ^^ules.
Thus was Lot requited for his kindnesse.Hebr. 13.2. Lodge strangers, for thereby some have ^^tertained Angels. Never did man yet lose by his charitie: the unthankefull world ^ay faile in due estimation, but God will regard it, and reward it. WhileAct. 10.3. Corneli^^ is doling out his almes on earth, the Lord sends downe to him an Angell from hea^en. In charitable succour Extendere manum is ostendere humanum. But if in this ^e be not so good as Lot, to give; let us not be so bad as Sodome, to take away. Now he that turned Sodome to ashes, and delivered Lot; turne our sins to ashes, and ^eliver us.
3 The time: when the fire was even a kindling, and that sulphureous deluge prepa^ed in the clouds: for the Interim was small betwixt Lots deliverance, and Sodomes ^engeance. He was Titio ereptus,Am. 4.11. a brand pluck'd out of the burning; the prophet ^luding to Lot, and naming this very overthrow. As when a heape of seditious ^ookes are burning, and one good booke ready to miscarry with the rest, is snatch'd ^y some stander by out of the fire and saved. So neere it came to him, yet did not ^ouch him: that his heart might be sensible, both of a holy feare of the Iudgement, ^nd a thankfull joy for his escaping. Indeed the Angels say to him,Gen. 19.17. Escape for thy ^^fe, lest thou be consumed: not that God meant to hurt him, but to terrifie him.
It is Gods delight, in the extremitie of evill to be a Deliverer.2 King. 6.16. When armies ^ave besieged his servants, and they have no power to defend themselves; then he ^usters up his Angels. Pharaoh pursues the departed Israelites: he had men of war, ^hariots and horses; they were weake unarmed people. Therefore the Aegyptians ^ave themselves the victorie before hand, and the Israelites gave themselves for dead ^nd are already talking of theirExod. 14.11. graves. The sea was before them, their enemies be^inde them: the wheeles ratling, the waves roaring: as the Britaines once complai^ed to the Romanes; Barbari ad mare nos repellunt, mare ad Barbaros: hinc vel jugu^^mur, vel obmergimur: the sword, or the deepe; they knew not which had lesse ^ercie. Yea, even they that had seene the wonders past, and the Pillar present; doe ^ow more feare, Aegypt, than beleeve God. Their unbeleefe matured the danger; ^ow could the Lord forbeare them? Surely, his patience was no lesse miracle than ^is deliverance. Yet even then he delivered them: and for assurance of it, he removes ^he cloud that was erst before them, and sets it betwixt Aegypt and Israel. As if he ^ould say, They shall first overcome me, before they shall touch thee. Now when ^^ey saw the Pillar remove behind them, and the sea remove before them: who ^^n tell, whether wonder should not exceed feare? That the deepe should be^ome their protection, and the sea bee made a Gallery or through-fare; no mor^^ll eye before it ever beheld such a path. Yet thus did the LORD Deliver ^^em.
Take another instance; Consider Ioseph in Puteo, cast into a ditch: he looked ^^r brothers, and behold butchers: he came to inquire of their health, and may not ^^turne the newes of his owne miserie. Hardly are they restrained from cutting his
 throate: but stripping him naked, at least they will cast him into a deepe hole, as it wereGen. 37.24. alive into his grave. Thus with lesse mercy than is found in the savagest robbers, they purpose to torment him wth a lingring death: and not only to kill him, (...) doe what they can to kill their father in him. Hee like a poore suppliant, bowing his bare knees to them, he dreamed he should bow to him; with passionate praye^^ and teares, imploreth mercy. Beseeching them by the deare name of brother-ho^^ by their profession of one God, for their fathers sake, for their owne soules sake, not to take away his life. But what can the neerenesse of fraternity prevaile, wh^^ humanity is lost? who could thinke of so innocent a youth, naked and desolate, (...) a dry and deepe pit, crying for pitty, and not cry for company? But cast downe (...) is, and they sit downe to eate his provision unmoved: never thinking by their o^^^ hunger, what it was for their poore brother to be famished to death. Here was (...) extremity; who shall now deliver Ioseph? The Lord steps in with a ransome i^ (...) strange hand. Ishmael persecuted Isaac, yet the seed of Ishmael shall redeeme the (...) of Isaac. Money shall buy him to the Midianites, and from the Midianites to (...) Aegyptians. Little did they thinke, that that Ioseph whom they left a poore sla^^^ the Midianites, they should find the same a great Lord among the Aegyptians. C^^^ doth ever raise up some secret favourers of his children, among his most malici^^^ enemies. Ruben saves him from the sword, Iudah from the pit. How happily ^^stowed was this little mercy? If Ioseph had died for hunger in the pit; Iacob, I^^^ and all had dyed for hunger in Canaan. How neere was his soule unto death, (...) present and marvellous was Gods Deliverance?
Take one instance more.Exod. 1.22. Moses is borne in the time of Pharaohs bloudy decree; that all the male children of the Hebrewes should be cast into the river and ^^ned. His mother during all her pregnancie, could not but feare a son. She hath him, sees him, and now thinks of his birth and death at once. To consider, that the executioners hand must succeed the Midwives, makes her second throwes more gri^vous than her first.Ioh. 16.21. In other mothers, the very sight of a new-borne son, wor^^ a forgetfulnesse of the former anguish in travell. But their remedy is her sor^^^ that which mitigates their paines, aggravates hers. Still shee fearefully lookes w^^^ some fierce Aegytian should come in, to snatch the infant from her bosome, and c^^^ it into the river. Therefore when she could no longer conceale in her wombe, (...) hides in her house: afraid, lest every cry of the child should guide the executio^^ to his cradle. But now his age and hiding being a quarter old, the fearefull pare^^ adventure the childes life to save their owne.Exod. 2.3. In a reeden Arke shee puts him (...) the bulrushes by the rivers brinke. Trusting him to the mercy of the waves, w^^^ beasts, and ravenous fowles, and (which was more mercilesse than all) an Aegyptian passenger. Thus exposed, she sets her daughter to watch her son: the mo^^^ cannot forbeare to love, whom she is forbidden to keepe. But how shall the p^^^^ babe escape; feeble, forlorne, alone sprawling upon the waves? what, but ine^^^ble d^ath? Yes, there is a God that lookes upon him, and in this pinch will di^^^ver him. No floud, no beast, no instrument of Pharaohs cruelty shall touch hi^ No friend, not his owne mother dares owne him; now steps in his Deliverer, (...) chalengeth his tuition; he is mine. He was not safer in the middest of the te^^s (...) Israel, a Prince guarded with so many thousands, than now. The tyrants da^^^ter must come forth to bathe, the arke offers it selfe to her eye, the cry of the in^^^ to her eare, compassion leapes to her heart; his teares and beauty, were a preva^^^ oratory. But is this all? And hath the Lord done? No, Moses must have (...) Nurse; and the girle is ready to fetch his own mother; and who so fit to be a N^^^ as a mother? She could not keep him before without danger, now she receives (...) by authority. Shee would have given all shee was worth to save him, and (...) she hath wages to nurse him. She doth but change the name of Mother into N^^^^ and she hath her sonne without feare, not without great reward. Here was a d^^^verance, and that in season: O how should it fix our confidence in so gracious a (...)
 server! The wicked say,Psal. 71.11. God hath forsaken him, persecute him, and take him, for ^here is none to deliver him. None, thus they conclude, but we finde the contrary. As Apelles, striving to paint a drop of fome falling from a horses mouth, after long ^tudy how to expresse it, even dispairing lets his pencill fall, and that fall did it. Quod ars non potuit, casus fecit. When we see no meanes how to be delivered, no hope of extrication, or attaining our wished peace, even ready to despaire; the Lord knowes how to save us.
4 The place was Zoar; wherein consider three circumstances: his journey to Zoar, his safety in Zoar, and Zoars safety by him. For howsoever Zoar preserved Lot, yet more properly Lot preserved Zoar.
1 For his journey: beleeving the judgement; he desires a place of refuge: God ^ppoints him one, he makes choice of another. Goe to the mountaine, saith the Lord: let mee flye to Zoar saith Lot. Some say, this was done in a mystery: the mountaine is not safe, but Zoar in the valley:Greg. a low and humble life hath more security, than high places. The proud like Capernauin,Matth. 11.23. lift up themselves to heaven, ^ut God shall depresse them to hell. He refused the mountaine, because of the craggy rockes, such as are now to be seene in the hils of Engedi. But more proper^y he preferreth Zoar for the vicinity; it was neerer to him, and he might with more speed and lesse danger reach it than the mountaine. And such was his charitable heart, that although hee could not redeeme the rest, yet he would intreat for that. Therefore he useth an argument of the smalnesse: as being lesse populous, it might be lesse impious.
Well, Zoar is granted him, but with this double caution: Tarry not in the plain, look not behind thee. For the former; the very skirts and suburbes of Sodome, yea, the very smell of Sodome must not cleave to Lot, nor he to it. If we be departed from Babylon, let not a rag or a relict of superstition abide with us. What matters it, whether a man be slaine with a great bullet, or with a small shot? The divell sayes like Pharaoh. Goe out of Aegypt but not farre; be within call. But Moses separates Israel from Corah;Num. 16.26. Depart from the tents of these wicked men, and touch nothing of theirs: we cannot be two farre off from such company. It is sorry comfort, to escape in Sodome, and perish in the plaine. To the terror and conviction of them, that though they openly professe not love to Rome, yet still have an itch of popery upon them. A man cannot bee too earnest of heaven: that kingdome is gotten with violence, not with indifference. He that loves little, shall have little: and he may love so little, as to have never a whit. Many feare to bee too hot, but are not sensible of their owne coldnesse. We say commonly; too much heate annoies, but too much cold de^troyes. Religion of all tempers, in these dayes does not complaine of heate. O ^hat as the advanced Sun heates the aire, so our hearts were enflamed with zeale and ^ove by that blessed Son of righteousnesse and salvation!
For the other, look not behinde thee: not because it was dangerous to looke into the infected aire. But 1. To note the indignity of the place, not worthy to be looked on by an honest eye. 2. To avoid curiosity, that Lot might not prie too narrowly into Gods judgements. 3. For feare the horror of the sight should have astonished him, or wrung out his commiseration. 4. For the better speed that there might be no stay in his passage; as the Apostles were forbidden the interruption of a Salute. 5. That his love might be quite lost to Sodome; no more to thinke of the wealth and pleasure he found in such an ungracious Citie. 6. Lastly, to make tryall of his faith and obedience, as God proved Adam in the prohibited fruit. Small precepts from God are strong bonds: obedience is as well tyed and tried, and disobedience as well punished, in a little as in much. Ananias nimm'd a little, he thought the Holy Ghost had no need of it, or could not misse it. But God credites us first with lesse things, ^s men prove vessels with water, before they trust them with wine.
The same charge was given to his wife, which she obeyed not: in her flight she must needs turne an eye upon Sodome. Perhaps she beleeved not that it should be
 burned, or pitied and lamented in her heart that such a populous Citie should bee burned, or curiously desired to see it burning, or so loved the pleasures of her co^^trey, that shee could not chuse but give it a looke, and as it were bid it farewell. B^^ for this she was turned into a monument of disobedience; a Pillar of salt. The Hebrewes say, because she refused to bring salt to the guests the day before: this is their dreame.Philo. But that opinion had need of salt, to keepe it from stinking. Some (...) it an allegory; They that divert their affections from spirituall to sensuall things, become senselesse pillars. Nor is it said to be of salt only in respect of the duration, as an everlasting covenant is calledNum. 18.19. a Covenant of salt: for salt hath a preserving propertie, to keepe things from putrefying, decaying, and corrupting. But she was turned into a materiall salty pillar: Iosephus saith it remained in his time: others, that it is Duraturum usque ad tempus resurrectionis,Tharg. Hierosolymit. to last unto the day of Iudgement. N^^ that her soule was thus metamorphosed, but her body. And though she suffer^^ thus temporally on her flesh, yet her spirit might finde mercie and peace for ever.
Aug.But the use of this monument is Praestare fidelibus condimentum, to season the faithfull.Luk. 17.32. Remember Lots wife. Now what did it availe her to scape turning into a^^^ in Sodome, who is turned into a pillar of salt in the plaine? One would thinke i^ small fault to looke backe, yet even this cannot the Lord endure. In re parvae pecc^^^, peccatum non parvum. To sin in a small thing, is no small sin. Being so farre out o^ that cursed citie, she might now think her selfe safe, and no danger in looking behind. But if we provoke the Lord, he can as well meete with us out of Sodome. Th^^^ is no place safe to sin, none dangerous to obedience: faith and observance of God^ will shall secure us even in Sodome.
2 Thus for his journey to Zoar, now for his safetie in it. Being come thither, he might well wonder at the stay of his wife, for in his flight he durst not looke backe to call her. Returning to seeke her, he finds this alteration with wonder and sorrow. Sodome is turned to a heape of sulphure, and she to a heape of salt. This change he little expected; the losse of his wife touched him neerer than the losse of all Sodome. Yet he finds salt in stead of flesh, a pillar instead of a wife. He that saved a whole Citie, could not save his owne spouse. Here was a sharpe miserie clap'd on the heeles of a sweet mercie. When God delivers us from destruction, he doth not secure us from all affliction. Though we be not1 Cor. 11.32. condemned with the world, yet we may be chastned in the world.
Lot saved himselfe, yet he lost his Allies, lost his flockes and heards, lost his gold and riches, lost his habitation, and now for conclusion lost his wife, all b^^^^ crosses. Without some sawce of sorrow, all worldly delights are but like de^^^ meate to a man that hath lost his taste. Let us give God leave to scourge us, so long as he doth save us. Our deliverance from the fire of hell is cause enough to make (...) thankefull, though the trifles we delight in be taken from us. Shall Lot say, I (...) rich, I am now undone; and so be dejected with sullen griefe? No, but I was i^ danger of fire and brimstone, I am now escaped, I will therefore lift up my hea^ with thankefull joy. If God doe not answere us in every thing, shall we take pleasure in nothing? Shall we slight all his favours, because in one thing he crosseth (...) whereas his least mercie is beyond our best merite. Lord take away what thou pleasest, for thy glory and my good; so long as thou savest me from the fire of hell, a^^ thy everlasting wrath.
Zoar shall be honoured with Lots preservation, a little one, the least of all th^^^ opulent cities. As Bethlem, thoughMic. 5.2. little among the thousands of Iudah, hono^^^ with the birth of Gods Sonne. This little citie was safe, when great Sodome (...) too hot for him.Psal. 127.1. The citie which God keepes, is strong bee it never so small: (...) he forsake it, the thickest walls and hugest turrets are weaker than paper. The Lo^^ promiseth to beZach. 2.5. a wall of fire round about his elect: no scalado, no undermining (...) blow it up: it shall both protect them, and consume their enemies. The good (...) sleepes more securely in his tent, than the sinner in his barricado'd fortification. A^^
 the springs and rivers of the Plaine, could not quench Sodomes raging fire: one ^rop of Lots faith and holinesse in Zoar keepes it from kindling. How poore and ^lender soever our cottage bee, let us set our prayers as a guard without, and our ^^ith as a lock within: the seven-fold wals of Babylon were not so strong. This is ^ore truly, than was said of those Gyants; to have a Citie walled up to heaven. Let ^rayer be the key to open the morning, and prayer the bar to shut up the evening. Let us in every place trust upon Gods providence, and every place shall be safer to ^s than was Paradice. Be our faith upright with Lot, and in the last day when the ^hole world shall burne with flames as Sodome once did, we shall finde a Zoar, the ^osome of Iesus Christ.
3 Lastly, Lot was not onely delivered in Zoar, but Zoar was delivered for Lot. I will not overthrow this Citie for which thou hast spoken.Gen. 19.21. As Lot in the danger of fire ^oActs 27.24. Paul in the danger of water; in the rage of both the elements, God doth not ^nly give his their deliverance, but he also gives others for their sakes into the grant. (...) wicked man hath the feet of a Wolfe, whatsoever he treads on never prospers af^^r. But a whole family, a whole kingdome, shall fare the better for one Ioseph: his ^ery presence procures a common blessing, wheresoever he goes. Zoar might hap^^ be as bad as Sodome, but here was the difference, it had a Lot within, Sodome ^ad none.
But for Gods deare children intermingled with the world, it could not stand. ^he wicked persecute them, for whose sake they are forborne: they owe their lives ^o those few Lots whom they contemne. Potiphar was angry with that Ioseph, who ^ade him prosper. The most contemptible man in the peoples opinion, is he that ^rocures their peace and toleration. Ahabs sin brought the famine, Elias prayer ^rought raine, yet Ahab tels Eliah, thou troublest Israel. Cease ye malicious sin^ers to vex the religious: you are beholding to them for your very breath: if they ^ere taken away, you should be tormented before your time. As Christ himselfe ^as the Day-starre to enlighten: not the Dog-starre, to burne: and Paul no pestilent ^^llow to sow sedition, but an instrument of blessednesse and salvation: so the elect ^^e good, not malignant stars. Yet still they speed at the worlds hands as did their ^aster before them: Christ healed their diseases, fed their bodies and soules, every ^ay did them good; yet they crucified him: and in killing him they did offer to ^^ke the only Ship that might save them. As the Sun-beames shining on the earth ^e not only heate that solid body, but by reflection also warme the region of the ^re conterminate to it. So the mercy of God lighting on a christians heart, not on^^ heats that with inward comfort, but makes it reflect back consolation to others.
The faithfull pray for the pardon of mens sins, for grace and favour to their ^ules, and no good comes without their procurement; yet the world cannot abide ^^em. Let the rich Aldermen thanke these, that they have leasure to tell their gold. ^hat the worldling builds houses and takes rents: that the Citie can feast with the ^^ines of the Church, and misse of Belshazzars sudden sawce; (for I am perswaded, ^^ey get enough from the Temples, to maintaine their Hals) even in this they are ^eborne, because there be Lots among them. What doth a poore man find before ^^em, but reproch and disdaine? he that is not rich, with these men is neither wise ^r good: onely by their wealth they value themselves, and onely by their wealth, (...) Camels by their burdens, be they valued.
London blesse thy lots, and GOD for them. Thine honour had long since ^n laid in the dust, thine oppressions become a hissing to all nations, and nothing ^^d beene left of thee but a stinking memory, but for these. The subject of thy de^^sion, hath bin the meanes of thy preservation: and those eyes have often bin lif^^d up to heaven for thee in prayer, upon whom thou wouldst never cast an eye of ^^arity.Psa. 35.13. Ver. 15. When thou wast sick, they humbled their soule with fasting, and mourned, as (...) weepeth for his mother: thus doe they for thee. But in their adversity thou rejoy^^, and tearest them without ceasing: thus doest thou for them. While the lascivious
 embraceth his harlot, the luxurious his ryot, the covetous his money, the malicious his revenge; the fire of Iudgement would flash in their faces, and the fire of torment swallow up their soules; but for Gods elected, their despised Lots. Hi^ mercie encrease the number of them, and our love to them, and our endevour to be like them, that as we are spared for them, we may be crowned with them in the day of Christ.
Delivered just Lot.] I come to consider his thraldome, and the prisoner described first, by his grace; a Iust man. Wherein three points must be examined. 1. What this Iustice is. 2. In what respects a man may be called Iust. 3. The exceptions against his Iustice.
First, what is Iustice. There is an increated Iustice, which cannot be in man, for he is finite, and this is infinite.Psal. 119.137. Righteous art thou O Lord: and, God is righteous i^ all his wayes. A man is one thing, and his righteousnesse is another: but God and hi^ righteousnesse is all one: therefore it is as impossible for man to be thus righteous, as it is for him to be God: this is proper to the Deitie. Created Iustice is either ^^gall or Evangelicall.
Legall righteousnesse is of three sorts. 1. Perfect, which consists in an absol^^^ completion of the Law: this is lost beyond all recoverie. But is it not restored by Grace? No, for our sanctification is but in part: as a child is a perfect man, in all the parts of a man, but not in the quantitie of every part. But Rome saith, the Virgin was righteous, for she sinned not: her life was free from sinne actuall, her conception from sin originall. This is false, for if she were no sinner she needed no Saviour: and she dyed; now if she had not sinned, in Iustice she should not have dyed. 2. Civill, which consists in an outward deportment conformable to the Law: when a man professeth religion, to answere the first Table; and refraines from publike and visible sinnes, to answere the second. But in thisMatth. 5.20. the Pharisies went beyond us, yet they came short of heaven. Too many content themselves with this rotten and hear lesse righteousnesse: but if they have no better, they shall get into heaven, when the Pharisies come out of hell. 3. Internall, when a man by repentance after sin, and by endevour after repentance, doth inwardly serve God. That this righteousnesse, legally considered, should justifie us, is with Rome to abuse Gods Iustice, and to incroach upon his mercie. This may justifie our faith, it cannot justifie us. Our works deserve nothing; it is only in Christ that they are accepted, and only for Christ th^^ they are rewarded.
Evangelicall righteousnesse is that which is revealed in the Gospell: and should never have beene revealed, if that of the Law could have saved us. But it could not; not through the owne defect, but our default. This is to be had in Christ only: which, as he is mediator, consisted in the puritie of his nature, which is separate from sinne: and in the perfection of his obedience, which is satisfactory for si^^^. From so pure a nature proceeded so perfect an obedience: no originall sin touching his conception, no actuall staining his life.Rom. 3.10. There is none perfectly righteous (...) He: not one that is, not one that was, not one that is to come: but onely he th^^ and that was, and that is to come. This in him was active and passive: for us he ^^^fered, what we should have suffered, and suffered not: for us he did, what we sh^^^^ have done, and performed not.
Thus we have found out the righteousnesse that makes a man just: now let us s^^ how Lot became just, or we are justified by it. This is done by imputation.Cor. 5.21. (...) that knew no sinne, was made sinne for us; that we might be made the righteousnesse (...) God in him: what can be plainer? CHRIST was a sinner only by the imputation (...) our sinnes, we are just only by the imputation of his righteousnesse.Rom. 10.4. Christ is (...) end of the Law for righteousnesse unto every one that beleeveth. Not finis dissolve^s, (...) absolvens: an abrogater of the ceremoniall, but a fulfiller of the Law morall. A f^^filler, for whom? for all them that beleeve. So Christ by doing, and we by bel^^ving,
 fulfill the law; therefore are righteous. But can one man be wise by anothers wisdome? Rich, or strong, or valiant, by the wealth, power, or courage of ano^her? We have no right in anothers wisdome or valour, but we have a right and ^ropriety in Christs justice. One mans wisdome cannot be anothers, because they ^re two distinct persons: but Christ and the beleever make but one mysticall body: ^o his righteousnesse is as truly his members, as the wisdome in the head belongs to ^he whole body. But it is anProv. 17.15. Abamination to the Lord, to justifie the wicked. Why ^hen will he doe it himselfe? No, but he first makes a man just, and then so accounts ^im. He is indeed said toRom. 4.5. Iustifie the ungodly; that is, the man who was ungodly ^efore, but is not so after: Distingue tempora, conveniunt omnia. Thus was Christ ^ade a sinner by the reputation of our sins, and we made just by the imputation ^f his righteousnesse. And as he that knew no sin in himselfe, undertaking for us, ^^ffered death: so we that had no justice of our owne, apprehending his righteous^esse, shall enjoy everlasting life.
But how is this justice imputed to us? By our faith.Ioh. 1.12. To as many as received ^^m, he gave power to be the sons of God, to those that beleeve on his name. There is a re^^iving: what is that? It is expresly said, Beleeving. Man finding himselfe naked, (...) this hand reacheth that glorious Robe, which is held out to him. This doth not ^^stifie Effective, working an habituall justice in us: nor materialiter, as though faith ^^selfe were our justification: but Objective, as it apprehendeth Christ: and Orga^^ce, as it instrumentally applieth his righteousnesse. Neither is it an opinion, which ^^an uncertainty in the judgement: nor a suspicion, which is an uncertainty in the ^^ill: nor a Science, for that is onely by the demonstration of reason: neither love, ^or hope. Love can extend the passions of the heart to the thing loved, yet cannot ^^prehend Christ: he must be apprehended before he be loved. The office of hope (...) to wait: it waites for salvation, but properly it apprehends it not. It is first belee^^d, then expected.Lam. 3.26. It is good both to trust, and to wait for the salvation of the Lord. ^^o trust that it wil assuredly come, this is the action of faith: to wait untill it do come, ^^is is the action of hope. Faith is a taking hand, and love is a giving hand: faith ^^es hold on Christ, love gives forth tokens of faith to God and man: hope is the (...), that lookes out for the good things promised. As faith is the hand of the soule, (...) love is the hand of faith, and hope is the eye of both. Of faith, love is the hand ^hereby it worketh, and hope the eye whereby it waiteth. Thus faith worketh (...) love, waiteth by hope, but beleeveth by it selfe. The point of our Iustification ^^ing thus cleared, let me touch at two usefull meditations from it: there is in it ^^^ter of humiliation, of consolation.
1 It serves to humble us. How fowle was our nature, that all the water in the ^^rld could not clense it? Not the bloud of all the creatures, not the righteousnesse (...) men or Angels could cure it. All the men and Angels in the world cannot make ^^e sinner righteous: but the Son of God must become man, suffer, dye, and rise ^^ine, and all to make us just. Vaine man, whereof art thou proud? Yet how doth ^^^tle polluted dust vaunt it selfe? Clothe a Leper in scarlet, is he not still a Leper? ^^pose in Christ we be embraced, and even honoured of God himselfe, shall wee ^^refore be high-looked over others? No, here is matter of exultation and glad^^se, not of insultation and haughtinesse: let us be joyfull, let us be thankefull, let ^ot be scornefull. The naturall Son of God was humbled for our pride, shall we ^roud still? Quomodo non humiliatur homo, coram humili Deo? Shall man be ^^d, when God himselfe is humble? He that is not humbled for his sin, is not ye^ ^^^ed from his sin. In his humility Christ wrought that great worke of our re^^ption. Observe with wonder, that God did more for us in his humility, than (...) he did in his glory. In his Majesty he onely made us, but in his humility bee (...) saved us. Looke we first downe with humility upon our owne wretchednesse, (...) then looke up with faith unto Christs righteousnesse.
2 We are Iust before God by no Iustice of our owne, but by Christs: and this
 is so much the better for us, as now we are sure it cannot be lest. God created Adam with a perfect legall righteousnesse: he received it for himselfe, and for us: and hee lost it for himselfe, and for us. That being gone, he gives us another, a better: b^^ because he saw man so ill a keeper of his owne Iewels, he would not trust him with it: but sets it in the P^rson of his Sonne, charging him to keepe it for us.Col. 3.3. We are dead, and our life is hidden with Christ in God. It is hid past Satans finding, and locked up past our spending. We as ignorant of the worth, would quickly exhaust it: but CHRIST truely values it, dearely payd for it, heartily loves it, and therefore will safely preserve it: and when we come to his fathers presence, will cloth us with it then. It is now in a safe hand, where we are sure to find it, and have it, wh^^ wee most need it. Wee may sinne, and so lose the present sensible comfort of a good conscience: but we cannot lose our righteousnesse. That is in our owne ^^nure, this is not.
It is impossible for a beleever to be poore: take away all he hath, his wealth, heal^^ friends, libertie, life: this is no more than he hath in his owne hands, which he may easily lose. His true riches are in anothers custodie, no power can meddle with th^^^.Matth. 6.20. His treasure is layd up, where no theefe nor corruption can enter:2 Tim. 1.12. he that is Tresp^^^ with it, will faithfully keepe it. Satan may make Iob poore for this world, and take (...) from him, from which God would one day take him. But Iob hath a better stock going in heaven, in the hands of his Redeemer, the devill cannot touch this. Other possessions in death we leav behind, this inheritance by death we begin to possesse. C^^^ corpus resolvitur,Ambr. anima absolvitur.2 Sam. 19.30 Let Ziba take all, so I may come to the Son of David in peace.
Samson had his strength in himselfe, and betrayed it: Esau his birth-right, and sold it: the Prodigall his portion, and spent it: Hezekiah his treasure, and expos^^ it: Salomon his wisedome, and abused it: Mary Magdalen her beautie, and pro^^^tuted it: Nabal his wealth, and lived beside it: Adam his integrity, and an Apple bought it. O what is in man, that he may not lose! The Master of a Familie (...) all his hired servants their wages into their owne hands, suffers them to use and ^^spose it at their owne pleasures, without further injury: but the portions of his children, and their Iewels he keepes himselfe. LORD, what ever worldly thing thou take from us, keepe our righteousnesse for us: though sinne hath left utter'd and death send us away naked; doe thou cover us with the rich garment of Christ.
2. Thus is a man Iust before God, but Lot was also just before men: and th^^ is a visible Iustice, so well as the invisible. We must therefore seeke out for a fu^^^^ righteousnesse, an inseparable effect of the former, and that is, Holinesse of life. The other is that Iustice of Iustification, this the Iustice of Sanctification. As a si^^^^ justified by Christs righteousnesse inherent in Christ himselfe: so he is sanctified by Christs righteousnesse diffused from Christ into the sinner. His Iustification is p^^fect, because that which justifies him, is still in Christ: his sanctification is unpa^^^^ because that which sanctifies him, is in himselfe. The one imputed to him, the (...) infused and inherent in him. Therefore here we are to examine, in what resp^^^ man may be called Iust. Neither are we bound alwaies to the same distinctio^ (...) conceive, a man may be approved Righteous, Praeparative, Separative, Reparative, (...) ra^iva.
1 There is righteousnesse of preparation, which is a resolution and full p^^^^ of heare to be righteous.Psal. 119.10. I have sworne, and am stedfastly purposed to keepe thy ^^^^teous Iudgements. Though he doe sometimes admit sinne, he doth never inten^^^ If the Spirit could totally prevaile over the flesh, he would never do ought to d^^^^nour God. My heart is ready, my heart is ready: r^ady to heare thy will, ready (...) it.Aug. Give what thou commandest, command what thou pleasest. Perfect my purpose (...) thy gratious performance, and then I shall be righteous. By this resolution (...) bound for Canaan, and thitherward steeres his course: notwithstanding the p^^l^^s
 rockes and pyrates, and contrary gusts and stormes, that would put him out of ^^e way.
2 There is a righteousnesse of separation, because it is seene to decline the pla^^ of temptation. So they are called Saints, because Separate from the world. He ^n a manner guilty, that frequents the occasion of being made guilty. A wise Se^^or, whose Coach-man had driven him over a dangerous passage, which he might ^^ly have avoided by fetching a little compasse about; though he scaped without ^^me, yet turned him of, as unworthy of future trust. What thankes to us, if pre^^itating our selves in the knowne snares of sin, we are kept by Gods preventing ^^ace?Ioh. 5.18. He that is begotten of God, keepeth himselfe that the wicked one touch him not. I ^e not say that God deales with us on such an advantage, as a furious Papist answe^^d: when he was asked by one of his owne Sect, why in the gunpowder treason ^^ey would destroy children with bastards, Catholicks with Heretickes: Inventi ^^er haereticos, pereant cum haereticis: If they were found among hereticks, let them ^^rish with hereticks. Yet often he makes them smart: as the Magistrate inflicting ^ere punishment on a dissolute crew, one cried out to him; Parce filio, spare thy (...): what, my sonne among the enemies of peace and goodnesse? No, Sociaris in ^^pa, nec separaberis in poena: as thou hast offended with them, thou shalt smart with ^^em. We will trust no antidote, to goe into the house where the plague is: if ten^^on finde us, never let us seeke tentation.
3 There is a righteousnesse of reparation; which consists in the reforming of ^^rors, and conforming of manners, salving past defects by a bettered life; and is in^^ed the righteousnesse of repentance. Righteous, not because there is no sin com^^itted, but because there is no sin that is nor repented God esteemes a fault indeed ^^rowed, as if it had never bin indeed admi ted. Aliud est peccare, aliud peccatorem ^^se: it is one thing to sin, another thing to be a sinner. Every one that handles a ^^^te is not a Musitian: nor every that doth an unrighteous action; is strait an un^^ghteous person.1 Cor. 6.9. The unrighteous shall not enter into the kingdome of Heaven: to be ^^just damnes, not to have done some actions unjustly: the habite, not the act, casts ^^to hell.
O blessed effect of repentance, that can make unrighteous manners cease to de^ominate an unrighteous man! I will shew you a riddle. A foule mother brought ^^rth a faire daughter: the mother bred her laughing, yet the daughter is alwayes ^eeping. The father that begot the daughter, could never abide the mother, nor ^ver came neere her bed. She was no sooner borne, but she was the death of her ^other; killing her that bred her, and (which is strange) she is blessed for it. She ^as begotten in a miracle: no sooner conceived, than borne: no sooner borne, but ^e spake: other children are borne crying, she also speaking: the first aire she brea^^ed, heard her articulately declare her owne desires. And ever since shee workes ^iracles: she brings light out of darkenesse, life out of death: she makes the blinde ^o see, the deafe to heare, the dumbe to speak, and even casts out devils. She lookes ^ackward, and moves forward: is her selfe a darke cloud, yet brings a faire Sun^hine. This riddle is expounded in Repentance. Sin is the mother, repentance the ^aughter: the mother is foule, black, ugly; the daughter faire and lovely. Sin was ^^erry and wanton, repentance is alwayes sad and blubbering. God is the father of ^epentance, and he could never endure the mother, Sin; but rather perfectly hates ^et society. Being borne, she slew her mother: repentance could not have beene ^orne but by sin, and repentance is the onely thing that kils sin.August. Peccatum tristitiam ^p^rit, tristitia peccatum conterit. Sin breeds sorrow, and sorrow kils sin: and this ^arricide makes her blessed. Miraculous is her birth: at her first conception by the ^oly Ghost, shee lookes up and speakes; Open ye gates of heaven, and let mercy come ^owne upon me; her first breath is, Pardon. Miracles she worketh; turning the dark^esse of error into the light of knowlege, and making the dead heart live unto grace. The blind eyes by her, are made to see the filthinesse of sinne: the deafe eares now
 hearken to the word of truth: the dumbe lippes cry out for compassion and forgivenesse; the devils lust is expelled. She still is looking backward to her sinnes past, and moving forward to holinesse and perfection. To conclude, Repentance is her selfe cloudy, and made up of sadnesse, yet brings everlasting joy.
Such is Gods mercie to Repentance: yet let no man, though he trust to this, (...) to himselfe. The promise is to repentance, not of repentance. Nature flatters it selfe in that one in stance of the malefactor on the crosse, who in an instant got repentance. But the calling and saving of that one soule at the last, hath by Satans po^^^ beene the losse of many thousands.
4 There is a Righteousnesse of comparison; so was Lot just comparatively among the Sodomites. It is Christs incommunicable priviledge, to be The just: (...) all other men on earth to pray, Enter not into Iudgement with thy servants, for in thy sight shall no man living be justified. And, Forgive us our trespasses, and to pray for th^^ daily: perpetuall remission argues perpetuall aspersion.Ioh. 1.10. He that saies, he hath no (...) I am sure he hath no righteousnesse. But it is said of Zachary and Elizabet, that they were both,Luk. 1.6. Iust before the Lord, walking in all his commandements, blamelesse. Before God, without hypocrisie: in his commandements, not the traditions of men, without flatterie: in All of them, without reservation and partialitie. Without repr^^, Sine querela, non sine macula: not scandalous and culpable in the eyes of men, and worthy of crimination. So,1 Ioh. 3.9. he that is borne of God, sinneth not, or committeth not s^^. Not the sinning sinne, not the raigning sin, not peccatum scandalizans: not the sin ^^to death, which cannot be repented, therefore must not be pardoned.
Compared with God there is none righteous: Omnes odit, qui malos odit: he hates all men, that hates ill men. Yet some may be so, respectively to others. Th^^^^ more righteous than Iudah, yet Thamar sinfull enough. The Publican rather ^^stified than the Pharisie, yet not simply and sufficiently justified. The Spouse f^^^ among women, yet she justly complaines of her blacknesse. Some men have br^^^ and levia peccata, lesse and fewer sins, yet they have sins: though fewer in number, and lighter in measure, yet sins in nature. The Moone is glorious to a candle, pa^^ to the Sunne. The lilie white to the wooll, short of the snow. The swarthy compared with the Black-moore, thinkes himselfe faire.
Not that I would have men pitch themselves by the Pole of the dissolute. As because they are not so drunke as Nabal, therefore to thinke themselves sober: beca^^ not so proud as Haman, therefore humble: because not so trecherous as Iudas, therefore loyall. Compare not thy selfe with the worst, to see how far thou art beyond them: but with the best, to see how farre thou art short of them. Luscus inter ^a^ acute videt: and the thicke-eared heare well to the stark deafe. Among the numerous Cloistures of illiterate Monkes, if one rarely get a smacke of learning, he thinkes himselfe a brave fellow, famous among his companions.2 Cor. 10.12. They compare themsel^^ with themselves, and measure themselves by themselves. He that hath but feried over (...) Amsterdam, conceits himselfe a great Traveller, among those that never smelt other than their owne smoake. How ploud is a vaine foole of a strange language! apt (...) thinke all the rest Idiots, that understand not his Spanish or Italian! Audax Insc^^^: none so bold as the blind.
Thou that thinkest thy selfe charitable and just, compare thy selfe with Zacc^^^ after thy fourefold restitution, hast thou given halfe thy goods to the poore? Th^^ that holdest thy selfe zealous in a cold generation, consider David: The zeale of ^y house hath eaten me up. Thou that art humble, meditate on Paul, yielding to them th^^ hated him. That art sober, thinke of the Rechabites: that chast, looke upon I^s^^h in his temptation by so great a Lady. The Pigmeys wonder at his stature, whom we esteeme a dwarfe. Doe not looke upon the profane, to admire thy owne holinesse: but on the Iust, to condemne thy owne unrighteousnesse. Rurall people admire and even adore a Lady, that never saw the Queene. When the Indians first saw the Spaniards. they held them faire and goodly creatures. But bleeding under their c^^c^ties,
 and beholding other from more cold and temperate climates, of fairer com^^ections and kinder dispositions; they tooke these last for Angels. We that have ^^ized our selves by those below us, let us now value our selves by those above us: ^^en all our pride will turne into shame, and we shall blush for our idle glory. Lord, (...) they that had their faults be more righteous than we; what are we in respect of ^^ee that hast none? Give us all grace to bee more righteous, and when wee ^^ve done all wee can, pardon our great unrighteousnesse in Iesus Christ.
5 There is an Operative righteousnesse, and this may be taken either strictly or ^^gely.
Strictly, it is equity: he that deales truly withall, without respect of persons, is ^ust man. And he that is not just in his conversing and commersing with men, will ^^rdly be found righteous with God. This is not onely to render what the Law ^^quires, but even what a rectified conscience requires. As for instance; to bury the ^^ad, this is not an action of charitie only, but of equity. Funeralls are called Iusta, ^^cause they be as just to the dead, as meate is to the living. So to feed the poore: ^^ul calls Almes, Righteousnesse.Prov. 3.27. With-hold not thy good from the owners thereof. ^hey are the owners of thy superfluities, and it is just to give every man his owne. When thou doest thine almes; diverse copies read, Cum facias Iustitiam,Matth. 6.3. when thou doest ^y righteousnesse: so Eusebius reports it. Almes is thy Iustice; If not Debitum proprie^tis, yet Charitatis: and he that denyeth this, is an unjust man. That ministers doe ^each, it is Iustice, even due debt.Rom. 1.14. Ver. 18. I am a debter to the Grecians, etc. There is a woe to ^^em that with-hold the truth in unrighteousnesse. Yet thus unrighteous is the Church ^f Rome, to with-hold the Scriptures, and obtrude Traditions: as men put out the ^eare candle, to light themselves to bed with the stinking snuffe.
To helpe forward the truth is but Iustice: it is the office, albeit also the honour ^f good men to be Gods fellow helpers.Iudg. 5.23. Curse yee Meroz: Why? because it did ^^rt the Lord? No, but because it did not helpe the Lord in the day of battell. This ^uestion will one day be asked, when didst thou helpe the truth? Every man by ^rayer helpes the hand of Moses. He that does not helpe forward the building of CHRIST, is unjust: and they that doe helpe it even in the meanest degree, shall ^ave part of the reward.1 Sam. 30.24. As David would have the prey shared even among them ^hat kept the stuffe; they helped.
In contracts to faile willingly, is to be unjust. An oath or solemne promise is ^o sooner made on earth, than registred in heaven. Indeed In malis non est malum ^^scindere fidem: bad promises are better broken than kept. As David in breaking ^f his vow concerning Nabal, was not unjust: and if Herod had done so for Iohn Bap. ^e had beene more righteous. Yea, a just man will keepe his oath with a very theefe, (...) compelled oath about pecuniary matters; but not when a sinne or mischiefe fol^^wes. To give every man his due, this is just. A young Merchant being to chuse ^im a partner, by his mothers advice, at convenient time gave to one a Pomegranate: ^^e receiver cutting it in two, kept the lesse moitie to himselfe, and returned the Mer^hant the greater halfe. He gave the like to another; and he dividing it, gave him ^acke the lesse part, keeping the greater to himselfe. He thus tryed a third; and he ^^tting it into equall halfes, tooke the one himselfe, and gave him the other. This ^^st was determined by his mother, to be the fittest man to make his partner. So ^oung Cyrus being shewed by his School-master, a great man with a little robe, and little man with a great robe; and having both the garments put into his hands to ^istribute: he disposed the greater to the greater, and the lesse to the lesse. His Ma^^er replied; this was just in case of decencie, but unjust in case of equity: for he was (...) have given every man his owne.
But if this be an argument of Iustice, Lord, where shall we finde a just man? ^sal. 12.1. Helpe Lord, for the righteous man faileth: time to cry, Helpe LORD. ^ake cresset light, and search narrowly all about Ierusalem, I had almost said, Lon^on. And find one that doth Iustice: Ierem. 5.1. scarce a just man in this whole Citie.
 is to pay Tythes, to be just? O that just man is a miracle! Ignorant people on all occasions say of their Minister, I wonder he does not preach. They esteeme it a matter, before it comes, of no labour: and when it comes of no thankes. Yet, who challengeth his owne heart, of knowne unrighteousnesse, and confesseth, how ^^just have I beene in defrauding God and his Church? will the Lord be so liberall to give us the best of things, eternall life; that grudgeth him the worst of things, temporall trash? Or, that the Gospell should save our soules, which it promiseth: when we with-hold from it those trifles it requireth? Or, that God will not pinch them of spirituals, that pinch him of temporals? Will a man shut a bird fast into a cage, give her no meate, and yet bid her sing? Yet is this too universall an unrighteousnesse, and thus unjust are we. But let men read and tremble;Rev. 22.11. If any man (notwithstanding these premonitions) will be unjust, let him be unjust still. The Lord with his infinite mercy swallow up this unrighteousnesse, that this infinite unrighteousnesse swallow not up this Citie.
Largely;1 Ioh. 3.7. He that doth righteousnesse, is righteous. The scope of whose life and actions is devoted to goodnesse; not without infirmity, but without irregularity. The best traveller may stumble in his journey; yet have his eye observant and his foote constant on his way. The interposition of some cloudes doth not frustrate the regular motion of the Sun. And trees haue more life at the roote, than at all times appeares in the branches. Notwithstanding some transient distempers, thePsal. 119.80. he^^ may be sound and upright. Some gravell will stick on the toes, even when the Ba^^ of justification hath washed our soules. We are not perfectly just, except by anticipation, assuming the name before we possesse the thing. We are now the sonnes of God:August. quid hoc est? Sumus, and non sumus; we are, and we are not: sumus in spe, ^^mus in re: we are in hope, we shall be indeed.
There may be a time when this justice is not so operative, which yet shall not condemne us for unjust. The world is ever taxing the least fault in the best man: every man is borne a Cain; envying that good in another, which he wants in himselfe. They blame some ill in the Saints, not because they are evill, but because i^ respect of themselves they are too good. One imaginary cloud in a just man, (...) in their censure darken all the stars of his graces. The smallest spot in his face, shall excuse all the sores and ulcers in their bodies. But it is not so with God: he value men, Quomodo semper vadunt, non quomodo semel cadunt: respecting vitae commu^^ cursum, rather than involuntarium currentis casum. Nor is his saving grace so fickle a thing, to be lost by every weakenesse.Cant. 6.2. Hee goes into his Garden, to eate the fr^^^s, and gather the flowers: not like these buzzing Dorres, that flye over all these to a dunghill.
But now if we will be righteous, let us doe it, and shew our justice by our practise. The title of Righteous is often ill bestowed upon men: as the mistaking woman attributed to the blessed VirginsLuk. 11.27. Wombe and dugs, that happinesse which belonged to her faith. Or, as silly rurall people salute a meane Gentlewoman in bea^^ clothes, If it like your Lady-ship. Or, flattering Pamphleters ascribe to your loose^ Patrons, noble and meriting titles. Truth cals him Iust that is so. God ordained light for the eyes, language for the eares, the aire for respiration, but righteousnesse for all parts. That the minde should thinke nothing but righteousnesse, the tongue speake,August. the hand doe, nothing but righteousnesse. But alasse; Aliud defiderium c^^dis, aliud desiderium carnis. There be reluctant motions in the heart, yet De^^^e cordis, in the heart of my heart, I serve the Lord. Bare theory may come (...) righteousnesse, onely practise apprehends it. To whom is that Enge at the great Day, but to the Doer? Well done good servant, that is the forme. Not the b^^^^ and dead habite, but the living and fruitfull exercises of Iustice, shall have happinesse. Rightly, a man knowes no more than he practises. It is said of Christ that he2 Cor. 5.21. (...) no sin, because he did no sinne: in that sense, he knowes no good, that doth no good. One said of the Iesuites, that abroad call themselves Apostles; the old Apostles le^^
 earth to earthly men, shewed others, and got heaven themselves: we are more be^olding to our new ones, they shew us heaven and leave it for us to purchase; and (...) meane time coozen us of earth and worldly possessions. It is as fearefully true of ^^ose that point others the way to heaven by a righteous life, and will not move a ^^ote in that path themselves. The Saints are all said to have white garments: the ^^be of Iustice that is not white, is not right: it must bee visible to men, that it may (...) acceptable to God.
3 I come to the exceptions against Lots Iustice: the Scripture notes six great ^^lts in this good man: three principall, and three lesse principall.
1 His contention withGen. 13.7. Abraham, his Vncle, elder and better. Before they ^^ew rich, they dwelt lovingly together; poverty confirmed their society. When ^^ither want, nor weary journeyes, nor strange Countries could part; wealth di^^des. How poore a good was their opulency, in respect of their company and ^^ternall love! Many an one is a loser by his gaines; and findes that which mul^^plies his outward estate, to abate his inward. Who will esteeme those things good, ^^at make us worse? Abraham is the Vncle and worthier, Lot the Nephew and ^^unger: yet is Abraham first in the deprecation of strife. I pray thee, etc. But he ^^lds it no disparagement to begin the treaty of peace. He that is the son of Abra^^m will seeke to win by love, not to force by power.
It had bin Lots duty to offer, rather than to chuse, to yeeld than contend; yet Abraham offers the choice to Lot. Take the left hand, or the right.Ver. 9. From whence ^^th one, the custome grew in parting an Inheritance, Vt major dividat, minor eligat,Rupert. ^^at the elder should divide the younger choose. Lot takes it, but marke the event: ^^t was crossed in his election, Abraham blessed in his resignation. Never did man (...) desire of peace yeeld of his owne right, that God suffered to be a loser by it. Lot (...) he thought chose the best ground, the goodly plaines of Iordan: but while hee re^ects the goodnesse of the soile, and not the badnesse of the people, he smarts for ^^s choice, and is soone carried away captive. Abraham content with the worse, ^^th a large amends. Lift up thine eyes, looke East, West, North, and South:Ver. 25. and all the ^^d thou seest, I will give unto thee and to thy seed for ever. Let us not desire to be our ^wne carvers for this world: it is our surest happinesse without ambition or avarice, (...) rest at Gods finding.
2 His incredulity, in doubting to be saved in the Mountaine; as if the promise ^^d direction of God could have failed. He had no charge to dwell in Sodome, he had ^harge to flye to the Mountaine: yet Sodome he affected, the Mountaine he refu^^d, and was faulty in both. It is no small sin even to doubt, when wee have Gods ^^mmand and warrant to serve us.
3 His feare to tarry in Zoar, which the Lord had given his word to spare for (...) sake. But he that was so hasty to chuse it, is now againe as hasty to leave it. How ^^riable is man, when he fixeth not his submission to Gods ordinance? This fugi^^e inconstancy is by some thus qualified: that the losse of his wife at the entring of ^^ar, put him quite out of heart to stay there. And the sight of the same sins in his ^^e Citie, which so raigned in the greater, gave him cause to suspect it could not (...) long forborne.
Here were three of his infirmities; Inconstancy, Incredulity, Ambition; to ^^ew, that none is so righteous, but in some things offensive. None were more ho^^ under the law than the Priests,August. yet were they bound toHeb. 9.7. offer sacrifice for them^^ves and their owne sins. None more holy under the Gospell, than the Apostles, (...) were they taught to pray, Forgive us our trespasses. Merit-usurpers are the worst ^^^vants: for how bountifull soever God be to them, they will never acknowledge ^^eir master; all is their due. The most terrible Vsurers; all Gods blessings they ^^nke but the interest of their owne moneyes. But the least cloud in a Diamond ^^ders the price; the least infirmity in a Saint keepes him from being perfectly ^^^hteous. Yet no man puts away his horse, that hath carried him throughout his
 journey, for thrice tripping by the way. Nor doe three Parentheses disgrace a good Oration. Three drops of poyson are dangerous in a little cup of water: let them fall into a running spring, their malignitie is soone dispersed to nothing. Wash a spotted robe, and it is cleane again. Yet let us strive against all staines: Abraham going to sacrifice, left his two young serviters and the Asse behind him. Lots feare and dealting were like two timorous and cowardly servants; his covetousnesse like the Asse: leave (...) all these three behind us in our devotion, that we may be welcome to the Lord.
4 He offers up hisGen. 16.8. owne daughters to the rage of the Sodomites, that he might deliver his guests: chusing rather to be a bad father, than a bad hoste. This fact ha^^ found diverse excuses. 1. It was a lesse sinne, Coire secundum naturam, than advers^^ naturam:Ambr. and of two evills the lesse is to be chosen. Answ. This is true in pe^^^ evills, not in criminalls: in corporall things, not in spirituall. There is no necessitie that should compell a man to sinne: he ought rather to die.Rom. 14.22. Blessed is he that c^^demneth not himselfe in the thing that he alloweth: then he is not blessed that allowe^ the thing in act,Cajetan. which he condemnes in Iudgement. 2. Lot did not meane to p^^ off one sinne with another, but useth a seeming submission to qualifie their rage: he knew his daughters espoused to some great men of the Citie, and that they durst (...) attempt their constupration. Answ. But this had beene to tempt God by a fo^^^ presumption, to make such an unruly rabble this offer, in hope it would not be taken. 3. Though a man in himselfe must not doe a lesse evill for avoidance of a greater:Chrys. yet to stop anothers precipice into some monstrous mischiefe, and to mo^^^^ his mind by insinuation to a lesse; this they hold tolerable. As if men by custome must sweare, the oath is better by their head, than by God. He that is shut up i^ (...) walled fort,Greg. let him escape where the wall is lowest. Answ. This is true, where we are perswaders from evill, not actors of evill our selves. So if Lot had perswade^ them to the young maides of the towne, and to forbeare the men, it had beene more sufferable. But no man is to sin himselfe, with the hazard of his owne soule, for the prevention of anothers wickednesse. 4. His intent was good to preserve his gods. Answ.Rom. 3.8. We must not doe evill, that good may come thereof.
Chrys.Indeed there is a necessitie which comes a Posteriore. As when a man hath swo^^ to undoe his neighbour: if he breake his oath, he commits perjurie: if he keepe hi^ oath, he breakes charitie. What now? rather in breaking it offend onely God, th^^ in keeping it offend both God and man. But this perplexitie is not Ex parte (...), it is not necessary to sweare falsely, or breake charitie: but Ex parte hominis, (...) cannot revoke what he hath spoken and done. 5. He knew that if his daughters wee forced against their wils, they did not sin; and if they sinned not, he sinned not. A^s. If the maidens should consent,Aug. facient cum Sodomitis, te authore, nequitiam, Lot was (...) author of their sin: if they should not consent, Patientur a Sodomitis, te authore, volentiam, Lot was the author of their ravishment. There might have beene uncertai^ty in their consenting, there had beene none in his exposing. His purpose was go^d, his offer was faulty. If by his allowance the Sodomites had defiled his daugh^^^ betrothed to others, it had beene his sin. If through violence they had defiled hi^ guests, it had beene only their sin.
It is for God to prevent sinne with judgement, not for man to prevent a great sin in possibility, with a lesse in present act. Thus it cannot be justified, only a (...) qualified. 1. In respect of the times, wherein knowledge was not so cleare. 2. By his charitie, he did it to conserve intemerate his guests. 3. By his troubled mind, without any recollection or serious advise. The best minds troubled yield inconsiderate motions; as water violently stirred sends up bubbles. Thus Lot meant well, (...) God meant better: he preferred the unknowen Angels before his children, and th^^ Lord preserved them all.
But if this were such an error in Lot, though meant in charitie: how horrible (...) it in those that doe it for iniquitie? One would thinke there were no such mo^^^^ in nature, yea monsters against nature. TheLam. 4.3. Sea-monsters are not so cruell, as (...) land-monsters, to their young. A good father will not sell his childs body a sta^^ (...)
 man, shall any sell his childs soule a slave to the devill? O that the Sunne should shine upon that woman, which will be a Bawd to her owne daughter! That the body she brought forth wth paines to this earth, she should sell for gaines unto hell. Let her lose the name of mother and bee held a murtherer: there is no woman ever more deserved to be called the divels Dam. Let al her sex be ashamed of her; and even the sinners that reward her, curse her. Parents admonish your children, disswade them from sin, pray against their sin, do not teach them to sin. What is said of the childs eye despising the parent, let me say of the parents tongue tempting the childe,Prov. 30.17. Let the Ravens of the valley peck it out, and the young Eagles eate it.
5 His drunkennesse. Lot fled from Sodome, yet he could not flye from sin: He that could not be tainted in the Citie, is overtaken in the Cave. It is not the place that amendeth manners. Si desit Spiritus, non adjuvat locus.Greg. Some places are more dangerous, none are secure from tentation. It is a Popish fancie, that a cloisturall life can make a man more holy. If drunkennesse crept into Lots cave, who can excuse their Cels and Cloistures. Lot sinned in the Mountaine, Adam in Paradise, the Angels in Heaven: are Nunneries and Monasteries safer than these?
Some wholly excuse his drunkennesse,Chrys. because hee did not purpose to bee drunke.Eph. 5.18. But the Apostle faulteth all excesse: the excesse is a sin, what ever bee the purpose before, or effect after. Other say for it,Aquin. Theodoret. Aug. that he dranke liberally to allay his sorrowes, and mitigate his heavinesse. Ans. It ill becomes a just man to make use of such a comfort: the remedy was worse than the disease. I deny not, but wine to a man afflicted with so many griefes, hath the allowable use.Prov. 31.6. Give strong drinke to the heavy heart. But he that shall thinke to enable his body, by disabling his soule, and to cure his sicknesse with his sin; runs into the fire to avoid the smoke.
Let there be no pretext found for drunkennesse; it made a just Lot prostitute his body to beastly uncleannesse. Sodome could not deceive him, but Wine did. Vritur aebrius flammis mulierum, quem sobrium sulphurea flamma non attigerat.Origen. The fire of wine within him, did more than fire and brimstone without him. Nor in him alone hath it prevailed: Who would thinke to finde Noah, that father of the new world, lying drunken in his Tent? Or that a little Wine should doe more than a whole deluge of water? That he who was not perverted by the bad examples of the old world, should now begin a new example of sin to the new world? Lord, what is man, if he be but himselfe? What living man, had more noble proofes of Gods Mercy, and Iustice: mercy on himselfe, justice on others? The Lord once said to him in the midst of innumerable apostates; Thee onely have I found righteous. Hee that was purged when the world was uncleane, proves now uncleane when the world is purged. The Preacher of the former world, and Prince of the latter, is the first that renewes the sins which he had reproved, and for which he saw it condemned.
There is no sin hath so strange an effect, it is worse than sin. Other sins procure shame, but seeke to hide it, this displayes it. Lot is thus made a foole to his daughters, Noah to his son: it is a common quality in this excesse to disclose secrets. Adam had no sooner sinned, but he saw and abhorred his owne nakednesse, seeking concealement even in bushes. Lot and Noah discover their nakednesse, and have not so much rule of themselves as to be ashamed. Drunkennesse doth not only make vices, but make them manifest. So would God have it, that our shame might be double by it. Both a shame for those imperfections we discover, and of that imperfection which moved us to discover them. One houres drunkennesse filthily discovered, what six hundred yeeres sobriety had modestly concealed. He that gives himselfe to wine, is not his owne man. How abhorrible is that vice, which shall rob a man of himselfe, and lay a beast in his roome? He that resists that one sin, escapes many: as he that kils the pregnant damme, is sure to destroy all the brood.

Drunkennesse commands all: the senses command the members, the affections command the senses, the heart commands the affections, the head commands the heart, and wine commands the head. As Themistocles boy said; I rule my mother, my mother rules my father, and my father rules the whole Senate. Wine is aspiring, and wil get up to the crowne, and then humbles the crowne to the fee^^. If it once take the sconce, as Ioab said of Rabba, all the rest will follow.
6 His Incest. Rather than Satan will leave Lot untempted out of Sodome, his own daughters shall prove Sodomites. They that should have been his comforters to succour him, became baites to betray him. So little are they moved with that grievous Iudgement, the turning of Sodome to ashes, of their mother to a Pillar, both in their eye: that they dare think of lying with their own father. Yea, and one of them afterward, impudently calls that son Moab; My fathers son by me.
Some have excused their fact, that they did it to preserve seed: not out of intemperancie, but love of their Name and posterity: not for lust, but pr^creation. Answer The end was commendable; but the meanes, by ince^^ with their father, culpable: better for them never to have beene mother, th^^ to be so by their father. Yet their intent shall judge many: they affected commotion for fruit, diverse make that their last, and least end: lust of delectation is stronger with them, than desire of propagation. It seemes, they sinned directly against their owne consciences; because they did first intoxicate their father, to put him from his rectified memorie. They thought he would not consent to them, unlesse he first did forget himselfe: that while Lot was sober he would not be unchast. Drunkennesse is the key that opens the doore to all bestiall affections and actions. Wine knowes no difference, or of persons or sinnes. Their fact was more hainous than their fathers: his only drunkennesse, theirs to make him so, and then to commit incest with him.Aug. Culpandus Lot, non quantum ille Incestus, sed qua^tum illa ebrietas merebatur.
For his Incest, he knew it not:Gen. 19.33. he perceived not when they lay downe, nor when they rose up. It is no incredible thing Nescientem cotre: not that it was done by nocturnall pollution, without the act of generation; as Tostatus out of Thomas. Now those sins condemne us, which we doe knowingly: Et facinus facimus, qu^^do mala facta sciamus.Cajetan. The use of his reason was hindred by drinke: for if he had remembred himselfe upon his awaking, he would never have done it the second time. Some say, the progressive facultie may bee exercised in sleep, as some walke in their sleepe and transport things from place to place. Certainely, the Devill was not absent in such a a fowle businesse,Calv. working fancies in his head. But in a word, Non tam illa turpitudo a vino quam propter ebrietatem stupor inflictus a Domino: his unchastitie was the punishment of his ebrietie.
Thus came his uncleannesse from his drunkennesse, but what is to be said for his drunkennesse? Once, and a second time he admitted it Noah was drunke but once: one act cannot make a good heart unrighteous, as a trade of sinne cannot stand with regeneration. So dangerous is it to give way to Satans temptations: where he is once entertained, the next time hee is confident. Hee that hath takes one sore fall, is the worse for it long after. I know it is true in some; Te d^c^^^ lapsus, magis ut vestigia firmes, once to have stumbled, is alwaies to bee admonished: but this is above nature, a happinesse onely beholding to Divine grace.
These are the exceptions against Lots Iustice, who (for all these) hath a testimonie from the mouth of the Holy Ghost, that he was a Iust man. Now whom God calls Iust, let no man call unrighteous. Such is the difference, not of sinnes, but of men. He that sees Lot and Iudah pardoned for Incest, while Zimri suffers for fornication; must confesse, that God doth not so weigh the faults as the persons. It is a foolish proverbe of mans partiall indulgence; that one man may better steale a horse, than another looke on. But the Lord is Iustice, and hates all sin whatsoever, in all persons whatsoever: yet will he pardon their great sin, that are
 members of his good Son: and severely punish the least fault in them for whom he ^^ffered not. He regards not so much, quid, as quis: remission goes not by the mea^^re of the sin, but by the qualitie of the sinner, yea, rather the mercie of the forgi^er. Not the man that hath done no sin, but whom the Lord wil not charge with sin ^^e isPsal. 32.1. Blessed. From all that hath been said, I will draw certaine usefull conclusions.
1 Even a just Lot is suffered to fall: he that was a gracious Saint on earth, ^nd is now a glorious Saint in heaven; had his aspersions. When God upholdes ^s, no temptation can move us: if he let goe his manutenencie, none is too weake ^or us. Which of Gods deare children have not once done that thing, whereof ^^ey have afterward beene ashamed? This the LORD suffers for diverse reasons. ^. To humble us if: such excellent men have trode awry, how should we take ^eed to our wayes? Shall such Gyants stumble, and we lame creeples be secure? ^. To keepe us from despaire: the Scripture tels us of their infirmities, that in ^heir pardon we may reade Gods mercies. Let their falling humble us, and their ^^sing againe comfort us. If we had not such patternes, how could we but despaire (...) the sight of our sins? But he will hope well of his wound, that hath so good ^xperience of his Physician. 3. To magnifie his owne infinite goodnesse, that can ^o good turne our evill: he lets us fall, knowing how to make as good use of our ^^n, as of our obedience.
Lot might be ashamed of his Incestuous seed, and wish to have come from So^ome alone. Yet was this unnaturall bed blessed with increase. Diverse good wo^en have failed of this fruit by the lawfull rights of marriage as Sara, Rebecca, Rachel, Elizabet; all hardly conceived. Some with one unlawfull copulation have ^ecome pregnant: as Thamar by Iudah, Bethshabe by David, Lots daughters by ^heir owne father. Not that God favours forbidden conjunctions: but in his Iu^tice to bring such secret sin to open shame; in the elect for their conversion, in the ^eprobate for their further confusion.
Moab is derived from this Incest, one that might call his father, Grandfather; ^nd his mother, Sister. One father begot both the mother and her child, and one man is both the brother and sonne of the same woman. Yet from this line came ^one of our Saviours worthy Ancestors: of Moab came Ruth, married to Boaz, ^he father of Iesse, the father of David, the progenitor of IESUS CHRIST ac^ording to the flesh. Gods election is not tied to our meanes: we may beget children, we can neither traduce blessings nor curses to them. Holy parents from a chast bed have sometimes bred a monstrous and impious generation. And the Lord sometimes raiseth a holy seed from the drunken bed of fornication. Whatsoever we doe, God will be chuser; and serve himselfe, not according to our act, but his owne purpose. Weightie eares of corne have sometimes growen out of ^he compasse of the tilled field: and sweet flowers beene found out of the inclosed Garden, even in the wild forrest. Thus will GOD keepe his owne liber^ie of election, by his grace, not our workes; and let us know, that we are not borne, but made good.
2 Notwithstanding these infirmities, still Lot is a Iust man: some particular ^cts may be too light in the ballance, without extinguishing his title before the Lord. A man is sanctified in foure respects. 1. In the not imputation of his sins: and that which is not imputed, is as it were not committed. 2. In inchoation of holinesse, begun in this life, perfected hereafter. 3. In acceptation; Num. 23.21. God seeth none iniquity in Iacob, hee seeth no transgression in Israel: there is sinne in us, but God will not see it. 4. In comparison; so they shine like starres in a darke night. Lots offences were some blemish to his sanctification in earth, they could not nullefie his Iustification in heaven: blemish his vertue they may, not frustrate his grace. For if still as the elect sin, they should lose their grace, and cease to be righteous; Gods election were as mutable; as our condition. The franticke in his mad fits doth not exercise reason, yet he hath it: he loseth the use, not the habite,
 ratione Principii. In a swoune the soule doth not excercise her functions: a ma^ neither heares, nor sees, nor feeles; yet she is still in the body. A suspend^^ Priest cannot be put from his right in the Church, for Ministerium indelebilis ch^racter: he hath his ministerie, though forbidden to excercise it. The out-Law is still a subject, albeit debarred of some priviledges. The sonne angers his father, ^e doth not strait disinherite him. Though the vessell reele, yet feare not, Caesar^^ vehis, thou carriest Caesar; said that Emperor to the quaking Mariner: we are we^^ of our selves, but Christ is in us.
Lot fell sixe times in many dayes, the Iust man fals seven times in one day; yet he is still Iust in his Saviours righteousnesse. This concludes our comfort: he (...) bad Peter forgive his repenting brother seven times, will forgive our repen^^^ soules seven thousand times: he scornes that any Peter, Saint, or Angell, should outgoe him in shewing mercie. In our selves we are sinners; in CHRIST righteous. When the Philosopher in his owne meane clothes could not bee admitted (...) the Court on a solemne day, he went and borrowed rich and gorgeous apparell, he was then let in with ease and respect. Being in the Presence, he was continually kissing his robe: the King noting it, wondred, and asked the cause: he answers, ^^noro honorantem, I honour that which honoured me. Nam quod virtus non pot^^^, vestitus obtinuit. My vertue could procure me no entrance, my garment did. We are too base, ragged, beggarly of our selves, to be let into that glorious Court of heaven; by faith put we on the Princes embroidered garment, CHRISTS righteousnesse; then shall we be admitted. Let us admire and honour that which honours us: Quod virtus nostra non potuit, vestitus ejus obtinet: what all our righteousnesse could never doe, that his robe doth for us.
Now1 Pet. 4.18. if the righteous shall scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and sinner appeare? Righteous, that's happy: but scarcely saved, that's hard: yet shall be saved, that's happy againe. Let no beleever feare, for he is righteous: let none presume, for he shall scarcely be saved: yet, let none despaire, for he shall be saved. For all thy sin, yet thou (being faithfull in Christ) art righteous: for all thy righteousnesse, thou shalt scarcely bee saved: for all that difficultie, yet thou shalt bee saved. Thus like those on the seas,Psal. 107.26. they mount up to heaven, and downe to the deepe, and up againe: or like the Heave-offering, that was heaved up, and downe, and up againe: or as CHRIST, the Anti-type of it, was heaved up to the Crosse, downe to the grave, and up againe unto glory. So we are Iustified by Christ, this lifts ^s up to grace: we commit many sinnes, this humbles us with shame: yet we love righteousnesse, and endevour to perfection, this shall advance us to everlasting Glory.
3 Iust Lot was delivered, neither for his Iustice, nor without it. Not for his owne righteousnesse, but for Gods mercie. I will deliver him, because I have a favour unto him. Nor doth the Apostle meane, that Lot was delivered for hi^ owne sake: nor the Prophet, that he was delivered for Abrahams sake; when he saith,Gen. 19.26. The Lord remembred Abraham, and sent out Lot. He should have beene saved, though he had not beene a kin to Abraham. Yet is this repeated to testifie Gods love to Abraham, and his gracious answere to the prayers of the Sons of Abraham; which shall prevaile with him. But indeed, God remembred Abraham, not so much because hee prayed, but because himselfe had promised: the deliverance depended not upon any merite in Vncle or Nephew, but on the di^^^^ goodnesse.
The Pontificians say, there be two things in a good worke: the Meritorio^^ part, to get heaven: the satisfactory part, to escape hell. It cannot doe the latter, Propter Inutilitatem, for the unprofitablenesse of it; being no more than we are bound to doe. It cannot doe the former, Propter Invaliditatem, for the insufficiencie of it, being not so much as we are bound to doe. If God judge by the Law morall, no worke is good: for if by the Law evangelicall, joyned with the remission
 of sinnes, many workes are good. Some have affirmed that all our workes (...) evill; as if truth and lying, covetousnesse and liberalitie, hatred and charitie, ^^ere all one. God never taught that doctrine. Indeed our best actions have their ^^emishes and imperfections. The Egyptian midwives saved the Hebrew chil^^en by a lie: yet it is said,Exod. 1.20. God prospered them, and made them houses. He rewar^^d not their lie, but their pietie: he so regarded their mercie, that he regarded (...) their infirmitie. Prosperitie belongs to their goodnesse, pardon to their dissi^^lation. The Lord forgave the obliquitie, and blessed the honestie of the work. ^^ere be three circumstances in every worke, which Saint Bernard would have us ^^ke unto. An liceat, an expediat, an deceat: the lawfulnesse, expedience, decency: ^^e maine is the licet. But man is so lame, that though he keeps the right way, yet he ^^ts. Without our righteousnesse we cannot be saved, yet for our righteousnesse (...) are not saved, but for his that came to save us.
4 The Iust Saints are to bee followed, but in their Iustice and sanctitie. ^o many encourage themselves on their fals: Lot was incestuous and drunken, (...) hee is called Iust; why for such sins am I held unrighteous? Am I better than (...)? better? No, would thou wert halfe so good. 1. He sinned and condemned ^^mselfe, thou sinnest and defendest thy selfe. Thou likest that in him, which he ^^sliked in himselfe. 2. They sinned and repented, thou shewest thy sinne, but no ^^^e of repentance. Quos secutus es errantes, sequere paenitentes. Their weakenesse ^eene in our hands, but their teares are not seene in our eyes. 3. Evill was never ^^de to be imitated, but goodnesse. Lots faith and obedience is not such a sinners ^^ject, but his Incest and drunkennesse: as if Iacobs modest looke, liberall hand, ^^th-speaking tongue, devout knee, and humble heart, were not worth noting; ^^t only his lamenesse and halting. He markes none of their graces, but their ^^rres. 4. Their fals serve to raise us up when we are downe, not to cast us ^^wne when we are up: for our consolation afterward, not for our presumption ^^ore. To thinke of their errors, should humble us with feare, not hearten us ^^^h encouragement to evill. It is said of the wicked, They feare, where no feare (...) here it may be said, where feare is they feare not. These examples are Paeniten^^us in solatium, not praesumentibus in refugium. To say, why should not I find m^r^^ with David, this is the voice of faith: to say, why should not I venture to sin ^^th David, this is the voice of folly. 5. Thy sin is greater by this bold imitati^^: a lie ventured on by the example of a Saints frailtie, is of a more malicious ^^ure in thee, than it was in him. Any transgression thus derived, is the argument (...) a more ungracious soule, than that it seekes to imitate. What he hopes shall ex^^se him, doth more properly condemne him; because he had that warning be^^re him. 6. Thy repentance is doubtfuller.
He that tempted them to sin tempts also thee; that is Satan: but he that gave ^^em repentance, is not bound to give it thee, that is God. Thou makest thy fall ^^^taine, thy rising againe is uncertaine. Such a man hath bin dangerously sick, ^^d escaped; his Physitian was skilfull and diligent, his medicine proper and effe^^all. Wilt thou make thy selfe sick, on purpose to try the skill of the one, and ^^^tue of the other? 7. For them, there was a cure behinde, the sacrifice of the ^^mbe no^ then slain: but now if men wilfully frustrate the price of that redem^^on Christ died no more: his next comming shall not be in the humility of a suf^er, but in the glory of his Father; not to redeeme, but judge the world. 8. All ^^ripture is for instruction, all is not for imitation. Lucerna pedibus meis; a light ^^y feet, shewing me the blocks whereat they stumbled, that I might keepe my ^^e upright. Commissum atque conscriptum est. It is so done and written:Aug. for our ^^tation? No, that were an argument of two much violence, to draw on sin ^^th the cart-ropes of examples: to take some stones from the Temple, that with ^^em wee might beate downe the rest: and to spoile our selves by the ruines of ^^ods Saints.

This is fit to be urged against those that flesh themselves by the sins of Gods children. Will any infer, what matter is it what manner of men wee are, wh^^ Paul a1 Tim. 1.13. Blasphemer, a persecuter, an oppressor, was received to mercy? When (...) comming a Wolfe against the Lambes, is made Paul a Shepheard for the Lamb^^. This is true in him, but he did it ignorantly; thou having his example doest it maliciously. and God will not be mercifull to them that off^nd him of set purpose. He that deliberately resolves to sin, doth what he can to make himselfe uncapable of forgivenesse. Indeed it is true, that nemo bonus, nisi qui aliquando malus; the^^ is none good, but hee was once bad: Peter by experience of his owne frailty, might learne with his keyes to open heaven unto others. But though God forg^^ our sinnes in his patience, let not us forget them in our penitence. God pardone^ in Lot what was bad, and accepted what was good: let us follow his vertues, th^^ we be never condemned for his sinnes.
5 If we will be delivered let us be just: but doth God deliver none but th^ righteous? Yes, sometimes also the wicked, and that for diverse reasons. 1. Th^^ they might be brought to repentance; for that is the scope and purpose of (...)Rom. 2.4. goodnesse and patience of God. But man is so given to pride, that if he speed we^^ he thinkes he deserves well: and so instead of humble thankefulnesse swels wi^^ proud arrogance. 2. For some proginie to come from them: for good He^^^ to be borne, his wicked father Ahaz is forborne. Why doth Amon draw o^^ two yeeres breath in Idolatry, but that good Iosiah was to be fitted for a king?Psa. 73.17. When I came into the Sanctuary of God, then understood I the ends of these men. The^^ we finde, that many sacrilegious, extortioners, idolaters, are delivered, because God hath some good fruit to come from their cursed loines. 3. To fill up the measure of their sins: they have alrady done so much, that they are suffered to do more: so sin is punished with sin, as drunkennesse with thirst. 4. To magnifie the Lords patience, in giving them time and meanes of penitence: that as they make his labour without successe, they might be left without excuse. Thus (...) Cham delivered f^om that universall deluge, yet after he comes to deride his own father: twice had Noah given him life, yet he abuseth both his father and pr^^^^ver. Even Gods Arke may nourish Monsters: on the seats of the Temple (...) sit contemners of their spirituall fathers, as often filthy Toades lye under the consecrated stones. Was this Gods favour to preserve him to judgement? He (...) better have perished in the waters, than live unto his fathers curse. It is not imply our deliverance, but our thankefulnesse for it, and obedience after it, that g^^^ sufficient argument to our consciences, we are in the favour of God.
6 Never did man serve God for nothing: if Lot bee just, he shall now (...) the benefit of it, he is delivered. It is the speech of Atheisme and Apostacie: (...) is in vaine to serve God, and what profit is it that we have kept his CommandementsM^l. 3.14. Most false, from God, Discedet nullus sine munere, munere dignus: he highly seem^ to owe a man any thing. Cyrus in the conquest of Lacedemonia, encouraged (...) Souldiers: that the foot-man should have a horse-mans place; the horse-man (...) charriot; the Lievetenant should be made a Captaine; the Captaine a Colo^^^ and he that was President over a Citie, should be made a Vice-roy over a wic^^^ Countrey. Whereas Christ, say they, for his Souldiers, speakes of nothing b^^ taking a crosse, and bearing a yoke: of persecution abroad, and affliction at ho^^. Here is not Labor muneratus honore, but honor mutilatus labore: it was better wi^^ us before, we had more prosperity with lesse piety. They are miserably deceived, there is no honour like to his service, the feare of God rewards it selfe.Esa. 49.4. (...) have laboured in vaine, and spent my strength for nought; the earth is barren: but (...) worke is with the Lord, and my reward with my God; heaven is fruitfull, there shall be a blessed harvest of recompence.
Mal. 3.16.Then spake they that feared the Lord, and a booke of remembrance was written, etc. They met together to serve God: for this purpose was their comming, and abo^^
 this businesse was their communing. What followed? A book of remembrance ^as written for them: not one good worke of theirs, but is there registred: the ^reat Master of the Rols records them, and rewards them; here in a heaven of ^eace, there in the peace of heaven. And they shall be mine, saith the Lord:Ver. 17. When ^hall say to the wicked, Depart from me; then I will acknowledge them for mine. ^hen I make up my Iewels, setting all the trash and refuse on fire; I will gather up ^^em into mine owne treasury, as a man locks up his precious jewels in his Cabi^^t. And I will spare them, as a man spareth (not every sonne, but) his sonne that ^^veth him.
This was the convinced divels acknowledgement;Iob. 1.9. Doth Iob feare God for ^^ght? And Sauls insinuation to the Benjamites, disheartening their adherence (...) David.1 Sam. 22.7. Will the son of Ishai give you fields and vineyards? Will hee make you ^aptaines over hundreds and Captaines over thousands? Reward is the encourage^ent of service. This was the ground and colour of the angry sonnes exception. These many yeeres have I served thee, without breaking thy commandement;Luk. 15.29. yet thou ^ver gavest me so much as a kid, to make merry with my friends. An unjust expostu^^ion of a son to a father, and such a father as had given him the inheritance.1 Cor. 15.5. Ye ^^ew that your labour is not in vaine in the Lord. Labour. Idlenesse shall doe you no ^^od, but labour. Your labour, the paines of another shall not profit you, but ^ur owne labour. Is not in vaine; not like the Black-mores washing, a labour in ^^ine: but if it misse your end, it reacheth Gods: wee see not the successe, yet it ^ospers. In the Lord, it may be in vaine in the world, and men never requite it; ^^t in the Lord it shall finde recompence. Our labours end with our lives, but our ^^wards end not with our labours. This we know: Divinity consists of certaine ^^ounds and infallible principles, a sure foundation, a knowledge. The Physitian (...) his medicine never so proper, knowes not whether he shall recover his Patient. ^ead the Lawyer never so learnedly, he knowes not whether he shall regaine his ^lients right. The Souldier may fight valiantly, yet is not sure of the victory. ^ut Divinity is a knowledge, making us know, that our pious endeavours shall ^e rewarded.
7 The Lord first makes us just, and then saves us: as he first sanctified Lot, ^^d then delivered him. So that our Iustice is not Iustice in proper and district ^^rmes, but mercie.1 Cor 6 1^. Ab luti estis, you are washed. What, have you washed your ^^lves? No, yee are washed, yee are justified, yee are sanctified in the Name of the ^ord Iesus, and by the Spirit of God. So1 Co^ 1 30. Christ is made to us wisedome, and righte^^snesse, and sanct^fication, and redemption. Wisedome in the instruction of our ^^ules, righteousnesse in the forgivenesse of our sinnes, sanctification in the holi^^sse of our lives, and redemption in the deliverance from all our enemies. We ^^e none of these in our selves; that he who rejoyceth, might rejoyce in the Lord. ^rust not your armes of flesh, nor your hearts of ashes, nor your purest spirits ^hile they are housed in corrupted walls. If you have stood a time, trust not your ^gges, you may slide: if you have slip'd and recovered, trust not your recovery, ^ou may fall againe. Trust not your strength, it is infirmity: trust not your wis^ome, it is folly: trust not your holinesse, it is blended with iniquity. Prophets ^^ve fallen, Patriarchs have fallen, Apostles have fallen, Starres have fallen, An^els have fallen. But trust the mercy of God, which is of infinite perfection: ^^d the merits of Christ, which are of perfect satisfaction.Esa. 43.25. It is I, even I, that put^^th away thine iniquity for my own sake. It is not Abraham nor Moses; nor the Vir^^n Mary, nor the Virgin Martyr, not Peter at Rome, nor Paul at Ierusalem, that (...) doe this cure: heare the Physitian; It is I, saith the Lord. Not with the pre^^ration of our owne nature, nor with the cooperation of our owne justice, nor ^^sposi ion and liberty of our owne will: heare him once againe; It is I, even I, and (...) mine owne sake, and sons sake, that forgiveth your sins.
To conclude with application. God hath given us a gracious deliverance,
 which we may paralell with Lot's. We have beene saved from the Fire; such a conflagration, as knowes no comparison, but Sodome or hell. With a match it should have beene done, without all Match, if it had beene done. Some differences there are: that fire was in a just severitie, this, in an unjust trecherie. Sodomes for came downe from heaven, this gunpowder fire was fetch'd up from hell. That was inflicted by the Ministers of God, Angels: this was devised by the Ministers of Satan, Traitors. That was prepared for the nocent, this for the innocent. That was fire and brimstone, this fire and gunpowder; of a more suddaine and dispatching violence; not reserving pause for a Lord have mercy on us. We were Titio ereptus,Am. 4.11. a brand pluck'd out of the burning. The Lord did not only deliver us from the burning, but he also kept the fire from kindling. He sent Lot o^^ of Sodome, to save him; he prevented Sodome in England, to save us: he did not remove us from it, but he removed it from us.
He that sent that fire downeward, kept this fire from mounting upward. He delivered Lot by visible Angels, and Angels were not wanting though invisibly, when he delivered us. He remembred Abraham, and sent out Lot: when he freed as from the fire, he remembred the Sonne of Abraham according to temporall birth and his owne Son by eternall generation, Iesus Christ. He did reveale to Abraham this purposed destruction of Sodome: he did not conceale from our gracious Soveraigne the notice of this intended destruction of his kingdome. Lot was sent out by breake of day, and we delivered by foure a clocke in the morning: that very morning: there wanted but a little worke of the morning, and then sufficient to the day, to the yeare, to all ages of the world, had the malice of that morning beene; more accursed, than ever was read in the kalendar of any time. The l^cendiary a Faux, a fire-brand indeed, kept his vigils, but the Lord prevented his Iubile. There was Titio infernalis, a hell-brand ready with his match, to make Communem rogum, a generall bone-fire, both of mortall men and immortall Trophees and Charters: to make a whole burnt-offering of us all, and to passe us through the fire to that Moloch of Rome. Temples, sepulchers, monuments o^ age and honour, should have beene tossed into the aire, then into the water, after they had beene first spoiled by fire. Our river had beene turned into a river of bloud, and her carriages, in stead of commodities, into dead corpses and discerpted limbes; her chrystall streames died into rubies. Thus they meant us like Sodome but God delivered us like Lot. The danger was imminent and furious, their rage violent and monstrous, our deliverance strange and glorious; let our commemoration and thankes bee solemne and generous, heroicall and perpetuall for ever. Amen.
Vexed with the filthy conversation of the wicked.] The next point is his place, which was sinfull, fl^gitious, stigmaticall Sodome. It was worse than a Gaole (...) his just soule: and report lies, if our common Gaoles be not like to Sodome, the very dennes of mischiefe, the Schooles of wickednesse. Thus Gods ordinance for reformation, is made a meanes of further transgression: and the place built for discipline, breeds and feeds villanie. A malefactor learnes more pestilent untowardnesse when he comes there, than ever he knew before. O that the Magistrate would looke to this; that drunkennesse and blasphemie might not usurpe the place of mortification and humilitie!
Chrys.But why would Lot stay in such a wicked Citie? Not as a neighbour affected with their customes, but as a Physitian to cure their diseases. But he that looked for a Paradise, found a hell: and the cup of his prosperitie was spiced with the bitter fruites of a cursed societie. It was indeed Terra bona, but Gens mala; as it was once said of Ireland; nothing bad there but the people.Matth 3.22 Christ would not suffer his weake Disciple to goe bury his Father; lest hee should be perverted by
 some carnall friends at the funerall. I am life, tarry and live with me: let the dead ^^one, lest thou dye with them. How often doth God part his children from the ^icked, by making them smart with the wicked!Aug. As Augustine speakes of the ^eligious taken among the rest by the Gothes: Iure amaram vitam sentiunt, quia ^eccantibus amari esse noluerunt.Psa. 120.5. Woe is me that I must remaine in Mesheck, and dwell (...) the tents of Kedar.
^o live among the good is a great happinesse, a little Image of heaven, a module ^nd abridgement of the communion of Saints. Where one doth love another and ^ll love God: one is at peace with another, and all at peace with their owne con^cience: one doth honour another, and all honour their Maker. When the inha^itants of a Parish shine in the day, like a Firmament of bright Stars in the night; ^ot one malevolent aspect among them. Like a Quire of tunable voices, every ^ne keeping time and his owne part, and in a sweet harmony, all singing the pray^es of the Lord. But O where shall we finde such a neighbour-hood? how much ^round shall we leave behind us, ere we arrive at this society? The Prophet once ^ried, O ye heavens drop downe righteousnesse; as if the earth had quite lost it, being ^^ken up above the cloudes. We may now cry and complaine for want of this ^eighbour-hood; O ye heavens drop down kindnesse and charity into our times, O love that art Alumna coeli, sis medicina soli; come downe and helpe us.
Imagine with the fable, a Citie consisting of selected men, all peaceable, tra^table, charitable, humble; the Magistrate clemently ruling, the people meekely ^beying. The enemy knowes it invincible, while thus governed: therefore craf^ily resolves to shuffle in among them a paire of false brothers; a lyer, and a theefe. ^ut because in their owne formes they would soone be discovered and abhor^ed; he puts them in two disguises; the lyer like a Lawyer, the theefe like a Vsu^er. Their wealth procures them roome and respect, they fall to worke. The ^yer with his forged weapons, whispers to the Magistrate how the people stomack ^im: to the people, how the Magistrate tyrannizeth over them: to private persons, what hard language is given them, what wrong is done them, what right is kept ^rom them, and that the law is ordained to render every man his owne. First, there ^s heart-burning, then brawling, then contesting at law: and now instead of peace ^nd humility, there is pride and enmity. The Vsurer, he so robs them by a legall ^heft, that they become at once sensible of want and injury; covetousnesse gets in^o the heart, oppression fils the hand. Now far-well charity, every man for him^elfe, none for God, and God for none. Consider your selves, and wish this were but a Parable: punish the divels instruments; hang up theevery, cut out the ^ongue of lying, and so be shut of them: this were a faire riddance of them both, ^s the proverbe hath it, without a Session. There was a Mathematician in Con^tantinople, that in anger thus vexed his neighbour.Agath. Hee did set in his Cellar ^reat Caldrons of boyling water, with heate multiplying the motions of the va^ours; and then turning them all into narrow pipes, gave them vent under his ^eighbours floore: which made such an earthquake, that it shooke all his house. ^hen with fire-glasses and barrels he so thundered and lightned, that he forced ^im to forsake his dwelling. The vapours of secret slanders, the earthquakes of ^pen contentions, the thunders of blasphemy, the flashes of burning malice, doe ^o afflict us: that we cry, Our soule is among Lions; sons of men whose teeth are speares, ^rowes and sharpe swords.
But still what doth Lot in Sodome, a Saint among sinners? fishes may be fresh (...) salt waters; live in the sea, and not pertake the brinish qualitie: it is not so with ^an. Rather, Aliquid mali propter vicinum malum; some evill for neighbour-hoods ^^ke. Pure streames passing by a corrupt foile, contract some of the putrefacti^n: and springs running thorow the veines of the earth, savour of the minerall, ^hich they last saluted. Inficitur terrae sordibus unda fluens. Commisti sunt inter Gen^^s: c They were mingled among the heathen. What followed? They learned their
 workes. No wonder: can a man be cleane among Lepers? or sleepe with dogges, and not swarme with fleas? We certifie our selves of mens behaviour, as the Lacedemonians inquired the carriage of their children: Of what sort are their companions: as they, Of what condition are their play-fellowes? The mischiefes of Sodome and Babylon should forewarne our departure: as the swallowes would not come neere Thebes, because the wals had beene so often besieged. The smitten Deere is presently forsaken of all his fellowes. A great Tree never fals alone, but also spoiles the under-wood, wch otherwise would have thrived well enough. The reason why the Raven returned not unto the Arke, is given by some, because she met with dead carcases. The worlds carrion keepes many from their faithfull adherence to the Church. Any thing taken from the proper place loseth the vertue: a coale of fire kept in the chimney, lives: separate it from the harth, leave it alone in the aire, it presently dyes. What Philosophy said of good, experience justifies of evill: Malum est sui diffusivum, evill is diffusive and spreading of it selfe; indeed more catching than goodnesse.Hag. 2.12. Aske the Priest if a man carry holy flesh (...) the skirt of his garment, and touch other things with that skirt, shall they be holy? No, saith the Priest. If one that is uncleane by a dead body, touch any thing, shall it not bee uncleane? Yes, it shall be uncleane, saith the Priest. Sooner are the good corrupted by the bad, than the bad are bettered by the good. Why are we taught continually to pray, Deliver us from evill: but that it hath a dangerous power to make us evill? Yea, LORD, free us from Sodome, separate us from sinne, alienate (...) from the wicked, Deliver us from evill, for thine is the kingdome, the power, and the glory, for ever, Amen.
Vexed with the filthy conversation of the wicked.] The matter of his vexing was their sin; the evill of the place came from the persons, who were fully, fowly, filthily, palpably wicked. Not by way of infirmity, or in any meane degree, but wicked, in the extent of sin. Not seldome, or by fits, but alwayes; their conversation was wicked. Not secretly and in corners, but notoriously in the publike view; their visible life was wholly wicked. And for specification, if any s^^ were predominant above the rest, it was Filthinesse, Sodomes filthinesse, a bestrality, yea worse. For Pejus est bestialiter vivere, quam bestiam esse: it is not so bad to be a beast, as to live like a beast; a sin abhorred by nature it selfe. Therefore to put some method into this further discourse of their wickednesse, three circumstances appeare in the description. 1. The impudence of it, being notorious and open; Lots eye-sore. 2. The continuance of it, during their whole life: not an act or two, but their conversation. 3. The turpitude of it, being so obscene and nasty a fifthy conversation. Thus we have the fore-head, the heele, and the composition of the whole body.
1 The impudence; it was manifest wickednesse, their faces did not blush at i^. The shew of their countenance doth witnesse against them,Esa. 3.9. they declare their sin as Sodome, they hide it not. It is true, that nocturnall pollutions shall have publike plagues: b^^ they that dare sin God in the face, shall beare a heavier weight of his vengeance. The harlot doth bad enough, that wipes her lips, (as if the print of her sin could be seene there) and it was not she: though she commit it, she will conceale it. B^^ Absalom worse; that spreads his incestuous pallet on the roofe, and cals the S^^^^ a blushing witnesse to his filthinesse.Psal. 73.6. Pride compasseth them about as a chai^e: they weare their wickednesse in pompe, as if they meant it should grace them.Phil. 3.19. They glory in their shame: such as boast their quantities of drinke, and varieties of uncleannesse; (it is all one) how far into their hearts they have admitted the d^^^^
Such are calledRev. ^2.15. Dogs: not onely because they are as fawning as dogs, ^^^tering their feeders: or as ravenous as dogs, insatiately devouring, canine appeti^^: or as malicious as dogs, barking out scandals at their lives that shine with goodnesse: but as uncleane as dogs, and as shamelesse as dogges; noisome with imp^dence, and impudent with noisomenesse; their place is without,Psal. 10.3. The wicked b^^steth
 his hearts desire: he doth not cover it, nor excuse it, but boast it: nor shift it (...) another, but makes it appeare his owne hearts desire. Mala admittunt, admissa ^^ctant, jactata defendunt.Isidor. de sum bon. cap. 20. Majoris est culpae manifeste quam occulte peccare: ille ^^pliciter reus, quia and agit and docet. The Popish rule is safer, Caute si non caste: ^ut these, vitia tam minime abscindunt, ut non abscondant. They prostitute their ^oules as the Romans did the bankrupts houses, with, Who gives most? If their ^^and hath beene the Organ of unrighteousnesse, their mouth shall be the Trump^t ^o proclaime it.
There is more modesty in them that seeke concealement: if there be any bush (...) Paradise, any tempter to bee named by Adam; a woman of thy giving, Eve; ^hereas it was a woman of his owne seeking, concupiscence: Gehezi hath a lying co^er, Saul a pretending colour; here is something to be alledged for mittigation. ^ut to sin without shame, yea, to out-sin all shame, to publish the tenour of vil^ny in print; this is Sodomes state. Vncleannesse was not confined to the Cham^er, nor the every to the night, nor corruption blanch'd and skin'd over with hy^ocrisie: but borne aloft, justified by protection, and crowned with garlands of ^onour and approbation. This sin abandons secresie, scornes reproofe: admoni^^on to it were but like goads to them that are mad already, or a powring of oile ^owne the chimney.
It is said of b Thamar; that Iudah tooke her for an harlot by her dressing.Gen. 38.15. She ^^kes upon her the habite of an harlot, because she meanes to be one: her attire de^lares her purpose. If she had not wished to seeme a whore, she would have avoi^ed such a place and vaile. The externall monuments of immodesty bewray a ^arnall heart: they that meane well, will never wish to seeme ill. Nature (not too ^^r perverted) is not more forward to commit sin, than willing to hide it: and we ^ommonly affect to shew better than we are. Not few harlots put on the sem^lance of chastity, and bittterly raile on them that appeare naught. Moorish pas^^ges are dangerous for travellers, but the pits which the eye sees, the foot avoides. ^et us never trust those that doe not wish to appeare good.
To conclude then, Sodome sought no cover, and she was not covered; fire ^nd brimstone had free accesse to her; and her confusion no lesse than her corrup^^on, was palpable to the world. Opennesse of sin saves Iustice a labour of inqui^^tion: there need no hew and cry after that theefe which presents himselfe. Are ^^ere no such publike sinners amongst us? None that openly dis-hallow the Sab^aths; none that justifie sacriledge; a sin now as manifest as Sodomes: none that ^ave so sworne away all grace, that they make it their grace to sweare.Rom. 16.17 Marke ^^em that cause devisions and tumults among you, marke them with the black coale ^f infamy: let them be to you, as Lepers among the Iewes, or as men ful of plague^^res among you; whom neither the feare of God nor man can worke to peace, ^nquietnesse must be their portion for ever; the shame of the Gospell, malicious, ^rangling Christians. Concerning these open sins, let me say to the Magistrate, (...) David to Salomon of1 Kin. 2.8.9. Shemei; we may not, you must punish.
2 The continuance: as their sins were extant, so constant;Psa. 10.5. Their wayes were ^^wayes grievous. Their wayes, not some few steps; grievous, not meanely offen^^ve; and that without intermission, alwayes. It is not so much sin, as the trade of ^n that is damnable. They sin while they eate, sin while they walke, talke, even in ^eepe they sin: their sportive, transportive mirth is full of obscenesse: their beds, ^oards, chambers, and (if they dissemble any devotion) the very Churches are ^itnesses of their impiety: such fluid soules, that no costive medicine can stay the ^^ux of their sins: but the very remanent snuffe of originall goodnesse must lan^uish out in a stinking dissolutenesse. Time, cummunis medicus, the remedy of ^ther evils, encreaseth this. Other creatures grow up to their height, and then ^ecay and dye: onely it is said of the Crocodile, that she growes to her last day. ^o doth this mans sin; Plus senio confectus, plus malo infectus: corpore debilior, facinore
 fortior. It is said of the Moone; Crescit, senescit, evanescit, and reparat sua c^^nua Phoebe: she waxeth, and waneth, and vanisheth, and then appeares againe with repaired hornes: but here is no change, except from evill to worse. They so habituate sins, Vt diu assueta, tandem putantur nulla: as the Fryers dwindle their orders, from Minim's to Nullan's. Or as some owe debts so long, that they forget them to be debts. They thinke the Preacher does them over-hasty wrong to call them from their inveterate lusts: as when a creditor demanded his money long due; the debter jested with his companion: See, I have ought him the money these ten yeares, and he is as earnest with me as if I had borrowed it but yesterday. Like men that have so often told a lie, that at last themselves thinke they speake true.
Lot may preach to them, but unlesse Lot could convert them, there is no reparation of their life. Resolute sinners love dissolute Teachers; such as cannot, or dare not speake the truth. That cannot, for insufficiencie: their place hath set them to charge, but they have neither powder, nor shot. That dare not, for flatterie: we may say of their Sermons, as it is reported of some harpes: Oculos pascunt, (...) onerant: it is better to see, than heare them: their fingering may please the eye, their melodie is nothing worth. Yet as Saint Keywins harpe is kept for a great relique: so flattering teachers are venerable monuments with these.
Bern.They sin because they will sin: Quare peccas? quia nescis quid facias? d^s^: quia cogeris ut facias? absit: sed quia placet ut sic facias. The cause is neither ignorance, nor compulsion, but wilfulnesse. Though we must offend, yet for shame let there be some interruption and breaking off in our sins: let not men run head-long to hell, and never so much as looke backe. It is for the Devill only to doe nothing else but sin: a sinner from the beginning, a sinner to the end. Who gives a peny to that merchant that rejoyceth in his shipwracke? or will conferre an estate upon him that resolves to be a beggar? Saint Augustine confesseth a state of himselfe unconverted, bad enough; when he said, Petieram castitatem, sed nollem obtinere: but these will not so much as Petere, desire to be good.
While they are in Dalila's lappe, they thinke themselves as safe as if they were in Abrahams bosome. As beggars get their living by shewing their sores: let a Chirurgion offer to heale them, they refuse it, because they live by them. We offer to cure mens maladies, their riot, rapine, uncleanesse, lying, blasphemie: No, they thank us, and say, they live by them. This is that Babel which will not be cured. Yea, they are worse than those beggars; for they desire not ulcers, yet when they have them, they make use of them: but these by an unnaturall lust conc^^^ them, and make ulcers in their conscience. Perhaps the issue there hath continued so long, that if they offer to stop it, they die: the Devill hath hamper'd some so fast, that they dare not but sin, for feare they should anger him, for a Ne^^c^^: and their consciences would so pinch and torture them, that they dare not ad^^^^ conference. As they that have curst and shrewish wives at home, love to stray abroad: so men molested with a scolding conscience, as the whore, drunkard, homicide; are faine continually to play, drinke, riot; to goe to bed with their heads full of wine, and no sooner wake, but to it againe. So that their conscience and knocke at the doore a thousand times, and they are never within, or at leasure to be spoke withall. Yet must they at last be met and found, as Ahab was by E^^^, even by this enemie: stay they never so long, and stray they never so farre, they must home at last. Sickenesse will waken them, conscience must speake wi^^ them, as a Master with his truant Scholer after a long absence; and then there are no men under heaven who more need that prayer, LORD have mercy upon them!
 The uncleannesse: their sin was not only palpable, and durable, but detestable: they were exposed to turpitude, their bodies prostituted to fleshly polluti^^^. By [filthy] understand all carnall defilements, the kinds whereof Saint Paul specifies
 to the Romans under their proper names, because they were familiarly knowne to them. But to the Galathians, he wraps them up in generall termes, be^ause there they were more obscure: As our Apostle doth not name Sodomes fil^hinesse to the Christian Iewes, lest by specifying it he should in a manner teach ^t. The degree of Pope Syricius involved marriage among the pollutions of the ^^esh: and such was the over-sight of Saint Gregory upon, 1 Cor. 7.2. Concessit mi^imo, ut majus declinetur: a false glosse of a sincere Text, striving to prove by the Apostles words, that matrimonie is by permission, not by commandement: and ^herefore Sine vitio non esse, quod ignoscitur, and non praecipitur; that cannot be with. ^ut sinne, which is pardoned, and not imposed. But if it were a sin to marry, God ^imselfe should be the Author of sin, for he was the author of marriage. Neither ^oth God pardon it as a thing forbidden, but permit it as a thing lawfull, though ^he Apostle doth not there impose it as a thing necessary. And it is a forced inter^retation, to taxe that of iniquity, which God hath ordained for a remedie. For ^^e doth not forbid, but rectifie our desire; Let every man have his owne wife: Su^m, non alienam: Vxorem, non concubinam: vxorem, non uxores: a Wife, not a concubine: his owne wife, not another mans: his Wife, not wives. Lamechs incongrui^ie, (Heare O yee wives of Lamech) was like false latine: for wives admit of no plu^alitie, when they be construed with one husband.Mal. 2.15. God had abundance of Spirit, yet unus unam uni, he ordained but one woman for one man.
But let us abhorre that doctrine, that shall at once cast out the aspersion of sin ^pon marriage, and yet seeke to vindicate uncleannesse from sin by a toleration of ^tewes. It was Gods expresse prohibition;Deut. 23.17. There shall be no whore of the daugh^ers of Israel. Many flatter themselves, that this is but a tricke of youth: belike they are content to lose the kingdome of heaven with a tricke: an unhappy tricke, that costs a man his soule.
It is truly said, that a whore is the high way to the Devill: he that lookes on her with lust, begins his voyage: he that stayes to talke with her, is halfe his way: he that enjoyes her, is at his journeys end. She is Mendax, out-lying a newes-monger: fallax, her kisses be sweet poyson: Vorax, her eye is on your face, while her heart is on your cash: Tenax, a deepe ditch: what is wrack'd there, is lost for ever: Curiosa, dressing her selfe all day, to provoke appetite at night: Impudica, others sinnes shew like land-schip, a farre off; hers like huge statutes: damnosa, damnable both to her selfe and others. She keepes her selfe a stranger to repen^ance, till they two meete at an hospitall. She lives like Cain, a reprobate vagabond without any constant habitation. Her body is the common sewer, her soule a snuffe which onely Surgery keepes alive, and at last it goes out in everlasting stench.
For others; it is her miserie and mischiefe not to be damned alone, she brings many to her owne fire, and so does the Devill speciall service. She is a witch that hath wrought upon Saints, asGen. 38.15. Thamar (though otherwise a good woman) did once upon Iudah. He esteemes her by her habite, and the very sight of an harlot hath fiered him with lust: the Devill knowes that a fit object is halfe a victorie. At the first sight he is enflamed, and (which is strange) caught with her love before he saw her face. Not examining whether she was faire or foule, sicke or sound, friend or enemie, it was enough that she was a woman. The presence of the Adullamite does not restraine him: so had lust besotted him, that he could endure a witnesse. She was cunning, and would not trust him without a pawne: a pledge he leaves her, his staffe and signet. O that the filthy affection should thus transport a sonne of Iacob! But in him let us see the easiest fruites of it, feare and shame. Feare he came to pay the hire of his lust, and shee was gone: now hee feares, lest his owne signet should seale his reproach, and to be beaten with his own staffe. Shame, purposing, if these evidences were produced, not to owne them, and wishing that no other might know them. When the fact appeares, and the author cannot lie hid,
 with that shame, yea horror must he looke upon Thamars two sons, the monuments of his filthinesse? It must needs cut off his soule to heare them call him Si^^ and Grand-sire and Thamar both mother and sister. Shame is the surest and easiest wages of this sinne, there is more belongs to it.
He that hath thus fallen, must goe to the price of many a teare, it must cast him deepe sighes, and the heavy grones of a broken heart. It is not a light and transient sorrow that can doe it: the gates of heaven are shut, and every breath of a Miserere will not open them. Their state is dangerous, and there is but one way to helpe them: to repent what they have done and never more to doe wh^^ they have repented. If we have admitted such a prostitution of our bodies, let (...) obtaine by faithfull penitence such a restitution of our honours. So shall the ga^^s of blisse be opened againe to us: for God esteemes not men as they have beene, but as they are.
Vexed.] The last point is Lots case: he did burne in zeale, as Sodome did i^ lust: there was fire in them both; his, a holy fire from the Altar of God, theirs, an unnaturall fire blowne into their veines by the bellowes of hell.
Vexed.] this was no ordinary disturbance, nor common displeasure: but oppressed, excruciated, tormented; his senses, his very soule exceedingly afflicted. He was not an idle looker on, as if he minded not what they did: nor in a timerous observation of the Proverbe: of little medling comes great rest: but knowing it to be the cause of God, his heart was perplexed about it. He durst as freely expostulate, as they durst act; and tooke as full liberty of reproving, as they took licenciousnesse of offending. He was not vexed with them, but with their deeds: we are to hate none for their creation, but perverting the end of their creatio^ let us love Gods Image, not the filthy defacement of it. Pax cum viris, bellum c^^ vitiis, peace with the person, not with the conditions.
Vexed.] that which is here passive, is in the next verse active; he vexed his righteous soule. He vexed his owne soule: who bad him stay there to be vexed? He vexed himselfe, when he might have quitted himselfe. Yet because he was vexed, he is delivered. He was but a guest to Sodome, an Host to the Angels: ^e liked well of their situation, not of their conversation, and found more bitternesse in the one, than sweetnesse in the other. Yet because he avoided their sins, he escaped their judgements. And surely they were both miraculous: for his declining their sins, was no lesse a wonder than his deliverance from their flames. As the latter was Gods gracious prevention, so the former was his prevenient grace: and he was not more bound to blesse God for saving his body from the fire, than for saving his soule from their sin.
The nature and quality of this vexation I referre to the next verse. Conclude we with observing and admiring a wonder: a man environed with fire, and not burning; floating on the sea, and not drowning; dealing with dunghils, and not defiled; contemned and honoured, made rich by being impoverished. If I should propound a riddle; what is the highest and the lowest: the fairest and the fowlest: the strongest and the weakest: the richest and the poorest: the happiest and ^^happiest: the safest and most in danger of any thing in the world? I durst not promise with Sampson, new sutes of apparell to all that can expound it. It is a true Lot, a good Christian.
He is the lowest of the world, De profundis clamavi?Psal. 130.1. Out of the deepes have I called: so low a hedge that every son of fortune treads him downe. Yet the highest, for hisPhil. 3.20. conversation is in heaven: let his feet stand upon earth, his head is in heaven.
He is the lowest in appearance to the world; for so disguised with weeping, watching, fasting, that he seemes like a bottle dryed in the smoke: so loden with reproches,Esa. 53.2. that he lookes black as if he had lyen among the pots. u There is no forme, no beauty nor comlinesse desirable in him. Yet the fairest; black but comely; fairer
 than all the sons of nature; the delight of Angels, the love of God.Cant. 4.7. Thou art all ^^ire my love and there is no blemish in thee.Acts. 6.15. Thus the face of Stephen appeared like ^n Angell: the Sunne, the Heavens, the Firmament of refulgent Starres are not ^omparable.
He is the weakest, a Lambe among Wolves, afflicted on this side, oppressed ^n that: a reed that bowes at every gust. Elias under a Iuniper-tree, weary of ^is life: Iob on the racke, broken with sores and sorrowes. Yet the strongest, be^^g armed with faith, hope, and love, three invincible forces: faith being able to ^^move mountaines, to overcome the world: hope an immoveable anchor, able ^o stay the vessell in the greatest stormes: love strong as death, undertaking death (...) the terriblest forme, that it may come to Christ. Thus Elias durst face a king, ^nd tell him, Thou troublest Israel. Herodian writes of Plantiamus, the Emperor Se^erus his favourite, that he had such a terror in his countenance, men durst not look ^im in the face. Therefore when he went abroad, he had his Ante-ambulones, ^entlemen-ushers before him, to give warning, that men might cast their eyes to ^e earth at his comming. It is said of St Benedict, that he had such a power of ter^or in his eye, that casting but a look upon Totilas, that warlike King of the gothes furious and audacious man; he made him tremble. Such a Majestie hath resulted ^^om the face of diverse martyrs, that the tormentors were more afraid of them, ^an they of their tormentors. They are built upon such a foundation, that all the ^rdinance of hell can never batter them.
He is the poorest, not only in regard of superfluities, but even of necessaries. Moses must not thinke scorne to keepe sheepe, nor David to beg bread of Nabal, or Elias to be fed with ravens, nor Lazarus to be glad of crummes, nor the Apo^les for pure hunger to plucke the eares of corne, nor Peter to confesse, Silver, and ^^ld have I none, not a peny in his purse; nor CHRIST himselfe to be so neere ^riven, as to looke for figs from a tree in the way, and misse his purpose. Yet still ^^e richest, without meate, not without Christ: sine domo, non sine Domino: what^^ever he wanteth, he wants not content. And it is no paradoxe, that a man may ^e rich with little, and poore with much. Content is the poore mans riches, and ^esire is the rich mans povertie. Discessa avaritia, cessat indigentia: there is no want, ^here is no wantonnesse.
Hee is the unhappiest, for his hands are tied from revenge, his eyes muf^ed that he must not looke upon vanitie, his lips sealed that he may not returne ^^buke for rebuke. He lives in the worldlings paradise, as the Poets fained of Tan^^lus; up to the chinne in pleasures, and is not suffered to taste them. Touch not, ^^ste not, handle not; what a miserable life is this? Yet, is he the unhappiest; the ^eace of conscience, being his everlasting Christmas: a joy he hath, which no man (...) take from him. The Affrican King in Charles the greats Court, offering to be ^^prised, observed diverse poore men sitting on the ground, and served in meane ^anner, demanded what they were: it was answered him, that they were the ser^^nts of CHRIST. Whereupon he replied, If the King keepe his servants so ^^th, and CHRISTS servants so poore, I will be no servant of CHRISTS. ^hey that thus looke on the out-side of Christians, find small glory to please the ^^e of sensuall reason: it is the Inner man that is faire and rich and blessed, adorned ^ith more Iewels than the eye of the world ever saw, or the treasure of the world (...) selfe is worth.
He is in continuall danger, his soule being the but for all Satans darts, his bo^y the anvile for the worlds afflictions, he runs thorow many deaths, and is killed (...) the day long. Thus was Christ himselfe served; Nec recessit a servo, quod prassit in Domino. When the Iewes offered Iesus gall and vinegar; he tasted it but ^ould not drinke; he left the rest for his Church, and they must pledge him. Yet ^ill he is safe, under the shadow of Gods wings; and when the whole world floats ^n the waters, Noah shall sit dry in his Cabin. Let Sodome be all on a flame, not
 a haire of Lots head shall be sindged. All the assaults of flesh and bloud agai^^t them, is but as if glasse should encounter Adamant. The great King takes them into his protection, and woe unto all those that attempt their ruine.
This is the Christians estate: now every man would be partaker of the height, not the basenesse, of the beautie, not deformitie, of the strength, not infirmity, (...) the riches, not povertie, of the happinesse, not infelicitie, of the safetie, not the d^^ger that waits upon religion. But the comforts of Iesus be not for them tha^ d^^claime his sorrowes. Ioseph had faire possessions in the land of Aegypt, but he b^queathed none of these to his children, because they were to have Canaan. So God allowes his children but little here, because he meanes to give them he^ hereafter. Lord, whatsoever requisites be wanting, or troubles abounding, a^o^^ journey: let our latter end be peace.



VERSE 8. For that righteous man dwelling among the^, in seeing and hearing, vexed his righteo^s soule from day to day with their unlawf^l deeds.

IT is an apparant argument of an ungracious man, that he can with unmo^^ patience beare the dishonours of God. Hot yron cannot chuse but hisse, wh^ cold water is poured upon it; nor a good man but vexe at open wickednesse I know there be some will sooner fight in their Mistresses quarrell, than in th^^ Makers: fiery against their owne disgraces, coole and remisse in the cause ^f Christ, as if it were quite unconcerning them. There is no love without zeale (...) there can be no heate without fire.Cant. 8.6. Love is strong as death, Ielousie cruell (...) grave. Take death at the strongest, Christs love to us was stronger; but (...) abuse it, that love growes jealous, and that jealousie growes cruell, cruell as (...) grave. Our love to him must have the same nature, though it faile of the same ^^^sure: that which dishonours him, must vexe our soules. Entire love will not s^^fer it selfe to be adulterated.Num. 5.15. No Oile nor frankincense might come into the Ie^^^sie offering, because it brings iniquitie to remembrance. The ground of Ielousie is ^^^tending unto hate upon a just suspition of a just cause: there is no competition (...) Christ to be admitted. Lot loved God, therefore was zealous of his glory, ^e^lous therefore reproved his offenders, reproving he found no amendment, th^^^fore vexed his owne soule. Let him be righteous, if he had not dwelt among (...), there had beene no vexation? let him dwell among them, if he had not beene r^^^teous, no trouble: let him be righteous, and dwell among them, if they (...) ^^t beene wicked, no offence. Be he righteous, and among them, and they wicked, y^^ if he had not seene and heard their evill deeds, yet he had beene free. Yea, g^^^^al^ these si^ister concurrences, if their sins had been few and not frequent, his vexa^io^ had beene lesse. But lay all these together; a good man, among the ungod^y, seeing their workes, and the unlawfulnesse of them, and the continuance of th^t ^^lawfulnesse; he must needs be vexed, and that vexation be of the same ex^e^^ a^^ duration as was the cause; their ungodlinesse, from day to day.
The generall parts of the Text are two; the Incentives or kindlers, a^d ^^e
 fire it selfe. The incentives are set downe by foure degrees. 1. Causall or radicall, He being righteous. 2. Occasionall, Dwelling among them. 3. Objectuall, their unlawfull deeds. 4. Organical or instrumentall, In seeing and hearing. For the fire it selfe consider. 1. The property, it is fervent against unrighteousnesse. 2. The sincerity, it workes inwardly, moves the soule. 3. The rarity, but one among ^housands thus vexed. 4. The constancie, from day to day. It is not coole, not counterfeit, not common, not mutable.
1 He being righteous.] As in naturall things, Simile non agit contra simile, fire fights not against fire, but against water. So in morall things, Innocens non agit contra innocentem, one good man doth not persecute another. If either the Sodomites had bin righteous with Lot, or Lot unrighteous with them, here had beene no contention. Wolfe and Wolfe can agree, Lambe and Lambe fall not out; but who can reconcile the Wolfe to the Lambe? That good man who was eyes to the blind, and feet to the lame, yetIob. 29.17. brake the teeth of the ungodly. Faith is the ground of zeale: faith is from Christ, love from faith, zeale from love: nor can ^aith be discerned without love, nor love without zeale. Intellectus est prior poten^ia quam voluntas:Heb. 11.1. Faith is first, as the foundation before the building, the evidence before the possession. That which made Lot righteous in Christ, made him zealous for Christ. When the weather is hot, every man opens his mouth: when it is cold, he shuts it, till his teeth chatter againe. Where is righteousnesse, there is heate, where is heate, men will quest and open: I beleeved, therefore I spake. But where is no heate, there is an unperfect sound, a chattering of the teeth as if men were afraid to speake.
Righteousnesse, which is the life of the soule, is discerned as the life of the body; by motion, heate, and feeling. If the dishonours of God doe not runne like goads and poniards to our heart, we are all dead flesh: if his glory doe not lift us up with joy, there is no heate in us. Antigonus his sonne being grievously sick, and none perceiving the cause; when his mother in law entred the chamber, his eyes began to quicken, his bloud to rise, and pulse to beate extraordinarily: whereby the Physicians understood the cause to bee the unnaturall love of his mother. As in that vicious love, so in true holy affection to God, the very mention of his name will make our pulse beate, our hearts incontainable of joy or sorrow; our love cannot be suppressed. Good bloud will never belye it selfe; well-borne children are touched to the quick with the injuries of their Parents: not thus to be moved, is to confesse our selves bastards. This point will fall heavy on some, when it comes to be concluded: that where is no zeale, there can bee no righteousnesse.
2 Dwelling among them.] One reason why God suffers evill men, is to try the good: Vertue is more glorious being set off with vice. Beauty were lesse admirable, if there were no deformity. Some Canaanites are reserved to make tryall of Israels constancie.1 Cor. 11.19. There must be Sects, that the approved may be knowne. They are the best Lilies that thrive amongst thornes. To be temperate in Ilands, sober among Germans, chast in Sodome; this is the praise. Divers have stood with filthy shooes on holy ground; but to stand on filthy ground with holy shooes, here is proofe. It is peculiar to heaven, to have never a bad neighbour: only that immortall kingdome hath the priviledge of never being tempted. This world is for triall, that to come, for reward. The solitary man knowes not himselfe: he thinkes himselfe good, because he hath no meanes to be bad. Let him refraine sin yet it is Laus parva, quia laus parvi. He that overcomes the solicitation to evill,Bern. holds his vertue in assurance. If I can be patient among my offensive neighbours, chast among the lascivious, sober among Epicures, modest among impudent railers, just among defrauders, faithfull to the Church among the common and exemplary spoilers of it; this argument is of force. The Souldier can keepe his station till he be assaulted. When tentation oppresseth, and lust rebelleth, as when a
 a mans horse curvets, then let him sit fast. When blustring stormes of persecutio^ shall make a man gird the garment of his religon closer about him; this approves him. True zeale, like fire in a frost, is the hotter for opposition.
Among them that hate righteousnesse, and him for it: that say of good living as Festus did of great learning;Act. 26.24. It makes a man mad. They cannot know anothe^ to be sober, that are mad themselves. As old men answer the young; you thi^^e us fooles but we know you are not wise. So answer we these, you thinke us m^d that are so hot against sins; but we know you mad that are so cold for your soules. Achish and his Courtiers thought David mad, yet he was the wisest man amo^^ them. It is not a Nicodemus that the world takes notice of, but a Peter; Th^^ ^^s with him in Galile; they will put him to it.
Among them that thought Lot to be the only man that molested them. A^^ can charge Elias with this,Act. 24.5. and Tertullus Paul. The mutinies and up-rores of the world were fathered upon the Christians in the Primitive times: as the Popi^^ traitors decreed to blow up a State, and then to lay it upon the Puritans in these latter dayes. There can be no crosse or judgement in Sodome, but Lot is the m^^ that brings it. Yet in all sense he that does but defend himselfe, is not the autho^ of strife. Though the true man strike some blowes, yet the theefe is he that begins the fray.
Among them that thought Lot a proud and imperious fellow; as Eliah ce^sured David,Gen. 19.9. I know the pride of thy heart. There is no goodnesse in man, b^^ such will ascribe it to vaine glory. This opinion of others is derived from a co^sciousnesse of themselves; that would not doe one good deed, but to be highly applauded for it. Therefore would not the rich man perhaps helpe Lazarus, because he feared that as Lazarus died, so his good turne should dye with him. No^ the Levite succour the wounded man,Luk. 1^. because it was not in popular view. The Pharisies did all to bee seene: now that distressed man was out of the way, no body to looke on.
Among them that thought him a foole for his labour. Tell us of our facts, as if they were faults? Doe not all thus? You onely against it? Alas, it is but o^e Doctors opinion. That which the world cals policie, eats up true wisdome their discretion and moderate staidnesse devoures all true honesty. O say they,Eccl. 7.16. Be not righteous over much. But of that extremity there is in these times no fea^e, it is now short shooting that loseth the game. You have scarce one that exceed^ for ten thousand that fault in the defect: and it is better to have our broth bo^^ over, than be raw: rather goe in furres than naked. Liberality feares and ^y^s covetousnesse, rather than prodigality: truth is more suspicious of false-hood, than of vaine-glory: zeale is more cautelous of coldnesse, than of heate: is mo^e afraid lest the fire should goe out, than endanger the chimney.
Among them that thought him exorbitant,1 Pet. 4.4. because he walked not after the^^ rule. Often do we heare remisse professors strive to choake all forward holinesse, by commending the golden meane. A cunning discouragement, the devils sophistrie! Whereas the meane of vertue is betwixt two kindes, not betwixt two degrees. It is a meane grace that loves a meane degree of grace. Yet is this the sta^e with which the world beats all that be better than themselves. What, will yo^ be singular? walke alone? But were not the Apostles singular in their walking? m A spectacle to the world: did not Christ call for this singularity? n What singular thing doe ye? You that are Gods peculiar people, will ye do no peculiar thing? Ye that are separate from the world, will you keepe the worlds rode? Shall L^t leave his righteousnesse, for such an imputation of singularity? Must the name of a Puritane dishearten us from the service of God? Saint Paul said in his Apologie; o By that which they call heresie, so worship I the God of my Fathers: and by tha^ which profane ones call puritanisme, which is indeed zealous devotion; so let my heart desire to serve IESUS CHRIST.

Among them that hated the truth, and loved theMic. 2.11. prophecie of wine, and ^trong drinke. Such a man may live in quiet: if Lot had spoke peace to Sodome, and ^ot the truth, they had brooked him well enough. It is truth that breeds hatred among bad neighbours.Ioh. 16.7. Neverthelesse I tell you the truth; though it breed sorrow ^r anger, or malice in your hearts, yet veritatem dico. I know that in these dayes to ^peake the truth, is to be censured of indiscretion: the world thinkes us children or ^ooles to hazard our selves by speaking the truth. Yet we will not square our po^itions to their dispositions, nor forbeare to tell what they are loth to heare. In^eed, you will heare the truth, if there be no Nihilominus, neverthelesse; if it con^erne you not. But saith Christ, Expedit vobis, better lose your favours than your ^oules: and Expedit nobis, to discharge our consciences from a burden of bloud. They that flatter you, are your deadliest enemies; that either in furthering sin, or ^n smothering sin, spill your dearest lives.
Among these bad men dwelt this good Lot, and still hee was righteous. Neither their exemplary life, nor popular exposition, nor powerfull terrors, could ^urne his feete out of the paths of goodnesse. It is likely, they endevoured to win him to them, either by rewards or menaces. But as when Capellus tempted Fabri^ius, the first day with an Elephant, so huge and monstrous a beast as before he ^ad not seene: the next day with money and promises of honour: he answered, I ^eare not thy force, and I am too wise for thy fraud: so Lot could be corrupted with neither. But now, if hee could be holy among wicked, a Saint among sin^ers; how is it that wee are evill among the good, sinners among Saints? Hee ^ould be hot when all the rest were cold, and shall we be cold when many are ^ot? He was righteous in the midst of irreligion, we in the midst of true religion are unrighteous. We have no interdictions of pietie; may be some snuffers to qualifie our zeale, and make it burne brighter; no extinguishers to put it out. It is ^ot forbidden us to serve God with all our heat, with all our heart. If there be ^ome lasie professors, divert we our eyes from them to the gracious examples of ^ighteousnesse. Complaine we of trouble? There is no age that alwaies suffered good men to live in quiet. As Saint Augustine said of persecution; Inventus est ignis, qui unum ditet, alterum damnificet, utrumque probet. Were we frighted with ^he Spanish Inquisition, wearied with the Turkish imposition, somewhat might be pleaded for our remissenesse. But he is a bad swimmer that cannot move on with ^he current. The Gospell calls us, grace invites us, good examples helpe us, what ^s now left to excuse us, if we be not righteous?
Their unlawfull deeds.] Sinne is the object or matter of a Saints vexation. It ^s the attribute which God gives himselfe,Exod. 34.14. Ego Deus zelotes, I am a Iealous God. Now when we ascribe any humane affections to God, we must separate them from ^ll imperfections whatsoever. A man may be jelous not out of love, or without ^ust cause, God cannot be so. The ground of his Ielousie is love, the cause of his ^elousie, our unfaithfulnesse to him. We cannot be jelous of God, because his love ^s infinite, and we need feare no partners.Act. 26.29. Paul wished this happinesse to all his hearers. Gods love hath roome enough, beyond all measure and comprehension, ^or is it diminished by being communicated. How many millions soever the Lord ^oves, he loves thee and me never the lesse. But mans love to God is so pent and narrow, and the bed of affection so little; that if we admit a partner, he hath cause to be jelous: anothers gaine is his losse. There is an obligation of love betweene the husband and the wife: when he conceives likely-hood of any breach, he growes jelous. Love is the ground, and suspition the cause. If no love, no suspition; if no suspition, no jelousie. This is mans torment and racke; nor can the strongest barres enclosing her, ease his pangs. Knowledge is the only cure of Ielousie: there is more miserie in doubting her false, than in proving her so. The remedie of knowne evills is patience; but for doubted evills there is no physicke. This sparke once kindled will never die, nor can time, that dull and tardy Physitian
 helpe it; nor can the strictest observance satisfie it. This is the Iealous mans misery: he may prove his wife false, he can never prove her true. The anguish of th^^ affliction is more or lesse according to his affection.
Thus hath the soule of man plighted her faith to God, and by vertue of th^ contract, is called his Spouse. If she forsake his holy bed, and run after other l^vers, he growes jealous: not by way of suspicion or doubt, because he knows the heart and most secret motions: but because his honour shall not be given (...) another. Thus he isZach. 1.14. Iealous over Ierusalem; and if she prostitute her betrothed love, he disclaimes her forHos. 2.2. his wife: and when he quite gives her over, and ceaseth to be an husband, thenEzek. 16.2. he will no more be jealous, as a man divorceth himselfe from a wanton wife, Cant. 8.6. As the primary nature of God is to be loving, so it is the nature of that love on just cause to be jealous, and the nature of that je^lousie to be cruell, cruell as the grave; if before the grave swallow us, repent^^ce doe not help us. God is so jealous in the decalogue, that he wil not set any creature in the same table of the law with himselfe. There shall stand neither father no^ mother, King nor Caesar, Saint nor Angell, in the same table with God. If w^e take our lusts into a resolute competition with him,Zeph. 1.18. Nah. 1.2. his jealousie will burne l^^e fire against us.
Now that which grieveth God, should also vex us: this hath tried the zeale of the Saints.Exod. 32.19. So was Moses vexed: the idolatry of man made him breake the tables of God.1 Kin. 19.14. So Elias; he durst confront a King, and reprove an idolatro^^ kingdome. Samuel hewes Agag in peeces, Hezekiah rends his clothes at blasphemy,1 Mac. 2.24. Mattathias sacrifices the sacrificer on his owne superstitious altar. It grieved Pauls heart at Athens, to see the towne so given to idolatry. Phineas w^^ heard at once of her father in lawes death, of her husbands with many others; ye^ did not all this so afflict her as that the Arke was taken by infidels. It is of this alone she speakes dying:1 Sam. 4.22. The glory is departed from Israel, for the Arke of God (...) taken. We are no Lots, if not vexed with the worlds unlawfull deeds. All Israel saw the boldnesse of Zimri,Num. 25. in bringing a whore so palpably to his Tent: but their hearts were so full of griefe, and their eyes of teares, for their bleeding brethren, that they had no roome for indignation. Phineas looked on too, but with other affections. Zimri seemed to him as one that defied the Lord, and flowted the peoples sorrow: that while they were wringing their hands, and beating the^r brests, he would be dallying with his mistresse. His heart boiles with a desire of holy revenge: his hand was used to a Censor, but now it shall mannage a Iavelin: and with one stroke he joynes those two bodies in their death, which were joyned in their sinne: and in the heate and height of their lust, makes a new way for their soules to their owne place. As they were more beasts than any that ever he sacrificed, so their slaughter was the best sacrifice that ever he offered. He doth not stand casting of doubts, who am I to doe this? I am a Priest, my office is all for peace and mercy: it is for me to sacrifice for the people, not to sacrifice any of the people: my place is to appease Gods anger against them, not to revenge Gods anger upon them: to desire the conversion, not to worke the confusion of a sinner. Is not one a Prince in Israel, the other a Princesse of Midian, and c^^ the death of two such persons be so put up? Or if it be safe and fit, why doth my Vncle Moses rather shed his owne teares, than their bloud? I will even be sorry with the rest, and let them revenge whom it concerneth. No, this holy fire of zeale hath quite consumed all the drosse of such deliberation: he holds this execution to be both his duty and his glory. How doth God love this heate in all the carriages of his servants? and if it ever do transport them too far, yet he will rather pardon erring fervency, than luke-warme indifferency. And to shew that (...) pleased him, he presently frees Israel from the plague, and entailes the Priesthood to himselfe and his posterity for it.
But this holy disposition is not to be found in many. Will you know wh^^
 (...)? We thinke our selves wronged, and know not how to be revenged; this vex^ us. If God doe not answer us with raine or faire weather, as we would have it; (...) vexeth us. The better estate of our neighbour, as if anothers preferment were (...) ruine: the crossing of our unnaturall desires, if we cannot have our owne wills: (...) interdiction of our lusts by a superior Law: these things vexe us.Sen. Volunt homi^ ita praeceptum esse ut vivunt, non ita vivere ut praeceptum est. Men would have the (...) according to their lives, not their lives according to the Law. If the Vsu^ interest comes not in the same pace that his covetous heart prompts it; this ^eth him. To be told that sacriledge is a sinne, that our contentions be carnall, (...) while we maintaine strife with our brethren, we have no peace with God; (...) vexeth us. Private inconveniences take up our vexation, not Gods losse. But ^ou will be angry without sin, be angry at sin; not with your brother, but with (...) and your owne faults. When you see Gods name dishonoured, his service pro^ed, his good Spirit resisted, and the Church or familie that is named in heaven (...) earth, wounded; let this vexe you. Be vexed at them that are vexed at God ^selfe on every slight occasion: that if their mouthes be not filled with laugh^ and their bellies with delicates, are ready to breake forth into termes of un^ifulnesse,Mala. 3.14. What profit is there in serving of God? But let the zeale of Lot be a ^le to kindle this dead age; so may this Text be as profitable, as it is conveni^ for these times. If those Angels were sent againe to survey the earth, what o^r newes or observation of their travell would they returne, but thatZach. 1.11. all the ^h setteth still, and are at rest: all are either cold or but luke-warme. Not only ^se frozen in paganisme out of the Churches pale: but even the most within the ^opickes of Christianitie have just so much and so little heate, as to thinke they ^e enough and need no more. This end of the world being like the period of ^vids life, so old, so cold, that no clothes were enough to keepe heate in him. ^r spirituall state and condition is like our countreys site and position, betweene (...) torrid and frigid zones, neither hot nor cold. If Lots example may but warne (...) and warme us, to bee enflamed with the love of GOD, and hatred of sinne; ^ere my labour ends, your comfort shall begin, and the fruit of both continue (...) ever.
In seeing and hearing.] The eye and eare are those speciall doores, that let in^  the heart it's comfort or torment. We are not sensible either of the mischiefes (...) pleasures, which we neither heare nor see. Sodome might have continued sinfull ^thout Lots disturbance, if their sin had not beene exposed to his sight and sense. ^s soule had beene quiet enough within him, if suspition had not begot mistrust, ^r experience a manifest proofe of Gods dishonour. His eyes and eares were ^e unwilling witnesses of their impietie, which he neither would see, nor yet ^uld looke off. No man delights to looke upon ulcers, unlesse animo medendi: ^r to heare the barking of dogges, howling of Wolves, and schriechings of ^wles; such is the noise of oathes and blasphemies; but Invito corde, with necessitie ^d detestation. There are many things which a good eare would not heare; as ^his servant cursing him: nor a good eye looke upon: Modo non videam,Eccl. 7.21. saies Hagar of her child; let me not see the death of my sonne.Gen. 21.16. As the blind Bishop an^ered Iulian, taxing Christ of impotencie, that he could not open the eyes of his ^vant; I am glad that I want eyes to see thee the monster of men. Such was Lots (...) happinesse, that he must see and heare their wickednesse. From this instrumen^l meanes of his vexation we may observe diverse things.
The sight of sinne makes a man either sad or guilty* if we see it, and be not  ^rowfull, we are sinfull. If Lot had not now beene vexed at them, God had beene ^exed at him: on such a cause not to bee angry, had angred heaven. Ely heard (...) his sonnes impietie doubtlesse with griefe enough, but not with anger e^ough: therefore he is punished with hearing of their destruction, that was too re^isse in hearing of their transgression. It is unhappy to make anothers sinne become
 our owne, by a fond indulgence: he that sees evill without dislike, do^^ (...) see it without fault. They are not true hearted that stand by without drawing (...) weapons,Iudg. 5.23. against the notorious oppugner of holinesse. k Meroz is cursed (...) Angell, because they came not forth to helpe the Lord in the day of battaile. They (...) the armies, and heard the drummes of those proud adversaries, gave the lo^ on, tooke part with neither: they fought not against God, yet because they (...) fight for God, they are cursed.
Such are dough-bak'd christians, too clammy for the stomach of (...) whom he hath borne long, yet but wamblingly. Shall we heare blasphemie, (...) uncleannesse, and hold our peace? will the LORD digest us in such a (...) while the fields and tap-houses beguile the Temples; curses are offered up (...) of prayers, vaine expences for almes; and we see this, are not our soules grie^ while men pray as if they were a sleepe, and heare Sermons as dead men doe^^ funeralls; it would make a man sicke to see God thus worshipped. But alas, (...) doe men rage at those that find fault with others, or endevour to be good th^^ selves? Let a sparkle of fervent devotion breake out in a familie, all the ne^^^bours are up in clamours; as when the bells ring disorderly, every man is (...) with his bucket to quench the fire. Disgraced they must be for Puritans, bu^ (...) by Laodiceans. Indifferencie strives to dash zeale out of countenance. But (...) heare and see evill, and dare not reprove it, cannot amend it, yet let us grieve fo^ (...) that we be not guilty of it.
 The most offensive sins are such as be objected to sight and hearing. The^ a sin that does only furere in orbe suo, is mad within doores, without admitt^^^ ^ny witnesse but the inevitable ones, God and their own conscience. But sins th^ (...) secret to man, we leave to him to whom all things are open: they be only (...) evills that vexe the righteous. When all Israel rings of the lewdnesse of (...) sons, it is high time for their father to begrieved. Spirituall and internall sins (...) be majoris culpae, corporall and outward be majoris infamiae. Take an insta^^ while God was angry, all Israell grieved, the heads hanged, the people plag^^d* a Prince dares brave GOD and them all in that sinne, which hee saw so g^^^ously punished before his eyes. Here was fornication, a nodious crime; and (...) of an Israelite, whose name imports holinesse: and that of a vertuous Pr^e^ whose actions are so many rules to others: and that with a Midianite woma^, (...) whom it had beene unlawfull for him to marry; this in the face of Moses ^^verning, of all Israel mourning; even while they were yet bleeding and weeping (...) the same offence; how monstrous was this impudence? But because he (...) Prince, he thought he might sin by priviledge; who dares controll me? (...) noblenesse sets him above the reach of Iustice: it is easie for the greatnesse of ^^thoritie, to beare out the smalenesse of pietie. Commonly the sinners of the m^^^ty are mighty sins; therfore their destruction is made answerable to their pres^^ption; and their vengeance so much the greater as was their conceit of imp^.
In this example we read the sins of the world; blasphemie is audible, d^^kennesse visible, oppression sensible: we heare them, see them, feele them: th^^ (...) no gall of zeale in our soules if we be not vexed. How can we not be ashamed (...) them, that are not ashamed of themselves? A wicked man thinkes he may live (...) of danger of the Law, if either he have a great man to his friend, or have (...) great man to his enemie. Pride would be out of request at home, if notice (...) not taken of it aboad. While sin hides it selfe in corners, there is some hope: (...) there be shame, there is possibilitie of grace. But when it dares once look upo^ the Sunne, send chalenges to authoritie, defie heaven and earth; the ulcer is desperate, the member fitter to be cut off than lanced.
 He did not see and not see, heare and not heare. Connivence at ranke imp^^^^e is bad in all men, intolerable in some: such are the Ministers of either Gospell (...) Iustice. For Preachers, if they winke, the Wolfe may prey on the Lambe
 cold Preachers make bold sinners. But we have cause to tremble when we consi^er, that God will in some sort reckon with us for the religion of our people. Let ^ere be fire in our lips to consume the drosse of vices that are fallen into the sinke ^f our times. When the whole Citie is secure,Ezek. 9. it is our parts to mourne for ^eir abominations. The evils, the devils of these dayes will not out but by ^equent preaching, and fervent praying. Shall wee bee mutes in the midst (...) so many raging consonants? not as lowd for God, as they for Baal, for An^^christ? We see wickednesse, we heare it: O let us pray it downe, let us peach it ^wne, out-face it, out-live it. Let us be within and without Preachers: the ^eights of the Sanctuary by the law, were to be double to those of common use. ^^lior sanctus idiota, quam doctus nebulo. How gracious be their feete,Aug. not only their ^s that bring the Gospell! Because their feet must walke in the way which they ^escribe. It is good life that must accompany doctrine, as lightning doth thun^^r. Fire in the preaching does well, but water in the Preacher to quench it by ^ample does ill. Infirmities are in all, but ranke and resolute sinnes become not ^ose that finde fault with the like in others. In all respects, and by all meanes, let (...) make it appeare, that Gods glory is our onely scope; therefore we dare not ^t rebuke sinne, as men preferring the winning of soules before the winning of ^e world.
Connivence is yet worse in Magistrates: we can but reprove it, they must ^orrect it; and open wickednesse is too stubborne to be chidden out of counte^^nce; it is well, if sharpe whipping can reforme it. No scarlet robe so well be^mes a magistrate, as one made of zeale. Bee wise yee Iudges, yea also, be just ye ^dges: some are so wise that they dare not be just; nor punish lesse offenders, for ^^e lest great offenders should punish them. I know there is a wisdome requi^^d to distinguish of offences; and true Christianity takes no delight in bloud. If Magistrates were onely to kill, the divell might have beene put in sole Commissi^er. It is a breach of Iustice not to proportion the punishment to the crime: for ^eft, rapine, adultery, sacriledge, to say no more with1 Sam. 2.23. Eli, but why doe yee so? ^his is true connivence; to shave the head that deserves cutting off. A weake ^argation doth but stirre the proud and tough humours, and anger them, not drive ^em out. To whip one for murther, or to burne treason in the hand, or to lay pecuniary mulct upon Incest; is in effect to patronize evill, not to punish it. Bare proofes doe but encourage wickednesse, and make it thinke it selfe as easie as is ^e censure. Like vehement showers to a ripe field, which onely lay the corne ^t is ready and worthy of a sickle.
Exod. 32.27.Moses did put the Idolaters to the sword: it was his mercy that made him ^s cruell: all Israel might have cursed him if some had not smarted by him. Do ^t our Magistrates heare and see idolatry, blasphemy, sacriledge, profanation ^ Sabbaths? are there not lawes for castigation? why then be these impieties ^ffered in the face of heaven? Doth not want of execution make all lawes like ^eat bels without clappers? The Magistrates sword should not be like a childs ^gger rivetted in the sheath: a sword, saith Paul, not borne in vaine. When they ^nish malefactors, they are said toExod. 32.29. Consecrate their hands to God. The judges ^untenance should beProv. 25.23. Like a Northerne wind, to dispell the fogs of sinne. The ^ngs of the earth are chargedRev. 18.6. to render double to the bloudy strumpet of Rome: ^hy then doe her Locusts encrease and multiply? God grant our too much pit^ never undoe our selves. There are two speciall causes of this connivence in sub^dinate magistates; cowardice and covetousnesse.
Cowardice and timorousnesse is a quality too base for eminence.Neh. 6.11. Should ^h a man as I flee? Saith Nehemiah. It is the want of courage that betrayes the ^th; while men are more carefull of their owne quiet, than of Gods glory. So^ons Throne had carved Lions; not Foxes, Apes, nor Wolves: no toyish, petu^, deceitfull or ravenous things; but majestick Lions: no dastard feare is admitted
 to that seate. Magistrates have iron Gantlets, and need not feare children blowes. Moses seeing the sin commands them to punish one another, and they doe it: None replies; he is but one, we are many: we may more easily destroy him, than he can destroy our God. Aaron durst not resist us in making it, and sh^^^ he withstand our keeping it? Not so, God hath set such gracious characters of majestie in the brow of authority, that guiltinesse dares not looke it in the face. They stoope to the basest and bloudiest revenge he should impose. Sin is so co^scious of it selfe, that when it is brought forth to triall, palenesse and feare (...) betray the guilt, and it will rather seeke a hole, than a hold or fort. If the^^^ horse in a teame be shie, the Carter fenceth his eyes on both sides, that he ^^y leade the way fore-right without starting. Let the Magistrate rectifie his loo^^^, and onely bend them directly upon Iustice: a squint eye, cast upon persons, ill (...) comes him. Let him looke no side-way, neither to the left hand for feare, (...) to the right hand for favour.
Covetousnesse is a vice, which makes a man of place transgresse for a me^^^ of bread.Exod. 23.8. It blindes the eyes of the wise, much more of the foolish: of the rig^^^ous, much more of the covetous. When a malefactor shall give him so (...) gold for a Say, you saw me not; then as if he had the Iewes curse upon him:Mat. 13.14. ^^^ring he will not heare, and seeing he will not perceive.Prov. 17.8. A gift is as a precious stone, ^^^thersoever it turneth, it prospereth. A prosperous stone, as if he meant the Ph^l^sophers stone, so much in quest and request; a charme more powerfull that witches night-spell. The building of great houses keeping great houses, or ra^^ leaving great Houses, and matching with great Houses, are too frequent occas^^^ of unjustice. When a small office shall swell up a great estate, the world (...) needs swell bribery in it. The ambition to advance their owne house, blowes (...) their zeale to Gods house.Iob 29.14. Iob compares Iustice to a Cloake or Robe: a Cloake is; but the Cloake that hangs, like our Gallants, on one shoulder is quickly blo^e^ off: a Robe it may be, but a loose one, some night-gowne, that is soone pu^ of. Many say, they discharge a good conscience, and so they doe in some sense, they discharge it quite away. Iustice is called a Girdle, to girt all other vertues: but it them take heed lest it sag and bend to the side where the purse hangeth.
4 Sodomes sin was so much the more hainous to God, for offending (...), and vexing the heart of his servant Lot. Iniquity then exceeds it selfe whe^^ growes scandalous. Woe unto the world because of offences: when it is not eno^g^ for men to be bad themselves, but to raile at the good. If there be one in a co^pany that abhors impious language, they will blaspheme on purpose to vex h^^.M^t. 18.6. They had better have sunke into the Ocean, bound to a Mill-stone. They (...) their tongues like rasors, not onely to shave a man, but to cut his throate; but (...) Lord shall cut them out. Thus Popelings hisse like serpents at their mother; (...) like Shimei, not only by word of mouth, but in their railing and lying Pamphle^* Many a good man may say.Psal. 69.12. I became the song of the drunkards. Aske the d^i^^ing-schooles, if no such doctrine of hell be heard there. While we play (...) Davids harpe to ease their griefes, they cast their Speares and Iavelins to wou^^ us.Eph. 4.31. What Paul bids Put from them, they delightfully call to them. Serpents (...) onely deafe to our charming, but turne their tailes to sting us.
Nor let the great ones, whose authority should punish these abuses, t^^^^e to scape: there be often pasquils to cast aspersions on their noble names. When as honour is a curious parcell, guilt, laid on with Gods owne finger, whic^ (...) lewd tongue may scandalously licke off. For us, our contempt is not enough, (...) lesse it be chanted in rime. It is Iosephs party-colour'd coate, composed of all li^c^s of graces and blessings, that procures their hatred. Such is the worlds despe^^^ policy, to vex them whom God hath blessed. But the Lord takes them into h^^ speciall tuition; and if any shall hurt hisRev. 11 5. faithfull witnesses, there goes a (...) their mouthes to devoure their enemies.Psal. 143 12. Destroy all them that afflict my soule, (...)
 David: not that he would have it so, but because he knew it must be so. A man (...) better anger all the witches in the world, than one of the Saints: for God of^ forbeares offences against his own Majestie, when he plagueth offences against (...) little ones.
He that would not be vexed with evills, let him turne his eyes and eares an^er  way: be not fond to be grieved; no man is bound to seeke his owne vexati^ Therefore Nunc te melioribus offer; let us frequent their company, where in ^g and hearing we may reape comfort. But how shall we know them? They ^e not such markes, as Du Bartas describes Cain's supposed horse: and he may ^eive others, that cannot but deceive himselfe: yet the wise heart may discerne ^m. By the innocencie of their actions, sobrietie of their speeches, disesteeming ^e, coldnesse after pleasures, ardor in Gods cause; you may distinguish them; ^y sparkes rising from a heape of embers, you may know there is fire within. (...) did the Saints leave such repining tumults; and resort to places of sanctitie (...) benediction. If we fall, here be they that shall raise us: if we stand, that shall con^ne us: if we complaine that shall comfort us. Sorrowes divided among many, (...) borne more easily: many small brookes meeting and concurring in one cha^, will carry great vessels. By their reproofes we shall know our selves: we (...) blinde in our owne imperfections, therfore we borow the eyes of our friends, ^ing them ours; so we mutually direct and correct one another.
There are two helpes to goodnesse; the praises of an enemie, and the repre^sions of a friend. He that shall take from friendship the libertie of a modest (...) roofe, leaves nothing to distinguish it from flatterie. To see men in troupes ^he Courts of God; to heare the melodious harmony of his praises, the vol^ (...) of invocations sent up to his glorious Name, to behold the charitable contri^ions to the poore, the holy emulations to exceed in good workes; all like bees ^ouring to bring honey to the hive of the Church where wrongs are pardoned, ^d men encouraged, the Gospell honoured, and the will of God obeyed: O ^e is an object worth our seeing and hearing, which in stead of vexing, shall de^t our righteous soules: lifting up our desires to heaven, where all good workes (...) done with perfection: where we shall see and heare what we shall never bee ^ry of seeing and hearing: see the glory of God, heare the melodie of Angels, (...) joy of all Saints, and be both ravished in the pleasure, and confirmed in the e^ take ternitie of them.
To conclude; we that have grieved others, let us now be grieved for it our ^es. It was an impotent and childish passion in Honorius, to be more grieved for ^ltry hen, than for his Imperiall Citie. Yet if wee can more lamen the de^ture of a friend into blisse, than the departure of CHRIST from our owne ^es: and be more heartily troubled with a convulsion of body, than with dis^esting our conscience: if every trifling inconvenience of our owne have pow^ ^o racke us, when the dishonour of God cannot move us; wonder we no more ^onorius. We may howle for corne and wine, but in vaine:Hos. 7.14. our true teares and sobs ^uld be for our sinnes. We are yet in the day, yet in the way: let us husband ^ht this blessed opportunitie, the only certaine houre of our visitation. O let ^ot play out the candle, and goe to bed darkling: nor consume our lives in folly (...) goe to the grave in ignorance: like boyes that slubber out their books before (...) have learned their lessons. That sudden conversion of one at the last, was never ^nded in Gods purpose for our temptation. If every man should run on in sin, ^e meet unexpected mercie, because one in sin obtained mercie: then every man ^ght as well spur his beast till it speake, because Balaams beast did once speake.
Could we be sure that God would call us at the last, yet how unsweet were (...) sacrifice, the bran and dregs of our dotage; the wine and flowre being con^ed in folly? whereas the good man is the older the better, as CHRIST kept (...) good wine till the last. If we repent when we cannot sinne, all is necessary:
 they leave us, we leave not them, nothing is here voluntary. What q^^y i^ (...) lay the heaviest burden on the weakest beast: to force old age, too weake to b^a^e it selfe, to carry the load of our repentance? When that strong man is gro^e^ stronger by prescription, our tabernacle rotten by corruption, when (...) hath turned vice into nature, and sin is soaked into substance, our bones being (...) of the faults of our youth; we would then repent; we would if we could. (...) as he that never went to schoole, will hardly when he is put to it, read his N^^^ verse: so he that never learned the doctrine of repentance in his life, will find it ^^ry hard, if not impossible, at his death. Wine at first drawing is quicke and l^^ely; when it runs low, it growes dead. Let us give God our youth, that is l^^elyhood, and pleasing to him: not when our life runs on the tilt, the lees and (...) of old age. Heaven is not unlike Ahasuerus Court, no mourners are suffered thee all joyfull guests in their wedding garments: we must either mourne on earth, (...) mourne in hell. Thus we that have vexed the Spirit of God, and the eyes (...) eares of others by our sins: let us now please the Spirit of God by our repen^an^^ and rejoyce the eyes and eares of others by our amendment. Wretc^ed (...) we deferre our rep^ntance, wretched if we repent not our deferring. Let us ^^pent as soone as we can, yea and repent for this, that we have repented no soo^^. In a word, howsoever in indifferent things, it be held safe to heare and see, (...) say nothing; yet in grosse and scandalous evills let us not be silent; so if we c^^mend others, yet with Lot we shall save our own soules in the great day of Ch^^.
Vexed his righteous soule.] I come from the kindlers to the fire it selfe. Ze^^ is a fervencie of spirit, arising from a mixture of love and anger, say some. It ^ not a single affection; that were to confine it, rather than define it: there are (...) affections excercised in it than love. Nor yet is it a mixt affection; that were r^ther to compound it, than comprehend it. It is not one affection, nor many, (...) a fervent heare of all: as varnish is no one colour, but that which polisheth all (...) makes a man to love what he loves, excessively: to desire what he desires, pass^^nately: to hate what he hates, deadly: his sorrowes be not remisse, but bitter (...) racking: his joyes not transient and overly, but ravishing: when he hopes, his eyes are dimme with waiting: when he feares, all his bones feele a trembling a^d shivering. To be cold or luke-warme is not an affection, but a constitution (...) zeale is no nature, but a temper; a spirituall heat wrought by the Holy Ghost improving all sanctified affections for the glory of God. As the spirits are to the body, and wine to the spirits, and quickenesse to the wine, so is zeale to the (...), making it vigorous and strenuous in Gods service,(...). like a Gyant refreshed (...) Faith and zeale are the soules two wings, whereby she is made resembling the Angels: who are armed with wings, and called a flame of fire, for their burning a^d flying execution of Gods hests. It is zeale that helpe us to doe what we pray; (...) will of God in earth as it is done in heaven. This zeale is axis and cardo, the (...) bloud that runs in every veine of the Text: a burning fire in the heart of Lot (...) gives him mettle to contest with Gods enemies; and because he cannot (...) them, he vexeth his owne soule. His example teacheth us three observations (...) zeale; that it doth prove our righteousnesse, improve our righteousnesse, and honour our righteousnesses.
 It is the argument of a righteous man, to be farre from coolenesse in his makers service.(...) Whatsoever thy hand findeth to doe, doe it with all thy might. D^^ this become us in other things, and mis-become us in the worship of God? S^^ a man eagerly follow his lusts, and not be violent for the kingdome of heaven (...) The slothfull hastens his own beggerie in temporall things, much lesse shall he (...) rich in the graces of Christ. He hath but a meane skill in the most excellent art is never admired: a man had never better poetise, than only rime; never paint, (...) doe no more but daube: as good no religion, as coldnesse in the best religi^* Shall we, like those Iewish elders for the Centurion, be instant for a friend, (...)
 cold for our heavenly father? He is worthy of infinite more love than we are a^le to give: all our brookes and springs of affection ought to run into this maine; ^ot one small chanell bee suffered another way. Let all reflect upon him, and ^othing bee respected out of him, of whom, for whom, and through whom, are all ^hings.
How unbrookable is dulnesse in any worke to a man of spirit? A heavy and ^lt-lesse oration is insufferable to a quicke hearer. We single out the forwardest Deere in the herd, chuse the liveliest colt in the drove; and thinke we the back^ardest man fit enough for God? will he that is all Spirit, be pleased with a lea^en and drousie service? He bids the giver, give cheerefully: the doer, doe ^uickly. He forbad the Israelites to offer theExod. 34.20. firstling of an Asse: why so? ^oth God hate the Asse? No, but for the qualitie of the creature; it being the ^ieroglyphicke of slownesse: to shew that God cannot abide tarditie in his busi^esse. It is lazie to goe, we are bid to run the way of his Commandements. As ^iles to the ship, and winde to the sailes, so is fervencie to righteousnesse. A souldi^ without courage, a horse without mettle, a creature without vivacitie, such is a ^hristian without fervencie.
It doth also improve righteousnesse; like the fire which came downe from  ^eaven upon the sacrifices, causing the sacrifices to ascend thither in acceptation. ^ighteousnesses hath no grace, but this fervencie makes it more gracious. Repen^nce is one primary grace; yet if a mans sorrow be not fervent, it is like a hot ^mmer-shower, that makes the streetes stinke after it. Faith is a fundamentall ^race, should overcome the world; it will prove but a coward without fervencie. ^ope, the waiting-maid of Glory, will soone fall a sleepe, if zeale keepe not her ^yes open. Love without fervencie is cold and dull, and as it were enforced; and ^on extorquebis amare. Reliefe of the poore is left-handed without this; no re^ard belongs to it.Iam. 5.16. It is onely fervent prayer that prevaileth. Israel had ne^er wrastled, or wrastling, not prevailed with God, but by fervencie. It was no ^erfunctory devotion in Moses, that caused the Lord to answere, Let me alone. No vapours ascend up from the Still, unlesse there be fire under it: nor prayers ^each heaven without the heat of zeale. Fluminall baptisme is but a cold proofe ^f a mans Christendome, except this flaminallMatth. 3.11. baptisme of fire and zeale ap^rove it. The worship of God without this, is like meate dressed by an uncleanly ^ooke; it will not downe with him. Let a table be furnish'd with the choisest ^ands the season affords; if they bee boiled or rosted to the halves, or stand on ^e boord till they be luke-warme; the guests will not be pleased with their cheare.
Fervencie is that marke which God would have us set on all his services, that (...) they may be discerned to be his own: as the name of a famous Tradesman doth ^ll his commoditie, so the marke of zeale crownes all our workes. If the colour ^e pale, the motion insensible, and the pulse leave beating, we give a man for dead: ^e moving of these argue life. They whose actions want heat and colour, that ^ive unwillingly, that doe Iustice constrainedly; appeare dead. It is fervencie that ^akes a difference of actions* we have all alike precious faith, the seeds of all gra^es are in every convert: the inequalitie is in the degrees, the degrees are seene in ^e fervencie. This makes men differ in grace, as stars doe in glory, or as humane ^en in bloud and dignitie.
It honours righteousnesse: many thousands have beene righteous, whose  ^mes are not on record: but of those that have beene zealous in their pietie, the ^cripture takes speciall notice. Our Apostle having spent one whole verse upon ^e commendation of Lots fervencie, in vexing himselfe for their sins, is not so con^nt; but exegetically presseth it further, exemplifies it in particulars; shewing ^hat a righteous man is better than his neighbour. The righteous are the best of the ^orld, the fervent are the best of the righteous. It is true of zeale, as of fire; the ^ture of it is to multiply, as one coale kindles a whole heape, and one torch lights
 many.2 King. 2.12. Elisha calls Elias, The Horse-men and Chariots of Israel: in the plurall number, to shew that he was Instar multorum, one man worth a thousand: doing Go^ more service than a Iesuite doth the Pope, or a make-bate the devill. It is not ^^likely that Davids zeale made him stiled, A man after Gods heart.
But doe we thus honour our righteousnesse, that God should honour us? If (...) the same time come severall newes; one, some losse of our owne estates; the other, of some apostated Christians: which doth now most vexe us? We hea^e (...) once Gods Name blasphemed, our owne name traduced: which most stirres us? We perceive trade decaying in England, the religious Professors of the Gospel^ bleeding in France and Germany by the sword of a cruell enemy; which of these goes neerest to our hearts? When some unruly yonkers were sporting in the field on the Sabbath day; a Churle fretted and stormed at it; an honest neighbo^^ did also dislike it, that they so little regarded the Sabbath: tut, quoth the other, what tell you me of the Sabbath? It vexeth me, that they have spoiled my come. In carnall things we are very sensible; in spirituall, without feeling. Men ca^^y swords, and stand on tearmes of reputation, on the least crosse word they a^^ ready to cut one anothers throat; confessing their lives to be little worth, not so much as a word. Let God be dishonoured a thousand waies, they are as s^^p^ as the stones they walke on: if they take any part, it is against their Maker. Be the honour of their owne house questioned, their weapons flie like lightening: let Gods House be pulled downe to the ground, all their helpe is, to carry away the timber and the stones. They heate the fornace seven times hotter in their owne cause, than they doe in Gods cause.
But will the Lord multiply his favours upon such? Husbandmen cast the^^ seed on the fruitfullest ground, which will returne them the best harvest: and God his graces on such as will improve them. When Iudgement covers the ear^h who shall then be delivered but the zealous Lots? God will preserve them* as men doe their plate, while they let the baser stuffe burne. For their ferve^^^^ in goodnesse was Enoch translated, and Elias advanced in a triumphant cha^^^ ^o heaven. How ever all Beleevers have their places in blessednesse, yet he th^^ rewards all according to their workes, observes that congruity in crowning ^^s owne graces; that the most zealous in this world, shall be the most glori^^s (...) the World to come.
Vexed his soule.] As this was no common fervency, so no counterfeit: he l^^tle dissembles whose soule is moved. Zeale, like the King of Israel, hath ma^y shadowes, therefore we must distinguish it from all semblances. There be fa^^ fires, which while they usurpe the honour of it, rather bring an ill name upon it. How common a thing is it to wound all holinesse under the name of Purita^; whereof convinced, they thinke to make amends with, Crie you mercy, I me^^ the hypocrite: as the ruffian strikes a man first, and then excuses it, that he m^^tooke him. B^sides, it cannot be denied, but some have taken on them this order, greater than the Knights of Malta, or of Saint Iohn of Ierusalem; that have d^^graced it by an unworthy deportment of themselves. And some, after it hath served their turnes, leave it: as the doore when it hath beene oiled, leaves the creaking. For their sakes, the name of goodnesse is blasphemed all the day long, (...) ill report and suspition raised upon them that serve God in truth: so for the deceivers fault, the true man is beaten. There is in the body the native and radicall (...), a principall Instrument of life: and there be often anguish and distempered ^e^^s that cause sicknesse and death.
There be some that vexe themselves out of envy: Lot did not so. The Poets faine this affection,1 Cor. 3.3. Act. 5.17. G^l. 5.^0. Iam. 3.14. 1 Cor. 13.4. Rom. 13.13. ex Styge and Pallante natum esse: they meant inspired into me^ by Satan, and those envious devils. This is a blacke Zeale, reckoned among the workes of the flesh. These are not pure tapers, shining cleere, and giving light: but brinish and ill made candles, that sparkle and spet at others. Lot vexed himselfe,
 because he saw men bad; these, because men are good: not that Gods Law ^s broken, but because others keepe it better than themselves. It is the cursed zeale ^f these men, to maligne the good zeale of all men.
There be that vexe themselves out of choler; robustious men, transported with intemperate passions. We doe not read that Lot was cruell and turbulent, ^exing others: but he vexed himselfe. Severitie should never be but by cumpulsion, and then not without compassion. Christianity abhorres cruelty, and rather wisheth with that happy Queene, that it knew not how to write a sentence of con^emnation. It is for the malignant Church to satiate her selfe with gore: nothing ^ut fire and fagot, is the voice of Rome. This is a wolvish fervency, to feed on ^o dyet, but the warme bloud of the Lambes. Poore Sheepe are the subject of ^heir tyrannie: to the Lyon they are as submisse and fawning as dogges: over the ^est they rage and dominere, like the Sea in a storme. Whereas the thunder spares ^he yielding purse, and melts the resisting metall: descends not to the low cotta^es, but strikes the towring pinnacles. The sonnes of thunder dare checke the ^ighest and greatest; as Iohn did Herod, and Ionas Niniveh. But these, like bustards ^n a fallow field, cannot raise themselves, sine vi turbinis, without a whirlewind. ^nd then like squibs in a throng, they fly out on all sides. This turbulent fervour (...) bred of two causes: the defect of love and humility, the excesse of passion and ^mperiousnesse. As Spirits, that being once conjured up, scorne to k^epe with^n their owne circles. A wild-fire, no harth can hold it; it is mettle in a head^trong horse; and runs like the weights of a clocke when the spring is broken.
There be that vexe themselves without cause, and strike an Israelite instead of (...) Sodomite, their friends for their enemies. A contentious zeale; Sheba blowes ^ trumpet, and suddenly they are up in armes. Alas! against whom doe you fight, ye sonnes of debate? Brethren against their owne mothers children? You ^re brethren, wrong not one another in the sight of your Father, in the armes of your Mother. What way is this, but to advance the name of Mahomet in the Temples of IESUS? But to come neerer home; how hath Anti-christ got ground ^y our dissentions? The unnaturall coldnesse of some, and the preternaturall heat of others, hath set us together by the eares about trifles; while the common enemi^ breakes in: and we have poured those vials of indignation one upon another, which should all be spent upon the seat of the Beast. While the Devill can busie men about ceremonies and circumstances, he hopes they will let him alone about ^he principall, which is faith and manners. Alas! they are not Tanti, not worth our vexation; we have made him too much sport already. How doth Saint Paul ^eat downe their weapons! Rom. 14.4.10. Let our zeale come in to part, not to partake the fray: all endevouring and praying, that peace may bee within the gates of Sion.
There be that vexe themselves out of hypocrisie; they have other ends than Gods glory. Ostentation leads them more than conscience: they will offer violence to nature, wring out a shew of fervencie; but all is on the stage. When such a furious Orlando hath done his part, he is quite another man. These be hi^trionicall professors, that bounce at the gate as if they would breake downe the house; more violent than a Iesuite in the pulpit. There is nothing more liable to suspicion, than a fantastick affectation of zeale. A horse-coursers jade will bound, curvet, and shew more trickes, than a horse of good mettle. Come,2 King 10.16. see my zeale for the Lord, sayes Iehu: his word was, for the Lord; but his project was for the kingdome. It is not a little art, to hide Art: let me tell them that love to be marked for the religious, by the white of their eyes, audible sighes, unfashionable garments, (as if this were,Rom. 12.2. not to fashion themselves to the world) by conspicuous places in the Church, and ruffling their leaves for proofes: that the best zeale is to hide zeale. The Preacher in the pulpit, or the painter in the windowes, must proclaime their benevolences: this is farre from Christs rule. Comets make a greater
 blaze then fixed starres: reed, than substantiall fewell. A Fever breeds flus^i^gs and is more seene in the face, than naturall warmth at the heart.
There be that vexe themselves out of ignorance, for there is a zeale not according to knowledge. Thus a devout Papist vexeth himselfe, that his adored Idols should be held as puppets, and that the Popes Supremacie is curbed. The Separatist vexeth himselfe, that all reformed Churches receive not his Innovation; that his Sect-master should not be set at the sterne to guide the whole vessell. Blind they are, and led by the blind; whose errors they first imitate, then inheri^e. Out of this ignorance, Satan hammers them like swords and pistols, to raise tragedies; till they become, like the Turkes Ianisaries, his best souldiers. Here is a pitieable fervencie, like mettle in a blind horse, or a sting in an angry bee. If the^^ eyes were opened, and their zeale directed, they might be speciall Instruments of Gods glory. The Stoickes would pull out the gall and bowells, as if they had to use to serve vertue. Not so, they are bad masters, but good servants. Let anger remaine still, but stand in awe of reason: as a souldier, that at the command of ^^s Captaine takes up, and laies downe his weapons. There are three affections (...) the soule, like three mineralls in the earth, Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury. Wit is like salt, Sales ingenii: anger like sulphur: affabilitie like Mercurie. These w^^ tempered and allayed, are necessary and helpfull, otherwise noxious. If wit wh^ it selfe to justifie mischiefe; if anger be not qualified by reason; if affabilitie tu^ne to flatterie; if all be not directed by knowledge, they runne to danger. Wh^^ the ship is under saile, with a faire way, and a fore-wind, then looke to the s^^^age, keepe the watch, have an eye to the compasse and land-markes. The A^gels are said to have eyes to guide their way, as well as wings to maintaine their flight. Turne Pauls zeale to the right and he did not so much hurt before, as now he will doe good.
Thus true Christian fervencie hath diverse counterfeits, which brings ho^^ zeale into suspition with the world. But shall men taxe all the Apostles, beca^^^ of one Iudas? or admit no fire into their houses, because some sparkes are ^^ruly, and will not keepe their owne harths? The very name of a counterfeit presupposeth an originall: he that heares of a false CHRIST, takes it granted (...) there is a true. Slip-coine warrants us that there is of that stampe current money. The best drugs have their adulterates: and let not men that have beene deceived by base colours, despise those that be dyed in graine. This we may safely co^clude, that that vertue which even hypocrites put on to grace them, is qu^s^io^lesse some rare and admirable thing. The true Lot, whose fervencie is in the Spirit, not in shew: in substance, not in circumstance: for God, not for himselfe: guided by the word, not by humour: tempered with charitie, not driven with turbulencie: such a mans praise is of God, though it be not of men: and through al^ contempts on earth, it shall find a glorious reward in heaven. But as Saint Pau^ ^aid of his countrey-men,Rom. 14.10. I beare them record, that they have a zeale of God, but not ^^cording to knowledge. So I must invert it of my Countrey-men, I beare them record, that they have a knowledge of God, but not according to zeale. Now the Lord rectifie our zeale by our knowledge, and heate our knowledge by our zeale; that every man of a Philemon may be made a Zelotes; of a faithfull servant on earth a glorious Saint in heaven.
That righteous man.] This is the singularitie of his zeale. One Lot will be righteous amongst and against all Sodome; and expresse this righteousnesse in the midst of their vicious customes. It hath beene the Lot of fervent holinesse to be rare, as to be excellent: adherents may hearten, opposites must not dash zeale out of countenance. It is the common Remora to all forwardnesse of profession, the small number of such: why should I attempt more than others? Few indeed there be that stand with all their might for religion, and few there be that shall be saved. He is unworthy of heaven, that will not live well without company, not
 doe good but by example, nor move a step before his neighbours. Cowards stand still looking who should goe first: and they are meere Iades that will not goe except the way be led them. He was a brave and bold Israelite, that first did set his foote into the chanell of the sea, leading the rest all along that moist and uncouth walke: he a souldier of courage, that first mounts the breach. Yea, resolute spirits will cast lots for the on-set, and shew willingnesse to desperate services.
The feare of trouble is a poore hindrance to godlinesse, where faith lookes unto the preserver, and reward.Rev. 14.^. The fearefull stand in the fore-ranke of them that are cast into the lake: they have beene most backward to goodnesse, therfore shall be formost in vengeance. The timorous snaile puts out her hornes to feele for danger, and pulls them in againe without cause. It is an ill modestie that suffers another to out-goe him in the way to blisse: lik some travelling Iade, that hearing another horse come after him stands still till he overtakes him. True faith neither feares to doe well, nor to reprove those that doe ill. But there be few so good? Yet Lot was good alone, none to goe before him, none to goe with him, none to come after him, in all Sodome. No man can say so with us, for we see some zealous of Gods glory. And if there be any; true emulation will single out the best patternes. How dearely is one content to buy a choise principall, or some rare copy!1 Ioh. 3.3. He that intends to be a good Artist, propounds to himselfe the most exquisite master and lesson. God limits us to no ordinary stint of holinesse; but bids us aime at perfection: if we can, to goe beyond all that have gone before us, yea to come (if possible) close up to Christ. From this point we may well gather three duties.
1 So neere as we can to make choice of the good; for man naturally produceth works conformable to the objects before his eyes: as Iacobs sheep brought forth Lambes according to the colour of the pilled rods. A good example hath not so much power to make us good, as a bad one hath to make us evill. One man sicke of the plague will sooner infect ten sound ones, than ten sound men can cure him. The flockes feeding among the bushes will leave some of their wooll behind them: it is hard to live in the forrest of impietie, and to reserve integrity. Sinne upon earth is in it owne soile, growes without planting, or any paines bestowed on it: much more when it is manured with applauses and practise. But vertue is like some precious seed fetch'd from Paradise, which will hardly grow here without speciall care and indulgence. It is not safe venturing among the wicked in confidence of our owne strength; no more than it is to run among theeves, in hope that they will not rob us. How many breathe in this world, like men sleeping in ^ hoate, carried downe the streame even to their Graves-end, without waking to thinke where they are? Therefore Eorum simus sodales, quibus licet esse similes: if we may be our owne disposers, seeke we our lot among the righteous. The situation of Iericho may be good, but the waters are naught: he that goes from Ierusalem to Iericho, soone lights among theeves; to leave holy company for base commoditie, is a quench-coale to righteousnesse. Can one be warme alone?Eccl. 4.11. Can one single coale keepe it selfe from going out? Hee that forsakes the orbe of heat and fervor, the congregation of Saints, must needs take cold.
2 If like Lot, we be necessitated to the societie of bad people, yet let us be good still; yea therefore the more holy, because in the midst of a perverse generati^n, shining as lights in a darke place. The colder the climate, the more piercing ^he aire, the more doth a mans naturall heat fortifie it selfe within: their palpable wickednesse caused Lot inwardly to vexe himselfe. Every visible act of vice should be our encouragement to vertue. The dissolute lavishnesse of many prodigalls makes the wary man still the better husband. And it is the trades-mans policie, by engrossing a commoditie in the plentie and neglect of it, to enrich himselfe when ^ yeare of dearth shall come. It made Erasmus more studious, by seeing the Monkes such illiterate dunces: as the good knife is made sharpe by the dull whetstone. The Christan will be good and devout, like Daniel, though alone: though
 with the Emperors and the worlds Non licet: though he seeme a prodigie among men, digito monstrari, the pointing of all fingers. Esa. 8. Ver. 18. Wee are fo^ signes and for wonders in Israel. Signes and wonders, where? even in Israel. If it were a wonder to see a familie serving GOD in Israel, what is it in Sodome? If a miracle in Ierusalem, how much more in Babylon? But as he that stands upon a hill, where the aire is cleare, and sees the fields round about beaten with tempests, the valleys full of fogs and mists, doth not seeke to change his station for being alone, though he be remarkable to every eye. Let our hearts be aloft, fixed on Christ; and albeit we are exposed to the worlds derision, yet we shall blesse God for our deliverance from the worlds malediction.
3 Let us follow the examples of the best, not of the Most. Who had not rather be righteous with one singular Lot, than perish with all ungodly Sodome? Neither have we him alone, but even a cloud of witnesses, that have beene faithfull among the dissolute: a Pillar of fire (in many blessed precedents) that went before directing us the way to Canaan. The Church is full of those holy acts and monuments: the confession of Christ before Pontius Pilate, the profession of the Apostles before the worlds tyrants, the bold testimonie of the Martyrs at their stakes. O let the very pictures of their fires warme our hearts, and inflame our constant zeale to doe, and (if God will) to die as they did, that we may come to the place where they are. If we find a living Lot among us, fasten we our eyes upon him; let his sprightly example put us forward. He is a dull Iade that will not follow: a brangling hawke in the company of high flyers will mend her pitch, and make her point: the societie of the Prophets is able to make even a Saul prophecie. Yea, let us learne to be righteous even by a man of meaner grace: a good mettled horse seeing but a Iade in the company put forward, springs out and is scarce restrained. No free spirit but is ambitious of a transcendencie in lawfull endevours.Act. 8 5. At S^las comming, Paul burnt in the Spirit: a lesser sticke may fire a billet, a little candle lights many torches. But these great examples, how should they worke in us grea^ zeale! Soe the Stoickes defined zeale; Imitatio alicujus boni sine invidia. Th^^ Alexander: was stirred up with the fame of Achilles, Caesar of Alexander* Cicero with the eloquence of Hortensius, Demosthenes of Isocrates.2 Cor. 9.2. The ze^^ of the Corinthians provoked many: let this good mans provoke us, that we may provoke others: helping them that come after us, as we have beene holpen by those before us, toward heaven.
From day to day.] This is the constancie of his zeale; it was not mu^ab^e. The fixed starres are ever like themselves, whereas meteors and vapours have no continued light: the wicked may have some aguish fits, and lunaticke moodes. To run with the streame, or saile with the winde, or like the marigold to open only with the sun-shine, is no praise of pietie. Give me that Iob, that will be as hone^^ a man among his thousands, as under the rod, when the number of his present ^^cers exceeds his former riches. To shoote up like the corne on the house top, by the favourable influencie of great persons: for a Saul to prophecie no longer tha^ he is among the Prophets: or for a Ioash to be good only while Iehoiada lives: th^t which depends upon humane supportations, is but like Ephraims, a transi^ory goodnesse. Thus you have some rash riders; at their first exeunt they gallop a maine, till within some few miles they tire, and are overtaken by the slow pac^horses. The hasty girds of profession are seldome durable, suddaine showres have suddaine ends. And whereas the Sun and all naturall motions are swiftest toward their end, these begin hot in the spirit, and conclude stone-cold in the flesh. Their religion is but a blaze, which quickly goes out in smoke and smother. True fervencie, like the vestall fires, or the fire of the Altar, is never extinguished. To be hot to day, and coole to morrow, gives little assurance of Lots fervencie.
Would we know the meanes to maintaine a constant righteousnesse, to be good, yea better from day to day? 1 Pray instantly; prayer and zeale, like water
 and Ice, naturally produce one another. Fervency enliveneth prayer, and prayer encreaseth fervencie. At heaven-gate he that does not knocke mainely, knockes vainely. This God will heare, yea, if it should want a tongue, so it want not a heart. As Christ, though he heard not Zachei verbum, yet he saw Zachei votum:Luk. 19.4. he perceived his desire to invite him, therefore invited himselfe. Thus he breaths more grace into our soule, that breathed our soule into our body. 2. The ordinary ^ewell to maintaine it, is Preaching: Sermons being so many bellowes to encrease ^his holy flame. 3. Reading the word hath a speciall place: no devout soule ever returned from that exercise, but his soule was more warmed. 4. Meditation perfects the rest. Meditatio docet quid desit, oratio obtinet ne desit. Contemplate that infinite Majestie; the apparition or shadow whereof fired Moses more than the burning bush. Let but the unfolded heavens give way to Stephens eyes, to behold CHRIST in the glory of his Father, how willing is hee to ascend by that ^tony passage! These be the accustomed meales of the good soule, that will ^eepe naturall heat from decaying. When thou goest to bed, rake up thy fire, wrap up thy devotion with prayer; so in the morning thou shalt find it ready to cheere thy heart.
Discontinuance of good duties hath lost men much vertue: to bethinke the cause betwixt God and our selves only by snatches, when we have nothing else to doe: or to read the Bible by fits, only upon rainy dayes: here may be a smacke^ing to maintaine table-talke, but not enough to keepe life and soule together. Let not men plead want of leasure, they have somewhat else to doe: for there is one ^hing necessary, to which as to the Kings businesse, all the rest must vaile and stand by. From our most serious labours we can steale some houres for our pleasure: is ^here no time to be spared for God and our soule? O that men should thinke one Sabbath more tedious than ten Holy-daies! Nor let those flatter themselves with ^ufficiencie, that present themselves in the Temple twice every Sunday: let God have some of the devotion at home, and by themselves. The kings ordinary ser^ants doe not only waite on festivall dayes, but are alwaies ready in the presence to be commanded. True love is most passionate without a witnesse: he that humbles himselfe before the Lord alone, betwixt them two disburdens his heart, weepes, prayes, begs mercie, hath some proofe of his Christianitie. Our families, beds, boords, walkes, and meetings must witnesse our devotion so well as our Temples: this is the daily worke of Christians.
I know the soule hath it's satietie as well as the body; and fire may be oppres^ed with too much wood: nor doth God so require men to serve him, as to be unmercifull to themselves. He that hath done his worke honestly, may goe to play ^^rrily. But this is rare, to find a man offending on the right hand. Nor let the ^crisions of Sodome coole this religious heat: a wise man will not be scoff'd out of his money, nor a just man be flowted out of his faith.
One caution; when we have thus heat our selves, let us beware of taking cold ^gaine. The fire is put out either by the subtraction of fewell, or powring on of water. Sinne is the quench-coale: he that voluntarily admits it, or does not sud^enly repent it, endangers the cessation of zeale. When we have done a sin, till ^e repent truly, we serve God but coldly. He whose very hunger hath tempted ^im to steale a lambe, saies but a cold grace to his supper. How the oppressors and ^efrauders of this Citie give thankes to God for their wealth, I refer to your ^houghts and their owne consciences. Sinne is worse than a theefe in the candle, or (...) obstruction in the liver. A deadly sinne clapp'd on the heeles of late devotion, ^ like a sudden cold after a violent heat; dangerous, if not mortall. Let us be^ech him that hath begun a good worke in us, to finish it: that we be not vexed ^ith sin to day, and pleased with it to morrow: but that our lusts may drop from ^ like leaves in Autumme, and our graces enjoy a perpetuall spring, through the ^p and life of all goodnesse, Iesus Christ.

Thus I have run thorow the maine scope and other passages of the Text; and yet some further instruction remaines, if your good construction will admit it. Three things I take leave to consider; a Question, an Illation, and a conclusion.
The question.Lot was vexed in soule,] inwardly grieved; but was his zeale confined to his owne brest? Did he smother it from the Sodomites? How could they the^ be convinced of their crimes, or know his dislike of their soule courses? Certainly, that holy man did not keepe it in, but manifest it to them on all just occasions. Fire in Ieremies bones will make him weary of forbearing; and new wine, if ^ have no vent, will burst the vessells. We may justly suspect that zeale, that is never manifest: let men talke what they will of their honest hearts, whilest they have dumbe mouthes and lame hands. Faith will open the lips, and he that loves God cannot but speak for him. Nichodemus was but cold when he stole to Christ by night: but when be buried Christ by day, his fervour broke forth like unsuppressed love. It was hardly enough for Obadiah, to hide his religiousnesse in his bosome, as hee did the Prophets in a Cave. Profession is the relative to faith: With the heart wee beleeve,Rom. 10.10. with the mouth wee confesse. Some confesse and beleeve not, such are hypocrites: some beleeve and confesse not, such are timorous cowards; some neither confesse nor beleeve, such are Atheists; some both beleeve and confesse, these are sound hearted Christians. Fire cannot be smothered, it will either finde a vent, or goe out: true righteousnesse never wanted words or deedes to declare it selfe. David often professed not onely to praise God, but in the great Congregation: both ad supplendum defectum, and ^x^itandum affectum alterius: for them that cannot, and for them that will not. (...)Rom. 14.22. Hast thou faith? have it to thy selfe before God. What then? Be present at m^sse, communicate with the wicked in their idolatries; because faith may still be firme before God? No, Paul speakes of the faith (not quae ad dogmata pertinet, sed de rebus medijs) that concernes indifferent things: otherwise, he that expresseth not his faith before men, hath denied the faith before God.
Earnest affections will finde a tongue: if it be low water, the mill may stand but a strong current will set it a going. If the spring of zeale be wound up in the heart, the wheeles will be kept in motion. It is not enough to keepe our religion within dores, to tumble over a few Orisons while we are dressing or undressi^g our selves, halfe a sleepe, halfe a wake: nor to observe a short perfunctory forme and stint, as mill-horses do their round, or pack-horses their pace: Such coward-souldiers are not for CHRIST's Standard. They must bee those dare hazard themselves to many troubles; a fire not quenchable by the worlds buckets, b^^ consuming their owne and others corruptions. So Chrysostome conceives the Apostle, as a man made all of fire, walking in the midst of stubble. The sluggard heares of a Lion, and quakes: tell Sampson and David, they will goe out to me^ him.Act. 21.13. Let Agabus tell Paul of bonds at Ierusalem; he answeres, I am ready (...) onely to be bound, but to dye at Ierusalem, for IESUS. The horse neighes at the trumpet, the Leviathan laughes at the speare. Tell Luther of enemies in Wormes, h^^ will go, though all the tiles of the houses were divels. To carnall friends he saies, I know you not: to disswaders, Get you behind me Satan.Pro. 30.30. Foure comely things are commended by Salomon, to which we may adde a fifth, stronger than the L^^, swifter than the Gray-hound, nimbler than the Goat at climbing upwards, more victorious than a King; it is a resolved Christian, who armed with faith and zeale, disdaines all resistances in his journey to the Kingdome of Heaven.
The Illation.If the Sodomites be so condemned for vexing a righteous Lot, what deserve they that vexe the true Lot, Iesus Christ, the Righteous, with their unlawfull deeds? Is it not enough that wee have once put him to death, but that we must againe renew those wounds, and being healed set them bleeding a fresh? The Iewes were but the instruments of his crucifying, we are the principalls: they cried, Crucif^e Him, in the court of Pilate: our sinnes cried, Crucifie Him, in the Court of Heaven.
 Ours, I say, no^ the reprobates: for as his death was not efficient to save repro^tes, so their sinne was not sufficient to kill Him.Hebr. 10.29. To despise the bloud wherewith (...) were san^t^fi^d; this comes neare him. If wee aske him concerning his former ^u^ds, he will answere, Thus was I wounded in the house of my enemies. But if, ^ncerning these new incisions, by blasphemies, oppressions, etc. he will an^ere,Zach. 13 6. Thus was I wounded in the house of my friends. The least unkindnesse of ^riend pierceth deepe:Psal 41 9. My owne familiar friend did me the mischiefe. Our ^ter vexing of him is farre worse than the first: his body was then passible and ^or^all, now it is glorious and immortall: the Iewes knew not what they did, ^e know it and yet grieve him: then he was dead and buried, but he rose againe; ^e bury him in forgetfulnesse not three dayes, but all our life, excepting onely his ^ntion.
The torments of his passion were unconceivable, in comparable, intolerable: (...) it appeares by his protestation, that the least wilfull sin of a Christian doth ^re vexe him, and strikes more to his heart than all those dolorous pangs. It is (...) sinne still that keepes him on the racke, and (though he be out of the reach (...) sorrow, yet) does what it can againe to kill the Lord of life. What pleasure (...) we take i^ grieving him that is the life of us all? Call not thy selfe the friend of ^HRIST, if thou delight in that which tormented him. Thinke of this, you ^si^g swearers, whom nothing can perswade to be civill, to be men, I say not, to (...) Christians. You sweare away your salvation, curse away your blessing, vex^ (...) Lord that bought you. If nothing can asswage your rancor and hell-bred ma^e, know it had beene better for you that there had beene no Christ. His first ^th was for y^^r redemption, but the many deaths you now put him to, is for ^ur gr^^ter damnation. If your blinde soules could consider this, it would not ^y ^lifie your hearts for the sins past, but also terrifie you against sins to come ^or f^^tter your selves, that he shall doe you good at your death, who have mis^d ^im all your life. When that fearefull houre comes, you would all then faine (...) to heaven and that by Christ: alas, as that despairing Pope said, the Crosse ^uld d^e him no good b^cause he had sold it away: so how should Christ doe (...) w^o hav^ railed him away? you have vexed him so long as you lived, (...) l^st^^e shall vexe all the veines of your hearts when you are dead. The (...) a man (...) to God, the more heartily he detests sin: now if Lot, a man ^y bu^ in (...)* with many infirmities, were thus vexed with iniquity;^ph. 4 ^0. what an (...) it be to the most righteous God, and Him that dyed for it, IESUS ^HRIST.
^f Lot w^^ so vexed at others sins, how should we be vexed at our owne?The co^^^usion. For ^m is required a sorow of compassion, for our selves a sorow of compunction. ^ome we home to a selfe-condemnation; we, we have dishonoured God, therfore (...) to be vexed at our selves. What is repentance but contrition, what is contrition (...) a vexation? we that have sinned with Sodome, let us be vexed with Lot. If Lot (...) not repented his owne sins, he had never grieved for theirs: if the Sodomites ^d beene thus vexed, they had not perished.Iob 7.20. We have sinned what shall we do unto (...) O thou preserver of men? What, but repent and amend? Repentance is the ^per medicine for sin; as God hath ordained a salve for every sore. A medicine ^ich cureth the eyes and nothing else, we may say was made for the eyes and (...) nothing else. A man loseth his wealth, and is sory for it:Chys. will sorrow recover (...) He ^th his child, and is sory for it: will sorrow raise him from the ^d? He suffers injurie, and is sory for it: will sorrow right him? Himselfe is ^e, and i^ sory for it: will sorrow heale him? Nay, will it not rather hurt him? ^row then was not made for these things. He hath sinned, is he sory for that? ^row now will helpe him, repentant sorrow will take away his sin. Sin is then (...) si^knesse, for which sorrow is the remedie. Direct this lesson to your hearts, ^fore you goe home to your houses, and digest it before your dinners: have
 troubled hearts, vexed with sorrow for your sins. Many a one comes into (...) Church a dissolute sinner, that goes out an humble Saint; why should I not hope (...) much of you effect? This were a blessed of a Sermon; when the fruit of one houre is no lesse than eternity of dayes. A square piece of metall, molten and cast into a round mould, comes out round: a piece of blew put into the scarlet fat, comes forth scarlet. Remember our Saviours sentence of sin; vel paenitendum, vel perendum:Luk. 13.5. l Except you repent, you shall perish. If the child cry it lives: so if we can heartily cry for our sinnes, there is life in us. Thus let us be grieved, that we may be comforted.



VERSE 9. The Lord knoweth how to deliver the god^y out of temptations, and to reserve the unjust unto the day of judgement to be punished.

Induction.PRofane people conceit GOD to bee all of mercie, and cannot (...) to heare of his Iustice: or if they bee convinced to acknowledge (...) also Iust, yet they measure it Secundum parvitatem suam, by the po^^tie of their owne Iudgement; and thinke it pitie to destroy a man for his sins. Indeed it pleaseth God to be magnified by his mercies above all his workes: and (...) never finde him called the Father of Iudgements, but often the Father of ma^^. Mercie seemes to be more properly his than vengeance: for he takes the man^^ a mercie out of himselfe and his goodnesse:Bern. Sed quod judicat and damnat, nos cum ^^damodo cogimus: but that he punisheth and condemneth; our sins compell (...) it. But both are infinite in him that is infinite; and as mercie hath her day in giv^^^ time of Repentance, so Iustice must have her day in the retribution of vengeance. All sins are debts, all Gods debts must be paied: it is a bold word, but a tr^e^^ is in vaine to hope for pardon without payment. Every sin must be pu^^^ either in the person of the Saviour, or in the person of the sinner. Too many ^^^kon their owne sins, as the false Steward did his Masters debts: of a hundred, they set downe but fifty: as if God would call them to account, because he knew the^ faithfull. Thus they may hide God from themselves, but they cannot hide the^selves from God. Doe they think that God wil be so kinde to them, as to be (...) to himselfe? No, the Lord will be just, let them goe on and perish. There c^^ (...) no reconciliation without remission, no remission without satisfaction, no sa^^sfaction but in the bloud of Christ. Turne over the book of thy conscience, see (...) thou canst finde that reckoning there discharged. We keepe bookes for expences, doe we keepe none for offences? He never breakes his sleepe for debt, that p^^s as he takes up. But carelesse arrereages shall find a day of reckoning.
Connection.That God is not just without mercie, nor mercifull without Iustice, this Text proves; which speakes of a Deliverance to the godly, to the unjust of Vengeance. God indeed isNah. 1.3. slow to anger, yet he will not acquit the wicked. So that a man sh^^ say,Psal. 58.11. Verily there is a reward for the righteous, surely there is a God that judgeth the earth. A man, any man, every man shall confesse it, none have power to deny it. This is our Apostles conclusion upon the premisses: God could preserve
 the holy Angels by his mercie, and confound the Apostate Angels in his Iustice: in his mercie saveth righteous Noah, when by his Iustice he drench'd the unrighteous world: Iustly destroyeth foure ungodly Cities, and mercifully delivers one just Lot. He that could doe such mighty workes, in heaven, on earth, in the waters; can as easily still deliver his children, and reserve the unjust to the day of Iudgement to be punished.
The verse containes a paire of thwart sentences, directly opposite,Distribution. in qualitie of persons, conditions, and events. Here is the Godly and unjust: a delivering, and Reserving: out of temptations, into Iudgement. God stands in the fore-front, and hath ^wo armes stretched forth: one arme to the East, another to the West: one to de^iver the godly out of trouble, the other to inflict severe punishment upon the wicked. Here is an Enlargement, and an Attachment: a delivering out of prison, and a casting into prison: a releasing from present perturbation, and a binding over to a further Session. The godly are acquitted, absolved, freed; not reprieved, but quite delivered. The unjust are apprehended, bound over, goe as 'twere under baile: at the generall Assises they must make their appearance, and being guilty receive their sentence. This the Iudge can doe, and will doe: he wants not power, for he is The Lord: he wants not wisedome, for Novit, He knoweth. His Almighty wisedome, and all wise power, are extended to both these actions, The Lord knoweth. The righteous proceeded thus far, they come upon their tryall; for ^emptation is a tryall: but not to arraignement, much lesse to conviction, least of all to condemnation. But being charged by that common Barritor, the accuser of the brethren; and thus brought before the Iudge, not publikely at a Session, but to a private examination, they are found innocent, and delivered. Temptations, like fet^ers, may hamper and afflict them for a while, but when their cause comes to be heard, and their righteousnesse appeareth, they are discharged. For the other, their guilt is manifest, therefore the chaines of bondage are upon them, which together with the custodie of omnipotencie shall keepe them fast to the day of Iudgement, ^nd that shall send them to execution, to be punished.
In the enlargement consider these particulars. 1. What, a deliverance. 2. Who are delivered, the godly. 3. From what, out of temptations. 4. By whom, The Lord doth it. 5. How; we need not examine, it is sufficient, Dominus novit, The Lord knoweth how.
First, the matter is a Deliverance. It is a great comfort in every distresse,Deliverance. to hope for a deliverance: to beleeve it, greater: to be sure of it, greatest of all. Thus certaine is every Christian, by the assurance of faith, grounded on the infallible promise of God. It was promised to Abraham, in Isaac shall thy seed be called: yet must Isaac, before he had seed, be killed; and that by his fathers owne hand. Here Abraham might reason; I may beleeve the promise, and not obey the commandement: I may obey the commandement, and not beleeve the promise: but ^ow can both stand together? But he holds the promise, and obeys God, though all the reason in the earth cannot tell how that promise and that commandement should stand together. Though I know not, and reason know not, yet God know^th. In humane reasoning it is a note of ignorance to sticke alwayes to the conclusion: but in spirituall tryalls this is sound Divinitie, to hold fast GODS promises. Therefore hee both beleeves the one, and obeys the other: this Deliverance was above his reason, it was not above his faith. Hee did not argue, but obey: being sure that what GOD commands, is good, and what he promises, is infallible: therefore carelesse of the meanes, he trusts to the end. Daniel is not delivered at the beginning of his trouble, he must first be in the Lions den; then he finds it. Those three servants are not rescued at the ovens mouth; in the fornace they are. That is a gratious well tryed faith, that can hold out confidence to the last.
Abraham after that terrible command, must goe three dayes journey, a tedious
 extension of his sorrow: and in all that travell no Angell meets him with newes of a deliverance. He sees the chosen mountaine, dismisseth his servants; a strange devotion that will abide no witnesses, none comes yet. All the while the Altar is a building, his owne heart bleeding; Isaac pleading for his life, none yet. He bindes his hands, layes the wood on the Altar, the Sacrifice on the wood; yet no newes. Now having kissed him his last, after many mutuall teares, he lifts up his hand to give the fatall blow of death: yet he does not thinke, perhaps God will relent after the first wound. Loe, now the comfort of Abraham, the hope of the Church, lies a killing by the hand of his Father; yet there is no revocation. I would have made the bowels of a Savage yearne at this spectacle; to see the knife of such a Father hanging over the throate of such a sonne: yet he whom it nearest concerned, is least touched: faith had wrought in him, what cruelty would in others, not to be moved. He proceeds, contemning all feares, and overlooking all impossibilities: deliverance he might expect, but he knew not which way it could come: onely that the same hand which raised Isaac from the dead wombe of his Mother, can revive him from those ashes. Now having given Isaac, and Isaac given himselfe, for dead; the knife is falling upon his throate: Now, now comes the Deliverance; by an Angel calling, forbidding, commending him. Often is deliverance promised,Ier. 25.11. and yet the time not mentioned. They shall serve the (...) of Babylon seventy yeares: not a day, not an houre to be bated, Exod. 12.41. At the end of foure hundred and thirty yeares: till then Moses undertooke it in vaine, D^^ 5.30. That very night. Neither did Daniel, that knew the determined time of seventy, till upon the expiration, pray for deliverance.
God deferres His deliverance. 1. To returne us home: when no man (...) harbour that unthrift sonne, he will backe againe to his father. 2. To make a seeke our deliverance in the right unde: while money can buy physicke, or friends procure enlargement, the great Physician and Helper is not throughly trusted (...) to. 3. To set a better price on his benefites; for suddenly gotten are suddenly forgotten. Abrahams child at seventy yeeres was more welcome, than had hee been given at thirtie: and the same Isaac had not been so precious to him, if he had not been as miraculously restored, as given: his recovery from death made (...) more acceptable, than if he had never been in danger. Gods charges are (...) harsh in the beginning, hard in the proceeding, but the conclusion is alwaies comfortable. Spirituall consolations are commonly late and sudden; long before they come, and speedy when they do come, preventing even expectation.
The Lord deferres on purpose, that our triall may be perfect, our deliverance welcome, our recompence glorious. Say our tentation be externally aff^ict^^^ and we are not delivered from it: our poverty is long, and we shall never be (...) our sicknesse tedious, and we shall never recover; what now? Shall we desp^^^ and dye?Dan. 3.18. No, but whether he doth deliver us or not, We will serve Him; tho^^^ He kill us, wee will trust in Him. Though he hold off long, and suspend our (...) yet deliverance shall come; if not the same way we would have it, yet a way that is better for us. Shall we be sullen, because our desires be not presently granted* As Ionas would dye, because he was displeased: Achitophel, because he was de^^sed; Saul, because hee was discomfited. No, death it selfe shall deliver us; that red Sea shall put us over to the Land of promise; and we shall say to the praise of God, we are delivered.
The godly.The persons delivered are the Godly. Godlinesse (according to the proprietie of the word) consists in two things; the devout adoration, and sincere imitation of God. They that worship him as he will be worshipped, and follow him in the things wherein he will be followed, are right godly men. He that worships God aright, adheres to the rule, and beleeves the reward. Superstition first loves, and then beleeves: true Religion first beleeves, and then loves. Reverence and zeale become adoration: for a man to mouth a Pater-noster, while his heart is (...)
 ^is coffer; as if he could reconcile those two contrary masters, and at once serve God and mammon; in vaine thinkes himselfe godly. When in the Temple God ^arce hath our knees or our voices, seldome our minds; never tell me of godlinesse. ^ou are not Atheists, to thinke that he regards your prayers, as he doth the hum^ing of flies and bees; that they bee so formall and heartlesse. The godly man ^owes that God sees him, sees him in every place, takes speciall notice of him in ^e Church. Caesars eye made his souldiers prodigall of their bloud: Gods eye ^d speech to the soule, Well done good and faithfull servant, makes him worke out ^s heart. Loose thoughts are too bad for common places, intolerable in divine ^orship. We may observe how God bates of his owne service for us; allowes (...) to goe from his Temple to quench a burning house, or to helpe a beast out of ^e pit; and makes homicide the greatest sinne upon earth. Now shall he bate of ^s owne glory for our benefit and shall not we bate of our benefit for his glory? ^hey that either for wantonnesse or covetousnesse, much worse for drunkennesse, ^olate the Sabbath, which is the time of Gods worship; or neglect the Church, ^hich is the place of his worship; have little godlinesse. We are charged to wor^pIoh. 4.23. him in spirit and truth. The Iewes worshipped him bodily, wee must also in ^rit; they figuratively, we in truth.
Nor is adoration enough without Imitation; it is the summe of all religion, imitate him we adore. He was called a Platonist, that followed Plato's princi^es: and he that followes the example of God, is godly. Outward holinesse ^ust be joyned with inward; a man may be a Saint at Church, and a Devill at ^me: true godlinesse is seene in our owne house as well as in Gods house; he is ^re short of godlinesse, that is not an honest man. It is shame for Christians to ^rne honestie of Pagans; and yet they say, some of us are a forme below them. ^e may know whose children such are by their complexions and conditions: (...) that doth righteousnesse, is righteous. It was not enough by the Leviticall law ^hose ground was morall to chew the cudde, but to divide the hoofe: our feet ^ust be cleane as well as our mouthes While the worship of God sits in our ^s, and the dishonour of God is seene in our lives; we might as safe be wholly cleane.Rev. 13.16. Some have the marke of the beast in their hand, some in their fore head: ^e^her in the fore-head, or in the hand, so it be his marke, it is all one to the De^l. This commendedIob 1.8. Iob, that he feared God; that's one part of pietie: that eschewed evill, that's the other. The doctrine of faith is much controverted; ^d while Satan can raise troubles about faith, he hopes the world will let him a^ne about manners; and so that Christi nomen periret de terris: but it is a counter^ faith without obedient and practiall godinesse.
Gods word is first sowen in the heart, that seed is rooted in faith, that root ^ngs forth a tree of charitie, and that tree beares the fruit of good workes. Our ^sons are justified by our faith, our faith is justified by our charitie, our charitie (...) the actions of a godly life. Therefore justifie thy faith, that thy faith may ju^fie thee. Faith is an Illumination, and many content themselves with an illusion: we want charitie to our brother, there is no faith to our maker. Some lose them ^es Vituperando Christum, as Pagans: some Etiam laudando Christum, as pro^e Christians: these so praise his merits, that they never weigh their owne mis^meanors. But doe good, and have good: little saies the Scripture of the Apo^s learning, it speakes much of their acts. It is not the taste of meat that nouri^th, but after concoction the benefit is in the strength. The conscience is not sa^fied with reading good things, the comfort it feeles is in the practice. Children ^e after their father; thus toLuk. 6.36. shew mercie, is to be godly.Ioh. 13 27. Forgive your offenders ^hy? God doth forgive you: be as ready to pardon men, as you are ready to de^ your owne pardon of him. He that walkes under a wall in a sunny day, shall ^heated by the wall, which first was heated by the Sun: if God have forgiven (...) the warmth of charitie is in us to forgive others. Be yee holy: Why? because
 God is holy: if we finde a piece of waxe with an impression or marke upon it, we know there hath beene a seale, the print whereof is left behinde: holinesse is the print of Gods sacred seale: if not holy, not sealed. God is patient toward s^^ners; furious avengers of themselves are not godly. He is the God of peace, the sons of malice and contention are far unlike him.
The godly most tempted.We see who are godly, now these are delivered: they of all men, out of temptations; because they of all men are most subject to temptations. The higher a tree shootes up, the more tempest beaten: if a Christian growes to any statute and talnesse in grace, and sprouts up toward heaven, Satan will raise the sorer stormes against him. Some are not troubled with temptations, know not what they meane; aske them, they never felt the devill so busie about them. The more miserable creatures they: no Prince makes war against his obedient subjects: sho^ld they rebell against Satans lawes, they should heare of him in another kinde. (...) as God said in his Iustice;Hos. 4.17. Ephraim is joyned to Idols, let him alone: so Satan in (...) malice, they are joyned, united, incorporated to sinne, let them alone. They me^dle not with repentance, and he meddles not with them;Luk. 11.21. all is peace. Let th^^ take it for the fearefull signe of a dead heart, when they feele not the Thorne (...) t^^ flesh, temptation. Fall they to deprecation, cry for pardon of their sins, and se^^ the kingdome of heaven; then Satan begins to bustle, then temptation upon temp^^tion: Iob had not more foes to vexe him, than they shall finde baites to entice th^^. Therefore CHRIST on purpose, to the Pardon of sins, annexeth, lead us no^ (...) temptation. Not only because with the pardon of sins past, we should desire (...) prevention of sins to come: that neither our consciences be stung with the old nor our concupiscences corrupted further with the new. But because a mans (...) be no sooner forgiven, and he rescued from Satan; but that Lion foames (...) roares, and bestirs himselfe to recover his losse. So that grievous temptation^ (...) alwaies accompany the remission of sins. Some suspect themselves to be ou^ (...) Gods favour, because they are so wearied and worried with temptations: but godlinesse and temptation be such inseparable attendants on the same person, it is ^therwise. For the devills hatred is to them most, whom God loves best: (...) where he shewes mercie, Satan will exercise malice. So that in the characters o^ temptations we may spell Gods love, which cannot be enjoyed without S^^ disturbance. Yea, howsoever weake consciences have beene dismayed at it; (...) proofe of saving grace in us, is the exercise of the devills malice against us
They that receive from God more graces, are sure of more temptations. (...) God testifie good of Iob, the Divell will have a fling at him.Mat. 16.22. If Peter have (...) the keyes, Satan will tempt him to be a Satan to his master. If there be ho^e^^ the vessell, the waspes will be busie about it. But as no wise man leaves his (...) for some flies, but rather seekes to drive them out, than they should drive him (...) so no good man forsakes his holinesse for temptations, but rather resists the d^^d, as knowing then he will flie from him. A full barne is better than an empty o^ though theeves let this alone, and be pilfering about the other. We doe not ^^stroy our roses for the cankers, but rather destroy the cankers from the roses ^s no policie for the traveller to leave off his weapons, because he knowes the^^ ^e theeves in the way. We say, one true man is hard enough for two theeves, o^e faithfull man is able to repell many wicked spirits. Our godlinesse doth not (...) us from temptations, but conquers them. CHRIST was no sooner come (...) of the water of Baptisme, but he enters into the fire of temptation: if he be (...) of the holy Spirit, he shall be set upon by the malignant spirit. If God say, Th^^ is my sonne: Satan will say, If thou be the Sonne of God. That Divine testimony did not allay his malice, but exasperate it: the Serpent most violently affaires (...) whom God hath honoured.
Neither the gifts of grace, nor the seales of grace, can free us from affaires we may have force to repell bad suggestions, we have not to prevent them. The
 more we are engaged to God, by the bonds of our owne profession, and the pledges of his favour; so much the more busie is the tempter about us. That Goliah defies none but the Host of the living God: if we be once seene in the field, then he is mad, and seekes to wring away our weapons, and with them to wound our owne bosomes. Lord, how should we scape that Dragons assaults, when the Sonne of thy love could not be free! When even to be gracious drawes on his enmity, and the profession of a good conscience, is the Butt for his burning arrowes? He that spared not the Head, will not forbeare the remoter limbes. If the state of Innocency could have been any defence against evill motions, the first Adam had not been tempted, much lesse the second.
Nothing should more comfort us than resistance: if we did not stand for the Lord;Zach. 3.1. Satan would not stand against us: if wee were not in a way to doe good, we should finde no rubbes. The divell hath no cause to trouble his owne, especially while they goe about his businesse. To sinne, he would have our paths smooth, and calme, and pleasant, winning us forward: but if wee turne our feete toward Sion, then hee encounters us, and blockes up our way with temptations. But it is not the presentment of bad motions that can hurt us, but our entertainment of them. Ill counsell is the fault of the giver, not of the refuser: if we be tempted, as Ioseph was by a great Lady, and withstand it, we are not the worse, but the better. We cannot forbid lewd eyes to look in at our windowes, we may shut our doores against their entrance. If Satan knock, it is in our choice to open: a booty lyes in our way, we may choose whether we will stoop and take it up. To suggest evill, is Satans blame: to resist evill, this is our praise. The more we are tried in the fornace, the purer gold we shall goe to the Treasury of Heaven. Lord, make us as strong, as the devill is malicious: say in a sweet spirituall feeling to my conscience, as Thou spakest once vocally and audibly to my Saviour; Thou art my Sonne; and let the devill doe his worst.
Temptations we understand to be of two sorts; Probations,Temptations or Provocations; trials of suffering, or trials of doing. God tempts, to draw something out of us, and to make it appeare; Satan tempts to put something into us which was not before. It is one thing Explorare an sit peccatum, another Provocare ut sit peccatum. The former we may properly call Examinations, Searchings, Afflictions; these are of God. The other, Incitements, enticements, impulsive motions to sinne, these are of Satan. Now this promised deliverance stands in analogy and reference to both these.
For Satans suggestions; What godly man hath not beene wrought upon by temptations; not only to like the bait, but even to swallow it with consent of will! Yet hath it not choaked their grace, God hath delivered them. Looke upon David; 2 Sam. 11. While his people are busie in the warre against Ammon abroad, Satan as busily makes warre against David at home: they lay siege to Rabbah, he layes siege to their King. The temptation first takes fire at his eyes, his eyes recoile upon his heart, and his heart burnes in the desires of his lust. The tempter so prevailes, that he makes him become a tempter, bestowing his owne bad office upon him. He sees Bethsheba, inquires after her, sends for her, solicites her to uncleannesse. There was store of faire Virgins in Israel, yet he must dote upon the marriage-bed: he had many wives of his owne, and was not restrained from taking more; yet is not contented saving with the onely one of a subjects. He was not overcome by the sollicitation of a strumpet, but himselfe was the prosecutor of this filthinesse. There is nothing wanting to amplifie his sin, and cause our feare. O whither shall we goe, if God stay us not? What man among the millions of Gods servants was better furnished with preservatives against such temptations? Where could the Devill have lesse hope of prevailing? Yet is this strong man overcome; and as it is hard and rare to commit a single sinne; he does not only abuse the wife, but betraies the husband, and teacheth his lust to looke
 with bloudy eyes on the life of his faithfull servant. If wine cannot wo^ (...) to father a false seed, the sword of an uncircumcised Anatomie shall fall upo^ him. Thus deepe in is David, and fals asleepe many moneths, exchanging the conscience of his sin for the sense of his pleasures Yet even out of this tempta^ion he is delivered; Nathan shall rowse him, the Spirit shall melt him, his ow^e heart shall smite him; with a wounded soule he shall cry for pardon, d^ (...) wickednesse and finde mercy.
In this glasse we see our selves, how apt to be tempted, to go along with it, yea often to persist in it; yet withall, Gods infinite goodnesse to deliver us from it. For this we pray, Lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evill: the la^te^ being an exposition of the former: that we be not led into temptation, deliver us from evill; the cause being taken away, the effect ceaseth. The best of Gods children may not only be drenched in the waves of sin, but even lye in them for a time; as a man may sinke twice to the bottome, yet rise with life in him. But they that belong to the covenant, shall be delivered: Saul is tempted, sinneth and sleepeth in it his last: David is tempted, sinneth, and sleepeth, but not his la^^. Peter is tempted to conceale, to deny, to forsweare his Master; yet one looke of Christ delivered him: Iudas is tempted to betray him, goes on, and perisheth. The Lord would never have suffered so deare favorites of his, as Lot, David, Peter, to fall so dangerously: if he had not meant to make them universall examples to the world, of not presuming, of not despairing. For how can we presume of no^ sinning, or despaire for sinning, when we find so great Saints thus fallen, thus risen? How many yeares had those ten brethren forgotten their unnaturall trechery! Alas, what long and dead sleepes may the holiest soules take in fearefull (...)* Were it not for Gods mercy that thus delivers us out of temptations, we should end our spirituall lethargie in a sleepe of death. David in those ten mone^^s might have some transient glances of remorse; but no compunction is heard of till Nathans message, and perhaps had bin further adjourned, if that Monitor had bin longer deferred. God could have sent him sooner, and checked David (...) h^s first project of sin: so had Bersheba bin chast, Vriah alive, and himselfe gui^^l^^se of murther. But that Almighty wisdome knew how to win more glory by the permission, than by the prevention; by the permission of one sin to prevent ^^ons. How many thousands had presumed on their own strength, if such a Champion had not fallen! How many thousands had despaired in the consciences (...) their own mis-deeds and weaknesse, if such sins had not found remission! It is h^^py for all after-times that we have such precedents, so holy sinners, so sinfull ^^^tents: their fals have taught us by whom to stand. In a word, many Saints (...) committed as great sins as reprobates: that the one is pardoned, not the other, ^he difference is not in the quantity or quality of the sin, but in the mercy of God.
1 Wee that pray for deliverance from evill, must endeavour against e^^. The best Fencer lies close,  and is more carefull to defend than to offend: w^ we lye open, Satan hath a faire marke. Ranke mirth, a full belly, gaming, and wine, lay a man open. That wine is an inducement to lust, David knew; and therefore gave Vriah such superfluous cups: and it is hard to refuse pledging, where a King begins a Health to a Subject. This might easily lay him open to evill; the drunkard may be any thing but good. But temptation is then stronger, when (...) proceeds from a mighty instrument: the requests of Princes are commands ^he^^ very suites imperative. How many Bethshebas and Iane Shores have thus beene wrought, to pollute both a royall and matrimoniall bed! The countenance of authority is authoritative with many: aske a Romist, whether if the Pope command him to kill his Soveraigne, he is to doe or refuse it: perhaps he trif^es that the Pope will never command it: but put him to it, If; then his answer m^st bee affirmative. If Saul charge a Doeg, he will wreake his splene on the Priests. L^^ the master tempt his servant, the father his child, their least word is a law. But (...)
 will be no excuse to say at last, such a great person tempted me, as Adam said of Eve* it is quid that we must regard, not quis; the action, not the person: be the mover never so glorious, if his motion be to sin, let it be entertained with d^fiance. Let us have wary eyes, for it is not the selfe-appearing divell, but the same a transformed Angell, that doth corrupt us.
2. Consider what preventions the provident God useth against our sinnings. How many staies doth Saul find in his pursuit of David: twice he casts his I^^elin, and mist him: exposed him to the Philistims, but hee slew them: M^chol was given him for a snare, yet shee delivers him; Ionathan is constant to him: Saul hath begirt him, loe then he is delivered by the Philistims invasion. This found Balaam in his pestilent itch to curse Israel: one night God puts him off;1 S m. 23 27. the second time hee answeres his importunacie and bids him goe in anger: an Angell stands to crosse him, his beast turnes out of the way: she bruiseth his fo t^ against the wall, at last fals downe under him: many crosses to recall him H^w is the other Saul (with his letters missive to vex the Church) arrested from heaven. I know there be sudden sins, no sooner thought of than dispatched; which is like fire to powder. But in our resolved intentions of doing a sin, if we would marke it, we meete with strange impediments, as Ionah did in his flight; which should make us grow jealous of such enterprises. Some have bin frighted from their uncleannesse, by the tolling of a passing-bell: others diverted from a b d journey, by the sudden lamenesse of their horse. How often hath God prevented murthers by strange accidents? Sometimes he shortens our owne armes, sometimes strengthens others against us. Sometime reason is heard, when religion si^s out: and the dishonesty, inutility, or difficulty of a sin is p^^p^nded. But it is best, when the feare of God hath corrected us, or the word of God av^rted us, or the Spirit of God recalled us. By innumerable meanes doth the Lord stop our precipices, hedge up our wayes to sin: that when temptation invites us, we may have hands manicled, and feere fettered with detentions; and we coozen the devill against our wils. Hee would have us come, and we would com^, but (thankes be to God) we cannot come. Let us observe it; as when we are doing w^ll, wee have many provocations to alienate our mindes from it; so when we are intending mischiefe, God sends many inconveniences, as it were vocall accidents, to hinder us; as if God should say, take heed what you doe.
3 Let us meditate how we are blessed of God, and have reason to blesse God, for these happy deliverances. As Saint Augustine, Tentator defuit, etc. I had time and place to commit sin, but then the Tempter was away: thy doing, O Lord, it was that he was away. The tempter was present, but then time and place were wanting; thy doing it was that I wanted time and place. Time and place were convenient, and the tempter was there also, provoking me forward, all opportunities furth^ring: but then I had no stomach to it, lust was coole, my will had no will to consent: thy doing it was that I was unwilling, that the edge of my appetite was dull. Sometimes I had will, but then I wanted meanes: sometimes I had meanes, but then I wanted will: sometimes I had likewise will and meanes, but then I also wanted abilitie: another time; meanes, will, and abilitie were concurring; but then came in some other interruption; a messenger with sudden businesse, the distresse of a friend, the invitation of a neighbour. Still, O Lord, that I was not led into temptation, nor captivated by suggestion, it was thy doing. Blessed be God, as for his furtherance in good, so for his hinderance in evill. If we be godly, and find these things true, let us enter into our chambers, fall upon out knees, lift up our hearts, and say in humble thankfulnesse; Lord, thou hast delivered me, I find thy mercie, to thy name be the glory.
4 Lastly, if we love not evill, let us long for our finall and plenary deliverance from it; that immortall court, where sin can no more enter, than sorrow or death: out of this the Tempter is excluded for ever. Here the Lord d^livers
 us from the damnation and domination of sin, there from the temptation and assault: here it shall not overcome us, there it shall not come neare us.Rom 7 24. Wretched man! who shall deliver me from the body of this death? Who? He that now free^ us from the burning, will then from the smell of the fire. Here even a Saint is but a mixt creature; and the sinne which he hath by his generation, fights against the grace which he hath by his owne regeneration. This felt St Paul: and Ierome i^ his very abstinence; Mens ardebat desideriis in frigido corpore: my face was pale, but my heart was flushing; and I had a burning minde in a chill body. Mortall perfection is a vaine dreame: Aquinas thinkes we may fulfill a precept two waies: either perfectly,Epist. 22. quando pervenitur ad finem, when we performe the full scope of (...): or imperfectly, cum non receditur ab ordine ad finem, when we keepe the way conducing to the end. But as when the Captaine bids the souldiers fight and conquer, he that fights and conquers, perfectly doth his will: he that fights and doth not get the victory, comes short of doing his will: and in Gods battailes, he that conquers not, which is the end; recedit ab ordine ad finem, doth certainely faile in the meanes. Therefore he that sincerely loves GOD, and detests sinne, desi^eth dissolution for no other end, but to be freed from temptation. The good soldier will fight when he is in the field, but he is contented to have the battaile over. This is one benefit that death against his owne will shall doe us; a perfect delivery from all temptations. In Paradise man had a Posse non peccare: in heaven he shall have a Non posse peccare. Satan shall then bee bound in eternall chaines, never to stirre out of that locall torment; and the Elect be set at triumpha^t libertie.
For Probations, which are the other sort of tentations, or tryalls by troubles; they are derived from three fountaines, and may thus be distinguished, not in proprietie of termes, but after the common acceptance. As they come from Satan they are usually called temptations: as they come from man, persecutions: as from God, afflictions. All these are in some manner from the Lord: neither man nor devill can afflict us without God, God can afflict us without them. When we pray not to be led into temptation, we pray not against correction, but against evil: for though Christ mak^ us invincible, he makes us not invulnerable. All our dayes are evill, some worse^ as the ague hath chiefe fits, criticall dayes. Some be more grievous sufferings tha^ others; as Martyrdome in the extent, (for it may be occulta cogitatione, though not aperta passione) and we have cause to blesse God that we resist not unto bloud. If there were no good in these temptations, they should not come neare us: for nothing absolutely evill shall come to a good man. And when they have done the businesse they came for, they shall leave us: the plaister will not sticke on whe^ the sore is healed.
Doe they come from the ungodly? Whether Tertullus persecute the Church with his tongue, or Elimas with his hand, God hath the command of both. I^ deed the wicked are the mediate causes of our troubles: the righteous are as the center, thePs^l. 11^.11. other the circumference: which way soever they turne, they find themselves environed: yet still the center is fixed and immoveable, being founded upon CHRIST. It is good for some men to have adversaries: for often they more feare to sin, least they should despise them, than dislike it for conscience, least God should condemne them. They speake evill of us: if true let us amend it: if fal^e contemne it: whether true, or false, observe it. Thus we shall learne good out of their evill; make them our Tutors, and give them no pupillage. In all things let us watch them, in nothing feare themPhil. 1.28. Which is to them an evident token of perdition, but to us of salvation. The Church is thatCant. 4.4. Tower of David: if there be a thousand weapons to wound us, there are a thousand shields to guard us. When the Angell saluted Gideon, God be with thee; he replied,Iudg. 6.13. If God be with us, he^^ i^ all this evill befallen us? Why doe the Midianites vexe us? Yes, God may be with us, and the Midianites against us: yea therefore are they against us, because
 God is with us.Cypr. It is neither our shame to suffer what CHRIST suffered, nor ^ir honour to doe as Iudas did. Howsoever they be wicked Instruments, yet the (...) hand is the Lords: God gave, saith Iob: what and the Devill tooke away? No, (...) Sabeans tooke away? No, but the Lord tooke away. As when the malignitie of ^isease is spent, health will returne: so when all our adversaries have done their ^rst, if not before, then God will deliver us. Let Iesabell fret her heart out, and ^eare by her gods, Eliah must be safe.Revel. 12. Let the red Dragon spout forth flouds of ^ome, the Church hath wings to flie away, she shall be delivered.
Doe they come from God? diligit quem corrigit: stormes and afflictions are (...) from fury without love, but rather from love without fury.Ioh. 11.3. Lord, he whom (...) lovest, is sicke: Lazarus may be sicke and yet CHRIST love him. The intelli^t sonne knowes that his fathers correction is no argument of his fathers ha^d; therefore is silent.Psal. 39.9. I was dumbe, because thou didst it. I was not dumbe for ^t I did, but confessed my sin: but dumbe for that thou didst, acknowledging it ^st punishment.Esa. 54.8. In a little wrath I hid my face from thee, for a moment. It is but Mo^um, a little, ad momentum, for a moment: and I hid my face, never turned my ^rt from thee. Indeed as man is under the Law, they are legall punishments: ^t as under grace, paternall corrections. They are a testimony of his good ^our toward us, when by them hee separates the sinne which hee hates, from ^e person which hee loves. And this hee alwaies so tempers, that it is nei^^er according to our sinnes, nor exceeding our strengths. Non ultra vires: ^ts? No, but not above GODS strength in us. No parent corrects anothers ^ild, and he is no good parent that corrects not his owne. By this we come to ^ow our friend: three things are not knowen but in three places: valour, but in ^nger: wisedome, but in anger: a friend, but in miserie. Afflictions have done (...) this good, that we are sure we have a friend, a father in heaven, for we have try^ him. Faith understands troubles to be Probationis Indicia, not Reprobationis ar^menta. Our life is a web woven by the hand of God, the threed reaching from ^r birth unto our death. The woofe is trouble, but still runs with it a Weft of ^erwoven comforts. But if so then may we not pray for their removall? Yes, ^emove thy plague away from me: Thy plague, and mine: thine by affliction,Psal. 39.19. mine (...) passion: thine because thou didst send it, mine because I endure it: thine because (...) comes from thy Iustice, mine because it answers my injustice: remit what I have ^one, and remove what thou hast done. But whosoever laid it on, the Lord will ^ke it off. Be ourPsal. 34.19. troubles many in number, strange in nature, heavy in measure ^et Gods mercies are more numerous, his wisedome more wondrous, his power ^ore miraculous, hee will deliver us out of all. This doctrine well digested, will ^reed good bloud in our soules, and is usefull three waies.
1 To fortifie our patience; hee needs not feare the trouble, that knowes (...) infallible deliverance.Luk. ^1.19. Possesse your soules in patience. Hee doth not say, pos^^sse your mouthes, for some being provoked will give no bad language; nor ^ossesse your hands; many being urged can forbeare violence: yet still the desire ^f revenge may boile and ranckle in both their hearts. But possesse your soules, that (...), your selves, in patience: this binds both mouth and hand to the peace and good ^orbearance: all are quiet, if the soule be quiet. Two things become a Christian; ^apientia in verbis, patientia in verberibus. Time is the Physitians Cure, reason the ^hilosophers Cure, patience is Gods Cure. Time helps sorrowes, Dies adimit ^gritudinem: but still this is tedious, and time runs to dully with them that be in ^isery. Reason qualifies it, for it is the courage and magnanimity of a man to ^ffer. But this onely seekes meanes to extricate us, reason will not stay for time: ^u^ faithfull patience lookes neither to reason nor time, but knowes a better reme^y: she commits her cause to God, and resolves upon this resignation, that either ^er sorrow shall be lesse or her fortitude more. Nobile vincendi genus est patien^ia. Faith, Charity, and Patience, are the three rich possessions of a Christian:
 by Faith we possesse Christ, by Charity, we possesse our neighbour, by Patience (...) possesse our selves. He that wants Faith is without the head: he that wants Cha^^ty, is without the body; he that wants patience is without himselfe. Our patience, like our triall, hath but a short exercise: our deliverance is glorious and everlasting.
2 To confirme our hope, he that hath tasted the mercie of God in some no^ble deliverance, hopes in the next tryall for the same assistance.Rom. 5.4. Experience brings hope; because it hath made the matter easie: he that hath often done a thing eas^y, mistrusts not to doe it againe. David had often found his deliverance out of (...) exigents, therefore saies; In the Name of God I will leape over the Wall: his experience had made it so easie to him, that it was but a skip or jumpe in his conce^.
3 Let us not faine afflictions before we have them: we can expect no del^^^rance out of fantasticall griefes.Gal. 6.7. Be not deceived, God is not mocked. T^^ beggars by permission, that faine themselves halt and blinde: and begg^^ by commission, that have patents for fires and wrackes: but their fires are (...) fained and false fires, and all their wrackes the wracke of their owne conscie^ces. Let them take heed, lest their fictions prove at last true afflictions, thei^ ^^sembled lamenesse prove lamenesse indeed. As Martial writes of Caelius, who (...) avoid the Ave potentiorem, giving his attendance early and late to the great ones (...) the time; fained himselfe sicke of the gowte; so cunningly, that his hyp^cr^^ came home to him, and he fell sicke of the gowte indeed. Tantum cura potes^ (...) ars doloris, desiit fingere Caelius podagram. How often have those mischances tales to men without reliefe, for which they beg'd reliefe before they had cause! Go^ promiseth deliverance from the tentations he sends, not those we fetch: such as come from our want, not from our wantonnesse. Many make to themselves c^^ses; and while Gods hand is not visible, they with their owne hands beat themselves. Haman that great favourite hath honour enough, though Mordecai do^^ cringe to him: yet this makes him discontent; here was a crosse of his owne beg^ting. Ahab was King, had lands and demeasnes enough of his owne, yet beca^^e Nabaoth denyes him his vineyard, he falls sicke of the sullens. For this trouble let him thanke himselfe: what needs a rich man be a theefe?2 Sam. 13.2, 4. Amnon had v^^^tie of choise objects for his inordinate affection; yet he must be love-sicke of T^^mar: none but his halfe-sister can please the eyes of that wanton Prince. Or^^^^ry pleasures will not content extraordinary persons; such pamper'd and ^^vern'd youthes, whose greatnesse and ease have made unruly appetites. This (...) unnaturall heat of which he languishes; was not this an affliction of his owne (...) king. It is not rare to see a great man vexe himself at the neglect of a peasant; (...) as a true Lion would passe by with an honourable scorne. To see the husband (...) a vertuous and comely spouse, doting on a foule and forbidden bed. To see (...) man pine away with projecting how he should live when he is old. Innume^^^^^ be our fantasticall evills, and we trouble our selves about nothing. Evills co^^ fast enough of themselves, there is store made to our hands, we need not encr^^^ their number: those ill weeds will grow without our planting.
The Lord.Our deliverer is The Lord. It is the voice of all creatures in their severall la^guages, Salvation is of the Lord. The confession of men more sensibly,Iob 7.20. This (...) the preserver of men. The acknowledgment of Saints more especially, (...) helpe standeth in the Name of the LORD. This word leads us to a cons^deration of his Power; He can deliver us, and none but He. Lord: his Almightinesse was the first Name He would be knowne by to the world, Exod 6.3. Not that Iehovah was not in some manner formerly knowne: for Gen. 15. and 26.24. But as if he made this difference: Then I gave promises what I would doe, now I come to performe the promises: with God Almighty, which signifies my Majesty; I will shew my selfe Iehovah, the God of Abraham, which shall demonstrate my mercie. Subjiciuntur omnes potestates Potestati Infinitae. The Lord. his Soveraignty is a point that comes not often to be handled, therefore here I take leave to
 enlarge my selfe. It may bee considered in seven respects.
1 It is undependant: many things are said to governe, but they have some ^ependance on their superiours.Hos. 2.21. Our life is beholding to the fruites, the fruites ^o the trees, the trees to the earth, the earth to the raine, the raine to the Sunne, ^he Sunne and all to the Lord: Natura Naturanti, machina Creatori. Fruites are ^om trees, and trees from seeds; both moistned by the aire, and matured by the ^unne: element is qualified by element, orbe depends on orbe, the Sunne it selfe ^n Primum mobile: Astra regunt homines, sed Deus astra: we can goe no higher. The child lookes up to his father, his father lives by the peace of the countrey, the ^ountrey could have no peace but by the Magistrate, the Magistrate is countenan^ed and warranted by the King, the King is ruled by God. Still one lookes upon ^nother, but the eyes of all things looke up unto thee, O Lord.
2 It is absolute; hee may dispose of his Subjects at his pleasure. As the ^otter having the lumpe in his hand, makes what kinde of vessell he listeth; ^reat or small, round or square, for the Parlor, or for the Stable: and when ^ee hath done, hee may set it on his cupboord, or on the dunghill: bee it to ^onour or dishonour, hee will be honoured by it. Man respects deserts or de^erits, in making the poore rich, or the rich poore; in ennobling the base, or de^asing the noble: God doth all according to his owne will without further relati^n.Mat. 20.15. Is it not lawfull for me to doe what I will with mine owne? He can make Tabor ^ little heaven, and turne Paradise into a desart. It is absolute, without controll: ^here is none to call him to account or examination; with Cur ita facis? O Lord, (...) was not therefore thy doing because it was good, but therefore is it good be^ause it was thy doing. Whether thy mercy saveth us, we have cause to be thank^^ll: or thy justice confoundeth us, we have no cause to complaine: still Thou conti^uest holy, O thou worship of Israel.
3 His Lordship is universall. First, overall times; other Lords die; Domi^i terrae, but terra Domini: he is eternall. Eternity is properly the duration of an ^ncreat^d Ens. It is improperly taken, either for things that have both beginning ^nd end, as Colles aeterni, terra aeterna, everlasting mountaines; diverse such phra^es in Scripture. Or for things that have a beginning but shall have no end: so are ^ngels, and mens soules eternall; so, eternall life, eternall fire. But God cals ^imselfe,Exod. 3.14. I AM: I am what I have beene, I have beene what I am, I am and ^ave beene what I shall be. This Attribute is incommunicable: all other things ^ad a Non esse preceeding their Esse; and they have a mutation tending to nothing. They shall be as nothing that warre against thee:Esa. 41.12. all come to nothing unlesse they ^e upheld by the manutenency of God: butPsa. 102.27 Thou art the same, and thy yeares shall ^ave no end. Thou turnest man to destruction, and againe sayest, Returne: even from everlasting to everlasting thou art God:Psa. 90.2. the sole Vmpire and Measurer of beginning and ending. Secondly, over all places, heaven, earth, hell. Psal. 135.6. Kings are limited, and cannot doe many things they desire: they cannot command the Sun to stand still, nor the winde to blow which way they would: in the ^ofty aire, in the depth of the sea, no King raignes. They fondly flatter the Pope with his long armes, that they reach to purgatory; (but indeed both power and ^lace are alike imaginary,) it is CHRIST alone that hath the keyes of all places. ^hirdly, over all creatures; binding the influences of Plejades,Iob. 38.31. 2 Kin. 1.12. Amos 5.8. Dan. 3.25. Psa. 148.8. Iob 38.8. Iob. 43.2. and loosing the ^onds of Orion: commanding the fire against the nature of it, to descend: creating ^nd ruling the starres, over-ruling the Lions, sending the meteors, hedging in the ^eas, lapping it up like a child in swadling clouts, dividing, diverting, filling it. In ^oth fire and water, these two raging elements that have no mercy, he shewes mer^y: delivers us from both in both. He cals the fowles, and they come: the beasts ^nd they heare: the trees, and they spring to obey him. He hath a Raven for Elias, (...) gourd for Ionas, a dogge for Lazarus. Makes the Leviathan, the hugest living creature, preserve his Prophet. That a terrible Lion should be killed, as was by
 Sampson; or not kill as they forbore Daniel; or kill and not eate, as that Prophet, 1 Kings 13. Here was the Lord. Over metals, he makes Iron to swimme, sto^^s to cleave a sunder. Over the divels, they must obey him though animo resiste^di. But they continually rebell against him, and breake his will? They doe indeed against his complacency, not against his permission: Et quando permittit, non ^^lens sed volens permittit.August. There is then no time, not the houre of death: no place, not the sorest torment; no creature, not the divell: but the Lord can deliver us from them. Therefore at all times, in all places, and against all creatures, let ^s trust in him for deliverance.
4 It is necessary; we could not live but by his dominion. Take away government, we are worse than beasts; a bad King is better than no King. If man rule (...) he over-rules all:Eccl. 5.8. Higher than the highest. Above all, to support: the Pillar and the foundation of the pillars and foundations of the world. Above all to correct, binding Kings in chaines: if authority grow warped, to straiten it with his justice. Above all, to direct, he directs naturall government to naturall good; that the Elements be not at war, but working in a well disposed harmony for our benefit: that one doth not swallow up another, nor the stronger oppresse the weaker; it is the Lords doing. As he made nature with his Fiat, so he sets it a working wi^h his Faciat: let it so be, let it so worke. He directs politick government to politick good, that we might live like men in a civill peace. Supernaturall government to salvation, that we may live like Christians in a gracious obedience and comfort. This power was necessary for creation; he must be an Almighty Lord that could make us of nothing. It is necessary for preservation, to conserve things in their being and working. Necessary for redemption; it must be an infinite sto^e, that must pay an infinite debt. If the Lord had not become a servant on earth, those servants could never have beene Lords in heaven. All the parts of a Common-wealth, ought to uphold one another in policy: all the members of the Church to uphold one another in charity: as in a building one stone doth bea^e up another, but the foundation beares up all. The members uphold the body, the body the members: the Subjects uphold the King, the King upholds the Subjects: but Thou O Lord, upholdest us all.
5 It is immutable; whatsoever the Lord is, he is Simul and Semel. With ^s one thing doth exclude another, this moment thrusts out that; learning excludes ignorance, riches poverty; the businesse of this houre gives place to the next. Be^ Gods Essence and perfections are together: Aeternitas Dei; Essentia Dei est. As he is eternall, absque Origine, so invariable absque Mutatione: We are not prese^^ to things past or to come: God is to all times and things, past, present, or (...); ever present. The reason is, he is Immense, and fils all places without mo^i^^, without ascent, or descent. Indeed he is sometime said to d descend; but it is because he then doth some new worke; men tooke no notice of his presence before This Lordship hath no succession, yet he produceth workes successively: Eg^f^cio, and Ego faciam. But this is not in regard of himselfe, but in respect of us, that he is said to doe one thing after another. He doth not now create the world, not now destroy it, nor now call Abraham out of Vr: nor is Isaac redeemed from sacrifice, and Christ sacrificed, in the same place or at the same time. The type (...) properly goe before the antitype. It is false then to say that men were justified before they were borne: they are elected before all time, but called and justified in time: these things are done successively. With the Lord there is order, though there be no time. If I come to a Pillar with my left side toward it, it is then on my left side: if I come with my right side toward it, then is it on my right side: yet is the pillar it selfe unmoveable. Omnis mutabilitas quaedam mors, saith the Schoole if God could change, he could dye. Now change is either substantiall, or qualitative: but Gods substance cannot be changed, and he hath no qualities. Againe, it is either amissive, or perfective: no man changes but he is either the better or the
 worse by it: God is the fountaine of life, nothing can be added to him, for he is ^nite: nothing derogated from him, for he is the Lord Almighty. In his will, his purpose, in his joy, in his Iustice, in his mercie, in all unchangeable. How is then said to repent? Not that he doth repent, but appeares to us in the alterati^ of his work, as one repenting. There may be change in the worke, there is none ^he worke-man. Ad novum opus consilium non novum, sed aeternum: mutat rem,Greg. non ^ilium. The unchangeable decree of God disposeth the change of all things, ^ man that builds a house, hath an Idea in his head whereby he purposes to frame ^he decrees how to order this part, to erect that corner, here to build a partition, ^re a chimney, to set up a scaffold, and pull it downe againe: here is a varietie (...) change of the worke, the worker is still the same. What God once is, he is ^ ever: once just, ever just: once mercifull, ever mercifull.
6 It is incomprehensible, who ever saw God in his strength, and lived? This ^rd is in himselfe Invisible, as indivisible: seene in his mighty workes, never to (...) seene in his Person.1 Cor. 13.12. But we shall see him face to face? Not the deitie it selfe, as (...) Anthropomorphites dreamed: not a light only resulting from him, as was the ^or of the Armenians. But by face to face, is meant the cleare knowledge of ^ understanding: and we shall know him, not with comprehensive knowledge, ^ with Scientia adaequata, as he is cognoscible, for he is incomprehensible. So are ^se places to be understood, Hebr. 12.15. 1 Ioh. 3.2. Revel. 22.4. The intel^uall vision is not of his Essence, but of some worke represented. And that of ^uel, Chap. 7.9. was but a dreame or vision upon his bed; some divine and su^naturall revelation. But did not Iohn BaptistMatth. 3 16 see the Holy Ghost? No, not the ^vine nature, but the Dove. But doth not Iob assure himselfe ofIob 19.26. Seeing God? ^t GOD himselfe, but his Redeemer, God in the vaile of the flesh: IESUS ^ll be throughly and joyfully looked upon: but the deitie shall not be seene here^er with the bodily eyes.
Nothing can apprehend that which is out of the limits; but we are finite, and ^d is immense. Every thing that is seene, must be seene in some place; but God (...) no place. Our body indeed shall bee spirituall, not needing meat, nor sleepe, (...) breathing by aire: yet it is not capable of comprehending that infinite Spirit. ^re we understand him after the measure and capacitie of man, in a humane re^blance; as if hee had feet, eyes, affections: because they that should know him, ^e such. But when we read of Gods Foot, let us thinke of his comming, as a ^n removes by his feet. When wee read of his eyes, consider his knowledge of (...) things, as a man sees all by that Organ of sense. So when we are said to see his ^e, conceive our knowledge of him to be meant. He that made the eare, shall he (...) heare? he doth not say, Hath he not an eare? but, shall he not heare? TheM^tth 5.8. Pure (...) heart are promised to see God: but as that purenesse is in heart, so is that vision (...) heart. Wee say, I see a mans wisedome, see his valour, see his meaning; yet (...) not these visible* so nor this Lord but by his effects, what his power worketh. ^us farre in heaven we shall exceed in knowledge: here we know him only by ^gatives, what he is not; that not mortall, not mutable: and by his workes; ^he Lord is knowen by his Iudgements; and vacate and videte,Psal. 46.10. Be still,Ps^l. 9.16. and know that (...) God: you that are absent, come and see: you that are present, stand still and ^ntemplate: see and know, know and confesse, confesse and apply, make use of ^at you see and know. What's that? I am God, you are but men: Put them in ^de, O Lord, that they are but men; wormes, vanitie, nothing. But Ego Deus, not ^opular, titular, idle, abject God, like the gods of the Gentiles, not able to wipe (...) dust off their owne faces: but a God that makes gods, a God that marres gods; ^t hath a dominion above all dominion, above all comprehension. LORD, ^e cannot comprehend thee in thy Majestie, doe thou comprehend us in thy ^rcie.
7 It is Glorious and blessed: he is the chiefest good, and he enjoyes himselfe,
 therefore is perfectly and infinitely blessed. Our blessednesse consists in enjoying him, his, not enjoying us, but himselfe. The Hebrew speakes of Blessednesse in the plurall, Beatitudines: as the latines call wealth, Divitiae, Opes: because ^a^y things concurre, as to make up a rich man, so to make one blessed. There is (...) them both, Objectiva pars; as gold, silver, lands, houses be the materialls of ^^ches. And Formalis pars, the free and certaine possession of these things; for if they may be gone, a man is poore in possibilitie; when they are gone, he is po^^ ^^deed. Mans blessednesse is from another, the Lords is from himselfe: m^^ (...) grace, Gods in nature: mans temporall, Gods Eternall: mans voluntary, Go^^ necessary, it cannot be otherwise: mans changeable, Gods alwayes the same. The greatest and statelyest monarch puts off his glory and robes at some times; (...) when he goes into the Bath, the bed, the grave. He carries no Scepter in the (...) yet may he then have a Crowne on his head: he hath neither scepter nor Cro^^e in his bed, yet even then he is knowen a King by his attending guard: but in (...) grave he leaves off all. Now Gods glory is never left off, there is no interu^^^on of his blessednesse, not a moment wherein he is lesse happie.
His blessednesse is Internall or externall. Internall consists. 1. In the c^^templation of his owne sufficiencie: thus he saw all to be very good which he (...) and tooke pleasure in his owne wisedome that made them. 2. In the compre^^^sion of all happinesse; for it is nothing to be blessed, and not to understand it: ^^ny were faelices, bona si sua norint: Gods omniscience is his blessednesse. 3. (...) the delectation taken in this comprehension, when he knowes there is nothing (...) offend him: whereas Kings may be free from danger, not from feare. 4. (...) contentation taken in this delight; having all things so fully in himselfe, th^^ (...) needs no addition. Many men think not themselves happy in the much they ha^^, because they want some thing they would have: but there is nothing more (...) God to desire. He comtemplates his owne goodnesse, and rests in himselfe (...) a sweet complacencie,Psal. 148. Rom. 9.5. as the infinite fountaine of all blessednesse. Externall blessednesse is that he receives from the creatures, every one, sensible and insensible, especially, Angels and men. He is blessed in himselfe, yet he will also be blesse^ (...) us. We can adde nothing to him, nor may we take his due honour from him. H^ lookes for praises for electing us, creating us, etc. We discourse our blessings (...) an annuall commemoration, rejoyce and solace our selves in them; but still let (...) reflect all by praises to our Maker. A King will take a present of a beggar, (...) by this occasion he may (not enrich himselfe, but) reward the poore man. G^^ needs not this outward clothing, yet he is pleased to weare it for our sakes. 1 C^^. 1.3. Blessed be God, etc.
Nazian.Thus far I thought good to meditate on the ineffable Majestie of God. It is (...) possible to drinke up all the sea, to sucke in all the aire, much lesse to compreh^^ God. When a man considers himselfe in relation to the reasonlesse creatures; (...) the beasts doe him homage, the earth yields him her fruites and metalls, the^^ brings him in merchandise, the aire provides breath for his nostrills, and (...) for his table, the Sun misseth not his houre to enlighten him; he may then th^^ himselfe something:Bern. but when he considers the Lord, he is swallowed up, (...) thinkes himselfe nothing. Now though a man cannot drinke up all the river, y^^ he may tast it: though not spanne the Sun, yet looke upon his beames: though (...) cannot take in all the aire, yet enough to fill us. Let us get enough of this L^^^ fill our hearts, we need no more. When a man thrusts his hand into the fire, it burnes him: when he comes but neare it, it warmes him: let us come with a purpose to partake,Aug. not to comprehend the Lord. Origen on Levitic. The two daies offering are the two Testaments; these eate and feed upon: what is reserved for the third day, is for the world to come; it will fire us to search that. Not is th^^ point barren, but hath the comfortable use, and that even appliable to our p^^pose. Doctrine being like the Sun, not only to delight us with the contemplatio^, but also to warme and quicken our affections.

This Lord being the Supreme, and all other Powers subordinate to him, and  dependant on him, let this encourage our faith to trust him with our deliverance. (...) Trouble not your selves with your enemies, nor yet say Manus nostra excelsa,Exod. 14.13. our owne hand shall deliver us: Kings are men of might, yet but men of dust: without this Lord their power cannot save themselves, much lesse us. Angels are mighty, but cannot come unlesse this Lord send them;Mat. 26.53. I could aske my Father, ^d he would give me Legions of Angels; saith Christ: we must aske our Father, or ^ot have one Angell to doe us good. He shall look his eyes out, that trusts to any other deliverer than the Lord.
His Dominion being so absolute, let men cease to rebell against it.Psa. 46.10. I will bee  ^xalted, not only in my Israel; but in Gentibus, among the nations: if they receive ^ne, volentibus, with their good contents: if they refuse me, Invitis, against their wils. And if there be any ground, whose lines are extended farther than people ^nd nations inhabite, there also will I be exalted, in universa terra. We feare Kings ^nd take their wrathfull lookes as messengers of death; and we doe well toRom. 13.7. Iob 13.23. Give feare, to whom feare belongs. But here is a Power we cannot resist, a Wisdome we cannot delude, a Iustice we cannot corrupt. Locks, and stocks, and trebble bar^ed doores, a darke dungeon, and a cruell Gaoler, all cannot keep them in,Acts 16.26. whom ^his Lord will deliver. His power shall shake the foundations of the earth, that earth-quake the foundations of the Prison, that trembling (as in the body) dis^oynt and unfasten the doores, and loose all their bands. There is no knot but he can untie it; let us at once feare and trust him.
This being universall over all times; the God of Abraham, and of his seed;  Heb. 13.8. Iesus Christ yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever; the God of our fathers that were, of our selves that are, of our posterity that shall be, then our enemies shall never finde time, wherein he shall not find meanes to deliver us. Over all places, Coelum and terram impleo,Psa. 139. whither shall we goe from his presence? Whither? That place was never yet discovered. He is present even to those that shun his presence; that say to him, Depart from us: how much more to us? Dominus nobiscum; yea he is not onely with us, but for us; Nobiscum and pro nobis: Immanuel, God in our nature, God in our flesh.Psa. 46.11. The Lord of hosts is with us, the God of Iacob is our refuge. Dominus virtutum, there's his power: Refugium nostrum, there's his favour. The Load of Hosts, strong: the God of Iacob, sweet. The one Virium, the other Voluntatis: the one Roboris, the other Foederis: one of puissance, another of promise.Exo. 34.6. The Lord, the Lord; whatsoever belongs to Power, Majesty, Governance: mercifull, what ever belongs to election, dilection, compassion, covenant, sacrament: both together a just aequilibrium betweene greatnesse and grace; a faire and sweet harmony. Over all creatures; as heaven is his throne, the earth his foot-stoole, and the sea his wash-pot; so all creatures in them are at his beck; none can say, Ego solus aufugi, I have escaped. He can make the very flies and insects, those scornes of nature, executioners of his vengeance. Over us, in a gracious and speciall maner; which affords us a challenge and defiance against all adversary forces: we feare not armies of men, legions of devils, nor the gates of hell: Dominus Deus noster, The Lord is our God: which are not onely voces charitatis, comprehending in a community all christians; but voces fidei, when we take this great Lord for our proper and peculiar God. That he can deliver us, this we presume: that he will deliver us, this we assume: from that principle or Thesis, we derive this Hypothis, and appropriate it to our selves. Therefore we say not onely with the Leper;Mat. 8.2. Lord, if thou wilt, thou canst make me cleane: but we know thou canst, and we beleeve thou wilt, and we beseech thee to doe it.
The necessarinesse of this Lordship gives us experience, experience confidence,  and confidence will bring deliverance. How easily would the thunder strik us dead, the sea breake in upon us, theeves spoile us, the whelpes of Rome worry us, the fiends of hell ruine us; but that our Lord sits in the chaire of omnipotency
 and protects us: Many are the dangers which we see and feare; innumerable those, we neither see nor feare: therefore to take away all attribution to our selves, even when we know not,Psal. 104.24. the Lord delivers us. How manifold are thy workes O Lord* How manifold, if we saile in the maine Ocean, and put not into some arme or cree^ we never finde an end.August. But that Consuetudinis perseverantia amisit admiratio^^: we wonder not because they are common. Abundantia contumeliosa in seme^^psam:Tertul. of fulnesse comes loathing. It is not magnitudo, but novitas; that drawes our eyes and observations. But he that considers his owne weakenesse and impotence; how he was made in the wombe, and knew it not; taken from the wombe and not able to helpe himselfe: that God must now give him his daily bread to feed him, his daily breath to quicken him, or he perishes: or that considers the power of his enemies, with the implacable fury of their malice, the bloud-hounds of hell: and yet that he is delivered; must confesse, A Domino, factum est, This is the Lords doing. That Sisera should fal by a woman, Pharaohs host sinke like stones into the bottome of the sea, an invincible Navy perish by a few rotten ships on fire:Psa. 107.8. O that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodnesse, and for his wonderful workes to the children of men: that our childrens children to the last period of any generation in this Iland may say, O God we have heard with our eares, our Fathers and Grand-fathers have declared to us, that noble worke of thy deliverance.
The immutability of it gives us further cause to trust in him. Laban may  love Iacob well, but his countenance will change upon him: Amnon will hate Th^mar more than ever he loved her: Pharaohs Officer forgets Ioseph when his tu^^e is served: there is no constancy in man, but Ego Iehovah non mutor, I the L^^d change not. The World changeth, the Vines cast off her grapes, the tired ea^th growes dull in encrease, mans stature is lessened, his length of life lesse than th^^, his honesty little or nothing at all: the sea encroacheth upon the land, Springs lock like Autumnes: States change, policies change, governments change, all the materials of nature change: we see it, we need not preach it: it is matter of fight ^o^ of faith. Every mans mouth is full of this complaint. The world is fickle: wh^^soever is delectable, vanisheth like smoke; Nocturnum somnium. That medici^e helpes to day,August. which doth not to morrow: God is alwayes helpefull. That ^^ceit helpes one which helps not another; God helpes all. The hoarder adores his money; yet is his wealth but like an Inheritance on Salisbury plaine; he may robbe many Passengers for a time, at last some body will rob him. Set not your heart o^ riches, lest you be driven to say, as Laban to Rachel, Thou hast stollen away my he^. And when they are gone, Plus cruciant amissa, quam delectant possessa. Contra^^ly, Gods love encreaseth;August. though not formaliter, in it selfe, yet effective, to us. Frie^^s are mutable, Paul had many adherents, yet at last complaines,2 Tim. 4.16. No man stood (...) me, but all forsooke me. Indeed Alexander opposed his words: some withstood h^^ but none stood with him. Yet then he finds this Lord to stand for him, he deliver^^ him.Ver. 17. Peace changeth into warre, discord thrusts out amity; but in God is const^^^ peace.Esa. 57.19. I create the fruits of the lips, peace, peace, etc. Where we find; 1. Certit^tnem, Paraohs dreame is doubled for the surenesse; 2. Magnitudinem, no peace (...) our reconciliation wth God, it is past all understanding. 3. Multitudinem all kinds of peace that may stand wth goodnes.2 Cor. 1.5. If sufferings abound for Christ, consolations (...) also: if the exuperance be in either scale, it is in the comforts. Ro. 8. we read of se^^^ enemies: and v. 38. of seven victories. And if there be any other obstacle, from the height of heaven to the depth and bottome of hell: or further malignity in a^y creature, it shall be removed. Whom God loves he loves to the end: and if he have once given us an earnest of his favour, we shall be sure of the whole bargaine.
The incomprehensiblenesse of this power, so far transcending angustias h^^^ni cordis, and yet so visible to the eye in the great and wondrous effects; may wel further shew us where our deliverance lies. Howsoever the noblest demonstration of things be from their causes and principles; yet the nearest to us ward, a^d
 most apprehensible is from the effects and performances. At Senacheribs army Iudah hung downe the head, rent her clothes, and hid her face; nothing was left her, but Lord bow down thine eare and heare, open thine eye and consider: yet in this extremitie they found the Lord a Deliverer: an Angell slew in one night 185000 of them. Here was an invisible hand, but a mighty one: a power not comprehensible, yet discerned in the worke. If any object, We see not our signes, not one finger of this hand appeares: we are in distresse, and the Lord hath thrust his working arme into his bosome, buried his mercies in forgetfulnesse: yea hee does that which seemes contrary to his workes of favour; not diversa, sed adversa, which the Prophet calls Opera peregrina,Esa. 28.21. strange and unproper workes, almost aliene from his nature, troubling his owne people; that the very wicked insult, Where is now their God? yet even then is an invisible hand working for us; and when the Devills conspiracie is come to the birth, it shall be abortive, or strangled in the wombe; the God of our salvation will deliver us.
It is blessed, and that which blesseth us, and all things to us: the Sun doth not  so necessarily lighten the aire, as God doth blesse them his favour is pleased to shine upon. CHRIST is his principally Blessed Sonne. Matth. 26.23. Sonne of God. Mark. 14.61. Son of the blessed. This blessednesse comes downe from him to the rest of his children: all blessings come from God, but by the hand of man, even that man of God, and hand of his Father; Christ. That bread should not choake, rather than nourish; it is blessing. That garments, which are cold of themselves, should keepe us warme: but especially, that we perish not in our sins, that we are delivered from the power of death, and pawes of the Dragon; this is his extraordinary blessing. Blessednesse is every mans desire; now he that hath God, hath blessednesse: whosoever hath the Sun, hath the light of the Sunne; he cannot want water, that hath the fountaine. Saint Augustine hath the story of a histrionicall Mounte-banke, that to get spectators, and money by them, promised to tell them the next day what they all most desired. The Theater being full of people, and their minds full of expectation; what was the Device? Vili vultis emere, and chare vendere: you would all buy cheape and sell deere. But this holds not; for the good man in a famine will buy corne deere, and sell it to the poore cheape. And on the other side, the unthrift will sell his inheritance cheape, to buy vanities deere: therefore he failed of his promise. But if he had told them, Beati vultis esse, you would all be happy, this had beene a full satisfaction. Let us cleave to this blessed God, and he will deliver us from sin and hell, which is blessednesse begun; and bring us to salvation and heaven, which is blessednesse perfect and consummate.
Let this teach us to blesse him, that blesseth us. A man drinkes of a river, he addes nothing to it, but takes something from it: when we offer to God our praises, we give him nothing, we receive something from him. Psal. 116.13. It is but thankes we give, but we take the cup of salvation. We send up praises, as a man throwes up flowers, that fall downe backe upon his own head: so the showers of our free-will offerings fall downe upon our selves in showers of mercies.
Let it also invite us to love him, as being most blessed and lovely. Looke what foundation there is in any other, why thou shouldst love, feare, serve, honour them all these are a thousand times more in God. Thy Prince hath honour, thy father reverence, thy Master service, thy wife love: all these are due to God in a transcendent measure. He that is thy King, is but Gods servant; and spiritually we are all kings, in Christ: and when all the confederate kings of the earth cannot deliver thee this Lord can save thee. Thou lovest thy countrey, it is well: thy countrey gave thee not being and life: to displease God is the way to make thine own countrey spew thee out. If therfore Curtius in a vain-glorious love to his countrey, threw himselfe into the gulfe, because the oracle said, whom the people loved best, he must be cast in to stop it. How are we bound to love God even above our own lives, that hath preserved us here, and provided a better countrey for us hereafter! Thou reverencest thy father, thou doest well;

nature it selfe would rebuke the contrary. But if such awe be to the father of thy flesh, what humble reverence is due to the Infuser of thy soule, the father of thy father and of all mankind? Thou servest thy master, well done: that God which alwayes commands, not seldome commends this obedience. But if a Masters reward be such an encouragement, what is it to heare from heaven, Well done good servant? Thy wife hath thy heart, it is fit, you are one flesh: but be not so uxorious to thy wife, as to be injurious to thy husband, Christ. Of all places, remember Salomon, and let not thy wife have Gods place. The love of a brother is great, of a friend greater, of a wife above that: but the love of God must be above all.Matth. 8.22. Let the dead bury their dead, follow thou me: forsake thy father living, much more dead, to follow CHRIST. If the wife of thy bosome alienate thy affection from him, she is a Traitor to thee and to him. Now if lust or profit comes in competition with God, examine thy conscience, which preferrest thou? Gold many goe to the Devill for, yetPsal. 119.72. Thy Law is better to me, than thousands of gold or silver. How many of all these things do postponere curam, make it their last and least care! many mens shooe-tyes cost them more in a yeare than God and their soules: so unmindfull are we of thee, O Lord!
The Lord knoweth how.] I have held you long in this point of deliverance, and you say it is high time to deliver you from it: one circumstance more, and you have your wish. This last concernes the wisedome of God: it is enough that he promises deliverance, he keeps the Quomodo to himselfe. It is set down indefinitely: no man, no Apostle, no Angell, can know all the meanes of Gods delivering his: it is enough, Novit ipse, himselfe knowes. This gives a checke to all sawcy Inquirers, that will not beleeve helpe from the Lord, unlesse he tells them How. It hath ever beene the foolish ambition of man, to be most prying into concealed things: desiring to know what he is forbidden, and slighting that he is charged to learne. It was not the thirst of gold, that was the fall of mankind; the earth and all her metalls were his: not of honour, he had soveraigntie over all the creatures: not of pleasure, he wanted none: Satan had another baite, a forbidden knowledge. How Divine a thing is knowledge, whereof even Innocencie it selfe was ambitious! Adam looked for speculative knowledge, he should have looked for experimentall. Hee thought it had beene good to know evill, whereas good was ample enough to have made up his perfect knowledge and blessednesse. He that knew all other things, knew not this one thing, that he knew enough. All that God made was good, the Maker being much more good: they good in their kinds, he good in himselfe. Adam knew the Creator, and his creatures, yet this could not content him: he would know that God never made, evill; evill of sinne, evill of death: both which himselfe made by desiring to know them. Ever since, we know evill too well, and smart with knowing it: how deare hath this lesson cost us, that it is safe to be ignorant, where God hath not bid us know. Yet still are we transported with this sawcy appetite of our Grandmother, and run our selves a ground with the curious affectation of forbidden knowledge. For the things revealed, Lord give us a sober knowledge for the things concealed, give us a contented ignorance. There is more manifested than we can know, enough to make us happy by knowing. Deliverance we looke for: how or when the Lord will deliver thee or me, that is in his owne bosome, and the brest of his privy Councell, Iesus Christ.
The Lord knoweth how.] As there is nothing unpossible to his might, so there is nothing concealeable from his understanding. Gods wisdome and providence is like the eye of a well-drawne Picture; that lookes upon all and every one, as if every one were all. Take an eye and draw never so many lines from it, it sees all alike, and at once: the Center is present to every point of the circumference. This is a threefold comfort to us.
1 He knowes our tentations before they be upon us: he sees the preparing of
 the potion, weighes the ingredients to a scruple, qualifies the malignity of th^ purgatives with sweet consolations. Satan, that bloudy Apothecary, mindes nothing but the drugs and dregs of poison; but God puts in an Antidote that he knowes not of: he meanes to doe hurt, but the Lord knowes how to convert it to good. Thus tota miseria Christiani est dolor medicinalis, non sententia poenalis.August. Now he that lookes to our affliction, will looke to our extrication. ^e would never suff^r Satan to assault us, but that he knowes how to deliver us. It Pharaoh had kept himselfe at home, Gods honour had not bin so great at the red Sea: he knowes as well how to get himselfe honour of Satan, as he did of Pharaoh.
He knowes them when they be upon us.Exod. 2.25. The Lord looked downe upon the affliction of Israel: Pharaoh plagues them, he sees it, and therefore plagues Pharaoh.Psal. 31.7. Thou hast considered my trouble, thou hast knowne my soule in adversities. Now he that knowes the soule in adversity, knowes how to deliver it out of adversity. Videat Dominus, sayes dying Zechariah;2 Chr. 24.22. The Lord looke upon it: yes, hee did see it. The wronged childe hopes to relieve himselfe, by making moane to his father. The Eagle, though she flies aloft, hath still an eye to her young ones: if any danger approach, she swiftly stoopes to defend them.Plin. Thus Christ in heaven hath an eye to his darlings on earth: if any Saul be riding with a bloudy Commission against them; downe he comes from his Emperiall throne to their rescue. Why doest thou persecute Mee? Me; dost thinke Saul, that Christians have no Patrons upon ea^th.
3 He knowes how to rid them from us: they are often so perplexfull and intricate, that neither we see, nor the world sees, nor reason apprehends how, yet the Lord knoweth. Aegypt afflicts Israel through many degrees: Pharaoh suspects them for purpose of revolting, imposeth on them heavy burthens: still God looks on, and lets him alone. To the name of strangers is added the name of slaves: Israel had gathered some rust in Aegypt, and now must be scoured: it is well they bore their burdens, who else had borne the burden of God. When like Palme trees, they flourish with their burdens; Midwives are suborned to destroy their male children; and they whose office is to helpe the birth, must murther it. Still the Lord knowes, and holds his peace. From burthens they proceed to bondage, and from bondage to bloud; from vexation of their bodies, to destruction of the fruit of their bodies. If the Midwives refuse, the multitude shall doe it: cruelty had but smoked before, now it flames up. It is rare tyranny that findes no villany for an executioner. Lastly, impossible labours are laid upon them, the Tyrant requires taskes not faisible: they could neither make straw, nor finde it, yet they must have it. Doe what may be, is tolerable: but doe what cannot be, is cruell. Yet thus doth Pharaoh pick a quarrell to punish: and if they doe it not, they are beaten. Now God begins to looke downe, and spight of all he delivers his people. No armes shall keepe them longer in Aegypt, no armies shall hurt them out of Aegypt. Pharaoh or the sea lookes for their conque^t: to scape is beyond all hope, all thought: yet both shall be disappointed; The Lord knew how to doe it. So that they did not cry so loud before, as now they sin: not faith, but sense teacheth them to magnifie that God after their deliverance, which they scarce trusted for their deliverance.
The Antichristian enemies of Gods Church and truth, after the infatuation of so many trecherous conspiracies, found out at the last a speeding one: such as in so many thousand yeeres, from the fall of the reprobate angels, never came into the head of any divell, to put into the head of any man* or if the head could devise it, yet to find a heart to receive it, or a hand to act it, would have beene thought impossible. But decreed it was in the Senate of Rome, in the bosome of that man of sinne, who turnes the keyes of the Kingdome of Heaven, into the keyes of the Kingdomes of the Earth. Advised by that family of malice, who of all the world, Soli inventi sunt dogmatizare mendacium; as Augustine said of the
 Priscillianists. Thus far God lets them alone. Executioners must be found, there must be hands as well as heads; Vlisses may contrive, Diomedes must thorow with it. Still the Lord saies nothing: their secrecy makes them confident, dejerated with a trebble bond of counsell-keeping; Religion, Oath, Sacrament: You shall sweare by the blessed Trinity, and holy Sacrament, not to reveale it: thus they eate their God upon a bargaine of bloud. Still the Lord is silent. They build the foundation of their designe under the foundation of the Parliament house; Insidiantur in abscondito, and say to the ground, cover us: they trust not the aire, but lay up their treason in a^ subterraneous vault, with great improbity of labour. Who should discover those Penetralia mortis? Those inward chambers of death: Yes, the Lord knowes how. Their catholick doomesday is now at hand, and their wants nothing but a hand to act it: they say of our soules, there is no helpe for them in their God. Then was Gods time and hint, and in a Parable, by a Miracle, we are delivered. Their stratagem is defeated, their dungeon and hell of secrecy opened, the deeper hell of their hearts eviscerated, their vault of most barbarous villany ransacked, to convince them and all the world, that novit Dominus, the Lord knowes how to deliver his. Alas, we were like men that dreamt, nay we dreamt not of this: the noise of mill-stones, light of candles, bread and wine, bride and bridegroome, were our song: the plot of ruine came not within the reach of our thoughts. Blessed be that God who onely delivered us.
Thus he can deliver with equall meanes, with small meanes, with no meanes. Novit Dominus, he can tell how. Midian comes against Israel; they like the sand by the Sea, covered all the Valley: the Israelites were two and thirty thousand strong. They thinke we are too few: God sayes, the people are too many. They say, the Midianites are too many for us: God replies, you are too many for them. Indeed, if Israel had expected the victory from their owne fingers, they had bin too weake for Midian: but seeing God will give the conquest, and have the glory; they are too strong. Where humane strength is opposed, there needs an equality: but now God will fight, and he knowes how to doe it with a few, with none, as well as with many. His care is not how to get the victory, but how to preserve the glory of it gotten. Therefore he chuseth to save by few, that all the honour may redound to himselfe. So jealous is he of his glory, that though he give deliverance to Israel, yet the praise of the deliverance he will keepe to himselfe. Therefore he shortens their meanes, that they may not shorten his mercies. Now if he will not allow lawfull meanes to darken his honour, how untolerable is unlawfull meanes? He that remembers the yeare eighty eight; (and what true English spirit can forget it, or forbeare to report it to his children?) An invincible Navy, an implacable fury, furnished with instruments of murther and torture, confident of our utter desolation: and considers how they were all desolated, and we delivered, when no arme nor finger of flesh was for us: must needs confesse, that Novit Dominus, the Lord knowes how: he used no helpe in the delivery, let him have no partner in the glory. There is lesse danger in stealing any thing from him, than his honour. If men steale the Princes tribute, or clip his coine, he may pardon it: but not if they goe about to rob him of his Crowne. No, but still let him be praised, both in our chambers at home, and abroad in our Churches, for our time, and throughout all the generations of our childrens children after us, till Christ appeare in the cloudes; and then in the Kingdome of Heaven for ever and ever, Amen.
And to reserve the unjust unto the day of judgement to be punished.] We have seene how the godly speed, now let us marke the end of their persecutors. The wicked keepe such a noise in the world, that a poore mans tale can no more bee heard, than the humming of a Bee in a clap of thunder. So head-strong and uncontrouleable is the precipice of sin, that when the righteous would withstand it, they are borne downe by it. Virtutibus semper contradicitur. The Church should
 never finde so many stratagems directed ex professo against her, but that she takes a course which the world dislikes.In Ezek. Hom. 9. Perversorum derogatio, vitae nostrae approbatio, Greg. In all ages, the rebuke of Christ, hath bin the religion of Christians. The reason is, our singularity and discent from their customes: which as it makes them hisse like serpents, because we trouble their nests: so like an Antiparistasis, it should inflame our zea^. We have read of Heathens that would shunne the popular current. Phocion had not suspected his speech, had not the people applauded it. Antisthenes mistrusted some ill in himselfe for the vulgar commendation. And shall we be brutishly driven with the drove? Or rather like nailes in a wheele, turne as we are turned, without either conscience of sin, or guidance of reason? If we live like them that are reserved to Iudgement, how should we thinke our selves not reserved with them? This is their time to persecute, ours to suffer: their time will come to suffer, ours to triumph. Let me rather feele their malice, than be wrapt up in their vengeance. Recusat esse de corpore, qui non vult mundi odium sustinere cum capite,Tract. in Ioh. 87. August. They are our corrosives, corrasives, used onely to pare off our excrements, and eate out our dead flesh by their tentations: but the patient is preserved, when the plaister is throwne into the fire.
Saint Ierome allegorically upon Ezech. 47.19. The possession begins at Thamer, and reacheth along to the waters of strife. Is there peace betweene Iosuah and Gibeon? then there is quarrell enough for the Amorites against Gibeon. The heires of heaven can expect no better at the hands of the children of this world. A larger booke might be written of the Apostles Sufferings, than that of their Acts. And had not the Divine power given them a miraculous successe, in the safe conduct of a Gospell, thorow a world of tentations; it might have been entitled in a bloudy Rubricke; The booke of the sufferings of the Apostles.1 Cor. 4.9. God hath set forth us the Apostles last, as it were appointed to death; Paul might well say: last, with an Emphasis: the former endured but the injuries of their owne countrey, the last, the malice of all the world; vying who should multiply the most disgraces upon them.Act. 28.22. Concerning this Sect, we know it is every where spoken against. They might well affirme it, that were the first authors of it. As Caesar wrote of those battels, Quibus non solum interfuit, sed and praefuit. But let us stand upon our guard,Tertull. Vrsin to Fernesius. keepe to the lists of our warfare, maintaine the fight wee have sworne in Baptisme me. Subtle arguments well answered, breed a cleare conclusion: our soules shall shine the brighter one day for this rubbing. Consider we two encouragements. First,Hebr. 12.3. Christ endured such contradiction of sinners: he is the commander and beholder of this combate: the Iudge and rewarder of this courage: the leader of the company, and conquerer of the enemie.Ioh. 16.33. Bee yee of good cheare, I have overcome the world. Next, their rage is but like their Generalls, sharpe but short; for a time: for they are reserved to the day of Iudgement to be punished.
The parts are foure, according to the proceeding of civill Iudicature: the malefactors; their binding over, the Assises, and the execution.
The
Malefactors; The unjust.Binding over; are reserved.Assises; To the day of Iudgement.Execution; To be punished.
The unjust.] This terme must be considered in a threefold relation. 1. As it is a want of that righteousnesse which the Law requires. 2. As a want of that righteousnesse which the Gospell accepts. 3. As it implies a habite of unrighteousnesse, such as both the Law and Gospell condemnes. Of all these a little.
1 For legall Iustice, how far short is the best man of it! God requires a perfect fulfilling of the Law, because he gave a perfect abilitie to doe it. If man would lose wilfully this sufficiencie, what fault is in God? Now the sonne that inherites his fathers goods, is bound to pay his fathers debts: we have our fathers goods, naturall endowments, etc. Therefore bound to answer for his sin: if so wee call
 originall sin, not ours but His. But howsoever our parents conveyed unto us originall sins, we our selves are the parents of actuals. All naturals are depraved, all supernaturals are deprived, by the first fall. Mans nature may be inclined to some morall vertues imperfect; as Truth, Iustice, temperance, chastitie: but not to supernaturall, as faith, hope, charitie, humility; these are quite out of natures orbe. So for that Iustice, which should give absolute obedience to GODS will, all men be unjust.
2 For Evangelicall Iustice, which is had by faith: this is a righteousnesse of Grace, to supply the defects of nature. We that had no righteousnesse of our owne, must be beholding to one that hath some to spare: such a one, as though he give never so much, hath never the lesse: an infinite and in exhaustible fountaine of goodnesse. Satan like a Chimicke, had extracted all the juyce and spirits of our grace: we have no way to enrich our bankerupt estate, but with the treasures of CHRIST. He was not not only our brother by taking our flesh upon him, but also our suretie by taking our debts upon him: not only naturam hominis, but formam servi.Psal. 69.4. Restituli quod nunquam abstui, may he well say; I paied that I never tooke. What man will give hisMic. 6.7. sonne for his sinne? Yet God did more: he gave his Son, for (not his owne, but) anothers sin. Mans sin was the cause of Christs death: Christs death the cause of mans life. He gave life to us, by giving his life for us. Had he bin meere man, this had done us no good; his Iustice had bin little enough for himselfe. But the Son of God suffered, not in Proprietate Natura, yet in Vnitate Personae; Personaliter: and so he merited.Zach. 13 7. The Sword of Iustice was awaked to be sheathed in our bowels; the Shepheard interposed himselfe to take the blow. By sin we are indebted to God more than we are worth; now Christ undertooke for us. In his Circumcision, he gave the earnest, set his hand to the Obligation, to pay the whole debt. God is the Creditor, he payed him, and sued out for his Church a Quietus est. Satan was the Gaoler, he payed him; death the executioner, he payd him too; though for their fees they parted his garments among them.Gen. 44.30. As Iacobs life was bound up in the life of Benjamin, without whom his gray haires would be brought to the earth in griefe. So our life is bound up in the life of IESVS, and if he be not with us, we shall dye with anguish, and goe to the grave in sorrow.
This is a second way to be just: the former we lost by sin, this we finde by faith: he that wanteth this is unjust and must perish. Now reprobates cannot have this justice, by reason they lack faith: as he that is blinde hath no benefit by the light. Indeed the world thinkes this an easie attainement; but is quite mistaken. A child cannot generate, nor a man regenerate himselfe: the latter is as possible as the former. Mans nature being whole, could not preserve it selfe: much lesse being broken, can it repaire it selfe. He that cannot keepe himselfe from death while he lives, will more impossibly restore and revive himselfe to life being dead. Faith is a rare gift, though there be many Christians: all thinke they have it; yet even CHRIST himselfe sayes, he shall scarce know where to finde it. How great a part of the world lies quite out of the orbe of faith! In Rome it is not they contest against it. In Courts it is rare, many live there rather by the favour of the Prince, than by the faith of God. In the Citie, the credit of faith is so weake, that it cannot be trusted without ready money. In the Countrey she is likeliest to be had; but the Tenant findes so little faith in the Land-lord, that he thinks it a needlesse vertue in himselfe. Among Lawyers there is just so much faith, as there is charity. Most men have so much, and so little, as to thinke they need no more. The professors of faith are like Gideons army, two and thirty thousand: but when the faithfull are separated, as those souldiers were mustered, there is but three hundred left. Lord, encrease our faith, and the number of the faithfull: that we who cannot be just in our selves, may be just in Iesus Christ.
3 There is a third kinde of Iustice; actuall, practicall; inseparably proceeding
 from the former: it is a sanctified conformity to the will of God. This justifies all them to the world, whom faith hath justified to the Lord. When in all our earthly businesse, we still carry a heavenly minde. When our faith to God, is seene in our faithfulnesse to men.Rev. 2.10. Be thou faithfull unto the death, and I will give thee the crowne of life. Continue in evangelicall faith, though you dye for it: continue in morall faithfulnesse, til you dye in it. There is a faith of the Law, Mat. 23.23. There is a faith of the Gospell, Mat. 25.23. Rom. 1.17. The one is fidelity in our promises, the other is confidence in the promises of God. If he covenant with us, I will be your God: we must restipulate, then will we rest upon thee. Thou shalt be my people; then we must be faithfull. Secundum fidem quam credimus, Deus fidelis nobis: secundum fidem qua credimus, nos fideles Deo. Both these together: for no man can deale faithfully with God legally, unlesse hee beleeve evangelically that God will deale faithfully with him. Want of legall faith oppugnat Dei majestatem: want of evangelicall faith oppugnat Dei veritatem and misericordiam. Be not false-hearted in the first, nor faint-hearted in the latter. In a word, he is a just man that doth good: and there is no sap of life in the tree if no fruit appeare in the branches.
The unjust man wants all these three righteousnesses: he is not legally just, for he hath no purity of nature: he is not evangelically just, for he hath no sanctity of grace: he is not practically just, for he hath no morality of life. The first wicked men cannot have, the next they will not have, and (without that) the last they shall not have.
Thus we see negatively who are unjust; but there is more than a bare privation in it; Quiddam positivum: it includes not onely a defect and indisposition to doe well; but also an actuall contrariety to Iustice, doing what is palpably evill. So there is a two-fold malignity in it; the transgression, and the duration of it. For the former, the wicked are unjust to God, to men, to themselves.
1 To God: righteousnesse is an obedience to the will of God; and injustice is no other than disobedience. That wee may learne to judge our selves in this, consider the infallible markes of obedience. First, it must be Integra; respective of all the Commandements: he that transgresseth one, hath not obeyed. Saul kept part of Gods precept, slew the most, and worst; yet God rejected him as disobedient. Many peece their lives, as beggars doe their cloakes, here and there a new patch: an almes at Christmasse, this is a patch of charity: communicate twice a yeare, two patches of faith. Disobedient for all this. Secondly, Simplex, we must obey the law Intuitu legislatoris, without glance at our owne profit or credit or safety by it. If one eye looke one way, the other another way, the object will never be well seene. The servant would go to Church, to please his master; more faine another way, to please himselfe: but he that lookes any other way in his devotion, than to the Lords precept; is unjust: he makes God the second, himselfe the principall. Thirdly, Prompta, ready: Angels have wings to flye about it. Abraham no sooner received that strange command, but he rose early to obey it. A compulsory obedience the devils may give, but are never the nearer being righteous. He shall never be welcome to God, that comes on his feet, and leaves his heart behind him. Fourthly, Assidua, constant: that obedience which hath an end, had never any true beginning. If it fals it was never a fixed Starre, but a meere meteor. A man may lose his Horse, his Purse, his Cloake; these be separable: the grace that hangs on by tacks, like a mantle, soone drops off. Divers have a crust of profession congealed by cold, desirous to keepe themselves warme by the fire of the Temple; which the summer of wantonnesse thawes into fluid and spilt water.Nah. 3.17. The Grashoppers campe in the hedges in a cold day, etc. In cold weather they lye in heapes and swarmes: in hot weather they scatter: when prosperity comes, their loosenesse appeares. In Gods Booke these are found unjust servants. Fifthly, Vera vel Iusta, no trick nor equivocation in it. It seekes not to
 obey God for mans sake, but man for Gods sake: it obeyes men, but never against the Lord.
Disobedience is called witch-craft, for it goes from God to the devill, and like a Witch intends mischiefe and revenge. There be two parts of it; Cum non fit quod praecipitur, cum contra fit quam praecipitur. Disobedience materiall, when it breaks the Law: formall, when it scornes the Law-giver. Disobedience did cast Adam out of Paradise, Angels out of Heaven, Ionas out of the Ship, Saul out of his Kingdome, Israel out of Israel. Superiours complaine that others doe not obey them; but no wonder, when they obey not God. Shall any creature owe that man service, that will performe no service to his Maker? God for this often makes a tumult and rebellion in their owne bosomes; that reason, the Queene Regent of the soule, cannot be heard, nor any of her lawes be respected, because the mutinous affections make such a combustion, putting the whole man out of order and good disposition. Disobedience will not bow, but it shall be broken: as the thunder melts the stubburne metall, and spares the unresisting purse. Thus is he unjust to God, that detaines his honour: that is fed and gives no thankes: such an one steales his meat. He requires the seventh of our time, the tenth of our encrease: we are unjust that deny this. These are thought honest men, yea thinke themselves no lesse: they goe as merrily with this profanation and sacriledge at their heeles, as horses with an empty Coach. Yea, the divell serves them, as Carriers doe their horses; lay on them heavy loades, and then hang bels at their eares, to make them musick. These are reserved to judgement, for no humane law takes hold of them. Where should the poore Minister have the Tenths adjudged to him? And for making that day common to licentiousnesse, which God hath separated for especiall holinesse; where is this censured? A good Lord gives his poore servant a farme to live on: for the Rent, he requires every weeke one dayes service, and at the yeares end the tenth of his profits. Hee that returnes not this small part, to that God who gives all, is most unjust, and will be so found at the day of sentence.
2 To man: such are they that measure their right by their power, and therefore will do injurie, because they can doe it. Vnjust. 1. To the common-wealth, as the golden extortioner. (I may so call him, because he gets gold by Vsurie, as Babel is called the Golden Citie, because she is an exactresse of gold.) Let all the scribes in the Citie passe their words for him, yea set their hands to it; yet God will hold him unjust. 2. To the Church; that deny him reverence to their mother, and withhold her maintenance; and which is worse, plead a custome for it: as if it were a custome for children to rob their parents. The Italians have a tricke in the art of rapier and dagger; they will teach a scholer with a traverse or two, to get the point of his adversaries weapon, and then to locke him up so sute, that (turning away his face) he runs him thorow: and for-sooth he turnes away his face, because he will behold no crueltie. It is Custome in England that lockes up our points; and the Law takes away the Churches weapons by a tricke of custome: yea men stand still, behold this, justifie it: but Gods Iudgement shall finde them unjust. 3. To private persons; such as steale away a mans good name with a felonious slander. Every one is bound to preserve the reputation of his brother: he that abuseth it, (colour his splene with what pretence he can) shall be condemned for unjust. Such a man is a monster; his throat a sepulcher, his tongue a sword, his mouth a bagge of poyson. I know in diverse Courts, scandals have their just censures: but how if the Courts themselves admit of scandals? By the Law of quittance, he that accuseth another of crimes which blemish his credit, and cannot prove them; should undergoe the punishment due to such an offence.Act. 18.16. Gallio drove the railing Iewes from the Iudgement seat: he knew they had more malice than matter: a rare example! Thus Lawyers often hunt a man at his forme, and leave the cause at losse. A Captaine of Darius hearing a mercenary
 souldier raile upon Alexander, stroke him with his Iavelin: Ego te ut pug^^s; I hired thee to fight against him, not to raile against him. Let Advocates plead the cause, not Petere adversarium, inveigh against the adverse party.
The great injustice of the world is oppression; that dothPsal. 10.9. ravish the poore, not of their bodies, but of their estates. The hard heartedLuk. 10.32. Levite did but passe by, without succouring the robbed passenger: it is wicked miserum relinquere, but worse miserum facere. If the Levite be taxed for not helping him, what is their punishment that rob'd him? Such are depopulaters, ruining people to feed beasts that where before men devoured sheepe, now sheepe devoure men. This hath beene an old disease, complained of by our fore-fathers: there were oppressors in their dayes, but the successors of them are now worse. Antigonus was a Tyrant bad enough; yet being dead, and a more cruell one succeeding him: a Cynicke fellow falls every day a digging by the high way. The passengers asked him what be digged for: he answers, Antigonum refodio, I would have Antigonus againe. Rehoboams government made them ready to say, God be with Salomon.1 King. 12. This caused the poore widdow, an old Tenantesse, so to pray for the life of her young Land-lord, who had now the third time racked her rent. This he hearing, demanded the reason why she should so blesse him, that had so cursed his father; seeing that he (in his modest phrase of oppression) had improved her rent. She answered; when your Grandfather dealt hardly with us, we wish'd him in his grave, hoping for some goodnesse in the next. Your father was worse than hee; ew longed to bee rid of him, our hopes looked on you; now you are the worst of all. And seeing by experience, seldome comes the better, we desire to keepe you still: for certainely when you are gone, the next will be the Devill himselfe. Innumerable other be the demonstrations of Injustice; as the wicked borrowes, and payes not againe: the sword-man wounds the Image of his Maker: the tradesman abuses the simplicitie of his customer: the lascivious corrupts the wife of his neighbour: these be capitall unrighteousnesse, that bring men to Iudgement.
3 To a mans selfe: so is the unthrift, that spends himselfe into povertie by pride and luxurie. His father went to hell with Carrets, and he followes after with Potatoes: out of a laborious silke-worme rises often such a painted butterflie. The drunkard is unjust to himselfe; hath bloud, and he fires it; spirits, and he choakes them; drownes himselfe on the dry land. So is the envious, that loseth the sweetnesse of his owne, by grudging at his neighbours; that grinds himselfe to powder with his neighbours milstones: anothers fatnesse shal keep him leane: and not being patient to tarry sicknesses leasure, or (which is more dispatching) his Empirickes; soone dies of the sullens. The covetous of the unjust to himselfe; what he should adde to the content of his nature, he addes to the continent of his treasure. It grudgeth his heart, that his heart should have any good. If his body be not kept pining, his mind is repining. A secret and sore Iudgement; that he who is unjust to all others, should be most unjust to himselfe. When pride, or lust, or mis-affection calls for the purse; it is ready: let the soule call for it; that cost may be spared. While you deny your selves for a whole yeare the body and bloud of your Saviour, are you not unjust to your selves? While you heare Sermons, the food of your soules, as if you had no stomach to them; your are more unjust to your spirituall life, than hee that wilfully famisheth himselfe, is accountable for his owne death. Oh heare your consciences in time, and comfort them, lest they be never able to comfort you.
Thus you have heard the nature and specifications of Injustice; now looke upon the continuance of it; for so much the word imports. God will not cast all sinners into hell, who then should goe to heaven? but the unjust: such as practise unrighteousnesse without any recovery of repentance.1 Cor. 6.9. Eph. 5.6. The unrighteous shall not enter into the kingdome of heaven: it is the continuance in sinne that excludes from mercie. Two things throw men to perdition, without the intervention of
 extraordinary favour; malice in sinne, and utter apostacie. These be the symptomes of that endangered disease, for which there is no balme in Gilead; we call it the sinne of the Holy Ghost. Not that it is against the third Person, as he is the third person, more than against the first or second: but because it is against the function or operation of that person, whose office is to illuminate the mind, and mollifie the heart with love: therefore himselfe is called love.Heb. 10.26. If men sinne wilfully after that they have received the knowledge of the truth, there remaineth no more sacrifice for their sinnes: because they maliciously have sacrificed their sacrifice, and split the only vessell that should save them.1 Sam. 3.14. The iniquity of Eli's house shall not be purged with sacrifice for ever: never expiated.1 Ioh. 5.16. There is a sinne unto death, I doe not say he shall pray for it. Every sinne is unto death, but this Emphatically; with a prohibition of interceeding set upon it; like the flaming sword that kept Paradise; Pray not for it. Schoolemen give this reason, why the sinne of malice is unpardonable. The defect may find remission, where the will may pretend feare of excesse. A sinne of ignorance is often forgiven, as was1 Tim. 1.13. Pauls; because a man may affect too much knowledge; as Adam did. A sin of infirmitie is oft forgiven, because a man may affect too much power and dominion, as did the Angels. A sinne of carnall feare is often forgiven, because a man may affect too much zeale; as did two of the Apostles. A sinne of partialitie is oft forgiven, because a man may affectEccl. 7.16. too much Iustice. But not a sin of malice, because a man can never affect too much charitie.
No lesse doth Apostacie and falling off from God; Totus, a toto, in totum. A man may sin beyond all comfort in his owne conscience, till he cannot hope for himselfe; as did Iudas. Beyond all interest in the Churches devotion, till their prayers cannot helpe them:Ier. 7.16. Pray not thou for this people. Beyond all claime to Christs satisfaction; the bloud of the Lambe shall not helpe them, Mat. 12.31. That which makes this sin past all cure, is, because it strives against the cure: as a mad man wounded, will not suffer his wounds to be bound up, but rather seekes to wound the Chirurgion God hath mercy upon sinners, Christ came to call and dye for sinners, there be none now in heaven but they were once sinners; which of all the holy Patriarchs, blessed Apostles, can excuse themselves that they never did act unjustly? But Injustice was none of their trade; they did not live in it, not dye in it. Zacheus was once unjust, but he testified his repentance by charity and restitution. But they that practise unrighteousnesse to the end, in the end shall finde judgement.
Are reserved.] This is the binding over: God puts off many wicked men from the Quarter Sessions, to the great Assises. There is a Reservation that tendeth to good: as in the danger of wrack, much luggage is throwne over-boord, the precious things are reserved. In the generall slaughter of Amalek, Saul reserved Agog.Esa. 1.9. Vnlesse the Lord had reserved a remnant, we had beene as Sodome. But here is a reservation to punishment: whether they sleep or wake, play or work, stand or walke, their time runs on, their judgement is neerer: and they are more surely kept unto it, than any dungeon with the thickest wals and strongest chaines, can hold a Prisoner till his arraignement comes. This reservation affords us a two-fold collection or observation.
1 Wickednesse hath but a time, but the punishment of wickednesse is beyond all time. The most raging sea of malice hath the bounds, the usque the devill himselfe knowes that he hath but a short time. Stay till the Amorites sins be full, then comes their overthrow. The wicked are suffered to have their wils upon the righteous, their fils of unrighteousnesse; butPsa. 73.19. How are they brought into desolation, (...) in a moment! The manner is scarce visible, the time scarce divisible: H^^, and in a moment. Impudent Pharaoh bloudied with this unresisted tyranny, can belch our defiance in the face of heaven; Who is God? It is too much honour for man to receive a message from heaven; yet God sends to Pharaoh, and is repulsed. Humility
 saies, What is man that God should regard him? Pride sayes, What is the Lord that I should regard him? Thus he domineers for a while; but ere God have done with him, he will be knowne to him, and knowne by him to all the world. He could have swept him away suddenly, as a man most unworthy to live; who with the same breath he receives denies the giver of it. But he was reserved to another purpose, he must rage a while longer, that his determined confusion might be the greater. He sees Israel crossing the sea, and wonders: yet hath neither the grace not wit to retire. He is angry at the sea, thinkes not on the Lord: sees not the plaine difference which he puts betwixt his Israel and the Aegyptians. He cannot now either consider or feare, it is his time to perish. Faire way he had, and smoothly ran on, till he came to the midst; not so much as one wave to wet the foot of his horse* When he is too farre to escape, then God begins to strike. They know not why, but they wish themselves but againe. Their Chariots grow heavy, when they had done them the service to bring them to their perdition.
Wicked men run not faster into sin, than they would run from judgement. But they shall find, that it was never so easie to post into transgression, but it will be more impossible to post from destruction. Sauls persecution makes David take many a weary step: he kils the Priests, consults with Witches; what not? Hee hath his day, but in meane time is reserved to the Lords day: the battell in Gilb^^b shall pay for all. The people are slaine before his face, his sons fall under the swords of uncircumcised enemies, and the last scene of that tragicall field is reserved for Saul himselfe. GOD is long ere he strikes, but when he doth, it is to purpose. The wicked man is not halfe so sure of transient pleasures, as he is of permanent plagues. Sin serves him as Abner did Ishbosheth; put him on the challenge of the Kingdome, and there leave him miserable: or as Tamberlaine helped Cosroe to the Kingdome of Persia, and then tooke it away againe. It is like a boyes squib; flashes, and cracks, and stinkes, and is nothing. It serves him as Iael did Sisera; he asks water, she gives him milke: he wishes shelter, she makes him a bed: he begs but the protection of her Tent, shee covers him with a mantle: she gives more than hee askes, but withall, more than he expects. When his troublous thoughts were pacified with the change, and he flatters himselfe, It is better to be here, than in the whirling of Chariots, in the horror of fight or flight; among such wounds, such shriekes, such carcasses. But as when Agag sayes, the bitternesse of death is past, even then he feeles the sword: so in these contentfull thoughts Sisera dies: the terror of Israel lies bleeding at the foot of a woman. Doe we see impudent sinners flourish, awe the greatest, confront yea controll Magistracy? It is their time, and they take it: doe what mischiefe they can, answer it as they may.Psa. 37.13. But the Lord l^^ghes at him, for he seeth that his day is comming. There is a day of reckoning and that day is comming, and the Lord sees it. He that may reckon with them at any time, will not reckon till that time.
2 The unjust are already reserved, the decree is past against them. They are bound over to the last Assises by a threefold recognisance, as it were with infrangible, though insensible chaines of Iudgement. The bond of their sins, the bond of their conscience, and the bond of omnipotent Iustice: and this threefold cable is not easily broken.
The first bond is their sins;Prov. 5.22. He shall be holden with the cordes of his sinnes. His owne shackles shall hold him fast enough, he needs no stronger chaines than those he makes for himselfe. It may be asked the sinner, what he meanes to make his fetters so strong? Saul was ever from the beginning his owne enemie; neither did any hands hurt him but his owne. At last, his death is sutable to his life; his owne hand payes him the reward of all his wickednesse: he that had beene so long a killing his soule, now makes as short worke with his body; Satan needs not bind a reprobate faster than he bind himselfe. The wicked doe not, like temporall malefactors, goe under baile; where it is but forfeiting the recognisance,
 and scape: for every step they take in sinne, brings them directly forward to their Iudgement.
Therefore is this bondage called a death: sin being the death of life on earth, and the life of death in hell. There may be certaine degrees in this spirituall dying, as there are in a corporall dissolution. There is a Syncope or swooning, an Epileps^e or falling sicknesse, an Apoplexie or cold palsey; which if it be to all, is also finall. The former are incident to the faithfull, but recoverable by their ordinary repentance: as a man in a swoone is restored by sprinkling cold water, or bowing forward the body. The second are greater crimes, deadly sins; so expelling the Spirit of God, that no signe of his Presence appeares. It must bee an extraordinary repentance, that recovers these offenders: as a man in the falling sicknesse, by striving, sweating, beating of himselfe. No^ they that are in a swoune, or foaming under a Epilepsie, are bound fast enough, they cannot run away yet such fits and fals may be recovered. But when it comes to an Apoplexie, a putrified custome, a rotten obstinacie in sin; the grave does not surer bind a dead body within her mouldy barres, than these bonds of obduratenesse enchaine such a soule. There may remaine a while some smale appearance of breath, a little naturall warmth: yet is it impossible, without a miracle, to recover that spirituall life, which is so long, so universally excluded.
There is a proceeding with the mortified conscience, as with the dead ^case. First the dead man that is to be buried, is the impenitent sinner; resembling a corps in many respects. 1. In lacke of sense; so lethargis'd in sin, that he feeles not the prickings and woundings of a sore heart. Lay a mountaine upon a dead man,Revel. 3.18. he feeles not the weight. CHRIST counsells him to buy restoratives; he perceives no need to buy: the cause of buying is the feeling of want, not the want of feeling. There is no love to God, no charity to men, in them: they have the true love of sense, but not the true sence of love. 2. In lacke of appetite; they neither hunger nor thirst after righteousnesse; as being full of sinfull crudities. Life brings appetite, appetite desires meat, and meat affords nourishment: if the soule hungers not, it lives not. Appetite is sharper in famine than in plentie: a double punishment; more stomach, and lesse meat: but these desire not the body and bloud of Christ. There is no corporall affection like thirst; as we see in Hagar, in Sampson, in Christ himselfe suffering; not Esurio, but Sitio; extreme heat working upon the radicall moisture. But dry these soules are to the death, yet feele no thirst after the waters of life. 3. In lacke of motion: Indeed; a dead body hath a naturall propension downewards: so these unjust men have a passive motion, feruntur in infernum: but they cannot actively move one finger to goodnesse. A corps is a heavy disanimated lumpe, pressing downewards; as sinne cast Dathan from this world, Lucifer out of heaven. 4. In lacke of heat, infected with the poyson of that Serpent, which is cold in the fourth degree, mortall. When a man is dead, chafe him, rubbe him, bow him, put Aqua-vitae into him; then take him by the hand, and bid him walke; yet he cannot stirre the least joynt; except the soule be restored, all perswasions be in vaine. 5. In lack of sweetnesse; the soule, his salt being gone, what can keepe it from putrefaction? Thus is adultery a noisome uncleannesse; Slander an unsavory breath, like the steame that comes from a new open grave;Psal. 5.9. their throat being an open sepulcher. Heapes of ill-gotten wealth is a very dunghill; all wickednesse like stinking carrion to GOD.
Now the coffin or grave for such a sinner, is three-fold; according to his death. The sepulcher of the body is the earth, the sepulcher of the soule is the body; the sepulcher of both dying in sin, is hell: as there is naturall, spirituall and eternall death. The Bearers that carry him, are foure. 1. Hope of life; neither age nor sicknesse can put him out of that hope. 2. Promise of repentance to himselfe, when he can sin no longer. 3. Presumption of mercy; as if God must needs
 save him, because he made him. 4. Love of the world,Luk. 7. Aug. which makes him forget the world to come. These carry him out of life, as the widdowes son was borne out of the gates of the Citie. A wanton eye carries a man out, by the gates of his sight: a swearing tongue, by the gate of his mouth: itching after scurrilous speeches, by the gate of his eares.
Thus dead is every obstinate sinner: dead in sin, saith Paul; yea, saith the Lord. It is not the opinion of some Physician, that may be deceived in his principalls, but it is a Dicit Dominus. It is said of Adam fallen, as of a condemned malefactor; Mortuus in lege. Not only in respect of the dissimilitude betwixt Gods life, and theirs: which is such anEph. 4.18. alienation, as is indeed a diametrall opposition. But in the order and course of Gods Iustice, sentencing death to every one that sins: and this death must be answered either in the sinner, or in the Saviour. So they are as dead to God, as a Traitor to the Prince, or as a Felon is to the Iudge.
This is one especiall bond, wherby they are reserved and bound over to the day of Iudgement; a death in sin. Not, but that CHRIST is able to raise the dead,Psal. 116.16. and to lose these bonds. He raised three sorts of dead in the three yeares of his Ministerie. One in the house; Iairus his daughter: another in the gate; the widdowes son: a third in the grave, which was Lazarus.Serm. 44. de verb. Dom. Saint Augustine thus resembles them a sinner is dead in the house, when he sins secretly, imagining mischiefe in his mind. He is carried out of the gate, when he sins openly, not confining it withindoores: butPsal. 7.14. Rom. 2.5. brings it forth, in word or deed, and makes it scandalous to the Church. He stinkes in the grave, when he sins habitually, without any remorse. The first may be raised by Doctrine, the next by discipline: as appeares by Christs owne practice and direction, Ioh. 2.15. Matth. 18.17. But what shall we doe with the incorrigible and customary sinner, who is dead in the grave? Only pray with Mary:Ioh. 11.32. Lord, if thou hadst beene here, my brother had not died: but I know, all things are possible unto thee. Now there was weeping for the damosell dead in the house: more weeping for the man carried out of the gate; the mother wept, the Church laments: but most weeping at Lazarus his grave: Martha wept, and Mary wept, and the Iewes wept, and Iesus wept, and groned in the Spirit. We ought to weepe penitently for the beginnings of sin, more for the proceeding and encrease, most of all for the completion and accomplishment of death; when the sinner betakes himselfe to the scorners chaire, deriding God and all goodnesse. Let us say in the Church, as Demosthenes did in Athens; we have more cause to weepe for the lives of the bad, than for the d^aths of the good. It is over the spiritually dead, that the confused Quire of hell sing Epinicions, and songs of triumph. They are glad to see us sin in the house, admitting an ill motion to our purpose: rejoyce at our carrying forth breaking out into notorious offences: are most merry, when we continue in filthinesse, till we stinke in the sepulcher. O let us hearken to Christ Surge; sit up and speake; to comfort our mother on earth, to please our father in heaven.
The next bond is their evill conscience; an infallible binder, hell it selfe is not surer. Such a man is (...),Tit. 3.11. damned of his owne selfe. Vnlesse he could run away from himselfe, he cannot scape this Iudgement. There be three acts of conscience. 1. Before the deed is done, examining whether it bee lawfull or unlawfull. 2. In the deed doing, allowing or resisting. 3. After the deed done, approving or condemning. There be diverse reasons why every man hath a conscience.
1 That man might have an internall Schoole-master to direct him: now the fittest for this office is conscience.Chrys. If the Irascible or concupiscible part had beene our governors, either they would have beene often absent, or else led us amisse. What a beast is man under the regiment of lust or sense? and how seldome does anger play the game with reason? But conscience like a pulley, keepes reason in the right wheele; and either cashiers mutinous affections, or executes martiall Law
 upon them. If only outward Rulers were to governe us; they have no eyes to see the mind: there might be mis-rule enough within doores, and they never the wiser. Therefore they would either be contemned for meanenesse, or condemned for partialitie. But in the conscience there is both awe enough, and Iustice enough; and every man is willing to be ruled by his owne mind: if not, this School-master hath a rod to compell him.
2 That he might have a thing within him to put him in remembrance. In the Law a man will doe nothing without his counsell learned; but for the passages of his life, he seldome stands upon advise. This Monitor will be ever plucking him by the sleeve, telling him, this action is naught, God is angry at it, unshiftable plagues attend it.Chrys. David portavit in pectore, tanquam Imaginem pictam, adulterii and homicidii. The word doth but sometimes discover our corruption: it is the Glasse Saint Iames speakes of, wherein we looke, and see our Image, but turne our backes, and forget it. But conscience is alwayes at hand; it is the continuall reflection of the soule upon it selfe. Even in the darke it will represent to a man his owne forme, make his wounds smart, and send him a maine to the Physician.
3 That he may have a Iudge within him: wherein conscience hath yet a higher office. For, 1. a Schoole-master may be despised. Customary sinners, like boyes growen tall and stubborne, contemne the rod. A remembrancer may be dispraised; and said as Hushai of Achitophel; his counsell is good, but not at this time: but a Iudge we all tremble at. 2. Externall Iudges may be corrupted, but the conscience will take no bribes. O that as every Iudge hath a conscience, so this conscience might evermore give the Iudgement. 3. The guilty person may flie from another Iudge; but there is no evasion of conscience. Nescis temeraria, nescis quem fugias, ideoque fugis. It is impossible for a man to runne away from himselfe. 4. Great men cannot be brought to Iudgement-seates: the poore are like materia prima, under generation, so under reformation: but the rich are like starres above the Moone, too high for the reach of ordinary power When a company of Lacedemonian Gallants had defiled the bench and seat of Iudgement; the Magistrates at first stormed, and vowed punishment. But when they knew who did it, they enacted a Law of exception; Liceat illis, It is lawfull for those Gentlemen to doe what they will. But be they never so great, this Iudge will make them stoope. 5. Preachers dare not reprove all men particularly: such an attempt would bring them into contempt. Conscience feares no man; dares checke a Magistrate, controll a Prince. It may sometime slumber; no woman is alwaies scolding: but when she wakens she will speake.
4 That man might have his comfort, or his torment, within him. Comfort to the righteous; in all afflictions they have this stay, that they be not overwhelmed with sorrow. Though they be condemned, this approves; affords libertie in prison;Revel. 2.17. Chrys. in the want of outward food, this sustaines: it is the Hidden ma^na. Torment to sinners; that they may tast of Gods Iudgements even in this life. In the midst of all their prosperous fortunes, they have inward tortures. A malefactor in prison, though he fare well, yet is tormented with the thought of ensuing judgement. It is the hand-writing on the wall, that prints bloudy characters in Belshazzars heart. This is the breakings out of the flames of Tophet, a little module of hell: as a looking glasse broken into many small pieces, every one can shew the contracted forme. This is another indissoluble chaine that binds them over.
The last bond of this reservation is the immutable justice of God. In respect of his decree before the world, and suffering them to heape up sinne in the world, that they may be punished in the world to come. But this is to be adored with reverence and with silence. Novit Dominus, he knowes how to doe it.
For our selves let us take externall prosperity for no good marke of our election: the fattest beasts are kept for the slaughter. Flatter we not our selves with
 the sense of impunity: the lesse sorrow we feele, the more we have cause to feare; for the more may be behind. Let us breake off our sins by repentance, that God may breake the bonds of our durance. Pray with David;Psa. 142.7. Bring my soule out of prison, that I may praise thy name:Psa. 35.17. Rescue my soule from destructions, my darling from the Lions. That our sins being remitted, and our consciences quieted; we may live in grace, and goe to the grave in peace: and when all bookes be opened, ou^s may have no sin found in it, but instead thereof, the righteousnesse of IESUS CHRIST.
Vnto the day of judgement.] This is the Assises. Lewd persons riot in the Gaole of their durance; yet when the Session comes, they begin to be a little calme; put off their disguises of dissolutenesse, and put on some modesty and semblance of humiliation. Then they change their apparell, their garbes, their, lookes; all to appeare civill. If the meditation of this dreadfull day when all hearts shall be searched, all secret corruptions embowelled, a finall sentence pronounced, by a Iudge that cannot be deceived, upon sinners that would not be converted: if this cannot make us tremble; our hearts disdaine comparison for hardnesse with the nether milstone.
Iudgement is diversely understood. For rule and governement, Mat. 12.18. Order them aright. For equity, Luk. 11.42. Ier. 22.3. For opinion, Dogma. 1. Cor. 4.3. That is a mans Iudgement, which he thinkes. For plagues and calamities, Exod. 7.4. For righteousnesse and holinesse. All the wayes of God are Iudgement and Truth, Prov. 28.5. For authority, Ioh. 5.27. For Gods secret councell, Rom. 11.33. For our afflictions, 1 Pet. 4.17. 1 Cor. 11.32. Here it is taken for a determination, or giving a sentence by a Iudge on the Bench, and in the seate of justice. For this there is a Court, and a Throne. The Court shall be kept in theMat. 24.30. Cloudes; if any aske, why rather on earth, than in heaven? I answer, the malefactor to be judged hath sinned on the earth; and it is the manner of secular Iudges there to keepe the Assises, where men committed the trespasses. All the Elements have bin abused by sinners, therefore are they judged in the midst of the Elements: that the very place guilty of their fault, might be satisfied with their ruine. Againe, to be admitted into heaven, though there to be judged, is an honour whereof sinfull nature is not capable: therefore they must remaine in the lower parts of the world. No reprobate man or devill shall ever see God: Christ indeed they shall see in the glory of a Iudge, not in the glory of God. There is also aMat. 25.31. Throne: earthly Kings, when they will show themselves to their Subjects in awfull Majesty; ascend their Thrones: this is the highest state of a Kingdome. This Throne shall be most terrible to the wicked;Dan. 7.9. A fiery flame, and the wheeles b^^ning fire. But to the faithfull there is aRev. 4.3 Raine-bow about it, to qualifie the terriblenesse of it.
To the day of judgement.] This point I have diverse times handled: therfore to avoid a co-incidence of discourse, I fasten onely upon two meditations, formerly not observed. The sufficiency of the Iudge, and the necessity of the judgement.
1 First the sufficiency of the Iudge: his infinite perfection cannot be better discerned of us, than by comparison. There be two maine conditions that conc^^re to the making up of a Iudge: outward warrant, and inward inablement.
For the former; Iudgement is not every mans worke, there must be commission and designement for it. There have bin indeed some extraordinary actions of Iustice, without specification of warrant. Such was the act of Phineas,Num. 25. for which some plead extraordinary instinct from God: and doubtlesse, he would not have accepted that sacrifice, if himselfe had not prompted it. So he had the substance of authority, from private revelation, though not the forme of authority from publike deputation. But I rather thinke that his judgement was also solemnely warranted. For both, God sayes to Moses, Hang up the heads: and Moses to
 the under-rulers, every one slay his men, that were joyned to Baal-peor. So that for this execution every Israelite is made a Magistrate; and then why not Phineas? But it is objected, that he was a Priest, and his place for peace and mercy. I answer even this act of justice was a worke of mercy: Samuel thought it not out of his office, to hew Agag in peeces. They might make a carcase which might not touch it. Levi got the Priest-hood by such a sacrifice, shedding the bloud of Idolaters. Thus ordinary justice might well beare out Phineas in that act. But it is not for every man to challenge this office: private persons may only pray for the redresse of sin: if the man be not warranted, it is a lawfull question, Who made thee a judge? Now if a deputed Iudge be of great authority, who hath yet a Supreme Magistrate over him, to examine and reforme him; how mighty is this Iudge? Qua^tus ille judex, qui facit judices; that makes, yea, and unmakes Iudges? That judgeth them; and if they doe ill, condemnes them? By him Kings raigne, and Iudges rule: by him shall Kings and Iudges be called to account. The Iewes once questioned Christ;Mat. 21.23. By what authority doest thou these things? And the fooles of the world would faine doubt it. But this day shall shew, that theIoh. 5.22. Father hath committed all judgement unto the Son.
For the other, which is Enablement; whatsoever sufficiency is in other Iudges, comes from the Lord; how infinite then is himselfe? To make a sufficient Iudge,August. these vertues are required.
1 Knowledge, Deut. 1.13. A man can best judge of that which he knoweth. Ignorantia judicis, calamitas innocentis. It is bad at the Barre, worse on the bench. An Advocates ignorance can wrong but one mans cause, a Iudges may prejudice the whole Countrey. In this, Paul thought himselfe happy; that he stood before a IudgeActs 26.3. expert in the Lawes,Eccl. 5.22. Wisedome is better than weapons of warre. Without this a Magistrate is but a blind Poliphemus, a great Monster without an eye. A stander by can say, this you cannot doe by law: or in derision, you are beside your book. It is a shame for a Iusticer, that before he can tell what to doe, he must goe consult his Clark. Otherwise he must weave a resolution out of his owne braines, as Spiders spin their cobwebs out of themselves. If he hit on the right, it is beholding to his luck: and so he relieves the plaintifes hope, not with constant equity, but with an uncertain lottery: and fils up the time, with that which empties the occasion; some Adage, or a stolne jest of stale wit, or a patch of Poetry. But our Iudge hath cleare eyes to discerne the cause: and knowes the law, for it was of his owne making. There is nothing that can Latere cognitionem, vel effugere potestatem. The Iesuite cannot equivocate with him, though he have tricks beyond the devill.
2 Courage, Magnanimity, or Spirit: typified in Iudah, that judiciary Tribe; whose Embleme or Escoucheon, was a Lion Couchant; that lyes by the prey without feare of rescue, and turnes not his head at the fight of any creature. The principall pillars of a house had need be heart of Oake. Of soft wood, or bending lead, Carpenters will not make them Rules: and are flexible dispositions fit for Rulers? Men doe not chuse a starting horse to lead the Teame. He had need be of Davids valour, that can snatch the prey out of the Lions mouth, rescue the oppressed from him that is too mighty for him. Now all the courage of man is but the gift of God.1 Chr. 29.12. In thy hand it is to give strength to all. If a beame be so radiant, how glorious is the Sun himselfe? The Iudge of all the world is inflexible: it is falsely said of Cato, that the Sun might sooner alter his course, than he pervent his course of Iustice. The stoutest and strongest may yield, either for feare, as Pilate when he heard but a buzze that he was not Caesars friend. Or for favour, as Eli; that buried the living severitie of a Iudge, and burning zeale of a Priest, in the frozen and dead indulgence of a father. But whom should this Iudge feare, or who can deserve his favour? No audacious swaggerer dares crosse him, no great mans letters can prevaile with him: nor the frownes of kings, nor the flatteries of Courtiers, can move him.
3 Integrity; there must be no corruption in him. The braine had need be of a strong constitution, that can disperse and dispell the fumes surging from a vitious stomach, liver, or splene. He whom neither clamour, nor rumour, nor terrour; neither furious passion, nor melting compassion, can divert from Iustice; is fit to be a Iudge. In this Court of Christ, there will be no commuting, give me thy silver for thy sin. No dispensing; Beare with me, and I will beare with thee. No conniving, as Eli;1 Sam. 2.25. the Iudge shall judge it; whereas himselfe was Iudge, and did not judge it: so sentencing himselfe, while he did not sentence his sons. No slubbering over a cause, without ransaking the bowels of it. But a vindicating of truth out of all the dens and thickets of juggling conveyance. The Scholer searcheth it by disputation, in thesi: the Iudge by examination, in hypothesi. Neighbourhood is my friend, allyance is my friend, bountie is my friend; but Iustice is my friend above all. ThusIob 29.16. Iob searched out the cause which he knew not. Man doth search before he finds, God doth finde before he searches. Man goes by discourse, by certaine rules and principles and generall deductions, and from thence concludes: GOD sees at first. Man and truth are two severall things; truth and God is all one.
Mortall Iudges may be blinded with bribes; and the champions of Iustice become Mammons slaves. This acceptatio muneris, pravaricatio veritatis. A gift in the bosome wresteth Iudgement: the injection of a dram swayes the golden balance of Iustice, and so the cause is poised by the weight of the bribe. If the left hand be full of bribes, the right must be full of mischiefe. But our Iudge is not thus to be wrought upon:Gen. 18.25. Shall not the Iudge of all the world doe right? Did not the Iudge in his mortall flesh, scourge such money merchants with zealous severity? Did not his Apostle with fiery indignation ban Simon and his money? It comes to passe that whole kingdomes and Churches perish, because such men and their moneys perish not. O if this Iudge would take gold, how few rich men would goe to hell? But gold hath lost milions of soules; it never did, never shal, save one. A dram of grace shall be more worth then, than all the treasures of the earth. Sublunary materialls have their places;Iob 28.2. Ver. 13. Iron is taken out of the earth, and brasse moulten out of the stone: the sun is found in his orbe, fire in his element, etc. But where is grace to be found, and what is the place of Iustice? It is not found in the land of the living. Nature sayes, It is not in me: wealth and honour disclaime it; It is not found in us. Then how shall we doe in the day of Iudgement? It is found in the treasurie of Iesus.
This point willingly and usefully extends it selfe to Magistrates, of what place soever; collaterally to all persons: teaching them to doe equitie, and to preserve integrity.
1 Doe Iustice; to this the Iudge stands bound in reason, as the proper act of his function: if he be not at leasure to doe this, it is time to unjudge him; as the woman said to Philip, Noli regnare.2 Chron. 19.6. Iudgement is not mans, but the Lords. Iudges are a kinde of living instruments; and the nature of Instruments consists in the use and operation: as a knife is only to cut. Ad nihilum valet, quod non valet ad finem suum: if the axe be not good to hew, we say it is good for nothing. What then say you to those Magistrates, that have eyes and see not, eares and heare not? They are Idols: only one defect of those Idols they are not troubled with: we cannot say, They have hands, and handle not: for they handle too much: so much of the money, that they care not to handle the cause. Eyes they have, and see not: feet they have, and walke not: mouthes they have, and speake not: hands they have, but they doe handle. These are Instruments without operation: for Iudicem Iudicare, is as agreeable and naturall, as for the eye to see, the eare to heare. If the other be not Idols, sure they are Idolaters: golden calves if they be not, yet they are worshippers of golden calves. Yet in doing Iustice, I would not have Iudgement triumph over mercie; whereas mercie rejoyceth against Iudgement. To banish
 all favour, is to banish some equity. There may be favours within the cause, not favours without the cause: legall favours, though not personall. Where no wrong is done to Iustice, there may be faire use and place for Mercy.
2 Keepe integrity; what place soever you make good: it is the spirituall constitution and best health of your soules. The breach of this, the Apostle cals a Ship-wrack; and a Divine, Solutionem continui. The weight of all goodnesse will leave us, when we leave that: it shall powre contempt upon Princes, and make a great Antiochus called a vile person. As we love our lives, as we love our soules; through all the transitory, temporary, momentany passages of this world; let us preserve the life of our lives, and soule of our soules, our integrity.
2 The necessity of this judgement. That this should be, it stands both with the Iustice and Mercy of God.2 Thes. 1.6. It is a righteous thing with God, to recompence tribulation to them that trouble you, to you that are troubled, rest with us, rest with himselfe. For this world, they are afflicted most, that serve God best: and men of worst conscience flow with abundance. So that the world thinkes none miserable, but the conscionable: the more holy, the lesse happy. Who have more seconds and friends at a pinch, than the deboisht sonnes of Belial, the roring Monsters of the world, that with Crest and breast oppose all hindrance in the way of their lusts and humours? What plotting, what siding there is to maintaine a Ruffian, to countenance some disordered Retainer, to uphold a rotten Ale-house, to procure a Homicides pardon; who sees not? Whereas a good mans trouble is by all cunning aggravations greatned; as if the world meant all hurt against him, that meanes none.1 Cor. 15.19. O if in this life onely wee had hope in Christ, we were of all men the most miserable. There had need be a judgement; and for this cause among the rest, the Saints cry instantly, incessantly; Come Lord Iesus, come quickly.
Be pleased to consider this point also comparatively. Without judgement how could any Nation stand? All things would run to disorder and confusion, but for this. There can be no society among men without indifferency: there is no indifferency, where offence is done without satisfaction: satisfaction may be sought many wayes, can no way be enforced, but by judgement. This they resolve into severall acts of judiciary proceeding, even from the Summons to the Sentence, from Gods owne example in the first sinners conviction. If visible powers were not more feared, than the invisible God, the world would be overrun with outrage. Even when Gods owne Israel had offended, Moses makes them bleed for it, He that was so good, that he would rather perish himselfe, than Israel should perish; yet pronounceth sentence of death on the Idolaters, rejoyces and blesseth the executioners. It is charity as well as justice, to punish offenders: and it is hard to say whether God loves more; a pittifull justice, or a pu^ishing mercy. But might not those sinners have repented and lived? Or if they must be punished, can nothing serve but death? Or if they must dye, shall it be by the hands of their brethren? Or if brethren must cut their throats, shall it be done in the heat of their sins? Yes, so God commanded; and even that judgement was mercy: judgement on the bad, mercy to the whole: the corrupt bloud is let out, that the body may be preserved. Moses had a soft heart, but zealous and wise: pittifull he was, not fond.
A sinfull Common-wealth cannot live, unlesse it bleed in the common veine. There is not a better sacrifice to God, than the bloud of malefactors: this sacrifice so pleased him in the hands of the Levites, that they alone must sacrifice to him still. Next to our prayers, we doe no better service to God, than in punishing obstinate sinners; if they deserve it even unto bloud. How doth this free the Land from those Iudgements, which God otherwise would inflict! His revenge pursues transgressors; but if the revenge of mans justice overtake it, God gives over the chase: to execute this judgement, saves him a labour. If the Land be defiled with bloud, in duels, drunken quarrels; there is no way to purge it, but
 by their bloud that polluted it. Often hath the Lord done justice on the whole body, because the head hath not done justice on a member: and the seasonable infliction of a lesse punishment hath avoided a greater. The Tribe of Levi by shedding the bloud of the Idolatrous Israelites, was cleared from the bloud of the innocent Shechemites. The best friends to the State are the impartiall Ministers of judgement: nor doe the prayers of them that sit still and doe nothing, so much pacifie Gods wrath against us, as their just retribution. We gaze and wonder at the iniquity of the Land, yea shed teares for it: but it is the publike sword of our authority in correcting it, that must reconcile the Lord. Governours are faulty of those sins they see and punish not. It is no lesse than a good sight in a State, even a Malefactor at the Gall-house. We could not eate our meat, nor sleep in our beds, nor say our prayers in peace; but for judgement. Such is the necessity of it, that no State can stand without it.
This is a benefit in our Land which we must acknowledge by experience, God grant we may acknowledge with thankefulnesse. We have Courts and judgment seats for all causes; spirituall and temporall, civill and criminall, pecuniary and capitall.1 Sam. 7.16. We have Iudges visiting all the great Cities twice in the yeare at least: so that the people cannot complaine that they travell far for justice, nor except against triall, who stand or fall by the deposition and verdict of their nearest neighbours.Luk. 18.3. The Widdow tooke a right course in solliciting the Iudge. When they have matters, saith Moses, theyExod. 18.3. come to me. And when Christ chargeth us toMat. 5.25. Agree with our adversary, etc. he speaks not against just proceeding in Law: but rather ratifies and rectifies the course of civill Iustice. Being smitten he stroke not againe; yet he expostulated De facto, Iohn. 18.23.Act. 23.3. Paul reproving the High Priests in justice, was yet prepared to suffer: and he appealed unto Caesar. If then it be so necessary for man, that he cannot conserve his profit, credit, quiet, life it selfe, without judgement: how much more stands it with the honour of God? There be innumerable sins, which neither the eye of man sees, nor the arme of man can reach: these must not scape, God must be glorified in all: now he cannot be glorified, unlesse all transgression be punished, and all obedience crowned. I conclude.
O that men would therefore prepare themselves for this last and great audite.Application. Rev. 6.8. I beheld a p^le horse, and his name that sate on him was Death; and hell followed him. Many tremble at death, but how would they be affrighted if they could see his follower, hell? The Foxes doth not more waite upon the Lions, nor Crowes upon Armies, nor Gaolers on Serjeants, than the divell attends on death for a booty. Death is but as the hooke, that jerkes the reprobates like fishes out of the pond of this world: there is afterward a fire and a Frying-pan, or scalding caldron to come.1 Cor. 15.32. Let us eate and drinke, to morrow we shall dye? Never beast made such a senselesse argument: Riot, because we shall dye? How strange is such a conclusion to such a promise? It is all one with them to be a Farmers hog, or an Aldermans Horse, or a Ladyes puppy; or themselves: that thinke death the full period, the last and finall cessation of the creature. So when Antisthenes cries out in his pangs, Who shall ease me? Diogenes tenders him a knife, to cut his owne throate. Our frantick combatants, falsely tearmed brave spirits; as prodigall of their lives as Cocks and Dogs, powring them out on every drunken quarrell; little thinke of this dreadfull day to come. It is not the losse of the men we so much pitty; good for nothing but to stop breaches, and make up forlorne hopes, in the mouth of Cannons; but it is the losse of their soules. If they did thinke of this judgement, they would have little list to such desperate combates. For who would not rather welcome a Rapier or Pistoll, than a lingring and racking sicknesse; but for this consequence; that after death comes judgement.
Death is but the beginning of sorrowes; when we have done with him, judgement begins with us. Yet too many banish this meditation as too melancholy:
 and like children or cowards, rather shut their eyes, and chuse to feele the blow, than to see and avoid it. How silly is it to feare death, whose pangs be sometimes lesse than the tooth-ach; more than the day of Iudgement, which whom it finds out of CHRIST, shall cast into everlasting fire? So fooles feare the thundercracke, and not the thunder-bolt: the report of the ordinance, not the bullet: the Serjeans arrest more than the Gaolers Imprisonment. Let us not seeke to avoid death, this we cannot, but prepare our selves for the tryall, this we may. Some a little wiser, and a very little better, upon a cold thought of death, (...) a short breath'd parley of Iudgement. And then after a sigh or two, put all upon a LORD have mercie on us; wee trust it shall goe as well with us as with others; even as GOD will have it. These have some scattered and preposterous flashes of the last Iudgement in their consciences; yet take no cou^^ to get faith and pardon in IESUS CHRIST. Most men thinke all well, an^ they shall answer the matter easily enough; not weighing the horror of their sins. But how fearefully doe they finde themselves deluded, when their soules ^w^^, as Ionas did in the tempest; in the gulfe of fire and brimstone? Let us ballast our s^^p before we put to sea, lest wee perish in the maine: and judge our selves, that we be not judged in the day of Iesus Christ.
To be punished.] This is the execution. It were a vaine Session, if malefactors were not put to execution. Irrite and forcelesse are those censures, which impunitie followes. The mulcts and fines which are not required, doe make wickednesse more bold and insensible. But after Gods Iudgement followes an unavoidable execution: the unjust are not only judged, but punished. Among men, good lawes droope into contempt, by making difference of offenders: magistrates are afraid to meddle with the outrages of the mighty. Whence it comes, that small thefts are condemned to carts, while the great sacriledges are honoured in coaches. If the great beast make a gappe in the mound, the whole heard will not be afraid to follow. It was the Lords charge to Moses,Numb. 25. hang up the heads. God could as well have stroke the rulers, as the people: yet while himselfe punisheth the vulgar, he bids Moses punish the Princes; which one would think should have beene more properly reserved to his owne immediate hand. Yet these he leaves to humane authoritie, that he might procure awe to his owne ordinances. It is the impartiall execution of noble offenders, that winnes credit to government: and the want of it cuts the sinewes of any state. If their sins have made them base, let there be no favour in their penaltie. But in this Iudgement, God respects no persons: he knowes no valour, no honour, no riches, no royaltie, in the matter of sin: butRom. 2.9. Tribulation and anguish on every soule of man that doth evill. He knowes nothing in man, nothing for man, but only the righteousnesse of one, God and man, his son Iesus. There is a sin among men, for which there may be some mediation;1 Sam. 2.25. but if a man sinne against God, who shall intreat for him? None but Christ. To be punished, From hence I will only derive these two collections.
1 That mans soule is immortall, and his body shall be raised againe: otherwise how could there be a punishment after the day of Iudgement? Carnall reason can hardly imagine, how a soule should have subsistence after it's separation from the body: it seemes incredible, because it is invisible. But Eagles can see more than Owles: nor was meere nature ignorant of this; through all clouds of error she could see this cleare truth; that soules die not with their bodies. This is an inbred instinct sucked from the brest of nature, an indeleble principle stamped in the soule by God himselfe, not to be rased out. The waggoner hath a being though his coach be broken: the ship is wrack'd on the sea, yet the mariner may swim to harbour: the addar lives after shee hath slipt off her coat: the musician keepes his skill, though his lute be broken: the snaile may creepe out, and leave his shell behind. Beside faiths cleare sight, and supernaturall revelation;Rev. 6.9. I saw soules under the Altar: Iohn did see spirits.

Reason it selfe can finde no absurditie in it. 1. I know my soule to be in my  body, I cannot see it: my body is but a house of clay: cannot another substance be as capable of this soule, as clay? may not the aire, or heaven, or any other place, containe it as well as earth. 2. The soule is not guided by the body, but the body  by the soule: that may be cholericke, when the body is flegmaticke: that cheerfull, when the other is melancholy. Diverse Martyrs have expressed solid joy, when their corporall torments have beene extreme: as if they had beene spirits without bodies. The body would often eate, when the soule hath a minde to fast: the body would sleepe, the soule rowseth it up to pray: often have you seene a cheerly mind in a distemperd body. Now if their dispositions be so manifestly crosse; that the one can be wel, when the other is ill: one grieved and troubled, when the other is in perfect health: it is plaine, that this soule may as well be, and be sensible, out of the body, as in the body.
It were foolish for men to be so carefull about their surviving names, if their  soules were extinguishable with their bodies. What is that honour to me, whereof I am not sensible? If death were the destruction of the whole nature and substance, a good remembrance were to little purpose: and men had better leave their posterity more wealth, though lesse credit behinde them.
Death it selfe were but a toy, if no Iudgement followed it, or if there was  no soule to be judged. It were then only as the breaking of a pitcher, which was full of nothing but fluid aire. He were a coward that would feare death, if he thought it to be the end of all feare. Expiration were not terrible, if it left nothing that remaines sensible.
If the soule does exhale as sensuall bruites, why does it understand more than  bruites? The soule of the beast is as salt to keepe it sweet: man's hath a nobler and more Divine dowry: it can discourse, reason, forecast, invent, remember: it can read, exercise arts, deduce conclusions; which be characters of an immortall nature. For men will not write on waters, nor ingrave curiously in snow, yee, or such liquefying stuffe. Therefore it is a particle of Divine breath, inspired into formed loame by God himselfe. It doth not arise out of the body, but is infused into it: therfore may as well exist without the body after, as it did without the body before.Eccl. 12.7. Dust returnes to dust, the spirit to him that gave it: both to their originalls, dust to dust, heaven to heaven. First, the soule goes to this Tribunall, then the body to earth: first the soule is judged and punished or rewarded, as the principall in good or evill: afterwards the body, as a meere accessary. The soule of the righteous is first, crowned, as that which more purely and primarily served God: the body did but rather hinder: therefore must come after. Dies mortis corpori, dies nativitatis animae.
The body is but sometimes awake, the soule is never a sleepe. The body is  infirme and dull; now that which never sleepes in the body, shall certainely never sleepe out of the body. And how is that lyable to death, that is not capable of sleepe? In the deadest and deepest slumbers, that is alway discoursing, working, thinking: deaths younger brother cannot overcome it, sleepes elder brother shal not annihilate it. No Somniferous Opium, or dormitory potion can charme this into slumber: yea, it doth not seldome exercise the faculties with more freedome in the epilogue of sicknesse, in the confines yea even article of death: and shewes more vigour in the corporall weakenesse, than it did in the fulnesse of health: as a prisoner lookes and speakes more cheerfully, when the windowes be open, than when all are shut up in darkenesse. Yea, it rejoyceth at death, as at the keepers turning of the key, to open the doore, and set it at libertie. It leaves the body, as the inhabitant leaves a rotten and ruinous house; as a carpenter leaves his axe when the edge is blunted: or as a musician layes by his lute, when the strings are broken: or as a guest makes hast out of his Inne in Domum aternitatis sua, to his long home. She never sleepes in sleepe, therefore not in death: for death is a long sleepe
 as sleepe is a short death. Elias prayes that the1 King. 17.21 Childs soule may come to him againe; therefore it was not extinct, though out of the body.Acts 7.59. Lord Iesus receive my spirit, was Saint Stephens farewell: his spirit was not stoned to death.Mat. 10.28. Feare not him that can kill the body onely, etc. To kill the body is one thing, to kill the soule another. By Saint Pauls choice, 2 Cor. 5.8. a man may be at once absent from the body, and present with the Lord.2 Sam. 11.11. As thou livest, and as thy soule liveth, saith Vriah to David,Luke 16. he speakes of two different lives. The rich man was in hell: no man thinkes his body there; it was his soule. GOD is called Deus viventium, the GOD of the living: now the bodies of the Saints are dead, therefore their soules be safe.
To conclude then, the soule is not a vapour, but a spirit: not an accident, but a substance; the bodies elder sister, an excellent Queene over it: in it but not mixt; but separable from it: a guest that fals not with the house: but departs from it for a better habitation: and when it is re-edified at the Resurrection, will revisite and reunite it againe to it selfe. Thus it lies not a dying with the flesh: but as when the body sleepes, the soule sleepes not: so when the body dies, the soule dies not. If it have kept house well, it shall be exalted to everlasting peace: if bin unjust in life, after death it must be punished.
But is the soule only accountable, is that alone liable to punishment? No, the body that hath accompanied it in the sin, must not be separated in the penalty. Diverse have beleeved the soules immortality, that have doubted the resurrection of the body: and this error seemes to have found place in some of the Corinthians.1 Cor. 15.12 How say some of you, that there is no resurrection? Some of you, all doe not say so: S. Paul doth not wrap up the innocent and orthodox with the rest in the same accusation. Many acknowledged this, some doubted: therfore he spends a long Chapter in this argument: which I forbeare to amplifie, as not daring to suspect any of us taken with such an hesitation. The soule never dies, and a man is not a man without his body; therefore there must be a resurrection of bodies. Let a greene twig be bowed together by the hand of man: when the hand is gone it will come to it selfe againe. Some are so nimble that they can lay their heele on their head; yet is not this the right place: but after such a forcible violence, the whole body comes againe to the first proportion. Death may take one peece of man from another; but when he shall be driven to let goe his hold, these two parts shall joyne. The soule is a spirit, and cannot be called a man without the body: no man is said to be a husband that hath no wife: nor is the sap a tree: nor faire written paper called a booke, till it be bound up in a cover. The soule in heaven is not a perfect man without the body. Vses.
1 It discovers their pittiable folly, that upon every galling discontent, lift up heir owne hands against their owne lives. They thinke death the remedy of all vils, seeke it as a present ease, the onely cure of their violent passions and perplexed consciences. But alas, then begins their present misery: for that sends them to this judgement, and for this lamentable end, to be punished. They leape out of the smoke, into the flame: from a momentany disturbance, that may be cured by faith and repentance; into a woe that enwraps them in eternall vengeance. What a foole was that crafty Polititian; that could order his house, dispose his goods, and then hang himselfe! He little thought of this judgement. Thus Saul forsaken of all hopes, scorning deaths blow by the hand of a Philistim, begs it of his Armour-bearer: and what he could not obtaine of him, himselfe supplies. As if he had borne armes against himselfe, he fals on his owne sword. The Armour-bearer followes his Master, and does that to himselfe which he durst not to his King: both yeelding that to their owne swords as familiar executioners, which they grudged to their pursuers. Saul had bin told the evening before by a familiar,1 S .19. To morrow thou shalt be with me. Now he makes hast to prove the divell no lier: rather than faile, he makes his owne mittimus; accepting the greater mischiefe,
 to avoid the lesse. He might have suffered the Philistian violence without blame: to have died by an enemy had bin his fate, not his fault. But when he will needs act the Philistims part upon himselfe; he lives and dyes a murtherer. Other prisoners by breaking the Gaole may escape the Assisses: but here to breake it and not to stay for a summons, is to hasten the judgement, as it were to purchase a Sessions, for his owne damnation. Vpon the soule we passe not this sentence, upon the fact we may. There may be repentance, but the deed is hainous: and without repentance the punishment will be grievous.
2 Let it teach us all to provide in our life, a harbour for this storme that comes after death. How unshiftable otherwise shall we be in that houre, how unable to answer at the day of Iudgement? What is it for a poore man to take care of his winding sheete? Or the rich for a curious tombe? their names may stinke like their carcases for al this. Or for the superstitious to be buried in a Fryars cowle, or with a great summe to purchase a grave under the Altar? Whereas a good man buried in the Church, is Templum, in Templo. Or for the desperate to wish for mountaines, instead of monuments? When they shall be turned out of their bodies, as Hagar was out of doores; and rejected from Gods presence, like vagabond Cain; saying with the unjust steward, what shall become of us? It is a provided receptacle, that shall comfort them that have it: foxes, and hares, and even vermine fore-acquaint themselves with muses, thickets, and borowes: and when they are hunted, repaire thither for safetie; and shall man be to seeke for his refuge?Prov. 30.26. The comes make their houses in the rockes: we have only one Rocke to borough in; our only Citie of refuge, and Sanctuary of peace Iesus Christ.
2 The other collection is, that there is a Punishment ordained for the wicked: a punishment for the matter; but for the qualitie and manner, this is sealed of God and concealed from man. Horrible it is, and unconceivable; therefore hath no specification in Scripture, saving only in some shadowes and narrow representations; according to humane capacitie; the figure, rather than the nature of hell. Diverse popish writers have made certaine mappes and models of hell, searched all the nookes of that dungeon, surveyed the darke roomes, quartered them into regions and cantons: here placing lust, there ryot, there covetousnesse. Bellarmine sayes that one glimpse of that burning climate were enough to make a man (not only Christian, but) even turne Monke, and confine himselfe to the strictest rule of their mortification. But to wish such a sight, and come off like a discoverer; to make report unto men, is superfluous, superstitious: a thing that God hath not thoughtLuk. 16.31. fit for him to grant, nor necessary for man to know. If we aske what is in heaven, CHRIST answers;Ioh. 14.4. You know the way, follow it. So if you aske what is in hell, you know the way; avoid it. Quid mors est, rogitas: si scirem, mortuus essem. No man ever saw hell, that came backe to make relation. Let us h^are Moses, the word, the Preacher: if the Lord meane us any good, they shall doe us some good. Let us not desire it painted in tables, but considered in our meditations; and that frequently: short and transient thoughts of it, may leave men to the long and permanent paines of it, so thinke of it that we study to escape it. Take these glimmering shadowes of it.
By the want and privation of all comforts: how terrible is it for a man to be famished? it is able to make him gnaw his owne flesh. In hell the want shall be greater, and the desire more violent described byRev. 16.10. gnashing their teeth for anger, and gnawing their tongues for hunger. A son takes it grievously to be banished the sight of his father:2 Sam. 14.32. Absalom was weary of his life by this delay. What a torment is it then to be shut out for ever from the presence of God, without all hope of readmission? David, was but the father of his flesh, God is the father of all spirits: Absalom might have life by him, but did not live in him: yea, he could live not only without him, but against him. But in God we live, and without him can be no life. It was griefe enough for Adoniah, though he were pardoned, to be decourted,
 confined to his countrey house. With what horror shall the reprobates heare, Depart from me yee cursed? Everlastingly to be expiled from him in whom is all life, must needs be an everlasting death. If in the Lords presence be the fullnesse of joy, the fulnesse of sorrow must be in his absence.
By the necessitie, in respect of the decree of Gods immutable Iustice; which casts them into prison without baile or main-prise: no ransome, no redemption. Bondage is terrible, especially to them that have ranged in libertie. Though Absalom be repealed, yet to have his owne house his prison, vexeth him. It could not content Shimei, though he had roome enough, to be confined to the river Kidr^^ for gadding. Take a man from his well furnished house, seated in a good aire, his grounds watred with commodious springs, with his choice of Gardens, fields or walkes; from walking or riding at his pleasure: and lay him up in some loathsome prison, to spend but the short miserie of his remaining dayes: how disconsolate is this restraint? Such, and ten thousand times more, is it to be fetcht from this broad world, Sun-shine, light, and delight: and to be bound in the chaines of eternall darkenesse.
By the society: the company addes much to the content or torment of a place. A loving wife, gracious children, kinde neighbours, cheerefull companions, are the sweet refreshments of this life. Now for a man to be excluded from these, and to be haunted with furies, male-contents, melancholy, or wrangling copesmates; how grievous is the change? No man delights to dwell among Herses and Funerals, or to live in charnell houses; unlesse Sextons that can make themselves merry with dead corpses. We hate to dwell in Hospitals, Bridewels, or Bedlams: yea, the very society of ruffians and teare-Christs is odious to us, if the love of God be in us. How intolerable then is the habitation among dogs, uncleane birds, reprobate spirits worse than any scriech-Owles, Tygers, or Toades.
By the extremity: flesh and bloud hath beene exercised with many sharpe miseries, and tho^^ ^orer than flesh and bloud (without the comfort of Grace) could ever indure. The Collick, the Gowte are torments: the strappado, or the rack: the slow burnings of materiall fire, all terrible. Yet are all these but the rast of this punishment; like an itch to those exquisite paines. The rich oppressor will then thinke his former Gowte a pleasure: and the murderer wish to hang eternally on his gibbet. But hath a man bin vexed with a disquiet conscience, the arrowes of guiltinesse sticking in his sides, groning under the pressure of unbearable sins? This comes neerest to the say of hell, a taste of those vials, to which the gall of Aspes is honey, and the stings of Scorpions a meere tickling. That which made the humane nature of the Son of God sweat clods of bloud, and heavy his soule to the death; crying as if he were forsaken; thinke of that punishment.
By the eternity; which makes all the rest absolute. Did the glasse hold more sands than ever the Sea washt on the shore, and but one little dust could passe in a Milion of yeares; this were miserable enough: yet would there be an end of that long ruine. But this punishment is a continuall feaver, a death which hath no death: it hath a beginning,Mat. 8.29. it hath no end. Adde eternity to extremity, and then consider hell to be hell indeed. If the Ague of a Yeare, or the Collick of a Moneth, or the rack of a day, or the burning of an houre, be so bitter: how would it breake the hearts of the wicked, to think of all these beyond all measure, beyond all time? Yet is all this truth, saving that it comes farre short of the truth? This is much, it is not neere all.
O that men would meditate on this before they sin: but such thoughts are held too melancholy; and we counted bloudy Physitians to speake of hell in our Sermons. They upbraid us, that we torment them before their time. Men are loth to be tormented before their time, and yet feare not to be tormented time without end. Alas, all our scope in discoursing of this fire, is but to snatch your soules out of the fire: we bring you to the brinke of the gulfe, that seeing it with horror
 you may never fall into it. All this the very divels, I doe not say, beleeve, but feele and shudder to thinke of. Shall a temporall King have his judgement seat, his prison, his executioners; and not God, who is so infinitely just? Shall man punish with death corporall, and is not death eternall just with the Lord? Let men ruminate of these things by themselves: and if the description of these flames cannot make them detest sinne, how likely are they to become fire-brands of these flames? Without some infallible antidote against this poison, mee thinkes the soules of unbeleevers should goe out of their bodies, as devils doe out of the possessed; raging, rending, foaming. It is a wonder that any should dye in their right senses and wits, that have not learned to dye in the faith of Christ. Death it selfe is painefull, therefore no marvell if men wish it short: of an easefull life man desires a protraction, but speed of his inevitable dissolution: not more willing to live when he is well, than to be out of his paine when he must dye. Every pang of violent and mortall sicknesse is a death: to lye one houre under deaths tyrannie is tedious: but to be a whole day a dying, is beyond naturall patience. What then is that death which knowes no end? As this body is as fraile as the life that animates it, so that death is as everlasting as the soule that endures it. It were grievous for man to be but so long a dying, as he hath leave to live: yet one minute of the second death is worse than whole ages of the first. Let us never be so mad and desperate, as to shrinke at that which must come, and will soone be over: and not to tremble at that which may come and continue for ever.
To conclude, here is one thing that answers to all doubts and questions that here might be moved. If it be asked who these unjust are, Dominus novit: he knowes who are his, which is a Novit of approbation: who are not his, which is a Novit of reprobation. If, how reserved, what bonds be upon them; Dominus Novit, he hath insensible chaines of durance. If when this day of Iudgement shall be, what time is designed for it; what moneth, what yeare the Iudge shall appeare in the clouds; Dominus novit; it is not fit for man to know, the LORD, keepes it to himselfe. If, how they shall be punished, what that fire and brimstone is, how differently it shall worke upon sinners, where the locall seat of torment should; in aire or earth: still Dominus novit, and suo tempore revelabit. One Quaere before I part with the verse.
Whether doth God alwayes forbeare notorious sinners to this great day. Indeed he set a brand upon Cain, that he should not be cut off by the hand of man, but reserved to this generall Session: and many an oppressor dies aged in his bed, and tarries long for his condemnation. Even this is a heavy punishment, that suffers men to grow old in their sinnes. It is best for a reprobate, excepting only never to bee borne, to have his swadling clouts a winding sheet, and his cradle become his sepulcher. Then is a terrible woe, when God forbeares smiting, and man forbeares not sinning. But this impunitie, doth not alwayes hold to a mature and white-hair'd death. Some are met withall betimes, in the heat of their fury, breathing out bloud and slaughter against the Church; even suddenly confounded, as Paul was converted. Corah rebells; doth his fall stay for his age? No, the earth opens, and swallowes him quicke. That element was never used to such morsells: many dead carcases hath it taken into the hungry bowels, never before bodies informed with living soules. Before it hath beene only opened with the violent hand of man; now opens it selfe. It had often beene a grave, now it is both a grave, and an executioner. Those five Kings pull sudden vengeance on their owne heads, they come forth to their death: Ioshua's sword and Gods hailestones dispatch them apace.
Sisera flies from the impartiall hand of a victors warre, gets into a Tent, a friends ten^* there securely falls a sleepe: in the midst of all that tumult, and the jawes of death, he finds time to sleepe: as too many hearts doe in the midst of their sins and spirituall dangers. And whiles haply he was dreaming of the clashing
 of armours, rattling of charrets, cryes of the bleeding, and triumphs of the conquering; even then he sleepes his last, and hath the fatall reward of all his crueltie. His head was fastned so close to the earth, as if his body had beene listning what was become of his soule. Of his hundred thousands so soone hath he none left, not a page, to prevent his death, to accompany it, or bewaile it. He brag'd of great wonders that he would doe with his yron chariots; and now one naile of yron kills him; and he knowes not by whom he perishes. Fearefull are the examples of these sudden doomes; there is nothing more horrible, than to die in the act of sin without the act of repentance. Too many promise themselves the grace and space to repent in their old age: that rich man afforded himselfe many yeares; foole,Luk. 12.19. he had not many houres. Nadab and Abihu, while they were offering sacrifice, were made sacrifices. God sends downe true and strange fire upon them, that offered false and common fire to him. What sinner can be safe, when these sons of Aaron so suffer? Nature might have pleaded for them, they are young men, scarce warme in their office, the sons of the High Priest, of great eminence, they have not yet experience, may be more carefull all their remaining time, it is but their first fault.
Thinke of this ye that study pretences and patronages for your sins: what hope of plea shall you finde either in the greatnesse of your birth, or greenenesse of your youth, or in the newnesse of your ill doing, when you doe that you know God hath forbidden? O there is no priviledge that can beare off a sin with the Lord: no prerogative can challenge pardon; when as you see young men, sons of the Ruler, for their first offence, stroke dead. How did Phineas Iavelin take Zimri napping; as it is reported of one of the Popes, to dye in the instant act of his adultery. Let fornicators tremble at this remembrance, when they purpose fulfilling their lusts. The Blasphemer, that wounds himselfe by wounding Christ, hopes to quit all with a miserere at the last: but did he never heare of Iulian, of diverse common swearers, that have died with oathes in their mouthes? The drunkard assures himselfe to be sober long enough before he dies: yet how many hath he heard of, yea some knowne, that have perished in their cups, and never awaked from their drink, till their soules appeared to judgement? Examples of men quackled, drowned, crushed to death, breaking their necks, are frequent enough. The theevish oppressor promises himselfe to give over, when age hath fill'd his purse. Such is the resolution of reprobates, and men ordained to damnation. I have credibly heard of one slaine out-right with a peece of timber, which he stole but halfe an houre before. Of another that had stollen a Sheepe, and resting his burden on a stone, was strangled with the struggling of it about his neck.
Thus doth God sometimes execute Martiall-law, doing present execution; that fooles might not say in their hearts; There is no God. As he forbeares others that men might see a necessity of the solemne judgement to come. We pronounce not definitive sentence upon particular men so dying: but certainely they leave behind them to their friends little hope and comfort of their salvation. Nor yet is speed of death ever more a judgement: sudden dying is alwayes deprecable; and when it comes, full of feare, doubt, and suspicion of the worst. But is never a manifest and infallible argument of anger, but when it strikes men in the act of sin. Howsoever, leasure of repentance is a signe of Gods speciall favour: when hee gives a man law, it implies that he would not have him wrapt up in destruction. But presume not O sinner, nor flatter thy selfe that the day of judgement is a great way off. Thou knowest not, when the drunken cup is in thy hand, whether thou shalt live to drinke it off. When thou swearest, whether thy mouth shall ever open againe to call for pardon. When thou goest to the bed of adultery, whether thou shalt ever rise againe from thy uncleane pillow. When thou liftest up thy hand to strike thy brother, whether thou shalt ever lift it up for mercy to thy father. When thou beginnest an unjust contention, whether thou shalt ever end it ere thou
 commest to hell. O thinke of a powerfull arme, which though it drawes back long to fetch the harder blow, yet is it alwaies able to strike, and dead the despiser of Goodnesse ere he can have leave to swallow his spittle.
How often doth God cut men off for a sin they never did, while their assiduall iniquities are not summoned, nor medled withall? Not much otherwise he did Zeba and Zalmunna: they had bin cruell to many of Gideons fathers children; yet had they bin spared if his mothers children had not died by them. For Succoth, he slew the Rulers, and spared the people: for Midian, he slew the people and would have spared the rulers. Gideon would, but God would not: he will finde occasions to bring wicked men to their Iudgement: and they which should have scaped the penaltie of their publike wrongs, must perish in a private quarrell. So swaggerers, when for theft and homicide they have scaped the Iudgement of a Session; often bleed their last drop in streetes and Tavernes: God doing on them just execution, by an unjust adversaries weapon. Wherein he shewes his manifest wrath by performing that himselfe, which he charged the Magistrate to doe, and he performed not. The slaughter of Gideons brethren was not the greatest fault of those Kings: yet when the rest should have found an unjust forgivenesse, this alone kills them. The sins of a wicked man are many, yet some one shall bring him to shame. Not seldome doth God pay men with one sin for all the rest. Shimei had faults enough, cursing and abusing the Lords Annointed with dust and stones: David pardons him, Salomon confines him; he might now rest in peace: No, he must run to Gath, to fetch home his servants, with the losse of himselfe: this payd him for all the rest. Ioab had trecherously murdered Abner and Amasa, scapes for both these: at last hee sides with Adoniah, and this brings him to his end in bloud.
How many bloudy murders have beene thus punished in a mutinous word? The tongue in rash language hath scourged the iniquitie of the hand. One hath done many robberies, scaped many searches; at last when all hath beene forgotten he hath beene hang'd for accessary to a theft he never knew. Suspected felonie hath often paid the price of an unknowen rape: and they that have gone away with unnaturall filthinesse, yet have clipped off their dayes with their owne coine. Still GODS Iudgements are just, even when mans may be unjust. Sinner, that which hath befalne any of these, may befall thee; what dispensations soever thou givest thy selfe. Some of these were mightie, some rich, some young, some thought themselves as wise as thou: none of them ever looked for such ignominious ends more than thou doest. In the feare of GOD, if we deprecate such ends, let us decline such courses.




VERSE 10. But chiefely them that walke after the flesh in the lust of uncleannesse, and despise governement.

SO monstrous are the outrages of the world, and so incorrigible the boistrous precipice of sin; that Reason (which is of a middle nature betwixt grace and corruption) begins to doubt, whether there be a God and Iudge of all the earth. The godly suffer injuries, and are not delivered from their oppressors. The wicked are impune and prosper in the midst of al their flagitious crimes. Where is then the Iudge, to punish the one, to deliver the other? He sits in heaven, sees and disposeth all that is done upon earth: beholds the sufferings of his pious children, knowes when it is fit time to release them. The wickednesse of the unjust cries to him for vengeance, he knowes when to answer it. He forbeares to strike these, for the ripening of their disobedience: to ease the other, for the exercise of their patience. Some hot spirits would call fire from heaven, sudden destruction on their persecutors: not so saith God: there is a day prefixed; and what is it to you if I will have them tarry till then? They cannot wind themselves out of my hand; I have them bound fast enough: be you quiet and let your expectation depend on this Iudgement.
Now from this Thesis he comes to the Hypothesis, accomodates the generall doctrine to his owne purpose. If God will take vengeance on all the wicked, let not these pernicious seducers, beasts in the shapes of men, thinke to escape. They follow the Flesh, not Reason, much lesse the Spirit; but like bruites, are governed by their sensuall appetite. They walke after: the flesh is not like some stranger, whom they meet rarely: or some friend, whom they see but now and then: or a neighbour, whom they border upon, and often converse with: or a domestick companion, with whom they eate, drinke, play, sleepe. But it is their Captaine, their Leader, their Commander, whose colours they march under; file, or ranke, or troupe, according to his direction: their primum mobile, by whom they move; a if they had no particular motion of their owne: so benighted and pusled with blindnesse, that they know no other way than the flesh guides. It is the weight that sets all their wheeles a going; the horses that draw their chariot, the very life of their corruption, and corruption of their life, without which they doe nothing. In the lust of uncleannesse: if you desire to know what course this flesh prescribes them, it is lust: renouncing all studie of honesty, they must give themselves to Lust. But there may be a sanctified lust, I desire to doe thy will, O God: or a naturall lust; as hunger is an appetite to meat. Therefore this lust hath the specification; lust of uncleannesse; a sordid, belluine, irrationall, stinking turpitude. After this the reprobate walkes; his whole selfe, all the parts of him: his eyes walke after to looke upon it: his eares walke after to hearken to it: his mouth walkes after to talke of it: his feet walke after to pursue it: his hands stay not behinde to act it: his heart is formost of all to desire it. Finally, whatsoever may crosse their lusts, they set themselves to contemne; Despise government. Not that Almighty word which rules Heaven and Earth, but all the beames of Gods Omnipotent royalty,
 in his deputed magistracie: vilipending all lawes, canons, sanctions; dishonouring all Princes, Iudges, soveraigne powers. Neither Moses nor Aaron, Caesar nor Paul, Minister of the word, nor Minister of the sword, finde reverence in their hearts, or obedience in their lives. As if they resolved to disgrace that, wherein GOD hath imprinted the most immediate characters of his owne Supreme Majestie.
But chiefly.] There be degrees and differences of sins and sinners; for God here sets a Prasertim, Chiefly, especially, principally, upon some. Whatsoever becomes of others, they shall be sure of a large share in vengeance. There is a notorious marke set upon them, a boaring thorow the eare, like perpetuall slaves; or a burning in their hands, like once convicted malefactors; a branding with some indeleble marke of shame. There is great reason for this Chiefely, in respect of the sinners quality: they walke after the flesh, that is there owne carnall desires and sensuall delights, in the strength of corruption, yet perhaps without eruption. They balke such facts as may expose them to the censures of men: so keepe themselves, that the nationall lawes cannot fetch them in Coram nobis. How doth the covetous man scrape and oppresse, yet dares looke the Iudge in the face: because though he be in the extremity of the Law, yet not beyond it. The Vsurer guards his interest with statute-lace, he will not take a peny above that stint or allowance: so he scapes, and is rather made a Grand Iuror, than a guilty prisoner. The adulterer walkes under the canopie of night, throwes the silken robe of greatnesse over his lust; and then the Iudge dares not see it: or lockes it up with the doores of secrecie, and then the Iudge cannot see it: or buyes it off with money, and then the Iudge will not see it: or when none of these will serve, he hides his head where the lawes hand cannot finde him. Now upon him God sets his mark, this Chiefely: thou scapest fairely, yet remember thou art reserved to Iudgement. The more remisse man hath beene against thee, the more impartially will God proceed with thee. He is content thou shouldest passe all apprehensions till the last, till his own Pursuivant, death comes for thee. A King takes some capitall offenders from the common course of Iustice, and reserves them to his owne censure.
But how is this so fitly applyed to the next clause, Despisers of Government? This should rather seeme to bring them into present condemnation; that by suffering temporall punishment, they might repent and scape the eternall. Magistrates are often more curious and sensible of their owne injuries, than of the Lords: though this be an abuse of authority, to weare the sword of Iustice in their owne sheaths; and to draw it not so readily against publike offences, as in their private causes. How then come these to be reserved? Either they are too great for the hand of authority, or too contemptible for the eye of authority. Too great, as the Popish clergie are exempt from the temporall Sword: or a strong faction of mal-contents; a beast that knowes the owne strength. Or too base for notice; such are the droves of beggars, profest cyphers, nothing-does that swarme about this Citie, and have their cantons all over the countrey. Spight of all lawes, statutes, and contradictions, they will begge rather than worke; and curse that authority to the pit of hell, that shall correct their vicious life. These the connivence of man lets alone, and the patience of GOD also forbeares: but their damnation sleepeth not.
Great difference then doth God make of offenders: eye for eye; not the whole body for an eye, not two eyes for one. Theft finds an easier mulct than murder, than murder treason. All sin is culpable enough; but there is a Chiefely belonging to some: as to him that miscalls his brother, Matth. 5.22.Hebr. 13.4. Whoremongers God will Iudge; they are often reprieved to his owne tribunall.Revel. 22.15. Without shall be dogs, etc. Many other sinners shall be excluded, but chiefely these. 1 Tim. 1.9. If hell were too little, some lesse offenders should be thrust out; these must have roome. There is a Maxime on the head of a deboisht Christian: howsoever men
 live or die out of the pale of the Church, a wicked Christian shall be sure of plagues.M^tth 26.24. Woe to him that betrayes the Sonne of man: Iewes, Elders, Priests, souldiers, Pilate, all guilty; but chiefely Woe to Iudas; he hadIoh. 19 11 the greater sinne. The Midianites fare not so ill as the wicked Israelites, Iudg 8.16. The sword quickly dispatcheth them; these die with lingring and horror, the flesh torne from their backes with thornes and bryars; beaten and scratch'd to death. How severe was this revenge, how sad a spectacle to a tender heart! to see their bare bones looking in some places thorow the bloudy ragges of their skin and flesh; every rent worse than the former, death multiplied by torment?
Such a Chiefely, or high place in hell is reserved for some sinners: the rest are beaten, but they that know Gods will and doe it not, especially; with many stripes. All corrupt and rotten trees are good for nothing but the fire; but chiefely the vine, if it be dead and fruitlesse. At that dreadfull day how many shall unwish themselves Christians; or wish that the Gospell and they had never beene acquainted. If infidels live ungodly, they doe but their kind: their punishment shall be, though just yet lesse. But if men after a religious nurture, and knowledge of the truth, shall shame their education; this God takes more hainously, and revenges more sharply. The more bonds of dutie, the more plagues of neglect.
That walke after the flesh, etc.] Here is a double mis-behaviour; one in regard of themselves, another in respect of their betters. While they neglect service to their governors, they justly become slaves to themselves. It is fit they should be left to their owne desperate guidance, that scorne to be awed by Gods ordinance. In the former of these vices, consider two things. 1. What is their leader, The flesh, etc. 2. How they follow this leader; Walke after it. In particular, here is the daughter, the mother, and the grand-mother: the daughter is uncleannesse, the mother Lust, the Beldam or Gand-mother the flesh. Vncleannesse is from Last, last from the flesh; uncleannesse, lust, flesh and all from the Devill. In a tree there is the sappe, roote, branches, fruite: Satan is the roote, flesh the sap, lust the branches, Vncleannesse the fruite. All of them bad counsellers, intolerable commanders.
Flesh.] By flesh, to decline the various acceptions, wee here understand the whole corruption of our unmortified nature. It is not only a privative incapacitie of goodn^sse, but a positive inclination to all evill. The godly are not wholly freed from it, but not wholly governed by it. It is in the wick^d, as the Turke is at home, ruling all: in the reg^nerate, as the Turke and Christian, they can never agree. The flesh, like Esau, is the first borne: but Iacob, grace gets the blessing from it. These are mixed in the beleever, as fire and water are in compounded bodies; light and darkenesse in the aire at twilight; or water cold and hot in one vess^ll. We cannot say, that the water is in one part hot, in another cold, but the whole quantitie is partly hot and partly cold;^^l 5 17 that is luke-warme. e The flesh lusteth against the spirit, etc. The flesh carries him one way, the spirit another: as the inferior orbes have a violent motion ab extra, and a naturall motion contrary of their owne. But still light shall overcome darkenesse, heat over-master the cold; and the dead flesh be weakened and finally annihilated by the quickning grace of Christ.
Many complaine of the flesh, as of the Ephialtes in a slumber; they would remove the burden, and cannot: hence they begin to doubt of their salvation. But then Paul could not be sure of his salvation; for he cryes out for deliveranceRom. 7 24. From the body of this death. And we need no better proofe that a man is not dead, than because hee feeles his deadnesse. If wee be sensible of the flesh, detest her motions, repent of her over-bearings and prevailements; weepe and fight, as a troubled aire doth at once both raine and thunder; call upon Christ for victory, with the weapons of resistance in our hands; we shall then sing to his glory that triumph; Blessed be God, that gives the victory through Iesus Christ.

But the flesh in these men here, is a Dominus fac totum; which not only makes lawes to a reprobate, but makes him keepe them: a Queene regent, a shee-devill, a profest strumpet; and under her conduct and Standard marcheth the whole feminine army; Avaritia, invidia, superbia, etc. The divell doates on the flesh, and her resisting is a resigning: for if Satan should not feed her with temptations, she would tempt him for them, and snatch her owne bane. Sometime, she is troubled with a wrangling neighbour, Conscience; which if she cannot pacifie, she will reare up; as Chirurgions doe incurable Fistula's. She heares of Christs passion, and is glad of it; not as her remedy, but her security: she takes his death as a lisence to sin, and his Crosse for Letters-patent to doe mischeife. She heares the Word, as a man writes on the waters; no character, no print of his finger is left behinde. She will not understand, butProv. 5.23. dies without instruction: onely hell torments can open her eyes. So the rich manLuk. 16.23. Lift up his eyes in hell: they were never opened before.Iudg. 8.16. As Gideon taught the men of Succoth, with briers and thornes: he made them to know, taught them with a vengeance. She is ever ready to run into extreames: like the Iewes, in adversity unfaithfull, in prosperity unthankefull. Or as Labans Sheepe were in the extreames; either all black, or all white: Iacobs were in the meane party colour'd. The wicked are alwayes in extremities, of either defect, or excesse; of irreligion, or superstition. In a word, as the world is Satans bawd, so the flesh is his harlot; upon whom he begets all his children, the workes of disobedience.
For us that have both our fathers bloud and our mothers bloud in us: grace from the former, as we have flesh from the other; and one of these will be master: let us as it is fit, give the Soveraignety to our father: let his grace rule us, albeit the flesh entice us. Be thou a faithfull Porter in Gods house; diligent to keep out his enemies, and to let in his friends. Beware of denying entrance to the least motion of grace: for mans heart is like a spring-lock; pull too the doore after you, and the lock will shut of it selfe: but being shut it cannot be opened without a key. The heart with the least pull locks out grace easily: but cannot open to re-admit it without his helpe that hath the key of the house of David, that opens and no man shuts, that shuts and no man opens.1 Cor. 15.50 Know you not that flesh and bloud shall not inherit the Kingdome af Heaven? We say in wrongs, flesh and bloud cannot endure this: we say in temptations flesh and bloud cannot hold out. What flesh doe we meane? That which God hath damned? Which he will never admit to the Kingdome of heaven? A faire plea! When that must be our Apologie, which is our impiety. No, let grace be our direction, for it is grace that must be our salvation.
Lust.] This is the daughter of the flesh, and mother of uncleannesse: the branches that grow from that cursed roote, and bringing forth more cursed fruit. The sparkes that flie up from that burning fornace, the bubbles of that noisome and banefull fountaine. For method of discourse, I shall examine five questions concerning Lust.
1 What lust is. It must be considered as the Originall fountaine of all sins; and so it is an impotency of heart, whereby it is inordinately carried with the desire of evill. Originall sin is called Lust, because it principally shewes it selfe in lusts: as an obstruction of the liver is perceived in the burning and drinesse of the palmes. Or it is taken for a branch and fruit of the former corruption: flesh is the Tyrant raigning, lusts are his lawes, rules, preceptsRom. 6.12. Obeying them is the vassalage, a tenure in villany. It is either fomitis innati, the in-borne occasion of sin: or Actus i^terioris; whereof be three degrees. 1. Propassio, the first motion. 2. Delectat^^, it likes us. 3. Consensus, we yeeld to it. The first is impossible be to avoided, the second difficult, the last by grace easie. The appetite desires noxious meate, yet we choose whether we will taste it: it pleases our palate, yet is it in our choice to swallow it downe: we swallow it and it makes us sick yet then let
 us refraine it. Lust then is either Facultas concupiscendi, or Actus ipse: the one like a drowsinesse of nature, the other like the passion of slumber: that pravitas nativa, this pravitas activa: that the nourishment of sinne, this the accomplishment of sinne.
There is a three-fold concupiscence; Naturall, Sensitive, Voluntary. 1. Naturall, which is in stirpes and plants, whereby they covet and draw unto them their food and nourishment; this is properly called (...), desire. 2. Sensitive, such is in bruite beasts. 3. Voluntary, this is in man onely, (though the other be not excluded,) and is called (...). In this voluntary lust we must consider (...) the faculty it selfe: and (...), the exercise of that faculty. Further, these must be considered Physice, naturally; such is an appetite to meate: or Metaphysice, supernaturally, such is a regenerate desire: so there is anPsa. 119.127 Holy covetousnesse,Gal. 5.17. A spirituall lust;1 Cor. 12.31 An anger without sin. Thus we may covet, desire, affect, and sinne not. Or morally, in relation to the commandement; which consists in concupiscendo illicita; in lusting after unlawfull things. Such are aliena, not our owne; anothers house, or wife, or any propriety of his: or licita modo non licito; as exceeding in measure: so sinners covet wine to riot; or money to hoard, not to use: or strength to revenge: or beauty to tempt: or apparell for pride. To lust for a lawfull thing may be an unlawfull lust; as to desire it supra modum debitum, or citra finem licitum. ThereforeDe Doctrin. Christia. lib. 3. cap. 10. S. Augustine cals concupiscence, a motion of the mind to enjoy riches, health, another, yea, himselfe; or any thing else, non propter Deum, not for God.
2 What is the seate of this lust:Rom. 7.18. I know that in my flesh dwelleth no good thing. Where Ambrose by flesh understands the body. His reason why sin hath the habitation in the flesh, rather than in the soule, is because the flesh is derived ex Traduce, by progagation, so is not the soule. For if that were propagated as the flesh, sin should rather habitare in anima quam in corpore: the soule being the agent offending more than can the body, which is but the instrument. Ans. This proves that the first pollution is of the flesh, not that the soule can be free: for by infusion must follow infection; as good liquor is spoiled by a musty vessell. But sinne disperseth it selfe into the whole nature of man, body and soule. So there is (...)Col. 2.18. A minde of flesh: nor is the naturall minde apt to any good. 2 Tim. 3.8. Corr^p^ mindes: therefore the Apostle requires a^ph. 4.23. Renovation of the minde. Nor by the outward man must we understand the body, and by the inner man the soule: but the regenerate part is called the t inner man,2 Cor. 4.16. the unregenerate part the outward. Grace is the inward man, because. 1. Intus potissimum regnat; the power of it is chiefly discerned in the minde.Martyr. 2. Non patet oculis humanis; so called the1 Pet 3.4. Pareus. Hid man of the heart. 3. Non externa quaerit: ^vill lusts are ever wandring abroad; without a man, exercised about vanities: this keepes home, and seekes not riches, but peace of conscience.Cajetanus. Calvin. 4. Per excellentiam; as the minde is more excellent th^^ the body, so the spirit more noble than the flesh Lyranus would have the inner m^^ to be reason, the outer sensuality; that beast of man which alwayes rebels against reason. So Gorrhan: In carne, that is, in homine sensuali: so Tolet, Pererius, and the present Romists. But it is plaine by the Apostles demonstration, that the flesh is Totus homo ut natus, and the Spirit; Totus homo ut renatus; there being in the regenerate something that is spirituall, and something that is carnall. The seate of s^^ is in the rationall part, the will bringing it forth: the body doth but execute the edict of reason and will: therfore the part rationall hath something carnall. Shoolemen like the Philosophers,Arist. Eth. lib. 1. c. 13. make two parts of the minde; (...), the reasonable part: and (...), void of discourse, the seate of affections and passions. If Paul should make no other difference betweene flesh and spirit; his Apostolicall theologie were no greater comfort than their blinde philosophy.
Bez.3 Whether lust be a sin; wee must know that not onely the act of lust, but ipsa concupiscibilitas, concupiscence it selfe is corrupt and forbidden; unda cupi^^t^^.
 The difference betweene us and the Pontificians in this point, lies thus. They say, there is concupiscentia formata, the second motion, which is with consent of will; this is sin, and we say so too. There is concupiscentia informis, without deliberate consent: this they say is no sin, we affirme it. They say, it is not sin, but the cause of sinne; as the Sunne is said to be hot, because it causeth heat: but wee call it truly sinne it selfe. Let us first weigh some of their arguments against it; then ours for it.
Object. That which is naturall, cannot be evill: but concupiscence is naturall, for it was in man before his fall. Ans. As it is naturall, it is not forbidden: if the matter desired be lawfull, the manner regular, the end honest; Gods glory, ours or others good. So a man may desire that is proper to him, the wife of his bosome or that is appropriate to him, as an office, 1 Tim* 3.1.
Object. Nothing involuntary is sin, but the first lust is against the will, therefore no sin. Answ. The rule of good or evill is not mans will, but Gods Law. That which is in us necessary, was in Adam voluntary, and by him in us. Now it cannot be avoided, then it might: his willing transgression transmitted to us a necessitie of sinning. Originall sin is in Infants, it is not voluntary: yet they die, which could not be in Iustice, had they not sinned. So though that of Aristotle may bee true; Nemo volens malus, nec invitus faelix: no man is bad with his will, nor happy against his will: yet habite can make that necessary, which was at first voluntary.
Object. The Law commands no impossible thing,Aug. de. Temp. Ser. 61. nor doth God condemne for that which no good man avoid. Ans. The Law was possible to created nature, that is now impossible to corrupted nature: that we want power to fulfill it, is because we had power and would not keepe it. Nemo quantum possumus melius novit, quam qui ipsum posse donavit.
It is objected from, Iam. 1.16. that either concupiscence is not sin, but the cause of sin: or if it be sin, yet is not mortall sin; for sinne till it be perfect, brings ^ot forth death. Answ. This is no true conclusion; concupiscence brings forth sin, Ergo it is no sin; but Ergo it is not that sinne which it brings forth. A man begets a man, therefore is he not a man? No, but therefore he is not that man which he begets: Yea, he is a man even because he begets a man. And to say, sin perfected brings forth death, therefore sinne not perfect brings not forth death; is as if we should thus reason; the father begets a mortall man, therefore the Grandfather doth not. Because actuall lust produceth death as the nearest cause, this hinders not originall lust as a remote cause to be mortall.

Our Reasons.
Argum. 1. Whatsoever is forbidden by the Law, is sin; but the Law forbids the first motions of lust. If you aske, what commandement forbids it, I answere; Lust with consent is forbidden in the ninth, Lust without consent in the tenth* Without this distinction I see not how we can make ten commandements: the seventh forbids lust in the voluntary desire, as our Saviour expounds it.Matth. 5.28. Therefore if the tenth should not restraine the involuntary and first rising lust, it were superfluous, as being all one with the seventh. It is not untrue, that originall sin is condemned in the whole Law, but more directly in the first and last commandments: because these two more properly concerne the heart of man: the former respects it as concerning God, the other as concerning man.Rom. 7.7. Saint Paul confesseth that his lust tempted him against his will; and by that lust he meanes the first motion: for the second, which are with consent of will, he knew well enough before to be sins: yea, the very heathen knew this by the light of nature. To covet then is forbidden; if we doe covet, we breake the Law therefore sin. The other lawes condemne pravos affectus quibus delectamur: the last,Calvin. ipsos appetitus quibus titillamur. To say with Pererius, that the former only prohibite Actus exteri^res, and the last consensus interiores; is false by Christs owne exposition: who
 citing the Law, Thou shalt not kill, affirmes it to be broken by rash anger: and that, Thou shalt not commit adultery; by lusting after a woman.
Argument. 2. Rom. 7.20. If I doe that I would not, it is no more I, that doe it, but sinne that dwelleth in me. He is unwilling, yet he calls this lust, sinne. Pererius answers, it is called sinne, because it is Effectus peccati, or Affectus peccati: as the writing is called the hand, because it is written by the hand: or as Frigus is called Pigrum, slothfull, because it makes men slothfull. Solut. But that which makes a man bad cannot be good it selfe. Quicquid efficit tale, ipsum magis est tale. Concupiscence is not only causa peccati, and paena peccati, sed ipsum peccatum; as Saint Augustine hath it. The Iesuite replies, Augustine meanes not peccatum morale, nor peccatum mortale; but vitium corruptae Naturae: as blindnesse, deafenesse, lamenesse, are called Peccata sive errata Naturae: as being against the integrity and perfectnesse of our naturall constitution: so the rebelling of concupiscence is against the integrity and perfection of the soule; an error in nature. Answ. There are naturall faults in the soule; as ignorance, forgetfulnesse, dulnesse of understanding; in the body, infirmities, weakenesse, sicknesse: which are the effects of sin, not sins themselves. But all these are effects and passions, whereas concupiscence is active and working. In a word, it resists the motions of Gods spirit, now all disobedience is sin. In civill matters no man is accessary to a sin withour consent of will, but it is otherwise in the court of conscience.
4 What varietie of lusts there be.Eph. 2.3. 1 Ioh. 2.16. Saint Paul enlargeth lust to all motions, inclinations, passions, and perturbations, of heart, mind, will and affections. Originall concupiscence is the seed of all sins in man: looke how many sins there be in the world; so many lusts in the heart of man: the number of lusts is no lesse than the number of sins. Of actuall lust, there be two degrees: sudden, or voluntary and deliberate. Sudden is the motion not agreed to voluntary is with consent. The eye is sometime cast upon an object on the sudden, without any intention or consultation of the mind: sometime it is sent on the hearts errand by the minds direction. As the eye may be shut in a twinckling without thought or purpose: and it may be shut with deliberation, to sleepe, or prevent harme. The heart is a fornace, that sometime sends forth sudden, sometime leasurely flames. The first is the nature of sin, the next is the nurture of sin: consent doth nurse the child of death, practise brings it up: actual lusting is the oile that feeds the lampe of concupiscence. The mother brings forth the daughter, and the daughter nourisheth the mother: Hagar produceth Ishmael, Ishmael sustaines Hagar: blessed is that Abraham, whose house is well rid of them both.
5 How hainous this sin is; even no lesse than damnable in it selfe. Lusts are often more punished by the great Iudge, than diverse actuall sins. The continued lust of uncleannesse, is worse than a discontinued art of uncleannesse. He that alwaies desires pollution deserves greater punishment, than he that is overtaken with it against his will. One killes a man against his will, another desires to kill him and is hindred: this last is the murderer before God. It is this lust that Paul calls the burning: it is one thing Calefieri, a good man may be hot: but Vrere, to burne, is another thing; when lust finds indulgence, and is scarce restrained with shame.Matth. 5.28. The act of adulterie is not more haynous among men, than the unlawfull desire and consented lust of the heart is to God. Without practise, the very purpose stands culpable before him. Silly people thinke the commandment is not broken, if the outward grosse sin be abstained: but God fetcheth in malice, anger, envie, within the compasse of murder. Some ignorants use the commandments for prayers: poore soules, they little thinke they are Gods thunderbolts, to throw them into hell for their sins. Thus Vsurie, the desire of gaine by the undoing of others: hoording of corne in dearth, which is to make a private profit of Gods publike Iudgement: bad example, with a delight to corrupt others; which are like those erring lights, that instead of guiding ships to the haven, lead them upon
 rockes and shelves: all these are degrees of murder. So a wanton eye, an obscene discourse, a vaine attire, a light behaviour; all these are degrees of adultery: lust is like a secret malignity in the bones, hardly got out: wounds and ulcers are sooner cured because of their appearance. Adultery may be restrained by corporall impotency; still lust is hid within; it must be a potent medicine that fetcheth it out. Vses.
1 It justly humbles us: if the first motion, without consent be sin: if the second with consent be greater sin; Lord, who can say, my heart is cleane? Not many can cleare themselves so with1 Sam. 12.3. Samuel, from the act of injustice: fewer withAct. 2^.33. Paul, I have coveted no mans gold, etc. but, I was never tempted to this; no man could ever say this but one, even that man who is the Sonne of God. If we had no more, this last were enough to hide our faces, and stop our mouthes before the Lord. Too few take notice of this naturall uncleannesse: though it be borne in them, and borne about them; yet they neither see the filth, nor feele the weight. Moores, that never saw men of more temperate climates, thinke there is no other complexion but their owne.Eccl. 18.30. Aug. de mixt. and Concup. cap. 23 and. 29. He doth much good that goes not after his lusts: sed non perfectum bonum facit, but he is not perfect, that doth not what is written, Thou shalt not lust. Now shall we not be cast downe for that, which without repentance will cast us downe to hell? Paul did not more trulyGal. 6.17. Beare about him the markes of the second Adam, than we doe all the markes of the first Adam. Let us know, that eternall fire is the wages of this lust; consent makes it hotter, practise enflames it. This lust is in us all, and this lust is sufficient to condemne us all.
But then, alas what shall we doe? How should we scape? This necessitates our ruine. Therefore as the law compelled him that hadExod. 21.33. Opened a pit, and left it uncovered, to make good his neighbours beast that miscarried in it. So having opened a pit, lest any soule should perish in it, let me cover it againe with comfort. The condemning quality of this sin is taken away by Baptisme; Reatus tollitur. Asts 2.38. All sinnes, now children have no sin but originall lust.Aug. cont Iul. lib. ^. cap. 8. Reatus, qui fuerat generatione contractus, est regeneratione transactus. In Christ it is pardoned, and shall not cast his members to hell. Yet is it by nature so dyed in graine, that nothing but his bloud can purge it. And even in the purged, it still remaines, tanquam in homine secum confligente. It shall not raigne over us here, not confound us hereafter, yet will dwell in us till our dissolutions. It was the Pelagians slander, that we hold Baptisme, non auferre, sed radere peccata; onely to shave our sin, because the root of concupiscence remaines. But we say, it frees us from the damnation and domination, not from the inhabitation of sin.
2 It teacheth us to withstand the beginnings of sin, to kill that pestilent brood in the cradle, to destroy them in their infancy, as we doe a nest of young Waspes.Iam. 1.25 For lust, when it hath conceived, bringeth forth sin: and sin, when it is finished bringeth forth death. Lust tempteth, there's the mother: being moved by the divell, there's the father: it conceiveth, thus the child is begotten betweene them; concupiscence being the divels strumpet, by whose pregnancy he fils his kingdome of darkenesse: she is mater mortuorum, the mother of the dead; as grace (like Eve) is mater viventium, the mother of the living. Delight is the midwife. It bringeth forth sinne, there the child is borne: it must now have a Nurse to bring it up, that is custome: and the full stature it growes unto, is death. It tempteth by entising the minde to evill, conceiveth by the consent of will and resolution to doe evill, bringeth forth by execution and practise; nurseth it to growth by custome and continuance: lastly, this stripling engendreth another childe, Benoni, the sorrow of the mother, and that is death. If we cannot prevent the conception, yet let us destroy it in the birth, make it abortive, by purposing never to act it: if it passe the knees, and draw the aire of intention, yet let us stop it ere it come to action; let us not doe the determined evill. If it over-sway us to like and act it, yet let it never come to an habite, let us devow a custome. But how much more easie were it
 to stop it in the first cause, as seasonable physick doth meet with an infection at the first taking, before it run into the veines, and corrupt the bloud. The seed of Ishmael had never afflicted the seed of Israel, had Ishmael bin killed when he was banished. As the first rising of Elias's cloud, Ahab had time to get home dry: that once ascended, all the speed of his Chariot cannot out-run the shower. Cut off the gangren'd joynt, and save the body. The way to minish the increase of ravenous and noxious fishes, is to destroy the spawne with the mother: to be rid of harmefull birds, is to spoile their nests. When a fire-ball is throwne into a ship at a sea-fight, they presently cast it out ere it breake or fasten. Meete thine enemy at his comming out of his bed, before he arme himselfe: take lust ere it come to a rebound. At the first motion, stop the mouth of it: let it never make a reply: stand not to argue, lest thou be overcome.
3 Let us avoid them as perilous and mortall enemies. 1. Dangerous for their nature; continuall tempters. Conscience doth sometimes sleepe from reproving, these never rest from enticing. 2. Dangerous for their number; Si c^^temnas quia minima,Aug. timeas quia plurima. Many temptations come in by the Cinque Ports, the senses; mo by Satans injection, that presents to the affections things absent from the senses. Most (by lust it selfe; that as no created thing is quicker than thought) tumbles over a thousand desires in an houre: many strings to sins bow, that if some breake, the rest may hold: many traines of powder, some likely to take fire. 3. Dangerous for their effect, bringing forth the most monstrous offences; mille actus vetitos, and mille piacula.^^v 9 2. Open but the pit, out swa^^e these pestilent Locusts. Who would have thought that Davids wanton look should have begot murther? He that hath given way to his lust, must confesse such fearefull precipices. Murther we detest; yet how many hands hath the lust of revenge embrued in bloud; how many neckes hath it brought to an ignominious halter? Incontinence hath the name from uncontained lust: many a disease of body, reproch of name, consumption of state, losse of life and soule, are beholding to it. 4. Dangerous for their continuance: an ill seasoning, that is never got out but by breaking of the pitcher: a marke that all carry to their graves, some to their torments. While the soule doth animate a body mortall, it will tempt both body and soule. Cut off the sprig of a tree, it growes still; a bough, an arme, still it growes: lop off the top, yea, saw it in the midst; yet it will grow againe: stock it up by the roote; then (and not till then) it will grow no more. Next unto God and Christ, we may thanke death it selfe, for the abolition of lust. We have three birth-dayes: the first of nature; this gives lust the breeding: the second of grace; this sets lust a bleeding; it doth mortifie it, not nullifie it; moribundum, non mortuum reddit: the last of glory, then are we rid of it for ever. Thus all the Saints in heaven are thrice borne; to si^, to grace, to glory. Lust in the first is a King; in the second a slave; in the third nothing. The second nativity crosseth the first, the last perfects the second. To be freed from concupiscence is a maine motive of that zealous prayer; Come Lord Iesus, come quickly.
Let us (in the meane time) beware the captivity of our affections.Rom. 6.12. Let n^t sin raigne in our mortall bodies: where it is a soveraigne, it will force obedience. It will inesse, let it not praeesse. There is difference betweene lusts, and actuall sins. 1. Interventio temporis: lust is sudden, action requires time, Luk. 12.20. He hath the present lust of covetousnesse, he must tarry a time to enlarge and fill his barnes. 2. Interjectio loci: lust often desires, that cannot be present, therefore adultery must stay for opportunity. 3. Interceptio organorum:Num. 22 29. Balaam had a des^re to kill his harmelesse beast, but he had no weapon: the hand is not so quick as the thought. 4. Interpositio impedimentorum: Absalom lusts for his fathers Crown there be many hindrances, he cannot reach it. If to atchieve were as easie as to desire, one mans lust were able to ruine all the world. 5. Intercessio ^rgument^r^^: the soule hath some discourse betweene the lust and the act. Video melior a prol^q^^,
 is in the soule of a Medea, a Sorceresse. 6. Intermissio cogitationum: sometime, the second naile drives out the first. So the LORD sets our lusts together by the eares, as the Egyptians against the Aegyptians; that while two poisons wrastle we may live. The falling out of theeves helpes the true man to his goods. The lust after beautie is driven out by a desire of revenge, that againe by a golden thirst and if grace comes, this drives them out all; as the feathers of an Eagle, that will not endure blending with other feathers, but rather consumes them. All these Inters should be the interruption of sinne, and for the compunction of heart: that though concupiscence have conceived, she may not be delivered. Iustly should we say to lust; as the Hebrew did to Moses;Exod. 2.14. Who made thee a Prince over us? whence hast thou this authority? Wilt thou kill me, as thou killest the worldling? No, thou shalt not, I have a deliverer, Rom. 7.25.
5 Seeing the flesh will be in man, so long as man is in the flesh; let us strive to fill our hearts with better desires. Lust workes in the memorie, by remembring vanities, injuries, bad examples: in stead of these, let us remember our sins, our ends, our Audite. In the affections; if it worke by pride, stop it out by humility: if by malice, with charitie: if by uncleannesse, with chastitie: if by covetousnesse, with liberalitie: if by revenge, with mercie as darkenesse will give place to the Sun. In the minde, if idle thoughts finde roome, it is because God is not there.Col. 3.16. Let the word of God dwell in you plenteously: emptinesse of that food will cause the repletion of windy lusts. In the body, if it worke by drunkennesse, rather turne Rechabite, never drinke wine. If by surfet and high feeding, fall to Daniels pulse, shorten the commons of sin: as it is better to beat downe the house, than to be fired in it. If by Idlenesse, skrew up thy endevours to a greater taske.Exod. 5.8, 9. They be idle, therefore regard vaine words: thus a Pharaoh could conclude. Let lust never call, but we have other businesse. The best remedie is prayer: when concupiscence tempts us to folly, let us make the matter knowen to our husband, CHRIST. When lust covets transient riches, call home the meditation of those permanent joyes; and say Our father which art in heaven. When lust would study how to get honour; then say Hallowed be thy Name. When ambition would have such a preferment; then say, Thy kingdome come. When it would carve thy owne portion; then, Thy will be done. When it covets moneys and riches; then, Give us this day our daily bread. When it would revenge thy wrath on others, then say, Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespasse against us. Howsoever it tempts us, let us pray, Leade us not into temptation. And that we may never yield unto it, Deliver us from evill. Let not lust raigne in us, For thine is the kingdome: we cannot avoide it our selves, for thine is the power: and for our deliverance, Thine be the glory, for ever and ever. Amen.
Of uncleannesse.] Of sores and ulcers and such noisome pollutions, sordid and odious to God and good men; such is the subject of my present discourse: that this may well be called a Spittle-Sermon. But as the Physitian is seldome sent for, unlesse men be sicke; nor is so much consulted about dyet as physicke; The whole need him not, but the diseased. So if there were no sin, you should need no Preacher: yet wise men require antidotes and preservatives; and would rather pay the Physician to keepe them well, than to make them well; health being not so easily restored, as conserved. Therefore let them that be infected with this leprosie, learne now the meanes of their recoverie: let them that be not infected, observe the meanes to continue their puritie. Whether they be or be not, this discourse, like the Bath, shall doe them no harme: an honest heart will not returne unbettered. For method, first, I will describe the disease of Vncleannesse, then the cause, last, the cure.
The disease lies not like the Meagrim in the head, nor like a Pleurisie in the bloud, nor like a Gowte in the joynts and extreme places, nor like an ach in the bones: but it is Epidemicall, like an ill habite of body, and possesseth in a reprobate
 not only Totum hominem, but Totum hominis: as Iob was not here and there ulcerous, but all his body one coagulated ulcer;Es^. 1.6. There is no whole part about him. First, there is a contemplative uncleannesse, when the mind pleaseth it selfe with vicious thoughts: thus there may be a world of wickednesse in a man, though the acts of pollution be refrained. The devill, who isIoh. 8.44. The father of lusts, raignes in the soule by these: yea such a heart that infernall Prince takes up for his bedchamber. Secondly, there is a preparative uncleannesse, which is an effeminatenesse of carriage; or affectation of inviting the eyes of lust: all their postures being so many characters, to spell the meaning of their lascivious hearts. It were well, if such an one were forced to cry, as the Leper in Israel, I am uncleane. 3. There is a procurative uncleannesse; that takes up the devils office, and helpes forward the damnation of men. Such was Ionadab to Amnon; whose unkindely flame might else have wasted it selfe out in time; but that such a wicked counsellor blew the coales. This was no worse a man than the Kings brothers son: now this noble Pander will project a course for Amnons satisfaction. The procurer is as uncleane, if not worse than the committer: the fire would languish, vanish, perish, if there were no such feweller. 4. There is a sensitive uncleannesse; when the eare sucks in obscene stories, the eye delights in immodest mixtures, and the tongue skrewes it into all discourses. This is, as if the doore were not wide enough, to set open all the windowes, and breake downe the wals, to let in the aire of uncleannesse. Actuall uncleannesse followes, whereof there be many degrees.
1 Fornication; I meane not titular; as Hostesse and Harlot are convertible termes: nor metaphoricall; as theHos. ^.4. children of whoredomes: nor spirituall; as Idolatry is called fornication: but corporall; which is commmonly taken for the incontinency of single persons. The naturall cure of this uncleannesse is marriage thus Shechem bewrayes a good disposition even in filthinesse, he would not let Dinah fare the worse for his sin. But as he had with dishonest rage abused her, so he strives with honest love to entertaine her. Her deflowring shall be no prejudice to her: as the sin was done by him; so he would have the whole shame redound to him; and so he will hide her dishonour with the name of a husband. To this purpose he communes, craves, offers, indeed would buy her; even purchase leave to make her satisfaction. He sues to his father, to hers, to her brethren, to her selfe; and begs with submission what he might have gotten with violence. The father consents, sollicites, is ready to buy his sons peace with his owne paine. No dowry shall hinder, but Shechem shall recompence Dinah. How far worse are they, that abuse without any purpose of amends? But mariage in this case is some satisfaction, no restitution: a good salve is not so good as no sore. This may make the next act lawfull, not justifie the former. How ever the scene concludes, the first entrance was naught. Though a late satisfaction be better than none, yet a timely prevention is best of all.
2 Adultery; when one or both are maried: this is the breach of many faiths; and so much the more pernicious, as it is a wilfull shipwrack abroad, when it hath a harbour and safe remedy provided at home.
3 Whoredome; which is a mad and transportive desire to abuse many. Sometimes it is lust, joyned with anger; doing it in spight; a desperate revenge, by polluting anothers bed to cast away his owne soule. So the foolish childe, when one snatcheth his apple, throwes his bread after him. Sometime it is joyned with covetousnesse; he wasts his body to fill his purse; as a foole burnes his band to make tinder. Alwayes is it joyned with folly: not so much respecting a faire woman as she is faire, but as she is a woman: foule water will quench that fire as well as faire.
4 Vnnaturall uncleannesse; as men with men, men with beasts, women with divels, as it is reported of some Witches. But these things are so horrenda facts, ut etiam pudenda dictu.
5 Vncleannesse with our owne kindred, which is incest. To patronize this,^e^t. 25 5. Gen. 38.8. Matth. 22.24. some alledge precept, practise, and custome. But that Law to the Iewes, was partly politicall, for distinction of families: and partly Typicall, preserving the right of primogeniture, prefiguring the spirituall birth-right in the Messias, which should be endlesse.Levit. 18.16 The morall law was otherwise: therefore we answer, that albeit God had particular exceptions from his generall lawes: as the Cherubins over the Arke was an instance against the second commandement: the Israelites robbing the Aegyptians, against the Eight: and Phinehas killing Zimri, against the Sixt: yet it is plaine that the Lord condemnes all incest.
6 With more wives than one, which is Poly-gamie. I know this fact of Iacob is diversly excused. As first, it was prohibited by no Law.Aug. Answ. It was not prohibited by a Law written, it was by the Law engraven: God made but one woman for one man; and he was a wicked Lamech that first begun bigamie. 2. But custome excuseth; as at first a side garment was a shame to the Romans, but at last it grew to a fashion. Answ. That was a thing indifferent, the decencie whereof time might vary: but there is no custome against the first Institution. 3. In the multiplicity of wives he propounded to himselfe the multitude of children. Answ, If ever such an Indulgence had beene fit for any, then Noah should have beene dispensed with, to propogate the world: but God gave him no such indulgence. 4. This was done in a mysterie. Answ. Indeed, Aug. Ruper. Greg. all reduce it into severall allegories: yet cannot this Iustifie the fact; no more than CHRISTS second comming like a theefe, can warrant a theefe sudden breaking into a house. This therfore must be granted, Iacobs infirmity: to marry two wives, was his transgression: but to marry two sisters, no lesse than Incest. Albeit God disposed this to encrease the holy seed, yet the fact is against his ordinance: and our positive Law makes it death, as by the Law Institutive it is deadly.Gen. 2.24. Every man shall cleave to his owne wife. Vxori, non meretrici: suae, non alienae: Vxori, non ^xoribus: to his wife, not wives.
7 Vncleannesse with a mans spouse; I meane betweene the betrothment and consummation.Iudg. 29 1. The Levites spouse, till he married her, was but his Concubine; and their conjunction was fornication. It is not enough to say, they were married before God: the hand of the Church must be there, or this is culpable uncleannesse. Marriage is no amends: otherwise than wilfully to breake a whole glasse, it is afterward to soalder it: yea it is rather to breake an arme or leg, to set it againe: or to condemne a man first, and then to sue out his pardon. The common opinions, This is but a true covenant ante-dated; the taking possession of a mans own, without due course of Law: the mowing of his corne before harvest: the plucking his owne grapes ere they be ripe. But this is triviall: contract is but Ius ad rem, marriage gives Ius in re. Contract binds to marriage, not allowes to touch before marriage. Contract is but like Articles agreed upon, marriage puts a seale to the covenant. Such a fruite of their bodies, is but a monument of their sinne: and without hearty repentance, a good proceeding seldome followes so bad a beginning.
8 Vncleannesse with a mans owne wife. This is when the use of the marririage-bed is either intempestive or intemperate: in a season prohibited, or in a measure not moderated, or in a manner not ordained, or to an end not warranted: as when it hath altogether respect to pleasure, not to generation; or to beget an heire for their lands, rather than a Saint for heaven; or their owne Image, rather than the Image of God. If uncleannesse can creepe into marriage, where will it be kept out? How soule is the disease, when the very remedie is often infected? Not but that Conjugium purum, but impuri conjuges: marriage doth not staine, nor so much as dye, in the Romish sense: it is honourable and cleane, yet the married may be uncleane.
9 Vncleannesse with a mans selfe; as the heathenRom. 1.24. dishonoured their owne bodies
 (...). There bee three turpitudes against nature; with another kinde, or with the same kinde of the same sexe, or with no other person but with themselves. Thus Saint Augustine distinguisheth betweene Flagitium and Facinus: the latter is in hurting another, the former in committing against a mans selfe. Other sins are1 Cor. 6.18. without the body, fornication against the body, this uncleannesse in the body. This was the sin ofGen. 38 9. Onan; abusing himselfe against the order of nature and Institution of God. This was a grievous sin; against God, whose ordinance he disobeyed: against his wife, whom he unjustly defrauded: against himselfe, whose issue he should not have prevented: against mankind, whose number he should have encreased: against his brother, to whom issue should be raised. Some Hebrewes thinke, that he did it to preserve the favour and beautie of Thamar, which bearing of children would have empaired. How ever, sensuall was his pleasure and the sin in any man is very grievous.
10 Ravishment: the former is a rape upon a mans selfe, this upon another.Gen. 34.2. Such was Shechems sin, as some understand it: but some rather thinke, that Dinah being so light to wander and gaze, was not over-difficult to yield. Commonly, such lust ends in loathing, as Amnons; beating her out of doores, whom he was sick to bring in. And therefore Shechems seemeth to be no rape, because he still loved her: and having wrought her shame in his fathers house, he would not send her home with disgrace to her fathers Tent: but rather seekes to marry her whom he had defiled. His offence did not make her odious; but so constantly he affects her, that hee is willing to draw bloud of himselfe, rather than forgoe her. Amnons rape was farre worse: Thamar is sent for as his Physician, but he makes her his physicke. She dressed him meat, but that was not the dish hee longed for: he loves the Cooke, not the cates. She presents the dyet, he throwes downe that, and falls a board with her. His sicknesse is now forgotten, the Devill hath made him lusty and strong on the sudden. The innocent Virgin intreats for her selfe, perswades in vaine: shewes the sin, Non licet: the shame, Non decet: the danger, deadly: thou shalt be a foole in Israel; I, no wife, yet no virgin. Prevailing not by reason, shee seeks to coole his present heat with future; hope of an impossible thing; Aske me of my father. But in vaine! he growes mad with resistance, and resolves to be a ravisher. If the Devill were not more strong in such than nature, they would never seeke pleasure in violence. This rape defiles Amnon, not Thamar: the wrong was hers, the uncleannesse his. She that is ravished, is more a Maide, than she whose owne loose thoughts have made her uncleane. Two lay together, only one committed Adultery, as Augustine of Lucrece. She was but the Patient; and it was not her fault to suffer, what was not her will to doe. Her virginitie was not Perdita, but Prodita; not lost, but torne from her by compulsory meanes: she still reserved it in her soule, though it had forsaken her body. The Inhabitant is not to be blamed, for theeves breaking into the house. She can doe no more than bewaile what she cannot keepe: lamenting the shame of anothers sinne; living like a widdow, who was neither maide, wife, harlot, nor widdow; but a ravished woman. Thus you have the specification of some Vncleannesses, (which O that none knew but by a generall apprehension and heare say; and not as Adam knew evill, by sense and experience) now to
The causes; which are many. Physicians say, that to know the cause is halfe the cure. By cause, here I understand not only that fundamentall cause, which is inordinate affection, the boyling fountaine of lust but: also such occasions, as breed and nurse uncleannesse. These are
1. A roving eye, that looks up and down for the objects of lust.Gen. 6.2. The sons of God saw the daughters of men: by that looking came lusting, thence preposterous mariages, thence universal confusion.Gen. 3.7. Ambr. His masters wife cast her eyes upon Ioseph: her eie led her heart, her heart, led her tongue, her tongue led her hand. Such be the harlots three weapons: the first engine is her eye, the very motion whereof discourseth a
 silent filthinesse. 2. Her tongue offers to take hold, where her eye cannot. 3. Her hand offers to catch him, whom her tongue cannot winne.Gen 38.14. Thamar sate in an open place, where she might be seene: Hebr. in the doore of eyes. This was Achans confession;Iosh. 7.21. I saw, I coveted, I tooke. The eye betraies the heart, the heart the hand: sin gets in by the senses, yea by the least piece of a sense; as bad aire at a cracke in the window. By them it ceizeth on the inmost fort, and there it commands them like a tyrant, to whom it was beholding for entrance. This is the order of our crimes: Achans song shall many chatter to a dolefull tune; I saw, I coveted, and tooke. The thiefe; I saw the booty, coveted, and tooke it: the drunkard, I saw the colour of the wine: the Idolater, I saw the goodly picture: the adulterer, I saw the beauty, coveted, and tooke it, and tooke my death with it.
2 S^m 11.2.David rose from off his bed, and from the roofe of his Palace hee saw a woman. From an after-noones slumber he riseth to his evenings walke: the eyes which unseasonable sleepe had shut up, an enticing object opens. Her Bath was no open place, but lust is quick-sighted: shee could espie no body, but David had espied her.Gen. 34.1. Dinah the daughter of Leah went to see the daughters of the land. The daughter of Leah; her mothers owne daughter, right bred; as the harsh note of the Hebrewes speakes: becauseGen. 30.16. Leah went out to meet Iacob upon such a bargaine: as if Dinah had gone on purpose to be abused. But the Mothers daughter, because both had a fault in their eyes: the mothers, a defect of nature, the daughters, a defect of nurture: hers an infirmity, this a curiosity. Her eyes were guilty of this temptation: She would needs see and be seene; and while she lookes about vainly, she is looked upon lustfully. Tu otiose spectas, otiose non spectaris:Bern. tu spectas curiose, spectaris curiosius. I know there may be a cleere and honest aspection, as1 King. 10.7. the Qu^ene of Sheba came to see Salomon.Luk. 7.44 See this woman, saith Christ to Simon. But it is better to be blinde, than looke with lustfull eyes. This sinne is little regarded: many come to the Church with Christian eares, but Pagan eyes: and Satan comes faster in at the eyes, than God at the eares: that which should save the soule, is lost by the wandring sense. There can be no safety to the Chariot, where these unbridled horses are let loose.P^^^. 113 37. Turne away mine eyes from beholding vanity: we must see it transiently, not behold it wishly. He can never keepe his covenant with God, thatIob 31 ^ makes not a covenant with his eyes. But my inward man is safe, why may not my outward man be free? This is an idle presumption: hee is more than a man, whose heart is not led by his eyes; hee is lesse than a good man, whose eyes be not restrained by his heart. So, the eare is the trap-doore of the soule; the flies of hell are ever humming about it. It is temptation enough to the theefe, that he heares of a booty. If dishonesty come so neare as the eare, let wonder stop it out, and save vertue the labour.
2. Bad company;Gen 39 1^. Ioseph shunned the society of his Mistresse. We know our owne hearts, we know not the hearts of others. To be the provocation of sinne is unholinesse, not to avoid the provocation of sinne is unhappinesse. God and his Angels will protect thee in thy waies: in thy waies, not in thy wandrings. If we once rove out of the lists of our calling, there is nothing but danger. Had Dinah kept at home, her Virginity had beene safe: had Shechem forc'd her in orbe muliebri, the house; she had sustained losse without sinne. It had not then bin her evill, but his: her gadding gave the occasion, even this made her not innocent. It is no sufficient warrant to draw us into suspected places, and spirituall dangers; only to see. No wise man will goe into the infected Pest-house, only to see the fits of the visited. Who would poison his body, to please his taste? Quales amplectimur, tales credimur: With the lascivious we hardly learne to be chaste. Immodest behaviour makes way for lust; this gives life unto wicked hopes. A cold deniall invites a second charge: she deserves some blame, that hath onely beene tried, though she consent not. A faire carriage keepes temptation out at the staves end: lightnesse of presence lets it in to the grapple, and gives encouragement to
 lewd desires. Though we fight and conquer, yet it was our fault that we were put to fight. A man is not only to keepe his conscience cleare, but his name; and to keepe this is harder. For our conscience is in our owne custodie, our credit lies in the hands of other: this stands on likely-hoods, and their construction of our deeds. It is no easie thing to disprove a slander: like an unruly spirit once raised, hard to conjure downe. Our reputation is more fraile than our selves, still liable to suspition: it must be our good behaviour, and avoiding bad societie, that can keepe our name from scandall.
3 Idlenesse, or no company, and nothing to doe: such a heart is the Devills day-bed, whereupon he takes his nooning. The Philosopher called love Otiosum negotium; a disease to be cured by labour.Matth. 25.26. Thou wicked and slothfull servant: if slothfull, certainely wicked: ifTit. 1.12. slow bellies, presently evill beasts. While Israel is working in Aegypt; pursuing or pursued in Canaan, they have no leasure to be wanton. Let them lie still in the plaines of Midian, the dancing lasses of Moab will soone seduce them to folly. Who ever saw David so tempted and foiled in the times of his busie warre, as when hee was idle at ease? In troubles hee could rise up in the morning to his early devotions, prevent the morning watch, breake his nights rest with the cares of the day: the service of God, and businesse of state, tooke him up: thus long was he innocent and holy. But when Satan finds him wallowing in the bed of idlenesse, he now thinkes him fit for a temptation. Gentlemen that live of their lands, and those of a worse condition, that have given over all trades, to live of their moneys; thinke themselves the only fortunate men: they need not toile, nor weary their limbes with labour: instead of the Pen or the Pike, the Pot and the Pipe is all their excercise. But there are none more unhappy; for lust can be no stranger to an idle bosome: the industrious man hath no leasure to sinne. Doth any man complaine the contiguitie of his labour? he finds fault with his owne felicitie: the toile of action is recompenced by the benefit: if he were not doing good, he would be doing ill: if we did worke lesse, we should suffer more: while we worke not our selves, Satan workes upon us.
The sitting bird is the fowlers marke: the Devill is like some lazy companion, that while he finds us busie gives backe and sees it no time to meddle with us. But if like the idle hus-wife, when her gossip comes in, we throw away our work and hold chat with him; nothing can please him better. Gratifie him but thus far, to talke with him; and he thinkes us sure. Exercise is wholesome for the body, better for thy soule. The earth stands still, therefore becomes natures common-Sewer; the receptacle of corruption, all dregs: the heavens, that are ever in motion, are alwaies pure. The troublesomest worke to a good man, is to have no worke: which when he hath supplied by prayer and meditation, and yet finds roome for more guests; he studies businesse; and qui non invenit, facit. They that surrender themselves to sloth, finde matter of disease breeding in their bodies and soules. The active spirit is soonest dulled with no labour; as the water that hath beene heated, soonest freezeth.P^o. 31.19. The danger of womens corruption is their leasure: idlenesse breeds fancies, which continuance of domesticall businesse would keepe out.
4 Lust after beautie; this is the generall snare, and occasion of uncleannesse.Gen 39 6 Ioseph was a goodly person, faire, and well-favoured: lovely to all, but not looked on alike withall eyes: his fellowes praise him, his master trusts him, his mistresse dotes on him: all love him, she over-loves him. That is true of the Poet, that vertue never hath a better grace, than when it shineth, from a beauteous face: yet was this danger, it gave him meanes to sin; which when he refused, it was the occasion of his trouble. But he was faire without, and fairer within; Pulchrior in luce cordis,Aug. quam in facie corporis. Even the Sonnes of God were caught with beautie. Balaam could not harme Israel with his curses, he doth with his courses and counsels: his curse had hurt none but himselfe, his counsell cost the bloud of twentie
 foure thousand. Send out your fairest women among them: this policie was fetched from the bottome of hell. There is no sin more plausible than wantonnesse, wantonnesse is no way sooner provoked than by the sight of beautie: this shall draw them to lust, their lust to folly, their folly to Idolatrie; so God shall curse them for thee, unasked. This project of that damn'd Magician was too prosperous: the daughters of Moab doe more in the Tents of Israel, than the Amorites and Amalekites could doe in the plaines of Moab. The women made them captives, whom the men felt conquerors. Had they sent their subtlest politicians, and strongest souldiers, to perswade or compell them to Idolatrie; they had beene returned with scorne. But the eloquent and victorious beautie of the women effected this. It had beene happy for them, if Balaam had used any charmes but these.
I know that a man may lawfully desire beautie in his own spouse, as Iacob loved Rachel: not for provocation of lust, but procreation of children, and more loving societie. Some actions doe not so well rid off a hand, without some delight; as eating of meates, learning of arts; and such is matrimoniall societie. As meate pleaseth us better in a cleane dish, wine in a Chrystall glasse: so vertue in a comely person. But if the beautie be let into our thoughts, and the vertue shut out, there is no speedyer way to ruine. As it is Gods use to fetch glory to himselfe out of the worst actions of Satan: so it is Satans ambition to advantage himselfe by the fairest workes of God. If the Lord suffer him, he will ruine us with the most rare pieces of creation: No one meanes hath so enriched hell, as beautifull faces.Prov. 23.28. The beautifull harlot encreaseth the transgressors among men. Three of Davids children were undone by it at once: it was the occasion of Amnons Incest, of Thamars ravishment, of Absaloms bloudy pride and murder. Beautie, if not well disciplin'd proves a traitor rather than a friend. It is a blessing to be faire; but such a blessing, that if the soule be not as cleare as the skin, leads to a curse. It is no rare thing to finde the foulest soule dwell fairest. If the inward conditions be bad, O what strange mischiefe can beautie bring about! How many Salomons and Sampsons hath it befooled and blinded? The weaker sexe is the stronger in temptation: it was the dowry that our Grandmother Eve bequeathed to her daughters; that they should be our helpers to sin. Indeed it is not a womans fault to be faire: the candle does not amisse in burning, the foolish flie offends, that scorcheth her wings in the flame. The chrystall streame is not to be blamed, because some distracted man drownes himselfe in it. Yet to be but a temptation, and (though the unwilling) occasion of anothers ruine, is an unhappyinesse, albeit not a sin. The Lord so mortifie all inordinate lusts in us, that we may be admitted to that citie, into which no uncleane thing shall ever enter.
The Cure followes; and this methodus medendi is two-fold: the one a preservative, the other sanative. To see the sinne in the proper and naturall odiousnesse, is a preventing antidote. For them that be infected, there are other medicines. The horriblenesse of it is seene in it selfe, and in th'effects.
For it selfe, the light of nature discerned and condemned it. It is objected, that Solon, a Law-giver, one of the wisest among the Grecians, used to buy harlots for the young men: and among the Carthaginians it was a custome for the Virgins before their marriage, to prostitute themselves publikely in the Temple of Venus, that they might bring the greater portions to their husbands. Answ. This was not by naturall light,Rom. 1. but the unnaturall darknesse of those given over to a reprobate sense, as the punishment of former wickednesse. Ob. But the Prophet Hosea was thus commanded;Hos. 1.2. Take thee a wife of whoredomes. Answ. Nothing can be concluded for it out of a typicall act: neither did he make a harlot, but take a harlot, to reduce her to chastity. Object. ButAct. 15.20. fornication is reckoned among indifferent things. Answ. Their esteeming it so, did not make it so; their owne conscience thought otherwise.Gen 20.9. Abimelech calls it a great sinne; this, that Heathen could see, but not so clearely asGen. 39.9. Ioseph: Dishonour to the husband, wrong to the
 children, breach of covenant, but above all, disobedience to God, is in it.Psal. 51.4. Against thee have I sinned; was his confession, that had sinned against Bethshebah, Vri^h, and the whole Church; but especiallyGen 34.7. against the Lord. It is most odious among Christians;2 Sam. 13.12. this folly ought not to be done in Israel: it is bad enough in all places, here intolerable.Eph. 5.4. not to be named among Saints. Let the act be so abhorred, that it may quite lose the name: especially, let no Saint have such a name. It makes the name stinke both living and dead. Living,1 Cor. 5.11. If a brother be a fornicatour, with such a one eate not. Dead,Prov. 6.33. verse 30. his reproach shall not be wiped away. It is more hainous than theft; Men doe not despise a theefe, if he steale to satisfie his hungry soule but he that committeth adultery destroieth his owne soule. Goods may be restored, honestie never: the breaches may be repaired, the pristine state not recovered.
 For the effects: It breeds diseases in the body, that the quality of the sinne may be seene in the nature of the plague; as we know a rotten nut by the worme  hole in the shell. It makes a more loathsome soule; so odious that till it be cleansed, neither will God dwell with it, nor shall it dwell with God. It blasteth the  estate,Iob. 31.12. Prov. 6.26. roots out all the encrease, and brings a man to a piece of bread. The Pare^^ uncleannesse makes the children beggars. It curseth the house, Hos. 4.13, 14.  His owne sinne abroad, is able to make his house a Stewes at home. What followed upon Davids adultery, but present paiment? The deflowring of his daughter Thamar, the murder of his sonne Amnon, the treason, incest, and ruine of h^^ Absolom. How justly is he scourged by the sinnes of his children, whom his owne act taught to offend? Vnlawfull lust still propagates it selfe by example: when the  father of a family brings sinne home to his house, it is not easily swept out. It endangers Incest; when the legitimate sonne may come to marry the bastard (...) of the same father.
 It is not only Poena peccati; that a man being hatefull to God for other sinnes, is made hatefull to men for this: Vt quod latuit in corde impuro, pateat in opere ign^minioso: other sinnes ought him a shame, this shall pay it him. Therefore, he that is good before God, shall be delivered from the strange woman, not the sinner. But also, Causa peccati, it brings no more wickednesse. So the Apostle joines them;Rom. 1.29. Fornication, wickednesse: if (...) be first, (...) followes. Give lust roome in the eye, she will possesse body and soule. The Midian faces first appeared to Israel; they like them, that brought them to like their presence, that to take pleasure in their feasts; from their boords to their beds, from their beds to their Idols: and now God is separated, and they are joyned to Baal-peor. Corporall fornication is the way to spirituall: if superstitious love make Idols of flesh, how soone do they give us up to Idols of wood and stone?
 It hath not onely undone persons and houses, but ruined ^hole Cities and Kingdomes.Numb. 25. What a breach did this double fornication make in Israel? God doth not smother his wrath, but himselfe strikes with the plague, and bids Moses strike with the sword. Dinah is ravished, the whole Citie is destroied for it. While every man lies sore of his owne wound, Simeon and Levi rush in with weapons and kill them. What was the shrieking of women and children in all the streets of that Citie? While the fathers and husbands take mortall physicke for their Princes sicknesse. For a particular Amnon to answere his lust in bloud, is not so ponderous: Many a whore-lover meets with such a catastrophe. But for a whole Tribe to be cut off for uncleannesse, as wasIudg. 21.6. Benjamin: for a whole kingdome to smart; asGen. 20.9. Abimelech said to Abraham, Thou hast brought a great sinne on me, and on my kingdome; that the whole kingdome of Israel should smart for the kings filthinesse; these be dire effects. The name of King became odious to Rome, for the rape of Lucrece: famous Troy was rased for one Helena.
 It is commonly mixed and plagued with blindnesse. So had lust befo^^^dGen. 38.15. Iudah, that he could not discerne the voice of Thamar which he heard every day, nor foresee what shame might follow those pledges: this passion for the time even
 bereaves a man of himselfe. Thus impudently blinde wasGen. 39.12. Iosephs Mistresse: it had beene too bad to yield, but for a woman to solicite, yea to importune, yea to ^^nce the modestie of her servant; grosse and desperate! As sin ever ends in shame when it is committed, so it makes us past shame in the committing. Thus Am^^ thrusts his defiled sister out of doores: where was his reason? Secrecie had some hope, but to expose her, what was it but to anger a royall father, incense a b^^ther, incur^e the Law, provoke her friends, fill the world with outcries? Though he looked not so high as heaven in doing the sin, yet he might looke so low as earth to prevent the shame. No, lust knowes the reason, and they that lose their honestie, shall lose their wit. This is just with God, to punish a deboisht heart with a besotted understanding. Vncleannesse loves a darke mind, as well as a darke house. How foolish were those Israelites; in joyning themselves to Baal peor? All Idols are abominable, this was also beastly: the devill appeared in a sordid and ^asty forme; yet uncleannesse workes them to it. Cupid is blind, and whither may not he be transported that wanteth his eyes.
Not seldome it goes off in hatred of the object: ordinate conjunction  encreaseth love, this begets detestation; and that both where it is crossed, and where it is satiated. For the formerGen. 39.19. Potiphers wife is an example; if she cannot have ^isephs body to enjoy, she wills it to ruine: when she failes of his love, she seekes his life. Lust is a pleasant madnesse when it is yielded, a desperate madnesse when it is opposed. Love is not more witty than malice: the arguments of his innocencie shall chalenge him of sin: hee left his coat because he would not doe that, for which he is condemned because he left it. No hate burnes so furiously, as that which ariseth from the quenched coales of love. Vel te ardenter amat, vel te capitaliter odit. For the other,2 Sam. 13.15. look on Amnon; how did he hate abused Thamar more than ever he loved her? He should indeed have hated himselfe for this bruitish violence, not his innocent sister: but his former love was not more unreasonable and mis-placed, than his later hatred. Fraud drew her into the house, force entertained her within, and hatred drove her out. So did one houre change the extremity of his love into extremity of hate; that he is now sicke of her, as before he was sicke for her: and she that kept the keyes of his heart, is now lock'd out of his doores.
It is a sin not easily repented of:Hos. 4.12. Whoredome and new wine take away the heart.  Saint Paul comforts the Corinthians, that they are1 Cor. 6.11. Washed from their sins: they will not off without washing, and there can be no washing without water, and a drop or two will not serve to baptise the conscience. But, say some, this sin ordinarily of it selfe brings to repentance? Indeed, losse of spirits, and terrors of the fact, may breed some kinde of remorse: and the expectation did not promise, nor the fruition performe more delight, than the remembrance brings irkesomenesse. The face of uncleannesse lookes lovely, but the farewell is deadly. If we could foresee the end, before we tast the beginning, we would never let it come so far, as to repentance; our former detestation would save our after-sorrow a labour. But l^st often ends in discontent, seldome in true repentance. The whoresProv. 9.18. guests are in hell, and that is no way to heaven.
Lastly, it pulls downe Gods fearefullHebr. 13.4. Iudgements, though it scape the censure of man. Amnon had so quite forgotten his sin, that he durst goe to that house a feasting, where2 Sam. 13.28. Thamar was mourning: not suspecting him other than a friend whom he had deserved to make an enemie. Now when his heart was merry, he fell downe dead. Wicked Absalom meant this murder to his soule, as well as to his body; but God was just in both. He that in two yeares forbearance would find to leasure to repent must now perish without leasure to cry for mercie.Iudg. 19.25. How fearefull a Iudgement came to that Levites concubine, to be abused to death? She lead wronged the bed of a Levite before by her willing wantonnesse: yet her father harboured her, her husband forgave her, the world had forgot it, her selfe never
 smarted for it. Thus farre she goes smoothly away with her sin; and neither father, nor husband, nor neighbour, nor Magistrate, nor her owne conscience, upbraid her with it. Now it is forgotten of all hands, God calls her to account for it. Yea, so just and even is that Almighty Iudge in his retributions; that the matter of her sin shall be the manner of her punishment: he will plague her with her owne delight. Vncleannesse was her fault, uncleannesse shall be her fate and ruine. Before shee had exposed her selfe with willing pleasure, now she is exposed by force: adultery was her sin, adultery is her death. Men may forget their owne filthinesse, God remembers it; and will pay them when they least expect it. Sin is a faithfull debtor, it never borrowes without payment: if it owe us a punishment, it will not breake with us. And if it faile of present Iudgements, yet this is sure, itProv. 6.32. destroyeth the soule.1 Pet. 2.11. Lusts fight against the soule, but uncleannesse kills it. These be the terrible effects, which if tremblingly applied, like corrosives will eate out the dead flesh, and become so many proper ingredients to the medicine of our cure. Or like ashes that are made by a fire of wood, which being powred on, will smother the fire in the wood, and put it out.
 The other remedies are; first, to abridge the flesh of provocatives;1 Cor. 9.27. beating downe the body, and keeping it in subjection. Take away the fewell, if the fire bee too hot. High feeding and lasciviousnesse are inseparable: that is the Lynbecke which destills all into lust.
 To remember a mans beginning and end. The Lord did not make us for pollution; and the thought of death will be a death to lust. Meditate of thy mortalitie, whensoever thou art tempted to this iniquity.
 Feare God, which will make every joint tremble at the very suggestion. Some forbeare a sin, because it is deare, some because it is laborious, others, because it is dangerous, few because it is impious. But the death of lust is religion: Moralitie resists but in cold bloud; heate nature, and all her in-borne principalls are forgotten. Regard of name and credit may feare the shame, yet love the sin. But he that feares God, and is watch'd by his owne conscience, can never finde a place darke enough to offend in. The Law lookes to our words and deeds, and requires that they be good: Religion also fetcheth in the thoughts, and makes them holy. We cannot without danger trust a morall heart with a faire body: we may safely trust a faire body with a sanctified minde. This was Iosephs argument; the pleasure of sinne cannot stand with the feare of God. Hee might conceit, that this kindnesse might endeare him as strongly to his mistresse, as his service had to his master: to bee so great a Ladies minion, how many hundreds of our younger brothers would have embraced it. But holy feare had taken up all the roome, before carnall love came. He knew that all the honours of Aegypt could not buy off the guilt of one sinne: that such an advancement would have cast him downe from the royall favour of GOD. The good heart chuseth rather to lie in the dust, than to rise by wickednesse. This were to get up on the scaffold of death, that a man might looke higher.
 Abhorre Idlenesse; the standing poole will gather filth of it selfe, and hee  full of toades and vermine. Attend the word preached;Psal. 119 9. Wherewithall else should a young man cleanse his way? That Physicke is only able to purge it.Prov. 2.16. This shall deliver thee from the strange woman. If wisedome enter not, lust will: they that find not delight in the Spirit, will seeke it at the flesh.1 Ioh 2.14. By the word of GOD abiding in you, yee shall overcome the wicked one. How have all weapons of reasons and morall resolution doubled in this encounter? It is the Sword of the Spirit that gets the victorie.
 Prayer: if Paul be buffeted, this is his refuge, and it brings remedie; he prayed thrice. Declare thy grievances, this shall bring downe heavenly graces. Shall we be like infants, that cry when a pinne prickes them, but cannot tell where? Say, God knowes our wants; what then? the sullen child sayes, my father knowes that I
 want bread, I will not aske him though I starve. God hath promised to heare (but only) those that call upon him. He so orders things, that he seldome gives till he be asked: it is a poore paines, but to aske and have.Psal. 2.8. Aske of me, and I will give thee. D^^o tibi, but first, Postula a me. The woman that would be rid of her importunate Tempter, is plaine with him, I will tell my husband.
Flee, the temptation: at other times, Fight Timothy: now1 Tim. 6.1. Fly Timothy. When such an enemie pursues, it is high time to fly. Rather will Ioseph lose his livery,  than blemish his Mistresses honour, his Masters in her, his owne in both, Gods in all. He cannot be excused, that lives where he may in likely-hood be faulty. To be safe from evill workes, is to avoid the occasions.
If we cannot fly, yet let us deny. David sollicites, had Bathsheba denyed, that  great sin had not beene committed. Had she beene mindfull of her covenant with God, and her matrimoniall fidelitie; the inordinate desire had beene checked, and in time choked. But ambition was the Bawd to lust; and the conceit to be the Kings Mistresses, to command him that commanded Israel; prostitutes her soule before her body: her facilitie furthers the sinne. The first motioner of evill is most faultie: but as in quarrells, the second blow makes the fray, and the Law takes speciall notice of that: so in sins, the second blow, that is, the consent of will, is by the Law of God most culpable. Lust is a sin of two: if but one party be wise, both escape: he that is sure of either, may be secure of both. Women are the weaker in nature, yet stronger in desires: and though many hold it an impudence to wooe, yet they hold not the innocence to deny. The woman at first tempted man, and therefore lookes ever since that man should tempt her. She was an agent in his first ruine, in all the rest, she would be a patient. The heat of mans constitution disposeth him to be the first profferer: now his chastitie lies in the hands of women. If she have the grace to refuse, what he had the fault to offer, they are both delivered. Lust would be the most common sin of the world, if like other sins it could be done alone. Indeed it is best never to be put to a denyall: but by a faire carriage to put temptation out of hope. Wisedome forbeares some lawfull things, because they may be occasions of things unlawfull.
Modestie; which is the only visible vertue, the chastitie of the lookes: a  transparent glasse, thorow which we see a cleane and uncorrupted heart. This sets the face in a right posture; farre from pride, and not nearer to wantonnesse. The beauties of both minde and body meet in the center of modestie. An affected and coyish demurenesse is incident to them that be bad: but true modestie is seldome found but in innocence. Modestie is the out-worke of the Citadell, that keepes the enemie even from the walls. For a great example of this vertue, we cannot looke too much upon Ioseph. Forraine stories make honourable mention of many famous for chastitie. Of Amabaeus, who had a beautious wife, yet abstained from her, perhaps he loved his Harpe better. Of Xenocrates, and of Spurina, a faire young man, who disfigured his face of purpose that he might not be desired of women. Of Hippon a Greekish woman,Valer. Max. that drowned her selfe to save her chastitie. None came neare Ioseph; who neither abstained from his owne wife, that were a folly rather than a chastitie: neither disfigured nor destroyed Gods workmanship; which were to pull downe our house, because the eye of a passenger covers it. But in the heat of youthfull bloud, when his Lady sollicites, promises reward, threatens ruine, conveniencie of place, opportunity of time, all the helpes of hell concurring; then to resist? O here was fire falling upon wet tinder, that soone went out. The Fathers commend him for those foure great vertues in this one act. For Temperance, that he would not be enticed by his Mistresse. For Iustice, that hee would not wrong his Master. For Fortitude, that hee overcame many assaults. For Prudence, chusing rather to leave his vesture than his vertue.
Marriage; It is better to marry than to burne. Burning is the disease, for 
 which mariage is the proper medicine. This is that ordinate fewell, whereon such fire should feed. S. Ieromes sophistrie on that place is absurd: Conjagium dicitur bonum, quia levius malum: for lust can never be good, being a transgression: and mariage cannot in it selfe be bad, as it is Gods institution. Not that every tickling should draw us to marrying; but a Burning, an aestuant flame: for it is one thing vri, another sentire calorem. Some Pontificians have cast b^tter aspersions upon mariage; taxing that for uncleannesse, which is ordained an antidote against uncleannesse. But that is a blasphemous doctrine, and must needs imply, that God himselfe was mistaken, and that upon a more serious deliberation of the blessed Trinity. Gen. 2.18. Iehovah Elohim: there was a greater consultation about making the woman, than about making the whole world. But it is objected, that1 Tim. 1.11. in marying they breake their faith. Answ. They doe not breake the faith, because they marry: but because they wexe wanton against Christ, and so marry. They are first incontinent, suffer themselves to be abused: and then to cover their offence, and to keepe them from publike shame, they marry. To accept of mariage only as a cloke to hide their former naughtinesse; this is the sinne condemned. Howsoever they thinke; mariage is an ordained remedy: strange lusts will give place to true conjugall love. Let the husband love his wife, the wife love her husband; (and they have reason, for they tooke each other for that purpose) these unnaturall fires will out.
These be the rules of prevention, to escape uncleannesse: but if any be defiled, they must take another Receit; true contrition of heart, the flouds that come from a broken rocke; washing themselves in the laver of Repentance, that they may be cleane. David in a zeale of Iustice against the rich oppressour, takes an oath to cut him off: God is more favourable to David, than to take him at his word. David sayes, The man shall dye: Nathan sayes, Thou art the man, but thou shalt not dye. Beside uncleannesse, hee had shed innocent bloud: and the strict Law requires life for life. But O, the wondrous power of Repentance! as if it could dispence with the rigour of Iustice: Thou shalt not dye. In David we heare the voice of the Law, awarding death unto sinne; in Nathan, the voice of the Gospel, awarding life unto the repentance for sinne. Whatsoever the sore bet this is the remedy. The soule that hath sinned, shall dye; saith the Law. The Gospell comes in with an exception; The soule that hath sinned, And not repented, shall dye: never any soule applied this remedy, and dyed.Psal. 32.1. Blessed is the man, not that hath not sinned; where is he to be found? But; whose sinne shall not bee imputed, because he hath repented. It is only unfained repentance, that can cleanse our soules from these knowne evils.
Without this, Gods hand will as surely overtake us in the punishment, as Satans hand hath overtaken us in the sinne. But for comfort to the wounded soule; There is no sinne so foule, but the bloud of Christ can scowre it off. Vncleannesse is a deep staine, sized into the soule by her dwelling in the body: there is no meanes to get it out, but by the bloud of the Lambe. Even theRev. 7.14. garments of the Saints need washing; and what can make them white? only, the bloud of the Lambe. It was the Iewish scoffe at Christ, Alios potuit servare, seipsum non potuit: he could save others, not himselfe. Saint Ambrose replyes, Imo ille solus potuit sanare velnera mea, qui negligit sua: he only can heale my wounds, that neglected his owne.Es^. 63.1. His garments were dyed red, to make all ours white. But neither can this be had without faith, nor faith be assured without repentance. It is a happy thing for a man to improve the dayes of his peace, for the prevention of future vengeance: to seeke onely to be safe by being good. Next to this divine providence, our best guard is our Innocence, next to that our repentance. For him that hath fallen, to pray, Lord deliver me; for him that hath not fallen, Lord preserve me, in Iesus Christ. Take here two Characters.
The uncleane person stands like one tormented with the stone in the kidneys;
 there is not a limbe or joynt about him, but suffers with the distortion of that one part. If some spot or token of his soules infection should breake out and appeare in his face, no leper would change complections with him. If he had a hundred eyes, he could bestow offices on them all, to purvey for his lust. He loves to be a looking on pictures; and when he cannot reach the substance, he courts the shadow. He sends his eye to the market, and money is his Cater. He loves the company but of three; Baud, Whore, and himselfe: only the Devill comes in, and makes up the fourth against his will. The pestilence is in his breath, it infects every place he comes in. His body is rotting apace, but his soule is already fallen to piecces. His Mistresse is his Idol, and he would never learne any prayers; but for doing his devotions to her. For God; he either thinkes or wishes that he could not see in the darke. He is borne to be a womans slave, not her Lord and husband: he dares not marry, for feare (contrary to other mens minds) of being paid his owne debts. If he doe bestow himselfe, he commonly soulders up some crackt piece: and in marriage is more jealous, than before he could be luxurious. He and his strumpet make up a fagot for hell fire; and must burne together in torment, as they have done in turpitude. He so consumes himselfe to cinders, that there is not one drop of moisture left in him, not though a teare could save his soule. Before he dies, he is become all stench: his soule stinkes God, his body stinkes to himselfe, his name stinkes to the world. It is just that he who leaves GOD for a harlot while he lives, should lose God, and his harlot, and himselfe, when he is dead. Reason left him long agoe, and he hath ever since lived beast. Commonly he dies of Hercules disease: a fire in his marrow. He may come to be sory, seldome to repent. At last, he is brought to his couch, or crutch; and there every body leaves him.
The chast is a pure man whether in wedlocke or virginity. If maried, he loves his wife, not because she was rich, or faire; but because she was and is good; because he once loved her, and still loves himselfe in her. All change abhorres; for he married not for recreation, but procreation; not for pleasure, but posterity. It is her soule he sets his love upon; he knowes the body to be but physicke for lust, a shell for progenie: therefore chose her not for that halfe whereby she is a woman, but for the better, wherein she is a man. Sensuall affection lookes only to the shape; rationall hath respect to the soule and minde forgetting the sexe, or leaving to the sense. Soules have no sexes; therefore they that love in soule, (in that part which is not sexuall, wherein both husband and wife are men) their love admits no more impuritie than inconstancie. If he be single, his minde keepes his mortall fabricke sweete: his conscience hath got the better of his concupiscence: he is so farre from doing, that he dares not thinke amisse. His mirth is so cleare, that you may looke thorow it into vertue, not beyond. He had rather seeme not to understand a bad motion, than to hold conference with it. He censures all charitably, and abhorres suspition: he thinkes none should doe ill, because he meanes well. He entertaines none but honest thoughts: if loose ones looke in at the window, he presently shuts the doore. He neither with unseasonable sleepe rusts his soule, nor with immoderate dyet teacheth his body to rebell. He is one of those that beRev. 14.4. not defiled with women, for they are virgins; and follow the Lambe whithersoever hee goeth. His soule is Christs betrothed Spouse, and he accounts death but a messenger, to bring her home to her husband. He is so cleane, that the Angels love to bee about him here, and hee shall bee received among them hereafter.
Walke after the flesh.] This walking is the Axeltree, whereon the whole frame of the Text moveth. There is no man can walke without lust, but the good man does not walke after lust: if it goe with him, it shall not goe before him. It is the natural mans way, the Christians trouble in the way. If he be enticed out of vertues p^^h, either he doth not give consent, or he doth not give full consent, or he doth grieve for consent. Either he doth not walke, or he walkes not farre, or he walkes
 against his will, and soone correcteth his steps. The wicked man is taken in his walke,Psal. 119.59. Psal. 68.21. But he that doth purpose before hand not to sin, and in the act doth strive against sin, and after the act is sory for sin; though he step aw^y weakely but not wickedly, God in mercy spares him, because this is none of his walke.Rom. 8.8. He that is in the flesh, cannot please God, so long as he keepes that way but as water that hath beene frozen with cold, may afterward be heat with fire; so he may come from a carnall to a spirituall course. Things of the flesh are of three sorts: some good, as the knowledge of arts: some indifferent, as honour and riche^ some evill, as the workes of sinne. We walke in the former, and doe well, keeping the right end: in the middle, not amisse, keeping the right manner: in the last, we goe amisse, and there is no pretence to excuse us. We make the good become evill to our selves; when we imploy our learning to justifie error. We make the indifferent very evill, when we preferre temporalls to spiritualls; as the tongue of the feverish infected with choler, makes sweet things tast bitter. I observe foure things in this carnall walking. 1. Their slavery to it. 2. Their constancie in it. 3. The specification of it. 4. Our remedie from it.
1 Their slavery: to walke is their errant diligence: to walke After it, is their servile obedience. The flesh leads, and they follow like dutifull servants. All servants. All service is from sin, this is the service of sin. If man had not sinned, he should not have served:Gen 9.25. Chrys. Cham was borne of the same Parents; only his sin brought him to a slavish condition. This was just with God: but for man to make his eldest sonne Lord of all, and the rest no better than his servants: if such a tyrannie of custome, (as if hey were all illegitimate) that in the book of God we can find no such distinction. There is a service of Superioritie: the good Prince thinkes himselfe but the highest servant of the common-wealth. He troubles his thoughts, he breakes his sleepes about the businesse of state; sets his shoulders under the weight of government: and his Praesse in ruling it, is but a Subesse to the conservation of it. There is a service of equality;Gal. 5.13. By love serve one another: he that doth not, is like a loose tooth in the mandible, better out than in.
There is a service of Inferioritie; which is either. 1. Voluntary, when a free man makes himselfe a servant; and such a servant may make himselfe free againe. Or. 2. Temporary: he that workes for us by the day, is so long our servant; at night he is free. Or. 3. Pactory; undertaking such a worke, for such a wages, during such a time; in hoc, ad hoc, and huc usque, he is a servant. Or 4.De Civit. 19. cap. 15. Captive, such as be taken in the warres: which Saint Augustine will have called Servi a Servando, because they were saved in slaughter. Or 5. Native, such as are borne servants, being the children of Servile parents. Or 6. Venditive, that have sold themselves; concerning whomExod. 21. God set downe a Law.1 King. 21.25. So Ahab sold himselfe to worke wickednesse. But Paul seemes to acknowledge this of himselfe;Rom. 7.14. I am carnally sold under sinne? We answer; there be two wayes of selling unto bondage: one compulsory, as the brethren sold Ioseph: so the regenerate are sold under sinne, but against their wills. The other voluntary, as the wicked sell themselves to Satan for very vanitie; instating themselves upon the flesh, that they tell (without asking) who ownes them, by the superscription of their livery, so thatRom. 7.13. Pareus sin by the commandement becomes exceeding sinfull. As a head-strong and unbroken horse, the more he is curbed by the bridle, the more he breakes out. Wine will enflame any man, but he that hath a feverish body, is more fired with it through his infirmitie.Lyran. There is abuying and felling. Esa. 52.3. Yee have sold your selves for nought, and yee shall be redeemed without money. But this is in a diverse sense: they are sold for nought in respect of God, because he hath no honour by it: and redeemed for nought, in respect of themselves, they paid nothing for their redemption, but not so, in respect Christ, for he bought us deare. But these have wilfully sold themselves to the service of sin.
2 Their constancie in it. Walking is a continued act; and acts continued make
 habits. Two sorts of Philosophers had their names from walking: the Stoickes, who derived their doctrine from Plato: and the Peripatetickes,Lactan. who had Aristotle for their Prince. Besides, their ambulating life, severing themselves from common society, they had a certaine peculiar and dogmaticall way, whereunto they confined themselves. But all their waies were but fantasies and errant opinions; without any truth of rule, especially without the Rule of Truth. Our blessed God hath given us a blessed way; andGal. 6.16. as many as walke after that rule, peace be on them and mercie: a perfect rule indeed; which wee have good occasion to seeke, good direction to finde, good encouragement to walke, good reward at the end.
Walking intends a perpetuated motion, not for a pace or space, but holding o^^: therefore, is the wicked conversation called a way; for that's a mans way, not which he steps into, but walkes and travels. Some have spoken much of the way, but out of the way; while they called every act of sinne, a way:Prov. 4.14. for the Scripture onely meanes it of practicall and habituall sinne. So then, to walke after the flesh, is an addiction to sinne, constate of many lusts. This is a true distinction: Every vice is a sinne, every sinne is not a vice: every wry step is an errour,Omne vitium est peccatum, omne peccatum non est vitium. Arist. Eth. 2. it is not a way, not an heresie in manners. Once being overtaken with wine, makes not a drunkard. Vice cannot consist with vertue, quia ex diametro pugnat: but Peccatum, a vicious act doth not destroy vertue, whether morall or theologicall. Peters deniall did not destroy his faith, nor Davids uncleannesse his charitie. These were their sinnes, they were not their wayes: their usuall walking tooke another course. Actions are done by the powers of the soule and body, but habits have their residence in ipsis potentiis, both of the sensitive and intellectuall part: as wantonnesse or drunkennesse in the former; pride, hypocrisie, diffidence in the other. If wee compare them before God, vice is more grievous than a sinne, because it is habituall malice: if before men, sinne is more haiuous than vice; for vices are not punished by Magistrates, but onely sinnes. But they ever beget one another; many evill actions beget an evill habite, and an evill habite every day begets evill actions.
3 The specification of it: the flesh hath many wayes for them to walke. Take them by couples: there is a Reeling way, and a Railing way. The former is the drunkards walke, that leads him from the lake of wine to the lake of brimstone: this he that never abstaines till he be a thirst, and never drinkes but double, for he must be pledg'd. The other is the swearers walke; that in every place sends up defiance to the Lord of Hosts. He infects all company, as thunder sowres wine; and often dyes raving and blaspheming, that's the end of his journey. There is a Ruffling way, and a Scuffling way. The former is the proud mans walke: as beggars hang their rags on the hedges, to tell they have beene there; so these leave every where certaine monuments and flagges of their arrogant folly. The devill cannot misse them, for he is sure to finde them in his owne walke. The other is the litigious mans walke; he passes through all the Iudiciary courts on earth, to the infernall court of hell. The way of peace he knowes not: there is no awe in his heart, while there may be any law on his side. And when all his substance is run out in fees to his Advocates, at last (without the especiall grace of Repentance, and resitution) himselfe goes for a round fee to the devill. There is a Burning way and a Turning way: The former is the envious mans walke; anger is but a passionate fit of the irascible part; but malice is an inveterate anger, a fiery habite. Anothers wel-fare is his most capitall offence: yet his envy, like Phalaris Bull, makes that first become a torment to himselfe, which he prepared for others. He fires himselfe before he goes to hell, as if he meant to season and harden himselfe for that unquenchable burning.
The other is the Hypocrites walk, whose religion lies in wait for the inclination of the Prince: standing water, that neither ebbes nor flowes, but according to the Moone, the Time. He is very earnest in what he undertakes, and reviles the opposite;
 yet he can be of any religion for a need, therefore his heart is truly of none. Of al men, the Ielous and the hypocrite are possessed with a strange madnesse; they are very diligent and curious, yet hope to lose their labours. There is a thorny way, and a myrie way. The former is the deceivers walke: a common Burse, where the fraudulent trader, the pestilent Vsurer, the impudent Churchrobber, every day fetch their turnes: conferring how to turne the common wealth; into a private wealth and to make all Priests of one order, Mendicants. To speak impartially; this is an habite, men walke in it to their graves. A way it is, but none of Gods wayes: an end it hath, but none of comforts ends: an answere it hath, but none of truths answers: a reward it hath, but it is the retribution of vengeance. Men thinke they may doe this without trouble of conscience; but God keepe them from dying with such a conscience. The other is the adulterers walke, but that it is somewhat too fast for a walke: for if his acts could answere the number of his desires, nature could scarce supply him with desired objects. Could his wishes take effect. Popery might have many Nunnes, it should have no maides. The flesh hath many more wayes and walkes, which Paul himselfe is faine to conclude with anGal. 5.21. etc.
4 For our remedie, first, let us beware of walking in sin, Psal. 1.1. It is dangerous to crosse their way, mortall to walke in it. Looke to the habite of sin, bee sure to mortifie that: it is not enough sometime to forbeare the action: it will be rare, if a bad tree should not yield bad fruit. Cut thy haire, it will grow againe: mow the grasse, it will spring againe: lop a tree, it is a tree still. Not to lust when a man is sicke, not to steale while he is a sleepe, not to quarrell while he in prison, not to sweare while he is at Church; No thanks; the root is still within. If the wicked restraine one evill, the godly will kill ten: if Saul slay his thousand, David will slay his ten thousand. He that strikes at sin, let him be sure to strike home; doe not favour it, for if it scape, it will have no mercie on thee; but be so much (...) more exasperated, because thou attemptest, and didst not speed it. He that ha^^ wounded this Lion at the heart, shall never feare the strength of his pawes, (...) teeth of his jawes, nor hideousnesse of his roaring. Colossi. 3. ver. 5. Mortifie your members that are upon earth. First, he calls them Members, because they be either as deare to you, as your members; or because they are brought into action by your members, or because they are the united limbes of concupiscence, as members are parts of the body. Your, for properly our sins are our owne, and nothing else. Mortifie, apply something that shall make them dead. Let not sin alo^^ till it die of it selfe, but kill it while it might yet live: to give it over when (...) no longer commit it, is no repentance. It will put you to some paine: men doe not ordinarily die without paine: and sin hath a strong heart, it is not easily killed. It is one thing to sleepe, another thing to die; with small adoe we may get sinne asleepe; by rocking it in the cradle of indulgence, and lullabying it with voluptuousnesse; till it stirre not in the conscience. But to get it dead, that it may not live in us, this will cost anguish and trouble. Mortifie these wayes for two reasons. 1. They arise not from any noble part in us, from no divine principle or gracious instinct; nothing that can declare greatnesse and true spirit in man: they are but the base and degenerate workes, and walkes of the flesh. 2. They only make us odious to God: it is not meane clothes, nor a deformed body, nor a torne cottage, nor homely fare; but only sin, that makes a man contemptible. Proud of vices? a lazar may better be proud of his ulcers, a beggar of his vermine, or a scavenger of his lay-stals.
Secondly, let us learne another walke, even to walke with God and be perfect. This is no time of sitting; Christians doe not leade vitam seden tariam; it will breed obstructions in the heart. Our Saviour himselfe dearely earned that voice, before he heard it;Psal. 110 1. Sit thou at my right hand. Noe time of standing still;Matth. 20.6. Why stand yee here all the day idle? Why doe yee stand? you have feet, walke: Here, in the beginning of your journey: in the day, the night is for rest, the day for labour: All the day,
 one houre were too much: Idle, a man may stand and doe some worke; but stand yee idle? There is a Medium betwixt sin and glory, and that's Grace: Vta Regia, via lactea: walke this way, or expect not this end. God did enough to bring the way to us, who could never else have brought our selves to the way: would we have him bring downe heaven and glory too? We are in the bondage of sin as the Israelites were in Aegypt: Canaan was theirs, heaven is our promised land: if neither of us fall to walking, nor admit a motion and removall; they through the desart, we through amendment of life; neither can arrive at their home. If thou think thy self to good for this journey, God wil think thee too bad for his glory.
God is the God of order, not of confusion: and nature is not suffered to run out of one extreame into another, but by a Medium. Suppose it now midnight, and the Sun with the Antipodes: he does not presently mount up to the heigh^ of our heaven, and make it noone-day. But first, it is twilight, then the day dawnes, then the sun rises, and yet lookes with weaker eyes, before he shines out in his full glory. We doe not to day sweat with summer, and be shaken with the fury of winter to morrow: but it comes on with soft paces; the day growes shorter, the suns force weaker; cold deaws, and white frosts, precede the extremitie of hardnesse. Indeed CHRIST is able in a moment, of sinners on earth to make men Saints of heaven; as he wrought upon that one dying malefactor: but he seldome doth so suddenly advance men in the degrees of sancti^^cation. That ordinary way, whereby men walke from the state of sin, to the state of glory, is the state of grace. You have seene some make sudden leaps; and of furious sinners become zealous professors, in a trice. Of such we m^y be charitably jealous; Non ad altum per saltum: holinesse shoots not up like Ionah's Gourd, in a night. Few men know the instant of their conversion as the Papists proudly demand the speciall times of their innovations, and who resisted their errors at the first rising? But as Popery crept in part after part, in every part (...) gentle degrees in every degree with pretence of truth; till it advanced the ^^nners of painted ceremonies, with a mighty noise of excommunications, lo^^er than the cataracts of Nilus: and howsoever it came in, we finde it here. So our conversion is by soft and scarce sensible beginnings, albeit not part after part, yet degree after degree: in every part by gentle soakings in of goodnesse, in every degree by maturitie and growing up to ripenesse: as we cannot see the growing of a tree, yet know that it doth grow, by the magnitude of bulke, and branches and fruits: so we may perceive our conversion to God, which walking on must confirme.
Walking is a good ordinary pace, between violent running and lazy creeping; a moderate course betweene Iehu's march and Mephibosheths. It is better for a man to goe soft and sure, than for a gird to run himselfe out of winde, and afterwards to stand still and breath him. Walke not slowly, for feare of comming short: not faster than we may hold out to the end, nor slower than we may come in good time to our everlasting rest. Any traveller may be called a side a little, to speake with his friend, or to looke upon a noveltie, so for a step and minute be out; but still his way lies before him: whereto recalling himselfe, and going constantly on in the proceedings of grace, he shall be blessed.
They despise government.] It is no wonder, if they that follow the flesh, contemne authoritie; and would have no other governor than that of their owne chusing. He that hath set up this Dagon for his God, would have nothing to doe with the Arke, nothing for the Arke to doe with him. It is not enough for Egistus to abuse the bed, but also to shed the bloud, of King Agamemnon. The Adulterer is fit to make a Traitor. Rome hath sent us too many prodigious proofes of this; that have at once lusted after the beauty of our women, and thirsted at the bloud of our Princes. Palpable demonstrations, that the enchantment of adulterie hath begotten instruments of conspiracie. And as a Iesuite is but a new word for a
 Traitor: so Seminary and seditious are but diverse termes of the same man. Who more despise the Magistracie among us, than the sons of ryot, that take in the fraight of lust at a Taverne, and than with wind and tyde faile to the Brothells? being questioned for this, they turne men of warre, stand at defiance, and rime away the awe of government with the ballads of scandall. A man would thinke, that none who professe the Gospell of Christ, should impugne the ordinances of God: or if they did despise the spirituall ones, as men that have no care of their soules; yet not the visible and temporall ones, as men that stand in feare of their lives. If there were none such, I might well have spared my Sermon, yea the Apostle might have spared my Text. But when this Vlcer comes to be searched, many moe will be found guilty, than be now suspected by others, or suspect themselves.
For method; here be two generall things considerable. 1. The excellencie of the thing despised; Government. 2. The pravitie of such as throw contempt upon it; Despisers. The former will appeare, both by the Authoritie that ordaines it, and by the necessitie that requires it.
Psal. 8.For the authoritie; this is from God himselfe: he gave man a fourefold regiment. 1. Imperium in animalia, over the creatures. 2. Imperium in se; over himselfe: before his fall by a potent freedome of will he governed all his actions; after his fall some relicts of this dominion appeare: reason still retaines some fragments of her regiment over the sensuall part; though here she be but like a Queene in the midst of none but rebells. In the body, some parts are made to governe and direct the rest; as the head: some to obey, as the members. 3. Imperium domesticum, over his houshold: the Master is a little King in his familie, as the King is a great Master in his kingdome. 4. Imperium politicum; whether Monarchiall, of one; or Aristocraticall, of many and those the best: or Democraticall, which is the popular state. All which are mediately or immediately of God, Rom. 13.1.Ioh. 19.11. Thou couldest have no power at all against me, saith Christ to Pilate, except it were given thee from above.
Against this Divine Institution there be some objections; to cleare all which, hold we this distinction. There is the Power it selfe, the Assumption of it, and the Execution of it. The manner of assuming it may be from the Devill: either by bribery, as it is likelyAct. 24.26. Faelix came in: so that he could not sell cheape, who had bought deare. Or by crueltie and intrusion,; asIudg. 9.5. Abimelech ascended the throne by the staires of bloud and fratricide. Or by invasion, as the conquerer makes himselfe King. Or by usurpation, as Athaliah kept the kingdome from the right heire, Ioash. So also the manner of using this power may be from the Devill; as to set up superstition for religion, and crueltie in stead of equity. Here neither the bad manner of acquiring, nor bad order of tyrannizing, are from God: yet the authority it selfe is of God. The hand doth violently extort anothers good, or smite with the sword: these abuses are from sin, but the hand it selfe is given of God.Origen Chrys. The sight is sore, or adulterous, yet the eye is of God. Matrimoniall copulation hath the patronage of God, copulation not matrimoniall is of Satan. The truth is plaine; By me Kings raigne, saith the Lord: let us heare what error objects.
1 Object. Hos. 8.4. They have set up Kings, but not by me: they have made Princes, and I knew it not. Answ. They chose the King without Gods approbation, they set not up the kingdome without his Iustitution. Evill Princes are said to raigne not by God; vel modo gubernandi, when they rule the people not by that Law which should rule the King.Martyr Faius Greg. Vel modo arripiendi, when God calls them not to raigne. Vel sibi, non Deo regnant; they raigne not for Gods honour but their owne humour. God made the member he made not the ulcer: Potentiam Deus distribuit, elation^^^ potentiae malitia invenit. When the Israelites chose Ieroboam their King; that treacherous revolting from their lawfull Soveraigne, and rebellious adherence to an
 usurper, an Idolater, was none of Gods doing, he condemnes it:Hos. 8.5. yet the act was his, 1 King. 11.35. So Ierome saies of Sauls election; that it was errore populi, non voluntate Domini: it is true, the manner was the peoples fault, but the matter was Gods purpose: he meant to raise up a King, only takes the occasion by their headstrong importunitie. So still doth it happen, that bad manners breed good lawes. Without question the thing was good; Monarchie, the best forme of government: but good things may be ill desired. So while they affected a King,1 Sam. 8.8.^. they rejected the Lord. Therefore seeing they chuse to have a King, God will chuse the King they shall haue. As he gratifies them in the monarchall condition, so he punisheth them in the monarchs person.
2 Object. Saint Peter calls it Ordinationem humanam,1 Pet. 2.13. an ordinance of man; how is it then of God? Answ. He calls it humane vel subjective, because the subject wherein this authoritie stickes is man: or Objective, because it is exercised in the affaires of man: or (...), because it is for mans good. The fruits of the earth are brought forth by the industrie of man, yet they cease not to be the gifts of God. The formes of administration may be of man, the originall institution is of God.
3 Object. If every power, then the tyrannicall, is of God; as the Mahometan, Pontifician, Diabolicall. Answ. The Principalitie is, not the tyrannie. Wealth is alwaies good in it selfe, and Gods gift; yet the unjust acquisition, and miserable usurpation, make it bad to such owners. Riches are not Mala, nisi malis. And were the Pope an orthodoxe Bishop, we would not deny his authoritie to be of God: but his chalenge of universall dominion, is not Potestas,Ioh. 14.30. sed potestatis ulcus: which he hath by his owne ambition, Satans instigation, not Gods Institution. And for the Devills power, it is by Gods permission, not without his limitation; no other than a hang-mans office, to correct and punish whom the Divine Iustice appoints. When he boasted of the kingdomes,Matth. 4.9. they are all mine; this was but his lie, he had not one foot to bestow.
The power of government is then ordained of God, and that in a speciall manner, by direct Precept. Sicknesse indeed and warre, famine and povertie, are ordained of God but not by commandement.Dan. 2.21. Promotion comes neither from the East, nor, etc. Nor from the suffrages of People, nor lives of Ancestors, nor conquest of swords, but from the Lord. By him are kingdomes disposed, Kings inaugurated, Crownes of gold set on their heads, Scepters and states established, Angels with their wings shadowing their Thrones; that their Majestie may be higher by the head than the rest of the people. That one man should rule millions, restraine, constraine, correct, command; how could it be but that God himselfe hath imprinted the characters of a Divinitie in him;1 Esd. 4.7. but that there is a Divine constitution in a humane person. It is thou O Lord, that subduest my people under me.1 Sam. 24.4. Saul is in Davids cave, the souldiers would now have him carve his owne revenge; they alledge Gods promise and this advantage concurring: but take it at the worst; Thou mayest doe to him, as it shall seeme good to thee: now, that might not seeme good to him, that seemed evill to God. But their incentive to bloud, David makes a preservative from bloud; The Lord forbid, I should doe this thing to his Annointed. Doubtlesse he had worke enough to defend both himselfe and his persecutor: himselfe from the importunitie of their instigation, his Master from suffering violence. Say, he could rule his owne hands, it is not easily to rule a multitude. What was the Charme to allay the fury of those raging spirits? He is the Lords Annointed: nothing else, this was enough: that holy oile was an Antidote for his bloud. Saul did not lend David so impenetrable an armor, when he was to encounter Goliah: as David lent him in the plea of his unction. Not one of the discontented out-lawes durst put forth a hand of violence against him. The Image and impresse of that Divine ordinance strikes such an awe into the hearts of men, that it makes even Traitors, cowards: so that in stead of smiting, they tremble,
 like them whose office is to suffer, not to doe. Feare God, honour the King: there was never man that feared God, but he also honoured the Prince.
For the necessitie; without Government wee were worse than beasts: It is the bond of the Common-weale; the life-breath which so many thousand creatures draw: who otherwise would proove a burden to themselves, a booty to their enemies. In the hoast of Heaven there is a Regiment: under God the Supreme, bee orders and degrees of starres and planets; without which composition it could not be called an Armie. There is a Regiment in the body; they are luxate and palsey members, that move not by the direction of the Head. In the Family is a Regiment; the servant acknowledgeth his Master, the child his Father. Among irrationall creatures is a Regiment: the Bees have their King, the Cranes their Leader, and they keepe their night-watches in disposed orders. All the Drove followes the principall beast, and the Sheep are not led by every Ram, but by their owne delected Guide.
Thus Nature teacheth, that we are all bound to subject our selves to Government. Man is a sociable creature, but there would be harsh society among them without a Ruler. None could say, This is mine; and Cheape-side would not be safer than Salisbury-plaine. The first rule that Nature dictates to man by experience, is to seeke a Ruler. We may say of all other creatures, Nascuntur artifices, they are borne their crafts-masters: Nature it selfe was their Tailour and Tutor, they came in apparell'd and armed; and by their estimative faculty, they are their owne Cators and Cookes, Physitians and builders. They can at first enterance choose their owne meates, build their owne nests and burroughs, and being distemper'd, skill their owne medicines. But man came in without a rag to his back, or a dinner drest to his belly, or a house to put his head in; no weapons, no ablenesse to use them: his understanding like white paper, nothing written on it: all which really teach him to seeke a protector. Therefore a common-wealth without a Governour, is like a body without a soule: where is no King, they are all kings. It were strange, if every member of the body should move by a severall soule: how long could that man hang together? The sonne hath a great losse in the death of his father, the wife of her husband, the servant of his master: but in the Funerals of Princes the whole land reads not so much the Princes; as their owne mortality: Et in una morte plares agnoscimus, Hectora flemus. One sayth truely; Dum mors insignes percutit, ^mnes petit. I know their fame is immortall, their goodnesse immortall, their soules immortall; but their bodies are mortall: there is so much of man in them, that they must dye. They are lent to us for our sakes, but wee must restore them againe for their owne sakes.
Rom. 13.4^Hee is the Minister of God to thee for good. Either for our naturall good, preserving our lives, which bloudy-men would soone ruinate, who feare not so much hell as the halter: like beasts that are more afraid of the flash of the powder, than of the bullet. Or Civill good, preserving our goods and possessions; else robbery were law, and men like dogges, would trie all right by the teeth. Or Morall good, in commanding and commending Vertue, which hath praise of the Power: or in punishing vice, Hee beares not the sword in vaine. Or Spiri^^ all good; the Magistrate by coactive power enforcing men to the duties of godlinesse. These seates would bee empty, the Preacher wants his relative, hearers; the Sacraments would be vili-pended, the Service of God resigned to the service of Satan; but for Government. The Sabbath would not be distinguished from common dayes, the markets be fuller than the Temples; the wicked, like sullen children, would not forsake their play for their meate, but for the rodde of correction. Many Saints in heaven might now confesse, that they had not knowne God, but for the King. First, compulsory meanes brought them to the feast, whereof once tasting, they would never leave it. t Compell them
 to come in etc.Luk. 14.23. It is a good storme that blowes the wanton and secure Mariner into the haven. Wee could not converse together, had not God set authority over us, to represse our mutuall violences.
Lewd wretches have not the feare of God, therefore God brings them under the feare of man: that being subjected to Rulers of their owne kinde, their outrage might be sent from temporall death to eternall. In that notorious apostacy of the Iewes, when so many execrable enormities were committed, the Spirit still prefixeth;Iudg. 17.6. At that time there was no King in Israel. We read of a poore Levite wanting meanes; why? there was no King. If God had beene their King, his Law had provided for the Levite. If Moses had beene their King, his sword would have cut out a portion for the Levite. We are beholding to government for order, for peace, for Religion. For order; where is no King, every man will be his owne king. For peace, he that is his owne king, will be anothers Tyrant. For Religion; every Micha would have a house of gods, beside Gods house. We are worthy of nothing but confusion, if we doe not blesse God for Regular dominion. No wonder, if the Levites goe a begging, while there is no King in Israel. The Tythes and Offerings were their due; had these been payed, none of the holy Tribe needed to wander for maintenance. Where both Legall and Regall authoritie appoints the Levite his right, the wickednesse of man will defraud him. But what should become of the Levites, if there were no King? And what of the Church, if there were no Levites? No King, no Church: no civill government, no Ecclesiasticall. How should the impotent child live without a nurse? It was Gods promise unto his Church, Kings shall be thy Foster-fathers, and Queenes thy Nurses. How should not the sheepe be a prey to Wolves and Foxes, but for the Shepheard? What life or temper can bee kept in the body that is head-lesse? Therefore, that the riches we have gotten by honest industry, may bee assured to our posterity; that wee may sit under the shadow of peace, and teach our children to know the Lord; that the lampe of our lives be not snuffed out with violence; that the good man may build up Temples and Hospitalls, without trembling, to thinke of savage and barbarous sacriledge to pull them downe: that our devotions be not molested with uproares, nor men called from their callings by mutinies: that our temporall estate be kept in libertie, our spirituall estate improved with pietie, and our eternall estate to be given in us glory; that our lives may be preserved, and our soules saved; for such a King of men, blesse we the God of the Kings.
This truth is plaine enough, no reasonable man would looke for impugners: yet we must be content to heare what the Synode of hell can plead for disobedience.
1 Object. Subjection came in with sinne; but Christ hath taken away sinne, therefore also subjection. Innocencie knew no Superior but God: and the subjection of Eve was her punishment, this could not antecede her sin. Nomen Servi culpa meruit, non natura. Answ. Subjection is twofold; Servile, and civill.Agu. The Vassalage of a slave, bound only to seeke his Masters proper good, was not before the fall: civill obedience for the common good, was. The former is a curse, such a one as Noah bequeathed to his impudent Sonne: not in it selfe considered, but by reason of the feare and sorrow united to it, which Innocency knew not. Civill subordination was before the fall: Encrease and multiplie; this did put a plaine distinction and inequality betwixt the father and the sonne. Eve was subject to Adam, before either of them was subject to sin. Shee might have Imperium apud virum, but he had Imperium in uxorem. Not that the Salicke Law accords with the Divine Law; as if no Queene might governe a kingdome: for the GOD of spirits hath often put great spirits into that sexe. The Queene of Sheba was a famous Governesse; and that masculine vertues may shine in a female head, this land cannot forget the memory of so long and sweet
 experience. Yet this hinders not, but that man is fittest to governe.Lev. 4.22.27 The Ruler was to bring for his sinne-offering,Theodor. a Hee-goate: the private offender, a Shee-goate: to shew that the Male sutes the Ruler best, and the Female the ruled. Thus Innocency had a superiority.
2. Ob. Every Beleever is even now in the Kingdom of Heaven; but in Heaven there is no King but Christ. Answ. In this respect they are also called kings, yet the King that doth not finde them subjects, judgeth them traitors. There is a spirituall regiment,Rom. 14.17. standing in grace, peace and joy: here is no distinction of persons; neither father nor sonne, master nor servant, King nor subject, but Christ is all in all. There is a civill regiment, which cannot consist without distinctions and orders; here must be masters and servants, etc. If all were Commanders and rich, every man must be driven to curry his owne horse, and cleanse his owne stable. As it is but a Trunke which is all body, no head: so it is a monster, which is all head, and no body. But they say further; The faithfull have Gods Spirit their guide, therefore need not humane direction. Answ. It is one thing what we doe, another thing what we ought to doe. Yet could we live without transgression, we could not live well without protection.
3. Ob.Mat. 17.26. The children are free; now if free from tribute, then from subjection. Answ. Christ there spake of himselfe, who was by birth heire to the Crowne, therefore free: yet to avoid offence He paid it.Gal. 5.1. And the freedome that hee gives us is from the law, from sinne, death and hell: a liberty of conscience, a spirituall enfranchisement; not an exemption and immunity from civill obedience. Licentiousnesse is not liberty, but slavery: this makes the wicked to affect their owne insensible bondage, and to dote on their owne libertine delights; as a mad man loves his chaines, because they rattle, and (as he thinkes) make a brave noise. He that made us free, taught us another rule by His owne example: He obeyed his Parents in the flesh with humility, the Emperour with piety, the law with integrity, His heavenly Father, usque ad mortem, to the death. So the Christian is Inimicus nemini,Tertul. multo minus Imperatori.
4. Ob. Civill government is full of cruelty; and the sword of Iustice not onely spills the life, but often kills the soule, but cutting off the time and means of repentance. Answ. Nay rather, the malefactour that is not moved at the sentence of death, despaires the possibility of amendment by longer life. Theevish Achan had suffered his sacriledge to lye fretting into his soule, had not the lot discovered him to death. Leasurely sicknesse and languishment is but the coachway to repentance, legall doom is the post-horse. How easie is it for men to delay the preparation for death, so long as they have hope of life? Sooner doe you heare of a malefactours contrition at the gibbet; than of an Vsurers in his bed: as a violent fire can thaw that yee, which lies long unmelted by a winters sunne. Cataplasmes and fomentations draw not out the pleurisie, letting of bloud does it. He sees, by the evidence of the fact; Intelligence of the Iurates, truth of the witnesses, impartiality of the Iudge; an Image of that higher Tribunall, whither his sinne will send him, when they have done with him. Here the Gaole can hold him but to the Session, the Session is not long ere it come to sentence, the sentence is soone answered with execution, the suffering of death is short; all these passages take up no long time. But then comes another Iudgement, where his conscience gives in testimony, all his crimes appeare upon record, Satan solicites Iustice, God cannot be unjust, the doome is certaine, the execution eternall. Therefore with an humbled soule and broken heart, he cries for mercy before he comes to the seat of Iustice; beseecheth Christ to procure him a pardon, and God to accept his Sonnes satisfaction. In this assurance he smiles death in the face, is free in prison, and never felt himselfe truely to live, till he is come to dye. Thus he that could not live innocent, dyes penitent; and seeing his body cannot be saved alive, he endevors that his soule may be saved in death. As he hath followed
 Satan our common enemy in sinning, so hee now defies him in repenting; and by his unfained teares disappoints that murderers hope of his damnation. Moe malefactours than that one have gone from the Gibbet to heaven; and from an ignominious place, after a more scandalous fact, been received up to glory.
5 Ob. But how if the Prince be bad, an enemie to truth and goodnesse, a ravisher, a persecuter, raising powers for the extirpation of the Gospell? Here, if ever, a subject may renounce all allegiance: for here is power against power, man against God, and the subject of both left to follow either. Answ. In this strait some, for feare of the King, shipwracke their faith, and these are traitors to God. Others by a defensive sword in their hand rebells to the King. There is no question, but God must be obeyed even against the King, when the King commandeth things against God. Hi carcerem, Ille gehennam minatur. What then?Aug. shall we resist him with violence? No, God never warrants that practise, no not against a Prince that denyes him. There is an Active obedience, and a Passive. I may not execute his impious commands, I must suffer his unjust punishment. Obedire oportet malis Imperaoribus, non mala imperantibus. The vices of men cannot frustrate the Institution of God: be he never so ungracious, honour must be given, if not Principi, yet Principatui. Peruse Matth. 5.44. and Rom. 12.17. this will tie the hands of Christian subjects. Samuel offered not to depose Saul, though the expresse sentence of God had cast him off, and he was excommunicated by a higher power than ever came from Rome; Saul lived and dyed a King.
The captive Iewes in Babylon, wrote to their brethren in Ierusalem, to pray for the life ofBaruch 1.11. Nebuchadnezzar. This wasIer. 29.7. Ieremies counsell, andDan. 4.19. and 6.21. Daniels practice: all his speeches savoured of most perfect obedience, even to a King that not so well intreated him. Let him be a Darius, and make a decree against God; then he will enter into his house and pray, open his windowes and pray, not passe many houres but pray; though every haire on his head were a life, ready to redeeme his duty to God with the losse of them all. What resistance did the primitive Christians make to those barbarous outrages? but praying for the Emperors life, when under the Emperors command they were bleeding to death. Neither did they suffer because they were not able to resist: but it was their doctrine, Occidi magis licet, quam occidere. Vis nobis non deest vel nummorum, vel numerorum;Tertul. we have meanes sufficient: they filled all places of that Idolatrous Empire, Ilands, Cities, Castles, all but the profane Temples. One night, and a few torches, could have offorded them an ample revenge. Mercie on us, had but the Iesuites such an advantage! Tertullian to these pagan tormentors; Noster est magis Caesar, the Emperour is more ours than yours: as being appointed by our God, and upheld by our prayers and obedience.
Christians never prove losers, but when they unjustly fight for their owne preservation. Provide we Scutum, non gladium, the buckler of patience, not a sword as ready to give as ward the blow.Mat. 10.39. Hee that loseth his life for my sake shall finde it: heare is the way, either to die by living, or to live by dying. When the decree was gone out byEsth. 3.16. Aug. Ahasuerus, this was their refuge; Preces and lacry ma. Potero stere, potero gemere. Rogamus, Auguste, non pugnamus. The Apostles could worke miracles, yet they resisted not the ordinate powers.Rom. 13.1. This charge Paul imposeth on the Romans, even while tyrannous Nero was their Emperor; a monster, whom diverse held to be Antichrist. Saul is in Davids cave; the souldiers thinke that God sent him thither on no other errand, but to fetch his death. If Saul had seene his own danger, he had given himselfe for death, and expected to receive what he meant to bestow. But wise and holy David gives way neither to his owne passion, nor his souldiers sollicitation; but only makes this use of it; the tryall of his loyaltie, and the meanes of his peace. It had beene as easie to cut Sauls throat, as his garment: but his coat only shall be the worse, not his person. Nor should the cloke have beene maimed to seeke his owne revenge, but for a monument of
 his Innocence. The very piece of his garment shewes, he meant no hurt to his Person; yet this violence strikes2 Sam. 24.5. Davids heart. He feeles remorse for touching that, which did once touch the person of his Lord. How unlike are those spirits of Rome, that teach and practise, encourage and reward, yea, canonize the violation of Majestie it selfe? David regrets for cutting a royall robe, they make no account of shedding the royall bloud; sheepe to cut the throat of their Shepheard.
Evill Princes are indeed a punishment;Hos. 13.11. Dedi in furiore. How miserable it is to have an intemperate Ruler, appeares by the wisest Preacher.Ecc. 10.16. woe to thee o Land, when thy Princes eate in the morning: following the pleasures that attend on Majestie, and not the paines whch belong to Magistracie. There is a miserable dedesolation threatned to Israel; the staffe of bread, and stay of water, the man of war, and the man of peace, the Iudge and Prophet, the honourable and ancient, the cunning artificer, the eloquent orator; all shall be taken away. How comes it?Esa. 3.4. I will give children to be their Princes, and babes shall rule over them: there is the Iudgement fulfilled.Psal. 109.6. Set thou a wicked man over him: among all other curses which hee calls from heaven by the Spirit of Prophecie upon his malicious adversaries, running like oile into all the joynts and bonds, of themselves, their wives, and children; this leads the army, as Iudas led the souldiers; Set a wicked man to rule over him. They that were weary of Salomon,Greg. were wearyed with Rehoboam. Secundum merita subditorum, disponit corda praepositorum. Yet must not all this expose them to contempt: Samuel would not pray with Saul, he would grace him before the people, to continue credite to the Magistracie. There is some good attained to under the worst Prince.Ordinary Glosse on Iob. 34. Even by the power given to the devill, Iob probatus est ut justus appareret; Petrus tentatus ne de se praesumeret, Paulus colophizatus ne se extolleret, and Iudas damnatus ut se suspenderet. Iulian sent his subjects to heaven in earnest, while himselfe went to hell merrily and in jest. But blessed be our God, we have no cause to complaine: we have such a Prince, whom whosoever praiseth not, vel non diligit, vel non intelligit. Only let us blesse him, and blesse God for him, that we may all be blessed in him.
Conclusion.That religion then cannot be right, that pulls downe Princes: seeing neither Moses in the old Testament, nor Christ in the new, nor Levite nor Prophet, Apostle nor Disciple, either counselled or practised against Government. Which should decide the point, that hath cost the lives of so many Christians, and still threatens more tragedies to come. They that in this argument found the weakenesse of their pens, have fallen to their penknives, multiplied the Schoole into a Campe, arguments to armies, teaching all their Proselytes dismall conclusions. Thus they fight against God in his Lievtenant, and the root of all civill order they desire to roote out. They complaine of us for suppressing them, that will not let us live in quiet by them. What security can Sara with her Isaac have in the house if Hagar and her brat be not beaten out of doores? The peace of our state, nor scarce of any state in Christendome since Charlemaines time, hath not beene violated, but the Pope or his Ministers have had a hand in it. To say nothing of their private turbulencie, what pestilences they be to the houses that harbour them, where they rule all with the Lady; it is their sawcinesse with the Crowne which our state suffers under. They doe but turne the Text;Luk. 22.15. Kings over subjects, and they over Kings. They will be Donatists, Anabaptists, Libertines, Pagans, any thing, so they be not subjects. How did they more than despise, even despight that Queene of blessed memorie? whom strangers came to see, as the Queene of Sheba did Salomon; forraigners reverenced, subjects loved, all Princes living admired and themselves outwardly flattered. By whose gracious hand God wrought those wonders, that the most potent Kings can hardly reach. Honour filled the circle of her Crowne, her brow with Majestie, her heart with pietie, her hands with pitie, her lap with plentie, her throne with equitie. All those vertues centred in her
 brest, which severally had commended the great Ladies of the former world. Yet how execrable were the treasons at home, the rebellions and invasions abroad which they contrived against her? Now when she is in glorious peace, have they not raked into her grave, and railed on her royall Name? She that lies buried, not in cold earth, but in the warme and living monuments of all religious hearts among us, is still persecuted by their barbarous violences. But as all their malice could not harme her Person while it was mortall on earth; much lesse can it reach her soule, which is now immortall and blessed in heaven. Lord, they have not despised her, but they have despised thee: revenge thine owne cause; confirme the diadem where it is, and let not the man of sin pull downe, what thou the God of righteousnesse hast built up.
Despisers.] The maine antagonists of Soveraigntie are the Anabaptists and Papists: who, howsoever otherwise they dart fire one at another, yet here like Herod and Pilate, they shake hands, or those seditious Captaines in Ierusalem, fight against the Magistrate as their common enemie. Thus Sampsons foxes have averse heads, but are coupled together by their tailes.
1 The Anabaptists did strike at the head of all Government; and with the sword in their owne hand, sought to wring the sword out of the Magistrates. They inveighed against authority, and yet tooke authoritie upon themselves. As I have heard a man reproved for swearing, presently rap out an oath that he would not sweare. It was Muncers ordinary doctrine, that he had conference with God about it: that he charged him to kill the Magistrates, to destroy the wicked, and constitute a new world. These cry downe all rule; as the heathen against Gods Annointed Sonne;Psal. 2.3. let us breake their bands a sunder, and cast away their cords from us. But at last finding themselves fooled by themselves, and that Kings would not be disputed out of their dominions; yea, that themselves could not be kept in order without some Prelation, they began to qualifie the matter: as men that can get nothing by Law, will come to composition. Regiment they will allow, if Magistates will be content with their allowance; which is not only like Davids Ambassadors, halfe their Regall robes cut off; but authority it selfe grub'd to the skin: not only lopping off the superfluous branches, but hewing the root till it bee past all growing. That he hath his institution from God, his constitution from the people: Regnat a Deo, sed per and propter populum. Thus with a paring knife they so shred his Government; till like the coozening Tailor that shrunke a freeze gowne to a doozen of buttons; they leave him only a titular Prince, and keepe the Principalitie to themselves. Let all their refutation be but a meere hissing at.
2 The Papists are more moderate in shew, little lesse pestilent in deed Their laitie shall bee subject to a Magistrate; but to one of their owne chusing, and that onely till their refusing, so authority is no sure knot but as Iugglers, they play at fast and loose. And upon the least exception to the pietie, yea obedience of the Prince, (a strange Catechisme, or Catachresis rather, that teacheth Kings to obey their subjects) they cast him out from his royaltie, discharge and absolve the people from their allegiance. This practise is according to their common distinction, not differing from the former of the Anabaptists; Principatus a Deo, Princeps ab homine: therefore they dare doe any thing in Principem, against the King; nothing in Principatum, against the kingdome. Execrable sophistrie! as if he that opposed the governor, did not oppose Government. Would this answere passe in Rome: the Popedome, as it is the succession of Peter, is of God: but the present Pope is of man? Or this, God forbids me to wrong my neighbour, yet (Iesuite) I may wrong thee? This was fit doctrine for Machiavell himselfe would not have beene ashamed of it. But Daniel, that was a counsellor of State to two Monarchies, and a Secretis, to foure Kings, ascribes this power of translating or entailing crownes to a familie, to none but God: it isDan. 5.21. He, not the Pope.

By their rule the Pope indeed is King, and all Kings but his vice-royes, to be placed and displaced, according as they please or displease him. And for their Clergie, they shall know no civill obedience at all. But were the sword as well able to plead the causes of Kings in the field, as the pens of Divines are in the Schoole, their Crownes would sit more quietly on their heads.Rom. 13.1. Let every soule be subject to the higher power. Si omnis, and vestra, saith Saint Bernard to an Archbishop: who hath exempted you from this universality? His conclusion is, Si quis tentat excipere, conatur decipere. Why did our Saviour submit himselfe to Caiphas, to Pilate, pay tribute to Caesar; and Paul appeale to his Iudgement seat? Is Christs Vicar started above his Master? Peters Successor better than Paul himselfe? What an alteration did Iosiah make in the face of the Church, purging the Idolaters, changing the office of the Levites, commanding a passeover? Hilkiah was the high Priest, and executed these things under him; but all was done Iuxta praeceptum Iosiae. Was Iosiah such a King in Israel, and is not our King in England! What hath the Hilkiah of Rome to doe here? So Constantine said to his Bishops. You in the Church are Bishops, I in the Church am King: you for the word and Sacraments, I for authoritie and presidence: you overseers of the people, I the overseer of overseers. The one to preach the word, the other to beare the sword: as Paul calls the Magistrate, the Lords Sword-bearer. He holds his prerogative in capite, given him from above. What one word of Christs commission to his Disciples, favours of encouragement to rebellious attempts? Goe into the world, preach, baptise, bind and loose, remit and retaine, feed, take the keyes, receive the Holy Ghost. Goe into the world, not over run it, shaking the pillars of it with conspiracies, the foundations with seditions. Preach peace, not proclaime wars: Build up, the kingdome of heaven, not thunder ruine to the kingdomes of earth. Baptise to repentance, not wash the people in their owne blouds with persecution and vengeance. Binde and retaine not with shackles, prisons, and wards. Feed the Lambes, not fleece them, nor flay them, making massacres of King and subjects. Take the keyes, not Princes Crownes. When he sayd Yee shall be brought before Governours and Kings he did not meane that Governors and Kings should be brought before you; that Emperors should kisse your feete, waite at your gates, in weathers stormy enough; but not more stormy than the Pontificall browes: that they should take their Crownes, (I say not at your hands, but) at your feet; holding your stirrups while you mount your Palfreyes, and eate bread like dogs under your tables. Christ refused to divide an inheritance, yet these men will undertake to divide kingdomes.Luk. 12. But there is a divider over them, that hath written in the booke of his Prescience, the finall division of their universall Supremacie. And as it is true of their persons;Petrach. Brevis est hominum vita, brevior Regum, Pontificum brevissima. So let the like breach fall upon their successions, till the seat of Antichrist be rased to the ground.
3 Proud and ambitious selfe-admirers, thinke themselves fitter to rule than obey; these despise government.1 Sam. 20.27. Saul is chosen King, the most and best applaud the choice: yet some sonens of Belial murmure against it. It was not the greatnesse of his parents, the goodlinesse of his person, the selection of his Lot, the approbation of Samuel, the sound proofe of his courage; that could shield him from contempt, ot winne the hearts of all. They saw hee chose not himselfe, they saw him unwilling to be chosen, they saw him worthyto be chosen: if the Election had beene carried by voices, and those voices by their eyes, Saul had beene still the man: yet they despise him. His parentage was not inferiour, his state equall, his person above his estate, his mind above his person; yet they despise him. But dogs will barke at the Moone; and what all men commend, you have some Thirsytes take delight to blast, Malcontents will devise slanders, if they can finde none like Coistrells, that first fill themselves with wind, and then flie against it. Their bloud is of a yellowish colour, like those that have beene bitten by vipers:
 their gall flowes in them, thicker than oile in a poysoned stomach. But the best is, their owne malice suckes up the greatest part of their venome, and therewith they burst themselves. There was never Prince, to whom some Belialists tooke not some exceptions: it is not possible to please or displease all men; some being as deepely in love with vice, as others are with vertue. It were ill with Princes, if their state depended on the ^^od liking of their subjects. But there be none but base, that are thus censorious: and the Sun will shine never the lesse glorious, though such sullen eyes scorne to looke upon it.
4 Denyers of due homage, are Despisers; as, 1.Prov. 24.21. Ambr. Feare; not slavish feare. Alied est timere quia peccasti, aliud timere ne pecces: illic formido est de supplicio, hic sollicitudo est de praemio: this feare is reverence. If any man feares not the King, the King hath cause to feare him. 2. Honour; not such as shall make a god of him, like Herods flatterers, and their successors, the Popes Sycophants: yet enough to advance him above all other men. 3. Fidelitie, such as2 Sam. 15.21. Ittai bare unto David: that is an ill hand, that when a blow is comming, will not lift up it selfe to defend the head. Salus capitis, caput salutis. The King is the light of our eyes, the breath of our nosthrills, even the life of our lives: any man will hazard a joynt to preserve his life. Subjects unfaithful at the heart, may be without suspition of their Prince, but they be held rebels in the Court of heaven. We are bound to be subject,Rom. 23.5. not only for wrath, but for conscience sake. In all the time of Davids prosperity, there was no newes of Shimei; he lookes like a faire subject. But he that smiled on David in his throne, curseth him in his flight: now his unsound and trecherous heart discovers it selfe, in a tongue full of venome, a hand full of stones. Prosperous successe hides many a false heart, as a drift of snow covers a heape of dung: but when that white cover melts, the filthy rottennesse will appeare. There is no security in that subjects allegiance, that hath not God in his conscience. The nearer such are to the Governour, the more perilous: and as no favourite of greatnesse can be without envie, (as in Chesse, the pawne that stands before the king, is most set upon) so the good one, like Ioseph, so endeares himselfe to the King of Aegypt, that he may be gracious with the King of heaven: and the bad one, like Haman, makes use of his power to mischiefe; till by plotting against the Church, he lose all comfort by the Church. All this mans glory shewes on him, but as if the Sunne shone in a puddle. 4.Iosh. 1.17. Obedience; to doe what he commands, and goe whether he sends. The servant that does not what he is bidden, despiseth his Master. The Law is mutus magistratus, the King lex anima^a: he that disobeyes the one, despiseth the other. 5. Paying of tribute:Rom. 13.7. Render tribute, etc. Render it; it is not a gift, but a payment. A man feedes the stomach, that it may nourish his whole body. Solvatur subsidium, ne contingat excidium. He that faineth himselfe poore to avoid a Subsidie, is worthy to be made as poore as his Subsidie: because he would not restore him a part, by whom he keepes all. 6. Prayer;1 Tim. 2.2. Let prayers and supplications be made for all men, especially for Kings. The heavyer burden requires the more strength: Aaron and Hur must hold up the hands of Moses, if they would prosper. We have cause to desire that that river may never want water, which must relieve the whole countrey. No army but would have their Generalls good successe. We call our peace, the Kings peace: our peace is but the effect of his, as his Majestie is a resultance from Gods Majestie.
What shall then become of them, that turne their prayersExod. 22.28. into curses? though their wishes be but whirlewinds, which breathed forth, returne upon themselves. This was an unwilling error, thatAct. 23.5. Paul willingly recanted. Curse not the King, no not in thy thought: for a bird of the aire shall carry the voice, and that which hath wings shall tell the matter. With the mouth a wicked rebell dares not curse him, for feare of the lash; but thought is free: such is his thought, but not Gods, to whom the conscience is a legible booke. The birds of the aire shall discover it; either by some miraculous demonstration, as just revealers: or by pecking out his eyes, as just executioners: or that Iudgement shall be swift against them, as if it had
 wings. Shimei curseth his King, is pardoned by succession, by Salomon after his father: he hath now quite forgotten his sin. But at last it comes home, by his going abroad: and the tongue that cursed the Lords Annointed, now payes the head to boote. The vengeance of Traitors may sleepe, it cannot die.1 Sam. 11 12. Saul had gotten victorie of the Ammonites, which made him a complete King: and now the thankfull Israelites enquire after the discontented mutiners, that refused allegiance to so worthy a commander. Their sedition deserved death, how ever Saul had sped at Gilead: the very purposes of treason must not escape impune: that God, who hinders the action in his mercie, will punish the intention in his Iustice. But that happy conquest whetted them to a more eager desire of this just execution.
Certainly, of all nations in the world, we have cause to despise the despisers of our Government. We that have a King, not more noble than wise, not more wise than good; how can we wish other than punishment to his contemners? We have usum and fructum communis pacis;1 King. 4.29. dwelling safely under our own vines; the benefit of those riches wch make a wel-govern'd State glorious. What do we want to the consummation of our prosperity, but thankfull hearts? For me to measure it, were to shew you the Image of a great Mountaine in a small ring. Religion, peace, honour, security; those foure cardinall blessings to uphold a State, as the foure cardinall vertues uphold a man. Now to disgrace authority, is the meanes to overthrow all felicitie. Tribute is given to Tyrants, commendation onely to good Princes. The Iustice of our Governour hath not spared the greatest offenders; yet his mercy hath made us more indebted to him than his Iustice. May his m^rcy never hurt himselfe, wee have to cause to complain. Even to his enemies he hath been pitifull, striving to overcome their malice by his goodnesse. Yet like those people, that in a daily ceremony, goe out of their doores, with their faces into the East, and curse the Sunne, which gives them light and preserving influence. So his adversaries, beside their cursed writings, base calumnies and blasphemies of his honour; have sought by trechery to stock up the root whereon themselves grow; sacrifising their Sacraments, Religion, Prayer, and the holiest things they have, to execute Satans will, and expiate Antichrists fury. They have turned Massing into massacring, Patres in patricidas, ghostly fathers into bloudy murtherers.
The huge and supereminent Colossus of all, was the Powder-treason; the u^most point of all villany; beyond which, it is terra incognita: no man can devise what should be between it and hell. The butchery over all France of above sixty thousand Protestants, might be pictured in the Popes Palace by the Painters art: but what colours could have expressed this confusion? As a learned Divine hath amplified it. What staine could shadow the bloud of so royall Princes? What red describe the goare of so noble Christians? What black, the darknesse of that day? what azure, the terriblenesse of that fire? What invention imitate the noise of that infernall blow? Lowder than many Cannons, and the shriekes of so many innocents, with the misery of infants yet unborne? This was a death never to be painted to the life: nor Pen, nor Pencill, nor Art, nor Heart can comprehend it. What an infamy strikes upon our age, to beare the date of such impieties? To have it recorded to posterity, in such a time was such a treason? The earth shall not hide it from the heavens, nor the heavens abtract it from the earth; it shall be the detestable hatred of all Generations to the end of the world.
Yet still hath the Lord protected our government, by preserving our Governour; even against the malice of our enemies, and (which is worse) the wickednesse of our selves. Therefore let us praise God for our Government, and we praise him for all: let us love and serve our Governour, and we love and serve God who hath given us all. Let us serve him with our fields and Vineyards for his maintenance, with our lives and strengths for his defence, especially with our prayers and supplica^^ons for his safety.





