


THE DIVELS BANKET. The first Sermon.



PROVERB. 9.17.18.

Stollen waters are sweet, and the bread of Secrecies is pleasant: but he knoweth not that the dead are there, and that her guests are in the depth of Hell.


I Haue here chosen two Texts in one, intending to Preach of a couple of Preachers; one by vsurpation* the other by assignation; the Worlds Chaplen, and the Lords Prophet. Where conceaue, 1. the Preachers: 2. their Texts: 3. their Sermons: 4. their Pulpits: 5. their Commissions.
1. The Preachers are two, the first hath a double name: Literally, here, the Harlot: Metaphorically, Sinne; the minde's Harlot; for between them is all spiritual adultry committed: Some vnderstand it more Sinecdochically, the Temptation to sinne; but (omne mauis includit minus)

their interpretation is like that short bed, you cannot lay this Harlot at her ful length in it. Others conceaue an Antithesis here, and by conferring the 4. verse with the 16. collect an opposition of two sorts of Preachers; the sincere Prophets of Wisedome, and the corrupted Teachers of Traditions, errors, leasings. I cannot subscribe to this sense, as full enough: let it goe for a branch, call it not the body of the Tree. This first Preacher then* is the H^br. 11.25. delightfulnesse, or if you will, the Hebr. 3.13. dec^itf^lnesse of sinne. The second is Solomon; not erring, adulterating, idolatrising Solomon: but conuerted, confirmed Solomon* A King and a Preacher.
2. Their Texts: 1. Sinnes Text is from Hels Scriptum est: taken out of the Deuils Spell; either Lucian his olde Testament, or Machiauell his new: lawes made in the court of damnation, enacted in the vault of darkenesse; like those vnder the Parliament-house; Gunpowder-lawes, fit for the Iustices of Hell. 2. Solomons Text is the Word of eternall Truth: with a Scriptum est, caelitus inspiratum; giuen from Heauen: this is Desuper, the other Desubter; this is all, 2 Tim. 3.16. Scripture is giuen by inspiratio^ from God, profitable, etc. the former is the 2 Thes. ^.11. Delusion of th^ Deuill; that 1 King. 22.2^. lying spirit in the mouth of Ahabs proph^^s, the diuinitie of Hell.
Verse 17.3. The Sermons differs as well as the Texts. 1. The Harlots dixit, verse 16. is thus amplified: Stollen waters are sweet, and the bread of Secrecies is pleasant. Tullius, nor Tertullus, nor Hermes, the speaker in the Parliament of the Heathen gods, neuer moued so eloquent a tongue: shee preaches (according to the palate of her audience) Placentia; nay, it is Placenta, a sweet Cake; whose floure is Sugar, and the humour that tempers it, Honey, sweet, pleasant. Shee cannot want auditours for such a Sermon: for as it is in Faires, the Pedler, and the Ballat-monger haue more throng, then the rich

Merchant: Vanitie hath as many customers as shee can turne to, when Veritie hath but a colde market. 2. Solomons Sermon is opposed to it with a But:Verse 18. But he knoweth not that the dead are there, and that her gh^sts are in the depth of Hell. A crosse blow, that disarmes the Deuils Fencer: a flat conuiction or Non-plus, giuen to the arguments of sinne: a little Colliquintida, put into the swe^t-pot: that, as I haue obserued in some beguiling Pictures; looke on it one way, and it presents to you a beautifull D^mosell: goe on the aduerse side, and behold, it is a Deuill, or some mishapen Stigmaticke. Sinne shewes you a faire Picture: Stollen waters are sweet, etc. Suaue and delicio sum; Pleasure and delight. Solomon takes you on the other side, and shewes you the vgly visages of Death and Hell, the dead are there, etc. If Sinne open her Shop of delicacies, Solomon shewes the Trap-dore and the Vault: if she boast her Oliues, hee points to the Prickles: if she discouers the greene and gay flowers of delice, he cryes to the Ingredients, Latet anguis in herba, the Serpent lurkes there: Illa mouet, iste monet; she charmes, and he breakes her spels: as curious and proud as her House is, Solomon is bold to write, Lord haue mercy on vs, on the dores, and to tell vs, the plague is there; Stollen waters are sweet, etc. But the dead are there, etc.
4 Their Pulpits haue locall and ceremoniall difference. 1. The Harlot's is described verse 14. She sits at the dore of her house, on a seat, in the high places of the Citie. 1. Sedet; she sits: she is got into that inchaunted Psal. 1.1. Chaire, Psal. 1. 2. at her house: shee neede not stray farre for customers: in se turba ruunt luxuriosa, proci: they come in troupes to her: 3. at her dore: shee presents her selfe to the common eye, and would be notable, though not able to answere the shew: 4. on a Seat: nouit suum locum: Vice knowes her Seat; the Deuill is not without

his Randeuous: what say you to a Tauerne, a Play-house, a Feast, a May-game? that I say not, an Ordinary: 5. in the Citie. Whoredome, scornes to liue obscurely in the Suburbs: Shee hath friends to admit her within the walles. 6. Nay, in the high places of the Citie: in the largest streetes, populous and popular houses; in excelsis vrbis: one of the most curious and ^ta^ely edifices of the Citie.
Thus Sinne reades not a high-way lecture onely, as among Theeues; nor a Chamber-lecture onely, as among Courtezans; nor a Masse-lecture onely, as among Iesu^tes, nor a Vault-lecture onely, as among Traitours; nor a Table-lecture onely, as among Humorists; nor a Tap-house-Lecture o^^ly, as among Drunkards; that fetch authoritie from the pot, like Augustus Caesar, to taxe all the world: but a Citie-lecture, such a one as 1 Kin. 21.10 Iesabell read to Iezreell: a publike Preaching, her Pulpit being excelsa ciuitatis, top-gallant; filling eminent places, with emanant poisons. 2. Solomons Pulpit is yet transcendent and aboue it; for it is a ^hrone; a 1 King. 10.18 Throne of Iuorie, ouerlaid with gold: such a Throne, as no Verse 20. Kingdome could follow it. The Preacher is a King, the Pulpit a Throne; nay, an Oracle: de Solio rex oracula fundit.1 King 4.31. For God gaue him wisedome, yea, such a wisedome, that no man but his Antitype, God and man, did euer excell him.
5 Their Commissions. 1. The Deuill gaue Sinne her ^rrand; guilded her tongue, and po^soned her heart: put a cup of damnation into her hand, and the Sugar of Temptation to sweeten it; allowed her for his Citie-Recorder, or his Towne-^la^ke; and sealed her a commission from Hel^; as Act. 9.1. Saul had from the High-Priest* to binde with snares (Filios T^rrae) the Sonnes of Men. 2. But God gaue Solomon a celestiall Ez^k. 2.9. roule to eate, as to Ez^kiel; and Esa. 6..6. touched his lips with a co^le from his owne

Altar, as to Esay, putting into his mouth (documenta vitae) the ordinances of eternall life.
God hath set this day before you two diuers Pulpits, aduerse Preachers, dissonant Texts; declares, who speakes by his warrant, who besides it, against it. Behold, as Moses said, I haue set life and death before you, take your choyse.
The Dialogue of both the verses present vs with a Banket: (conuiuium, or conuitium rather) a Feast, but a Fast were better: a Banket worse then Iob 1.19. Iobs childrens; or the Iudg* 16.30. Dagonals, of the Philistins; (like the Bacchanals of the Moenades) when for the shutting vp of their stomachs, the house fell downe, and broke their neckes. You haue offered to your considerations,Verse 17. verse 17. (supplying but the immediatly precedent word, Dixit) 1. The Inviter: 2. the Cheare. Solomon comes after, (as with Salt and Vinegar) and tels you 3. the Guests: 4. and the Banketting-house, verse 18.Verse 18. But the dead are there, etc.
The Inviter: It is a woman, She saith to him: but that name is too good; for she hath recouered her credit: a woman, as she brought woe to man, so she brought forth a weale for ma^: causa d^licti, solatium relicti: an instrumentall cause of transgression,1 Tim. 2.14. Gal. 4.4. and no lesse of Saluation. If you say, she brought forth Sinne without man, so she brought forth a Sauiour without man: as the Gen. 3.4. Diuell tempted her to the one, so the Luke 1.35. Holy Ghost ouershadowed her to the other. This not a woman then, but a Harlot, meretricia mulier: a degenerate woman, vnwomaned (^t pudore and pudicitia) of both, modestie and chastitie.
The feast is like to be good when an Harlot is the Hostice. And sure the Scriptures found some speciall parietie, if not ident^tie betweene these two:Iosh. 2.1. not making their names conuertible, which had beene much;

but expressing by one word both of them, which is more; as if it concluded their professions and conditions, names and natures all one, which is most of all. Impleta in nostris haec est Scriptura diebus. Experience hath iustified this circumstance. A Harlot then, bids, and feasts, and kils: what other successe can be looked for? If Dalilah inuite Sampson, wa^e his lockes; shee will spoile the Nazarite of his hayres: there are many Dalilahs in these dayes.
I haue read of many Inviters in the holy Writ: some good, many indifferent, most euill, this worst of all. 1. Good,Matth. 22.1. Matth. 22. you haue the King of Heauen a Feast-maker:Can^. 5.1. Cant. 5. you haue the Kings sonne a Feast-maker: Iesus Christ bids, Eate oh friends, drinke abundantly,Reuel. 2^.17. oh beloued, Reuel. 22. you haue the Spirit of glorie a Feast-maker, and an Inviter too: The Spirit and the Bride say, Come. To this Feast Luke 14.21. few come, but those that doe come, are welcome: well come in regard of themselues, for there is the best cheare: Reu. 19.9. Blessed are they that are called to the Mariage-Supper of the Lambe: welcome, in respect of God, who doth not grudge his mercies. 2. Many indifferent, and inclining to good. Gen. 21.8. Abrahams feast at Isaac's weaning: Iudg. 14.10. Sampsons at his marriage. The Wedding-feast in Cana, where the King of glory was a Ghest; and honoured it with a Miracle, with the Primum miracu^um a^firmatur; quod ex primis non dubitatur. first Miracle, that euer hee Ioh. 2.11. wrought. 3. Euill; 1 Sam. 25 36 Nabals feast at his Sheepe-shearing; a drunken feast: Dan. 5.2. Belshazzars feast to a thousand of his Lords, surfetting with full carouses from the sacred Boles; a sacrilegious Feast. The Iudg 16 23. Philistins feast to the honour of Dagon; an Idolatrous feast. Mark 6.28. Herods birthday-feast, when Iohn Baptists head was the last course of the seruice; a bloody feast. Luke 16.19. The rich Churles, a quotidian feast, a voluptuous surfet, all bad. 4. This yet worst of all, the Harlots feast, where (the Ghests at

once, comedunt, and comeduntur:) their soules feast on euils, and are a feast to Deuils: for whiles men deuoure sins, sins deuoure them, as Actaeon was eaten vp of his owne dogs. This is a bloody Banket, where no ghest escapes without a wound, if with life: for if Sinne keepe the Reuels, Lusts are the Iunkets, Ebrietie drinkes the Wine, Blasphemie sayes the Grace, and Bloud is the conclusion.
But allegorically Sinne is heere shadowed by the Harlot; Voluptuousn^sse, (meretricum meretrix) the Harlot of Harlots; whose Bawde is Be^lsebub, and whose Bridewell is broad Hell. Wickednesse (foeminei generis dicitur) is compared to a Woman: and hath all her senses: Lust is her eye to see: Briberie her hands to feele: Sensualitie her palate to taste: Malice her eare to heare: Petulancy her nose to smell: and (because shee is of the foeminine sexe, we will allow her the sixtsense) tittle-tattle is h^r tongue to talke. This is the common Hostice of the world; Satans house-keeper, whose dores are neuer shut: noc^es atque dies patet, etc. There is no man in the world keepes such hospitalitie, for hee searcheth the ayre, earth, sea, nay, the Kitchen of Hell, to fit euery palate. Vitellius searched farre and wide for the rarities of nature; Birdes, Beasts, Fishes of inestimable price; which yet brought in, the bodies are scorned, and onely the eye of this Bird, the tongue of that Fish is taken: that the spoyles of many might bee sacrifices to one supper. The Emperour of (the low Countries) Hell, hath delicates of stranger varitie, curiositie. Doth Iudas stomach stand to treason? there it is; hee may feede liberally on that dish. Doth Nero thirst for homicides? the Deuill drinkes to him in ^oles of bloud: is 1 Kin. 12.28. 2 Sam. 15. Ieroboam hungry of Idolatrie? behold a couple of Calues are set before him: hath Absolon the Court-appetite, Ambition? loe, a whole Kingdome

is presented him for a messe, a shrewd baite: Machiau^ls position, faith-breach for Kingdomes is no sinne. The Deuill thought this Dish would please CHRIST himselfe,Matth. 4 9. and therefore offered him many kingdomes for a morsell; reseruing this to the last, as the strongest argument of his Sophistrie. Doth Herod affect Enuie? behold, a Banket ^f Reuenge, furnished with the murdered corps of thousands, Matth. 2.16. Infants. Doth the rauening mawe of the Pope (1 King. 21.4 Ahab-like) forbeare meat, because he cannot get the Vineyard of a Kingdome? or hath hee bound himselfe with the spels of diuellish con^estations (like those Acts 23.14. in Ac^es) not to eat or drinke till he hath killed Paul? behold, here is wine set before him in a golden cup, (Reuel. 17.4. Wine of Abomination) wherewith whole nations reele: Locusts and Vipers, pestilent and serpentine poisons, whereof the world laughing dies. Is any Courtier p^oud? here are piles of Silkes: Is any Of^icer troub^ed with the itch in his hands? here is vnguentum aureum to cure it; a messe of bribes. Hath any Gentleman the hunger-worme of Couetousnesse? here is cheare for his diet: Vsuri^s, oppressions, exactions, enclosings, rackings, rakings, pleasing gobbets of auarice. Is any Trades-man light-fingered, and lighter-conscienced? here is whole feast of Fraudes, a table furnished with Trickes, conueyances, glossings, periuries, cheatings. Hath any Papist a superstitious Appetite? he is set downe in the chaire of Ignorance, and to him are serued in by Sorbonists, Iesuites, S^minaries, Loyolists; a large and lauish feast of Crucifixes, vnctions, scrapings, traditions, Re^iques, etc. And as Cheese to digest all the rest, yet it selfe neuer digested, Treason. For your route of Epicures, Ruffians, Roarers, Drunkards, Boone-companions, you may know the place easily where these Kas^rils light, euen at the carkase-feast. Sinne hath

inuited them, and they scorne to be scornefull; hither they come, and euery man hath a dish by himselfe, eate whiles hee blow againe; except their appetites agree in the choise. You heare the Inviter.
Let it not passe vs without obseruation,Obseruat. Satan is not without his Factors abroad: he hath spirits enough of his owne, my name is Legion,Marke 5.9. Marke 5. but hee is not content, except he suborne man against man, till (homo be homini daemon) man a Iudas to his friend, woman an Eue to her husband. I confesse, he hath many Setters of this literall name and disposition; Harlots, scattring his Stewes (like the lice of Egipt) ouer all the world: but I will not restraine his Kingdome to these narrow limits onely, which is not bounded but with the Earth: he that compasseth it,Iob 2.2. and hath such dealings in all Kingdomes, is not without his plotters, and Intelligencers in euery corner.
Hee hath superstitious Seminaries in the Countrie, me^cenary periurers in the Hall, a long Lane for Brokers and Vsurers in the Citie, and sometimes a dangerous brood of Iesuites in forraigne Courts, croaking like Frogs, euen in their Phara^hs Chambers: whilest himselfe roaues on the Sea of this World, like a Pyrate, Cardinals and Iesuites are his Marriners,Psal. 105.30. and the Pope sits at the Sterne: Antichrist is his Steward, (strange, hee who cals himselfe Christs Vicar should be the Deuils Steward) and hath euer beene faithfull to his Kingdome. Many soules haue they successiuely sent to people his low world, whiles their owne went also for company. The wickednesse of some Popes haue beene monstrous, and almost forbidding all the O^ficers of Satan to match them. That if a score of the most prodigious reprobates should bee mustred out of Hell, it is likely enough, that nineteene of them would be Popes; and perhaps to make

vp the twentieth, there would be some strife betweene a Iesuite and a Cardinall.
Rome, is this Harlots locall seate, her house, stiled by the Scripture, the Whore of Babilon; her Doctrine is heere expressed: Stollen waters are sweet, and the bread of Secrecies is pleasant. Waters of Heresie, stollen from the Ier. 2.13. Cisternes of Superstition. The bread of Deceipt, moulded by Errour, and baked in the Ouen of Tradition. Wee haue three commune Enemies; as wee are Men, the Diuell; as Christi^ns, the Turke; as professors of the Gospell, the Pope: the first hath the two last for h^s Factours: of whom, we pray* aut conuertantur, ne pereant: au^ confundantur, ne noceant: eyther for their conuersion, to saue themselues; or for their confusion, not to hurt vs. Amongst vs, the Pope doth most present mischiefe: Luke 22.38. Peter tolde CHRIST, Behold, heere are two Swords; Matth. 16.19 CHRIST told Peter, Behold, here are the Keyes: Peter ^ayes by his Swords, and takes the Keyes: the Pope now layes by his Keyes and fals to his Sword: Oh quantum hic Petrus ab illo? What difference betwixt the true Peter, and his false Successor? yet, as if he were Heau^ns Porter, men flocke to him: whom let me appose with that of the Poet:
Ecquae tanta fuit Romam tibi causa videndi?What foolish winde blowes you to Rome?
He hath infinite petrie stales, to tempt men to sinne, whom he hath officed for Bidders to this Feast. Will you take a short muster of some of his Inviters, organa iniquitatis, enginers, bidders to this Banket of vanitie: they haue all their seuerall stands.
1. In the Court, he hath set Ambition, to watch for base mindes, that would stoope to any secure villanie for preferment; and to bring them to this Feast

This attempt can tempt none but the base, the Noble spirit can not be so wrought vpon: this is a principall Bidder.
2. In Foro, at the Hall gates, hee sets Inviters, that becken contention to them, and fill the world with broiles. I meane neither the reuerend Iudges, nor the worthy Councellors, nor the good Atturneys; but the Labels of the Law: Solliciters indeed, for they are a sollicitation to our peace: Petty-foggers,Common Barr^tours. Satans fire-brands, and mortall things; which he casteth abroad,Prou. to make himselfe sport: but they do more hurt amongst the Barley, the Commons of this Land,Iudg. 15.5. then Sampsons Foxes with the fire at their tailes: Oh, that they were shipped out for Virginia; or (if they would trouble so good a Soile) into some desart, where they might set Beasts together by the eares, for they can not liue without making broiles.
3. Pride is another Bidder, and she keepes a shop in the Citie: You shall finde a description of her Shop, and take an Inuentory of her Wares, from the Prophet, Esa. 3. The tinckling ornaments, the Cawles,Esa. 3.18. etc. and the Moonetires, etc. Shee sits vpon the Stall, and courts the Passengers with a What lacke ye? Nay, besides her Person, she hangs out her Picture; a picture vnlike her selfe, though shee not vnlike her picture; all paint. Infinite traffique to her, but with the same lucke and successe, that the visitant beasts came to the sicke Lion: Vestigia nulla retrorsum: or at best, as the runners to Rome, that returne with shame and beggerie.
4. Ingrossing is another Inviter; and hath a large walke: sometimes he watcheth the landing of a Ship: somtimes he turnes whole loads of Corne besides the market. This Bidder preuailes with many a Citizen, Gentleman, Farmer, and brings in infinite guests: the Deuill giues him a letter of Mart for his Pyracie.
5. Briberie is an officious fellow, and a speciall bidder to this Feast. Hee inuites both forward and froward: the forward and yeelding, by promises of good cheare: secunda dies; that they shall haue a fair^ day of it: the backward honest man, by terrours and menaces, that his cause shall else goe West-ward: (indeed it goes to Westminster.) Yea, with pretence of Commiseration and Pittie; as if the conscience of their right did animate them to their cause: thus with a shew of Sanctimoni^, they get a Saints money: but indeed (argentum foecundum, argumentum facund^m) there is no perswasion more patheticall, then the purses. Briberie stands at the staire-foot in the robes of an Officer, and helpes vp Iniurie to the place of Audience: thus Iudas his Bag is drawne with two strings, made of Silke and Siluer, Fauour and Reward.
All Officers belong not to one Court: their conditions alter with their places: there are some, that seeme so good, that they lament the vices, wherevpon they yet inflict but pecuniary punishments. Some of them are like the Israelites, with a Sword in one hand, and a Trowell in the other, with the motto of that old Embleme, In vtrumque paratus: as the one hand dawbes vp Iustice, so the other cuts breaches of diuision. They mourne for Trueth and Equitie, as the sonnes of Iacob for Ioseph, when themselues solde it: they exclaime against poenall transgressions. So Caius Gracchus defends the Treasurie from others violence, whiles himselfe robbed it: so the Pindar chafes and sweares to see Beastes in the Corne, yet will pull vp a stake, or cut a Teather, to finde supply for his pinfold: so Charles the fifth was sory for the Popes durance, and gaue orders of publike prayers for his release, yet held him in his owne hands prisoner.
6. Faction keepes the Church; and inuites some vaine glorious Priests to this Feast: Schisme and Separation, like a couple of thornes, pricke the Churches side, wound our Mother, till her heart bleedes: All Seminaries of Sedition are Sathans speciall (...).
7. Riot is his Inviter in a Tauerne* hee sits like a young Gallant at the vpper end of the Table; and drinkes so many and so deepe healthes to the absent, that the present haue no health left them. This is a frequented Inviting place, that I say not, the Feast it selfe. Coue^ousnesse often is the Host, Ebrietie drinkes the liquor, Swearing keepes th^ reckoning, Lust holds the dore, and Beggery payes the shot.
8. Oppression hath a large circuit, and is a generall Bidder to this banket. This Factour hath abundance of the Diuels worke in hand: hee vntiles the houses of the poore, that whiles the stormes of Vsurie beate them out, hee may haue peaceable entrance: hee ioynes house to house, as if he was straitened of roome; tell him from mee, there is roome enough for him in hell.
There are infinite swarmes of Inviters besides, which runne like vagabonds on the Diuels errand, with Salutem's in their mouthes; as Iudas to Iesus, all haile; but it proued a ratling salutation, for Deaths storme followed it: all these declare to vs the bankets praeparation. Infinite among ourselues; Rome offers vs more helpe: but wee answere them, (as Octauian did of the Crowe: (Satis istarum a^ium habemus domi.) We haue enough of these brides at home: they are all Messengers of our wracke, Porkposes, premonishing a tempest; Vsurers, Brokers, Vagrants, Ruffians, Blasphemers, Tiplers, Churles, Wantons, Pedlers of pernicious wares; Seminaries, Incendiaries, Apostates, Humorists, seditious troublers of our peace: you may perceiue

that our Winter's busie, by the flying abroad of these wild-geese. All are Bidders.
Vse.These Instruments of Tentation cannot hurt vs, except wee be enemies to our selues. They doe their worst:Rom. 8.Vertitque in meliora deus: God turnes all to our best. Like wandring Planets, they are caried with a double motion, (Suo and primo mobili:) with their owne, and a superiour mouer. By their owne, which though (non sine errore, tamen sine terrore) wandring, and stalking with bigge lookes, yet are not so feared as they expect. 2. By the First and Great Mouers, which ouer-rules them with a violent hand. Perhaps they exercise vs with tentat^ons,Esay. 10* 5. with Esay. 14.25. as Ashur did Israell; but the worke done, the rod is throwne into the fire: they are but ^ubbish to scowre the vessels of Gods house; Apothicaries to minister vs bitter drugges, not able to put in one dram more then God our Physitian prescribes; Shepheards dogges with their teeth beaten short, to hunt vs to the sheepfolds of peace. In all their workes, the villanie is their owne, the vertue Gods: (as in Christs betraying, Opus dei redemptio, opus Iudae proditio.) If wee thinke,Iob. 21.17.30. Psal. 73.19. they flourish too long, let vs satisfie our selues, with Iob and Dauid; that (Subito ad Inferos) They goe suddenly downe into the pit. So the Poet propped vp his tottering ^aesitations, with this conclusion.
Abstulit hunc tandem Russini panatumultum,Claudian.Absoluitque deos.
In the end, God cleares his Iustice from any imputation, by turning the workers of wickednesse into hell.
 Doe not thinke, because I haue held you long with the Bidders, that I meane to forestall you of the Banket: behold, I haue brought you now to the Feast, such as it is: Stollen waters are sweet, and th^ bread of secrecies is pleasant. Thus it is in grosse; to cut it vp,

and serue it in, in seueral dishes; you haue. 1. A prescription. 2. A description. 3. An ascription. 1. A prescripon of their essences. 2. A description of their natures: 3. An ascription of their qualities. Quae, quanta, qualia. 1. The Iunkets are prescribed, quae sint, of what kinde they are: Waters, Bread. 2. They are described quanta sint, of what propertie, vertue, nature; Stollen, Secret. 3. They are ascribed to, qualia sint, of what operation, rellish, or qualitie; Sweet, Pleasant. Stollen waters, etc. Thus haue you their quidditie, their quantitie, their qualitie. This is the Banket (la^^um, l^tum) daintie and cherishing: ch^ape, for it is stollen; delightfull, for it is sweet. We will ascend to view this Feast (not to feed on it) by the stayres and degrees of my Text. You haue. 1. waters. 2. stollen. 3. sweet. So you haue. 1. Bread. 2. eaten in secret. 3. pleasant. Of them all first literally and morally, then doctrinally.
Waters: Not the Gen. 1.2.waters that the spirit moued on at the creation, the ^irst waters; nor the waters Esay. 44.3. of Regeneration* moued by the same spirit, sanctifying waters: nor the Ioh. 5.4. waters of Bethesda, stirred by an Angell, salutare and medicinall waters: nor the Ezek. 47.8. waters issuing from vnder the threshold of the Sanctuarie; preseruatiue waters. But the bitter waters of Exod. 15.25. Marah, without the sweet wood of Grace to season them. Psal. ^44.7. Waters of Trouble, from which Dauid prayes for deliuerie. Tumultuous waters: Exod. 7.17. Waters that turne into blood: bloodie waters. 2 Sam. 22 17. Waters of Tribulation, to them that digest it; though waters of Titillation, to them that tast it: much like our hote waters in these dayes; strange chimicall extractions, quintessences of distilled natures: Viscera, ne dicam, mysteria Terrae: The bowels, nay the mysteries of Earth, good and happy in their opportune and moderate vse; but wretched in our misapplied lustes; to turne the blood into fire, and to fill the bones with luxurie; not to

make nature swimme in a riuer of delights, but euen to drowne it.
Waters; neither Succourie nor Endiue, etc. no refrigerating waters, to coole the Soules heate, but waters of inflamation: Spaines Rosasolis, water of Inquisition: Tyrones Vsquebah, water of Rebellion: Turkey's Aqua fortis, a violent and bloodie water: Romes aqua inferna, a superstitious water; stilled out of Sulphure and Brimstone, through the Lymbeck of Heresie. Oh! you wrong it: it is aquavitae, and aqua coelestis. Let the operation testifie it: it is aqua fortis, aqua mortis. Vinum Barathri: the wine of hell: no poysons are so banefull: It tastes like honey; but if Ionathan touch it, hee will endanger his life by it.1 Sam. 14.43. These are wretched waters, worse then the moorish and Fennie riuers, which (the Poets faine) runne with a dull and lazie course: tranquilla alta: streames, still at the top, but boyling like a Cauldron of moulten Lead at the bottome: Phlegeton, and Pyriphlegeton (ignitae et ^^^mminiae vnde) were meere fables and toyes to these waters: they are truculent, virulent, obnoxious waters, deriued by some filthy guttures from the mare mortuum of Iniquitie.
The Pope hath waters, not much vnlike these of the Diuels Banket. Holy-waters; holy indeede, for they are con^ured with a holy exorcisme, saith their Massebooke. Of wonderfu^l effects; either sprinkled outwardly, they refresh the receiuer, as if his head was wrapped with a wet clowt in a colde morning; or drunke downe, they are powerfull to cleanse the heart, and scowre out the Diuell. Oh, you wrong Romes holy water, to thinke it the Diuels drinke; when the prouerbe sayes, the Diuell loues no holy water: yes, hee will runne from it, as a mendicant Fryer from an almes! To speake duely of it; it is a speciall riuer of hell, and drownes more,Exod. 14. then euer did the red Sea, when it swallowed

an whole Armie of the Aegyptians. Why, but holy-water is a speciall ransome to free soules out of Purgatorie; and digged out of the fountaine of Scripture. Asperges me, Domine, Hysopo:Psal. 51.7. Thou shalt sprinkle me, oh Lord, with Hysope: (for so their translation hath it:) the sense of which place, is, saith the Romist; that the Priest must dash the graue with a holy-water-sprinkle: for you must suppose, that Dauid was dead and buried when he spake these words, and his soule in Purgatorie. It is added that Diues desired in hell, a drop of water to coole his tongue: Oh then,Luk. 16.24. how cooling and comfortable are the sprinklings of these waters on the graues of the dead. But if they can speake no bett^r for them, they will proue some of these waters, here serued in at Sinnes banket: for if Antichrist can make a man drunke with his holy-water, hee will swallow all the rest of his morsels with the lesse difficultie.
These then are the waters; not the water of Regeneration, wherein our Fathers and we haue beene baptised: nor the waters of Consolation, which make glad the Citie of God: nor the waters of Sanctification, wherein Christ once, the Spirit of Christ, still, washeth (the feete) the affections of the Saints. Not the Hyblaean Nectar of heauen, whereof, he that drinkes, shall neuer Ioh. 4.14. thirst againe: nor the Reuel. 22.1. waters of that pure Riuer of life, cleare as Christall, proceeding out of the Throne of God. But the lutulent, spumy, maculatorie waters of Sinne; either squeased from the spungie cloudes of our corrupt natures, or surging from the contagious (vaines of hell) springs of Temptation.
I might here blab to you the Diuels secrets, and tell you his riddles, his trickes, his pollicies; in that he calls Sinnes, Waters, and would make his guests beleeue, that they wondersully refresh; but I reserue it to a fitter place: the Sweetnesse shall carrie that note from the

waters, I will contract all to these foure obseruations; as the Summe of that I would write of the waters, not De aquis, non sup^r aquas. on the waters; I haue better hope of your memories. 1. The preferment of waters at Sathans Banket. 2. The Diuels pollicie in calling Sinnes by the name of waters. 3. The similitude of Sinnes to Waters. 4. The pluralitie and abundance of these waters.
Obseruat. 1.Water is here preferre^ to Bread; for lightly Sinnes guests are better drinkers then eaters; they eate by the ^omer,Exodus 36. and drinke by the Epha: Indeede; a full belly is not of such dexte^itie for the Deuils imployment, as a full braine. Gluttonie would goe sleepe, and so doe neither good nor harme: Ebrietie hath some villanie in hand, and is then fitted with valour, the drunkard is an Hercules furens: he will kill and slay: how many doe that in a Tauerne, which they repent at a Tiburne? you will say, it is not wi^h drinking water: yes, the Harlots waters, (such as is serued in at the Deuils Banket;) mixt with rage and madnesse. Water is an Element, whence humiditie is deriued: the sap in the Vine, the iuyce in the Grape, the liquiditie in the Ale or Beere, is water: Indeede sometimes Neptune dwels too farre off from Bacchus dore; and the water is mastred with additions: yet it may (alienate the propertie) not annihilate the nature and essence of water: water it is still, though The foure mother-elements alter one into another: earth to water, water is ra^ified into ay^e: aire r^fined, etc and so backe ag^^ne: Inde r^tr^ red^unt, idemque r^^^xitur ordo. Metam. 15. compounded water: compounded in our drinkes, but in wines, deriued, (a primis naturae per media) not extinguished in the being, not brought to a nullitie of waters. Drinke then, bibendum aliquid, though the Harlot giues it a modest and coole name, waters, is the first dish of the Deuils Banket. The first entertainement into this Appij forum, is with the three Tauernes;Act. 28.1^. not so much a drunkennesse to the braine, as to the conscience. There is a Esa. 29.9. Drunkennesse, not with wine: there is a staggering not with strong

drinke. The Deuill begins his Feast with a health,Dan. 5* as Belshazzar, whatsoeuer the vp-shot be. He propounds the water, and he propines it; hee will not giue them worse then he takes himselfe. As Iupiter is said, to haue at his Court-gate two great Tunnes; whereof they that enter must first drinke; and himselfe begins to them.
Iupiter Ambrosiasatur est: est Nectare plenus.Pers.
Intemperance is the first dish to be tasted of:Non principalis a Princip^; ^ed principalis a prin^ipio. it is (if not principalis, yet, si ita dicam, principialis) if not the prime dish, yet the first dish: Satan must first intoxicate the braynes, and extinguish the eye of reason; as the Thiefe that would rob the house, first puts out the Candle. Vnderstanding is first drowned in these waters: Acrasia praei^. Acrisia sequitur. Riot iustles, and the Wit is turned besides the Saddle. The Sonnes of the Earth would not so doate on Reuel. 17.2. the Whore of Babilon, if the wine of her Fornication had not made them drunke: the ghes^s heere Esay. 5.11. rise early to the wine: it is the first seruice; and are indeede (as the Apostles were slandered) Act. 2.13.15. nine-of-clocke Drunkards: Matth. 6.34.^ The day would be without his su^ficient sorrow, actiue and passiue mischiefes, if the morning wine should not enflame them. They that are daily guests at the Deuils table, know the fashions of his Court; they must be drunke at the entrance. It is one of his lawes, and a Physicke-bill of hell, that they must not wash, till they haue drunke. These Waters are to be applied inwardly first, and once taken downe, they are fitted to swallow any morsell of damnation that shall afterwards be presented them.
Water was the first drinke in the world,Obseru. 2. and Water must be the first drinke at the Deuils Banket. There is more in it yet: The Deuill shewes a tricke of his wit in this title. Water is a good creature, and many coelestiall

things are shadowed by it.Matth. 3.11. 1. It is the element, wherein wee were baptised. 2. And dignified to figure the grace of the holy Spirit. Yet this very ^ame, must be giuen to Sinne. Indeede I know, the same things are often accepted in diuers senses, by the lang^^ge of Heauen. Leauen is est-soones taken for hypocri^ie, as in the Pharises: for Athei^me, as in the S^dduces: for Prof^nenesse, as in the H^rodians. And generally for 1 Cor 5 7. Sinne, by Paul, 1 Cor. 5. Y^t by Christ, for Luk. 13.21. Amos. 3.8. R^u^l. 5.5. grace. Luke. 13. God is compared to a Lyon: Amos. 3. And Christ is called the Lyon of the Tribe of Iudah. Apocal. 5. And the Deuill is called a Lyon. A roaring Lyon, etc. 1. Pet. 5.1 Pet. 5.8. Ioh. 3 14. 2 Cor. 11.3. Matth 3.9. 1 Pet. 2.5. Psal. 118.22. Christ was figured by a Serpent. Ioh. 3. And to a Serpent is Satan compared. 2 Cor. 11. Stones are taken in the worst sense, Matth. 3. God is able of these stones to raise, etc. Stones in the best sense: 1. Pet. 2. Liuing stones: and Christ himselfe, the headstone of the corner. Psal. 118. Be like children, saith Paul; and not like children: be children in simplicitie, not in knowle^ge. Graces are called Waters; so here vices; but the attribute makes the difference: Those are liuing Waters, these are the Waters of death. The Deuill in this playes the Machiauell; but I spare to follow this circumstance here, because I shall meete it againe, in the next branch; Bread of secrecies.
Sinnes may in some sense be likened to waters; yea, euen to waters in the Cup,Obseru. 3. for to waters in the Sea, they are most like; The one drownes not more bodies, then the other soules. They know the danger of the Sea, Psal. 108 23. that pro^ecute their businesse in great waters: they might know the hazards of Si^ne, that saile in the Deuils Barge of luxurie: I may say of them both with the Poet.
--Digitis a morte r^motiquatuor, aut septem* si sit latissimataeda.
They are within foure or seauen Inches of death: how many soules are thus shipwrackt? how many weepe

out a De profundis, that would not sing the songs of Syon, in the Land of the liuing! they forgot Ierusalem in their mirth, and therefore sit downe and howle by the waters of (...): but these, here, are Festiuall, not Marinall wate^s.
1. Water is an enemie to digestion; so is Sinne,Similitudes of sinnes to waters. clogging the memorie (the soules stomach) with such crudit^es of vice, that no sober instructions can bee digested in it: especially Waters hurt digestion in these cold Countries, naturally cold, in regard of the Climate, but spiritually more cold in deuotion, Frosen vp in the dregs of Iniquitie. Surely many of our Auditours drinke too deepe of these Waters, before they come to Iacobs Well:Iohn 4. our Waters of heauenly doctrine will not downe with them. The Waters of sinne so put your mouths out of tast, that you cannot rellish the Waters of Life: they are Marah to your palates. It seemes, you haue beene at the Deuils Banket,Matth. 5. and therefore thirst not after righteousnesse. The Cup of the old Temptation hath filled you: you scorne the Cup of the New Testament. If you had not drunke too hard of these Waters, you would Ioh. 4.10. Iosh 7. aske Christ for his liuing Water: but Achan hath drunke cursed Gold, when hee should come before Io^uah: Geh^^i hath drunke Bribes, when hee should come to Elisha.2 King. 5. No maruell if you sucke no Iuyce from the Waters of God, when you are so full and drunken with the Waters of Sathan.
2. Water duls the braine, and renders the spirits obtuse and heauie: It is an enemie to literature, saith Horace merrily:
Who in a Rithme rehearses,That w^ter drinkers neuer make good Vearses.Carmina non scribun^ur aquae potoribus.
Wee haue no skill in the himnes of the spirit, no alacritie to praise God, no wisedome to pray to him: why? wee haue drunke of these stollen waters. The chilling and killing colde of our Indeuotion, the

morose and raw humours of our vncharitablenesse* the foggy, dull, stupid heauinesse of our inuincible ignorance, shew that wee haue beene too busie with these Waters, nothing will passe with vs, but rare and nouell matters, (Ieiunus raro stomachus vulgaria temnit) and in these,Hor. Ser* 2. we study to admire the garbe, not to admit the profit.
3. Wee finde Grace compared to Fire, and gracelesnesse to water: the Spirit came downe on the Apostles in the likenesse of firie tongues,Acts 2.3. at the day of Pentecost: and Iohn Baptist testifies of CHRIST, that hee should Baptise with the Holy Ghost, and with Fire. The spirit of sinne falls on the heart like a cold deaw.Matth* 3.11. It is implied, Reuel. 3.15. that zeale is hote, wickednesse colde, neutrallitie luke-warme. Fire is hot (and drie) Water is cold (and moyst) praedominantly, and in regard of their habituall qualities: so zeale; is 1. hote; no incendiary, no praeter-naturall, but a supernaturall heate; equally mixed with Loue and Anger: such was Elias zeale for the Lord of Hostes;2 King. 2.11. he could not be cold in this life, that went vp in Fire to Heauen. 2. Drie: not like Ephraim, a Cake baked on the one side, but crude and raw on the other: no, the heate of zeale hath dried vp the moisture of prophanenesse. But wickednesse is 1. colde, a gelid nature, a numnesse in the Conscience: that, (as when the Ayre is hotest, the Springs are coldest, so) when the Sunne of Grace warmes the whole Church, is yet shaking of an Ague; nay, and will not creepe (like Simon Peter) to the fire. 2. Moist, not (succus and sanguinis plenum) full of iuyce and sappe; but sinne runnes like a colde rheume ouer the Conscience. This metaphor followes Saint Paul, Quench not the Spirit:1 Thes. 5.19. wherein hee fully iustifies this circumstance, forbidding the water, of impietie, to quench the fire of Grace.
Here then see the impossibilitie of vniting the two contrary Holinesse and Wickednesse.2 Cor. 6.14. natures in one conscience, as of reconciling Fire and Water into the same place, time, and subiect. If sinne keepe court in the Conscience, and sit in the Throne of the Heart, Grace dares not peepe in at the gates; or if it doth, with colde entertainement. I haue heard report of a generation of men, that carry Fire in the one hand, and Water in the other: whose conuersation mingles (Humentia siccis) Wet and Drie together, like the Syriphian Frogs in Pliny, whose challenge was, mihi terra lacusque, I haue Land and Sea for my walke: but alas, if the water be true water of sinne, beleeue it, the Fire is but a false fire, the blaze of hypocrisie: but the Hermite turned his guest out of dores for this tricke, that hee could warme his colde hands with the same breath wherewith hee cooled his hot pottage.
4. Water is a baser Element, and I may say, more elementary, more mixt, and as it were Sophisticate with transfusion: Fire is in the highest Region, the purest Element, and next to Heauen: this is the seate of grace, (non inferiora secuta) scorning the lower things. Sinne is (like water) of a ponderous, crasse, grosse, stinking, and sinking nature. They that haue drunke the Esa. 51.17. Cup of slumber, had need to be bidden Awake, and stand vp, for they are sluggish and laid: Phil 3.20. Grace (though in the Orbe of Sinne, yet) hath her conuersation in Heauen, and (cor repositum, vbi proemium depositum) her heart laid vp, where her loue and treasure is: her motto is, non est mortale quod opto. She hath a holy aspiration, and seeketh to be as neere to God as the clogge of fles^ will let her. Sinne is like water, though raging with the surges and swellings, and onely bounded in with Gods non vltra, here I will stay thy proud waues, yet deorsum ruit:Psal. 104.9. whiles these waters

swimme in the heart, the heart sinkes downe like a stone, as Nabals.
5 Phisitians say, that water is a binder: you may apply it,Though no Element is simply heauy but Earth, yet Water is co^paratiuely heauy. that men in these dayes are terrible water-drinkers: for the times are very restrictiue: you may as well wring Hercules Clubbe out of his fist, as a penny from auarices Purse. Mens hearts are costiue, to part with any thing in pios vsus: their hands clutch't, dores shut, purses not open: nay, the most laxatiue prodigals, that are lauish and letting-flie to their lusts, are yet heart-bound to the poore. It is a generall disease procured be these waters, to be troubled with the griping at the heart. Such were the Amos 4.1. Kine of Bashan, soluble to their owne lusts, bring, let vs drinke: bound vp, and strait-laced to the poore: not refreshing, but oppressing, not helping but cr^shing the needy: they Amos 6.6. greeue not for Ioseph; nay, they greeue Ioseph. These Kine are dead, but their Calues are in England, abundantly multiplied. These are not the dayes of peace, that turne Swordes into Sickles; but the dayes of pride, wherein the Iron is knocked off from the plough, and by a new kinde of Alchymistrie conuerted into plate. The Farmers painefulnesse runnes into the Mercers Shop, and the toyling Oxe is a sacrifice and prey to the cunning Foxe, all the racked rents in the Country will not discharge the Bookes in the Citie.
Great men are vnmercifull to their Tenants, that they may be ouer-mercifull to their Tendents; that stretch them as fast as they retch the others. The sweat of the labourers browes is made an ointment to supple the ioynts of Pride. Thus two malignant Planets raigne at once, and in one heart, costiue couetousnesse, and loose lauishnesse: like the Serpent Amphisboena, with a head at each end of the body,Plin. who, whiles they striue which should be the Master-head, afflict the

whole carkase: whiles Couetise and Pride wrastle, the Estate catcheth the fall. They eate Men aliue in the Countrey, and are themselues eaten aliue in the Citie: what they get in the Hundreth, they loose in the Sheere: Sic proedae patet esca sui: they make themselues plumpe for the prey; ^or there are that play th^ robbe-theefe with them: Vnius compendium, alterius dispendium: if there be a winner,Et terit, et teritur. there must be a looser: Serpens Serpentem deuorando fit Draco: Many Landlords are Serpents to deuoure the poore, but what are they that deuoure those Serpents? Dragons. You see what monsters then, vsurious Citizens are. Thus whiles the Gentleman and the Citizen shuffle the Cardes together, they deale the poore Commons but a very ill game. These are the similitudes. I could also fit you with some discrepancies.
1. Waters mundifie and clense,The dissimilitude of sinnes to waters.Non maculati* sed maculae. Iude 12. these soile ^nd infect: the Conscience growes more speckled by them, till men become not onely spotted, but spots, as Lucan sayd of the wounded body, totum est pro vulnere corp^^, the whole body was as one wound.
2. Adde, that waters quench the thirst, and coole the heate of the body, but these waters rather fire the heart, and inflame the affections; puffe the Splene, which swolne, all the other parts pine and languish into a Consumption: the heart is so blowne with lustes that all the graces of the soule dwindle like blasted Impes: these are (aquae soporiferae) waters of slumber, that cast the soule into a dead sleepe, whiles the Deuill cauterizeth and seares vp the Conscience.
3. Wee say of water, it is a good Seruant, though an ill Master: but wee cannot apply it to Sinne; it is not good at all: indeed lesse ill, when it serues, then when it raignes: if this false Gibeonite will needs dwell with thee, set him to the basest Offices. So Israel kept

in some Canaanites, lest the wilde Beasts should come in vpon them: our infirmities and mastred sins haue their vse thus, to humble vs with the sense of our weakenes, lest the furious beasts of pride and securitie, breake into our freeholds. But sinne of it selfe is good neither Egge nor Bird, neither in Root nor Branch, neither Hot nor Cold, neither in the Fountaine nor in the Vessell.
Obseru. 4.The pluralitie of these waters prolongs and determines my speech: their nature is not more pernicious then their number numerous: indesinita locutio, infinita turba: an vndefined word, an vnconfined number. If there were but one cup alone, it would cloy, and satiate, and procure loathing, (as euen Manna did to Israell) therefore Satan doth diuersifie his drinkes, to keepe the wicked mans appetite fresh and sharpe. If he be weary of one sinne, behold, another stands at his elbow: hath Diues din'd? hee may walke vp to his study, and tell his Money, his Bags, his Idols: or call for the Key of his Wardrobe, to feede his proud eye with his Silkes: for (Diuitiae and deliciae) Riches and Pleasures serue one anothers turne. If Nabal be weary of counting his Flockes, or laying vp their Fleeces, he may goe and make himselfe drunke with his sheep-shearers. Hence it is that (ex malis moribus oriuntur plurim leges) to meet with the multiplicitie of sinnes there is required a multitude of lawes; as when Phisitians grow rich,Plato. it is an euident signe of an infected Common-wealth. Sinne stood not single in Gods view, when hee threatens so fearefull a punishment, as the whole Booke (againe) can not match it.Hose. 4.3. Therefore the Land shall mourne, and euery one that dwelleth therein shall languish, with the beasts of the Field, with the Fowles of Heauen; yea, the Fishes of the Sea also shall be taken away: an vniuersall vastation:V^rse. 1. but as 1. priuately, there was no Truth, yet if there had bene Mercy: nay, no Mercie:

somewhat yet, if Knowledge had stood constant: no Knowledge in the Land. So 2. positiuely,Verse. ^. there was Swearing: can swearing be without lying? no, lying too: is the tongue alone set on fire at the Deuils Forge? no,Iam. 3. the hand is also a firebrand of Hell; Killing, Stealing, Adulterie ioyne their forces: and to giue testimonie against their singularitie, Blood toucheth blood. How should reprobates else fill vp the measure of their sinnes?1 Cor. 10.7. Thus when the vngodly haue eate and drunke, they may rise vp to play.
Will you descend to personall instances? loe, Iudas is new come from this Banket; giue him a vomite, and what lyes on his stomach? strange waters, and abundance of them: behold, the Spanish waters of Pride, the Romish waters of Treason, the Italian waters of Murder, the Iewish of Hypocrisie, the Turkish of Theeuerie, the Grecian of all Villanie: aske Mary Magdalene what varietie was at this Banket, she will tell you of seauen Viols, seauen Deuils; you may heare another tel his name, Legion. Bidde Absolon giue you a Tauerne-bill, or short Inuentorie, of these waters, and hee will read you* In primis the swelling waters of Pride. Item, the surfetting waters of Luxurie. Item, the scalding waters of Adulterie. Item, the red waters of Bloodinesse. Item, the blacke waters of Treason; and for the shot, aske him the totall summe of the Bill, and hee will tell you Damnation. If sinnes be thus familiarly linked in one man, how doe they tune in a Consort? how agree they in Companie? nothing better; not a Broker and a Pawne, not a deare yeere and a Cormorant. Hence Christ cals the way to perdition, the broad way. You can not stirre a foot in the great Road to the Citie of Hell, Pluto's Court,Matth. 7.13. but you meet sinnes in throngs; vanitie is the largest and most beaten thorow-fare of the world. Some double in their companies, some treble, some troupe, none goe single.

vae soli:Eccles. 4.10. if one sinne were alone, it would be easily vanquished. The Deuill knowes that (vis vnita fortior) collected strengths are vnconquerable: and therefore driues his waters so, that (vndae super advenit vnda) one waue seconds the former. 1. Sometimes they goe like Beasts,Rom. 13.13. by couples, Rom. 13. Ryot and Drunkennesse, Chambring and Wantonnesse, Strife and Enuy. Ierem. 23.Ier. 23.10. Adulterie and O^thes: and Ierem. 2. My people haue committed two euills,^er. 2.13. etc. 2. Sometimes they daunce in Triades, by threes, Phil. 3, Gluttonny, Pride,Phil. 3.19. Couetousnesse, Gallat. 5. Vaineglory, Prouocation,Gal. 5.26. Malice, Amos 1. For three transgressions and for foure,Amos 1.3.6. etc etc. If there bee not rather a great number meant:1 Ioh. 2.16. Saint Iohn abridgeth all the vanitie of the world into a triplicitie: All that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, the lus^ of the eyes, the pride of life. This is the Trinitie the world doth worship: Haec tria pro trino Numine mundus habet. 3. Sometimes they come by whole heards and droues, like the Host of the Aramites. Galat. 5. you may read them mustred vp: Adulterie,Gal. 5.19. etc.
Thus I haue shewed you the multiplicitie of these waters: what remaines, but that th^ s^me fire of Gods Altar, that hath enlightened your vnd^^^tandings, doe a little also warme your conscience^* should preuent the methode of my Te^^, ^f I s^oul^ yet shew you the direfull, dismall operation of these waters: yet somewhat I must say to make you loath them. As Captaines prouoke their Souldiours, Per verbum vocale, per semivocale, per mutum: By vocall speeches, semi-vocall Drummes and Trumpets, mute Ensignes: so God disswades you from these waters. 1. By his word; Viua et viuifica voce; A liuing and enliuing word: either in the Thunders of Sinai, or Songs of Syon, which the Word incarnate hath spoken. 2. Or by his semi-vocall

writings:Chrys. Serm. de Ielunijs. for at the beginning God talked with man by himselfe; but after, finding him estranged from his Creator, he sent him his minde in writing: And this hee makes sounding by his Ministers. 3. Or by his dumbe Ensignes, wonders, terrours, Iudgements vpon the louers of these waters.
Trust not too much to these waters:Vse 1. they are not so virtuall, as the described Inviters, the Deuils Prophets tell you. Sathan had long since his Water-Prophets: such were the Oracles Colophonium and Bronchidicum: wherein one by drinking of waters,Alexius. lib. 5. cap. 2. the other by receiuing the fume of waters, fore-tolde future things. Porphyrie obserues that antiquitie, called them (...), Madnesse; but the errour and impudence of succeeding ages (...), Diuinations. These were the Priests of Bacchus, welcome to the world, as those would haue beene to Israell, that Prophecie of wine and strong drinke. Men heare of strange fountaines (famoused for wondrous cures) and runne straite thither.Mich. 2.11. The Deuill is a Iuggler, and would make men beleeue, that if they drinke at his fountaine of Idolatrie, they shall haue good lucke after it: (hee blushed not to lay this batterie of Temptation to the Sonne of God.) As good lucke as Sampson had, when he drunke out of the Asses tooth,Matth. 4.9. and presently after lost his eyes: or rather,Iudg. 15. as he that to finde his Horse, must, by the Masse-Priests direction, drinke at Saint Bri^gets Well, accordingly found his Horse, and riding home ^hereon, broke his necke. Yeeld it a Fable; the Morall shall yeeld vs this: that we trust nothing, which hath not Gods word for warrant. Charmes, Spels, Coniurations, are all vanities, lying vanities: he tha^ trusts thereto, forsakes his owne mercie.Ion. 2.8.
Fear^ these waters, for they are dangerous: sinne is not more coole^n the t^st,Vse 2. then it is fierie in the operation. Afflic^ion is hote to the rellish,Matth. 20.22. (you cannot drinke

of my Cup) but coole, easefull, peacefull in the digestion: but these waters are (mel in ore, fel in corde) sweet in the palate, bitter in the stomach. The Oracle gaue it:Diodor. Sicul. Ninum prius capi non posse, quam fluuius ei fiat hostis: Niniueh should not be taken, before the waters became her enemie: she feared no invndation, the Sea was too remote: yet in the third yeere of her Seige, the waters of the Cloudes broke loose, and with abundant raine ouerwhelmed the walls; (Muros deiecit ad stadia viginti) to twentie furlongs. We liue secure, and deuoure these waters of iniquitie, as Fishes the water of the Sea; but when God shall make our sinnes compasse vs at the heeles,Psal. 49.5. and raise vp these flouds against vs, we shall crie, as the drowning world, woe vnto vs, the waters are become our enemies: the flouds of our owne sinnes ouerwhelme vs: so the Drunkard drinkes a riuer into his belly, that drownes his vitall spirits with a Dropsie.
Let vs pumpe out these waters of Sinne, which wee haue deuoured:Vse 3. It is the onely course we haue left, to keepe our Ship from sinking: Euomite, quos bibistis, fluuios. Cast them out by repentance: this is a sauing vomite; or else God will giue you a vomite of Sulphure, and shamefull spewing shall be for your glory: We haue all drunke liberally of these waters; too prodigally at Sinnes fountaine, Quando voluimus, et quantum valuimus; when we would, as much as we were able; not onely to drunkennesse, but euen to surfet and madnesse: if we keepe them in our stomachs, they will poyson vs: Oh, fetch them vp againe with buckets of sighes, and pumpe them out in riuers of teares, for your sinnes. Make your heads waters, and your eyes fountaines: weepe your consciences emptie and dry againe of these waters:Ier. 9.1. Repentance onely can lade them out. They, that haue dry eyes, haue waterish hearts: and the Prouerbe is too true for many; No man comes to heauen wi^h drie eyes: let your eyes gush out teares; not onely in Psal. 119.136 compassion

for others, but in Psal. 6.6. passion for your selues, tha^ haue not kept Gods Law. Weepe out your sullen waters of discontent at Gods doings, your garish waters of pride, freezing obduracie, burning malice, foggie intemperanc^, base couetise. Oh thinke, thinke, how you haue despised the waters of life, turned Iesus Christ out of your Inne, into a beastly Stable; whiles Pride sits vppermost at your Tables, Malice vsurpes the best Chamber in your mindes, Lust possesseth your eyes, Oathes imploy your tongues, Ebrietie bespeake your tastes, Theft and iniurie inthrone themselues in your hands, Mammon obsesseth your affections: Sicke, sicke, all ouer: you may cry with the Shunamites Sonne, 2 King. 4.19* Caput dolet: my head, my head: and with Ierusalem, Ier. 4.19. my bowels, my bowels. Oh let faith and repentance make way, that the bloud of our Sauiour may heale you.
We are not onely guilty of auersion from God, but of aduersion against God; Oh where is our reuersion to God? the waters of lusts are (aquae (...)) the waters of folly and madnesse; but our teares are (aquae (...)) the waters of change of minde and repentance. Poenitentia est quasi poenae tenentia: Repentance is a taking punishment of our selues: oh take this holy punishment on your soul^s: Weepe, weepe, weepe for your vanities. Achan cannot drinke vp his execrable gold, nor Gehazi deuoure his bribes, nor Ahab make but a draught of a vineyard, mingled with bloud, nor Iudas swallow downe his cousenage and treason, without being called to a reckoning.Orig. ho^. 5. in L^uit. Nos quare non credimus, quod omnes astabimus ante tribunal? Why account wee not of our future standing before a Iudgement Scate? Omnium aures pulso. All we, whom these walls compasse, haue beene drunken with these waters: some, that hate Swearing, with dissembling: some, that abhorre Idolatrie, with profanenesse: some, that auoid

notoriousnesse, with hypocrisie: many, that pretend ill-will to all the rest, with those (Lares et Lemures) household-Gods, or rather household-Goblins and Deuils, which almost no house is free from, Fraud and Couetousnesse. Wee know, or at least should know, our owne diseases, and the speciall dish whereon wee haue surfetted; oh, why breake wee not forth into vlulations, mournings, and loud mournings for our sinnes? cease not till you haue pumped out the sinnes of your soules at your eyes, and emptied your consciences of these waters.
And then, behold other, behold better, behold blessed waters:Vse 4. you taste of them in this life, and they fill your bones with Marrow,Ioh. 4.14. Matth. 5. and your hearts with ioy; they alone satisfie your thirst: without which, though you could with Xerxes Armie, drinke whole Riuers drie, your burning heat could not be quenched. Here drinke,Cant. 2.4. Bibite et inebriamini, Drinke, and be drunken in this Wine-celler: onely, hauing drunke hearty draughts of these waters of life, ret^ine them constantly: be not queasie-stomached, Demas-like, to cast them vp againe; the token of a cold stomach, not yet heated by the spirit: for as the loathing of repast is a token that Nature drawes toward her end; so when these holy waters proue fastidious, it is an argument of a soule neere her death. Take then and dige^^ this water. Recipitur aure, retinetur corde, perficitur op^re. The eare receiues, the heart retaines, the life digests it: but alas, we retaine these waters no longer then the finger of the Holy Ghost keepes them in vs; like the ^arden-pot, that holds water but whiles the thumbe is vpon it.
Leaue then, Beloued, the Deuils Wine-Celler, as Venerable Bede calls it, Vbi nos dulcedo delectationis invitauit ad bibendum,Bed. Exhortat. 139. Where the sweet waters of delight tempt vs to drinke. But Dauid, though he longed for it, would

not drinke the water of the Well of Bethlehem,1 Chron. 11.19 which his three Worthies fetched, because it was the water of bloud, brought with the danger of life: and shall wee drinke the waters o^ the Deuils Banket, (the venture of bloud) with the hazard of our dearest soules? No, come wee to this aqua Coelestis, be wee poore or rich, haue wee money or none, all that come, are welcome.Esa. 55.1. And know, that hauing drunke liberally at the fountaine of grace, you shall haue yet a larger and pleasanter draught at the fountaine of glory: that riuer of life,Reu. 22.1. cleare as Christall, proceeding out of the throne of God, and of the Lambe:Ver. 17. to which the Spirit and the Bride (are Inviters and) say, come. It is a delightfull banket we enioy heere; The Kingdome of heauen is right^ousnesse, and peace, and ioy in the holy Ghost:Rom. 14.17. None know the sweetnesse of these ioyes, but they that feele them: but the Supper of ioy,1 Cor. 2.9. the Banket of glory, the Waters of blessednesse are such as no ^ye hath seene, etc.August. Illic beata vita in fonte. There is the Spring-head of happinesse: they cannot want water, that dwell by the Fountaine.

Nam licet allata gra^us sit sapor in vnd^,
Dulcius ex ipso fonte bibantur aquae.

That which is deriued to vs in Pipes is pleasant, oh what is the delight at the Well-head? The Deuill, like an ordinary Host, sets forth his best wine first, and when the guests haue well drunke, worse: but thou oh Lord, hast kept the best wine t^ll the last.Ioh. 2.10. They are sweet wee taste heere, but medio de sonte leporum surgit amari aliquid, There are some persecutions, crosses to imbitter them, the sweet meate of the Passeouer is not eaten without sowre hearbs: but in thy presence, oh Lord,Psal. 16.11. i^ the fulnesse os ioy, at thy right hand, there are pleasures for euermore. There is no bitternesse in those waters: they are the

same, that God himselfe and his holy Angels drinke of; so that as for Christ his sake, wee haue drunke the bitter Cup of persecution, so we shall receiue at Christ his hands, the Cup of saluation, and shall blesse the name of the Lord. To whom, three persons, one onely true and eternall God, be all praise, glory and obedience, now and for euer. Amen.
FINIS.

