catholic confutation of m. JOHN rider claim of antiquity and first of the error contain in his inscription or title of his book and of his preface to all roman priest and all other of any other ROmish order untrue surname catholic priest and to every of they within the kingdom of Ireland if the irish testament a godly laborious and profitable work to God church have not embusy the printer press long before this time m. rider preface my friendly caveat have present itself to your friendly censure I have only handle the first position and can go no further in the rest till the printer return from London with new letter and whereas there be some fault escape impute they not to the skilful printer but to the stumpeworne letter for as weapon unsteeled cut not so letter overwear print not I have lay down your proof and speech touch the first position not add diminish or alter one syllable or letter but as I receive by a courteous gentleman I think a priest and as master Henry fitzsimon subscribe the same approve they to be apostolical and catholic your preface concern nothing the matter in question so I have deliver they only the preface i silence till I know your further pleasure because it be too bite and bitter relish rather of malice then matter but if ^ou mislike with this silence upon the least notice my next treatise shall manifest it to the world by way of a postscript to which I will annex a rescript and whereas your letter direct unto i at first be subscribe in stead of your name catholic priest I have therefore not know your name read Vincent and you shall see what Catholic be give you ^ill the same title but I must tell you plain you have only the name without ^he truth of the thing itself which vain usurp title you must cast off until you can prove your doctrine Catholic for a catholic opinion without a^ apostolical warrant be fit term upstart heresy than catholic divinity Fitzimon whether Romanians and catholic be not all one in the 4. number thereof omit the mistearm of our doctrine to be a dangerous dream which by God grace shall be due examine in the examination of protestancy towards the article of the let it be first know how m. Rider can confess that we be roman priest s. Hieron apol. 1. vict. l. 1. persecut. greg. Turon mart c. 30. and 79. yet no Catholic priest s. Hierome affirm they to be all one say if we agree with the bishop of Rome therefore be we catholic second s. victor and Gregory of Tours report that ancient heretic the arian and novatians use the same appellation in like decision against the primative catholic by call they romanish and roman priest say etc: etc. the roman will extol their martyr etc: of this roman priest etc. signify Roman Catholic and Christian to have be of one and the same signification for depend upon the authority of the roman bishop a comfortable correspondence betwixt first and last catholic to be by first and last heretic conformable misnamed for conformable consent in belief whether roman priest be Catholic priest 2. next in say we be untrue surname Catholic priest it may as light be deny as it be affirm but m. Rider may affirm that it be not light affirm consider he direct to vincentius Lirinensis a competent for manifestation thereof I embrace he with hart and good will protest to depend upon his decision in that and all other controversy the rather that I never peruse any either Catholic or other who reprehend he in all his little golden book hardly may any fail to find pertinent proof to our purpose but especial in the three chapter he examine and define what be Catholic and who be such I will allege it word by word for the pertinency thereof vincentius Lyrinensis cap. 3. 3. in fit also it be great to be obey in the same Catholic church that we hold that which every where ^^ch always and which of all be believe for this be true and proper ca^^ick which the signification of the name and definition do declare which ^^ly do comprehend all universally but this be then perform if we follow ^^uersalitie antiquity consent thus shall we attain universality if we ^^esse that one faith to be true which the whole church throughout the world ^^esseth and thus antiquity if we in no case depart from those supposition ^^ch be manifest our ancestor and father do sustain also consent in this ^^er if we follow the definition and sentence either of all or almost all ^^sts and master of elder tyme by this we learn first that many time people may pretend ^^se to favour they who absolute be their impugner and ^^st urgent disprover a foul yet usual practice among re^^mers second what have m. rider to do with that faith ^^ich every where which always and which of all be believe (@) not the reform faith profess new and know private use a lass our ancestor profess that faith let any one desy^s to know how universal ancient and how concordant the ^^rming persuasion be but peruse the 48. number follow and ^ecialy the article of the communion of saint they shall find ^y themselves profess new without all antiquity particular ^t only for province but also for person dissentious so exorbitant as they destroy persecute and execute on another as (@) many of the brother of Cadmus I will not the ^^^cussion thereof from the foresay proper place where it be no ^^se assure then pertinent and I doubt not unawnswerable ^^monstrated what do ancient heretic against primitive catholic s. Hieronim epitaph Nepotiani cap. 9 but be 'gainst we do as eager by reformer s. Hierome say bishop ^^e take priest slay and diverse of other ecclesiastical order church ^^e overthrow the altar of Christ make manger for horse the relic (@) martyr dig up etc. and now be not church turn to ^^bles church ornament to cushion and breech chalice to ^illing bowl church man pursue how many thousand religious habitation have reformer raze burn profane but more of this God willing shall ensue in treat of the practice of puritan nether be it a lawful objection that q. Ma^^ severe punish reformer therefore they may do the same for she follow not therein other law then in all Christendom from far memory be enact we be oppress by force against law make from far remembrance only upon the suggestion of miserable minister abuse the ear and clemency of prince and magistrate by their sword to destroy their trusty subject thereby to subdue all government under th^ say minister themselves as shall appear in our treat of th^ practice of Puritanisme Luther tom. 1. Germ. lib. theol. pag. 89. 6. the ancient christian law abolish in such manner as by Luther the canon law burn show that antiquity be not conformable to the abolisher of they and therefore such be a proof that they be not also catholic how come it now that novelty claim to be Catholic which be conjoin by s. Vincents declaration s. Vincent loc. cit. with antiquity wherefore I pray you be they hitherto as great enemy to the name of Catholic as to the ancient religion of which they pretend themselves reformer and not only they s. aug. con lib. 2. c. 25. B^za in nou. test 1565. Humfred in pag 113. Sutcliff in his challenge pag. 1. bible of the year 1562. 15^7 euseb nib. 2. hist. c. 22. in but all other heretic who general usurp to themselves the office and title of reformer as Gaudenti^ name the title of catholic human fiction by relation of s. augustin so by Beza it be call a vain word by Laurence Humphrey a void term by Sutcliff a fruitless name the hate of reformer against it make the Inglish bible in our late queen day a long time to omit it over the epistle of s. james s. Peter and s. jude although Eusebius affirm they have be so entitle ever since the apostle time and when the late bible be ashamed thereof will amend such omission they fail as ill as if they have say nothing by translate Catholic into general s. Hieron apol. 1. con Ruffin for if the late word out of s. Hierome if we agree in faith with the bishop of Rome therefore be we catholic shall be translate therefore be we general and Catholick^ shall hence forward be call general will not such translation and translator worthy be account both repugnant to the name and sense of the word Catholic and also ridiculous and foolish fancy of fanatical reformer in prefat. loc. come catechism Reformatorun Lyndan in the same hate against the name Catholic make the creed of the apostle to be corrupt by reformer say I believe in the kristian church for I believe in the Catholic church it make a albation out of Luther in the disputation of Altemburg Colloq. Altemburg an. 1568. fol. 154. to be utter ^^cted because say they it be not phrasis Lutheri a phrase use by Luther that any thing ought to ^nderstood catholick it make ancient heretic to apply it Vincent loc. cit. cap. 26. by ^sion against our ancestor say come o you fool and mise^^e who be common call catholic and learn the true faith which (@) be hide in many age heretofore but be now reveal and show of (@) to which word m. rider approach say you and (@) late romish catholic do quite dissent from Christ truth and (@) romish religion and therefore remember whence you be fall and ^^urne to the ancient truth and else where n. 113. 115. forget (@) claim to be a Catholic he tell we that we endeavour to keep (@) catholic in great blindness mean thereby 113. 115. 120. 130. they of our pro^^ion so soon after propound a observation to which (@) will have they of our profession to be attentive he say ^rke this you catholic again and lest the catholic shall think unanswerable wherefore we be restore by m. Rider himself (@) the name of catholic he must consequent be a of ^^e first untruth against himself the 1. untruth s. August tract. 22. in joan. and therefore by the word of (@) augustin we have receive the holy ghost if we love the church if we be ^^tt and conjoin together by charity if we do exult and rejoice to be catholics as well in faith as also in name of which exultation among we ^^ere can be no better proof then that we willing be name catholic be not therefore angry good brother say s. pacianus s. Pacian epist. 1. Symphron above (@) hundred year past and do not afflict thyself Christian be my name use Catholic in my surname by the former I be call by the second I be manifest this may suffice to testify all good christian as to be romanist so to be catholic whether the cause of omission of my preface be true allege first he tell that his two year delay to reply to my first ^wnswer of his six article or rather but to my answer of one ^^ticle happen because the irish testament embusy the printer press ^^ich testament be say he a godly laborious and profitable work to ^^ods church I will not except against either of these to be a ^ntruth yet consider that m. Rider be altogether ignorant of ^he irish tongue I marvel by his own word such as will censure before they see be like such wise man as will shoot their bowlt as soon a^ bush as at a bird he refrain not from commend a unknow translation the next point that he can go no further in the other article till the printer return be suspicious to be untrue bo^^ because the departure of the printer can not debar his proceed in his study as also because the printer return wi^^ new letter yet there be nothing print nether be all faul^ escape belong to the wear letter as often will appear 9 our preface contain the protestation of the chief protestant in the world that the father by m. Rider claim wer^ adversary to protestancy and it to they that it can be bitte^ or bite the 1. untruth by our fault must needs be untrue because no word of any catholic be intermeddle therein 10. my intention be to wink at the great part of untruth and only to calculat they the 2. untruth which by no evasion can be excuse let this then be the second in number that upon our dislike with his silence I can not approve his orthography here use th^ say preface which be manifowld make know to have ben^ dislyke he will manifest it to the world in his next treatise an. 1604. for such treatise as he publish the last of March against i want still my preface and to this hour he dare never manifest it and in deed as soon after it shall appear such it be as be a most pregnant and palpable manifestation that m. Ride^ claim to the father be unjust by verdict of the whole cru^ of his brother he may well say it be bitter and bite as every breath be to a scab head and as every touch be to a botch o^ boil painful and pierce 11. that he imagine Catholic opinion may be without a^ apostolical warrant be against the creed of the apostle by which be command to believe in the Catholic church by the same we be command to believe all Catholic opinion of that church to be apostolical the apostle whole consent as after God will shall be demonstrate in all and every article of such belief the marginal advice to read vincentius Lyrinensis we have accept and embrace and find behooveful as appear in our first 6. number i some time remain astonish at the wonder of God justus Caluinus in and now in particular that I find justus Caluinus as renown a Protestant as any in the troop acknowledge his recantation to be a Catholic procure by read this little book here commend yet that m. Rider fulfil the horrible ^^nsideration mention in God word eccl. 7. consider the woorck of God that none ^y correct he who he have despise not only be not convert by ^t book but also commend it to other as favour his imagination against which it may seem of set purpose compose but this be most sure that you have forsake the verity of Christ gospel and ^e faith of the primitive church Serm. 140. fol. 297. col. 3. to prove it but in this one point of our quendon Augustine say ther^^e the lord Christ absent himself touch his bodily presence from every ^^urch and ascend into heaven that our faith may be edify brag now no ^ore of Christ corporal presence to be in your church if you do we with augustine will say you have no true church whether by Christ be in heaven his real absence from the church be prove 1. he say it be most sure that we have forsake the verity etc. which he prove because s. augustin certify that Christ touch his bodily presence be absent from the church that our faith may be edify I showld think that for ^^ch a peremptory conclusion some very choice proof shall be allege which may effectua persuade but God be glorify ^ther this must purchase our recantation or there can be no other proof find to deserve it beside this we therefore answer ^oth that the ascension of Christ into heaven and also that s. Au^ustin in this place confirm we in our belief the ascension because it be wrought beyond the nature of a corporal body which rather descend than ascend it show that Christ be not tie to nature but as above nature he be bear of a ^irgin walk on the sea make himself invisible issue out of his sepulchre enter among his close disciple ascend up to heaven penetrate the heaven so also he may above nature be in heaven ^nd earth together and that he have so be in very deed shall God ^illing be notify in the 71. number yea Christ himself use ^^e argument that he will ascend to persuade that his word (@) his flesh to be meat true and his blood drink true etc. wear to be ^eleeved yet now they be here call into distrust by m. Rider because of such ascension which be to argue altogether opposit to Christ and consequent to truth second s. augustin only reason of Christ visible be in the church not usual since his ascension into heaven intend nevertheless that his invisible be therein be nothing thereby hinder as appear by his say in the same place s. augustin serm 140. temp. and we be not to behold he in flesh and yet we wear to eat his flesh the absence of our lord be not absence tecum the 3. untruth dist. 2. Consecr. c. 44. @ he be with the who thou see not etc. therefore it be a three great untruth perspicuous in the eye of all man that by such allegation we be prove to have depart from Christ verity etc. or that s. augustin be against we further answer be in the gloss upon a like testimony of s. augustin in the canon law and because I end by God help to convict m. rider in every principal point by his own principal brother I will here insert melancton and Westphalus word concur in this matter Westphal^ Melanct. in apol. con. calu. pag. 216. augustin never mean to tie Christ so to one place that he cold not be in another especial because the scripture never so teach and nothing can be bring to bind Christ to one place beside the judgement of human reason etc. this be melancton who martyr con Gardiner Eucha. 4. pag. 768. call a singular and incomparable man great or small fat or lean as he be he contradict m. rider wisdom in infer out of s. augustin that Christ be ascend therefore he be not in the b. sacrament 12. and again as you will have a corporal presence so you teach the communicant to receive Christ with their mouth corporal joh. Tract. 26. pag. 174. 4. deny read aug. joh. tract. 25.26 and 50. not with their faith spiritual contrary to the opinion of Augustine show the manner how Christ be to be eat in the sacrament four time together say spiritual spiritual and you can show one ancient writer that speak of the manner of our eat Christ in the sacrament that say once corporal and therefore see this ancient father condemn your faith and contradict your doctrine forsake new Rome heresy and return to old Rome religion whether corporal communion do exclude spiritual communion 4. untruth 12. in the 4. palpable untruth be contain that we teach the communicant to receive with their mowth corporaly not with their faith spiritualy I be witness that m. Rider peruse and note our decretal and all the second distinction of consecration which I understand by view his marginal observation and underlyning when I have borrow his book there he find we teach out of s. augustin which ^^o confirm that be contain in the next precedent number (@) that we receive Christ body and blood dist. 2. c. cap. ibid. cap. ibid. cap. ibid. which the apostle (@) behold and the jew do shed and the same invisible but not visible second in the three next chapter he teach that we shall ^eave Christ worthy by his and our dwell one in another ^d by faith and not only receive the sacrament but also the ^ce of the sacrament besyd cap. mandu^ at c. c. Corpus and c. Sacram. c. etc. what other in the say distinction to the same effect manifold whole chapter be therein out (@) s. augustin so that no ignorance can excuse this to be the ^wrth untruth he have peruse the decretal and know ^nsequently our doctrine to teach both corporal and spiritual rescue yea I undertake in the 34. number to disprove he by (@) own word that in our decretal we profess a spiritual ^eaving such our doctrine as not long after in the 39 s. Chrysost. hom. 60. pop. Antio number will ^peare of receive the b. sacrament both corporaly and spiri^^ly and not only corporaly nor only spiritualy be ancient ^ofessed by s. chrysostom say not (@) faith alone but also in very substance and by s. Cyril say s. Cyrill l. 10. in joan. c. 13. not (@) charity only but by natural partake be Christ in we whereby appear that to say we exclude the internal by include the ^^ternal or contrary wise be not either to know what we profess (@) know it to misinform witting whether our receive by faith be only of a figure ^ yet be it wary to be consider that in teach either manner (@) receive corporaly and spiritualy in neither of both we agree ^ith late reformer for although they a faithful ^^ceaving a faithful conjunction a faithful union etc. betwixt ^eir soul and Christ yet be there no participation betwixt ^e manner of faith by we intend and by they we instruct in ^e word of s. Chrysost. ho. 24. in 1. cor. (@) to approach by faith be not ^t thou showlde only receive the body propownd but much more that ^w shall touch he with a pure hart and so approach as to Christ he ^fe also in the word of s. augustin s. aug. ser. 2. verb. Apost. and 17.26 and 27. in joan. Corpus and in sacramento the body and blood of Christ will be life to every one if what be visible take in the sacrament be spiritua eat in the true verity so that according our approach by faith we come with a cleanse hart as to Christ himself according to verity and not as to a figure appellation or representation all this be teach after by m. Rider himself they teach the contrary that the sacrament only serve as a external sign that Christ feed at that time their sowl as bread feed their body Christ operate no effect by the sacrament in their sowl and be no near unto they then in heaven nor the sacrament effect any thing in their body because it be a sacrament say they only during the use and the use consist only in the similitude of his feed the soul as the bread feed the body yet at that time of receive they hold that bread as yet nourish not the body which be to none unknown for food must abide many alteration yea and mutation in substance before it nourish so that I can not conceive nor any other that ever I can encounter how at the time of receive there can be any such signification of double nourish in body and soul there be none possible at that time in body the bread not de digest and consequent how there can be any sacrament in time of receive which want the life of the sacrament which be say they only signification Zuingl to 2. resp. luth. confession fol. 477. for this be the office of every sacrament say that it signify only if they themselves conceive better thereof I do not malign they concern our former doctrine by mean of the same objection often reiterate it must be often also express num. 34. 39 46. 94. whether any ancient writer allow or mention corporal receive 15. although this belong to our second proof for the real presence by suffrage of counsel and father yet this fowl five untruth th^ 5. untruth be brief to be disprove in this place because I be after in the 120. number by God grace to deliver a verdict of Luther that they be heretic who deny God with the fleshly mouth to be receive I here omit it first therefore s. augustin say s. August l. con adverse leg^ and proph. Tertull. l. resurrect. s. ch^^^^t l. om. 45. in c^p. 6. joan. we receive with faithful hart and mouth second Tertullian and the flesh be say with the body and blood of Christ three s. chrysostom and and permit himself to be tutch and eat and tooth to be print in his flesh ^f in the mouth of two or three witnese every word be to stand ^en here be it make undoubtful that the denial of any ancient writer to have believe the corporal receive be the five untruth the receive by mouth the feed the flesh the touch (@) tooth be evidentl corporal receive and consequent this (@) truth be inexcusable but I will in form and proper term use not by construction only show the falsehood of m. rider nega^on in this point Cyrill l. 10. in c. 13. joan. by the communion of the body of ^hrist Christ dwellesh in we corporaly look m. Rider the very word (@) self corporaly blush and believe and contradict no more the apparent truth a answer to this place be in fox pag. 1325. but such (@) one as shall shame all foxian brother that there can no other be give for he confess that corporaly be to be take here ^n the same sense that s. Paul say the fullness of divinity to dwell corporaly in Christ that be not ligh nor accidentaly but perfect and substantia then which answer what may we require more to condemn m. Rider 16. but you will say it be shame for i to belie the holy sea the three book cap. 3. scripture pag. 102. Colen print 1588. then it seem some gross fault remain still who doctrine be apostolical and their life angelical my proof shall be your own friend Lindanus speak of a ancient complaint of Agobertus bishop of lion who say we have the most part correct the antiphonary cut off those which seem superfluous light false blasphemous and many fantastical thing behold now the purity of the doctrine of the church of Rome who dare venture his soul upon such sandy superstition nay wicked and damnable heresy and irreligion and for the life of your clergy in Rome hear some of your own friend speak their knowledge read 3. pag. 823. there thus you shall find it speak of Rome that be to say in this city of Rome the courtesan or common whore pass through the street or ride on their mule like honest matron and in the midst of the day the nobleman the cardinal dear friend and priest attend upon those whore we never see such corruption but only in this city of Rome which be a example to all other city the pope own cardinal be appoint by pope Paul the three dom. 1538. to visit the clergy and the stew return this shameful commission but perchance you will tell the queen subject that these whore dwell in some blind alley but the pope court and palace be a most holy sanctuary of saint no say Luitprandus your own proctor lib. 6. cap. 6. the very pope palace at Lateran sometime be the harbout of holy saint but be now become a filthy stew of common whore now you see the pope religion and the pope life the one false the other lewd forsake both defend neither for if you do Primasius rom. cap. 2. will tell you no man sin more dangerous then he that plead in the defence of sin whether our religion be wicked and damnable if the antiphonary be correct that heretic excel in corrupt book not only of other but of their own be most apparent in gretzers lib. lib. m. rider as may be perceive make a odious inference for the correct of the antiphonary first his allege author Lindanus inform that it be correct by a Catholic bishop from the error specify second he say that such error have creep in by deceitfulness of heretic and corruption of printer three the book so correct be so obscure and unknown among we that neither booke-bynders shop nor learned doctor can ever give i any notice thereof the premise due ponder I ask in the name of jesus Christ what condemnation belong to the Catholic religion for the say correction be it to have correct a corrupt book by such mate and mean second I crave in courtesy to be instruct why a private and unknown book be erroneous our religion shall therefore be wicked and heretical but since that it be make a lawful antecedent to such a consequence let i have the same allowance to infer in like manner the communion book after great travail the statute prefix to the communion book and deliberation publish be commend in the statute prefix to contain the most sincere and pure christian faith of the scripture of which say jewel in the apol. 170. Apostol. etc. we approach as much as we may to the church of the apostle etc. nothing remain say he fol. 46. that either be superstitious or repugnant to scripture or offensive to good man yet thus it be censure by puritan in the order of the service there be nothing but confusion Gilby pa. 2. pa. 90. to eat the lord supper they play a pageant of their own there be no difference put betwixt truth and falsehood betwixt Christ and Antichrist betwixt God and the devil second carlyle in his book that Christ descend not Browghton in his epistle to the Concil. of your bible your principal brother confess that in they scripture be deprave darkness spread falsehood follow etc. these two be book not private but commend by public authority ecclesiastical and temporal not mean but the very high and principal not once correct but eftsoon therefore by m. rider sequel m. rider religion must be wicked and heretical I will not trample (@) one prostrate but yet I will leave he to himself to rise ^yne but lest he shall seem to start far from i I will (@) this spansel to his horse foot present by Caluin say calu. art. 2. con Anabap. when under the show of ^ection we can not tolerat any imperfection in the body or member of the ^urch then we be admonish that the devil puff we with pride and se^eth we with hypocrisy this much from Caluin himself against (@) scholar for conclude so odious upon such pretend im^rfection whether wickedness of prelate be a lawful condemnation of any religion ^ he request my friend to admonish i that he will not ^gest but that I shall answer this matter be so material I be^eve before I depart from it he will be less able well to digest it first he say that whore in Rome do pass and ride like honest matron (@) have no dowbt thereof that they do so every where else second ^hat noble man and familiar of cardinal attend upon they which also (@) believe three that clerck be also in their I think they be the more to blame if I will say that such clerk if Beza his translation of the word be true wear minister I have this help out of Beza Beza in 2. pet. s. how soever it be take it belong only to the doer Concil. tom. 3. the ancient father transfer the name to the college of ecclesiastical minister fowerthly that the reporter of this abuse have not observe such corruption else where the more commendation of other place this complaint be return by nine commissioner among who be cardinal Poole of glorious memory appoint by Paul the three to reform and ^bolishe abuse be there now any thing in all this whereby our religion be taint be there great condemnation or commen^ation belong for this to the pope who employ such commissioner to redress abuse let we understand the next the Lateran palace of the pope become a stew of whoor I answer ^hat may happen in a large court among the serve man and officer unknown to the pope or when the pope be at s. Marcks^allace ^allace or in the Vatican Althowgh it have happen by the pope ^ault yet his life be never make our rule nor his vice our virtue so that as by a holy pope it can not be infer that we be all saint neither by a wicked pope may we be condemn to be devil and according our rule man may know good and the will of his master yet do contrary thereto and consequent may have a good faith yet a bad life be there any jot of these imputation unawnswer what more light matter against a religion more impertinent to our doctrine or to our controversy of the bless sacrament may be object clercke follow whore and in the pope Lateran palace there be whore your religion be hellish be not this a reasonable mat. 23.3 18. can they be ignorant of our religion safety against such imputation who ever hear our command we to obey our prelate word although we do not there work who ever hear s. augustin say s. August con. parm. lib. 2. c. 10. all sacrament whereas they be hurtful to the unworthy handler yet by they they profit the worthy receiver who have not hear above a hundred pope of Rome to have be of as eminent sanctity as dignity above other in so much as three and thirty martyr successive flourish in that sea to which number no other episcopal seat have any proportion and no other any resemblance shall we leave all these angel if one Lucifer all these apostle if one judas may incroache among they let we then if such reason must be currant turn the leaf whether any late reform patriarch wear of commendable life 19 I may be think unreasonable at the first surmise to examine this demand first that I will without limitation so general inquire of all the brood among who perhaps some first apostle of reformation may be inculpable second consider how great how exorbitant how incomparable commendation they may find give to the chief of their sort especial to Luther and Caluin I will deal upright and omit the residue not so excessive commend will examine the say two pillar of protestancy not conceal their commendation fox Acts. p. 404. the harbour in the last oratien 20. first I find Martin Luther a saint in fox calendar second I find in the harborowgh say I be the country which bring forth the bless man John huss who beget Luther who beget truth ^hirdly I find in jewel that he be a most excellent man jewel defen. apol. par. 4. c. 4. @. 2. mathes conc. 8. luth. pag. 88 amsdorf-praef to 1. luth. send from God ^lighten the world fowerthly in Mathesius he be the supreme father of the church five in Amsdorf he be ^h ^e Christiano to who in all the christian world ^ne like in spirit and faith wisdom and profundity in scripture be or ^er will be six in Alberus he be say verus Paulus Elias Alberus con lib. 7. b. d. 8. (@) true Paul a true Elias a man sufficient to appease the wrath of God num. 120. Illyric in Apoc. c. 14. Conrade Schluss in Theol. cal. l. 2. fol. 124. confess eccl. Tygur fol. 116. 127. luth. ep. Argentin 1525. cal. reform eccl. 463. to ^hom augustin may not blush to be his scholar seventh with Illyricus ^e be fortould in the Apocalips as the angel fly through the midst of ^aven have the eternal gospel eight with Schlusselburg Elias and John ^^p^ist be but figur of he nynth by report he call ^im self the prophet and apostle of the german which be confirm by ^s own say we ^re boast that Christ be first by we preach all which commendation ^e by Caluin confirm assure so that no Protestant may lawful doubt of they ten and last if you know not what place ^e purchase in heaven now give ear to Spangeburg first place to Christ Cyriacus Spangeb con. steph. Agricol fol. 6. a. the next to Paul then Luther first of other all not much inferior to the former be the praise of Caluin with Beza he be Beza lib. r. 3. a. and the chief interpreter of scripture than who no man ever write better wise clear and with great fame of scripture to Cartwright Cartwr li. 1. pag. 32. he be the most noble instrument of God church in restore the plain and sincere interpretation of the scripture which have be since the apostle tyme to one in Geneva he be so great Zanchius epist. mase ^s s. Paulus Caluinun if s. Paul will come and preach in the same hour wherein ^aluin preach he will leave s. Paul to attend on Caluin jacob Bernardus in epist Caluin cal. Caluin in antid. conc trid. sess. 4. pag. 374. to one james bernard he be the stone ^eiected by the builder make up in the corner head brief he say of he ^elfe shamefastness hinder i to say what otherwise I may most true pro^esse that for the understanding of scripture we have further more than all the actor the papist ever have from the begyne by all which and much more ^hich may have be bring appear that these two be incomparable prefer in heaven and earth in so much as the mother of God and all apostle be make inferior unto they for Luther what ever shift be find Luther will be second 21. if therefore these two by as evident testimony of like witness be find most abominable and wicked wretch can any body do less than think that man of such lavishness prodigality in untruth be to be suspect most where they importune most to be believe I will begin with the great prophet apostle Elias Paul light of the world father of truth angel and three or second person in heaven against himself and all his commender luth. epist. 234. philip. proh dolour Dei. I sit in idleness say Luther harden and senseless alas pray little and nothing lament for God church lib. I burn with the great fire of my untamed flesh in i it lie no way in my power to be without a woman Luther in Colloq. mensal fol. 271. 275. second he say of himself and his near bedfellow Catherina the devil sleep near and often by i then my catharine three Satan Satan favour i much more than be do other ibid. fol. 5.129 fowerthly Satan or a holy Satan pray for we we never have offend the o most clement devil there follow some word in this last allegation which I refer to m. rider as a reserve case be not this sufficient to make he know as far beyond all abominable miscreant in wickedness according truth as he be prefer beyond all saint according falsehood Schlusselburg lib. 2. art. 12. theol Caluinist if it be not let the child help the father he be say they proud furious intolerable full of error impudent forger depraver of God word deceitful seducter fals-prophet lunatic presumptuous crucyfyer and murderer of Christ etc. 22. now of Caluin say Schlusselburg God that will not be mock by man have show his judgement in this world against Caluin visit he by the scourg of his fury Conrade Schluss lib. 2. art. 9 fol. 72. in loc. cit. and horrible punish he before the day of his death for he strike this sacramental heretic in such sort as he die desperate swear and invoke the devil to who he render his spirit he die of the lousy disease gnaw with worm issue out of a filthy sore in his privy member so stink as the people wear not able to endure the stench these thing be public write beside all this he be infamous by sodomy for which be be mark on his shoulder with a hot iron by appointment of the magistrate he be cruel Hosnus defen. con. Caluin bloody tyrannous deceitful treacherous babbler contemner sophist epicure corrupt and tosser of scripture as Ovid in his metamorphosis this be reveal by the holy brotherhood themselves by after occasion I will confirm now I will examine whether the ^ood degenerate from the parent yet will I not touch they (@) our country that I may have their great good will and pa^ences to understand the truth ^ of the follower of thes two much be to be mention in ^e 18. number of the examination of the creed calu. lib. pag. 118. 127 of the great part (@) they who betake themselves say Caluin to the gospel what other in^^ntion have they then have shake of the yoke of superstition they may ^ore dissolut plunge themselves in all riot and lasciviousness ^econdly Smidelin say that the world may know they be no papist Smidelinus conc. 4. c. 2. luc. conc. 1. s^per c. 21. ^r to have trust in their good work not one good will they practice in stide (@) fast they be altogether in feast for be more bowntifull towards ^e poor they unfleece and flay they prayer they turn to oath and c. ^hirdly spangenberg faith Spangenbergius in mart. Lutherum and ^fter the revelation of the gospel and the papacy cast off man to have become (@) wild as they acknouledg not God nor hold any account of he and make (@) to be right and lawful which every one like fowerthly Castal pag. 54. castalion^^yth ^^yth of they of Geneva they be proud puff with glory and revenge that with less danger you may offend prince then exasperate these ^ierce caluinian their life be infamous and villainous they be master of ^rte in reproach lie cruelty treason and insupportable arrogance they ^ame their GENEVA the holy city and their assembly Jerusalem ^ut in very truth he dwell long among they and be a most peculiar friend of Beza we shall call it o Babylon Babylon (@) Egypt and the true frontier of egyptian and babilonical enchanter (@) most infamous Sodom and child of gomorrhe true I ^ould fill not a few sheet of paper with these evidence of their^wne of the deformation follow their pretend reforma^^ons but what need lantern in the sun ^4 a word or two in particular beside that which God will shall be say in treat of Puritanisme Schlusselburg lib. 1. fol. 92. 93. lib. 2. art. 1. lib. 3. art. 8. Beza not in the ^^me of his papistry but ever after in all his life employ himself (@) ^oly in fulfil his lust write his love revenge his corrival who ^uing long deliberate whether to use more of the two offence ^rlotrie with another man wife or sodomy with a boy he ^olued by his own confession to follow more this late I may perhaps translate his elegy contain the say confession Luther of and Bucer the brother themselves confess they be in the end smuther with devil among the caluinist Schlusselburg in cattle lib. 1. pag. 4. all the principal become turck or arian as Adam Neuser Silvanus gregorius Paulus Andraeas Seruet^^ Blandrata Franciscus David Gribaldus etc. even by their own brother confession reserve your for more of this kind to the examination of the creed of he confess of himself and his brother that their lechery have make they infamous in the end he die in rebellion arm whereof in remembrance be this verse in Germany usual in civil broil be martial sllayne 25. and that also the minister have no regard to God glory but only to their temporal licentiousness these few evidence may Menno in tit. doctr. first say Menno I have know most assure that they be without the spirit mission and word of Christ that by their teach and work they hunt only after favour of man honour pride revenue fair building calu. in tract pag. 150. and epist. 54. and l. scan pag. 131. and lousnes of life second say Caluin the minister of Geneva as empty belly give up to all idleness so they may enjoy their delight do not regard whether heaven and earth be confound together whereof peruse ample in the 18. number upon the creed so that what the leader what the follower what the under leader in general and particular have be be sufficient now notorious what their doctrine be defend of all these mischeef God to be the author and nothing to be sinful in his sight but only infidelity shall be by god permission abundant declare in the examination of the creed and compendious in the conclusion thereupon number 22. I trust by this time this matter to be so tart as he that will not digest but it shall be answer now that it be answer will require no more sauce to digest it I believe he will make as sour countenance in well digest it as if he have be cram with a bankett of sower crab for if as he infer by prelate life their doctrine be esteem such greaceless doctor can never follow but suitable doctrine I say nothing as you behold of Eton the preacher first pillory in cheap side and after at Paul cross for lie with his one daughter I will not recount rape sodomy murder piracy not so much to tell the truth for spare the doer as the hearer and myself especial desire only to discover the weakness and falsehood of his exception and for that purpose to relate bref sufficient demonstration and instance as far as may be from incense domestical reader to impatience ^^ and your friend Bernard tell the pope Eugenius to his face bern. in all his five book considerate that for his supremacy and usurp both sword he hold they not by God (@) and that his priest in show serve Christ but in deed Christ and elsewhere he paint out the pope clergy Serm. 33. upon the Can^ pag. 141. that there be with they Ni^^ etc. they be trim like whoor attire like player and serve like prince but (@) ^ife they be murderer whoormaister briber and deceiver and if the pope be a usurper of his supremacy and condemn for his ambidextership ^hat man of any reasonable sense will embrace this religion that be so false or ^^mmend this romish clergy who life be so filthy and now gentleman I ^onder you inform not the subject of the dangerous plot the pope and Spaniard ^actise against then the one have draw they to idolatry and the other incite ^hom he can to treachery popery seek to bring Ireland to spanish slavery from english liberty and if Spain may have his will of this kingdom but ^^e be like to loose Spain then conquer Ireland the subject shall be use as the dukedom of Milan and the kingdom of Naples be by the spaniard handle all ^^e nobility and gentleman upon pain of death be forbid to dwell in castle use the citizen in h^gh street but back lane and no man to wear a weapon ^^t a knife of three inch long yet rip with a french pofie no point this shall (@) the miserable state of the irish under bloody Spain government now for conclusion let i entreat you as August do his reader in his preface before the three book neither reprove nor correct these labour according ^o your own private opinion or contentious humour but correct and confute by God word and then you shall have my good leave and ^ove and my best furtherance to the state that after you have reply to this it may ^e print as also your person for further conference protect and the like I desire of you that when you find the text and truth against you you seek not any ^lying gloss or romish shift to help you rather contend for victory then verity the lord open your eye that you may see the truth that you and we joint and joyful may preach only Christ crucify without man invention etc. your love friend so far as you be Christ and the queen joh. rider whether s. Bernard reprehend catholic or protestant of strange digression 26. as from the 3. number to the 7. be demonstrate that vincentius Lyrinensis to who we be address approve our doctrine and disprove our adversary so in this place we be direct to s. Bernard in his book of consideration to find he against the supremacy and ^els where to find he against the clergy there can never any more unfitt be allege by protestant then s. Bernard in all and every controversy betwixt we not to linger or delay in show it this be declare by s. Bernard to be the 6. great untruth the 6. untruth that by he the pope authority or pope clergy be reprehend the authority of the pope be belong to the 6. article propound to be resolve s. Bernard lib. 2. c. 8. and therefore in this place let this small word be a record to the world what s. Bernard teach thereof Eugenius pope be he to who the key be deliver and the sheep commit not only of the sheep but also of the shepherd thou be the one pastor of all of the residue every one have his own to thou the huge ship contain all the universal church disperse through the whole world be commit for the other point that he reprehend not the pope clergy so much as protestant minister the express word declare they be the minister of Christ as they pretend and serve Antechrist s. Bernard ser. 33. in they go honour by the good of our lord who honour not our Lord thence be the whoor-lyke neatness the player like fashion the royal provision which you daily behold thence be gold in their bridle saddle and spur and their spur binght than their altar do not this near belong to your last attire wherein I do behold you when you come forth in your short cloak and short cassake ungirded and lift before in both syd to present in sight a great trunk pair of french russet or dowke purple velluet breech and at other time when you ruffle and glister in your satin gown face with velluet in your silk in your upon my conscience among all the prince of blood of the clergy who I view in Rome or else where I do behold none so player like or who altar wear so far less bright than their spur as you and your own self what I may say more in matter of other of the same crew I leave to another tyme I know what to find in the second admonition to the parliament anno. 1572. in Martin marr prelate etc. very I say not all at this time that I know of many extravagant digression for want of matter 27. of plot and platform we may perhapp be draw to discourse in treat of puritanism it be a property of falsehood to be full of fear the jew ancient say the roman will come and take away our place joan. 11. o o always fearful wickedness say Statius 2. Theb. but quoth Seneca oedip. he that tremble at vain fear do confess true cause of fear in his conscience ^e have no need to our catholic to withstand dangerous plot or practice they be themselves forward thereto ^^oke back to all service and exploit and do but indifferent ^^arde and you will find more Catholic blood shed in defence (@) kingdom than Puritan nay look to the most puritan captain of who some be knight and let they put out my eye ^^th a scar or scratch in repugn any invasion or for have ^y testimony of valerousse exploit alas what mean this ^^nging digression out of all our matter out of all our country ^^er sea over the alps and Apenins to talk of gentleman and ^mmons castle and cottage long and short weapon point use unpointed knyve and french poesy be it not easy and ^^tter cheap to write and speak at random of place than (@) travail to they to know whether what be report be true (@) no yes sure for the one cost nothing but a dash of a ^nn and travail of tongue the other require great charge ^reat toil great adventure and great tyme but in particular (@) the wander matter without wander it be the seven gross untruth that the pope have draw 37. the 7. and 8. untruth catholic to idolatry it be the 8. which in every part of the ^ormer divagation be contain some merry compagnions intended to make you m. rider ridiculous to the world every ^eane house in Milan and Naples may be a house competent ^or the mayor of your wigen every Citisen be arm at his choice every weapon long at will and point sharp every such poesy no point might pass for good english but not for ^ny french nether do they speak french in those country have not these man much mind to discuss a controversy of ^he real presence that make preface so far wide from it and ^ange rove to antiphonary to prelate life to whore to pope supremacy to the plot of the k. of Spain the habi^ations and weapon in Naples and Milan his preface be ^t large consider let my preface which he conceal have licence to appear answer this challenge letter whereby our disputation begin ^8 I covet only at this time to premonishe the reader concern the inscription of this letter s. August to 4. con c. 6. that as s. Augustine say of ^uld heretic although they believe not the Catholic faith yet they ^o speak as they may be take to be of our profession even so our new euphratean 12.6 they will fain pass for good israelit but they can not pronounce schibole that be they can not counterfeit the style of Catholic but that they be discover a friendly caveat to Ireland catolicqve concern the dangerous dream of Christ corporal presence in the sacrament of the lord supper ground upon a letter send from the catholicque etc. to the reverend father the holy jesuit seminary and all other priest that favour the holy roman religion within the kingdom of Ireland humble pray your fatherly charity rider f. w. and p. d. with many other profess catholicque of the holy roman religion that whereas of late they have hear some protestant preacher confident affirm and as it seem unto our shallow capacity plain do prove that these position here under write can be prove by any of you to be either apostolical or Catholicque by canonical scripture or the ancient father of the church which live and write within the compass of the first five hundred year after Christ ascension which assertion of they have breed in ^our suppliant great doubt touch the truth of the same unless your fatherly accustomed charity be extend present to satisfy our conscience in the same ^y the holy write word of God and such father of the church as aforesaid which be so direct and plain prove by you as aforesaid may be a speedy mean to convert many protestant to our profession otherwise if these point cannot be so prove by you upon who learned resolution we great rely than ^ot only we but many thousand more in this kingdom of Ireland can hold point to be neither apostolical or Catholicque and thus have show ^^me of our doubt we desire your fatherly resolution as you tender the credit ^f our religion the convince of the protestant and the satisfy of our poor conscience and thus crave your speedy learned and fatherly answer in writing at or before the first of February next with a perfect quotation of both scripture and father themselves not recite or repeat by other for our better ^^struction and the adversary speedy and strong confutation we commend your person and study to God bless direction and protection position that transubstantiation or the corporal presence of Christ body and blood in the sacrament be never teach by the ancient father that ever write in the first five hundred year after Christ ascension but a spiritual presence only to the faithful believer 2 that the church of God have not their service in a unknown tongue but in su^^ language as every particular church understand 3 three that purgatory and prayer for the dead be not then know in God church 4 four that image and pray to saint be then neither teach by the^ father nor receive of the Catholicque church 5 five that the mass which now the church of Rome use be not then know to the church 6 six that there ought not to be one supreme bishop over all the world and the bishop to be the pope of Rome and that the say pope have not universal jurisdiction over all prince and their subject in all cause temporal and ecclesiastical the protestant preacher affirm unless you prove the premise by canonical scripture they can be apostolical and there therefore not the conscience of any and if they can be prove by the say father than they be neither ancient nor catholic and therefore to be reject as man invention Gatho priest provoke to prove either by scripture or father which live within the com^^^^ of five hundred year after Christ ascension that the primitive church and catholicque of this time be of consent touch these article 1 that Christ be real in the bless sacrament 2 that scripture shall not be peruse by the vulgar 3 that prayer for the dead and purgatory be believe 4 that image be worship and prayer make to saint 5 that mass be allow 6 that the supremacy of the pope be acknowledge rider master w. n. gentleman the cause of this your provokement be a quiet and mild conference upon these position with a honourable gentleman and a special good friend of you concern religion wherein he confident affirm that the jesuit and roman priest of this kingdom be able to prove by scripture and father these position to be apostolical and Catholicque and that the church of Rome add the roman catholicque in Ireland now hold nothing touch the same but what the holy scripture and primitive father hold within the first five hundred year after Christ ascension now if you in this conference for your part have make such proof by the holy canonical scripture and such doctor of the church as aforesaid I have promise to become a roman Catholicque if you have fail in your proof which I be assure you have do he likewise before worshipful witness have give his hand to renounce this your new doctrine of the church of Rome and become a professor of the gospel of Christ this be the occasion and manner of your provokement which I hope the best mind will not mistake nor you misconter be only provoke by your friend 1. pet. 3.15 yea and faith if you refuse not saint Peter counsel to be ready always to give a answer to any man that ask you a reason of the hope that be in you the preface in effect which be conceal by m. Rider provoke to prove either by scripture or father which live within the compass of the first five hundred year after Christ ascension that the privative church and catholic of this time be of consent ruch these article 1. that Christ be realy in the b. sacrament 2. that scripture shall not be peruse by the vulgar 3. that prayer for the dead and purgatory be believe 4. that image be worship and prayer make to saint 5. that mass be allow 6. that the supremacy of the pope be aknowledge at this only entrance the whole residue be bring to a demur or adiurn to another term or as m. rider^^armeth ^^armeth it to a write or rescript which adiurne or rescript as ^et deprive the world of the say preface I think convenient to ^eliver the purport thereof in few word provoke say I to ^rove by scripture or father the foresay article I perceive ^^y challenger to have peruse the provocation of jewel as famous or call these matter into question as Herostratus for burn ^he temple of Diana remember only by infamy for Laurence ^umphrey the great doctor of Oxford humphr in pag. 212. write the life and commendation of jewel omit not to reprehend and reprove he for ^^ch vain and unadvised appeal to the father in these controversy say what have we to do ^ith the father he can not be ignorant that in all the volume of ^^e father nothing be treat but what we profess nothing commend or condemn but what we commend or condemn ^nd who can have any distrust thereof but such as can not behold light in the sun or water in the sea ^^ this make Luther in defiance of the father to exclaim I ^re not if a thousand Augustine a thousand cyprian a thousand church stand ^gainst i Hierom do chief anger i and for he write only of fast and choice of meat and virginity if he ^ued in this age he will plain condemn we which be a plain confession and the cause thereof not conceal luth. to 2. pag. 340. Colloq. convival c. Colloq. ger. schol. Theol. fol. 499. Gregory be deceive by the devil Basilius I have long since excommunicate Origen I disdain chrysostom for he be nothing else but a babbler Basil be altogether of no account he be whole a monk cal. l. 3. Instit. c. 5. n. 10. Beza ^p. 8. theolog and 81. and in tract trip a 1579. Zuing. tom. 1. in explan. art. 64. fol. 107. p. mart. pag. 50. 477. 490 476. Baleus in pref. act. rom. Po^tif in loc. con. Scrip. sacr. pag. 164. 165. second Caluin say of the father general they be bear away in error three Beza say they follow paganism for a rule the father in the council of nice underlay the seat of the harlot that sit upon seve^ mowntayn four the father yea forsooth the father have so profess but I allege to the no father or mother but the word of God five Peter martyr who they of Zurick send to plant protestancy in England which by have he say bale be happy and by want he be unhappy confess as long as we remain in concil and father we will abide ever in the same error six in ecclesian he be plain most foolish or witting malicious against the church of God who will bind the conscience of the faithful according the resolution of the father l. 1. pag. 513. pag. 154. lib. 2. p. 507. 508. lib. 1. pag. 88 lib. 2. p. 502. 303. lib. 1. p 94. p. 103. p. 98. lib. 2. p. 622. seventh Cartwright seek in the father writing be a rake in ditch a move and summon of hell a measure of truth by the crooked yard of tyme the father imagine fond they deal like ignorant man they be master by their passion they have many error Clement Anaclet and be discharge for rogue and man burn in the forehead damasus speak in the dragon mowth Ambrose hold many thing corrupt and many error and violent enforce the text there be no sincerity to be look for at Hierom hand augustin sentence be approve unadvised and thereby a window be open to bring in all popery Ignatius be a counterfeit and vain man etc. dial. 5. 8. 11. 8. Dionysius be but a dote foolish pernicious dreamer Clement a spreader of dross and dregs Ignatius a idle trifler Disp. albeit julie in act 8. run Bazam in A^t^ ap. c. 23. 2. thes. 2. annot. 3. 2. Timoth. 3. annot. 8. 1. cor. 7. annot. 1. and 9 and 28. a fanatical writer cyprian blockish and Nazianzen a babbler Ambrose bewitch by the devil Hierom no less damn than Lucifer etc. last Alba julia disputation commune we have no participation with the father 31. these be the chief reformer I can find in the world and of all sort the very principal of lutheran caluinian zwinglians puritan adiaphorist polimorphians etc. have not m. rider occasion to conceal this preface wherein all aforesaid reformer give verdict against he that he be let no man think these reproach to be i bind by his claim to have the father his favourer (@) abide still in error that he be plain most foolish and witting mali^^use against the church of God etc. who can blame he to affirm (@) be preface to be bitter and bite and who can disblame he ^^r impute the bitterness thereof from the wolf to the lamb ^^om the kite to the chicken that be from themselves to we if ^^y untrue will defeat we of our right the least we can be ^^lowed to do be to produce our evidence to disprove they no ^ore be now do by we if the father be for protestancy or ^gainst it let all the world now free determine I make but (@) be dilemma or two edge argument if the father by all protestant be confess their adversary how be they their approver ^^r if they be approver how be they so unreverent and disdainful banish unless you think according truth that (@) your consociate deserve no other treatment ^^ in your first line you change a word and for or rider which great alter ^e catholic question and be farrefrom our first meaning for we hold with christ truth that unless the write word of God first warrant it we be not ^ound in conscience to believe it though all the doctor and prelate in the ^orld shall swear it whether it be not all one to say scripture or father to be for any opinion as to say the scripture and father to be for the same ^2 I confess that m. Rider come to i the 2. octob. 1602. Fitzimon to reclaim his resignation of these controversy to scripture or father severally resolve not to accept the father for arbitrer unless they have the scripture conjoint concur with they a poor retreat first because ^^y promise and all his print book he have appeal to they ^ot conjoint but severally second because it be a silly imagination to think they may be separate s. aug. con pelag. l. 2. c. 10. for s. augustin^weetly ^weetly according to his manner instruct all christian to ^now concern the father quoth that which they find in the church they retain that which they learn ^hey that which they receive of their father that they deliver to ^heir child and consequent what the apostle recave of Christ they deliver to their successor their successor to their scholar their scholar to their disciple etc. which as it be conformable to the apostle s Paul ephes. 4.12 so be it perfect confirm by he say God to have give apostle evangelist pastor and doctor to the consummation of the holy until we all meet in unity of faith and knowledge of the son of God that be that he have give such instructer as by true and lawful descent and succession shall inform the age succeed one another in one faith and knowledge of one God until the first middle and last be gather into the flock of Christ and as the late shall receive from the former baptism and other sacrament so also shall they receive all other truth which will be infallible unto they if they will not leave their forefather to follow their own brainsick novelty d. Whitg lib. 2. pag. 353. 507. 508. therefore whitgift worthy exclaim at the puritan except against the father as be wrester and sorcer of the text the scripture not have any other searcher defender conserver but they therefore also Caluin worthy tax their presumption cal. in trac theol. p. 471. who unreverent insinuate the father do disagree from scripture they have from hand to hand of their predecessor receive the understanding of they they have by infinite labour expound they they have by virtue of they plant Christianity exclude idolatry Beza epist. 81. pag. 384. surmount heresy therefore Beza worthy impute it to ignorance impudence and impiety to divorce or sequester scripture and father or to affirm where the scripture be or father there they can be severally or otherwise then only conjoint so that from first to last who have father they must have scripture and contrariwise and consequent m. rider first and last remain alike engage but to make it evident to the most repine and spare conceit towards my allegation that I never change or for and and that all this be a frivolous and false cavil and pretext who do not know that the ground and foundation of m. rider claim be but a repetition and borrow of the owld impudent protestation of jewel in which not and but or be contain in all the article it be say either by scripture or by the example of the primative church or by the owld doctor or by the ancient general concil and if any be able to prove any of these article by any one clear or plain clause of either scripture or of the old doctor or of any old general concil or by any example of the primitive church within 600. year after Christ I promise to give over and subscribe so that I disprove hereby m. rider not only by his own print book but by his original copy whence as he take the same claim so he ought to have take the same condition and therefore whether he will or will he must stand that not but himself and his jewel have undo he by or use not and ^^ and this be demand of you not as the demander doubt that the canonical scripture be insufficient to prove any article of faith but only ^at all man may see and so be resolve whether the protestant or the now ro^ane catholic join near to Christ truth and the faith of the first primitive other whether all belief be contain in the write word of God ^3 all the proof bring by m. Rider joan. 10.31 so to persuade we be only in these word but these thing be write that you may believe that jesus be the Sonn of God and that believe you may have life in his name good lord ^hat inference be this hebr. 11. the thing write serve to believe in Christ therefore all belief be write by s. Paul declaration ^bel Enoch noe Abraham Isaac jacob etc. have undoubted faith ^et they have nothing of scripture write second all the primitive church have no parcel of the new testament at least ten ^earesafter Christ will you say they have no faith or be not ^ound to believe three the creed of the apostle p. Cotton sacrif country predicant gallice pag. 122. 126. 127. the consubstantiality of the trinity the procession of the holy ghost ^he perpetual virginity of our lady the baptize of child ^he not rebaptize of they by heretic baptize the break of ^he sabaoth and keep of Sunday the observation of easter in ^he Christian and not in the jewish manner the receive of the sacrament fast the eat of blood and strangle meat prohibit in the act the not marry of the sister in law after the ^rothers death without heir and especial I will know of ^ur protestant alloving woman to sing psalm in the church unless they build it upon some tradition true or false how tremble ^hey not to contradict the prohibition thereof by the apostle 1. Corinth. 14. 1. timoth. 2. where find you these point of belief which be believe in the whole church and some of they contrary to scripture nor in any scripture contain therefore that the scripture alone be sufficient to prove every ^^rticle of belief to concur with you once in a grammarian sentence he that think so upon better consideration may now think and say otherwise be not these people easy persuade to have good proof fo^ their profession when they can confute we about the name of Catholic by vincentius Lyrinensis about the pope supremacy by s. Bernard and now about tradition by this text here allege do m. Ride^ think that he be Perseus on his wing horse Pegasus transform al^ his adversary into stone that they can not discern these prooft to be no proof cal. in 7. mat in 9 12 16 18. c. 6. v. 16.17.18 in c. 26. mat in c. 2. luc. 16. in joan. 1. Castal in pref. Bibl. Edw 6. d. Whitg a pag. 31. 51. stow chron. pag. 1022. 1189. 1283. 1551. melan. in loc. con. an. 1539. fol. 8. and 10. an. 1545. fol. 53. an. 1558. sebast. fran. Bezam ep. 6. Cartwr in 2. reply pag. 191. joan. 10.31 but of stupidity in they allege they to ha^e the foresay word well apply in deed let they first procure that caluinian leave to doubt of the divinity of Christ let they be oppose to Castalio mistrust the messiah to be yet come let they be oppose to atheist abound every where since reformation begin let they debarr that there be no successor to Francis Kett master of art to George Paris and John Lewes late execute in England for denial of Christ divinity let they confound melancthon allow but a parcel of divinie nature to our saviour let they confound Sebastia^ Frank account Christ no more god than Socrates or Trismegistus let they confound Cartwright say the jew have be fool to account he their live god who they do behold a silly aend miserable man these thing be write that such shall believe jesus be the son of God and that believe they may have life in his name to prove any thing against we there can not possible be any wise application of they rider 34. for that faith which can be prove to be teach in Christ time and so receive and continue in the primitive church for the first five hundred year after Christ ascension must needs be the true ancient apostolical and Catholicque faith and that other faith that can be so prove be but base bastardly and counterfeit and I trust in Christ that the reader easy shall perceive before the end of this small treatise that this your opinion touch Christ carnal presence in the sacrament and so in the rest of the other position be never teach by Christ nor once dream on by the ancient father but invent and devise a thousand year after Christ by the late church of Rome ground their proof only of a empty sound of syllable without apostolical or Catholicque sense enforce both scripture and father to speak what they and you please not what the holy ghost and the father purpose whether m. Rider have condemn his church to be base bastard and cownterfet Fitzimon all this appear in our 20. number or 30. number 34. if any thing by he be unadvised affirm by this his verdict against his own church he have especial discomfit his profession for first thereby he have condemn Luther and Caluin and their adherent affirm they to have be first preacher of Christ and great doctor of truth not only above the primative other but above all that ever be or ever will be whether they (@) apostle or no if than the religion of the first five hundred ^^res be only true and all other but base bastard and counterfeit ^w can this new religion haddon in the end of his epistle bale cent. 1. pag. 66. 72 cent. 8. pag. 678. epistle to the confer betwixt Latimer and ridley-harborough in the last oration which haddon profess to have be ^t thirty year know of which all english late writter account Latimer to be the apostle and say Luther to have be not ^ly the reformer of abuse but the very father of truth but thereby (@) condemn nay how be not the two most glorify foxian martyr Ridley and Cranmer thereby condemn say they will ^ove all the doctrine set forth by k. Edward to be more pure than ^y other use in England a 1000 year before be it not thereby ^oth profess unknown till that time as also not to be the of Christ for have it be know and his promise true of ^e invincibility thereof 16. matth. it can never have have a 1000 ^ares interruption and what may be say of the prince of condees^^scription ^^scription in his coin of gold lud. 13 second all the disputation and monument of all principal ^otestants profess the primative father of the first second three ^nd four hundred year repugnant to protestancy as appear in the 30. number by induction be thereby condemn answer to sawnder rock pag. 248. 278. Beza conf c. 7. and 12. in c. 2. thes. three ^ll the learned protestant condemn the church of the Apo^les time and say Antichrist to have then begin and condemn ^l and every of the apostle themselves and evangelist and their ^nmediat disciple all these I say be thereby condemn for if ^ese be favourable to protestantcye cent. 1. l. 2. c. 10. 558. 559. 560. cal. in 1. cor. c. 4. v. 4. c. 7. v. 9 rom. c. 9 v. ^ Quintin Rescian in pref. nimistromachie cent. 1. l. 2. c. 10. calu. loc. cit. bullinger come in 19 and 22. Apoc. Quintin loc. cit. calu. fevard pref. in ruth Beza hist. luth. tom. 5. fol. 439 440. theod. pag. vlt. in nou. test there have be no occasion (@) despise or dispraise they in such manner as to affirm such de^cts in s. Peter as by the centuriast who curious and not only ireful have calculate 15. sin of he by Beza by Illyricus be (@) disparage he careful and plentiful register to affirm of (@) Paul with Caluin that he be full of cold and heat of presumption te^eritie confusion and precipitation and with Quintinus that he be not a ^osen vessel but a break vessel and with the centuriast that he be impatient (@) in desperation during his affliction in Asia dissension towards barnabas and hypo^tical towards james and other to affirm of s. John with bullinger that ^his promptness to adore the angel he have sin in apostasy with Quintinus to ^arme he Iwenen stolidulun a foolish youth with Caluin to distrust his 6. cap. ^nd with Beza his 8. cap. for untrue to affirm of s. james that he be a ^ruerter of s. Paul doctrine his epistle bastard counterfeit wicked and unapostolical to affirm with Luther luth. pref. nou. test and in ep. Petri Tom 3. Wittemb calu. in c. 2. mat. v. 15. c. 4. v. 13. c. 8. v. 17. c. 21. v. 9 c. 27. v. 9 act. 15. v. 40. tower disp. 4. day conference calu. in c. 21. act. v. 23. the three first evangelist to be apochriphal to affirm in particular with Caluin that s. Matthew abuse distort and allege unapt diverse citation that s. mark be a apostate and disloial not to be excuse to affirm with Luther that s. Luke be excessive in commend good woorck and with the tower disputation that hi^ gospel be dowbtfull and last of all apostle with Caluin to affirm that they be over superstitious and subject to vice if I say these have not be repugnant to protestancy why shall they be thus disable and disgrace nether will I be content to have their dislike manifest in particular against these apostle and evangelist as repugnant to their profession thereby apparent testify themselves not to have be agreeable to the apostolical church and consequent by m. rider own verdict to be base bastard and counterfeit but I will also discover their abjuration of the owld and new testament together for be also utter against they so that they must be enforce to depend only upon their father of truth their prophet apostle angel Elias and three person of heaven as they term he num. 2. their incomparable Luther who never have not will have his like Luther in epist. Argentin an. 1525. certify and assure himself to have be first of that rank say we dare boast Christ by we first to have be publish to which purpose I may have no small furtherance by the disputation of the tower tower disputation 4. day conference disauthentise out of the owld testament Tobias judith Hester Baruch wisdom 2. book of maccabee to which other adjoin the prayer of Manasses 2. Paralipomenon the song of the three child the story of Bel and out of the new s. Luke gospel Hebrues james 2. Peter 2. and 3. of John jude Apocalips etc. but have they altogether by the resolution of Protestant ringleader need the less to linger about parcel this then be Luther decree concern the owld testament luth. to 3. 1 par. jacob Carion in chroncl an. 1556. pag. 151. Basilea Moses let not Moses be thrust upon we we in the new testament will not abide to see or hear Moses that he have rather never preach then propownd out of Moses that he that do allege any thing of he Luther serm. moise do deprive Christ out of the heart of man that Moses belong nothing to we that by receive he all jewish ceremony must ensue etc. by Moses every one understand the owld testament which Luther say belong not to protestant and that they shall not abide to hear or see it now concern the new testament thus speak Zuingl tom. 2 ^lench con. anabap. fol. 10. etc. as often as Christ or the apostle remit any to scripture Ochinus lib. 2. dialog. pag. 154. 155. 156. 157. they do not understand their epistle or the aspell but the owld testament Ochinus proceed more to the matter ^^ying ^e shall not believe more than the holy saint of the owld testament ^herby he infer that we shall not be bind to believe the trinity consubstantiality etc. because they be in the new testament only and not in the owld by all which most unchristian ^fidelitie be testify in the sight of God and man that these re^rmers be nothing agreeable to Moses the prophet apostle use evangelist nor contrariwise they to they but do the second hundred year doctor content they better 2. cap. 4. pag. 55. 65. edit. Basil joan. Operin Centur. 3. c. 4. p. 79. ^o say the centuriast many monstruous and incommodous ^nions be find disperse by the doctor what of the three they answer the doctor of this age decline from the doctrine of Christ use his apostle as protestancy will have it for good work Beza loc. cit num. 30. and epist. 81. what ^et of the fowerh then be papistry underlay by the concile of nice say ^hey that congregation of sophister than be the creed make of Sathanasius (@) athanasius the history of their life so testify what further may be say of the be of the principal primitive father hermit monk or friar as for example of Effrem Climachus Nazianzen Basil Hierom augustin Da^ascen Gregory and c. can these erecter of cloister and abbay ^e favourer of the subverter of they can these commender ^f liturgy or mass of fast of care for the dead 2. 3. 4. in 4. of chastity ^f invocation of saint of good work of confession of tradition of Preesthod of the supremacy of ecclesiastical ceremony and of all papistry be so acknowledge by yourselves ^nd term in the 30. number precedent dote foolish per^tious idle fanatical bewitch by the devil no less damn than lucifer etc. can I say these man such commender and so by protestant abuse be favourer of protestancy or the first five hundred year wherein such man be pope bishop prelate confessor martyr and saint and honour by all the church ^f that time be favourerer of the reprehender of mass ^asting care for the dead chastity invocation of saint good work confession tradition and c. to conclude can the condemner of they to be heretic who deny the real presence dial. 3. c. 19 ^ertull prescrip. and in Sarpiaco Iren. l. 3. Epiphan. heres by Basil spirit s. c. 27. August l. con. max. etc. Epiph. she 53. Hieron l. 1. con jovin Marcel error clem. l. 5. recog. August she 11. and 49. con. faust l. 22. c. 30.74.76.77 she 51.53 greg. l. 4. dial c. 4. etc. clem. l. 5. recog. August she 54. as Theodoret condemn some or who deny or disalowed tradition as Tertullian Basil augustin Epiphan condemn therefore the gnostic Martion Cerdon Arius Eunomi^ aerius Nestorius or the despiser of Lent and fast day such as beside the former be the eustathian and jovinian condemn therefore by Tertullian Epiphan and Hierom or of Montanus manichean circumcellion donatist aerian and armenian for denial of confession of freewill of the lawfulness of monk and religious and church riches of purgatory and prayer for the dead condemn therefore by Marcelin Hierom Clement augustin Gregory etc. or of Aeti^ eunomius Simon Magus affirm solifidian justification condemn therefore by Clement and augustin can I say by all the wit of man or angel any accord be make betwixt all these as one church they who condemn late Protestant opinion in ancient heretic and therefore by late protestant be in manner aforesaid condemn and contrariwise they who defend by work and writing the same doctrine and profession of late catholic and therefore be by they honour and invoke as saint shall be favourer and furthere of protestantcy and disprover and enemy of papistry can any solder or hammer conjoin or couple these unsuitable doctrine together mat. 9.16 mar. 2.22 therefore m. rider it can not be deny but your new patch have tear your owld cloak and your new wine have burst your owld vessel and to all judgement not wilful perverse be reveal that never cold any profession by the defender be more betray than protestantcy by m. Rider challenge to be a Catholic and appeal for trial to Vincent Lyrinensis most opposite thereto impugn supremacy of the pope and appeal to s. Bernard so chief a maintainer thereof and claim to be of the first ancient church and have it so repugnant to he leave in the mean time his faith and profession discover by this mean to be base bastard and counterfeit yea leave by occasion of his unadvised assertion open to all man eye that owld and new testament apostle and doctor be disagree from protestancy and that all papistical doctrine even in particular be sustain by they and altogether condemn by they wherefore true say l. 7. confess c. 19 the impugn of heretic do make manifest what thy church with continual conformity and correspondence to itself hold and true doctrine teach 35. but first here you wrong yourself much your cause more rider but the simple ^^ple most of all in alter the state of the question for our controversy be of (@) manner of Christ presence in the sacrament the Catholicque priest subtle alter the state of the question whether he be there corporal (@) spiritual and you no doubt in your conscience know it impossible to ^^ove your carnal presence alter the question very deceitful from the man^^ to the matter that Christ be real in the bless sacrament a thing never deny ^s nor ever in question betwixt protestant and Papist for both you and we ^d Christ real presence in the sacrament but you carnal and local we mi^^allie and spiritual you by transubstantiation we in the command and ^full administration but here you forget your ground of divinity and rule of logic in make (@) opposition betwixt spiritual receive and real receive oppose they as contraries whereas the opposition be not betwixt spiritual and real but betwixt ^^^porall and spiritual for spiritual receive by faith be real receive and ^^^porall receive by the mouth be also real receive so that the scripture and ^^^ers that here you allege be altogether impertinent to prove your carnal ^^^ence of Christ and his new conception of bread not of the bless virgin by ^^^fulll priest not by the holy ghost for Christ willing I will make it plain ^o you that you have show little divinity and conceal much learning in (@) only huddle up a number of text of scripture and testimony of father (@) of common-place and otherlike enchiridion and never read the ^^^ers themselves which at first be request and thus trust other man ^^orts and not your own eye you have wrong yourself weaken your cause (@) abuse the simple for if you have diligent read and thorough weigh these scripture and father you may have see and know that these confute your ^^onious opinon and confirm they not but this you shall have here prove for the catholicque satisfaction in ^^ich you have altogether fail that after the priest have speak over and to the ^^ead and wine and use powerful word over it and they Rhem test 1. cor. 11. sect. 9 ^^ich you call your consecration that present the substance of bread and wine ^e go not one crumb or drop remain but whole transubstantiate tran^^^tured and change into the very real natural rhe. test. math. 26. sect. 4. and substantial body and ^^oud of Christ which be bear of the virgin Marie and nail on the cross use be now in heaven and yet in the sacrament whole alive and immortal and ^^at this body of Christ must be receive with our corporal mouth and local ^^scend into our corporal stomach which body so make by the priest be offer by the priest to God the father as a propitiatory merciful and redeem sacrifice by which the priest apply as he say the general virtue of Christ ^^ssion to every particular man necessity either quick or dead for matter tem^^rall or grace spiritual for who and when he list and for what he please ^ur carnal presence shall be first handle the second point which be your pro^atorie sacrifice shall be handle in the title of the mass this be your roman (@) learning which you shall have prove but how your own proof be ^^^ly examine disprove you let the learned judge but now to your first proof (@) of the six of John to prove your opinion touch the first position (@) 6. ^ers 51. the bread which I will give be my flesh etc. Catholicque priest (@) 6. ^ers 51. unless you eat the flesh of the son of man and drink his blood you shall have no life in you (@) 6. ^ers 55. my flesh be meat true and my blood be etc. whether we have change the state of the question or not and whether the real presence be ever deny by protestant whether protestant do not false claim the term spiritual and whether all the term of their supper be not redeem from they Fitzimon 35. concern the first demand I have conceive according to philosophy and reason that corporal and real be not different otherwise then by only conceit I also suppose it be all one to affirm Christ to be realy present and corporaly according as be suppose by all other writer of what profession soever they be this by m. Rider be call a wrong and deceit next he say the real presence be never deny by protestant nor in controversy betwixt protestant and Papist what think you gentleman whether be the name of catholic by verdict of vincentius disproof of supremacy by verdict of the primative father the forge consent of the ancient church five hundred year after Christ to protestancy or this resolute affirmation that the real presence be never deny or in controversy more full of shamelessness and inconsideration I need not to linger in make this 9 the 9 and 10. untruth and 10. untruth even to protestant themselves notorious yea and odious fox act and monument pag. 1687 first John fox say of one of his martyr John lomas not to have believe reality because he find it not write and d. perne fox page 1257. say I deny not his presence but his real and corporal presence show as any other not out of his wit that where there be real presence there also be corporal second Oecolampadius say it be absurd if we say the body of Christ to be realy in the supper fowerthly m. rider himself answer the first of the six article by act of parliament establish caveat before the four proof that there be Christ real presence say this article be sufficient confute if real presence be never in controversy or deny how can lomas and perne but believe it how can it be with Oecolampadius say to be absurd to affirm it how can m. Rider say that he deny it not and yet that he have confute it let any friend of m. rider but read fox of John Lambert Frith tindal barn Anne Askew and all the rest of fox principal martyr to inform m. rider of this foul untruth and if he be warn thereof by they yet will not reform it chide he in my behalf second in the other untruth that I have change the question why be he not more agreeable in such accusation sometime he make the state of the question to be betwixt corporal and spiritual sometime betwixt real and figurative sometime betwixt real and spiritual all be one with he spiritual and figurative but not with s. Paul hebr. 10.1 1. cor. 15.46 1. cor. 10.11 grant the jew have figur and shadd owe in the owld testament but the only new testament to have thing spiritual every thing with m. rider that be corporal be sudden deny to be spiritual but not with s. Paul say if there be a corporal or natural body there be also a spiritual brief I resolve he in two thing first that the question be not alter by i for I inquire whether Christ be corporaly in the b. sacrament and not only figurative true and not only by imagination himself and not only his representation figure or appellation second that affirm corporal and spiritual receive not only to consist but to be requisite together as in all the progress to be our intention and opinion shall God willing be manifest and be before certify in the 12. number I be plain opposite to protestant in this question who exclude not only the corporal but also the very spiritual be of our saviour in this sacrament if you admire that I appeach you to use the word spiritual unjust and deceitful chafe not but listen and you shall discern that I prove what I affirm and also defeat your opinion of all the misty term by you purloin to make your lord supper vain seem mystical I confess myself to be sometime offend with our learned controvertist because they suffer the adversary with out all right to chawnt or harp upon every mention of spiritual spiritual be of Christ in the b. sacrament as be favourable to they whereas indeed their doctrine be carnal not only by gross and pharisaical conceive of the word corporal but also by not endure the word spiritual to be belong to that divine mystery which hitherto few seem to have due observe I dowbt not by the grace of God but to make it evident even to the most slumber eye that they have no title or interest in either the corporal or spiritual or faithful or figurative or sacramental be in this mystery whereof now let these two proof serve for a taste (@) difference say the Protestant martyr between the faithful and papist concern the sacrament be that the papist say that Christ be corporaly under or in the form of bread and wine but the faithful say that Christ be not there neither corporaly nor spiritualy next say the bread be the body of Christ neither natural nor personaly nor realy nor corporaly nor yet spiritualy n. 96.108 nor figurative nor significative it remain after all these that we say the bread be the body of Christ as for sacramentaly it also shall be recover from they what occasion have I then to alter the question as if Christ can not be say to be corporal in the sacrament but thereby shall be deny that he be spiritualy or if he be find to be spiritualy thereby the protestant opinion shall be favour or my opinion disaduantage s. August l. 3. Christiana c. 10. true say s. augustin when the mind be preoccupate by any error what soever the scripture have so the contrary they take it to be speak figurative which be verify in our adversary who be preoccupate by error do strain and wrest all word out of their natural signification by some figurative collusion to serve their turn especial in affect such as have dowbtfull and ambiguous signification whether thy belong to they or no thereby to lurk unknown in darkness as in our controversy if any as I say infer Christ to be corporaly and realy present they except against it if they can find that any spiritual word or understanding be imply together therewith as if forsooth corporal and spiritual cold not in any wise to consist together but they to who neither of both belong must not be overthrow thereby or by any of the rest that refute they if any suffrage of the father testify the same if they find the least mention of figure sacrament or sign conjoin there withal they seem to be well defense by such a target infer thereupon that no verity cold be together both truth and figure substance and sacrament body and sign although hundred of assurance persuade the contrary and that the same as I say be make a safeguard to their figure only only signification only representation such reason may some time breed tediousness but little travail in refel it whereof if wisdom overcome the tediousness discretion shall moderate the travail now at least appear how destitute their opinion be of spirituality and how pretend it hitherto in show be to take a joseph cloak to a deceitful cloak of a synnfull dishonesty 36. gentleman you mistake utter Christ meaning turn back to the 3^ pag. and place the four last line begin the bread which I etc. as title to this 36. paragraph of m. Rider and then read as here follow gentleman you mistake etc. wrest Christ word from the spiritual sense in which he speak to the literal sense which he never mean ancient father never teach primitive church of Christ for one thousand year at least after Christ ascension never know or receive for the word and phrase be figurative and allegorical therefore the sense must be spiritual not carnal for this be a general rule in God book ancient father yea and in your pope canon and gloss that every figurative speech or phrase of scripture must be expound spiritual not carnal or literal as anon more plain you shall hear but that the simple be no long seduce by your roman doctrine expound this 6. of John grammaticallie and carnal contrary to Christ meaning constrain these place to prove your carnal presence of Christ in the sacrament when there be no sacrament then ordain I will set down GOD will Christ meaning true and plain which you shall not be able either by scripture or ancient father to contradict 1 first I will plain deliver the occasion why Christ use the metaphor of bread call himself Bread 2 second according to which of Christ nature he be our live bread whether as he be man only or God only or as he be complete God and man 3 three how this bread must be take and eat whether by the mouth of the body or the mouth of the soul 4 four the fruit that come to the true eater thereof 5 last the reason shall be allege out of Christ own word to prove that your round wafer-cake upon your suppose hallow altar be not that true bread Christ flesh which Christ here speak of the first proof of catholic for the real presence out of the 6. of s. Ihon. 36. the 11. the 12. and 13. untruth Fitzimon the 11. 12. and 13. untruth be here sudden obtrude to all man eye that Christ never mean the literal sense that Christ church for a 1000 year never it that every figurative speech must be expound not litteraly I may have add his say that the phrase in this mystery be figurative and allegorical that we be not able to contradict his exposition that he will expound such thing as he promise but that the bulk be not to great I promise to dissemble the great part of his untruethe nether will I proceed but by good proof against the former few untruethe calculate the first that Christ intend not the literal sense be contradict by Christ himself say when he do give at his last supper what here he promise that it be his body which be to be deliver mat. 26.1 cor. 11.24 mar. 14.24 and (@) ^lood which be to be shed therefore as not a figure nor any body figurative but literaly and natural be give for our sin so no figurative sense but literal must have be intend by Christ the second be to be testify in all our controversy the three be very absurd Galat. 4.22.23 Genes. 16.15.21 for s. Paul certify that Abraham have two son one by the handmaid and one by the free woman but he by the handmaid be bear according to the flesh and he by the free woman by repromission which say he be figurative speak now if m. rider word be not untrue these word be speak figurative can not be true which be know to be contrary to genesis wherein the literal history be relate likewise whereas he say that what soever Christ promise be to be receive by faith and whereas s. Paul here affirm the son of the free woman to have be by repromission it shall according to his wisdom follow that such a son be never bear but only by faith yea if to his former say you conjoin his say a little before that receive by faith be real receive and make one say of both that Christ promise be receive by faith and be so receive be real receive it must ensue first that Abraham have his son Isaak real yea and all his posterity real as soon as he believe faithful the promise of our lord second that our body already have immortality real and heavenly glory and all that we may expect at God hand if we have faith thereof as I say already real yea the punishment of hell be promise to the wicked by m. rider say must be receive by faith and consequent contrary to all protestantcy but not truth the wicked may have faith and contrary to protestancy Esa. 29.13 mat. 15.8 mar. 7.6 and also truth the damn themselves must have faith likewise see they receive the punishment promise to they by Christ be not this learned doctrine will any old woman know her prayer but in latin transgress so much against faith and religion 1. occasion the question be move by some belli-god that taste of Christ banquet and bounty in feed five thousand man with five loaf and two fish whether Moses or Christ be the more excellent and liberal in feed man rider 37. first they commend Moses from the greatness of his place and person be God lieutenant to conduct Israel out of Egypt 2. second they commend their manna from the place whence it come which be the heaven as they suppose 3 three they commend the bread from the virtue of it which be it feed their father in the dry sandy and barren wilderness and save they from famine and therefore they think that no man be great than Moses no bread to be compare with manna now Christ by way of opposition and comparison confute they oppose God to Moses and himself to manna 1. first deny that Moses be the giver of that manna but that God be the author Moses only the minister 2 second that it come not from the eternal kingdom of God which be proper call heaven but from the visible cloud improper call heaven 3 three Christ deny manna to be the true bread because it only preserve life temporal but can not give it but this bread Christ do not only give life corporal but also life spiritual in the kingdom of grace and life eternal in the kingdom of glory 4 four this bread manna cease when they come into Canaan and can no more be find josua 5.12 but this bread Christ do feed we here in this earthly wilderness and reign for ever with his triumphant church in our everlasting and glorious Canaan the kingdom of heaven 5 this bread manna and so all corporal meat when they have feed the body they have perform their office they perish without yield profit to the soul joh. 6.54 but this bread of life Christ be the true btead which once be receive into the soul do not only assure and give unto it eternal life but also to the body like assurance of resurrection and salvation so that the soul must first feed on Christ before the body can have any benefit by Christ contrary to your doctrine which be that the body must first feed on Christ carnal than the soul shall be thereby feed spiritual and because they be so addict in Moses time to manna in Christ time to his miraculous loaf respect the feed of their body not the feed of their soul therefore Christ dehort they from food corporal to food spiritual labour not say he for the meat that perish joh. 6.27 but for the meat that endure to everlasting life which the son of man shall give unto you etc. and thus much touch the occasion why Christ be say to be the true bread of life which as far excel manna as the soul the body life death eternity time and heaven earth now let we see according to which of Christ nature 3. point he be call our live bread whether according to his manhood or godhead or both Christ call this bread his flesh and Christ and his flesh be all one and therefore Christ and his flesh be all one and the same bread and as our body be feed with materiel bread so be our soul feed with the flesh of Christ and this flesh he will give for the life of the world which flesh be not Christ body separate from his soul as some of you imagine and untrue teach nor Christ body and soul separate from his divinity but even his quickninge flesh which be personal unite to his eternal spirit be by the same give for the life of the world not corporal and real in the sacrament as you untrue teach but in the sacrifice of his body and blood once on the cross as the scripture record for the flesh of Christ profit not but as it be make quicken by the spirit neither do we participate the life of his spirit but as it be communicate unto we by his flesh by which we be make flesh of his flesh and bone of his bone as have be show before which holy mystery be represent unto we in the sacrament of the lord supper and the truth thereof assure and seal in the due administration and receive of the same so this true bread speak of in the six of John which have this spiritual quicken and nourish power be complete Christ God and man with all his soul save merit and neither manna in the wilderness nor your round wafer cake upon your suppose hallow altar manna it can not be for it cease many hundred year before your imagine and transnatured bread it can not be because the sacrament be not then institute and so to the three point the manner how this true bread Christ must be eat 3. point the meat be spiritual and therefore the manner of eat must not be corporal for such as be the meat such must be the mouth but the meat be spiritual therefore the mouth must be spiritual as before you have hear in the epistle to the reader etc. which thing be there handle before out of holy scripture father and your pope canon I will only refer you thither where you may unless you be malcontent be full satisfy touche the true manner of eat Christ where you may find prove out of God book that come to Christ believe in Christ abide in Christ dwell in Christ and to be clad with Christ and to eat Christ be all one so that out of every one you may frame this or the like unanswerable argument how sacred scripture be exorbitant deprave Fitzimon 37. alas what misery and impiety be every line fraught with all in this his exposition Considre but how many falsification of the text be here use first that some belly-god have move question whether Moses or Christ be more liberal in feed man there be no such matter nether also their commend of Moses greatness for only Christ light mention he the residue not think of he by ought appear in scripture nether do they commend the bread from the virtue of it but only tell that their forefather have eat thereof without any further relation nether do Christ deny manna to be true bread for there be no such word the fowrtenth untruth the 14. untruth beside other wink at shall be register by m. Rider against himself here he say that our doctrine be that the body must first feed on Christ corporaly so it shall be to approach to truth than the soul shall be thereby feed spiritualy how be this say suitable to these word in his preface you teach the communicant to receive Christ with their mouth corporaly not with their faith spiritualy you make yourself ridiculous by such palpable contradiction that we teach and that we do not teach Christ to be receive spiritualy that we teach only corporaly and yet that we teach first corporaly and after spiritualy will not any other display all the figur of rhetoric against this figure of a learned man he tell after that Christ and his flesh be all one and all one bread yet will he tell you present that neither of both be any bread at al. next that some of we teach Christ flesh to be Christ body separate from his soul a foul untruth and the fowler that untestify after so many promise to have all our deal publish by our own print book leaf line etc. then that the flesh of Christ profit but as it be quicken by the spirit this he himself shall testify to be the fifteen untruth in these word the 15. untruth Christ will receive a bloody spear into his side before man sin can be satisfy this spear to have pierce Christ after his death and not when his flesh be quicken by his spirit be testify by s. John say that he have then deliver up his spirit joan. 19 a v. 31. 35. the jew have inform Pilate of his death the soldier when they behold he dead they do not break his thigh but one of the soldier with a lance open his side now make up these two together that Christ flesh without his spirit profit nothing and yet that man sin cold not be satisfy but after Christ flesh be separate from his spirit and then pierce I never in my life nor I think any other note such implication before in any book hitherto print but yet there follow more that we do not communicate the life of Christ spirit but by his flesh be not this to contradict all benefit fulfil to the patriarch by Christ descension of spirit without his flesh then say he what be spiritual can not be receive by a corporal manner be there ever any thing more contrary to divinity philosophy or reason first faith be spiritual yet it be by hear rom. 10.17 which be a corporal manner regeneration be spiritual yet it be by manner of a corporal wash yea God be a most spiritual spirit yet the apostle command we to bear he in our body 1. cor. 6. contrariwise Christ birth his body make invisible his issue out of his sepulchre his enter among his shut disciple walk on the sea his ascension be verlye corporal yet the manner be not corporal but spiritual so that neither spiritual gift be continual conjoin with spiritual manner but often with corporal and corporal gift often conjoyyn with spiritual manner the soul of man be a spiritual form and not material and yet it be receive corporaly and into a corporal body and the damn spirit be spiritual creature yet they be torment not with a spiritual but with a corporal fire 1. Corinth. 6. last s. Paul say you be with a great price glorify and bear God in your body so that God himself which be the most spiritual of all spirit may be bear in our body and not only in our sowl and when be he to be say bear in our body so much as when we receive the b. sacrament of his flesh and blood to which he be unite by his divinity personaly caveat in the preface now say he the meat be spiritual and therefore the mowth ought also to be spiritual as before be hear and handle that we may have satisfaction unless we may be malcontent good jesus what expectation may this man have that his own favourer will ever tolerat such dissimulation in the place where unto he refer we for this satisfaction this be all the proof out of holy scripture father and canon that be there find augustin show the manner how Christ be to be eat in the sacrament sour time together say spiritual spiritual one word more there be not either of scripture father or canon to prove that the mowth to receive every spiritual gift ought only to be spiritual first hereby how do he overthrow his former speech that we teach the communicant not to receive with their faith spiritualy and that we put opposition betwixt real and spiritual as contrary for if our own canon teach spiritual receive as here be evident affirm how will he be believe that we do not teach it be not these discourse resemble buckett in well of which the draw up of the one be a let down of the other second I have show and not slender if resolution of Protestant martyr be not slender that the profession of reformer can not brook the word spiritual three I have very late show that scripture reason and divinity do many spiritual gift to be receive corporaly and many corporal gift to be receive spiritualy fowerthly I have and do resolve that Christ presence be not only spiritual nor only receive spiritualy but also corporal and to be receive corporaly in the 12. and 14. number plentiful may be find to that effect s. August c. 9 and prophet whereunto I add out of s. augustin that we shall receive cord and over with faithful hart and mouth behold in plain and literal manner declare that as to the hart so to the mowth do belong to receive Christ second out of s. Leo this be receive by mowth s. Leo 6. Tertull. l. which be believe by hart three by Tertullian the flesh be feed by the body and blood of Christ that the soul may be fatten by God be not here declare without requiry that we exclude not spiritual receive by affirm corporal receive be not both affirm requisite and neither to be omit good m. rider spare your own reputation so much engage in this discourse that unless the residue supply defect and enormity here escape it be not possible but the state will think it belong to their wysdom to testify that they dislike your defence of their opinion defence wherein so many strange doctrine be affirm to be in s. ihons gospel which never any have yet perceive defense wherein m. Rider be make every foot to disprove and refel himself defense wherein wonderful promise be make of confute we when in truth it confirm all our doctrine for you shall not likely mistake any one earnest point of his reply but when you find he vehement seem to overthrow we than you shall discover he to be as a Senacharib 4. reg. 19 judith 6. 2. Machab. 8. Holosernes and Nicanor promise to ruin we and invite people consideration to buy our doctrine at the rate of ninety for one talon when we be most safe from inconvenience and he near to his destruction as Nicanor invite merchant to buy israelit by ninety for one talon when they be most secure from his sale and rather to recover their money who intend to buy they and he by they speedy to be discumfit and confound how many such promise do he make say I will show and discover that you have forsake the verity of Christ gospel the reader shall easy perceive before the end of this treatise that this your opinion be never by Christ I will show that you wrong yourselves forget your ground of learning that your proof be your disproof that you never read but enchiridion and never read the father themselves that here you change that there you dismember and c. when God know he show nothing but the turpitude and confusion of his profession Genes. 9.21 as Noah when he be drunken show the dishonesty of his body whereby one of his own child although wicked deride he how apt do s. augustin admonish such a promiser say ostend s. augustin l. 3. con max. c. 26. show your promise why proceed you in vacuity why delude you our expectation why effect you not your protestation you multiply needless word to waste needful time rider joh. 6.56.35 38. whosoever dwell in Christ and Christ in they only eat Christ flesh and drink Christ blood but the true believer only dwell in Christ and Christ in they therefore the true believer only eat Christ flesh and drink Christ blood joh. 6.56 Ephe. 3.17 the proposition be Christ own word of which it be damnable to doubt the assumption be Paul let Christ dwell in your heart by faith therefore the conclusion can be deny and so to the four whether m. rider unanswerable argument be not answerable even by a child to m. rider infamy Fitzimon 38. to manifest that this argument be easy to produce m. rider infamy I deny your mayor as be the 16. untruth the 16. untruth joan. 6.56 joan. 14.11 by express addition and alteration of the text the word be he that eat my flesh and drink my blood remain in i and I in he why then have you add the word only why have you no terror by the word of the Apocalips Apoc. vlt. so to violate god sacred truth and that to avowche a palpable and manifest error for Christ say do not you believe that I be in my father and my father be in i and who be so erroneous as to say that God the father do eat the flesh and drink the blood of Christ and that only will you affirm that any can more dwell in Christ than his father yet dare you not maintain that his father communicate the body and blood of Christ recant therefore and that with shame and say that they that dwell in Christ and Christ in they do not only eat his flesh and drink his blood the minor also be false that the true believer only dwell in Christ wh takerus in controuer. pag. 666. 1. cor. 13.12 and Christ in they for in heaven even by the confession of Whitaker belief enter not but all be bless by see face to face Christ dwell in all and all in he and also God the father and holy ghost do dwell in he who may not be say to have belief in he the conclusion be likewise false by have a four term only which shall not have be in the premise I leave to thy equitable censure indifferent Protestant whether I may not lawful lawnche into all rhethorical trope against such unanswerable argument of such a disputer true my devotion will serve i not to spare at least such impiety towards God word but I refrain that by moderate style the truth may shine to thy mind the bright as the son do more plain appear in calm then trouble water beside all that be produce consider how in the opinion of m. Rider the six chapter of s. John not treat of the b. sacrament his mayor proposition shall by himself be acknowledge impertinent but what care or know he what be pertinent or not the fruit and profit that redound to the true eater of this bread of life which be Christ 39 many rich benefit we have by eat Christ in the manner aforesaid rider that be by apprehend apply 4. point joh. 6.44.54.50.51 and appropriate unto we whole Christ with his benefit I will only name one or two and refer you for the rest to six of Ihon. he that eat this bread I will raise he up at the last day to life concern his body and he shall never die but live for ever concern his soul what the benefit be of the Protestant communion and how they frustrate all sacrament 39 all benefit to be receive by Protestant communion Fitzimon be here draw to two the first resurrection of the body the second everlasting life of the soul he neither tell you whether this shall happen by virtue of your receive or not by virtue thereof or only by grateful gift and reward of God concern the resurrection of the body I crave delay to reveal what protestant profess and believe thereof till I treat in the examination of the creed the article of the resurrection of the dead in the 20. number of the foresay examination but here let all christian catholic and protestant note that when by pretence of reformation five sacrament be abolish and two only of communion and baptism retain the next degree to have be to deny any fruit belong to either of these two so that they allow they only to be bare external sign in themselves without any power to sanctify of many proof I will produce but these apparent it be say the author of England persuasion Zuingl tom. 2. bapt. fol. 70. a great error of the owld doctor that they suppose the external water of baptism to he of any value towards the purge of sin and Luther affirm it to be luth. Babil calu. l. 4. Instit. c. 4. n. 17. 23. Beza 1 cor. c. 10. n. 3. calu. and Beza in 1 cor. 10. v. 2.3 in c. 373. calu. Instit. l. 4. c. 18. n. 12. Zuing. to 2. fol. 563. 564. Sloidan lib. 10. fol. 152. buchan hist. scot. l. 15. pag. 523. Benedict Aretius 2. part problem fol. 319. Bernard Lutzenburg in catal. she l. 1. c. 29. fox act. pag. 70. Zuing. tom. 2. resp. luth. conf. fol. 477. fol. 43. calu. l. 4. Instit. c. 14 n. 14. in joa. 6. v. 54. Beza epist. theol. 65. fol. 285. mart. in defence gardin par. 2. reg. 5. pag. 618. par. 3. pag. 683. but a external sign to make we remember God promise Caluin and Beza consent to the same and the anabaptist do omit baptism towards child as unprofitable likewise for communion they agree common that it be no more esteemable than the manna of the jew and shall be receive without any reverence sit at a table in good fellowship which be practise not only by zwinglians and anabaptist but imitate in Scotland as Buchananus relate and in other place they stand without all regard or reverence to receive their communion as to testify they shall not adore that which they acknowledge to be but a image figure or representation lest they shall break the commandment forbid to adore as they translate image and barlowe in the sum of the conference before the k. majesty pag. 95. confess the vicar of Ratisdal to have deal the bread out of a basket every man put in his hand and take out a piece etc. 68 this disable of this sacrament begin first from who fox call a worthy learned man who say that the body of Christ be no otherwise in the sacrament then in any other bread say it to be only as the emperor be in his banner he again Caluin Beza p. martyr jewel and now most protestant of their follower affirm it to be no otherwise in the sacrament then in a sermon say it be no more have by sacrament then by word etc. I fear not say p. martyr to affirm that we come to the receive of Christ body much more by word then by sacrament calu. in 1. cor. c. 11. v. 24. so that say Caluin if otherwise we be mindful of Christ death this help be superfluous and this be common to all sacrament for they be help of our infirmity what protestant hear their preacher magnify in word the benefit of these two sacrament especial of communion and say that thereby with the tooth and mouth of the soul and arm of faith and embracement of hart we eat devour and enjoy Christ with all his sowle-saving merit with all benefit of his passion seal all his promise unto we and give we interest title and right by a effectual and infallible call to eternal bliss and such other seduce benediction frequent in sermon that will ever imagine by such dilusion he be a lead to esteem as base of this sacrament as of the void ceremony of jew as of any other bread as of a needle memorial of a bare representation as of a sermon etc. or that it shall be as fruitless as the sacrament of the owld testament Galat. 4.9 which s. Paul term weak and poor element or as the english bible translate weak and beggarly ordonance against which and deformation of reformer hebr. 10.28 the say apostle worthy dispute say a man make frustrate the law of Moses be therefore adjudge to death by the verdict of 2. or 3. witness how much more deserve he more extreme punishment which thus tread the son of God under foot to conclude christian reader thou perceive by these confession that in their own opinion there be no more benefit contain in their sacrament then by remember Christ by any other mean either of sermon or representation in the owld or new testament petr. mart. in 1. cor. c. 10. u. 1 2. what then shall hinder i to grant all this to be true of their sacrament consider that I find the manna of the jew much more lively express and represent Christ by rain down from heaven in a miraculous manner so as it be wonder at by the jew which have all sweetness of delitesomnes be very white whereas the communion bread retain still his nature come from the earth without all miraculous manner to be wonder at have only the taste of bread sometime also mowldie and be not of the white and consequent not so convenient to represent the descend of the messiah our among mankind his wonderful incarnation and life his delytesome feed our soul his innocence as the former representation manna yea I report i to all indifferent wysdomes whether it be not rather far inferior in way of signification which by protestant be call the chief life of sacrament thereunto now then do not marvel good reader that m. Rider dilate not unto thou how by communion thou be to have resurrection of the flesh and everlasting life of the soul for it be sufficient in his mind to give the great promise paint word sweet benediction to thy soul and in effect to bestow only on thou a piece of bread extol against truth to make thou leave the true bread of life and dispraise as a sacrament institute by Christ to evacuat the new testament praise as a big shadow to make thou forsake and misbeleeve the substance of Christ body and dispraise as a substantial help to frustrate thy salvation whereupon I remit you to the 63. number to have a pertinent relation of s. epiphanius rider 40. but a opposition be make betwixt this true bread Christ and this sacramental bread as be betwixt Christ and manna it will be clear nay impossible that your consecrate bread shall be the bread of life which be speak of in the six of John 1 your consecrate bread never come from the heaven of heaven therefore it be not the true bread of life speak of in this place 2 all that eat of this true bread Christ be save but many that eat of your sacramental bread be damn therefore it be not that bread speak of in the six of John 3 your bread only enter the bodily mouth and be receive into the stomach of the body and so pass the way of all excrement and therefore be not the true bread 4 your bread can for ever preserve temporal life much less give it but not at all life eternal and therefore it be not the true bread of life speak of in this six of John whether there be any opposition betwixt our sacrament and Christ and whether by enter our stomach Christ be pain or hurt 40. our consecrate bread after consecration be Christ and therefore be the true bread speak of in this place Fitzimon and salvation be get only by he who we eat and by no other devotion so much as by eat he whereby it be say they that eat he shall have life everlasting viz. as by a most principal mean to come thereto yet diverse eat he unworthy to their damnation other after eat deprive themselves from the benefit of he by new wickedness to who may be say Ozec 13.9 their salvation be by he their damnation by themselves I pray let we as well examine these say opposition and your holy supper come your supper from heaven be all that eat of it save be all receiver thereof immortal I pray you good sir tell we of one only that be assure save of your sort or immortal by your lord supper nay how can you affirm conformable to your saying in the next precedent number that any have help or benefit thereby unless they be forgetful of their faith but you will say never thelesse where be any answer to that objection your bread enter the mouth pass the stomach depart with other excrement and therefore not Christ I answer thereto that it be not very Christian to think that Christ after his resurrection have a mortal body and that it be a conceit altogether capharnaical to suppose he be eat in so gross a manner as by you be specify our sacrament therefore which be Christ remain realy in we during the remain of the form of bread entire which form by the heat of our stomach be digest Christ after pour his grace into our soul cease realy to be in we and this answer may suffice any christian mind I will here also wink at several untruethe for brevite sake and axamin further nether let any one marvel that I be very succinct in treat the foresay point Origen hom. 9 and 13. in levitic hebr. cap. 5. s. August serm. 46. ciu l. 10. c. 6. in ps 39 lib. 50. hom. 42. tra. 11. in joan. how long Christ remain in the receiver because I imitate the primative father say in his and let we not be prolix in such thing as be know to the believer and can be notify to the ignorant this make s. Paul mention the sacrifice of Melchisedech to have straight abrupt it as not to be diwlgate to faithless conceit this make s. augustin seldom to name otherwise this mystery than the sacrament know to the faithful 41. rider joh. 6.54.50 now see that Christ have not all this time when he make this sermon in the six of John ordain his last super and therefore not the bread in the supper and see this bread can neither assure the body of the receiver of resurrection nor their soul of salvation it can be that this bread in the sacrament be the same that Christ speak of in John and therefore your proof bring to prove your carnal presence of Christ by these text be impertinent savour by your leave of small read in the father and less understanding in the scripture but that all man that read this may see your error and so beware of your new dangerous doctrine I will bring Augustine and other father to disprove you in plain term for misalleadge these text Augustine bring forth as it be upon a stage the three evangelist Matthew Mark and Luke deliver the doctrine of the sacrament aug. Tomo quart lib. 3. cap. 1. math. 26. mark 14. luk. 22. joh. 6. these three Euang. handle as it be the body of Christ John the soul and divinity of Christ lyra in psal. 110. but when he come to John he say in the 6. of his gospel speak nothing of the lord body and blood I wonder with what face you can brag to follow the father and no man nor sect more opposite to their faith and fact than you there Aug. have crack your credit salve it how you can and your own doctor lyra condemn your erroneous opinion which will apply these as speak of the sacrament his word be these this say of Christ unless you eat the flesh of the son of man and drink his blood do nothing direct appertain to the sacramental or corporal eat of Christ in the sacrament for Christ speak this long before he ordain this sacrament therefore no sound argument say he can be ground upon that literal exposition of the sacramental communion and he give a reason unaunswereable for first the sacrament must be ordain before it can be a sacrament but you here will have Christ carnal presence in the sacrament before it be a sacrament and then lyra conclude therefore of this place there can be make no good sufficient argument touch the sacramental communion unless say he some curious Hereticqu^^ will take these word speak by Christ to be speak prophetical now say your own doctor if you take this chapter of the six of John literal as you do than it be impossible and absurd because you will have a carnal presence in the sacrament before there be a sacrament if prophetical than your own champion call you curious heretic Lyra. luc. 23.41 and to prove your literal exposition gross false and absurd he produce against you two famous example the first of the thief on the cross who by his lively faith perform the tenor of this text yet never communicate sacramental and judas who communicate under both kind and yet fail in the meaning of this precept lib. 4. dist. 9 and then shut up the mouth of all litteralist and heretic that hold this speak of the sacrament allege Thomas Aquinas his draught out of he that eat not sacramental may yet eat Christ spiritual by faith and so do the thief on the cross and be save some eat the sacramental bread but not Christ which be the inward grace of the sacrament as judas do and be damn many more father shall you have to secod these against you if these satisfy you not thus you be condemn by two learned father that you ignorant or malicious or both mistake and misapply the six of John to speak of the sacrament before the sacrament be institute whether Christ treat of the eucharist in the 6. chap. of s. Ihon. Fitzimon in his rescript 41. I be threaten by m. Rider that unless I answer this matter well I be overthrow horse and foot I will therefore begynn thus say that s. augustin and lyra be untrue allege indeed s. augustin speak of the time immediate before Christ passion August tom. 4. Consen Euan. l. 3. c. 1. say John in this place say nothing of the body and blood of our Lord these word add by m. Rider six of his gospel be the text of a cunning misreporter not of s. augustin he give a reason why s. John treat not of the body and blood of our lord in this place because say he ample he treat thereof before be this augustin to deny or affirm that s. John treat of the body and blood of Christ in the six chapter for unless he treat in the six chapter only s. augustin word that he have treat thereof ample before in no other place they be specify can not be verify now to Lyra. tell posterity I request you in your next writing that you have mistake lyra for one Mathias Dornick who carp by reply at the addition of Paul Burgensis annect to Lyra. your own cite book will inform you thereof before the prologue to the psalm and else where the sword of Goliath again shall cut his own head I mean that the author by you allege shall testify against you lyra then say even upon the 6. of s. lyra in cap. 6. joan. after that he have discourse of the spiritual bread which be the word here he handle the spiritual bread which be the sacrament again etc. lest they shall believe that his flesh be contain in the eucharist as in a sign therefore he prevent that say my flesh be meat indeed again figurative here it be take realy say he and not figurative after he tell you that they be heretic who affirm it to be only as in a sign let this suffice to know to who may by another be say Eccli. 7. be ashamed at the falsehood of your ignorance for forgery be a bad reproach to any man but be incident principaly to the unlearned Eccli. 34. as here it be manifest three great untruth be heap together first by unlearned mistake s. augustin word be of what be deliver belong only to the immediate action of Christ before his passion second by addition of word to s. augustin speech three by unlearned mistake lyra for another notwithstanding I will score up but the 17. untruth which be by bad intention and only to misinform insert for the point all catholic and most principal protestant acknowledge that Christ in s. John chapter 6. treat of the sacrament but by way of premonition anticipation or instruction as be his wont towards the great mystery of his passion ascension come of the holy ghost etc. and not by institution it be clear among catholic I will aver it by Protestant martyr in defence Eucha. con. gardin par. 3. pag. 644. 547. Bucer in c. 6. joan. and in cap 26. math. Ecpenceus in Apolog. that say Peter martyr which Christ promise in the six of John that he perform in the last supper Martin Bucer upon the very six of John and else where crave pardon of God that ever he have bewitch any with your opinion that Christ handle not his true real and corporal be by way of premonition in this chapter like repentance have also Peter martyr for some time be of your imagination as also have Oecolampadius by his own testimony Oecolamp land hess 1529. fevard in pref. come in ruth in examine n. 7. calu. con Heshusium Beza in Creophagia tygurense con test Brency Micomius in s. marc. pag. 150. Cureus in spongia Daneus con Cautier pag. 186. etc. caveat a little before say I will most excellent prince that this right hand of i have be chap off when I begin first to write ought of the lord supper fevardent report that Caluin misbelieve s. John to have be author of this six chapter because it be to clear against his imagination yet Caluin himself in his book against approve it to treat of the sacrament so do Beza the minister of Zurick Miconius Cureus Daneus Cautier etc. so last do most clear m. rider not long before against himself say who soever dwell in Christ and Christ in they only eat Christ flesh and drink Christ blood which say he be Christ word in the six of John verse 56. it be damnable to doubt of they then sure it can not be but damnable to doubt of Christ mention the sacrament in the six of John whereby he be eat of we dwell in we and we in he I trust you will not deny now to have be answer to your full expectation and small consolation for both s. August and lyra contradict your information your brother confute it and yourself disprove it than which what foul disgrace can happen to a writer but I will make it yet fowler by ingadgeing your precious Jewel credit iwels reply against Harding art. 5. Divisione 3. pag. 323. whether Christ do not mention the eat of his flesh in the 6. of s. John or not he confident say that Christ in the six of s. John speak of the spiritual eat by faith by which his very flesh and very blood indeed and very be eat and drunken notwithstanding we say that Christ afterward in his last supper unto the same spiritual eat add also a outward sacrament or figure behold his assurance that Christ do here treat of eat Christ and that his speech here belong to that he after ordain rider you be not only tax by Aug. to be ignorant in the circumstance of the text but also in the sense of the text which be a gross thing in divine 42. now you shall hear Augustine tell you that this six of John be to be take figurative and allegorical and therefore spiritual mean that the speech and phrase which Christ use be borrow and translate from the body to the mind from eat and drink to believe from cham with the tooth to the believe with the heart so that what eat and drink be to the body that believe be to the soul and as bread and flesh be meat corporal for the body so Christ our bread be make spiritual for the soul and as corporal meat be take with the corporal mouth so be spiritual meat Christ crucify with all his benefit receive with faith the mouth of the soul and therefore to teach all posterity how to expound these word of Christ he give a general rule perpetual to be observe in God church say (a) (a) doct. Christ lib. 3. cap. 16. etc. if the scripture seem to command a horrible or vile fact the speech be figurative the second proof out of the six of John and then allege your second proof that you bring out of the six of John for example except you eat the flesh of the son of man and drink his blood you shall have no life in you Christ in this place seem to command a wicked and horrible act it be therefore a figurative speech command we to keep in mind that his flesh be crucify and torment for we now examine Augustine exposition to eat corporal real and substantial Christ flesh with our material mouth and to drink his precious substantial real blood with our bodily lip be a horrible thing therefore Christ word be figurative so that by Augustine own word your literal sense and carnal presence be wicked and horrible howsoever you cloak it with feign title to blind the eye and deceive the heart of simple catholic and if you will but read the five chapter of the foresay book you shall see his christian caveat he give to God church touch this point in cavendun figuratan littera^ etc. first of all you must beware that you take not a figurative speech according to the letter his reason follow for the letter that be the literal sense kill but the spirit that be the spiritual sense give life for when we take the figurative speech for a proper speech we make the sense carnal neither be there any thing more fit call the death of the soul thus you see aug. teach if you will learn that if the speech be proper the sense must be literal and carnal but if it be figurative it must be mystical and spiritual and allege this your own text for the same so I will wish you either follow Augustine doctrine or else cease to use Augustine and the rest of the father name for in usurp their name and pervert their doctrine you abuse the father and deceive the catholic your Bernard also in late time condemn your absurd and unchristianlike exposition of this your own text ber. Serm. 33. inp fol. 68 col. 2. unless you eat the flesh of Christ etc. he ask the question what be to eat Christ flesh and drink his blood but to communicate with his passion and to imitate his holy conversation in the flesh and then follow whence also this text signify that pure sacrament of the altar where we receive the body of Christ that as the form of bread be see to enter into we so we shall know Christ enter into we to dwell in our heart by faith by that holy and godly conversation that he have be in earth now examine Bernard your own abbot though live in the palpable time of the gross superstition yet he utter condemn your exposition of this place and show you that it do not signify Christ carnal presence in the sacrament but as the sacrament consist of a outward sign and inward grace so bread the outward sign enter into the mouth and Christ which be the inward grace enter into our heart by faith so that your own author tell you it be bread that enter the mouth it be Christ that enter the heart and that by faith not by tooth by believe not by cham or swallow so that this your Bernard teach you that this your text must be take for the divine part of the sacrament which be Christ with all his merit to the soul and heart of the believer not to or in the blasphemous mouth and stink stomach of infidel wicked man dog cat or other beast as your own book most wicked record whether every spiritual sentence or mention be a denial of corporal and real Fitzimon 42. they be in extremity and want of wool who wander among bramble to gather flock such be the proceed of our adversary seek with all earnest attentiveness fragment from the father in which they commend spiritual receive spiritual be of Christ in the sacrament a quick and lively faith towards Christ and the sacrament and by these sentence they certify their brother that the father stand for their opinion as if they be exclude true and real receive that which be so often teach they shall once be conceive that the father towards the sacrament commend spirituality conjoin with reality and substantialitie and allow figure conjoin with verity not have any purpose or place in their writing by the one to exclude the other our doctrine that spiritual and corporal be not incompatible but agreeable together chrysost hom. 60. Antioch hom. 61. be utter long since by s. chrysostom say of Christ be in the sacrament that he be meddle with we not in faith only but also in very substance again not by charity only but by very substance be he make our food also by s. Cyril Alexandrin Cyrill l. 10. in joa. c. 13. Theophylac in cap. 14. mar. and 17. mat. greg. hom. in conformable word not by charity only but by natural partake be Christ in we also by Theophilact this my body which you receive be not only a figure or exemplar of our lord body but the body of Christ also by s. Gregory Christ be both the verity and figure the verity by his body be make of bread ansel l. diu. office claud. rep. 3. c. 4. and the figure by what outward appear also by s. Anselme by the benediction of Christ the bread be make the body not significative only but substantia for neither from this sacrament do we exclude a figure neither do we admit it alone it be the thing true for it be Christ body it be a figure because that be sacrifice which be know incorruptible do not these father affirm both spiritual and substantial both figure and truth both spirit and letter why then be they wrest by they who profess only spiritual without substantial only figure without truth aug. trac 27. in joan. in psal 98. apo ser. 2. item cypr. only spirit without letter what mean they to bring s. augustin dispute against the capharnaical conceit of receive Christ as in in his carcase bowtcher or sell in the shambles as he himself express often and in respect of they to call the sacrament a figure do he say only a figure or he and s. Bernard commend the spiritual sense of scripture and spiritual receive of the sacrament a argument as if they have or will exclude thereby the literal sense or substantial receive be you in doubt of their mind in this controversy they then resolve you first s. augustin August in ps 33. that Christ by say this be my body be twice at the table once sit and once hold himself in his own hand s. Bernard and that according to the letter next s. Bernard say etc. the host which thou behold be not now bread but my flesh even so the liquor which now you see be not wine but my blood even as the form be there see who substance be not believe to be there so the thing true and substantia be believe who form be not see here our transubstantiation here our have Christ body in diverse place here our literal doctrine here our whole papistry be assure to have be in these father as much as in we s. Paul say 1. cor. 15.45 if there be a natural body there be also a spiritual body therefore the one do not exclude the other therefore Christ spiritual body shall not be capharnaica suppose to be bite rend or mangle by his real substantial and corporal be in the sacrament you will think he injurious who will infer that because you have a corporal head corporal body and be a corporal man that therefore you have no spiritual wit in your head no sense in your body and be no spiritual man can both consist in you and not a figure and substance spirit and corporal truth and literal in sacrament and scripture o protestantcy silly be thy shift and they discover foul and apparent thy falsehood and it make manifest yet there be that persist to follow thou fulfil therein the scripture say prou. 29. obedient by word will not the harden servant be amend for although he shall understand yet will he not obey I have be slack to number the 18. untruth the 18. untruth which at least be here produce in plain term that our own author tell we it be bread that enter the mouth whereas he only say which m. Rider himself translate the form of bread and not bread itself add that we shall know through it our lord very body to enter into we to dwell in our heart by faith Suerly if m. rider may receive his guest into his house and hart to his meat and mind as he often profess so shall he imagine that we may and shall in like manner receive Christ in the sacrament what he say of dog and cat christian shame will have spare can the son shine upon a dunghill and never be defile or the three child abide in the fire and never be burn or God divinity be in every thing and every where d. tho. 1. par. q. 8. art. 3. not only by power but by substance and essence equal in heaven and in earth yea and in hell and under water and not be blemish torment or disgrace why then be it think a absurdity that Christ true God and man be now immortal and impassable shall be any where or in any person how vile soever without all bleamish hurt or disgrace this ethnical reproach the heavenly mystery posterity will detest by the very testimony calu. in prefat. luth. ser. conuival fol. 158. and in pref. tom. 1. if not baalamitical prophecy of Caluin say and posterity will discover the fraud of reformer and return to the old way when as Luther also fortould the curiosity of these time will be satiate which be two strange prediction of two protoplast of the five apostolical gospel whereby all their enterprise be insinuate to be fraudulent innovation and desperate doctrine found only on the curiosity of these time rider gross absurdity follow the priest position 43. and if your literal exposition be true than none can be save but such as eat your consecrate Christ make of bread then infant that die and communicate not shall be damn captive that from their cradle live under tyrant and those that before Christ in Christ time and in the first thousand year after Christ before your new consecration be stamp be damn and contrariwise all that eat of your consecrate host be save be they never so blasphemous to God traitorous to their prince and injurious to their brother but that both these extreme that spring from your literal exposition contrary to scripture and father be false and horrible to christian ear no godly man may doubt unless he will deny Christ and his word the ancient father and the primitive church and you shall never give the catholic that have hang their precious soul upon your bare saying due satisfaction in this without public and penitent recantation of this you follow neither scripture nor father if with the father you will but observe due the circumstance of the 5. and 6. of John you may see it can be mean of the sacrament and therefore you be deceive in the scripture because the sacrament be not then ordain again by the judgement of Augustine the speech be figurative and therefore the sense spiritual and so Augustine stand with we against you old lyra say that the six of speak not one word direct and pertinent of the sacrament the father say nothing direct direct yet you against scripture and father will wrest these text indirect and impertinent to speak of the sacrament before it be a sacrament if we shall commit such palpable error against scripture father and common sense you will call we common sot without learning or sense plain murderer and soul slayer from which sin the lord deliver we both now I will ask your conscience this question how dare you cut off Christ word by the waste mean you plain in that sure no for if you have recite the whole verse it have mar your market you only set down the middle of the sentence conceal the beginning of it and curtal the end of it and so think that to serve your turn and blind the eye of the simple but God will I will discover the truth which you seek to cover and let the simple people see how far and how long you have deceive and mislead they to the great peril of their soul with wrest the scripture and wrong the father Christ whole sentence be this verse 51. I be the live bread which come down from ^eaven if any man eat of this bread he shall live for ever and this you cut off then follow your proof the bread that I will give be my flesh John 6.50 than you curtail ^he rest which I will give for the life of the world if you have deal plain and deliver Christ word to God people without substraction as Christ deliver ^hem unto you than the people even the simple of they will not have so ^ong be deceive by you for the former part of the verse and the late con^ealed by you expound Christ mind and bewray your error let i but reason with you out of the first part of the verse from the property of this bread here speak of by Christ first it be live bread and give eternal ^ife to the receiver you do not this come from heaven you do not who so eat of this can be damn but many eat of you and die eternal and therefore the very property of this bread show plain that it can ^e mean of your singing-cake as have be prove before unto you because they have no life in themselves and therefore can neither give life nor preserve ^ife unto other the late part of the verse concern Christ flesh which be this true bread and thus out of Christ word I prove that the flesh of CHRIST speak of in this place can be the flesh of CHRIST which you will have give in the sacrament how and when m. Rider reiterate strange deduction argument and reprehension 43. do not marvel at these deduction of m. rider to be often apply and reply for in 20. Fitzimon month space they be collect he may eftsoons forget what he have former engross and so forget himself and what he have say before he may insert the self same thing often or not find in so long study any thing to his purpose but rather wheresoever he turn his eye and convert his mind to be whole against his cause and condemn he and it he think good to make many mess of small cheer and to furnish the table with one only provision by art of cookery diverse prepare otherwise it be hard that in one sheet of paper they shall be so often inculcate yet than I answer (@) before in the 40. number that the of mankind JESUS Christ our lord be our food in the sacrament whosoever of discretion eat he not or by contempt after denunciation of his pleasure and merciful gift of himself shall never be save whe^ by impossibility or impediment any be debar from eat he they may be save by have intention to discharge their duty thereto at convenient opportunity all that eat of the consecrate host worthy for if unworthy it be their damnation they shall be save unless by their own wickedness they deprive themselves of the benefit thereof this be answer before and to the same old frivolous objection the same resolution may suffice but in vain of a coocow be any new and variable song expect very if I do think that all reader of his book do not plain observe his objection and matter to be handle in a method worthy of all deploration and by he to be huddle shuffle and juggle miserable disorder intricate and erroneus I will display it palpable but let we not long interrupt he I be here challenge to have cut by the waist and curtail Christ word indeed I confess when I intend to select brief proof out of scripture that my meaning be not to allege whole book o^ chapter of scripture as they be entire each of they by their writer deliver wherefore to affirm that I produce no^ whole scripture in that manner I confess it willing as also that by example of all writer sacred and profane I bring but such as seem to i sufficient against my adversary in that sense I yield to have cut by the waist and curtail scripture but that I have not competent for my matter deliver testimony of scripture or that I deceitful conceal any disproof thereof to my cause or that any syllable of scripture contradict i which any other have or may allege with modesty I may confident deny what then if this reproach be find but a pretext to avoid the brunt of the matter and under the shadow thereof not to have weacknes discover Front l. 2. c. 13. for so p. Claudius surmount by his enemy yet put up his flag of victory come cunning off and escape his wonder foe and diverse expert captain when they have most will to retire from imminent danger they raise fire and smoke not where they be but where they be not purloin their force in the mean time by darkness into their hold yet never do any of they practice this skill more oft than my adversary he blame i like as Goliath blame David 7. reg. 17.43 that he have but few and weak weapon for bring too little against he that by the mask of such a challenge he may sly remove from what torment his mind and quite overthrow his profession it appear by that ensue I have to prove that Christ give his body corporaly in the sacrament and thereto allege these word of Christ the bread that I will give be my flesh m. rider find that he can never deflect these word to his figure and representation raise up a mist or mask in reprehend i for cut by the waist curtailling and subtract pertinent scripture which say he be bring the simple have not be deceive I will fain know of any ^ne in his perfect sense do not what he have supply which I ^ad omit rather confirm then infirm my belief I believe ^hat the b. sacrament be Christ that descend from heaven and the sacred flesh which he be to give for the life of the world the word of Christ by he allege do confirm the same for ^e promise it shall be his flesh which he will give for the ^yfe of the world when he will give they the bread here mention be not therefore all reader by m. Rider account no better than dunce when he persuade they that these word be against our belief which of all other confirm it most for if the bread which he will give by himself in express term be declare to be the self same flesh which he will deliver in his passion for the life of the world how be it not believe how be it say to be only a figure how be this say to be against we but by this time it be know that there be no slandre in his tongue nor any regard due to his talk as be one who it satisfy to have say any thing it import not how little to the purpose but reader attend neither his word nor i but believe thy own eye when thou may behold whether of we tell the truth for I never say it to be only a figure appellation or representation I concur in the same word by Christ assure and utter and follow no imagination or construction of dream brain misledd even by their own confession by uncertain spirit as m. Rider do whether of we then do these word impugn a tub be never so full of sound as when it be empty so be not m. rider more full of noyize then when he be destitut of all other matter for than flourish he in his exception exclamation apostrophe etc. as a mere circulator or tooth draw physician under a banner of rot tooth and impostume when his stomach and purse be most empty than he plead and prate most endless this also be the three time of reply these same objection as appear in the 40. number he that have no change may be allow to turn and return his coat one m. Sabinus chamber on Christimas eave last pass 1604. give i under his hand that m. Rider defend under he for bachelershipp of art in Oxford 1581. although he take in new park great pain with he at the request of two of his own ant by who m. Rider be relieve yet that he can never make entrance for m. rider head into philosophy nor for philosophy into his head this foresay gentleman be at this hour in place and account of great trust who to be better believe add this secret token that m. Rider contrary to the law of the university proceed master in the self same year of his bachelershipp not without perjury in his witness marvel not therefore that he want variety of argument and knowledge especial in the high science of divinity when he can not enter in at the gate of philosophy which only lead to knowledge to the matter last rehearse further answer be also give at the num. 37. and 40. rider 44. Christ flesh promise in the six of John be only give on the cross but the sacrament be not the cross therefore in the sacrament the flesh of Christ be not give so that these argument ground upon Christ own word which you conceal confute you and your carnal presence in the sacrament for your sacramental bread neither come from heaven nor your imagine flesh of Christ make by the priest can be this flesh here speak of for it be offer once not often as you teach and that by himself not by the priest upon the cross not in your mass and that for the plenary remission of the sin of all believer not for the temporal benefit of some particular person quick or dead as the priest please whether Christ word teach Christ flesh to have be only give on the cross Fitzimon 44. this argument aver effectualy the precedent attestation as be out of all the 19 mood and three figure allow in philosophy for by have the medium or mean twice in the or late part of the proposition it shall be in the second figure and be deform in that figure it be exclude out of all the rest the deformation appear that the second proposition shall have be and be not in this manner but the flesh of Christ in the sacrament be not only give on the cross from which it vary by omit all the former part and exchange the be give on the cross into the be of a material cross the conclusion also be misshapen as which ought only to have be therefore the flesh of Christ in the sacrament be not promise in the six of Ihon. because I be rom. 1.14 debtor make a debtor to the learned and unlearned I have borrow licence of the unskilful in philosophy to have in a start follow this matter in his kind now to the capacity of all I answer to the first proposition the 19 untruth that it be evident the 19 untruth and against Christ express promise in the 6. of s. John promise that beside his give his flesh to be crucify he will also give himself to be eat of we say unless you eat etc. i answer to the next that it be true that Christ flesh in the sacrament be not only give on the cross as be also give to be eat in the sacrament the conclusion be contain in the premise and so deny or affirm as the premise all the residue be either specify and reverse in the 40. or 43. numbre or else be void speech at random need no further resolution behold belove reader joan. 6. v. 51.53.55 to these word of Christ this bread which I will give be my flesh for the life of the world no word of worth or wit be reply but time joan. 14.6 cap. 7.17 and wound waste in most idle divagation be Christ the truth be his word as the evangelist affirm the verity why then the bread he give be his flesh not his figure then his flesh be not only crucify but also eat then his flesh be meat true and not figurative to answer therefore to these pregnant and infallible word of Christ himself only that we mistake not show how the father deny when and what they affirm apparent that Christ word be spiritual and therefore not literal and for other answer to digress into reproach to multiply word to beat the wound not show any defence or warrant of scripture or father for your figure only without verity appellation only without substance representation only without commodity such aunswear I say be brief psal 4. v. 3. to love vanity and to seek lie the three proof of the catholic priest out of the six of John to prove Christ carnal presence in the sacrament Catholicque priest Vers. 55. my flesh be meat true and my blood be drink true rider 45. if you shall ask your boy in his grammar rule a question if he answer not in the same case or by the same tense of a verb that the^ question be ask by you will count he a silly grammatist but if you ask your sophister a question in and he answer in you will ta^^ he for a improper and impertinent answer but most of all if a great divine be ask a question to prove the manner of a thing and he neglect or omit that as too hard or impossible for he prove the matter that be never demand or doubt of what will the reader think of this matter this man and this proof sure he must say either he understand not the state of the question or else he be not able to prove the question and so use this shameful shift i^ steed of a sufficient proof all the catholic in this kingdom expect to be satisfy by your answer touch the manner of Christ presence in the sacrament whether it be carnal or spiritual and whether he must be eat by faith spiritual or the tooth carnal and your answer be as improper and impertinent as either grammatist or sophister for you leave the manner of Christ presence which you shall prove and bring the matter of his presence which be never in question say my flesh be meat true etc. how this your answer do relish of learning let the learned judge when a^ the catholic in the kingdom hang their soul on your say be these you contentment you give they if they ask you how they must eat Christ fle^ and drink Christ blood than you tell they my flesh be meat in deed and my blood (@) drink in deed do you answer their question or satisfy their conscience or resolve their doubt alas no. thus you have deal dally and deceive a long time Christ people with these your improper impertinent unprofitable nay untrue answer and yet you will be call father doctor and what not but I pray you tell i why you add not the next word of Christ you think they be against you but if you have deal as man have God fea^ before your eye you will not have stay there for the next verse plain discover your bad deal with the simple people for that answer their question and that will satisfy all good catholic in this point for if you ask there the holy ghost this question how must God child eat Christ flesh and drink Christ blood he will answer you that whosoever dwell in Christ and Christ in he eat Christ flesh and drink Christ blood but the faithful only dwell in Christ and Christ in they therefore the faithful only eat Christ flesh and drink Christ blood whether it be in hear the word in baptism or in the lord supper as you have hear before if you have add this verse it h^^ overthrow your carnal presence in the sacrament and your oral eat of Chris^ with your mouth tooth etc. but as you wrong the catholic with a impertiti^^ answer and as you abuse they by keep back the next word of Christ which expound his own meaning so here you abuse your holy father the pope and your dear mother the church of Rome in expound this text contrary to the roman sense the second part of the catholic first proof by scripture 45. here in the word of Christ be assure Fitzimon for the matter that it be flesh and consequent not his appellation only for the manner that it be true and consequent not figurative only yet do this proctor of the Protestant profession only to cavil tell that the matter be never in question and that the manner be not prove I say then the boy in grammar or the sophist that will not conceive the state of the question propound and expound unto he by Christ himself not obscure or doubtful but evident yet affirm that instruction have not be give he be to have many stripe according to God word proverb 10. v. 10. Ose. 4.14 the not understand people shall be beat etc. of the rest whether the faithful only dwell in Christ and only dweller in he eat he and that it be all one to hear the word and to communicate as here be affirm appear in the 33. 34. 35. and 43. numbre 46. for you take this flesh of Christ which be our true meat rider to be the flesh which be bear of the virgin and suffer on the cross but the pope and church of Rome say contrary for these be the word of the canon dist. 2. pag. 434. canon col. 4. read the gloss and you may see your error as in a glass the flesh and blood of Christ say your own church of Rome must be consider two manner of way either for the spiritual and divine flesh speak of by Christ my flesh be meat in deed etc. and except you drink his blood etc. or else for that his flesh which be crucify and that his blood shed by the sharp lance of a cruel soldier so that here you forsake your roman catholic faith and become apostate from the church of Rome thus you abuse the catholic in make they believe you teach as the pope teach and you do not therefore either the pope or you must err gross teach contrary but that all man may see that not only this pope but also other pope have hold the contrary opinion to your new broach heresy I will allege he that you dare not contradict innocentius lib. 4. cap. 14. sacramento pag. 179. that be innocentius that first beget your abortive the lord Christ when he speak of the spiritual eat say except you eat the flesh of the son of man etc. loe here be another pope against you for you late jesuite semynary rhemist and priest take this as speak of Christ flesh in the sacrament and they take it for that spiritual and divine flesh of Christ whereon all the faithful feed by faith as well before Christ incarnation as since his ascension the pope your father and Rome your mother witness against you priest and the rest of their degenerate child I will bring more witness against your untrue exposition and allegation but that I think it sufficient that the parent testimony be the strong evidence against their degenerate child and after the pope allege Augustine and the canon and then conclude against your carnal eat of Christ flesh most strong why say your pope prepare thou thy tooth to eat and thy belly to be fill believe and thou have eat he that believe eat for the flesh of Christ be not eat to salvation but to destruction unless it be eat spiritual and there in the next chapter pap. 180. the pope give this marginal note Christ be our spiritual eucharist not our carnal food in the sacrament and in the same page he say this be not meat for the body but for the soul and if it be meat for the soul than it must be receive by faith not the mouth spiritual not carnal you see now the scripture father pope old and new the text and gloss of your dear mother the church of Rome against you and lest you shall cavil I have allege the book chapter distinction and page and if you will still tell the catholic that these place by i allege be not true than I tell you all your own author and print be false for I allege father pope and canon of your own print and if you doubt look unto your own book and print print anno. 1599 and you shall find they so verbatim unless your late Ind^^ have blot out the truth as in many thing it have whether the pope and church of Rome do in their decretal deny Christ in the sacrament to be the same that be bear of the virgin Marie Fitzimon 46. the decretal and gloss tell only that Christ may be consider either spiritual as he be in the sacrament or as he be on the cross with his sensible quantity and innocentius instruct that we may receive virgin and in cruse his true body receive from the virgin and which hang on the cross sacramentaly that be say he under the form or spiritualy by faith only such testimony confirm apparent our doctrine and be opposite to our adversary without reason or rhyme our spiritual m. rider for the only mention make of spirituality certify to make for his purpose think he have as good right to all testimony contain spirituality although otherwise they be most repugnant to he as to all tyethe and fruit of his deanery bequeath for use altogether opposite to his wont office of spirituality as if he fulfil they in the mean time by several title be here make up the 20. untruth that our canon teach contrary to we either general the 20. untruth or particular in this point for do we say that Christ be present realy corporaly and substantia so do they dist. 2. consecr. cap. according to his flesh assumpt for the life of the world do we say that it be the same body which be bear of the virgin and crucify so do they dist. 2. consecr. cap. this which be by we do be the body take from the virgin for it be true the flesh of Christ which be crucify which be bury do we say that good and bad do receive Christ corporaly the good to their salvation the bad to their damnation so do they cap. sieut judas etc. the body and blood of Christ be no less in they of who the apostle say he that eat unworthy do eat judgement to himself do we say that it be not only a figure but also the truth so do they ibid. cap. the body of Christ be both the verity and the figure the verity when the body and blood of Christ be make by the virtue of the holy ghost of the substance of bread and wine in the virtue of he that be the figure which be externaly perceive now if you ask i why in so clear concourse with our opinion m. rider so resolute assure these decretal and pope to be against we I answer only because he love joan. 12. the glory of man more than the glory of God and to convice he palpable of a sear or cauterize conscience not so much by another as by himself consider his word in this place you take the flesh of Christ which be the true meat to be the flesh which be bear of the virgin and suffer on the cross but the pope of Rome say contrary else where before and after he say that the primative church and ancient father suppose the contrary to our opinion so specify a whole thousand year after Christ but this by himself shall be whole overthrow against himself in his debate Kemnitius his opinion s. augustin word say he be these August in psal 9^ and etc. etc. which take flesh of Marie and because in that flesh he walk here upon earth he give to we that flesh to eat to our salvation etc. so that m. Rider confess in express term that by the word of s. augustin the same Christ which take flesh of the virgin Marie and who walk here on earth give we that flesh to eat to our salvation therefore what before he say in our opinion to be contrary to pope of Rome and the father here he unsay in declare such to have be the opinion of s. augustin as he confess we do hold the 21. untruth have not he then make a large room to seat here his own 21. foul untruth have not he assure that as often as he have or shall deny the father to be of our opinion which have happen in most of his discourse sermon and all his book that so often he have be and will be to himself such a disprover dan. c. 13. as David be to the discordant judge leave he therefore as the apostle jude say jude versic. 13. vomit his own confusion I advertise he for a shutinge up of this point not to speak so prophanly of Christ word and presence in his sacrament as perpetualy to term they carnal and carna understand for although we sometime understand carnal and corporal or substantial to be all one yet in the mystery of religion we reject such phrase as bear often in common speech a bad and odious construction of sensuality and voluptuousness it be in deed use by Protestant to make our doctrine more odious to the ear of simple people yet be it more to their own reproach profess themselves christian to tax and reprehend Christ doctrine and the mystery of religion for carnal then to we we disallow no less the term then such interpretation thereof and meaning for as we say Christ be bear of the b. virgin enter among his disciple rose ascend true substantia corporaly and yet not carnaly so use we the same form of speech of his be in the sacrament and eschew the other if not for heretical yet for capharnaical they otherwise which will first exclude corporal and also spiritual as appear in the 26. number content with only figurative their final scope be to exclude also Christ corporal and true conception Castal in praefat. Bibl. eduard 6. nativity and whole life and death and with Castali^ to say the more they and peruse the word of the lord the less they find the messiah to be yet come for if Beza one of the principal of they be believe as common upon his word protestant in our country or at least puritan do depend then Christ have bestow no other body upon christian in the sacrament either on they that believe only figurative receive or on they that believe both corporal and spiritual than he do upon the jew from the begyne say Beza lib. con Heshus fol. 284. Colloq. mompel fol. 77. epist theol. 65. pag. 283 in Diallact that they have his true body not only by efficacy but also by essence and nature even in the time of Abraham to which word m. rider among the rest subscribe in this place say of Christ presence in the sacrament whereon all the faithful feed by faith as well before Christ incarnation as since his ascension such man by degree as I say practise to abolish all belief in the true body of Christ true bear true worship by the king true conversant with we and true dead and bury for we whereas they say that after his birth who we esteem to have be Christ our lord we have no other body of Christ either in essence or nature then the jew have in Abraham time so long before the very mother of Christ or Christ himself have take any body if then they follow the phrase carnal and carnaly to tell only that we believe contrary to they that since Christ birth by his institution of the sacrament we have a more true corporal and substantial body than have the jew in Abraham time we will accept such phrase grateful otherwise in manner aforesaid we disclaim they see in the 34. number 47. rider but I will of these your former improper and impertinent testimony out of the six of John conclude and urge no further but this one argument against you and they and then let the indifferent reader judge whether you have not deceive God people by misunderstanding the holy scripture or no whosoever teach that there be a carnal real presence of Christ in the sacrament before consecration be a liar a depraver of the truth and a deceiver of the people but some late pope the new church of Rome this be unanswerable with the college of cardinal new create jesuit semynary and all the romish priest now in Ireland teach that there be a carnal real presence of Christ in the sacrament before consecration therefore some late pope the new church of Rome with the college of cardinal new create jesuit semynary and all the roman priest now in Ireland be liar depraver of the truth and deceiver of the people the mayor or first proposition be your own doctrine for you teach that before be pronounce there be no consecration the assumption or late proposition be as clear for you persuade the simple people to believe that these text out of the six of John prove a carnal presence of Christ in the sacrament a year before be by Christ pronounce or the sacrament by Christ institute therefore the conclusion that you be liar and deceiver of the people be inevitable thus the catholic of this kingdom by the rule of your own religion you have deceive in teach Christ carnal presence in the sacrament a year before either sacrament or consecration in the sacrament be institute and this your leaden divinity without care or conscience you thrust upon the simple people as sound doctrine but if there be no other error or heresy hold and teach by you but this one point it be sufficient to make all the catholic in this kingdom nay in Christendom to forsake your opinion consider your ignorance or malice presume to justify that which holy scripture ancient father God church yea and the particular church of Rome with their bishop archbishop and pope for a thousand year after Christ ascension never speak or hear of and therefore it be no old faith teach by they but a new heresy invent by you but now to the rest of your proof of m. rider argument and their sufficiency and how the 6. chapter of s. John do belong to the b. sacrament notwithstanding it be before the consecration Fitzimon 47. as painter that by skill can not make difference betwixt a cat a horse and a dog be wont to tell by word under their picture this be a cat this be a horse and this be a dog even so m. rider when he make a argument in his own opinion substantia yet lest you shall not so conceive thereof he add before or behind or in the margin this be a unanswerable argument whereof you have a instance before the 38. number and in this place yet I undertake to answer this argument brief and sufficient and only by say as before in the 41. number by consent of catholic and protestant that we teach Christ real presence in the sacrament but after and not before consecration yet that such gift be promise and specify for the future time according to the word of Christ the bread which I will not that I do give etc. in the 6. chapter of s. John not that by such promise it be give at that time but after as the word import what parcel again of this argument be now unaunsware either according to catholic or protestant yea or according to m. rider deduction say that eat of Christ after the institution of the sacrament be prove out of the 56. verse of the six of John in such manner as it be damnable to doubt thereof how be it thence prove unless such verse and chapter belong to the eat of Christ therefore by himself the 22. untruth be make answerable this unanswerable argument and thereby the 22. untruth acknowledge Luther tom. sept. defence verb. even fol. 397. against who and his brother in this opinion Luther who they father of truth thus describe the argument which they call unanswerable their greediness to defend their credit make they mad that whatsoever they take hold of though it be but a straw yet they imagine it to be a sword or spear and that at every stroke they kill thousand again they think to have say pass well Luther fol. 394. 405. 381. 382. and much to the purpose although they touch not one argument and again in their book there be no pith or substance but only frivolous crack by who can ever this be more verify then by my good friend m. rider who deal in every point be so silly and defective towards God word father decretal and his own brother yet how he suppose that ride like a second Perseus upon Pegasus he have transform all his adversary into pillar by take all power of answer from they o confident champion but let we he forward and observe how little his discourse amend math. 26.26 Christ take bread do bless it and break it catholic priest and give it to his disciple and say take and eat this be my body this be my blood of the new testament which shall be shed for many for remission of sin 48 gentleman this be your proof out of Christ own word rider and this be deliver by Christ own mouth at the time of the institution of the supper and the night before his bless passion and either this must help you or else you be helpless but Christ willing I will plain show this your proof to be your reproof and I pray God for Christ his sake that the eye of your understanding may be open to see the truth and your heart touch to receive and confess the truth and renounce your error and so cease to deceive God people and the queen subject lest a worse thing come unto you all the doubt and controversy of this question betwixt we depend on this text which you say must be take proper and literal we say sacramental improper figurative and mystical and our opinion God will shall be prove by scripture ancient father and pope and the old church of Rome the three part of the catholic first proof by scripture 48. the psillians a people in Afric near the garamant Fitzimon Sabel l. 4. c. 9 Herod l. 4. and Goll. l. 6. c. 11. be molest with southern wynd to which their country lie open in most simple manner arm themselves to a conflict with they such will be my folly if I will arm my writing to incountre a bagg-pype or sack of wound only especial it be not of the sweette but let he conjoin any matter true or false and I will attend thereon to avowche or avoid it rider 49. but this be strange that man of your great learning as the catholic (@) you to be will deal so childish and weak in so weighty a matter be not offend that I say you handle this childish for in school he that allege for the probation of a proposition the proposition itself for the probation of a text the text itself be count childish and it be a childish point of sophistry and a fallacy to be use among young scholar not to be practise among simple catholic the catholic demand of you how you prove Christ carnal presence in the sacrament and you bring in which be the proposition whereupon all this disputation and contention depend after the same manner a man may prove the bless virgin Marie to be John the evangelist mother John 19.27 and say still notwithstanding any text bring against he as Christ say matter behold thy mother say what you will the word be Christ word therefore they must be true they need no interpretation Christ be not a liar and if a man ask a confirmation and say how prove you this proposition of Christ to be true literal and in deed as Christ speak it this be a loose kind of logic you bring in for confirmation of the proposition the proposition itself and say matter behold thy mother Th^^ when the catholic demand of you to prove your proposition of whether it must be take corporal or spiritual grammaticallie o^ mystical in school it be call than you bring the proposition itself and say to prove and so you will prove which be very childish and a beg of that as grant which be yet in question betwixt we and undetermined whether the word behold thy mother have one or like sense with the word this be my body Fitzimon 49. we approve our sacrament to be the true body and blood of Christ because he be the truth and who say as the prophet say be effect joan. 14.6 he speak and it be do psal 32.9 he command and they be create because he I say 1. cor. 11.24 matt. 26.28 himself do affirm it to be his body which be to be deliver and his blood which be to be shed and consequent his true body and his true blood which true and not only figurative be deliver and shed these powerful word of Christ which your great melancthon say melanct. l. 3. epist. Zuing. and Oecolamp fol. 132. mat. 24.35 will be one day thunder to the misbeliever and which word when heaven and earth will fail will remain be our foundation if the bless virgin Marie be say to be the mother and s. John the son it be say in such manner as only to give to understand that he shall honour and cherish she as his mother and no otherwise and so the scripture show he conceive it as be without any circumstance conjoin to conceive otherwise but in the b. sacrament Christ a whole year before in the six of s. John have forewarn joan. 6.55 etc. that he will give to be eat his true flesh which shall be their meat true and his true blood which shall be their drink true at the last supper make his new testament all be very attentive in solemn manner he take bless and break bread say this be my body etc. so that it be not a idle proof or to prove it to be Christ corporaly when we show Christ our omnipotent lord to have affirm it with the former circumstance more to this effect shall follow God willing in our 62. number 50. but you shall have prove by other place of scripture rider that change the nature and substance of bread and wine and you shall have prove by the scripture esay 7.10 that the prophet foreshow this strange conception of Christ to be conceive of bread as well as they do foreshow his conception of the virgin and you shall have prove by the scripture that it be ^ot only a sacrament but a sacrifice not only eucharistical but as well propitiatory and not only profitable to the quick but also to the dead nay not only for plague among man but murrain and disease also among beast now show by the scripture that have such a sense that the simple people may repose themselves more secure upon your opinion and proof but till you prove it which you can never do they must know you have and do deceive they with false exposition against verity antiquity authority yea and consent of the old church of Rome whether Christ word do testify a change of nature and whether it be prophesy 50. the nature of bread and wine must be change Fitzimon when they be turn into the body and blood of Christ and one proof serve to prove the one and the other what prove Eva to be a woman gen. 2. exod. 43. exod. 7.17 joan. 2.8 prove she not to ^e a bone whereof she be make what prove Moses rod turn to a serpent and after into a rod the river of Egypt turn into blood water turn into wine and all other such alteration prove than not to have be what thy be before the prophet do show this not conception but transubstantiation when they fortould that Christ shall be a priest according to the order of Melchisedech who sacrifice in bread and wine whereby be signify psal 109.4 hebr. 5.6.20 c. 11.17 jewel in his reply art. 1. say jewel the sacrifice of the holy communion I say who sacrifice by confession of Whitaker as also do Christ according to his be a priest of that order and that can not be conceive of either of both but in bread and wine for the other cruental sacrifice of his passion be do not active by Christ but only passive and that rather according to the order of Aaron then of Melchisedech Malach. 1. the prophet do show this transubstantiation when they fortould that among the gentile from east to west there shall be a clean oblation offer to God name in every place etc. which can not be understand of any thanksgiving or praise as you imagine such be not peculiar to the gentile chrysostom hom. in ps. 95. but frequent among the jew upon which word say s. chrysostom behold how clear and plain he have interpret the mystical table which be the unbloody host yea besides all other proof by scripture and father which by the mercy of God shall be afford in our treat of the mass take this also from your Beza Beza in cap. 22. luc. u. 20. Regius in 2. par. resp. 2. c. 7. Bibl. l. 1. paschate pag. 25. 26. Vrbanus Regius and Bibliander that before the come of Christ the ancient israelit be command to celebrate a figurative communion in bread and wine in token that the messiah will institute no figurative but true and substantial communion in the same by which be prove to the full contentment even of the least indifferent that for who soever Christ offer it may be profitable be they quick or dead such sacrifice contain true and substantia the same Christ will be also in the same manner profitable whereof see afterward in treat of the mass as also it be palpable demonstrate that the sacred body of Christ supply the place of bread by his say that bread be his body the substance of bread be no long extant for be bread it can not be his body persona unite to his deity unless he have be impanated as he be incarnate rider 51 and here I be sorry I must tell you so plain that you wrong great and grievous God truth and the queen subject in thus misalleadge this text 1 first by addition of a word 2 second by misunderstanding and misapplication of another word 3 three by omission nay plain subtraction of a whole verse addition for the first which be addition you add this particle it which be neither in the greek nor in your roman Latin bible no nor in your rhemish testament nor ever see in any doctor of antiquity and this fillable alter the sense and pervert Christ meaning and be add by you to maintain that which the text otherwise can not have any show to bear Fitzimon 51. this sorrow of you be as true as the rest for your toilsome wrest your brain to every least shadow of a fault and to run after your simple imagination as a cat run after her own tail as if you have espy a fault do show you will be inward glad to observe any true fault but from my will I assure you right and sincerity shall only proceed I trust also my skill in this matter will not be behind concern the addition of it that it shall alter the sense and pervert Christ meaning it make up apparent the 23. untruth the 23. untruth for what Christ take it he do bless it he do break it he do give no more nor no less be signify with it then without it and for my part that it be omit so it be conceive I leave to your choice that it shall be conceive appear to all capacity nether in so small a slip will I want the defence and example of m. Rider himself in his active and passive discourse follow upon the word which he construe he break it whereas but for the sense it shall be say only he break if you may add it for better understanding lawful why will you reprehend i and that so heinous to have insert it 52. second you misunderstand and misapply this word bless rider misapplication rhe. test. 1. cor. 11. sect. 9 for we say it signify to give thanks with the mouth and you say to make cross with the finger we say it be speak by Christ to his father you say it be speak to over or upon the bread and chalice and that he use power and active word upon they we contrary will show out of the word itself that it have no such signification when m. Rider cite or omit our author 52. you in your dedicatory epistle Fitzimon and else where do vaunt that you will confound we by our own father quote our own book our own print etc. this indeed be perform only when what be affirm be true understand make nothing for you or against we but we complain on you to yourself that in true accusation which will make heinous against we you cite no author no book no point but as I say before upon your own bare word have misinform you pursue your own relation thereby as it be behooveful for your cause eschue your controversy for example sake who of we tell you that Christ flesh give for the life of the world be Christ only body separate as you affirm from his soul which of our book record that Christ with all his merit be receive by infidel dog cat and other beast as you inform in the 43. number when do any of we teach a carnal real presence of Christ in the sacrament before consecration as you affirm in the 47. number and when or be do any of we certify you as you here and a little after report that to bless be not to give thanks or to pray but only as we vain and foolish teach say you to cross with two finger and a thumb with mumble word and charm cross whereby we forgive synn past and preserve that day from future danger why in these and the like be not our author book page and print allege the true answer be joan. 3. n. 19 for he that do wicked hate light that his work may not be reprehend but good lord if you have intend as you late pretend that you will prove your opinion true that Christ be not proper and littera but only sacramentaly improper figurative and mistica in the sacrament why will you seek and by-maters of blessing charm and mumble and gallopp after they in so long discourse but since we must have patience perforce without reason or remedy let we wait upon our wander knight who may above all writer of himself affirm out of Ovid ovid. now here now there and both unorderly I run rider 53. one part of the original word in greek signify in english speech utter with the mouth not a magical cross of or with finger and the other greek word which must be judge betwixt we do signify to laud to praise and to bless and blessing praise and thanksgiving be all one as anon you shall hear Christ himself so to expound it and all the evangelist and Paul agree in one congruence touch this matter against you how bless and blessing be use in scripture but first I will show the simple how diverse this word bless be use in the scripture to bless God be to praise he and give he thanks for all his mercy as you have in Luke Luke 24.53 and the disciple continue in the temple laud and blessing God I hope you will not say they cross God with their finger or consecrate he to make he more holy but praise he with their mouth for if you take blessing of God in that finger sense then see the absurdity you fall into joh. 1.18 joh 4.24 Anthropomorphitae first against scripture you must hold that God the father it not a spirit but have a bodielie shape that may be touch and cross with our corporal finger if this you hold join with those ancient heretic of Egypt who hold that God have a body and member as man have what it be for one man to bless another gen. 27. gen 48 Num. 6.23 let your high priest of Rome and you low priest of Ireland learn of Aaron God high priest how to bless God people and so cease to deceive they any more and the second absurdity nay blasphemy be this that you shall make GOD who be holiness itself the holy by your cross but I hope you will not take blessing in this sense but join with the disciple and we that blessing of GOD signify praise of GOD or pray to GOD for one man to bless another be nothing else but to pray for they and to beseech God that he will bless they that be defend they protect they and be merciful unto they so Isaac bless jacob and jacob the son of joseph and so the lord command Moses to speak to Aaron and to his son say thus shall you bless the child of Israel and say unto they the lord bless thou and keep thou the lord make his face to shine upon thou and be merciful unto thou etc. a christian pattern not only for priest but also for pastor and parent daily to practice the one for his flock the other for his family yet both in the lord and from the Lord which blessing be derive from God mercy and hang not on the end of priest finger again you see blessing be pray with the mouth not cross with the finger as you vain and foolish make your ghostly child believe that if you cross they with your two finger and a thumb they be pardon for their sin past and preserve that day from future danger and evil spirit which finger blessing of you be as powerful to pardon sin and fear away spirit as three sup of the chalice be to cure the chinne-cough this blessing be command by God to be practise by Aaron the highpriest and the rest of the priest upon God child but how far your blessing differ from this the simple may judge for first God command this blessing the pope your blessing this be by mouth only you with some mumble word and charm cross with your finger this blessing be a prayer to desire God to bless and you teach that in your breath and finger there be a power and a certain work or impression of some blessing upon they by mean of your say mumble and cross but your priest agree with God priest and your blessing with finger with God priest blessing with prayer of the heart and mouth even as well as truth and falsehood light and darkness superstition and religion Christ and belial and if the catholic will but diligent read this commandment of GOD give to the highpriest and priest in this place touch the manner how they shall bless God people I be resolve that few catholic in this kingdom hereafter will kneel at your foot or beg at your hand any finger benediction or cross because be have no warrant from God word and therefore ten thousand of they not worth a farthing how the priest bless the sacrament you cross the cup or chalice with a set number of cross and gesture sometime blow over the chalice sometime cross it sometime hide it that none must see it then join and disjoin of your thumb and two finger with many more such apish toy childish trick and charm prank which have neither foundation nor relation to Christ action and institution how the preacher of the gospel bless the bread and the cup. but we in administer this holy sacrament confess the greatness and grievousness of our sin that can no otherwise be pardon but in Christ bloody and bitter passion and we give thanks to God for Christ bless obedience to the shameful death of the curse cross by which he have satisfy God wrath and wrought our reconciliation in the blood of the same and continue this sacrament as he institute and command in reverence and remembrance thereof without addition alteration or subtraction and pray that our unworthiness and want of faith hinder not our spiritual union and real presence with Christ which be offer in the word of institution and seal in the right receive of the sacrament this be the force and effect of this word bless the true use whereof Christ by his practice deliver the primitive church father and we imitate now whether your blessing in the sacrament and your blessing by cross the people or we come near to God word and Christ practice let the best mind to God truth judge and then with God truth join thus much for your addition misunderstanding and misapplication now to your omission or subtraction of a whole verse omission or subtraction you bring for proof of your carnal presence the 26. verse and the 28. verse Caluin proceed further Caluin 1. cor. 10.16 jewel con. hard. art. 1. diuis. 9 pa. 23. confute Erasmus and all other who endeavour to confound as all one blessing and give thanks jewel tell that the meaning of Christ word be take you bread bless it break it and give it in my remembrance now to my think reason will have advise our adversary to have make a clean contrary inference that if the greek usual word (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) to give thanks be some time and especial in our controversy take to bless that the proper word to bless especial to so solemn a ceremony ought not to be take only to give thanck somewhat also must be say of the blessing by make cross lest m. rider applaud to himself for not have disadvantage in any thing he have propound first then even by scripture be it manifest that when the angel be command to mark god especial elect Ezech. 9.4 Niceph. l. 2. c. 42. Basil l. c. 27. Tertull. l. athanas l. incarnate Hieron ep. Demetriaden and epist. 128. August tra. 18. in joan. Cyrill 4. Catech. chrysost hom. 21. 27. 36. pop. Antioch Ambros. Serm. 45. August serm. 19 118. in joan gretserun cruse l. 3. c. 6. Hieron pam. rustic and in Hilarion and antonius August epist. 59 lib. 22. ciu. c. 8. beda in hist. Augl l. 3. c. 26. the mark or character to have be the letter or our letter t. in their forehead which be a perfect cross to all man eye also by relation of Nicephorus of s. John evangelist when he have fortify himself with the sign of the cross he descend into the monument s. Basil and Tertullian affirm to make the sign of the cross to be a apostolical tradition Tertullian athanase Hierome augustin Cyrill of Jerusalem chrysostom Ambrose and all father without exception do exhort and advise all christian at rise appareil wash sit eat at every action and time to arm themselves with the sign of the cross as proper to christian whereof say s. augustin and this advance our victory this destroy witchcraft and frustrate all attempt of the devil without which say he again and all other father no sacrament be think due minister saint Hierom tell you how throng of people flock to have s. epiphanius and hilarion blessing to they and their child and write to rustic bishop of Narbon he blame he for disallow a simple secular priest to bless the people say shall not he bless the people who deserve to consecrate Christ s. augustin relate himself and other to have use like devotion beda tell how in England the godly christian will trudge before in high way and cross passage to obtain priest blessing by mouth or hand for the one do not exclude the other so that it be time m. rider to leave this form of argument by one truth to exclude the other when both may consist together I grant you spend this travail against the cross when you be a puritan now perhaps you dare not christian a child without it in the mean time by your great wisdom you have make to catholic and protestant many good point God be praise know which have be more to your behoof unrevealed to conclude the vanity of his long digression manifowld appear otherwise it be not also obscure in this that whether blessing and thanksgiving have be all one as be demonstrate not have to be yet it have import nothing in the world to our controversy for the blessing be accidental and not essential to the matter and form of consecration the use of it do only show a great solemnity follow by Christ in the institution of the sacrament and no necessity that we be often bid by m. rider to read these and those in greek gentle reader he bid we to do for ostentation what he can not do himself for in my particular knowledge and experience a blind man have as much sight in his eye as he have good greek in his head and if we have find in greek what he pretend you now understand how little it have be to his profit or our hindrance the 24. 25. 26 27 untruth untruth be heap in this last discourse plentiful the 24. notorious untruth be that we teach our spiritual child they be pardon from synn and preserve from danger and spirit if we cross they with two finger and a thumb the 25. that the pope and not God command our blessing with the cross the 26. that we use mumble word and charm cross we leave charm and conjure for heretic tertul. prescrip. c. 43. num. 100 Ezech. 9.4 the intermeddle of heretic and magician say Tertullian be notorious our cross be no charm unless God and his angel be charmer of which see after in the 100 number the 27. that we teach a certain power to be in our breath and finger such matter as these will seem to deserve our allegation where we teach these point but it be sufficient that unless they be believe upon Puritan faith troth and honesty there be no other proof to aver they now I will in this convict m. rider both to be a puritan although the puritant respect he not and also to misinform our doctrine and that by the protestant even of England and that before his majesty in the conference set forth by barlow 1605. pag. 73.74 as his royal majesty doubt not to acknowledge say I be give to understand by the bishop and I find it true that the papist themselves do never ascribe any power or spiritual grace to the sign of the cross such a testimony be a lawful defence I trow against m. Rider both that he degenerate from the doctrine of the bishop of England and falsify our doctrine which be now lawful warrant to think so of the cross as the best protestant do approve it the 28. untruth the 28. that our blessing agree with God priest blessing no more than superstition with religion for I have show it to have proceed from God by his angel to have be practise by his apostle and receive by all the father and primative church the 29. 30. 31. untruth the 29. 30. and 31. at least be include from the parcel your apish toy childish trick etc. to the end so perspicuous as no auditor most favourable will take in his account and discharge he more spare now let we give place m. rider be at leyngthe to tumble into his matter in controversy after his long peregrination to cross charm greek and reprehension rider 54. but now to the rest of the body of the text and controversy wherein first let we examine whether your two proposition this be my body and this be my blood of the new testament etc. be proper or figurative literal or sacramental for if they be improper borrow figurative and sacramental they prove neither your transubstantiation nor your carnal real presence but even plain disprove they augustin doctr. lib. 3 cap. 16. pag. 23. 1586. saint Augustine rule before recite if you will be rule by it but neither scripture nor father can rule you but you will over rule they will present satisfy you that these two proposition must be figurative the latter you confess but the former as yet you will not his word again for the reader good I will repeat and they be these if the scripture seem to command any vile or ill fact the speech be figurative as except you eat the flesh of the son of man and drink his blood you shall have no life in you Christ seem to command a wicked act that be carnal and gross to eat Christ flesh ether confute s. aug. or confess your error the first be impossible the second be commendable read it it contain but 6. or 7. line the marginal note there condeme your literal fence etc. it be therefore a figurative speech so that Augustine thus reason against you to eat Christ flesh and drink Christ blood corporal be a heinous thing therefore Christ word be figurative so that if to eat Christ flesh with our mouth and tear his flesh with our tooth as also actual drink of his blood be heinous and wicked why do you so eager press the literal fence of these your two proposition against truth against faith and the ancient father Augustine in that short 15. chap. of the same book immediate go before wish always the interpretation of these and all other figurative speech to be bring to the kingdom of charity to have their true exposition now if you expound this literal and proper you forsake Augustine rule charity kingdom and the apostolical and catholic exposition it be but small charity to devour the food of a friend but to eat and devour corporal and gutturallie the precious body and blood of our Christ and saviour it be no charity nay say Augustine it be plain impiety and a wicked and a most damnable fact and so to prove the action lawful Augustine will have you catholic but you will he Caphernai^^ and cannibal the kingdom of charity have ever take these and the like proposition to be figurative and the sense to be spiritual therefore if you will be loyal subject of charity kingdom show your subjection to her charitable and catholic exposition otherwise you will stand indict of spiritual and uncharitable rebellion that protestant by their own principle can not affirm Christ our saviour not to be spiritualy itself in the sacrament also that s. augustin disprove they 54. his late say that he have my hand Fitzimon to the great error which most safe he keep with he I grant to be true yet not to but against the error which to his perdition most safe as he say he keep with he which as a candle by finger snuff leave blackness and burn to the snuffer hand remain by their detraction more clear and in itself more delytsome as in all our process by God grace it have and shall more and more appear it be first the 32. untruth the 32. untruth that if these word of Christ be figurative and sacramental this be my body this be my blood of the new testament they will plain disprove our transubstantiation for it have be oft profess that we allow but not only as you do spiritual and figurative sense of these word not exclude real substantial and literal it appear in the number 14. 15. 31. 34. 40. 42. 46. 49. etc. you have bind yourself in your first position for which you reply as it be engross by yourself to stand upon a spiritual presence only to the faithful believer therefore no testimony or allegation will avail you where in only spiritual or only figurative be not comprise nay if it contain the word spiritual it must be also impertinent to your purpose unless you recant your agreement with the protestant martyr who seal with their blood as fox deliver fox act and pag. 1529. that the difference of doctrine between the faithful and papist concern the sacrament be that the papist say that Christ be corporaly under or in the form of bread and wine but the faithful say that Christ be not there neither corporaly nor spiritualy behold how you be engage that neither can you hold corporal or the so much speak of spiritual caveat in answer to our allegation of tindal c. 1 unless you degenerate from your protomartyr and primative protestancy to who and which you have bind yourself in express word to agree in unity and verity of doctrine now to our matter and s. augustin word first he do not say that they be figurative only and consequent be not against we as appear in the number late specify nor for you second he dispute not against our belief but against the capharnait August tom. 9 trac 27. in joan. of who he say eg^ do as they understand flesh not so do I give my flesh to eat but how say he do they understand flesh as it be tear from a carcase or sell in a shambles in such sense only and to such conceit will s. augustin have Christ word to be esteem figurative to wit in regard of they who as s. Cyrill l. 4. in joan. c. 22. say add immanes they surmise that they be provoke after the savage manner of beast to eat man raw flesh and drink his gore blood whereas Christ do far otherwise intend it as that he will be eat in the likeness of bread and wine which be figure of his operation in our soul but to say that for the seem of Christ word to be horrible or to be take figurative his substantial and real presence shall be exclude August tom. 6. con aduer. leg and prophet l. 2. c. 9 be most remote from s. augustin intention and all his writing behold here but one yet infallible and palpable proof thereof cord and and we receive with faithful hart and mouth jesus Christ man mediator betwixt God and man give his flesh to eat and his blood to drink although it seem more horrible to eat the flesh of man then to kill and to drink the blood of man then to shed it do be seem horrible to eat Christ flesh according to s. augustin and to drink his blood yea more horrible then to kill yet he assure we that not withstand such seem we shall eat and drink not his figure but his flesh and blood not in faithful hart only but also by mouth alas let s. augustin alone in life a Catholic friar or monk in his book a Catholic doctor in both a enemy and triumpher against heretic hitherto you have never bring s. augustin testimony ^ reg. 11. but as Urias take infortunate letter to his own destruction aug. l. 3. ciu. c. 16. Further s. augustin will have these figurative speech so long to be account figurative till charity consist with their meaning out of which you infer that Christ can not be eat corporalye it be say you far against charity but this consequence be far against charity Serm. Euan. a beda 1 cor. 10. and verity witness the same s. augustin say and and i who have invite who have he invite and what have he prepare our lord have invite his servant and prepare himself meat to they who dare devour his lord yet never the less he say who eat i live because of i where Christ be eat life be eat nether be he kill that he shall be eat but he quicken the dead when he be eat he feed but be not impair loe whether s. augustin think it inconvenient or against charity for any to eat his lord himself be the inviter himself the preparer himself the food loe whether the eat of Christ be a tear digest or consume of Christ tom. 2. epist. 50. Bonifac. in fine tom. 5. ciu. l. 2. c. 25. but will you know what be to be against charity kingdom s. augustin answer he be not partaker of divine charity who be a enemy of unity no catholic say he no fruitful communion therefore good m. rider aug. to. 10. verb. apo. ser. 22. let this golden exhortation of s. augustin take place after so many misinformation of his persuasion will God say he they will not fear they to who long time they have sell error for they respect they they be ashamed towards human infirmity and not towards invincible verity and they fear to be expostulate with all in this manner why therefore have you deceive we why have you seduce we why have you affirm so much ill and falsehood they shall answer if they fear God it be human to err but diabolical through animosity to remain in error and a little after let they say to their believer we have fail together let we retire from error together we have be guide to you and you follow to your fall will you not follow we when we conduct you to the church I pray God this exhortation may take effect according to the intention and worth thereof in the mean time it be the 33. untruth that we over-rule scripture and father the 33. 34. 35. 35. 37. untruth the 34. that we confess to be figurative that be as you understand only figurative these word of Christ this be my blood of the new testament the 35. that augustin reason against capharnait who will not believe the word of Christ no more they protestant in these time the 36. that by our literal exposition we forsake augustin rule charity kingdom apostolical and Catholic exposition the 37. that we be caphernait and cannibal I will not requite his theon style and bad demeanour know that it be for want of matter because Eccli. 21. there be no sense where there be bitterness if vaunt be victory reproach reproof despise disconfiting m. rider have be as victorious as Cesar or Alexander as subtle and solid a disprover as a second prophet Daniel as great a vanquisher as the fair king Arthure rider amb. lib. 4. sacrament to cap. 5. 55. Ambrose be of the same opinion with we against you say make unto we say the priest this oblation that it may be allowable reasonable and acceptable which be a figure of the body and blood of our lord jesus Christ and Ambrose present after say the new testament be confirm by blood in a figure of which blood we receive the mystical blood by these word the reader may see that Ambrose and the church in his day take it not for the natural body of Christ but for a figure of his body and therefore cease to brag here to the simple of Ambrose and Augustine for they be not of your opinion innocent lib. ca. 12. fol. 148. and there shall you see the foolish and fantastical reason the pope give for those say cross and in the canon of the mass you have these word of Ambrose in that part which begin but you deal deceitful with God people for you leave out these word and there dash in five red cross and still teach the people it be catholic doctrine and the old religion but these juggle with the father must be leave or else good man that follow those father will doubt that god spirit have leave you how dishonest s. Ambrose be treat by m. Rider Fitzimon Ambros. l. 4. c. 5. 55. s. Ambrose be as foul or rather worse use than s. augustin compare m. rider word and these together in the very same chapter Paulo post and testificatione in his sacred hand say s. Ambrose he take bread before it be consecrate it be bread but when the word of Christ come it be the body of Christ then hear he say take and eat of this all for this be my body and before the word of Christ the chalice be full of water and wine when the word of Christ have operate the blood be make which redeem the people a little after our lord jesus himself testify unto we that we receive his body and blood shall we doubt of his truth and testimony can you m. rider Ambros. l. 4. c. 5. in either godly or honest disposition conceive s. Ambrose thus speak to think that in the sacrament be not the natural body of Christ but only a figure thereof because he mention as we profess a figure to be therein can you mistake without deep hypocrisy these word of he but when the word of Christ come it which before consecration be but bread be the body of Christ the blood be make which have redeem the people be not this a shameless resolution in make denial affirmation a act of such a careless man as be mention in Horace who have forfeit his credit abroad among all man friend and foe yet feign to they of his private howshould that all go well and nothing against he say Horatius lib. 1. Satyra 1. the world do hiss at i but yet I applaud to myself at home for opposition of s. Ambrose to protestantcy say he be bewitch by the devil and true in this point as after in treat of he in particular shall God willing be notify none be ever more opposite to they than he how loud therefore the 38. untruth have m. Rider make his 38. untruth that Ambrose and the church in his day with he against we but a mercenary mind to please man sell itself rather than it will seem disproveable s. aug. late exhortation I fear will not benefit one of this humour 56. and Augustine else where say rider aug. in ^narratione psal 3. pag. 7. 1. print at Paris 1566. August tom. 6. Adimant cap. 12. Christ commend and deliver to his disciple the figure of his body and blood and origin say not the matter of bread but the word recite over it do profit the worthy receiver this I speak say he of the typical and figurative body which be in deed the sacramental bread upon the 15. of Matthew Augustine confute Adimantus the heretic that hold that the blood in man be the only soul of man answer it be so figurative not otherwise and to prove it he use this proposition of Christ this be my body say I may say Augustine expound the precept of Christ figurative for the lord doubt not to say this be my body when he give the figure of his body Augustine say be a phrase figurative you say no but it be literal now let the catholic take this friendly caveat to heart for they have no reason to follow you that forsake the father and here may you see that our exposition be ancient catholic and apostolical your new private and heretical Tertullian a ancient father say Tertull. lib. 4. Martion pag. 133. line 26. etc. the bread which be take and give to his disciple Christ make his body by say this be my body that be the figure of my body what can be more speak of they for we against you Hierome 26. math. Ambrose in 1. cor. 11. and Hierome call it a representation of the truth of Christ body and blood and not the body and blood and Ambrose second his former saying in these word in etc. in eat and drink the bread and wine we do signify the flesh and blood which be offer for we so that they do but signify the flesh and blood they be not the flesh and blood and Chrisostome say Chris in hom. 17 in hebr. and 1. cor. 11. and afterward we offer indeed but in remembrance of his death this sacrifice be a token or figure of that sacrifice the thing that we do be do in remembrance of the thing that be do by Christ before etc. here be a manifest place against you chrisost in hom. 11. math. which you shall never answer and elsewhere he say in the same sanctify vessel there be not the body of Christ indeed but a mystery of the body be contain Clemens alex. in padago lib. 1. cap. 6. pag. 18. line vlt. and pag. 19 line 1. and Clemens alexandrinus who live 1300. year ago say etc. eat you my flesh and drink my blood mean hereby under a allegory or figure the meat and drink that be of faith of promise and the same reverend father in his second book and second chapter of his Padagogi and 5. pag. and line 21 22 23. have these word for our lord Christ use wine and bless wine when he say take drink this my blood the blood of the vine the word which be shed for many for the remission of sin do signify allegorical the holy river of gladness out of which I note first it be the blood of the grape proper and that be wine it be call Christ blood sacramental and by way of signification secondlie it appear to be figurative in this word shed for the blood of the grape which be wine be not shed for many but the blood of Christ but you will say it be true before consecration but after consecration it be Christ very natural blood no say Clement immediate follow and that it be wine which be bless he show again when he say to his disciple I will not drink of the fruit of the vine etc. out of which premise I note three thing read Clement follow clem. first that that which you call consecration this learned father call it benediction second that after consecration the nature of wine remain still and it be not change as you imagine three that the phrase be figurative and not proper beda in luc. 22. page 476. and venerable beda our countryman tell you that in England in his time the text be take figurative the solemnity of the old Passover say he be end Christ come to the new which the church be desirous to continue in remembrance of her redemption that in stead of the flesh and blood of a lamb he substitute the sacrament of his flesh and blood in the figure of bread and wine may show himself to be the same to who the lord swear and will not repent etc. beda call it not the natural body of Christ that work out redemption but a remembrance of our redemption and a figure of it thus the indifferent reader may see that Augustine Ambrose origin Tertullian Hierome and Clemens alexandrinus beda and many other which I omit for brevity sake all of they be ancient approve writer and all of they of your own print do hold with we against you that your proposition be not proper but sacramental improper significative representative allegorical and figurative which great wound the body of your cause and will weaken your credit with the catholic how the father grant a figure yet deny a figure as it be take by protestant 56. I grant with s. augustin the b. sacrament to be a figure of Christ but require that you show he to approve it Fitzimon a figure only I grant with Origen it be Christ typical body grant you the rest of his opinion in his own word deliver the law of God say he now not in figur or image as before but in the very form of truth be acknowledge Origen hom 7. in lib. num. and what before be in a obscurity shadow be now acclomplish in their form and truth it follow before be baptism in a figure in the cloud and in the sea but now regeneration be in form in water and the holy ghost then be manna in a figure meat now in form be the flesh of the word of God true meat according as he say my flesh be meat true and my blood be drink true I crave no more than Tertullian afford Tertull. l. 4. con Martion as appear in the number cite in the 54. that Christ make the bread which be give to his disciple his body by say this be my body that be the figure of his body in outward appearance as in the foresay number be avouch Tertullian l. resurrect. grant you also with Tertullian that and not only the soul be feed with the body and blood of Christ that the soul may be fat in God withe Hierom I consent that the sacrament be a representation do not you also impugn he say it be our saviour himself Ambros. l. 4. c. 14. with who flesh we be daily feed who blood we drink I subscribe to s. Ambros that it be a signification do you no less that after consecration it be the flesh of Christ I allow with s. chrysostom it be a remembrance chrysost hom. 60. pop. Antioch and exemplar of Christ sacrifice upon the cross for of that he speak do you no less when he say that in the sacrament Christ be with we not in faith only Clemens Alexandrin a but in very reality I profess with Clement alexandrinus to receive Christ as he speak which be nothing to m. rider intention and all other way it may be interpret under a allegory or figure as meat of faith etc: I confess also that our saviour himself be receive into the breast I grant all beda in luc. 22. that you allege out of beda do you also not contradict your own pretend witness but profess in the figure of bread and wine be the sacrament of Christ flesh and blood behold m. rider you have purchase that all which you have here produce except untruethe be free and libera permit but far from your purpose or profit be it because a figure or allegory be witnese and that not only or without contradict the substance that you and your only figure shall seem benefit I say with God word and mark it well that Christ be a figure sap. 7. 2. cor. 4. hebr. 1. Coloss. 1. ephes. 5. luc. c. 12 c. 22. and image of his father substance will you infer that therefore he be not the self same substance with the father I say Christ be spiritualy and figurative the head of his church will you infer that therefore he have not a material head I say that his baptism and cross be take some time spiritualy or figurative will you infer that therefore his material baptism and sensible suffer shall be exclude I say that he be Philip. 2. in shape find as a man will you say that therefore he be no man it be no less against scripture and father to do the one than the other to exclude substance in the sacrament for be together a figure and to do it in the instance allege therefore as I grant and show figure and verity spirit and letter shadow and substance by every by yourself produce so reciprocal do not misinform any long but say although they affirm figure spirit and shadow so they do not contradict verity letter and substance otherwise every reader will condemn your honesty word and learning as but a figure without verity a spirit without letter and shadow without substance Isichius in l. 6. c. 22. so certify say he receive by ignorance who know not this to be the body and blood according to the truth which be as much to say as who by faithless faith receive a figure without truth of the thing figure he have receive according to ignorance and infidelity but to your 4. note 1. ground upon Christ blood call wine 2. consecration call benediction 3. wine not change because still call wine 4. figurative phrase therefore not proper I answer to the first and three that it be a custom in God word and not only in holy father to call thing alter by their former name or according to the outward likeness they represent exod. c. 7. to^ 2. gen. 18. as for example Aaron rod devour their rodd whereas they be now no rodd but serpent Raphael be call a young man three angel three young man according to their only outward resemblance I answer to the second and last that the name benediction do rather approve the consecration then disannul it and the name figure not exclude propietie as aforesaid the premise consider no man will deny the 39 untruth the 39 untruth to be that his exposition be ancient Catholic and apostolical we new private and heretical pardon he be of their fellow ship who spirit consist as Vincent Lirinensis cap. 26. say in contrariety caligo and that ignorance with they mask under the name of knowledge cloud of cleerne and darkness of light so that as Luther himself confess luth. l. cont. Catharin wherein he and his do most willing hear and teach all thing else beside thing that be of ancient and solid verity therefore as I say pardon he in follow his trade and their train which be now describe when he claim his profession to be owld and we new let we only be his referendary for escape or untruethe not to be omit in his confession when God of his infinite clemency will grawnt he grace for which I pray perhapp as much as himself to repent the 40. the 40. 41 42. untruth untruth that we may never answer his objection out of Chrisostom as also that in the 11. hom. upon Matthew he have any word of what be by m. Rider allege the 41. that beda tell in England in his time the text be take figurative the 42. that these father do howld against we whereas we profess in every place as much as from they can lawful be challenge let fover or five small untruethe pass among the rest that it be know I keep the bulk as small as be possible 57 but you will say these testimony of these father rider though of your own print yet they prove nothing against you unless the church of Rome shall receive and allow that exposition of the father to be catholic if you shall so reply sure it be a weak replication and subject to many exception and you will wring I can say wrong the church of Rome that she shall hold a doctrine against all the old doctor but if you will thus reply to blear the eye of the simple yet will I frustrate your expectation for now I will show you that the ancient pope and the ancient church of Rome hold as these father do that the proposition to be significative and improper and therefore figurative against your opinion you shall hear the church of Rome deliver she own mind with she own mouth which you can deny her word be these that offer of the flesh which be do by the hand of the priest be call the passion death dist. 2. canon pag 434 you can den^^ but this Pop^ be a Protestant and if this canon be catholic then be your carnal presence antichristian and crucify of Christ but not in exactness of truth but in mystery of that which be signify and the gloss there make most plain against you it be call the body of Christ but improper that be figurative that this be the sense it be call the body of Christ that be it signify the body of Christ Fitzimon 57 how m. rider abuse the decretal and how by they he receive utter destruction to his cause be demonstrate in the 46. number yet now again he kick against the prick well then do the text and gloss say that the immolation of the priest be call impropre the passion and death of Christ true and so will all catholic say the same for who ever hear the mass of the priest to be proper the cruental act of the jew against Christ or call the cruental sacrifice on the cross this be as much against we as when we grant it to be true we lose no more thereby than a candle do in give light to another candle reserve as much light in itself as if it have light none so although we affirm all that be now produce m. rider suit be grant and our light nothing diminish rider 58. I will allege in this case other pope and the faith of the church of Rome in another age whereby the reader may plain see that the ancient pope and ancient Rome have the true succession in doctrine which we stand now on not that false succession of the place and a rot worm-eaten chair that you brag of dist. 2 panis in altar ibid. page 435. the gloss speak thus against your literal sense of yet this be impossible that bread shall be the body of Christ not possible by their own confession that bread shall be the body of Christ now gentle reader see the wrong the late pope and priest offer to the catholic of this kingdom they will have they embrace that for faith which the old church of Rome hold for heresy that for possibility which she say be impossible why will you have we to believe that which you yourselves say be impossible this all the jesuit and priest in Christendom can answer if you say these two pope and the church of Rome then teach the truth why do you now dissent from the old roman faith if you say the pope and church of Rome then err you will be count a heretic and therefore in god fear confess the truth with we and the old church of Rome and deceive the catholic of this kingdom no more with this literal sense of which you borrow from the late pope and late church of Rome and be a new error dissent from the old catholic faith Fitzimon 58. here be great want of integrity in the gloss allege be affirm that the say it be impossible that bread shall be the body of Christ shall be take according to a sound manner to wit during the be thereof bread for the say that of bread be make the body of Christ so that after consecration bread be there no long but the true body of Christ be towld to be the sound manner and mean intend in the very same text and gloss whether then can he seem to any man catholic or other which have the face and conscience to misreport this gloss and to inform the decretal thus destroy protestancy to stand for protestancy worthy to be hold a lawful preacher or a faithful witness or conscionable informer or as be a godly spiritual honest preacher when so many other his better be in great extremity to have yearly above 1500. razier or cowmb of corn besides other commodity in such a choice deanery I know not how many untruethe besyd all other faultiness any other will score up in these word which I calculat but for the 43 untruth only the 43. untruth let other imagine what discontentment and tediousness any religious mind may conceive to incountre so contrarious a spirit or such a spirit of contradiction against know truth 59 and I will add one other pope canon rider Dist. 2. can pag. 438. 4. you can deny this pope to be a Protestant in this point the body of Christ which be take from the altar be a figure so long as the bread and wine be see unreceive but the truth of the figure be see when the body and blood be receive true inward and by faith into the heart now the gloss in that place expound the text and say the body of Christ in the text signify the sacrifice of the body of Christ otherwise it be false out of which I note the church of Rome call the outward element Christ body that be a figure of his body be not receive though consecrate second that the body of Christ whereof the sacrament must be a figure the pope gloss against the pope text must be receive by faith into the soul not by the mouth into the stomach now the gloss say the text be false unless etc. but I leave the jar to be reconcile by you who be the pope friend yet this I say and gelasius another pope more ancient than those against Eut. be of this opinion these three pope and the church of Rome in those day it be before the birth of your transubstantiation and your carnal presence jump with all the old father and the primitive church that live the first six hundred year after Christ and say it be call the body of Christ the flesh of Christ the passion and death of Christ but not not indeed and truth but mystical significativelie improper figurative and by way of representation and that it be impossible otherwise to be the body of Christ yet when we speak of figure in the sacrament you mock we when we say the phrase be figurative therefore the sense must be spiritual you deride we as mis-interpreter of scripture and father but if your leisure and learning will afford you but favour to read with a holy devotion the canonical scripture and the ancient doctor of Christ primitive church that leave we these lesson for our learning you shall see that we learn what they teach and do what they say and you follow not what they command because you know not what they have record Fitzimon 59 as he go forward according to the apostle say he increase in ill this same text be cite in the 46. number according to the express sense thereof and title prefix to this chapter to signify our believe Christ body both substantia and also figurative in the sacrament if any learned man confer this say text and as it be interpret by m. Rider I request he not to spite or spit at his memory but to pity it for to have thus construe it be a figure as bread and wine be scene owtward he translate as they be see unreceave second for what he shall interprett but it be the verity as the body and blood of Christ in truth be believe inward he insert a parenthesis make the truth to be of the verity of the figure and not of the body of Christ I protest before God and his angel that grief and shame of his misdemeanure do avert my mind from be employ to unfold and refute he and procure i to overslipp much filth deserve to be sharp and in the most heinous manner reprove but I pray you notwithstanding these fault apparent to all eye in these word of his in the text and margin this all the jesuit and priest in Christendom can not answer you can not deny this pope to be a Protestant in this point confess the truth with we and the owld church of Rome he that tell you before himself that s. Bernard live in the year 1190 be in the palpebl time of gross supersttion mean thereby papistry here forget himself inform that the decretal and pope therein allege collect by gratian at the same time of s. Bernard by his say most superstitious do stand for protestantcy he that will not be try but by the father of the first five hundred year profess the world soon after to have apostate into papistry be now come to claim the decretal compile after a thousand year he that in claim the same father as appear in the 46. number the number precedent and in this present number be beyond all controversy utter foil and forsake of they and therefore just do multiply the 44. and 45. untruth that the least be speak in the foresay bowl assure and reiterate protestation the 44 45. untruth lactant. l. 5. c. 3. Anaxagoras be general reprehend by all man that contrary to sense and understanding only to be singular he will confidet shamles and contentious affirm snow to be as black as ink have we not find a heyer to he who can face out black to be white that be reproof to be approbation denial affirmation owld to be young falsehood to be truth darkness to be light substance to be figur preach to be communion the owld testament to be as fruitful as the new the primative church and father to have be late sectary Catholic to be heretical etc. I bequeath then as in my testament to ensue posterity that hereafter when man desy to specify any reader of such resolution as have Anaxagoras and his foresay successor they bestow on they for a perpetual memorial of such ancestor not that they be impudent contentious frantic depraver desperate falsifier corrupter against all pregnant and palpable truth but only without all injury that they ride or be rider as for his annotation that the church call the outward element according to their appearance a figure and that the body of Christ must be receive into the soul unless he dote he will not think any prejudice thereby to our cause for we grant both to be true but without be only a figure or food of the only soul his oppose the gloss and text as contrary they be evident most concordant and the gloss only tell the text to be intend of Christ body not in extensive manner but as it be a sacrifice also his addition that because it enter the soul it can not not the body what stupidity do it not contain 60. rider now brief I will acquaint the reader only with the time when these doctor live and the place where they teach this doctrine and then we shall see whether this your literal exposition of be catholic or not Clemens alexandrinus be divinity reader in the famous city of Alexandria in Egypt in the year of our lord if you will read advise these father you shall see plain your own error 107 Origen be his scholar and succeed lecture in the same place 204 Tertullian divinity reader in Carthage in Africa 206 Ambrose bishop of Milan in Italy 370 Hierome divinity reader in Stridona in Hungaria and sometime in Slavonia 387 Chrisostome bishop of Constantinople in Gracia 406 Augustine bishop of Hippo in Africa 426 venerable beda a famous learned man in England 570 and thus you may see that neither Alexandria Carthage Milano Stridona Constantinople Hippo nor Rome which be famous city nay which be more neither Egypt Italy Hungaria and Slavonia nor England which be famous kingdom nay which be most of all the three part of the world Asia Africa and Europe never hear or have such a literal exposition of for at least eight hundred year after Christ and yet your jesuit and priest will have their doctrine to be catholic vincentius that be true catholic say he which can be unless it be at all time and in all place and of all person receive for so your vincentius define catholic doctrine and here you see that for the three part of the world and for many hundred year after Christ it be not know and therefore it be neither apostolical nor catholic Fitzimon 60. one that fail to be a physician may perchance not be a ignorant musician or not be a gardener may yet be a hors-corse so in degree of learning he that can not write well may yet perhapp endite well he that be no rhetorician may yet be a grammarian he that be no poet may yet be a linguist he that be no divine may yet be a antiquarist or chronicler but to fail in all degree and science without know any one faculty sound and yet to profess a general skill universally and to possess such a deanery entire show the muse to be stepmother to his constitution himself to have lose great time in follow some other more convenient profession and that church living be run clean out of their wont channel as soon to a dunce as a doctor Sarcerius in domin. 10. a reform brother by name Sarcerius make this plain confession and it be now almost go into a proverb to be more expedient and safe to deal in civil matter for the point of belief and true protestation with a Papist merchant than one that boast himself a preacher of the gospel experience in all time and place have and do discover these good gospeler to deserve to be thus mistrust by their approve legertimain in their information and protestation wherein they sell or exchange their conscience and credit for a short applaud of ignorant popularity for it be not only their profession say s. s. iron l. c. c. 15. s. greg. Naz. 2. pace and s. Nazianzen but their perfection by false sleight to disguise falsehood for truth that every of they be so much prefer to his compagnions by how much he do excel he in impudent forgery do not you behold how country city and place be now towld to have be former Protestant and so towld as the particular time situation and many other particular be number for great persuasion by one of they who in the 21. number deny all antiquity disclaim all father and in the 34. number confess a late begyne and light never before know in other place do not you consider how both part of this contradiction be as vehement and contentious affirm to be true by preacher of the gospel as be possible although it be impossible that both can be true conjecture then whether these former foul imputation be not by they deserve but let we examine point by point you have or may have perceive from the 54. to the 57 number how untoward m. rider by mangle evidence stout avouch Clement alexandrinus Origen Tertullian Ambrose Hierom chrysostom augustin and beda to stand for he and to impugn our opinion in which number all that he allege out of they for the most part be grant to he yet be it show that he be as naked for any favour from they receive as Adam after his rich reckon to have be as God remain when he have eat the prohibit apple nevertheless he knit up his account with a total sum of all doctor for these foresay eight all city wherein they dwell by way of consent to their verdict all country wherein such city be by conformity in one and the same belief and consequent Asia africa Europe be infer to concur in their persuasion I grant also this collection or sum of account to be allowable among catholic although among reformer it have no manner of sequel for if Cartwright in succession of time be allege to affirm or deny any matter will it be suppose that whitgift consent think you thereto the same I may by induction delate of the residue as after be testify upon the article in the creed in the 21. numb of the communion of saint whereas therefore by testimony of all principal protestant of all sect in the world the foresay father to who belief Asia africa and Europe be by m. Rider link do belong to we and also whereas in the foresay number and in all this book they themselves do confirm the same can m. rider escape from condemn his own profession to have want approbation in all Asia Africa and Europe if there be any worth or wit in such his deduction moreover that you may conceive his skill in Chronologie of time which be the most sensible part of learning to all sensible capacity I will not disclose it in foreign author but in his own country man beda who he shall know best although he may find in his own relation that he live in the year 731. and also long until the year 776. never thelesse m. rider place his life 570. which if it be not confess and false he make beda to have be 206. year owld than which what can more absurd be affirm the 46. untruth beda l. 5. c. vlt. in fine in ep. Anatolium Frat. Wicrhedam baron beda I shall therefore do he great wrong not to calculat in this gross miscompt the 46. untruth and that beda peculiar do ratify all point of our religion as well for the real presence as for all other of mass matin purgatory cross relic religious profession vow pilgrimage miracle etc. be distinct and undoubted appear in his ecclesiastical english history translate by d. Stapleton and conjoin to the fortress of faith as for his puritanical term Clement alexandrinus and other for bishop but reader of divinity let he escape therewith unperceave but his be a Puritan be thereby plain prove nor can all such his trip be specify without much loss of time and tediousness if any other will demand of he why have number only to 570. year after Christ incarnation he infer thereupon that at least 800. year after Christ no literal sense of be once hear of add 230. year of his own allowance if he obtain of he any resolution have any literal sense I will think it worthy to be chronicle for a monstruous miracle mark well I do not say that he can give no arithmetical sense by he practise but literal sense for it be his profession how ignorant arithmetic so ever he use in a point of learning yet to use in a point of lease a skilful arithmetic to make every 570 to stretch at least to 800 or else to fail of his purpose and in this knowledge he accommodate himself to their manner who be by his brother puritan touch to the quick in the act of parliament 13. Elizab. c. 10. and cap. 17 although in doctrine he detest they as after shall be testify I may give some other a like question to propound he for from what person or city or country have he infer Asia to be against we or for he I find none specify belong to Asia I imagine he also will have a answer without all literal sense or none at all yes sure his true answer will be that Asia follow his foresay induction as well as other his deduction his controversy 4. in Eucharistia pag. 154. 61. and a late friar and friend of you old father josephus angle bring in cardinal caietans opinion write upon saint Thomas Aquinas in this manner that be the catholic can convince or enforce the heretic by the gospel to understand these word this be my body proper but this exposition must be fetch and hold from the authority of the church so this your religion be none of Christ because it be not warrant by the gospel of Christ which so expound the word of consecration see I pray you what one of your leardn friar report out of one of your scarlet cardinal of Rome that you can prove by Christ gospel these word this be my body to have a proper and literal signification so that Christ gospel condemn your literal and proper exposition and so your carnal presence of Christ must be maintain from and by the authority of the church of Rome though Christ and his gospel say no. alas with what conscience dare you teach the catholic this heresy quaest. 75. Art. fol. 236. print at Venice 1593. which by your own confession have no warrant from Christ gospel and cardinal Ca^etane himself write upon your saint Thomas Aquinas speak to the same purpose that the scripture speak nothing express express of Christ his carnal presence in the sacrament but only in these word which word say he be two way expound first proper second metaphorical but say he the master of the sentence be to be tax lib. 4. dist. 10. who hold too much with the figurative interpretation and there you shall see that he blush not to say that your literal sense be not from the gospel but from the church of Rome and if your roman church may be both party witness and judge there be no doubt but the verdict must sound on your side and there the cardinal handle which be due examine with many other forgery and foolery to maintain your carnal kingdom of your breaden-god thus much concern your two consecratory proposition which by the testimony of scripture and father be figurative to be expound as we say not proper and literal as you untrue teach how Caietan and the master of sentence be by he falsify 61. I confess that a late friar may be owld in age Fitzimon but I will fain be instruct what proof be afford that concern angle by he declare late and owld be not show little pith or method in such medley angle than affirm say he that heretic can not be convict by the gospel to understand this be my body proper why can any doubt thereof that have any common sense do we not behold that heretic notwith stand the gospel do deny it do we not behold that m. rider among the rest immediate before affirm that it be unheard of in 800. year after Christ and thereby be make a heretic by his own allege late and old angle shall we not remember the open protestation of a Protestant bullinger decad. 5. Schluss lib. 2. art 16. and divi the zwinglians not to be able to believe Christ to be in the supper according his true body although all the concil of the world all angel and saint do command to believe it to infer also that what can not be prove out of the gospel be condemn by the gospel be a blasphemous riderian sequel for neither the holy trinity nor manifold principal parcel of our belief mention in the 33. number can be prove by the gospel yet be not condemn neither by the gospel nor by condemn enemy of the gospel and can impudence itself inform and infer in the word follow that Caietan profess Christ and the gospel not to stand for the true proper and literal sense of these word Caiet. in 3. part d. th. q. 75. a. 1. o desperate depravation thus Caietan discourse in Eucharistia and we have therefore out of the verity of the word of our lord in their proper sense the body of Christ to be very in the eucharist and this be the first that we have out of the gospel belong to this sacrament behold now the forehead of m. Rider and think in equity whether impudence enjoy ever a more ordinary tabernacle to seat and plant itself than therein Caietan say m. Rider affirm that the scripture speak nothing express of Christ carnal presence I leave the word carnal to the carnal interpreter in the sacrament contrary to which say Caietan himself the word of our lord in their proper sense teach the verity of Christ very be in the eucharist again he blush not say m. Rider to say that your literal sense be not from the gospel contrary to which worthy to wrest blush out of a flint say Caietan and that in the same place cite this we have out of the gospel belong to this sacrament be it not therefore the 47. untruth that we be say not to be able by the gospel to prove the real presence because we be say to say that heretic can not be convict by the gospel the sacred scripture say prou. 29. either of God or man will not the stiff servant be amend for although he understand he will not obey be it not the 48. the 47 48 49. 50. 51. untruth untruth upon such premise that Christ gospel condemn we the 49. that by our own confession we have no warrant from the gospel the 50. that Caietan relate proof against we as loud and lew be the 51. untruth Caietan to reprehend the master of sentence for hold to much with the figurative interpretation he only report of he that he pursue their error who esteem such word shall be take metaphoricalie gentle reader to you I say in the word of s. augustin s. August l. 2. con petil. we be constrain to hear and refute these trifle only because the silly by they be not entangle for otherwise what grief can be great then to spend time and pain in encounter he who protection be to pervert disproof into proof affirmation into negation falshod into truth foe into friend and not to weigh sin or shame because he will be speak of and for a short time may escape uncontrowl upon my conscience and honesty if I can I will not follow he but by only mild method and modest manner but his inveterate and reiterate falsification and blasphemy by no christian mind may be less rigorous pursue then be do by i who can in any piety or peaceable disposition say or do less to his blasphemy against the b. sacrament among so innumerable other term it a carnal kingdom of a breaden God then to apply the word of s. Cyrill s. Cyrill l. 10. con julia. and there be nothing more easy to a scoffer then to forge and dispraise such scurrility against the b. sacrament pagan as after in the 147. number appear frequent and commend to their successor in impiety I can not debar they from follow pagan in this behalf s. bern. ser. 66. who as s. Bernard say by reason be not convict because they understand not by authority be not correct because they allow they not by persuasion be not incline because they be perverse it be approve they have rather die then be reclaim the end of such be destruction their conclusion be fire the only thing that I entreat of the honest sort of reformer be this request of s. augustin s. aug. l. 1. morih Cathol. eccl. cap. 18. 20. hear the learned of the Catholic church with like peace of mind and desire as I hear you there will be no need of 20. year in which you beguile i in far less far less time you will perceive what manifest difference there be betwixt verity and vanity and in the same book in the 34. chapter he say etc. then will you behold what be betwixt vaunt and verity right and stray say and fraud etc. which otherwise unless you help yourselves that god may help you you will not discover but still remain deceive rider 62. but yet you perchance will demand the reason why Christ call it his body if it be not his body let i first ask you another question and then I will resolve you this gen. 17.10.11 rom. 4.11 exod. 12.11 why do God call circumcision the covenant when in deed it be not the covenant but as God himself say a sign of the covenant why do God call the Paschall lamb the Passover when it be but a sign of the angel pass over the house where the blood of the lamb be sprinkle one answer will resolve both our question it be the usual manner of the holy ghost in all sacrament both of the old testament and new wheresoever the holy ghost speak of sacramets the phrase be tropical mitonymimicall and figurative attribute the name of the thing signify to the sign signify as in these example the phrase add a dignity to the sacrament but change not the nature of the sacrament to term the visible sign by the name of the thing signify as circumcision be call the covenant the lamb be call the Passover so baptism be call the fountain of regeneration and bread Christ body and yet in deed they be but outward sign and to the faithful only seal grace by the holy ghost with the name of the thing they represent and confirm the more to move and stir up our affection and to edge our zeal with a religious preparation to receive the same and to lift up our heart and soul by faith to behold consider and feed upon Christ crucify the thing signify yet for your further satisfaction I will entreat Augustine to answer your doubt who say (a) (a) aug. epistol. 23. in english thus if the sacrament have not some certain similitude and likeness of the thing whereof they be sacrament they shall be no sacrament at all and of this similitude many time they have the name of those thing themselves as the sacrament of the body of Christ be after a certain manner the body of Christ and the sacrament of his blood be after a certain manner his blood so the sacrament of faith or baptism be faith out of which we may note first they be but sacrament or similitude of the thing signify not the thing themselves second that bread and wine be the body and blood of Christ but after a certain manner and show how by a example as the sacrament of faith be faith so the sacrament of Christ body be Christ body but the sacrament of faith be not faith natural substantial by a change of substance but by change of quality or use therefore the sacrament of Christ body be not change into the substance of Christ body Theodoret dialog. 2. cap. 24. pag. 113. and dialog. 1. cap. 8. pag. 54. read they I pray you but only in quality and use as Theodoret say in his first dialogue not change nature but add grace unto nature and the same father in his second dialogue explain this more plain say the mystical sign after sanctification they depart not from their nature but remain in their former substance and figure and may be see and touch as before out of which ancient learned father I observe three necessary point for the catholic instruction consecration unknown to Theodor therefore it be a new term the change be in the name honour and use not in the nature and your confutation first he say after sanctification than your new coin term of consecration be not know in the church of God but sanctification and benediction second I note out of this father that though the sacrament have get a new divine quality yet they have not lose their nature they have before as you untrue teach three I observe that he confute by the example of bread and wine in the sacrament certain heretic who hold that Christ body be change into his deity after his ascension for this be the father proof against those heretic either answer this full or confess the truth that as bread and wine be true bread and wine after sanctification as they be before sanctification even so be Christ body as true a body now after his ascension as it be before his ascension so now the priest of new Rome can say that the bread and wine have lose their true nature and property in the lord supper after sanctification unless they will also say with the heretic that Christ have lose the nature of a true body now after his ascension and Chrysostome second Theodoret say chrisost Monach. marck this well you pre^sts and jesuit before it be sanctify we call it bread but the divine grace once sanctify it by the ministry of the priest it be deliver from the name of bread and count worthy to be call the lord body though the nature of bread continue there still out of which I note first the father call it sanctification not consecration second it be call bread before sanctification and be bread in nature after sanctification and three after sanctification it be call the lord body yet it be not the lord body in deed because the nature of bread remain what can you say to these proof to satisfy the doubtful catholic and therefore in that it be call the lord body it must be so sacramental figurative and improper and gelasius your own pope who you dare not contradict say plain there seace not to be the substance of bread and the nature of wine of the circumcision be call the covenant and the Paschal lamb be call the Passover as if the b. sacrament no otherwise be to be call the body of Christ 62. first in this discourse m. rider deal friendly with i Fitzimon and fraudulent with other Friendly in object against my profession a stale objection that circumcision be call the covenant and in afford to i a answer to avoid it that in the same place it be call a sign of the covenant so that I need not trouble myself for other answer such exposition be conjoin with the objection and no such in the sacrament against which it be bring but rather many contrary clause testify it not to be only a sign fraudulent in affirm that one answer will resolve both question in heap diverse dissonant matter as consonant in wrest and pervert scripture for the first one answer can not resolve both circumcision be call a covenant and the exposition be conjoin to such term thereof only as be a sign whereas in the b. sacrament neither be there any such exposition conjoin neither can the word adjoin be understand of a sign that it be the body which be to be deliver and the blood which be to be shed for what infidelity be it to affirm a sign of Christ body to be deliver for our redemption and a sign of his blood to be shed for the remission of our synn a heap of dissonant matter be perceive when it be affirm that the Paschal lamb be a sign of the Passeover as circumcision of the covenant for neither scripture reason not resemblance do account the lamb a sign of the Passover if it have be say to have be a solemnity in memorial of the benefit or protection show towards the jew it may have pass but to affirm it to be a tropical sign thereof be a foul wrest of scripture now it also have a clause conjoin therewith import that it be the sacrifice of the pass of our lord and therefore be distinguish from be the very pass itself which be otherwise observe as I say in the b. sacrament these objection be then to no purpose in our purpose they also be odious by their first author to such their application himself confess the author in these word that he have preach how the word be in this be my body Zuingl tom. 2. in subsid Eucharistia fol. 249. stand for it signify the notary in the senate of two hundred except that howsoever such gloss may stand in parable it can not stand in sacrament he trouble with such a reply go to bed at midnight a adviser who he know not whether he be black or white his language and discourse will easy disguise what angel he be say why thou dunce answer out of exod 12. v. 11. phase it be the paschal that be the pass of the Lord the conclusion now be that if this be a good angel must be confess a dunce if a bad angel I will wish all honest protestant to be no long disciple to his doctrine howsoever good or bad neither aught he to be able to seduce we from the doctrine we have receive nor be there any material force in his objection against we unaunswer but at the word follow christian stop your care that baptism be not the fountain of regeneration tit. 3. but only a outward sign thereof and that to the faithful o pestiferous puritantcie can not s. Paul bridle you from ride against his express testimony that we be save by the laver of regeneration can not the majesty of God sacred word mat. 3.11 mar. 1.8 luc. 3.16 joa 1 32 Acts. 2.38 mar. 16. every where extant hinder you from evacuate also that sacrament it which bring the holy ghost it which give remission of synn it which beside belief be necessary for remission of synn and eternal life it by which and the word of life we be cleanse Acts. 2.37 38. c. 22.17 1. pet. 3.21 from sin and save as true as Noah and his family be save by the ark and water support it but of this God willing in the 122. number and else where when I prove m. Rider a profund Puritan whereof also not a little be forspoken in the 39 number where be demonstrate these very two sacrament only leave to be esteem forceless at least this counterpoint to God word in make baptism no regeneration but a naked sign thereof be the 52. untruth the 52 untruth the testimony of s. augustin be riderica also interpret by the first note he make sacrament for have similitude with that they signify such as Christ body and bread by nourrish and Christ passion and baptism have by cleanse to be nothing else but similitude only and not the thing themselves which if it be true Christ be say in scripture sap. 1.2 cor. 4. hebr. 1. Coloss. 1. to be the image or likeness of his father shall not be one with his father he be say to be in shape find as man shall not be man by the second note he infer that because s. augustin say bread and wine be the body and blood of Christ after a certain manner mean in resemblance of feed therefore they shall not be such true which if it also be true when Christ be invisible among the jew he may be say not to have be true among they because he be only in a certain manner among they likewise if Tertullian say true lib. praescrip c. 51. they can not altogether be say to be the same that be blemish in any part it will follow that any that be blind or main will not be himself be but in a certain manner the same in the same note be infer that faith be call a sacrament yet not by any change therefore the sacrament of Christ body be not change but only in quality by as wise a therefore may it be infer God word which be more powerful than s. augustin word term Christ a lion the apostls salt and light therefore because by such call they be not change in substance nether-was there any other thing wine river rodd or any thing else change by God word in substance and so scripture will be deny creation disinherit and all belief pervert it be also no marvel that Thodoret or gelase who all other couple in this objection affirm the mystical sign after sanctification not to depart from their nature figure or substance to wit by outward appearance and sensible imagination and effect whereas the gospel do signify the water substantia turn into wine to have be water say when the master of the feast or ceremony have taste water turn into wine it be then no more water but wine also m. rider a little before say the outward sign by the holy ghost to be grace with the name of the thing they represent and consequent bread appear in outward sign may be call bread in substance by m. rider rule against himself but a more worthy though not a more weighty adversary shall impugn he s. bishop of Canterbury who live long before innocent the three time the hatcher and patcher if m. rider forge not of all our opinion s. lib. con the body of Christ be call bread either because it be make of bread or because it be flesh appear to man eye to be but bread whether consecration be a new name in the 64. number will apareare by the way in a word m. rider do s. chrysostom say that the nature of bread do continue still you bid priest and jesuit in the margin to mark which be the common phrase of falconer they mark and behold you to be the falconer proverb 10. of who the scripture say he that ground on untruethe he lead wind to pasture and he the very same follow bird fly they may mark you often at such your game and your wynd and bird skip and stray from your reach but no such matter as in the 113. number will be manifest be ever dream by s. chrysostom that any yet can ever mark this then the 53. the 53. untruth untruth rider 63. but you here will obtrude your old slanderous objection that we accept of the sacrament no better then bare figure no we acknowledge a change and a alteration but not of the substance but of the use be not this a marvellous change wrought by the holy ghost in the due administration of the lord supper according to Christ institution that of come bread and wine such as daily we feed our body with be make the dreadful and reverend mystery of Christ crucify where by we neither look upon the bare naked element as common creature but as sanctify food and in such sort that even as the bread do nourish our body and the wine do comfort our spirit so true real and unfeigned do the heavenly food of his body crucify and his blood shed for our sin by faith in the time of the holy supper feed and nourish our soul into everlasting life and so be make and seal our real conjunction with Christ not by his bodily and local dissension into our stomach but by our spiritual ascension to he by faith this be our doctrine touch these figurative proposition warrant by scripture and witness by the ancient father clem. Alex Theod: August with many more never hear of consecration but of santification and benediction hitherto have be plain and direct prove that your two proposition be figurative not proper second that the substance of bread and wine remain after consecration and therefore there can be no such carnal presence of Christ by transubstantiation under the form of bread and wine as you deem now I be come to your two main pillar that support and underprop your carnal presence which if they fail you than your foundation be sandy and your building will not be able to abide the least blast of Christ breath the first be consecration the second transubstantiation for unless there be consecration there can be no transubstantiation and then no carnal presence of Christ in the sacrament and then neither your mass nor matiens worth two penny and so the soul then in your imagine purgatory may cry and yell for lack of a dirge and a mass of requiem how m. Rider do avoid our objection that they accept of the sacrament no better then of bare figure 63. what I have say in the 39 number do testify Fitzimon whether they can think any better of sacrament then as bare figure listen to hear it a little before loud affirm by m. Rider himself so baptism be call the fountain of regeneration and bread Christ body and yet in deed they be but outward sign in this place he say it be a slanderous objection but by your leave you be make to object so slanderous to your face as slanderous shame follow do not you affirm they to be outward sign and figure be they not all one in this article why then do you not confess that you be your own slanderer but we part not so then he say no we acknowledge a change and alteration but not of the substance but of the use first of this change I pray you observe this annotation of fox say here be to be note that Peter martyr in his answer at Oxford fox act and men. pag. 1255. do grant a change in the substance and not only in the use of bread and wine which in Cambridge by the bishop d. Ridley be deny so that m. Rider have give doctor Ridley a knock for denial of a change I think you will now know how this change be wrought attend the mean and manner we look say he upon the dreadful and reverend mystery of Christ crucify not as upon bare naked element but as sanctify food I ask you first 1. pet. 3. in confidence that you be ready always to satisfy every one that ask you a reason of that hope that be in you according as s. Peter advise since when these mystery in your religion have be allow to be call dreadful and reverend in the foresay 39 number the mean sermon of a Puritan minister be make more available than they they be then declare superfluous but among forgetful person no better then bare beggarly ordonance no more to be regard than any other common bread etc. yet here they be make very terrible and venerable as in the last word be contain I can not among other observation conceal that by impute less to the sacrament then to a Puritan sermon you prefer Puritan sermon before any ever make by Christ or his apostle how so for they preach oft yet make not all hearer to either receive our saviour into hart or harborough no not in Bethsaida or corozain where he himself preach most usualy nor much less at his preach do make they to be true believer if therefore none can receive the sacrament but by faith as you say and yet that by a Puritan sermon there be more good and profit attain then by the sacrament to my slender capacity Puritan sermon be imply to make all hearer faithful consider that sacrament of less worth by your surmise than such sermon make all receiver to be faithful as be receive by no other yet that the sermon of s. Paul be not comparable in operation to our sacrament in controversy s. aug. l. 3. trin. c. 4. be say by s. augustin nether the tongue of Paul nor his paper nor ink nor word nor writing the we esteem as the body or blood of Christ so far be he from think that any Puritan sermon be so effectual as this sacrament second I crave how your supper be sanctify for the cross or blessing you will not allow and of prayer and the word of true scripture in this discourse you make no mention and other sanctification you can not justify three how by only look you make the food to be sanctify have you any gorgonical virtue in your look that all that you look on be sanctify as all that look on Gorgon head be say transform fowerthly how for all this dreadful and reverend change there be any alteration from a bare figure consider that the jew ceremony be as much sanctify and look at as your supper and also by all Protestant of your sort equal thereto five how have your look change the use of bread which be only to nourish you confess the use thereof in the sacrament to be no other then to represent Christ feed and comfort our soul as bread do feed and comfort our body the use therefore thereof seem to i not to be change because I know these demand insoluble by your whole profession and that I see your extremity and perplexity by your figure and dark word never at a end or stay but that by mean of your figure and sign you can not tell whether to use great or small term or devotion towards they nor do not constant determine what conceil may be have or hold of they but some time kneel thereto be requisite and some time sit thereat will suffice and some time as barlow in the sum of the conference before the k. majesty pag. 98. say it must be receive in amble thereto whereof the indecency be there say to have be very offensive I will conclude in the word of s. epiphanius s. Epiphan. l. 2. c. 12 cont. Cerdon num. 36. simile Aesopi not believe truth and wallow in falsehood they have lose the bread of true life tumble in the bottom of a shadow like Esop dog who leave the bread and snatch the shadow lose his bait then which sentence never be there any more pertinent against our figurist for their gloss the sacrament with dreadful and reverend word have evacuate the fruit thereof and make it but a shadow when shadow be change into substance and truth how can any thing more apt be apply unto they then by say they have leave the bread snatch the shadow and lose the bait 64. but first I must tell you the word be new rider neither use by Christ or his apostle in the institution of the sacrament nor hear of in any ancient father for many hundred year after Christ again never read in any author sacred or profane that consecration shall signify to change one substance into another for the nature of the word will not bear it now see by Christ or his apostle Paul it be not use nor ancient father ever take it in this sense again the nature of the word have no such signification I see not but you deserve much blame in bind the catholic conscience to believe that which be against divinity antiquity and common sense now gentleman pardon i to demand of you but this question what word be they that consecrate that be which turn the substance of bread and wine into the natural and substantial body and blood of Christ i think I hear you jesuit and priest call i a fool for demand such a question such father as live next to Christ time shall know best the practice of the primitive church and these father you refuse and choose other a thousand year young and therefore they be of less credit consider as you pretend that the church of Rome and their learned man have ever from Christ time hold with one consent one manner of consecration with a certain set number of word without addition or alteration and therefore my question be frivolous and needless and no doubt you make your catholic believe so but alas you deceive they it be not so for I will show you many several opinion among your learned man yea pope themselves one contrary to another I pray you let i and the catholic of this kingdom therefore be certify and satisfy by God word and the practice of the primitive church for the first six hundred year which be the word of consecration that work this miraculous alteration of substance which if you can prove as I be sure you can then the catholic have good cause to look to their conscience and to follow you no further than you follow Christ according to his word for if any man nay all man nay if a angel nay all angel shall come from heaven and preach otherwise then Christ and his apostle have teach let he be accurse if angel nay all angel from heaven must not be believe bring contrary doctrine to Christ and his apostle gal. 1.9 will you then bind the catholic of this kingdom to believe you only come from Rome and Rheims whence you bring new doctrine not only contrary to God truth but to the father of the primitive church and to begin with Guido in his whether consecration be a new term Fitzimon 64. alas be consecration a new term first your principal doctor Beza tell you be grievous deceive Beza in 1. cor. 10. v. 16. s. Ambros. l. 4. c. 14. Sacram. inform you that by the word (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) be signify the same in s. Paul as and to consecrate and sanctify so then by this testimony it be as old as s. Paul so teach you tell we a little before that Ambrose do not use the word of consecration if you may and please I crave how will you interpret this his say shall it not be thus or can it be otherwise when consecration come of bread be make the flesh of Christ I think also s. August consecr. d. 2. c. all scholar will thus translate these word of s. augustin etc. before consecration let we confess faithful to be bread and wine etc. but after consecration to be the flesh and blood of Christ remember also what word of he be to the same effect in the next precedent number now as our manner be we must make m. rider himself account upon himself the 55. the 55. untruth untruth in answer beneath our allegation out of s. Ambrose the bread be bread before the consecration but when it be consecrate of bread be make the flesh of Christ all this say m. Rider we grant to be true assure you must then grant to be untrue these word of you the word consecration be not hear of in any ancient father such he account s. Ambrose nu. ibid. for many hundred year after Christ it be confess by you to be true utter by s. Ambrose and that so often beside as you have make a observation against it as but late frequent so often you have inform idle and untrue it be a old proverb bis he be twice defeat who perish by his own weapon which be here and not seldom before brief and apparent verify against my copesmate 65. and to begin with Guido in his rider Guido cap 4. pag. 23. 24. 45. but more you may see in the cautel or sleight of your mass concern the necessity of the cross word of the canon of the mass and the priest intention who say there be four several opinion among the learned rabbin of Rome touch the word of consecration the first sort say he will have beside the word of the. 3. evangelist and Paul the intention of the priest (a) (a) in the cautel print at Venice 1464. and so say your mass book and the precept of the church to be due observe jump with your say mass book that unless the priest intention be to consecrate there be no consecration though he use all Christ word and Paul and if the priest omit that be the commandment of the church of Rome in his consecration he sin most deadly and be to be punish most grievous but abbot Panormitane page 220 be of another mind say not witstandinge the priest say mast with intention that God will destroy some man yet do he consecrate well what christian heart do not loath this devilish intention and hellish religion here let all catholic mark as the people be not sure of the priest intention so they be not sure of Christ carnal presence and so commit idolatry in worship bread be not consecrate that this first opinion hold that Christ institution be not sufficient without the priest intention for if his head be otherwise occupy he consecrate not and the due observation of the precept of the church which partly consist in word partly in gesture etc. so that by this opinion those that simple and plain for the first eight hundred or a thousand year next after Christ use the form of Christ institution only never consecrate right no not Christ himself nor Paul and so till of late day there be no consecration transubstantiation or carnal presence so that this opinion prove your own transubstantiation and carnal presence not to be either apostolical or catholic but new invent and fantastical the second opinion be of master doctor for so he call he and he flat contradict the former opinion and say if you say Christ institution be sufficient than your canon of your mass be superfluous if you say it be not sufficient without your mass canon then Christ institution be imperfect which to think be blasphemy that all the word from to in the canon of your mass book be necessary require to consecration and therefore the former doctor shoot short but gentleman you know that the canon of the mass be not make by one pope nor by ten pope but in many hundred year it be in patch together I hope you will not say that those saint and marrir of God from Christ time to the make of that idolatrous canon of the mass be many hundred year have not the right consecration when they practise Christ institution there be a three opinion of diverse doctor which hold contrary to both the former but because it be but fabulous and not worth read therefore I will silence it as not worth the write whether there can possible be any discord among catholic in point of belief svdden as I remark m. Rider intermeddle among scholastic my thought exclaim Fitzimon and Saul what be Saul among the prophet consider in in to what unsuitable assembly he have inchroach but his meaning be to make sport to his adversary forward then in the name of God first he say that we among ourselves have great dissension in our opinion of consecration I will not calculat up a untruth 1. cor. 11.16 but will say we have no such custom nor the church of God for if any be of a contrary belief among we obstinate we discard he present in to the rank of heretic by commission of Christ math. cap. 18. thom. waldens. l. 2. c. 21.23 and if he do not hear the church let he be unto thou as a ethnic and publican because lector christianus a christian reader must follow the judgement of the church under the pain of disbeleefe if it belong to belief or under the pain of obstinacy if it do not belong whereby all catholic be warrant that never dissension can possible have place in their profession if it be obstinate in the disputation of doctor when the church authority or judgement be not as yet pronounce August con. faust. l. 11. c. 5. epist. 48. Vincent according to s. augustin the reader have a free choice to judge to take or leave yea concern his own writing he license the same most religious say and etc. what soever thou find true embrace and impute it to the Catholic church what soever thou find false reject and impute it to i which be a man necessitate because all this kind of learning be not to be read with necessity to believe but with liberty to judge every Catholic and I among the rest do thus offer our whole understanding and all our writing at the foot of god holy church to say and unsay according thereto so that if you can find no other diversity among we then several disputation be altogether knit in one submission to God church you have labour as wise as one that will contend that many musician disagree in consort or symphony because they be not in one unisone but in several tune which gross misconceit be excellent refel by s. August l. 2. baptism con. donatist c. 3. say the difference betwixt Catholic writer to be Christiana to be without any whirlwynd of sacrilegious pride any puff arrogant neck any comention of malicious envy with holy humility with universal peace with christian charity until by a full council of all the world what be sound suppose shall be undoubted confirm now in particular to these 20. diverse opinion among we the first require say he the intention of the priest that the consecration be vailable why sir will you have mad man or any without intention to minister sacrament for none but aught to suppose that a man without intention do good or ill be not worthy of reward or punishment the second opinion of Panormitan be all one with the former differ only that it say to consecrate in a bad intention even to kill do not hinder consecration I answer that a sword make note be not hinder by the purpose to abuse it no more be celebration by the intent to misap it note then courteous Protestant his great wisdom in so simple a conceit against this opinion as for it to name our religion hellish note second how this deep learned and christian doctor affirm that Christ himself the apostle and whole church want intention in the institution and ministration of the b. sacrament i surmise by the want of method the second opinion to have be of Panormitan Scotus in 4. d. 8. q. 2. a. 2. but here I find it most confuse ascribe to Scotus true Scotus require to the essential form of consecration no more nor less then according the doctrine of the church to the great explication of all circumstance he require as also the church do the whole canon which canon for the essential part be ever unvariable from the begyne but for more ample declaration it have in succession of time receive new addition but always out of tradition scripture and concil unless that after in particular I do intend to unfold the antiquity of all parcel of the canon and show the signification original and allowance of the least syllable to be above a thousand year ratify I will in this place prosecute it the three opinion by himself he silence as not worthy the write true neither be the residue produce worthy relation especial to testify our pretend disagreement consider that never sober man can hitherto collect any discord in these two opinion either among themselves or with the Catholic establish doctrine rider 66. but Guido his opinion be flat contrary to they all and say precise that do consecrate without any more help so Guido be contrary in opinion to the former three opinion and every of they all contrary one to another here now the catholic may see the consent and unity of the late church of Rome touch consecration yet I will bring you a learned friar which have toss this question like a tennis-ball josephus angle in lib. 4. print by king Philip privilege 1572. pag. 108. and 109. euch. this friar say in his conclusion Christ jesus in these word for this be my body do consecrate the eucharist and so have continue still by the custom of the church etc. but present in his appendix he check that opinion and say yet it be to be believe that Christ consecrate with other word then these that he use in the institution and there be many of this latter opinion say he as innocentius etc. so that it be a palpable discord among they touch the very word of consecration two other contrary opinion and in the same page he deliver two other opinion one of Thomas Aquinas the other of Scotus the one contrary to the other which if you want opinion the book I will show you pag. 109. Soto say if Qu^ pridie be the priest word be not use as well as Christ etc. then it be uncertain whether there be any transubstantiation at all what wise catholic will believe this your uncertain doctrine and in the same page he show that be the word of Christ and that be the word of the priest so that Christ word without the priest word work nothing or be nothing worth and the same friar deliver the opinion of doctor Soto touch the intention of the priest in consecration of the cup but check his doctor ship in his immediate conclusion very sharp I will not say shameful say master Soto in this place disagree with himself and old Cato tell we that he that disagree with himself can agree with any (a) (a) pag. 113. read the place but in the next page he set down six several opinion touch the form of consecration one contrary to another and all of they hold and maintain very stiff for the truth whereof five of they must needs be false but I assure you there be none of they of Christ institution and therefore neither true apostolical nor catholic if they be not fabulous and frivolous I will pen they down verbatim but if you listen to see their error I have true quote their place you may see they without pain and I trust you will not read they without dislike now let i entreat you to hear some other of your friend speak that live in another age that the catholic may see your uncertainty in this point that none of you all know what to say nor what to believe and the reason be because you have deny and refuse the clear water of God truth and therefore drink of the puddle of man invention which be nothing else but fable and lie without certainty or verity Gabriel Biel. lect. 36. mark this you priest and jesuit Gabriel a learned man on your side say behold I pray you the uncerteinty of your consecration and therefore cease to deceive Petrus de Aliaco in 4 lib. sent. q 5. Christ as be very God may consecrate the bread and wine without any word or else he may speak certain word in secret and by they consecrate or else may consecrate by these word this be my body or he may first consecrate and after deliver or else first deliver and then consecrate but which of all these he do by the holy scripture it appear not but Petrus de cross they all and say that Christ consecrate before these word of mark this good reader for say he if it have not be Christ body before Christ can not have say true this be my body this now touch your freehold for he say plain unless consecration go before these word this be my body both Christ and priest shall lie this trample your consecration in the dirt and your antididagma print at Collen how blasphemous this be let the learned in Christ judge Bonaventura in 4. lib. dist. 8. q. 2. with the approbation of all the learned doctor in that age say precise that the bare word of Christ institution without the word of the canon of the mass be not sufficient to work consecration and Bonaventura be not ashamed to say that if we will right consecrate we must not seek to the gospel of Christ but to the canon of the mass now Scotus though he be master doctor be put to his dump what to do in this doubtful case of consecration when there be twenty several opinion one contrary to another and all contrary to Christ truth in the end this be his resolution the matter be so doubtful what then be your advice I say that the priest intend to do whatsoever the church do and read the word of the canon distinct and plain from the begin to the end do very consecrate neither be it wisdom for a man to account himself very skilful in his knowledge and to say I will use without all doubt these or these word to work consecration here your champion Scotus care not a point for your three evangelist nor the apostle Paul for read of the canon distinct be sufficient oh damnable heresy that renounce Christ institution and follow man invention and the word of your mass-book be and and also it must be pronounce if the foresay caution be not perform by the priest your consecration and appliccation be mar and not worth a pin now gentleman these be your doctor and this be your doctrine here betwentie several opinion of consecration in several age and none tell the truth have you use god people and the queen subject christianly in persuade they that all church and all father in all age with one consent have embrace this your opinion touch consecration for catholic without discord or dissension I tell you no for in this you have crack their conscience and do hazard their soul to maintain your superstition but perchance you will persuade the catholic false witness examine a sunder must needs be take trip and find liar for how shall you agree in that you know not nay in that which be not that though these doctor gross err yet the church of Rome ever hold one manner of consecration but that be as untrue as the rest for I will show you plain that your late pope and church of Rome since three hundred or three hundred and seventy year last pass know not what to hold nor what to affirm touch the form of consecration and therefore in this your new doctrine there be neither unity antiquity universality nor verity with which term you so long have deceive the people 66. Fitzimon whereas the doctrine of the Catholic church be manifoud express that consecration be essentia wrought by the very and only word of Christ this be my body this be my blood let all indifferent reader marvel at m. Rider for affirm Guido and angle teach by his own declaration the very self same doctrine in evident term to be repugnant one to another or with God church and if these all do assure determine that Christ either in more word or in few do consecrate be they not confess thereby to have believe a consecration to have be institute by Christ be not m. rider therefore a sage scholastic or sober scholar produce they to confess what he have report they do not believe as for innocentius if he suppose consecration to have be accomplish in the blessing of the bread and wine may he be say in any learning or wisdom to differ from the residue in belief of the truth of consecration then be bring in Thomas and Scotus as he say differ one from another but it be so palpable a delusion as one may view in their writing by i allege for my good friend omit citation when they be most needful as be above declare as it show he have a forehead of brass to aver any thing that aver it the opinion of Soto be confess belong to another matter and therefore can be opposite to the former as be not of the same for opposition must be concern the same then six repugnant opinion be relate in a dumb show not one of they either defend or impugn another but in m. rider assurance he be not ashamed here to affirm that he have true quote the citation of these six opinion thereof let your very eye be judge Gabriel ensue tell that Christ by thought may have consecrate without any word true any will think this to be most assure who believe Christ as powerful in thought as in word which unless m. rider approve he must be of opinion that Christ never make heaven note and earth before he have a mouth to speak and Gabriel say also true that the scripture do not declare by what precise word or sole mean Christ have consecrate who will infer these deduction as inconvenient but especial as repugnant beside my mate then succeed Petrus say that Christ consecrate before the word of consecration and this sentence also to who be it opposite of the rest unless any of they have say that thought be not precedent to word for in his judgement Christ intention in a thought of time have effect consecration before the word be full relate in the antididagmate there be no such matter but the contrary that they not well who omit the foresay form content themselves with the sole word of s. Paul to the corinthian last Scotus for his advise every priest about to consecrate to read the canon distinct and entire m. rider fall into this apostrophe oh damnable heresy that renounce Christ institution and follow man invention why good sir be the canon of the mass any other than Christ and his apostle institution contain only all which in the scripture be report to be do by he concern the sacrament be it because they be conjoin and to be read distinct and entire that therefore they contain a damnable heresy and man invention now jesus in what time of the day do m. Rider these sober illation the principal untruethe in this matter shall be calculate together 67. the pope and church of Rome as this canon testify be of opinion distinct. 2. in fine that the priest must recite begin at the priest must recite the whole word of the three euamgelist begin at the day before he suffer out of which we may see that this pope will have the word of the three evangelist which contain the cause and effect of the whole institution and not only etc. again there be use a most shame full and blasphemous word creature unless you will have Christ to become a creature and the priest to become a creator your master the pope be too forgetful that this have not be dash into his index but I must allege another pope to contradict this pope opinion Conse distinct 2. canon page 432. in another age there be a pope who with the church of Rome hold that there be a invisible priest that consecrate and change those visible creature into the body and blood of Christ not by virtue of those know word nor by all the word of the three evangelist as the other pope do but by a secret and hide power which you visible priest know not this pope will have a invisible body and blood of Christ what be more contrary and absurd than this this pope have brain your be your ordinary consecration and record all other pope and you jesuit and priest for heretic in hold that do consecrate but yet I will be so bold to ask this pope this question if this discord of pope you have not shroud in a unknown tongue the catholic have forsake pope priest and Rome long since lib. 4. cap. 6. page 105. 166. who be that inusible priest where be that priest what be his secret power do it consist in speak or cross or both or in neither or in some other dumb show the holy scripture teach no such priest speak of no such secret power and so this be a fable as be the rest and no sure foundation for the catholic to stick too therefore I wish that the well mind catholic of this kingdom will not believe this uncertain vanity but stick to Christ write verity I will add one pope more who opinion I know you will not gainsay for if you shall I must come upon you with a old school point this be pope innocentius the three of famous memory under the warmth of who wing your transubstantiation in the synod of Laterane be hatch at least one thousand and two hundred year after Christ ascension this pope record three several opinion touch consecration and one contrary to another the first hold it be make at the second sort teach that after benediction when either be by the priest make some print on the bread as it be by cross and some word speak over and to the bread then consecrat whosoever say nay and this sort hold that it be credible that Christ first deliver the bread and then consecrate the bread which thing make your finger and blow upon or over the bread more palpable because one must hold the element while you enchant they rather than consecrate they the three opinion cross both the other which be that Christ consecrate by his divine virtue and afterward lay down for posterity a form after which they shall bless or consecrate thus there be three several opinion that this pope speak of yet it seem he like but one of they which be the second which he seem to justify in the chapter follow sent. lib. 4. dist. 8. fol. 56 which be allege out of Ambrose but come near the matter and ask a question to make the matter plain with what word be consecration make give attention these be the word take you and eat you all of this this be my body take you and drink you this be my blood drink you all of this here you see that this master check pope and prelate for none of all these twenty and odd opinion ever put in these word take you eat you take you drink you as the word of Christ but as the word of your canon and that these word be not necessary part of Christ institution but only show the use of the institution but that be neither canonical nor catholic and if you listen at your leisure to read cardinal fr. Constantius his work print at Roanne 1592. pag. 144. 145. 146. entitle sum dedicate to this pope Clement the eight now live you shall see that he repeat other several jar that be now among your roman prelate touch consecration as contrary as these and therefore as absurd as the former now gentleman how can you salve this sore and reconcile these jar doctor schoolman canonist text and gloss pope and great prelate dissent most shameful about consecration none of they rely upon Christ plain institution and therefore behold their deserve confusion now blame not we for discover your discord and for forsake your error but blame your doctor schoolman friar monk legendary canonist your pope canon and your own mass book these be come to our hand we have read their work and discover some hundred of their heresy and send they to the view of the catholic but howsoever you blame we God and the world will blame you in keep the people from read God book and good writer which will instruct and confirm they in true religion and revoke they from your gross superstition thus much concern the uncertainty absurdity and blasphemy of your consecration now the true apostolical consecration be this when the element of bread and wine be set apart from their common use and apply to a holy use according to God word Fitzimon 67. the fox that by all attempt can not attain grape place in a height begin after to dispraise they as sour and seem ^o despise they so m. rider who before have assure himself of ^he decretal num. 46 find his conceit frustrate in great choler ^ayleth rebuke and in his opinion refute they in this place what he say be intend by the first pope such be his skill to think s. augustin have be pope for they be his word I assure he he may find in all missal to be prescribe general and to be practise in all mass at all place which show in all place a universal consent and uniformity the next pope offence he shall have say if he know what he say Eusebius but the name pope be such a sting in his hart that of the abundance of grief wrought thereby the mouth ever speak be to have mention a invisible priest a man that true and not feign have be familiar in the father chrysost hom. August 4. c. 7. and 14. l. 10. ciu. c. 20. cypr. ep. 63. Ambros. 38. theoph. 5. Anselm ibid. 10. etc. conc. trid. sess. 22. c. 1. 2. will never have except against such speech as at a novelty s. Chrisostom say when you behold the priest offer do not consider he work this but Christ hand invisible extend s. augustin say it be he Christ which offer he be the oblation the same be affirm by s. cyprian Ambrose Theophilact Anselme the council of Lateran of Florence and of Trent all these witnese declare the speech of Eusebius to be usual and sound Eusebius himself testify it to be ancient for he live 350. the three pope must not be different in this point if it be he that hacth it for if he hold in this other than we hold he can not be author of this that we hold marry innocentius in deed tell there be three general sentence in this matter to wit of some that will have consecration begin at the word bless of other that after of diverse that Christ consecrate by divine virtue and leave a form to consecrate for posterity of these the two first differr not otherwise in the point of consecration but that one tell it be begin in the first word the other that such word be rather a preparation than consummation of it I shall think these two not to differr so much as if one will say you m. Rider come from your father and the other that you come from your grandfather for all difference allege be of less diversity as be of what be believe to be the same substance whereas you be of distinct substance yea and state as you come from your grandfather and father your school point be the first and last savour any smack in logic for only two grammarian sentence be hitherto hear of it also bewray the author by be not apliable to a argument of authority but only of maxim or ground to be void of skill the argument or school point to support any authority according to Aristotle be only arist 2. top. two 1. 2. in in use of word the custom be to be follow in sense of thing the judgement of the wise be to be embrace your addition to the second opinion be more remote from sincerity than your former school point from subtility the text of innocent have thus nether also be it that he give first before he have accomplish which be a palpable negation in plain term as every half penny scholar may conceive m. rider either for want of skill or for want of fidelity make it a affirmation very this ignorance or juggle deserve at least to have your hood in the school lane pull over your head I know not what shall torment his mind in the three sentence unless it be that divine virtue be ascribe to Christ or that he have leave we a form to consecrate which two in God word and godly mind be undoubted although in protestancy Christ be say to have have no more divine virtue than Socrates or Trismegistus see in our 24. number as little do I know what he may cavil at in the next opinion of the master of sentence report it true without his own commixtion as but only tell for complete and perfect consecration not only for the essential but also for the ceremonial and historical part all that be prescribe by the church to be observe by all which accusation examine they be so idle so confuse and intricate as want all method and matter and so remote from disprove consecration as they all be confess be disputation not whether there be any consecration but such presuppose to be undoubtful in what sort there be any to approve it and withal so untrue report all man friend and foe to our profession may perceive that neither late or owld true or false settle belief or opiniative disputation do contradict our persuasion and that diversity can not or have not be among we in any other sort then by their impudent report who with squint eye and dazzle brain behold we thereby think like gogle-eyed drunkard every candle to be twenty now must we out of the whole heap only some choice untruethe the 56. be that he will show many opinion of pope contrary one to another the 57 the 56 57 58 59 60. 61. 62. 63. 64 65. 66. untruth that Guido number four diverse opinion that he or m. Rider have quote any of the six opinion by he say to be repugnant one to another that we know the canon of the mass to be in patch many hundred year that any fabulous opinion be relate or mention by Guido that Guido be of different opinion to any other by he relate in allow consecration that our religion be hellish the 58. that Christ and his church for the first eight hundred year want intention in institution and use of the b. sacrament the 59 that there be any such matter in the antididagmate as he inform the 60. that so judge the 61. that s. augustin or s. Eusebius be pope the 62. that transubstantiation be found by innocentius the three the 63. 64. 65. false allegation addition and alteration of negative to affirmative in repetition of innocent discourse the 66. that m. Rider have discover hondred of heresy in our writer etc. upon my credit I libera overpass for brevity sake ten time as many more impious untruethe easy to be view by every christian observer only because I loathe to reveal a sink out of which vamp so odious a stench the best rule towards such a reporter be to have all that he say in suspicion until his allegation be view which to he and he to they be ever find contrary 68 rider and when the lawful minister have teach the prepare communicant the grievousness of their sin the greatness of God wrath what true consecration be which the gospeler teach the sufficiency of Christ merit full to appease the same the nature of the sacrament which be a commemoration of that passion the office of faith to apprehend and apply Christ merit promise in the word and tender in the due administration of the sacrament then be there I say aright consecration of the sacrament now whether this consecration of you be warrant by Christ his word let the indifferent reader judge and with the true and ancient opinion join thus much concern your imagine and newstamp consecration now to your second pillar which be transsubstansiation first I must tell you in this transubstantiation as in the former that the term be new late invent and compound by yourselves and as your consecration be never find in the new testament what the true consecration be which the gospeler teach and whether it be according to Christ institution 68 I have think to have keep back myself at this point Fitzimon of the protestant consecration by occasion of the word late speak by m. Rider in the 66. number to wit oh damnable heresy that renounce Christ institution and follow man invention but this clause of his now be my text whereupon I intend to revy as the phrase of player be or reply if it dislike any have hitherto see all his lay and exception first in this his discourse borrow out of Jewel reply against Harding art. 1. diuis. 8. pag. 19 to which bullinger decad. 5. ser. 6. Caluin Instit. l. 4. c. 17. n. 15. and other of that sort accord I can not perceive Christ word of institution of the sacrament neither contain nor mention either as it be use by we or propound in the communion book what more puritantrie be not this Christ institution to be renounce and man invention follow the sequel thereupon be in my foresay text by conceit for brevity sake here reiterate but we will not so depart the substance of bread and wine when it be say he set a part from the common use and apply to a holy use according to God word the common use of bread and wine be to nourish I ask how you separate they from nourish especial when you often say before that as they nourish the body so Christ the soul not by his descend but by your ascend in faith if than the substance of bread and wine be set a part from their common use which be to nourish what relation have they to Christ feed our soul 1. timo. 4. I pray you for our understanding sake make this plain 2. in deed I find in s. Paul all meat be lawful that be sanctify by the word and by prayer so have come cap. pag. 336. bullinger decad. 5. ser. 6. do you therefore intend by application to a holy use that such sanctification of meat have operate any mutation in your bread and wine fie say you Noah for blessing charm or word of sanctification and operation we abhor then I require both how you interpret your intricate conceit and also what warrant for this whole discourse be any where else in scripture if you bring none as I be sure there be none yet know to your purpose remember my text be your own word how unfortunate it tumble upon you according brief to my promise in the beginning I will not overcrow over he so abject prostrate in superfluous discourse I let you therefore understand that the current of protestancy decline as from a serpent from the word of Christ institution and cloud and shadow of word mist and obscurity of sentence savour feign piety be make by they his institution and not his own word Decad. 5. ser. 6. witness bullinger pronownce in plain term there be no virtue at all in rehearse the word of the lord in the supper Zuingl to 2. resp. confess luth. sol. 431. and he confirm it by authority of Pliny a pagan witness say that none can ever give any sound reason or authority joan. Schut l. 50. cap. 13. fox act and Mon. pag. 666. 667. Buchanan hist. scotic l. 15. pag. 523. Suingl to 2. expos. fid. Christ fol. 563. 564. Bulling. in ep. hebr. c. 10. that command the word of Christ institution to be red in minister the supper witness John scut that the caluinist do so hate the word of Christ institution that they can abide either to see or to hear they witness John Lassels one of fox martyr that Christ word shall not be speak in the institution consider that s. Paul dare not mention they witness one George Sephocard a scotish Protestant martyr minister the communion without Christ word of institution witness the protestant in Switzerland where by declaration and approbation of and bullinger the people sit all a long in order upon form and give ear to one read the 13. chapter of s. John without Christ institution in the mean season be bread carry about in panier and wine in glass one give bread and wine to another and so end say they the communion witness other of England also practise the same profane indecency towards their supper of who we have treat numb 39 witness Beza advise to the communion Beza epist. Theol. 2. pag. 27. when there be no bread or wine at hand in any other food contrary to Christ institution and christendom practice witness the scotishe communion book in the administration of the l. supper luth. 10.7 verb. caene fol. 383. where the word of Christ institution be careful avoid witness last Luther say of this sort of people they fear lest they shall stumble and break their neck at every syllable which Christ pronounce if I be a good preacher I shall not so long have omit my text oh damnable heresy that renounce Christ institution and follow man invention I may have more ample witnese their hatred against Christ word if I have intend to flourish in abundance and prolixity only to conclude let we not be ignorant that Swenkfeld flout Christ word by testimony of Schlusselburg Schlusselb l. 2. theol cal. art. 32. Dialog. Comment. in lib. reg. she Peter vermil otherwise call Peter martyr first term be my body but a five woorded proof next he tremble not to say the divine word ought not to be follow so much in divinity as the word of nature no less blasphemous say etc. we must look with the left eye at the word of Christ but with the right at nature of thing this disdain towards Christ institution reveal let we next examine the cause thereof I find they several some think that Christ have not power to give we his body and together to be in heaven I find it in Caluin in Robert Bruce in Beza in calu. l. 4. Instit. c. 17. n. 29. Instit. l. 3. c. 23. n. 2. Comment. in cap. 23. isa l. L'Espine yea and Caluin thrice to my own knowledge deny God to be almighty absolute and Beza say that the angel speech to our lady Beza l. 2. con Heshus rob. Bruce in his sermon pag. 158. how nothing be impossible to God ought to be believe universally the residue affirm that God can neither understand nor will not work that the body of his son jesus Christ can be together in many place nor any other thing contrary to the course of nature once by he as Bruce say establish go and tell these man that Christ body can as well exceed nature in be in many place together as be bear of a virgin walk on the sea be invisible issue out of a sepulchre enter among his close disciple penetrate the heaven article of the family of love print in London an. 1578. art. 43. etc. they will answer confident for the first of Christ marvelous birth I mean they of the family of love that he be bear of the virgin Marie no otherwise then he be bear of their flesh for the second of his walk on the sea I remember not to have hear they disprove it nor for his invisibility for the three of his resurrection Colloq. Malbrun act. 6. Marlor in nou. test fol. 167. and in 20. joan. Thalman in c. 28. mat Calu in joan. c 20. 19 lib. 4. c. 17. n. 29. in harm luc. 24.36 pet. mart. in dialog. fol. 94. 95. pag. 185. 186. fevard entremangery pag. 263. they tell that the angel have make passage and that there be no miracle perceive therein for which opinion of Vermil gautier L'Espin and Beza diverse of themselves have repine as appear in the conference of Malbrown in Marlorat in Benedict Thalman etc. for the four of enter among his enclose disciple I can hardly relate their variable shift to escape it in few word yet I will attempt to comprise succinct their diversity about it Caluin say first that he find the door shut but knock and obtain entry second that by his divine virtue he secret have open they bullinger say that a angel have open they Aretius that they open of their own grace Peter martyr that he enter by the window simonius that he enter by the chink of the door Thalman that his body diminish itself like a thread and so pass thereat other that he enter at the tonnel of the chimney etc. and if you tell they the scripture declare a miracle whereby the apostle be afraid etc. they will answer as to the word of Christ institution aforesaid you must look with you left eye at scripture etc. for the last they affirm contrary to scripture that by many weighty reason they be persuade pag. 57 the heaven not to be hard but easy passable and consequent that Christ may have enter or pass through they not only without miracle but also without resistance so speak John brovant in his aphorism and replication note all this outrage proceed against Christ institution of the b. sacrament because if it be true these miraculous mystery of Christ nativity resurrection ascension etc. may stand if it be not allow in the literal sense these other mystery testify Christ true substantial body to have surpass the bond of natu^re as much as if it shall be in many place at once must likewise ^n this Protestant guise specify be contradict one bottomless misery and absurdity trail with it another for this same cause Beza profess to have translate false the 21. Beza in cap. act. 3. v. 21. verse of the three chapter of the act of the apostle of purpose say ^he to keep Christ presence from the altar whereat Caluin and other protestant great murmur for the same cause cal. in c. 26. mat. v. 27. Colloq. Monpelgartense^ in act fevard in c. 1. pet. and l. 5. c. 16. cal. Cureus in Spongia^ fol. 239. Erastus pag. 29. Aulakius 45. pag. Osiander con Morlinum Bavar con. lest thou shall have any belief to receive Christ blood Caluin tell that they be furious mad who affirm any blood to be long conjoin with his flesh whereby his scholar Aulakius Bavarus Cureus Erastus Osiander and the antilutheran of Witberg affirm that such blood be long since putrify and lose in earth no long in nature and be fruitless towards our salvation whereat the Compt or earl Mont-Belial say that his whole body tremble and the conference be present debar for such foul blasphemy by the duke of Witemberg Notwith stand all this of m. rider own and his brother hate against the word of Christ institution of so many mystery of religion and testimony of scripture so impious disinherit disdain and abjure two thing may seem incomprehensible first how minister can brave and face out with sugar and assure word their hypocrisy second how they can obtrud any long their filthy fancy now so plain discover to their own conscience and to all other who may so easy and by only natural sight behowld their abomination in the mean time I end pronounce my text since m. Rider to all man view omit Christ institution oh damnable heresy etc. 69. so transubstansiation be never find in the new nor old no rider I do not remember that in all my grammatical travel and study that ever I read it yet we contend with you not for name and word but for point and article of faith I can show you dictionary many and grammar more of diverse print and in diverse age print in several university of Christendom but none of they make mention of this word much less of the sense which be to change substance of several kind one substance into another whether transubstantiation have be ancient know and whether new name may consist with old doctrine 69. it may seem the more strange that m. Rider Fitzimon who make such a dictionary wherein beyond Thomas Thomasius his pyke-devant and all other like word former unknown in dictionary m. Rider find out turlererehiskum and diverse other as good ornament to his say dictionary can yet not find the word transubstantiation but it be the less admirable that he that seek it have a veil upon his hart towards the effect of transubstantiation and a mist upon his eye towards the word in all your brother writing against it by express name may you not have find it Brovaldt have it say in his aphorism pag. 2. and 26. that one name italian long before innocent the three bring it in to the church and after in the year 1051. it be establish by Leon the nine in the council of versel may you not have find it in Peter martyr in Caluin and in the whole crew say it not to have be before innocent the three which also yourself often do profess and yet you say you never remember to have read it a better mind will bring a better memory in the mean time be recorder of your own 67. untruth 67. untruth but what mean you to think it strange not to find especial in grammarian travel and study for old belief but new name as for example in your own profession you use the name of the word of which use you have not one instance in scripture but rather where it be take in a bad sense mat. 26.58 mar. 14.56.65 joan. c. 18.12.18.22 cap. 19.6 2. cor. 11.15 second none more often speak as of all other word of doubtful signification of the name in his sermon pag. 4. 12. westphal in apol. pag. 5. in come pag. 292. argum. 12. sacrament yet Robert Bruce tell that it be not use in scripture nor to be use by christian so do etc. but at other time say Westphalus the caluinist because they find the word apt for they to shift and lurk under do greedy embrace it I require remembrance be take of this admonition when m. Rider will stand upon the name sacrament as upon a brazen wall as Caluin term it so likewise of all time in our profession to signify a old belief with more efficacy a new term be impose as (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) to signify consubstantial (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) to signify the mother of God for the conversion of bread and wine into the flesh and blood of Christ in con. nic. in con. ephes. conc. trid. sess 13. c. 4. August epist. 174. cic. l. 2. Heren etc. which word be to be measure according to the propriety of they and the authority whence they proceed rather than according the antiquity of they but because s. augustin say it be a most contentious part to contend about the name when the thing be know and as Cicero say it be the propriety of caviller to pursue word by the definition of transubstantiation we will be instruct how sound and ancient it be 70. but brief rider as the word can be find in God book nor ancient doctor so the sense have neither warrant from holy scripture nor catholic writer for this be your opinion that after consecration which yet you know not what it be the substance of bread and wine shall be convert into the natural body and blood of Christ the accident of bread and wine as whiteness roundness breadth weight savour and taste of they only remain you may assoon and to as good a purpose prove a transaccidentation as a transubstantiation but as there be no change of the former so not of the latter but a mere f^iers fable and therefore frivolous and whereas the father use these word change conversion mutation transelementation they always expound themselves in their several work that it be a change of the use not of the substance neither can you show any one father that ever mean such a change of one substance into another for every change of one thing into another carry not with it at all transubstantiation of one substance into another for there may be a change without conversion of substance but conversion of substance can be without a change for there be as much difference betwixt change and transubstantiation as betwixt the general and the special for change be the general and contain under it transubstansiation but not contrariwise and as there be a change of substance so there be a change of accident to wit of quality of time of place of habit and such other like thing according to their nature and to the predicament under the which they be comprehend these logical rudiment I hope you have not forget our regeneration be a change not substantial but accidental that be we confess a change of name and of use but only during the action not after to be a sacrament no more than water in the font after that baptism be finish by the minister it be not a change of the substance of our body and soul into any other substance but the change be in quality which be from vice to virtue from sin to righteousness etc. and this our change now in question be sacramental not substantial of the use of the creature not of the substance but if you will needs have a change of substance speak like scholar and tell i for my learning in what predicament I shall seek it and yet I think I shall never find it but I will not be tedious in transubstantiation see the great rabbin of Rome can no more agree upon this than they can about consecration as also because we have confute it in such place where we prove bread to remain after consecration for so many father as prove bread to remain after consecration confute transubstantiation I will only give the best mind catholic a taste of the rest of your late school-doctor by allege one grand captain instead of the rest who word be these sent. lib. 4. di^t 11. pag. 58. but if it be ask i say this your great moderator what kind of change be make in the sacrament whether it be formal or substantial or of any other kind I be not able to define it unto you will you hear your own friend Cuthb Tounstall bishop of Dirrhum deliver his opinion Eucharistia lib. 1. pag. 46. of the manner of this change or conversion how it may be do perhaps it have be better to leave every man that will be curious to his own opinion or conjecture as i^ be before the council of Laterane leave at liberty be this your antiquity universality and consent you see it be a jar novelty void of verity why then will you take upon you to teach that which you never learn and persuade the catholic to believe that which the chief on you^ side make a doubt of nay all of your side can prove nay which be in deed but a fable without truth absurdity follow the grant of transubstantiation for one thousand and two hundred year after Christ never hear of and therefore see it be neither apostolical nor catholic no man conscience be bind to believe it now I will only show some gross absurdity that follow the grant of it and so proceed to the rest what the sense be of transubstantiation and how old it be Fitzimon 70. transubstantiation in our purpose be a conversion of the whole substance of bread into the substance of the body of Christ our lord conc. trid. loc. cit. and of the whole substance of wine into the substance of his blood so that if the father ever teach the whole bread in substantial matter and form to be convert in to the flesh of Christ and the wine into his blood without any substantial part or parcel of they remain they can not be deny to have teach transubstantiation Zuar. 3. par. q. 75. d^sp 50. sect 1. the name creation be add out of s. augustin conseca d. 2. c. whereby be only intend what here in other word other have for the evidence whereof first let we learn what name they use to express this conversion for brevity sake I will only relate such as in the proof of their opinion in zuares be specify to wit a transmutation a make a creation a mutation a conversion a translation a transelementation transformation a transmigration transfusion of bread and wine into the body and blood of Christ every one use the most forcible word he bethink to testify the same which the council of Trent do say convenient and proper to be call transubstantiation second note these few proof of the primative father and other doctor persuasion cyprian first s. cyprian panis the bread which Christ deliver his disciple not in resemblance but in substance and nature change by the omnipotency of the word be make flesh o comfortable and Catholic testimony of fourteen hundred year antiquity Cyril catechist 4. s. Cyrill of jerusalem this know and howld for most certain this bread not to be bread which seem Ambros. l. 4. c 14. lib. 6. c. 1. although the taste do the judge it bread s. Ambros panis (@) this bread be bread before consecration but when it be consecrate of bread it be make the flesh of Christ s. augustin August dist. 2. cap. Consecr. and it be his flesh which under the likeness of bread cover ^e receive in the sacrament and his blood which under the show and taste of ^yne we drink s. Cyrill of Alexandria Cyril alex. in joan. l. 4. c. 13. that which seem bread be not ^read although in taste it so appear but the body of Christ beda beda lib. remigius in psal. 21. there the form of bread appear ^here the substance of bread be not s. remigius panis and bread and wine be say in christian verity ^ot that they retain the nature of bread and wine after consecration but that ^hey nourish s. Bernard Bernard the host ^hat thou do behold be not now bread but my flesh likewise the liquor ^hich thou view be not wine but my blood even as the likeness be see ^hose thing or substance be believe not to be there so the thing be true and ^ubstantialy believe who shape be not perceive will all thesis testimony whereof every one alone have be ^ufficient to the most partial or least indifferent Protestant be ^o pregnant so precise to the matter so godly and from so godly as every one of they have be account at least these 400. bullinger decad. 5. fol. 370. year a saint reclaim our adversary bullinger a great Protestant answer negative say and the zwinglians not to be able to believe Christ to be present in the supper in his true body although all the council of the world all angel and saint do command it to be believe yet I trust in the mercy of God that diverse read this manifestation of error and justification of truth will instant open their heart to let shadow and figur depart and to embrace Christ and verity let i die a bad death if I will otherwise then to purchase that good to deceive soul spend only to incountre m. rider such precious time in display or disprove that infidelity which be incident to he for his profession which of itself be notorious and every day vanish and consume without our labour and for your learning m. rider you may peruse 75. 47. sectione 2 and be instruct by he particular in what predicament be transubstantiation and so have resolution in conceit so impossible I be true weary in sum up untruethe they be so manifold only I will certify some especial the 68 that we know not what transubstantiation be the 69. that we may to as good purpose prove transaccidentation the 70. that transubstantiation be a friar fable the 71. that the father never intend a substantial Change the 68 69. 70. 71. 72. 72 73. 74. untruth the 72. and 73. that the master of the sentence or Tonstal doubt of the conversion of bread into the flesh of Christ they only dispute how it be wrought which be no more to deny the mather in question then if one shall confess you to have the rich deanery of s. Patrick and muse by what mean whether by assure simony or unknown desert or blind choice you come thereto the 74. that we see transubstantiation to be a jar novelty and a fable without truth these be but gloss imputation of m. rider to dazzle the mind of his reader that they do not conceive when truth be represent to their eye by we or when falsehood be inculcate by he denial without shame affirmation with remorse and torture of conscience exprobration without regard of fidelity protestation repugnant to all truth and sincerity rider 71. this fable of transubstansiation overthrow sundry article of our faith and therefore it be abominable it teach a new conception of Christ to be make of bread by a sinful priest and every day and in every place where it please the priest contrary to the article of our faith which be that Christ be conceive by the holy ghost and bear of the bless virgin and but once for such Christ as you tender to the poor ignorant catholic be not a true Christ neither can be for many respect which be before in the beginning allege second if Christ be in the sacrament he be not then ascend and so there be another article of our faith destroy by this damnable fable and three if he be couchant or dormant in the pyx than the scripture deceive we in tell we he shall come from heaven to judge bo^h quick and dead and so another article of our faith be overthrow and if your doctrine be true Christ shall have eat himself corporal but you confess he do eat himself (a) (a) josephus angle pag. c. 110. 4 spiritual if your doctrine of transubstantiation be true than the lord supper be no sacrament and the reason be this for every sacrament consist of the outward sign and the inward thing signify and they must both still remain during the outward action of the sacrament now if bread which be the visible outward part of the sacrament be change into Christ body than there be no sacrament because there remain but one part of the sacrament which be the thing signify and then you utter deceive the people which tell they it be the sacrament of the altar when it be no sacrament at all again another absurdity follow upon it for if the substance of bread be change then there be no proportion or analogy betwixt the sign and the thing signify because accident can nourish for the likeness or resemblance betwixt bread and Christ consist chief in this that as bread nourish the body so Christ body crucify nourish the soul but if the substance of bread be change into another substance than the proportion and property be so change that it must cease to be the thing for which it be first ordain and so the best you will make of the sacrament be but a shadow without a substance another unreasonable absurdity will follow that Christ have two body one of bread make by the priest another of the bless virgin conceive by the holy ghost again if his own body shall be in many place at once that be contrary to a natural body and be as void of learning as the other of religion and by this your new thirtheenth article of your new faith you will maintain the be of quality without a subject and the be of quantity without a substance which both be impossible but because the opinion be false and forge without scripture or testimony of ancient father I will allege no more absurdity at this time till I be urge whether the article of Christ ascension be not rather a proof than disproof of the real presence 71. saint augustin ever according to his wont Fitzimon August 22. ciu. c. 11. pertinent answer sectarist and now in these word answer to m. rider behold with what argument human infirmity possess by vanity contradict God omnipotency now to the first it teach no new conception of Christ according to s. Ambros being s. Ambros. loc. cit. Maria and in cruse and no other flesh plain than be bear of Mary suffer on the cross and rise out of the sepulchre to the second his be ascend above the order and propriety of a natural body do rather aver and assure his be in the sacrament beyond the bare nature of a natural body and to that end joan. ^ Christ himself in his instruct the jew that his body be true meat to have they believe his word forewarn they that they shall see his body mount and ascend by the one be beyond nature confirm the other to be possible notwithstanding nature to wrest then his ascension against his be in the sacrament be a wicked gloss corrupt the text that make Luther to confess that we be bind to believe Christ real presence in the sacrament luth. tom. 7. defence verb. fol. 394. for that both the scripture and article of our faith azure we thereof most constant be it not therefore a strange assertion to say the article of faith be impugn when they be conjoint with scripture consonant in this controversy to the three I answer out of the psalmist Israel he sleep not nor nod who preserve Israel his be in the pyx hinder not his come from heaven no more than his be in heaven sit at the right hand of God the father psal 109. until his enemy be make his footstool hinder his be view in earth by his apostle s. Paul act. 9.17 c. 22. c. 26. 1. cor. 15. in the high way to Damascus and that after his ascension which be a insupportable inevitable thunderboult against they that affirm Christ body neither to have be nor possible able to be in many place at once especial be confess by m. Rider after that a true apostle must see the lord jesus in the flesh wherefore s. Paul be assure a true apostle do behold Christ in flesh at his first election to be such apostle which be in the high way to Damaso and consequent Christ then and still be at the right hand of his father be in flesh in two place at once in heaven and in the way to Damascus to the four we confess both spiritualy and corporaly as have often be declare and not only spiritual or only corporal to the five it be rather against you say there be only a external sign and no inward grace we for the external sign show the form of bread and wine for the internal grace Christ precious body and blood to the six accident strengthen by Christ support may and do nourish Ambros. consecr dist. 1. c. to the 7. although it be all one with the first s. Ambrose again inform you say and and in and and the same body true the same body certain which be take from the virgin which suffer and be bury and rise and ascend and sit at the right hand of God his father and will come to judge the quick and the dead to the eight it be not contrary to a natural body but beyond it and be testify by scripture to have infallible happen and good m. rider if it be impossible that quality can be without a subject how do God make light gen. 1. without a subject for neither firmament son moon or star be yet make and other subject be not mention it be strange that you dare affirm that impossible which the scripture assure possible beside the argument to the contrary that nothing beyond the condition of a natural body be possible imply there will be no resurrection of the dead there be no birth walk on the sea entrance among the enclose disciple resurrection and ascension of Christ as be beyond nature glory be to God divine majesty for so ground we on truth as that we can not be impugn but God omnipotency the scripture and chief mystery of religion must first be deny my turn be next to examine my adversary in these article of belief and the rest to practice they no less to defend then offend that by their resolution to heavy and urgent imputation their strength or weakness appear whereby I do not intend so much to grieve or gravel their mind as to instruct they not by my document but by their own in what they be occasion to consider better of their estate for it shall now be make notorious that we may be taint for be contrary to the article of belief but they and not we touch and stain with that infidelity argument full of falsehood and futility have be object against we but now against they pregnant and press proof without strange and far inference shall be tender and produce to convict they faulty and faithless against all and every article of belief a examination of protestancy concern the 12. article of belief in general it have ever be among sectarist Athanas. Socrates l. 2. c. 7. sozom. l. 3. c. 5. cassian l. 6. Epiph. she 73. a principal difficulty provident to collect and resolute to embrace any form of belief whereunto they will remain tie and invariable the arrian by testimony of the father four time in few month change and revoke their creed to abrupt other induction when late reformer present their confession entitle of Augusta to which they general subscribe bind themselves thereto by solemn protestation whereupon they be name protestant and to this day they only among the learned be so call who avouch the foresay augustan confession although they have as provident and politic compile it as they may not be ashamed upon future deliberation to justify it yet never do chameleon alter his colour more often than it Chlebitius in and therefore a famous Lutheran one William Chlebitius be constrain to say it be not expedient before the people to number how often and in what manner the confession of Augusta have be amend another exclaim that it have be hosius in Antibrentio turn pervert convert change deprave maim then which kind of lamentation nothing be more frequent in Lutheran writer Osiander Hosium ibid. behold I pray you the confession collect as studious and judicious as may be possible to the maintenance whereof all master of art by oath be oblige even as to the fover evangelist and all opposite thereto as be also determine Cassimiriani cap. 4. a aberrant and and do stray from truth and the word of God and as separate from the church of God be most just condemn eschew and as wolf from Christ sheepsowld repulse behold I say how miserable it have be like a cock of hey in summer time toss toil and torment change fashion reform and deform as if it contend with courtier of late time to be in as many new fashion as they I will not unfold any thing of the english communion book diversity a survey of the pretend holy discipl land joan wolf 1593. pag. 3. 13. 77. because puritan shall not be offend with i for intermeddle in their charge their milenarie suffrage against it their exception against 150. article thereof their say that the government of the church of England be antichristian and diabolical and that none but betrayer of God do defend it be more than sufficient to be say to my purpose 2. where as there be three form of creed one from the time of the apostle another of the first general council of nice which after for further explication add in the council of Constantinople bear common the name of the constantinopolitan whereof godw l I will treat in the explication of the mass the three of s. athanasius which to this day be readd in the Sunday office eu^n among protestant although these three according to their order more or less have be in all Christendom hitherto irrefragable yet now the second displease for the word (a) (a) Luther con jac. Latom. homoousion and all founder thereof be term but a congregation of (b) (b) Beza in epist. theol. 81. sophister also the three for stand to much upon and for the bless trinity be misnamed for the creed of s. athanasius the creed of (c) (c) Georgio Nigro Stanislao Sarnicio Blandrata Lismamni^ etc. Stanchar l 6. 7. and in pref. Sathanasius against the first of the apostle diverse exception be make first by Caluin (d) (d) calu. Lindan pa. op. pag. 112. that he doubt whether it shall be of authority not be contain in scripture second by Brentius (e) (e) brent in incline not so much to doubt thereof as to be assure it shall be disinherit three by anabaptist deny it in general and particular to these may be reduce profane and impious Erasmus or rather all they to he affirm praef. in matth. Apostolis manaverit whether this form of belief ever come from the apostle o unworthy and unchristian distrust worthy be it say vulgar but by that which follow may best appear that protestant be in great dislike towards it Lavath in hist. amisfort in doctr. euang. Gallus in Thesib sur. add an. 1557. Lavatherus a Zuinglian Amissortius and Gallus lutheran and Surius a Catholic do conformable recount how the Dieta of ratisbon 1557. septemb 4. enjoin 12. choice protestant to establish a form of belief not after at any time by any to be contradict they meet and eftsoons deliberate without any conclusion then three day far consultation for better advice be have and those also be expire seven other day request and grant yet nothing be determine they be so far from consent to either the apostle belief or any other that seven of they excommunicate the other five as be the only impediment of agreement yet neither can these seven either then or ever since deliver any form of belief to which they or other will stand or abide irrevocable 3. as s. augustin say they that believe of scripture what they listen s. August con. faust. l. 16. c. 3. and what they listen not do not believe they believe not the scripture but themselves so be it in the believer of the creed therefore he that offend in one be make guilty of all or as s. chrysostom say s. Chrysost. in Galat. s. Ambros. symbol s. athanaesij verse etc. ephes. 4.5 hebr. 11.6 he corrupt the whole doctrine who overthrow the least particle thereof or as s. Ambrose say he be reject from the number of the faithful and lot of the holy which in any one point dissent from the Catholic verity so that if protestantcy be find opposite to any one article although it profess the residue yet may it not be say available or a true belief nether can there be other than one faith as there can be but one only God and without this true and only faith it be impossible to please God how honest soever misbeliever live in the world wherefore all sectary must be repugnant to this true and only faith and far from salvation who have no other evidence of their faith the one above the other but bare challenge of scripture common to all late and ancient heretic in particular let they assure themselves that the true faith have public prevail both for continuance and purity against the gate of hell math. 16.18 to wit against the power of pagan and malice of heretic such be Christ infallible assurance to the only faith of his church next let they as careful provide that the faith by they esteem true be not late reveal for thereby both be it know to have be prevail against if it be at any time extinguish and also we be admonish by God word 1. joan. 2. rom. 16. Galat. 1 that it remain in we and we in it which we have hear from the beginning and if any preach otherwise then we have already receive to hold he accurse whereof some what be dispute before three let they no less eschew hebr. 13. that it be not mutable as be forewarn by s. Paul not to be misledd by variable and strange doctrine so that if these observation tender by the holy ghost in sacred scripture be opposite to their belief it be a manifest demonstration they shall suspect and reject it rom. 10.17 2. cor. 11.14 4. true faith be by hear the word of God reveal to we by his holy spirit whether in write or by tradition whereas thetfor Satan may transform himself into a angel of light we be forewarn not to believe every spirit but to depend upon the faith of God church the pillar of truth 1. jo^ 4. 1. tim. 3. govern by the holy ghost which if we do not observe 14. joan. mat. 18. Galu l. 4. Instit. c. 1. n. 17. 22 4. we be no near salvation than ethnic and publican this be the faith contain in the creed of the apostle to be now examine therefore it can not be less than a rash precipitation in late founder of pretend reformation Guliel l. 3. Vincent Beluac in spec. Erasm Alberus de Carolostad Luther tom. 7. p. 228. thom. Kelug subsid Euchar fol 249. Tom 2. Staphil in resp. con. jacob schmidelin pag. 404. to depart from their first belief at the sensible suggestion of Satan and by delusion of dream as by their own confession and no otherwise it happen of that he be direct and assist visible by Satan all sort of author catholic and protestant do record Luther and testify the same both of themselves and of Oecolampadius and Caluin acknowledge that he be not so much guide by his own disposition as by his goblin other successor of Luther confess that he be a dreamer because his night imagination conceive in his drunken head he utter for the pure express word of God also other disciple of Caluin Lindan dial. 3. c. 1. Dubitan do certify of Geneva preacher * * joa. Spangeberg in etc. Ochin dial con. Schlusselburg proem lib. theol Caluin that which they dream by night that they engross in paper and cause to be print and strive to have their writing and word to stand for oracle another say of they Nigro Demone it be clear that the caluinist by dream suggest from the black devil endeavour to destroy the testament of the Sonn of God I omit for brevity sake how fox martyr-maker act and monument pag. 90. confess a spirit to have instruct he during his muse in bed to count the 42. month mention in the Apocalips by sabbath which spirit to have be false appear by the express word of God say the say 42. month to be 1260. day or three year and a half and not as fox calculate 294. year this be abundant sufficient to manifest that he that depart from his former belief upon such guide govern by such spirit and dream be in wisdom to deep in to this exammation follow 5. for better information in this point act and monument pag. 402. the definition of Protestant faith be to be propound fox define it thus faith in Christ be that every one shall believe particular that his synn be forgive he whereupon say he he be justify and this tutchstone of truth and doctrine be reveal first to Luther by a owld man say m. fox whereby the ice be break to all that follow Caluin calu. l. 3. c. n. 7. 15. 16. and protestant universally subscrib to this sure and certain knowledge in particular that by believe Christ promise of salvation none can perish as be perfect justify make a elect and predestinate cal. Instit. l. 3. c. 2. n. 38. 39 40. cap. 24. n. 6. 7. 8. brent in apol. Conf. wittem par. 3. p. 703. Luther tom. 2. wittem fol. 405. an. 1551. confess Beza c. 4. n. 20. so assure as nothing can separate he from God for this faith say they be once have may never be lose and Luther instruct herein by the owld man confess that he be angry that the apostle have not sufficient extol this faith and therefore that he think good by addition of a word only to make the text affirm that only faith justify whereupon by good consequence he sustain that only infidelity deserve damnation that god commandment belong not to christian that sacrament be superfluous as be before declare Bucer Brentius Maior lutheran profess that he be not a kind Christian Disput. ratisbon pag. 463. Sleidan l. 16. pag. 263. Zuingl tom. 1. fol. 268. who believe not with the same assurance that himself in particular be elect as that Christ be the son of God nay more quoth that you can not be damn unless Christ be damn nor he save unless you be save you have as great right to heaven as he act and monument pag. 1335. 1338 1339 (@) cap. 2.20 21. 2. cor. 7.15 philip. 2.12 2. eccl. c. 2. and if you labour to make this your justify faith assure by good work you shame say the english Protestant martyr the blood of Christ go tell these man that s. james be of a contrary mind that faith alone justify not that the apostle and evangelist be especial favour of good work as be necessary to salvation that they in fear and tremble wrought their salvation that be guiltless in their conscience yet they repute not themselves justify etc. it will be answer (a) (a) Pomeran Rom. 8. they write wicked (b) (b) luth. in serm. and public Beza in luc. cap. 22. num. 26. pos^ med. Caluin l. 4. Instit. c. 8. n. 4. they be no true evangelist and in like manner according as be specify in our 26. number and also if they be apostle let they not babble all that they listen etc. 6. this symbol and creed of the apostle be of such ancient reputation Concil. Bracharen 2. c. 1. conc. Leodicen c. 46. conc. rom. Martino 1 consecr. d. 4. c. c. c. August l. 8. confess c. 2. oen DD 2. 2. q. 2. a. 8. in the church of God as all primative christian must necessary have know the content thereof in particular at least according to the substance if not according the word or order of article under danger of damnation yea none be permit to come to baptism be of year who know it not at least twenty day before their baptize as wittness the father and all divine to this day conformable do affirm that it be a assure cause of damnation to be ignorant in the substance of the content thereof in manner a foresay as also that it be a most urgent obligation under grevous sin to godfather and godmother to provide if parent be negligent or otherwise defective that their spiritual child be not ignorant thereof omit all other preface because any prolixity s. August ser. 115. Ruffin in pref. expos. symbol s. August loc. cit. be long prologue to a greedy attendant I only advertise that the apostle by testimony of ancient father before their separation to have conformity in all Christendom every one in order deliver a article amount consequent to twelve which as they be speak be specify by s. augustin very particular I intend not to change their order but to examine succinct whether protestantcy and they agree or no suppose that not only in general but also in particular it endeavour either to infringe every one of they or at least that it be in some measure erroneous concern every of they other order ay may have follow for the division of article accord to the catechism of the council of Trent have I not to deal with they calu. l. 4. Instit. c. 14. n. 25. who reject the council of Trent admit s. augustin who I follow to be the most trusty witness of antiquity a examination of protestantcye concern the twelve article of belief in particular 1. article of s. Peter I believe in God the father almighty I believe 7. first it be necessary that belief shall be resolute Luther ser. Connival fol. 158. and in pref. tom. 1. Tom 2. jen. fol. 9 in pref. lib. item in Serm. connival fol. 10. 158. 273. and not any way doubtful such first be not Luther belief when he say that he hope as soon as the curiosity of these time shall be satiate his monument will decay and again I never dismiss these cogitation but that I wish I have never begin this course such distrust and remorse have second when he say Zuingl epist. Bolsec in v. cal. c. 22. num. 38. and in medium yet we define nothing but only deliver our opinon such three have Caluin Beza Oecolampadius melancthon etc. as by themselves in place quote appear second it be necessary that he bind not his belief to the reach of reason such be not vermils belief when he say as be in the 68 number God word ought not so much to be follow in divinity as the word of nature nor victorius when he affirm we shall look with the left eye at the word of Christ but with the right at nature of thing Caluin in joan. c. 6. etc. 7. declare of his brother that by mean of their carnal conceit of Chrsst they can attain to perceive he worthy and that by corrupt interpretation they be come to a contempt of the evangile for when the reason of any thing appear not unto they they sudden despise it see more in the foresay 41. number three belief in this cause require to believe beside scripture holy tradition for this belief be not know by scripture but by tradition and who be enemy to tradition be enemy to it such protestant be know general to be in God 8. they believe not in God who be atheist such as by d. whitgifts who be pastor and primate of protestant and have best cause to know they confession Whitg a pag. 31. 51. the congregation of England be replenish with all for by signification of the word atheist they renounce and disclaim all love or believe of God second neither they who believe in God author of evil luth. tom. 2. seru. arbitr. fol. 461. do believe in God who the apostle say do tempt none to evil of who only this form of creed treat such mistake God and as Caluin confess Caluin Turcism pag. 691. 701. Zuingl tom. 1. fol. 365. transform he into the devil which notwithstanding be the doctrine of Caluin Peter martyr Zuinglius Beza etc. of who say latro and when we commit adultery or murder it be God work as the mover Caluino Turcis loc. cit. author and inforcer the thief by God impulsion do kill and be often constrain to offend behold well-beloved to what god these man conduct their follower I confess to deal sincere most other protestant do inveigh and argue against this doctrine but in deed for no other intention then to have credit during their meditation how to bring their hearer by other degree from all belief in God three they believe not in God who account question concern he to be but trifle and thing indifferent and not necessary to justification such be Beza who affirm such to be the question of Christ and his office of his consubstantiality with the father of the trinity of predestination of freewill of God of angel etc. for in true belief the reputation of God and question thereto belong be of great importance than all other thing in heaven and earth the father Caluin l. 1. Instit. c 13. n. ^ lib. Valentin gentil epist 2. Polon Dialog. l 2. dial. 19 and 20. ed. Roger cont. an. 1579. art. 24 25. 26. luth. in enchirid 1543. cont jacob tatom Beza ep. 81. Symler an. 1560 in 33. Bredembach l. 7. c. 19 9 they misbeleeve the father who acknowledge no trinity such be Caluin say he will the name of Trinity be bury and the prayer holy Trinity one God have mercy upon we to be barbarous and impropre reject out of his prayer book the clause glory be to the father son and holy ghost such be Ochin now a Turk but before one of the apostle of England in k. Edward day say the name of trinity to be a sathanical name such be the family of love reject the trinity and divinity of Christ as papistical fiction such be Luther disclaim the foresay prayer holy Trinity etc. and say that his soul do detest the word homoousson or consubstantial betwixt the person in the holy trinity such be the seruetian term the b. Trinity a three head Cerberus or hell hound such the solemn legation of all caluinist in Polonia to Zurick and Geneva to have the mystery of the trinity abolish such be the caluinian synod at Vilna 1589. may 11. by public decree forbid minister in sermon to mention the name of Trinity second they misbeleeve the father Caluin l. 1. c. 13. n. vlt. ibid. n. 13. 23. 24. Melanct. loc. come an. 1539 fol 8. and 10. 1545. fol. 53. 1558. Symb. Athanas. who with Caluin affirm it foolishness to think that God the father do continual beget his Sonn whereas by his continual understanding he must ever produce a word which be the wisdom of the father and his Sonn three all they misbeleeve the father who exclude the Sonn and holy ghost from infinite divinity and coequality with the father as do melancthon Caluin Beza etc. for such as be the father such be the Sonn such be the holy ghost if he infinite they also must be infinite whereof after at the holy ghost almighty 10. of this parcel I have in the 68 number manifest manyfould principal protestant resolute deny the omnipotency of God besyd citation out of Caluin in the say number seel 2. Instit. c. 7. n. 5. and 24. lib. 4. c. 17. n. 24. and in ps. 37. v. 4. therefore for avoid superfluity I refer the reader thereto and for more abundant proof if Caluin be also peruse in the citation of this margin you shall find he flout at our doctrine that God be almighty and term it blasphemous here be a pitiful spectacle exhibit towards the first and principal article of our belief and every word thereof far have it be from my intention or wont in which protestation I refuse not my great enemy verdict to falsify or pervert any testimony allege let it therefore be every careful christian resolution not to slumber in the main chance of religion purloin by fair benediction out of his hart consider these author so much offend with this belief be the principal founder of protestantcy and consequent that they fail in the very foundation must likewise have little soundness in the rest and deserve whole to be suspect 2. article of s. Ihon. maker of heaven and earth 11. first it be necessary for the right belief of this article to confess that the son and holy ghost create as much as God the father they not be distinguish one from another as they be God and consequent their do be and must be all one in external operation such as be the creation of the world calu. con Valentin gentil and l. 2. c. 14. n. 3. contrary to this article be Caluin first in say the name of God peculiarly to belong only to God the father second in say that Christ consider according to his person may not be call creator of heaven and earth which impious paradox be allow to be true beside all other absurdity Christ according to his person shall not be God or at least-their shall not equality or God head be believe three in say in c. r 4. Genes. v. 18. in c. 6. joan. v. 57 Christ our lord to be but a second king next to God and a second cause of life if he have any regard to s. Paul affirm philip. 2. Christ not to have think it any robbery to be equal to God will he have adventure to disinherit he in this manner of his coequal godhead but why shall he have regard s. Paul when the very deity of our saviour jesus Christ can not retain he from this abominable blasphemy four in say that god in heaven be not dutiful and sincere serve without sin even by the angel themselves calu. in cap. 1. Colos. v. 20. whereby be insinuate contrary to scripture Apoc. 21. that in the heavenly city there be some thing defile when therefore all belong to power and government to the father of wisdom knowledge and doctrine to the son of benignity liberality plenty and sanctification to the holy ghost be impute and appropriate the meaning be only to ascribe all good among the three person and not to exclude any good from any one of they as be all three equal God and consequent not unequaly fountain of all good as well in particular as in general but more touch this article will follow in treat of Christ ascension to heaven 3. article of s. james. and in jesus Christ his only son our Lord 12. most protestant to be against this article appear beside what be say in the precedent article in our 24. n. for some affirm that Christ be not the messiah some that the name of Christ be a filthy name some that he be a deceiver of the world some that he be not God some that he have but a mean measure of godhead Edward Rogers against the sect of the family of love London 1579. some that he be ignorant his discourse absurd and himself no more God than Socrates and Trismegistus etc. the same blasphemy be extant in the first and second article of the famile of love the same also be imply by the Proto-Puritan Cartwright say that he can not be persuade the israelit to be so mad Cartwr 2. replic pag. 191. as to believe he to be the live God who with their eye they do behold to be a miserable and simple man these I say that Christ for take our infirmites be disinherit by these compagnions to be the live God and our Lord second those be against this article who equal themselves in God favour and right to heaven unto jesus Christ God only first beget consubstantial son our Lord whereof in this examine in the 5. number and after somewhat be to be find three they believe not in jesus Christ our lord who distrust any part of his doctrine whether it be of the b. sacrament or otherwise because they can not conceive it in their understanding Caluin in cap. 6. and cap. 7. joannis caluinist generaly to be such be confess by Caluin say when the reason of any thing do not appear unto we such be our great pride that we esteem it nothing fowerthly contrary to this article be Caluin say num. 9 pr^^ce^ it be foolishness to think that God the father do continual beget his son for thereby God the father be make sometime not to understand which be his beget and the son be abolish who be not otherwise actualy son of the father but by determinate actualy the relation of the father to himself beside all other demonstration of their blasphemy that every one may know that I charge they not undeserved and hatred against jesus Christ the son of God mention in the foresay 24. number harden your heart to hear Luther say Luther disp. ^e^ thes. 18. tom. 2. Wittemb latin^ and it be no marvel if Arius if a jew if Mahumet and all the world deny Christ to be the Sonn of God it be no marvel in deed that beside Arius jew and turk the lutheran be so persuade consider Luther thus teach among they be so principal a evangelist 4. article of s. Andrew who be conceive of the holy ghost bear of the virgin Mary 13. first they be contrary to this article Maldonat in cap. 1. math. who blasphemous affirm the holy ghost to have be father to Christ in manner of other father towards their child as appear in Maldonat Caluino Turc pag 530 531. greg. s. m. second all they who believe Christ to have be only conceive but not bear of a virgin such be Beza maytyr Bru^aut Molineus Bucer Fortunatus and all anabaptist and familist to who also anneer Caluin say most impious that the b. virgin have in manner of other woman be weaken in travail upon Christ m. rid. in his cau^a and although m. Rider honourable term our lady a bless virgin yet by his own word that he believe nothing but that which the write word of God warrant although all doctor and prelate shall swear it he do bind he to the same misbelief with the rest in this article and towards the residue Archibald Hamilton Ca^u demonst. l. 2. c. 3. fol. 151. because both the creed in general and this article in particular be not extant in scripture but only a tradition three they be contrary to this article calu. demonstr. 2. cap. 3. fol. 151. who common equal or prefer themselves to our lady as diverse in Scotland by Hamilton and in England by experience be know to do for in this creed and god church faith she have the prerogative to be bless above all woman and to conceive and bear a child and he the god of heaven and earth which no other woman ever have or do fowerthly they who make Christ body as much in Abraham time Beza l. con Heshusium fol. 284. and Colloq. mompel fol. 77. as when it be conceive and bear by the b. virgin Mary not only in efficacy but also in essence and nature as Beza do as also they who in more express term with the conference of Mompelgart say that Christ own body be extant even in the time of Abraham whereby be imply that Christ be true man in essence and existence before this conception and birth here mention that consequent the angel say not true to the shepherd this day be bear to you a saviour 5. Euangel. pag. 98. colon. 1595. Symlerus in pref. l. that the b. virgin Mary be not his mother etc. five they also who make Christ to have two body one deliver in the supper another bear of the b. virgin Marie because thereby they forge another Christ then be her son six they who affirm that Christ be not eternaly but begin only at the time of his birth do deny our savioure JESUS son of the most sacred virgin Marie who be according the same person eternal 5. article of s. Philipp suffer under Pontius Pilate be crucify dead and burge these be allege in our 68 number towards the end 14. many principal caluinist as Cureus arastus Aulachius the genevians etc. be first repugnant to this article by evacuate the passion of Christ first by say his blood be putryfy in earth whereby must follow that by it we be not redeem as also confess Faustus 1. pet. 1. socinus etc. for according to the apostle we be not reedeem by any corruptible price see before in the 39 number second molin in harm euang. they evacuat the passion of Christ according all other part who with Molineus of all other his merit say they proffit we nothing they be of no force jac. 5.20 jone 3. Numer. 22.7 math. 19.26 mar. 10. euc. 18. etc. but only the death of Christ his preach be make again leesse available then of other man who by preach do cancel the multitude of synn his fast and prayer less than of the ninivit who thereby eschew the wrath of God and less than of Moses who purchase to the israelit god favour his voluntary poverty his innocent life his circumcision his work of mercy be make of no benefit whereas in any other all and every of these have be a sufficient price for heaven and can not be deny to be of infinite price in Christ and consequent of sufficiency all and every of they to redeem thousand of woorld unless Christ be deny to be of infinite dignity wherefore all christian divin to this time of reformer in 3. part Christ and in 1. 2. q. 114. be of settle belief that Christ death be a demonstration of excess of love because he so love he as of the end and consummation of all love he leave they abundant proof and not that his other merit have not each of they sufficiency to reconcil infinite world to his heavenly father if Christ will have be content with what be sufficient omit what be abundant n. 83. to the former opinion consent m. Rider say after Christ birth and life though both innocent be not sufficient to cleanse my sin yea contrary to this former opinion of Christ death be his cruel say that a bloody spear go into his bless side before man sin can be satisfy God wrath appease etc. for this be do after Christ death his very death be thereby declare not to have be a sufficient satisfaction for sin or a appeasment of God wrath etc. and consequent neither his life nor death be allow to be meritorious or fit to redeem we but tolerat this there ensue more three they evacuat Christ death who make Christ unuoluntary to have suffer for we for as every sin be voluntary so be every merit Caluin say calu. in c. 26. math. v. 39 calu. l. 2. c. 16. n. 10.11.12 that he refuse to discharge the office of a mediator fowerthly they evacuat Christ death who with Caluin repute Christ at the time of his passion to have have no sufficiency above other man and that in his pray do not appear a temperate moderation that he be torment with dowbtfulnes of his conscience that astonish with the horror of God malediction and torment with the fear of the bottomless pit of horrible destruction he burst out into a voice or cry of desperation that etc. be overwhelm in desperattion he cease to pray long to God which doctrine also Beza Marlorat Beza in c. 27. math. Marlorat ps 22. Heshus Clebiti^ in Victoria par. 2. 6. and all principal caluinist do conformable confirm five they evacuat the passion of Christ who affirm he with a Caluinist to have be our deliverer only and not our redeemer as also they who reject the name of merit and with Caluin affirm if any calu. l. 2. c. 17. n. 1. will oppose Christ to the judgement of God there will no place remain to any merit because there be not in man that dignity to deserve any thing of God holinshead in the year 1579. pap 1195 behold and be amaze that Christ merit even of death be impugn and he affirm to be only man and not God six they evacuat the passion of Christ who in plain and express term say for Acts. pag. 468. 487. 1335. Stow in Elizabeth pag. 1195. calu. con Heshu^ pag. 39 Beza in colloq. mompel 1. p. 522. Bucer joan. pag. 34. in loc. fol. 363. 367. Zanchius in Miscellan p. 3. 200. 206. aret. Schlusselb l. 1. a. 6. 25. 26. and l. 2. fol. 42. theol cal. and his blood death and passion to have nothing avail to the redemption of mankind Christ by all his work deserve not heaven such be some of fox most famous martyr such be familist and many english minister by confession of your chronicler last they evacuat Christ passion who affirm his death and passion profitable only for the predestinate so that other may have no benefit thereby such be Caluin Beza Bucer Zanchius Aretius whereby follow that he be not redeemer of all or mediator for all offender not intend their salvation six article of s. Thomas he descend into hell the three day he rise again from the dead 25. first this article be impugn in say with Carlisle it to be a pernicious heresy that Christ descend and by Beza say Carlisle in his book that Christ descend not into hell print at lond. 1582. Beza apol. 2. Zantes pag. 385. Caluino Turc p. 567. Zuingl tom. 2. fol. 458. luthapse de Couc and PP p. 276. it to have enter into the creed by inaduertisment second by make his descension only to have be his pang upon the cross where not only his humanity but o execrable blasphemy his divinity endure pain yea death so say Luther do clear and manifest profess that he will not acknowledge Christ to be his savioure if only his humanity have suffer and Caluin second faithful all such impiety of Luther say hie this be his descension to hell that he suffer that death which God in his anger inflict upon the wicked Caelu in catheche c. calu. l 2. Instit. c. 16. n. 10. and in cap. 26.27 mat. item ibid. Beza he suffer all the pain in his soul which by God in revengement be exact of the damn again it have be of no account if he have die only a corporal death in which doctrine be contain besyd Christ death of body a death of his soul yea of his divinity and after endure such death he to have suffer all punishment of the damn three this article be impugn by make this descension nothing else but Christ burial in his sepulchre fevardent in entremanger c. 27. so Oecolampadius Bucer Caluin Tremel marot Beza Carlisle etc. affirm because the common name for hell in hebrue do signify some time a grave or but elswher Caluin confess Caluino Turc pag. 567. that the say name more usualy and proper do signify hell act. in cap. 32. deut. etc. 16. num. calu. in Annot. in cap. 2. in 1. reg. c. 2. in num. c. 16. in deut. c. 32. in psal 6. in job. 2.26 in amos. c. 9 the place and estate of the damn and diverse or the residue as Bucer Oecolampadius and other principal protestant as Peter Vermil otherwise misname martyr Paul fage Sebastian Munster Castalio and Flaccus Illyricus do oppose themselves against Beza be most earnest in the former opinion shewingby manifold text of scripture the hebrue word Scheol the greek word (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) the latin word to signify a infernal place of damn or at least of include by their right usual and natural signification as much as panis Beza in c. 2. act. in c. 11. math. c 10. and 16. luc. in Apoc. c. 20. in latin signify bread yea Beza himself confess that the greek and latin word contain no less but the hebreu word some time signify grave and therefore to avoid Christ descend to hell thereby to maintain former blasphemy of his suffer the pain of damn on the cross and to evacuat the deliverance of the father out of their limbo whereby also be imply the doctrine of purgatory if it once be grant there ever have be a three place of inclusion for sowl to avoid I say these block in his way he translate by his own confession as aforesaid contrary to greek Beza in c. 2. act. and latin interpreter and father and in his confession of the faith print 1564. to frustrate all disputation about the matter he think convenient to omit whole this part of this article and although he be drive consequent to not Christ soul but his carcase not his victory over hell but his victory over the grave which the english bible of an. 1562. 1577. eschew but it an. 1579. approve and many other such depravation contrary to sacred scripture yet will he not desist Beza in c. 16. luc. until he have occasion to refute suppose there be no hell or infernal torment but only metaphorica and then forget himself prove by scripture and father upon the 16. of luc. that Christ descend into the earth into the receptacle of those who be long restrain for evidence of which three place of soul beside heaven and eternal hell in their 2. reply against d. Whitg pag. 7. and in ther. 2. admonition to the parliament pag. 43. out of which there be no redemption the puritan earnest reprehend the creed of the apostle make in english meet among the psalm wherein be say his spirit do after this descend into the low part to they that long in darkness be the true love of their heart and also eager inveigh against one of their chief martyr for profess the same belief and so forward press into their anger against this article that in all late bible as Carlisle himself confess Carlisle in his book against Christ descension fol. 144. 116. humfrye l. 2. rat interpret pag. 219. 220 they have corrupt and deprave the sense obscure the truth deceive the ignorant and supplant the simple follow darkness more than light and falsehood more than truth to which accord d. Humphrey of Oxford behold the verdict of both your university say the foresay hebrue word shall not be translate grave but hell if the authority of the holy ghost be observe and consequent late english translation in this point fall and fail from the holy ghost by do the contrary but most earnest I crave the courteous reader Beza in act. c. 10.46 a 1556. Iwenal satyra 2. to peruse what Beza himself write against such late translator as follow new-fangled and doubtful interpretation in scripture refuse familiar and accustom word if he will observe a verres condemn other of theft a Clodius dispraise other for lechery a Catelin disprove other for prodigality a Gracchus reprehend other for sedition fowerthly this article be impugn by bullinger say bullinger in 1. pet. c. 4. that Christ descend no otherwise to hell then as he daily descend to we only by spirit and virtue interim in such sort as none surmise his body or soul to have descend to which annear Brentius Beza aug. lib. 3. Doctr. c. 10. affirm there be no other but a figurative imaginative and spiritual hell without other torment then metaphorical how deserve do s. augustin foretell when the mind of any be preoccupate by error all that scripture have to the contrary they affirm to be but figurative josias Simlerus in Bullingeri fol. 35. alan cop. dial. 5. c. 18. they begin first to make sacrament but figur they follow next to affirm all promise by Christ make for good work to be but hyperbolical diverse mystery of his life to be ineffectual all in his passion fulfil to be but figurative and histrionical and last heaven and hell to be only tropical or fantastical pause christian consideration at this if patience will permit five this article be impugn for the other part of Christ resurrection calu. in harm in c. 24. Luca v. 38. Beza in 1. cor. c. 15.23 Hollinshead an. 1579. pag. 1195. by Caluin say that Christ want some perfection of a glorious resurrection and by diverse reformer affirm as Beza confess Christ never to have rise but yet to remain dead by other also if lawful inference be admit who affirm before beside his bodily death a death of his soul and divinity by other who earnest except against the feast of easter in remembrance of such resurrection especial as it be a christian solemnity desire it be abolish or restore according to the jew ceremony luth. l. bale l. 3. c. 25. scrip. Zuingl to 2. respon. fol. 465. such be Luther bale and the puritan as appear in d. whitgift six this article be impugn by say Crassus Lutheri praetor the gross praetor of Luther apparel in his red hose in like manner as Christ go out of his sepulchre may also have issue which be most impious blapheme whereas Christ after his death issue by his own force as all doctor and father affirm without remove the stone place upon the monument to which accord against the foresay blasphemy the late protestant conference at Malbrun allege many scripture and father in approbation of such miraculous resurrection the same be also fulfil by Marlorat Thalman and at length upon better advice by Caluin and Beza the seven article of s. Bartholome he ascend into heaven sit at the right hand of God the father almighty 16. this article be first contradict by lutheran affirm Caluinist and Daneum con Osiandrum calu. l. 2. c. 14. n. 8. Beza in cap. 3. act. v. 21. cal. Instit. l. 2. c. 14. n. 3. Intermangerie pag. 157. 5. euang pag. 72. josiam symlerun in Bullingeri fol. 35. 55. Luther to 7. Witteb fol. 408. 409. heaven to be below in the bowel of the earth and hell in the high part of the world next by Caluin say that Christ sit at the right hand of God will continue no long then till the day of judgement three by those who affirm his be at the right hand of his father to hinder his true be in the sacrament as be before declare number 68 fowerthly by they who deny that by his power he can surpass the quality of a natural body and consequent not ascend as also be there manifest five by those who affirm his be at the the right hand to argue a inferiority or inequality with God the father or that God the father have a spiritual kind of body have hand etc. six by Caluin say that it be not to be imagine there be any place in heaven whereunto be ascend or accept the humanity of Christ seventhly by many principal Protestant as Brentius Illyricus etc. Christ ascension be make nothing but a disapeering without any motion upward where he be before the eight article of s. Matthew from thence shall he come to judge the quick and the dead 17. this article be impugn Generaly all protestant first by such as by grant one judgement in general at the day of doom affirm Christ never judge every one in particular Luther second by they who affirm only infidelity to be subject to judgement whereas Christ do promise to call into account every idle word and omission of charity three by such as say God will judge unjust as Luther say that as Luther to 2. fol. 461. serve there in this life he powdered grace and mercy upon the unworthy so here in judgement he pour anger and severity upon the undeserved which God injustice in judgement and condemnation of the wicked be imply by the common doctrine that God be the author of evil not only by provocation but by impulsion and enforcement for be say to be the inforcer to evil how can he punish just they that obey he and such doctrine be universal as be demonstrate among the great protestant Luther Caluin and Beza as appear in the first article last they misbeleeve this article who affirm that Christ who shall come to judge be dead according both to humanity and divinity such be John Islebeus and especial say in cruse doubt not to maintain public to profess and to spread etc. if he remain dead he be not rise and ascend or from heaven to come to judge the quick and the dead the 9 article of s. james of Alpheus I believe in the holy ghost the holy Catholic church Beza con fol. 284 and colloq. Mompelg fol. 77. Zanchius l. 3. Siml^rus ^n praef. l. Dei. 18. first they believe not in the holy ghost who affirm it to be blasphemous and idolatrous to counsel Christ to be god or to have ever be according any deity before his birth of the b. virgin Marie for thereby the holy ghost proceed from the son no less then from the father be also deny second all they who impugn the holy trinity do it more to reject the holy ghost then for any thing else of who look in the first article to the disgrace whereof consider how round Caluin discourse say Galu epist. Polon pag. 946. Conrade Schluss^lbur in thiol cal. l. 2. fol. 2. 8. 14. 20. 26. as much to say the trinity that they shall know the one god as much to say the trinity this as not only unsavoury but also as profane I do despise nether do other protestant dissemble at this blasphemous derision but rebuke he for it in superlative term of scold hence among his disciple Prateolus in lib. 10. c. 10. as every one be more learned so in scripture he flout at the holy ghost affirm nothing in holy scripture of the old or new testament to be have of his divinity hereupon a great protestant exclaim cave Christiane lector in epist. con Caluin n. 4 5. etc. beware Christian or reader and especial you minister of the word of God beware of the book of Caluin joan. schutz in l. 50. 48. Adam Newser Schluss loc. cit. fol. 9 and in cattle l. 1. p. 4. and especial in the article of the trinity etc. another say he open a window and gate to Arianisme and Mahumetisme another Arianismus and Caluinismus Arianisme Mahumetisme and Caluinisme be three brother and sister and three breech of one cloth another caveat Caluinismum who fear to fall to Arianisme let he beware of Caluinisme some print book with inscription print in an. 1586. that caluinist be not christian that they do judaize that heed be to be take of their leaven but none be more forward blasphemer against the holy ghost than english puritan and familist joan. matth. caluinistaru^ and all this be confess by protestant who evidence only I employ in this information three they impugn this article who make their fanatical imagination the very inspiration of the holy ghost and all there bad and impious inclination his motion Zuingl tom. 2. in act fol. 609. ^uth ton 5. Galat. c. 1. fol. 290. so have his doctrine from such spirit as aforesaid yet say he I know for certain my doctrine to be no other than the most sacred and true gospel by the testimony of this doctrine I will judge all both man and angel so Luther luth. tom. 2. and I be assure Christ himself to name mean evangelist and to approve i his preacher so Caluin Caluin Eccles. 463 calu. lib. arbitr. con. Pighium l. 1. pag. 192. fulminasse the matter itself assure not Martin Luther in the begyne to have speak but God to have thunder out of his mouth and not we to speak now but God to utter his power behold if each one of thes most repugnant among themselves be not as secure of their own persuasion to be from the holy ghost as they be doubtful of Christ of his apostle and of his church doctrine to be sound apt literal and authentical fowerthly they impugn this article who derogate from sacred scripture the authority due thereto by be by inspiration of the holy ghost Zuing. Tom 2. Elench. con. Anabaptist fol. 10. jacob curio ^em in Chronolog. an. 1556. pag. 151. Basilea Ochinus l. 2. dialog. pag. 154. 155. 156. 157. this be do by say as though Paul do so much to his epistle as to think all in they contain to be authentical which be to impute to the apostle immoderate arrogancy do this man think you remember what he immediate before say of himself Ochinus proceed further we ought to believe no more than the saint of the old testament so that hereby all the new testament be together abolish Luther be more courteous in only exclude three evangelist Matthew mark and Luke s. james and some few other and the rest of reformer in only except against Toby judith Hester wisdom the two book of maccabee s. Luke to the Hebrew james 2. of Peter 2. and 3. of John jude Apocalips to which other add the prayer of Manasses the song of the three child the history of and last Caluin add the six and Beza the eight of ihons gospel Luther in moise you shall also behold by Luther the ancient testament as resolute exclude all together as be the neweby Ochinus Moses let not Moses be thrust upon we we in the new testament will not either regard or hear he tom. 3. in 1. the same be do be other against Moses as testify jac. Curio loc. cit. that he have rather never preach then propound any thing out of Moses that he that do allege any thing of he do deprive Christ of the heart of man that Moses belong nothing to we that he receive he not for otherwise he shall also receive all jewish ceremony that his government be fail and himself dead that Moses belong only to jew and not to christian Saunder schism Anglic. lib. 2. pag. 272. person par^ 3. pag. 332. to the same concern the new testament Bucer if all be true which the evangelist do set down Christ must be true and realy in the sacrament but whether we be bind to believe absolute every thing set down by they to be true or Noah he will not be judge by which appear that what thes man listen to believe be but of their own imagination they make it to be inspire by the holy ghost to be the most sacred scripture themselves to be evangelist their testimony to be bastant to judge angel and man what also displease their stomach be it in new or old testament they raze cancel reject and abjure it as apochriphal not have any more reason or authority for any parcel exclusion or condemnation than their fellow for many whole volume and both old and new testament together neither in this be they yet satisfy but certify that the holy ghost himself and can suggest or teach nothing but what Christ before deliver by mouth and such restraint and limitation to be say calu. l. 4. c. 8. n. 8. Caluin heedful note yet Christ himself tell in his gospel that he have many thing whereof as then they be not capable which the holy ghost shall in time reveal as also teach they all truth never the less they will not hold or stop in such their so desperate abomination how contrary to they be s. chrysostom say hom. 1. in therefore etc. joan. 16.13 what be say of impugn the holy ghost for scripture belong also to tradition such as few of they but consent to part of they although they be not extant in scripture as to the bless trinity and consubstantiality of person the perpetual virginity of our lady the observation of Sunday not of the Sabbaoth the baptize of infant the communion receive fast the feast of easter etc. which tradition as all other acknowledge by the church joan. 16.13 have issue from the holy ghost according Christ promise that he shall not only teach vz by word but also suggest by inspiration all truth if I affect not brevity what father monument for tradition what foul deal of sectarist against they mention in Martin discovery cap. 2. can I allege fowerthly s. August in quaest. test q. 102. according to s. augustin they impugn the holy ghost who impute evident miracle frequent in God church govern by the holy ghost to the devil upon which occasion of the pharisee say that in Beelzebub Christ cast out devil Christ our saviour enter to discourse of the sin against the holy ghost show thereby to pertain to the holy ghost all miraculous operation but of miracle which be lawful and how to be know we be after to dispute for to conclude what there belief be against the holy ghost be testify when the first reform apostle of moravia do flout at the holy ghost say he will return soon to the then believe in he Prateolus l. 10. c. 10. five they impugn the other part of the Catholic church which in deed shall be a distinct article who can not abide the name of Catholic as appear before nor the name of church in their principal bible of the year 1562. but exclude it whole without redemption place for the name church the name of congregation and whereas they wear confound at such profane and odious interpretation consider it show a hatred against the chaste spouse of Christ a distrust to be try by the church who who hear not be as far from salvation as any publican or ethnic and argue a public revolt or rebellion from Christ himself head of the church they amend it in their late translation Math 16.18 with world shame yet so nice as in one chief place of scripture where Christ say to s. Peter upon this rock I will build my church the bible of the year 1577. retain still in lieu of church the name of congregation which proper belong only to beast and by application be transfer to man six they impugn this second part who affirm the mother church may err in any point of belief consider Christ promise math. 16. luc. 22. joan. 14. act. 2. luc. 22. that the gate of hell neither by error nor by violence shall never prevail against it the faith thereof shall never fail the holy ghost teacher of all truth shall perpetual remain with it that it be a spotless spouse without all wrinkle that it be convert shall confirm all other etc. fox Acts. pag. 1359. jewel repl. con. hard. art. 4. 14. and 21. pag. 249. 268. calu. l. 4. c. 2. n. 2. 3. etc. vlt. Luther num. 17. calu. Instruc con Libertin c. 13. such mother church to be it only of Rome all father and most sectarist themselves profess nether can it be deny consider it only have universality consent and antiquity as appear n. 4. consider also that no other peofession have holiness in life or doctrine which accompany on another as the good and bad fruit the good and bad tree witness first for doctrine all in this examination allege and second Luther say the commandment of God not to belong to christian witness next Caluin say in other man name but in his own doctrine 6 fraud have any covet his neighbour wife let he enjoy she if he can for he know assure he do nothing contrary to the will of God let he bold snathe by force or fraud his neighbour substance for he will take nothing unless god will Zuingl tom. 1. in act disp. fol. 628. and approve witness three and God have bind himself to give we heaven we need not travail to attain it Luther tom. 1. in c. 8. math. for the fruit ensue such doctrine witness again Luther iterun sue and they speak so of the gospel in 1. cor. 15. fol. 161. 162. calu. Scandalis pag. 118 127. 128. as if they wear angel but if you regard their work they be mere devil again they believe like hog and as hog they die witness again Caluin pastor etc. our preacher our very preacher I say who into the pulpit etc. be either of wickedness or other evil moer filthy example and such for soothe repine to be contemn by the people and to be point at in derision but I more admire the patience of the people that woman and child do not load they with mire and dirt witness three Zuingl tom. 1. fol. 115. we can not deny the heat of the flesh to be ardent in we whereas the work thereof have make we infamous to the church to descend from the three principal pillar of protestancy witness Lewes Hetzer by Luther relation defyler of four and twenty marry woman luth. in Colloq. mensal fol. 415. calu. con Libertin pag. 654. Erasm epist. Frens infer Germ. 1. pag. 82. beside maid witness Quintinus by the same reporter neigh after woman as stand horse after mare witness a friar who as Erasmus record marry three wife together but of this puddle sufficient be find in our first 17. number and little obscurity be there in the matter consider again that beside this roman church no other profession have any stability or constancy in their whole doctrine in their sacrament of their scripture witness beside what be say towards the begin of this examination 7. number of most principal protestant repentance and doubtfulness of their course Luther by his declaration appeal Zuingl Luthero tom. 2. resp. luth. in prefat. to thes only of his own book which he have write four or five year before and no other witness of against himself say Zuingl to 2. come relig. c. Eucharistia fol. 202. 42. 40. we do therefore recant here what we say there by this condition that what we deliver the 42. year of our age take place of what be give in the 40. year witness Beza Beza in Colloq. mompel pag. 150. 268. 388. I confess to have write many thing which I wish have not be write I will to god the memory of they all wear abolish witness last all their translation their confession their communion book their whole writing although they wear assure as before that they have all by true revelation never twice appear in one likeness and true it be one important point to be consider that thes man of all other the very chief leader to this dance of reformation can not dwell constant in their enterprise whereas the simple sort who light embrace their doctrine adventure to abide fire and sword rather than to forsake it be according the proverb who so bold as blind bayard not only more resolute therein then their preacher of who few or none but flee but also as every one be most simple weaver glover cobbler and principal woman so be they thereto most forward Sr. John old castle Cromwell the duke of Northumberland and other of the wise sort make by fox martyr for act and mon. of thes his martyr yet according to their wisdom when they can live no long in the liberty of the gospel they cry and recant their licentious belief but as I say obstinant idiot and wilful woman die in their infidelity seventh they impugn this article of belief who after revolt from such church as aforesaid have no other refuge to maintain themselves from blame of novelty particularity and lightness but to appeal to a invisible church remove from all sense like a platonical idea separate from all knowledge not extant in any country not mention in any history in which no voice of epistle or gospel have be hear no sacrament minister no man or woman know and all this because their conscience inform they the true visible know ancient and universal church wherein Christian name the scripture and sacrament be preserve stand with we against they against which their fanatical come c. an. 1561. cal. 4. c. 2. n. 2. Oecol n. c. 2. isa Illyric in 1 matth. bren. in c. 17. luc. luth. in c. 9 c. 52.53 isa tom. 4. buillng in Apoc. 62. 87. and poetical imagination of a church invisible all learned Protestant earnest write melancthon term it a monstrous speech Caluin Oecolampad Illyricus Luther Brentius Lutherus bullinger and all other refute and rebuke it as a desperate opinion proceed from profound infidelity consider for god love this heavy and urgent extremity by the way they who disinherit Christ word of his true and substantial be in the sacrament and many other mystery of religion because a natural body say they can not be but in a visible and particular place and god himself not to be of power to dispose otherwise of such natural body they I say as more powerful than god martyr defence con. gard. par. 1. object 147. object 7. dispose of all former christian notwithstanding their natural body in a congregation invisible and out of all naturality and natural circumscribe place because they can name no visible city province or kingdom profess christianity but be of our religion prou. 18. the impious man when he come to the depth of impiety he contemn what truth he contradict what falsehood he maintain say as before I say in his mind at all man shout at i Horace l. 1. sat. 1. yet I applaud to my self in my home in my private conceit in myself please fancy eight they impugn this article who in the other extremity to have a visible church remass and collect all sort of sectarist into one consent congregation such be Crispin Hamsted and fox in who monument especial of John fox how all sort of malefactor be rake and assemble together and as discordant sectarist as ever wear cat and dog intermeddle appear abundant in the late learned book of the three conversion of England of the hunt of the fox etc. by n. d. author of the ward-word what communion they have shall also appear in the next article for conclusion sweet and true be that sentence s. August tra. 33. in joan. of s. augustin as much as every one love the church so much he have of the holy ghost by which appear that these article be not impertinent unite by some in one the 10. article of s. Simon the communion of saint the forgiveness of sin 19 whereas by this article there shall be a comunication and unity betwixt the old and new and the live and dead christian in faith hope and charity in sacrament in ceremony in succour in all concourse they impugn this article first who deny all correspondence betwixt the saint in heaven and man in earth as also they impugn scripture to be produce in our controversy of the invocation of saint conformable to this say article second they be disprove by this article who be in deep and most irreconcilable discord among themselves in the specify point such to be all late pretend reformer one against another be now to be demonstrate in general and in particular Lutherani contradict pag. 24. Anglicanas gallicas Belgicas scotica heluetica matyre martyr etc. the lutheran quoth in their publish boook do condemn the church of England epitome colloq. maulbrune an. 1564. pag. 82. France Flanders Scotland Zuittzerland they call their martyr martyr of the devil etc. again and in what the zwinglians write that they by we be account brother that be so impudent and vain forge by they that we can not sufficient admire their impudency for we as we account they not in the church so also do we as little repute they our brother who we find transport by the spirit of falsehood and to be contumelious against the son of God the caluinist wear not slack in requyte lutheran Schlusselburg theol. cal. l. 3. 6. joan. jezlet Caluinista l bell 1 pag 25. 80. as be evident by Schlusselburg say the caluinist will account we lutheran as their brother who notwithstanding they condemn as heretic and so betwixt they say John jezler and Caluinistas there be no end of chide write accuse dispute condemn excommunicate betwixt lutheran and caluinist ibid. pag. 79. in the year 1555. quoth jezler the k. of Denmark the state of hamburg and maritimal city under great penalty forbid any lodging to be permit to the sacramentarian for brief resolution in this matter consider according the narration of being himself one among 175. flemish french english scotish and polonian fugitive in queen mary day under the conduct of Lascus superintendent over the congregation of stranger in England how first after long toss on sea and other incommodity of navigation they come at length to Coldinga in Denmarche where hae exhibit a most lamentable supplication to the king be Lutheran first they can not obtain any allowance to use their religion second have receive a gift of a 100 crown and their charge defray they can obtain no abode for old or young sick or hole but must have sudden in the depth of winter depart yea although some woman expect hourly their time of travail arrive at Hassne there also Palladius superintendent inform of their profession notwithstanding their pitiful inploration of compassion and declaration of the tempestuous weather the sharpness of can the sea and land cover with you the cry of woman in travail child whine and old man weakness yet no respite neither of a month or week but only of three day will be afoord to dwell even without the gate exclamation and thunder threat of God anger against such hardness of hart will not avail but that the master of the ship be command under pain of death by no mean or contrariety of wynd to stay any long than eight a clock on the three day and never after to return altogether like entertainment have they at Rostoc by George riken at wismar by henning and Lubec by Peter Briccius at hamburg by Westphalus be hunt out of their inn spit at in street repulse with all disdaynfulnes not without as detestable cruelty in the lutheran as public and manifest detestation of their profession who be so hateful eschew the most apparent demonstration of their eternal discord be that partly to avoid this heinous imputation of be thus divide partly by authority of prince the king of Denmark Sweuland Norwey the duke of Saxony Lunebourg Pruss Brunswick 5. Ministromachia Intremangerie etc. Witemberge deuxponts the marquis of Brandenbourg lansgrave Hessen the earl of Palatinat mansfeld A^halt etc. be desirous to see some settle form of belief mutua agree upon they command sundry and diverse time these reformer to assemble into a synod or congregation and by all mean possible to join in a fraternal atonement so then they meet at Sovabach Smalcald ratisbon Witberg Constance worm spire Basil Zuric arover Hidelberg Malbrun Altenbourg baden Monpelial Frankental but with such jar strife malice that in the conclusion the chief protestant confess Schlusselburg l. 2. art. 15. to be most clear no definition of either general or particular concil to be expect because all composition be impossible ibid. in proem diremerit unless the great day of the lord hasten and shut up this variance true say the prophet esaias there be no peace among the wicked isa 48. to shut up this part give i leave although by all mean I spare our protestant as be of a more calm and temperate disposition that they may with less alteration of mind these proceed to tell in a word what by barrowist be allege against the puritan those precise pretender d. Whitg 18. pag. 685. 11. pag. 559. 560. who as d. whitgift say seek to transfer the authority of pope prince bishop to themselves and to bring prince and nobility into a very servitude they be say the brounist or rather barroi pernicious impostor presumptuous pastor jewish Rabyns balaamit dissemble hypocrite smell-feast Barrowes discovery pag. 16. 19 39 98. 145. 174. 192. proverb 13. apostate soldier of Antichrist etc. fulfil thereby the proverb among the proud there be always jar be this not a sweet communion of thes saint be not this a gracious brotherhood three they be repugnant to this article who affirm it blasphemy to give title to saint in heaven which themselves give to sinner in earth witness Aschams epigram to our late queen on who he bestow liberaly as much as any Catholic attribute to our b. lady the mother of Christ the same in English hail England fame divine hail prince bright Elizabeth the briton goddess great give we new time new bliss by roll right appease this world from fury hateful heat grant joyful time for joy we humble pray thou briton only bliss and only stay in like manner Caluin cap. 12. not endure any honour towards saint or image yet cold not only permit his own picture to be bear about the neck of they in Geneva but also when some esteem such insolent arrogance reprehensible admonish he thereof that the citizen use his resemblance for a alexicacon or remedy against all mischawnce he awnswer grieve at it till you burst and after hang yourselves fowerthly they be repugnant to this article who be at difference about the chief principle of religion as about scripture sacrament virtue synn etc. such be late reformer Gallus in the as relate Gallus Christiana they be not slender contention which be among we nor of small matter but of the principal article of christian doctrine no Noah it be not my intention to discourse in this treatise of debat for cap or rotchet organ or bell etc. I show by your own brother your kingdom be divide and consequent tend to ruin fowerthly for the other part of forgiven of synn all protestantcy be repugnant thereto partly by affirm that faith only justify and consequent be once in the Protestant faith which say they once enjoy can never be lose they can never after be sinner luth. seru. arbitr. partly by make God the author of all evil and themselves but bare instrument and consequent not themselves but God to have need of the remission of synn thirdle by say that man have not freewill and consequent can not sin for every sin be voluntary last joan. 20. by say that synn can not be forgive in the church contrary to Christ express doctrine yet in their first belief they clear grant that the minister may absolve the sick from his sin in this form by his authority commit to i the communion book in the visitation of the sick I absolve thou from all thy synn in the name of the father the Sonn and the holy ghost amen but this treatise be dash and cashier out of the communion book let it of baptism stand sure against many puritan assault which if it do as great power in it be grawnt to man as by penance to absolve synn the one be a wash of one spot the other a lose of one bind the 11. article of s. jude. the resurrection of the dead 20. luth. 7. Witt^ber. defen. verb. fol 390. first Luther say of caluinist concern the resurrection of the dead it be certain they tend to a manifest apostasy concern this article it be also confirm by that in his own hear villag epist. praefat. lib. 1. Eucharisti^ and after notice be signify to be take yet the caluinist preach repeat and justify that the hope of life not to belong to the body but to the sowl Caesar lib. dial d. 5. calu. in epist. fol. 194. one of fox martyr as Cesarius affirm hold that there be no resurrection of body caluins resolution be perspicuous in thes word that the resurrection of this flesh seem incredible to thou it be nothing admirable Zuingl ton 2. Elench. con. Anabaptist fol. 39 as for the libertyn they deride the resurrection open the next impugn this article be to deny man sowl to be immortal whereunto Luther incline say luth. tun 4. in eccles. c. 9 v. 5.10 in cap. 25. Genes. in cap. 49. v. 22. calu. in prof. and in prof. out of this place appear the dead feel nothing to which Caluin also annear in thes word that he know certain good man to who this opinion of the sowl sleep seem sound himself to have be one of those goodman appear by his say the sowl to be but dead shadow in ps. 130. they of the wicked to be annihilate so that they be not in hell l. 3. c. 25. n 12. and the residue to be shadow imagination fantasy idol dead also from other who will not subscrib their name be publish 1568. certain thesis or position whereof this be the ten manner we deny any soul to remain after death to be brief at Geneva in a solemn disputation when they have long consult how to avoid purgatory they determine and let we affirm the soul to be extinguish together with the body and so purgatory will be speedy abolish this doctrine of purgatory seem to thes reformer so urgent that they be persuade it can not be well deny until the resurrection of the dead and immortality of the soul also be deny and certain Vrbanus Regius who most learned protestant and the evangelist and principal bishop of the duchy of Luneburg say that Vrban Regius fol. 86. Epicurei and Saducei none reject devowt prayer for the soul depart and restrain in purgatory but epicure and saduceit not believe the immortality of the soul but why be purgatory so annect to this article that thes reformer be drive to this extremity because they observe that God oft forgive offence yet reserve a chastisement for satisfaction as in Adam in Moses in David etc. who offence be forgive yet adam remain subject to death and all other misery endure Moses never enter the land of promise David child beget in sin must have die so likewise because God be ever one and like himself such as repent late or slack may be forgive at their death yet for satisfaction remain in purgatory therefore the most expedient way seem to make short work and to deny this article to be able to deny the other the 12. article of s. Mathias the life everlasting 21. contrary to this article be all those who deny God who deny heaven who deny resurrection of the dead immortality of the soul our redemption by Christ etc. of who sufficient be speak in the former article to discover they to be our late reformer who in the blindness and night of darkness wherein they be wrap do as s. Gregory say vaunt s. greg. l. 1. mor. cap. 26. and glorify as in the clearness of light whereof there never be a more perspicuous demonstration then in these word of Beza who blasphemy be among the most exorbitant say of himself this my exposition if a man compare with such thing as not only but also sundry other of the ancient father albeit for godliness and learning most famous have write upon this place Beza rom. c. 4. v. 11. he shall dowbtles find what great abundant light of truth the lord in this time have pour out upon we light in deed of the transform angel light of owl light of pirate to train to ship wrack light extinguish all christianity and belief in the Sonn of God as ample appear the conclusion 22. have not I have a flinty and brazen heart think you to go through this examination without faint or sound at every so detestable blasphemy in every article so often reiterate certain I never hitherto experience a great torment or corrasive then to have so much endure in this discourse which for the importance cold not be short and for the heinousness seem most prolix twenty time my mind loathe my hand tremble my intention relent to proceed in unfowld they and often for many day I refrain the sight and thought of they yet at last for thy benefit Christian I have pour and shut they away to thy consideration rather than by due amplification and aggravation or the heft and hate they import deliver they euseb l. 7. c. 6. Dion 3. c^ philem Presb let it be license to apply to i in this case what Eusebius relate of s. Dionysius of Alexandria that diverse do admonish he how by read heretical book his mind will be great torment and also probable defile and that he do acknowledge himself they wrought no less in he yet for a voice incouradge he forward and say this be the cause why from the begin thou waste call to the faith of Christ he willing yield to the pain incident to such study such in verity be my often adminition and chief impulsion it be to jesus Christ the Sonn of God that I offer and present the time employ in this replication who image I acknowledge and honour in the sowl by his sacred blood by heresy beguile for to tell the truth it be not the scope of my travail to answer my adversary who have no other wisdom then of the spirit of contradiction and no other regard then to delud by most disdainful impostur the simple christian understand according as be after say in the number 116. 119. etc. and to wynn time of fall into discredit and infamy s. August l. 6. to who seem speak what s. augustin say it be the glory of vanity not to yield to any power of verity so that I account quintinians grave sentence pertinent belong to i against he quintil. l. 1. c. 13. be quoth Quintilian a great misery and needle search of glory which wowld hinder and cloy understanding that may be better employ true few cold be better employ than I few less desirous to be fruictles employ then i. what part or parcel of belief to repeat in gross slight and abrupt of divine or human of owld or new testament of faith Sanderus l. 1 schis anglicano Caluino Turcis l. 3. p. 480. hope or charity but be disinherit abjure blaspheme by these reformer and that by their principal pillar many autheur recount of a consultation in Irland when s. Thomas of Canterbury be by sentence of k. Henry the eight degrade the owld justice plunkett of donsoghlye be present at this consultation and forbid to be honour as a saint how the inhabitant near a chapel which have be former dedicate to the say s. Thomas be at the king appointment to elect another patron when one covet to choose s. Peter another s. Paul etc. at leingth by advice of one of best judgement they elect the b. Trinity for their patron say if the king for other respect wowld also degrade or depose s. Peter and Paul yet if any will maintain their state against he none cold more forcible than the b. Trinity in the 9 number of this examination but alas how in this examination in diverse article be the very say divine trinity deride blaspheme and detest in Christ jesus be not his birth and sacred mother his merit his wisdom his duty to his father his whole passion his promise his miracle in the first 24. number in the 8 9 10 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16 17 18 of this examination of the holy ghost exam. n. 18. his resurrection ascension his divinity his soul his body his life his death no less then apparent contemn and altogether draw into distrust of the holy ghost for his divinity eternity coequality of his operation in inspyre the holy apostle in conserve and preserve the church in sanctification by sacrament of his be good and not the of evil in the 16. and 20. numb of this examination of his authority beyond the write word and the like how cold he more abominable be misbelieve then by thes mate of heaven and hell of the sowl immortality of any truth hitherto in christian belief what more disdainful dowbt exception or falsification then be produce by their palpable speech cold even by Sathan himself be vomit and which be worthy of principal deploration they who have thus transform God into a devil make he author of all evil they who have defy and deny Christ dignity life death and all his merit they who have thus impugn the holy ghost they who from one god and three person have to their power wrest all omnipotency wisdom and verity Exam. numb 10. 21. seq. 18. and 19 numb Exam. numb 1. 4. 7. 18. and before n. 38. they who have misdoubt church one saint heaven and earth life of body and sowl these man I say confess their persuasion receive by dream and devil profess the infidelity and impiety insue thereby acknowledge their shame and repentance of their own doctrine live and die detestable by their own open declaration yet that they have have and as yet have so many so otherwise plausible in their natural disposition so desperate and lamentable remain in the pernicious course by such begin for my part calu. in 1. cor. cap. 4. v. 19 I commit their amendment to God great mercy perclose this examination to Caluin and all late reformer in Calvin own word your gospel of which you vaunt so excessive where consist it for the most part but in the tongue calu. in c. 14. joan. where be the renovation of life where be effectual spirituality experience do teach that you be altogether depart from God infect and replenish with his hate and that you obscure the light by your perverse invention calu. in cap. 21. joan. which you have forge in your own proper fantasy 23. our first 71. numb what article of the creed my adversary affirm be overthrown by our opinion be n. 71. testify rather to be much confirm thereby and if we be not assure thereof we wowld perhaps have except against or suppress the symbol of the apostle as sectary have do either general by disallow all unwritten tradition such as be the creed or paricular by disprove many article thereof according their example of Christ descension into hell of the Catholic church of the communion of saint forgive of synn etc. but our aver the whole creed and their except against it do show we and not they to be of consent faith with the autheur of this belief 72. see now the fruit of your feign transubstansiation not full four hundred year old and yet forsooth you teach it be apostoliall and catholic whereas it lack one thousand and two hundred year of that age but he that listen to see the shift and wrangle of your schoolman to uphold lib. 4. sent. fol. 257. this rot romish heresy innocentius 3. lib. cap. 20. distinct consecr distinct. 2. canon 1. pag. 429. let he read Guillermus and innocentius the three a pope parent and patron of this fable the first canon of the second distinction where you shall find in the gloss there whether transubstantiation be but 400. year owld fitzsimon the 75. untruth s. Anselm in ep. 73. the number up of the 75. gross untruth at our first recowntre s. Anselme and he a saint a archbishop and a english man against his country man challenge to himself say panis Christiana the substance of bread to remain on the altar after the consecration of our lord body christian piety have ever abhor and late condemn in of Tours and his follower here be transubstantion and no bread remain above five hundred year acknowledge here be assure that christian piety not only then but before and ever do abhor to believe the contrary here be certify that and his complice for otherwise surmise be condemn the year 1070. after Christ therefore it must by thes word be unchristian impiety either to howld your opinion or to affirm innocent the three live above a 150. year after to have be first of our opoinion lanfranc con. sacramento o how much may I allege out of holy another archbishop of Canterbury and one of the first and chief writer against if I affect prolixity and decline not tediousness one only sentence of his I will engross in lieu of all other convertiin and and and it rest that we expound in brief the faith of holy church we believe the earthly substance which in our lord table by the priest ministry be divinly sanctify unspeakable incomprehensibily heavenly power wonderful work to be change into the substance of our lord body the species of unlike thing preserve and some other quality lest the receiver shall abhor raw and bloody thing and that believe they shall receive great reward of their faith this faith church which disperse through out the world be call catholic hold from old time and now hold you behowld he of set purpose to deliver the ancient faith to affirm the change into the essence of Christ body the accident to remain the cause of not seem what be contain plain express the same to have ever before and then be the belief of the catholic church as be now by we believe what think you two such holy archbishop of Canterbury be they not more worthy of credit than m. rider alas it be a shameful demand to be have in controversy since therefore he be not worthy to be their chaplain equal will he not blush if his forehead be not of brass to tell hencfoorth our doctrine not to have be ever the same in the Catholic church 73. that in the pope court and in his consistory rider there be diverse opinion touch transubstansiation yet the denial of it or the contradict of the pope opinion be (a) (a) denial of transubstantiation in Rome be no death no death though in those merciless day of spanish Philip and romish Marie it be make the thirteen article of our faith and it have be less danger to have deny those twelve old article of our old faith than this one of your new faith for the one be dispense with for money but the denial of the other be punish with death without mercy but you will reply and say not withstand the dissension aforesaid yet Christ word be true he can lie he have say this be my body therefore it be his body 73. I report i to all consideration fitzsimon whether they ever observe a style less steel as I say before or more frivolous what may I imagine to answer to such pregnant untruethe in the pope court and consistory in this point there be dissension of opinion under spanish Philipp and Romish Marie transubstantiatoin be make a thirteen article of belief he immediate tell it be make under innocent the three who live 300. year before Philipp and Marie then dispensation to have be grawnt for money concern all other article of belief etc. the least that I can do be to score up of so many the 76. untruth the 76. untruth 74. we confess these word to be Christ word and therefore true rider but the literal sense be you and therefore false but that I will not be tedious unto you I can show you as many several opinion dissent about the meaning of and as I have do in the premise but that the catholic shall know there be no such unity not verity in your doctrine as you confident but untrue have teach they therefore I will give they but a taste till some other time only point you and they to their author and place and then read advise and judge without partial affection this friar you hear late recite your several jar touch consecration josephus angle do euch. pag. 114. 115. 116. now hear he with your patience to deliver he and other several opinion touch the exposition of these three word several the first opinion be that this demonstrative pronoun must be refer not to the bread 1. josephus but to the body of Christ that this shall be the sense that be this my body be my body but how absurd this be let the young sophister in the school give their censure 2. Bonaventura 3. Occam in lib. 4. 1. s. thom. 2. ricar 3. Scotus etc. lib. 4. pag. 182 cap. 17. but the second opinion be of Bonaventura who say this pronoun must be refer to the bread that must be convert into Christ body but not to Christ body the three opinion be Occhams and he be of opinion with the first there follow three other learned man opinion contrary to all the former and say flat that this demonstrative must not be refer to note either the bread or the body of Christ but that this may be the sense this thing or this substance which be contain under the accident of bread be my body but how well these opinion with their strange logical manner of reason will content the learned priest and jesuit I will fain know for this I be sure they sound not either of divinity or learning but this friar for a farewell conclude pag. 118. this pronoun signify nothing till the last syllable they be pronounce demonstrate in the same pag. pope innocentius the three say that signify neither bread nor Christ body because the whole word of consecration be not speak unless say he you will say the priest consecrate at this word he bless but the pope say signify nothing and his reason be that the priest show or note nothing because he use not by way of demonstration but by way of cursory repetion mark this you jesuit and priest so then this pope will have this sense that be nothing be my body but in the three of the last line of that chapter his wisdom change his mind and say this be my body that be what soever be under the form of bread be my body be not this think you deep divinity for a pope you may see hereein how the pope use shameful shift to cover his sensible error and to deceive Christ little flock in his marc. anton. con. Stephen Gardner live but late see every man opinion expound what shall be he dislike they all and faith it signify as if Christ have say this but what it be I can tell but it must of necessity be some what be my body dist. 2. can but I will conclude with your own pope canon and gloss which you hold for canonical though in deed heretical it be a common question what be mean by this pronoun this whether bread or the body of Christ not bread for that be not the body of Christ nor yet the body of Christ for it appereath not that there be any transubstansiation till the word be all pronounce yea the last fillable they to this question this must be answer that by the word this nothing be mean but it be there put material without any signification at all see now whither you be bring or rather whether have you bring god people from truth to false hood if signify nothing where then be your transubstantiation for if in that word which shall first work in the change there be no mention of bread how can that which be no way comprise in they be change by they and so you speak against yourselves again as you be rend in sundry opinion touch so also be you touch for when you see that will not serve in his proper evangelicall and apostolical signification than you give he a new exposition for Bonaventure see that as Christ and Paul mean it will not fit their purpose what signify there be great variance amo^gst the romish prelate i. fit i josephus angle in pag. 115. than he of purpose expound it by that it may be thus in sense the bread be make my body yet Occam he like not bonaventures fit because he think it be too gross and too false and therefore he will expound that it may carry with it this sense this shall be my body but say he it be a very rash and brainsick opinion and allege as brainsick a reason as there you may see yet Caietanus the cardinal Eucharistia cap. 7. pag. 104. 2. c. d. deny to have any such signification unless it be in metaphor and parable but least that I shall be too offensive unto you I can deliver so many several opinion of you touch the one say it must be mean of Christ body glorify no say another that be false but it must be understand of his body as it be before his passion and a three opinion object certain doubt against both the former 4. dinstinct 12. page 60. deliver four several opinion the and now gentleman I appeal to your conscience if they be not cauteriate whether you have deal well with the ignorant catholic of this land in persuade they that in all your doctrine there be consent without jar antiquity without innovation and universality without limittation whereas there be nothing but jar discord and dissension in your consecration in your transubstantiation and in every word almost nay perticle as and be so wrest by your construction that you have bring both their proper signification to plain destruction be this exposition catholic what ancient father ever expound it so let the catholic know or else they with we will judge neither you nor your doctrine catholic will you follow a foolish friar a ignorant abbot a late upstart pope or priest that write and wrest within these four hundred year and forsake scripture and the ancient doctor of the church now let the indifferent mind catholic be judge whether you or we have antiquity consent and verity on our side and who differ from scripture and father from and among themselves not only in one point of religion but almost in every point and particle of doctrine thus much concern your discord among yourselves and all against the ancient apostolical and Catholic truth 74. fitzsimon be admit to behowld this courser I will say discourser can you good friend refrain from smile he tell you the three opinion be all one with the first and yet that it be the three and not all one but a several opinion this must needs make up the 77. untruth the 77. untruth next that the four five and six opinion be all contrary to the former and yet that be different the 78. untruth they be not different among themselves but that they all agree this be the 78. then he make a ragged argument if nothing be convert by the first word all our deal be undo alas if he will be capable he may think that this conversion be do by God infinite virtue in a instant not by part severally according to the word as if to every word a sundry part be correspondent but that to all the form conjoint all the conversion be to be refer so that there be conceive a diverse substance present which be not before not every word but the whole form be pronounce be not this a frantic kind of cofute to say only this be say I be sure it be false how absurd this be let young sophister judge I be sure they sound not of divinity or learning be not this deep divinity for a pope and no such matter say but forge by himself his assurance childish the absurdity only in his conceit the divinity and learning impugn so inexpugnable as neither in his brain be there any reason and by his mowth but riderian blast to contradict it therefore to bring disputation of doctor thereby to testify a disagreement betwixt they in their belief of the substance of transubstantiation they be only of the time thereof be as wise do especial by one more frequent and season with experience in law cowrt then learned college as if he wowld assure that layer disagree in allow the law because they plead severally for their client of the construction or time of constitution or number of syllable of the law or if he wowld say that philosopher doubt whether there be wound rain and river because they diverse imagine how when and whence they have their original remember what be inform in the 65. number that it be impossible we can have any dissension among we according to the say of the apostle 1. cor. 11.16 if any seem contentious we have no such custom nor the church of God because a christian writer among we must follow as Waldensis say tho. wald. l. 2. cap. 21.23 the judgement of the church under the pain of misbelief if it be a point of faith or under the pain of contumacy if it be not and all Catholic student among we do read the disputation of doctor undecided by the church with liberty to censure according to s. augustin word s. augustin con. faustum lib. 11. c. 5. epist. 48. Vincent and his instruction towards himself and all other embrace whatsoever they find true and impute it to the Catholic church and reject what they find false impute it to deceivable man this be a privilege of catholic to be free from dissension and never but to concur in one faith Luther cal. n. 19 not so the wicked not so as appear in the 19 number of the precedent examination they have their faith so inspire as they will judge thereby all angel and man and be judge by none and every one of they be in the right although by their own confession they be all find in and in their faith most miserable to be roll Colloq. Altemburg fol. 462. Centur. 9 in and without end or measure to vary their profession now approve for sound doctrine and sudden condemn the same now call it heresy which before be preach for invincible truth nether be there any so mean a conceit artificer that dine or sup without discourse on this discord of the holy reform crew let therefore our disputation alone and salve your own unreconcilable upror which hitherto all your cowncil or synod as be show in the 19 numb cold not so much as mitigat take out this beam out of your own eye leave to accuse we among who discord be as impossible as concord among you and it be irrefragable discover in all other point of the matter in hand take now this decretal demonstration thereof and inevitable assurance to protestant which your father of truth your Elias and beside what be say in the 17. fox act and mon. pag. 404. edit. an. 1563. Luther in confess to 2. Germ. fol. 357. number alter Phoebus your second Sonn most bright shine deliver say Carolostad wrest miserable the pronoun this make lean the verb be Oecolampad torment this word body other do butcher the whole text and some do crucify but half thereof etc. so manifest do the devil howld you by the nose let i therefore reply in m. rider word against himself orthodox confess Tygur fol. 105. 106. 107. will you follow a foolish friar one ignorant abbot a late upstart pope of Saxony as the tygurin entitule Luther or priest as Carolostad Oecolampad etc. that write and wrest within thes sower hundred nay one hundred year and forsake scripture and the ancient doctor of the church now let the indifferent mind catholic be judge yea and protestant also whether you or we have antiquity consent and verity on our syd and who differr from scripture and father from and among themselves not only in one point of religion but also in every point and particle of doctrine behowld how good friend m. rider and I be become both agree upon one tale and meet in the same form of word which speech of he I account so favourable on my side as for it I will omit to calculat any untruth in all this discourse how many soever which sure be above 20. have be offoord lest I showld seem offend with any parcel of the residue wherewith so true so undowbt and sincer declaration be annect for all man to know the protestant to follow Luther a foolish friar and as m. Rider say a heretical monk who usurp the power of pope and live within one hundred year forsake for his sake scripture and father and cleave to a ragged rabblement of dissentious teacher be not this to condemn to hell itself his own doctrine so assure know and confess to be from Luther a friar from ignorant and apostate priest who write within a hundred year and be so and repugnant so mad and mutable that by themselves it be not deny say nicolaus Gallus sup^ certain they be not small contention that be among we nor of trifle but of the high article of Christian religion of the law and gospel of justification and good work of sacrament and use of ceremony which by no mean can be appease hide or dissemble for they be plain contradiction which may not be accord be not this by open and plain confession without rack or torture to have thief fall out and true man to come by their good to have falsehood unhooded and truth reveal to have disagreement convict and the kingdom thereby know sathanical 75. now to conclude this matter I will show plain by scripture that can have no such sense as you teach rider expound by scripture which be that bread be not by this or any other word transubstantiate or change into Christ body and blood but that bread remain after sanctification or as you say consecration and that the scripture speak of Christ body and of the bread speak distinct not confuse that be they do divide they not confound they give to either of they their several nature and property yea after consecration and whereas we have now hear too much of the jar of your late pope and writer void of unity and verity now let we hear the holy scripture expound plain and true by the evangelist and Paul who know best Christ meaning upon who exposition all christian may and must only rest satisfy in spite of pope and popery 75. the first promise here make be that he will show plain by scripture that bread be not transubstantiate fitzsimon but that after consecration it retain still his nature the second promise be that he will bring such exposition from the evangelist and Paul that in spite of pope and popery we may and must rest satisfy thereby rider math. 26.26 luc. 22.19 luc. 21.19 1. cor. 11.24 eye mark 14.22 76. and first we will prove it from the difference of the sign and the thing signify the scripture when they speak of bread they speak active he give but when they speak of Christ natural body they speak passive be give when they speak of bread they speak activelie he break it but when they speak of Christ body they speak passive which be break when they speak of bread they say to you but when they speak of Christ natural body they say for you 1. cor. 11.24 mark 14.23 luc. 22.20 eye math. 26.27 luc. 22. math. 26.26 likewise when they speak of wine they speak active he give but when they speak of Christ his blood they speak passive be shed when they speak of the wine they say to they but when they speak of Christ blood they speak for you or for many 76. here be a discourse pertain to the single accidence in grammar not contain any wit or worth not so much as to such as will know what be a verb active and what passive in the word of Christ now for our lord sake let we examine it the scripture say he speak active of bread yea sir it that be take break and according your wisdom eat by record of scripture be it active or passive since therefore it be too to evident to be rather passive as it concern bread it make the 79. untruth second say he the 79. untruth the word be give belong not to bread but to Christ body by which be imply that what Christ give it be not give and what be give by he he do not give if it be bread which he give and not bread which be give if our late queen industrious in give name term a dance abrupt jump from point to point by the name of a frogg-galliard how will she have name this treatise rebound unreasonable from point to point when Christ say he do give what be to be give he be interpret to give that which be not to be give this be the 80. untruth the 80. untruth schlusselburb l. 2. art. 13. jezlerus Euchar. pag. 77. deserve to be call a blasphemy by which Christ be make untrue wherefore worthy do the lutheran exclaim against you say etc. what concord I pray you in God name may be take with caluinist give the lie to the Sonn of god but let we discuss the rest he interpret he break it I grawnt such interpretation to be true in sense although the word precise signify he break without the syllable it in the 51. number but when I have use the same interpretation in the 51. number he thus reprehend this syllable it alter the sense and pervert Christ meaning and be add by you to maintain that which the text otherwise cold not have any show to bear tell i gentle reader whether this writer be not extraordinary who be make every foot to disprove himself and show to offend in that which he wowld seem most earnest to amend further the scripture when they speak of Christ body say he they speak passive which be break you have silly sir break your cause by your good gloss for by say Christ body be break you say true but so as it must be understand only in the form of bread for Christ body be not else where or other wise break but pierce and it be fortowld by the prophet they shall not break his body s. Chrysost. in 1. cor. hom. 24. nor no one bone of he on the cross whereupon say s. chrysostom in sacramento in cruse Christ in the sacrament to endure break which he will not endure on the cross so also be the same assure by be break in the present tense declare in the oblation at supper time his true body to have be then present break or give to the disciple and not to have specify it as in his passion it be to be give in a cruental manner or otherwise it have not be say in the present tense and that of the greek text (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) be break so also if it have not be the same body which then be give in a unbloody manner with it which be to be give the next day in a cruental or bloody manner by other evangelist it have not be interpret or say shall be deliver in the future tense so that unfortunate be this active and passive gloss produce by m. Rider against himself claim to have he by all protestant careful of their honour sue to be a deponent for by say Christ body be break in the present tense it can no otherwise be understand by all the wrest of man wit then by the be true thereof under the form of bread consider as it be on the cross it neither be break and that be at that time it be speak to come it can not be specify in the present tense also as I say other evangelist mention the same body in the future tense shall be deliver they ascertain we what Christ give and break the same be deliver and consequent no figure only or only appellation but his true real substantial corporal body yet let we examine further eye he interpret to you a half penny scholar will never have so construe but say eye to signify to they and so also it be construe by himself in few word after other riff-raff in all confuse manner be intermeddle and juggle together to that Christ give not that which he give but something else and that in his word he play at pass-pass howld bread break bread blessing bread give bread and all as Oecolampadius say to no other purpose then to tell they Zuingl to 2. in ep. math. Rutlin fol. 155. that to be his body which be sit at the table which shall be give the next day as he give they bread how much be the patience of reader and writer abuse by such futility 77. when they speak of the cup they speak in remembrance of i in 8. cor. 11.14 in mat. 26.28 but when they speak of Christ natural blood they speak for the remission of sin so when Christ speak activelie as he give he break it be always speak of the sacrament but when he speak passive which be give which be break which be shed and for you not to you than he speak of his natural body give and break on the cross and this rule be plain and sure rule to direct we in and to the true understanding of this be my body in which plain path of the holy scripture if you will walk you may be preserve from wander 77. when the scripture speak of the cup say he they speak in remembrance of i not only of the cup good m. rider but also of the bread for so tell s. Paul if you will allow he s. Luke c. 22. v. 19 in the next verse before and s. Luke conjoin such clause for remembrance to the bread only omit to conjoin it to the chalice these good compagnions accept willing all remembrance of their liquor and cup etc. 4. argum. 5. and some time in the church they strive about it one of the principal of themselves shall be my witness thus expostulate with when as in the congregation I will not willing permit to thou the administration of the cup do not thou command thy colleague or compartner that in the face of the congregation he showld take the cup from i by force and for that cause do not I howld it fast and with both my hand I know that other will at this but I have rather have they lament that in all this dissolute or disjoint gloss m. rider the word of Christ institution etc. this be my body which shall be deliver for you etc. can not be perceive but in lieu thereof our lord and saviour be make to trip from matter to matter without any one syllable to our purpose in question where be here show that bread after consecration remain still bread where be the satisfaction by the evangelist and s. Paul that we must rely unto in spite of pope and popery what marrow or substance be in thes word for any other then for a single sintaxian to know that and be active verb and and be passive etc. for brevity sake I will not repeat the dismal hate of thes reformer against the word of Christ institution which I have already ample prosecute in the 68 number yet will I not omit Luther verdict against his brother say they fear Luther tom. 7. defen verb. fol. 383. lest they shall stumble and break their neck at every syllable which Christ pronounce and this make they range about through all the part of learning and not to come to any issue in the main point of his sacred institution true fulfil the say of the royal prophet psal 11. ambulant the wicked wander in a circuit and like serpent tread on the head or hen who neck be new crack they wreath and wrest up and down in manifold skip spend and waste their small time to live which by be quiet may some what long continue rider 78. thus you see how distinct Christ disjoine they sunder they with their several property bread and wine remain after consecration by Christ his testimony therefore transubstansiation be a forge and false fable invent by new Rome to support your new heresy of Christ carnal presence the sign from the thing signify not confound they as you untrue teach yea and after that Christ utter which you call your consecration now let we compare the phrase and word that the holy ghost use in both the new testament and the old and then you will say they be so like that they be rather borrow of the old testament then institute in the new and of necessity see they be both sacrament and of like word and ordain by one author and to one end they must needs have one sense so that the one will best expound the other and the one be sacramental and relative the other can be grammatical and proper as it be say in the old (a) (a) gen. 17.10 testament of the sacrament of circumcition this be my covenant so it be say in the new (b) (b) math. 26.26 testament by the same spirit this be my body but as by those word like to these in syllable sound and sense there be no transubstansiation of the piece of flesh of the foreskin that be cut off into God covenant make with his church so there be no natural nor miraculous change make of any part of the bread or wine into Christ body and blood exod. 12. 1. cor. 11.24 exod. 24 8. and as it be say of the Paschall lamb this shall be to you a remembrance so it be say of the lord supper do this in remembrance of i and as it be say in the old testament this be the blood of the covenant yet be not the covenant but a sign of the covenant luc. 22.20 so be it say by Christ himself this cup be the new testament in my blood yet the cup be neither the testament nor the blood but a sign representation and remembrance of Christ blood and the new testament be a obligation or bond wherein God for his part bind himself with most sure covenant and seal it with word oath and sacrament that he will receive into his protection and favour the believer and penitent and the believer and repentant of their part bind themselves by like indent covenant to perform unto his sacred majesty rom. 1.5 a lively and steadfast faith with holy obedience now the cup or the wine in the cup be a representation or commemoration unto we of this covenant of grace make in the new testament as the Paschall lamb and the blood of beast be sign of God covenant in the old testament this may suffice for the plain and true understanding of these word this be my body and this be my blood be expound according to the holy scripture now to your first proof out of saint Paul fitzsimon 78. it be a easy matter upon all the premise to tell we you see you see when nothing be give to be see but gross impiety and futility I admonish you dear reader that reformer conceive a vatinian hatred against Christ institution will you now behowld a lively demonstration thereof first he say that the phrase and word use therein be no new institution but borrow out of the owld testament second that the sacrament of the owld testament and new be so like as they must have one end and sense and the one not to be literal more than the other it be to be remember which be mention in the 36. and 63. number that by reformer opinion there be no more benefit by Christ sacrament of the altar then by the jewish ceremony which according to their translation saint Paul say to have be only bare Galat. 4.9 and beggarly ordonance I request all courteous reader to spare i the pain to relate the substance of such number in this place and that they will not proceed further until they have peruse what there be find first then I answer that if by similitude of speech use in the figure and the thing figure shall be gather that they both be of equal sense end and literalitie it will follow that all figur of Christ in the owld testament be equal with Christ himself that the owld testament be as behooful as the new note because they have one author one sense one end one phrase and one literalitie accord to m. Rider wherefore since joseph in the owld testament be call the of the world Genes. 41.45 joan. 4.42 and Christ in the same phrase by s. John be call they must have on end one sense one literalitie and therefore as joseph be no true of our sowl so also be not Christ and as Saul be call by David the anoint of our lord 1. reg. 24.7 luc. 2.26 even as our saviour be term by s. Luke they must have one end one sense one literalitie and by m. rider consequence the one be no better the the other but you may crave what mean this late coequal the owld testament and new that I may right answer to this demand I must first brief show that it be the drift of late reformation to bring in this equality as appear by thes word of Ochinus Ochin lib. 2 dial 21. pag. 154 155. 156. 157. 288. 289. and Moisis etc. whereas there be but one church and one faith therefore we ought not to believe more than the saint of the owld testament believe as perfect and the same be the church of Christ and of Moses this be the foundation frame this pile thereupon if in the owld testament Zuingl to 2. fol. 59 say he the carnal and external sacrament cold not bring any purity or cleanness to sinful and defile conscience how much less can such sacrament do we any profit in Christ in the new testament where only the spirit give life what frame do Ochinus himself build upon his own foundation Ochin loc. cit. pag. 157. of the owld testament do not believe the trinity coequality of person consubstantiality eternity etc. by the first inference adieu all sacrament of Christ for any profit and bring any purity to sinful person by the second inference we be not bind to believe any substance of the new testament of Christ birth his miracle he and the holy ghost divinity Trinity etc. because forsooth Ochin loc. cit. pag. 154. 155. 156. 157. we shall be of inferior condition to they of the owld testament be bind to believe more than they here be the scope here be the centre declare of thes instruction to equal both testament and after to condemn the new by the inutility of the owld and that by many testimony of scripture as when s. Paul say hebr. 7. the former commandment to be reprobate for the infirmity thereof and inutility now say they the new commandment be no better the sacrament thereof no more profitable the sense end and literalitie of both be from one author and of equal estimation therefore let we renounce christianity and all owld and new testament and become atheist and mahumetist Galat. 4. the owld law be but as they translat beggarly ordonance and consequent the new which be equal thereto no better I lament some time to behowld great and iudiciouse wit employ now confute one point of sectary impiety now another whereas if they have principal save other man judgement reveal the drift of thes reformation to be a stidiouse employment to deform by degree all virtue and religion there will many more reclamation although they be daily revoke in commendable number ensue now as s. Iren. l. 1. c. 35. Hieron ep. and s. Hierome learned observe etc. victory against they be the manifestation of their profession to produce their sentence be to confute they blasphemy be discover at first view their sentence even against the root and pillar of religion and christianity be detect there will many noble wit and mind of our country I dowbt not disdain long all consociation with such blasphemer last be it not a ricidulouse comparison of Christ word in this institution with the word of circumcision circumcision not be so much as a figure of this sacrament gen. 17. v. 11. but only of baptism the next word evident and express declare num. 78. joan. 6. 1. cor. 11. i and that it be a sign of the covenant betwixt i and you whereas contrary wise the word of this institution before and after do aver it not to be any sign but the flesh to be meat indeed the body to be that which be to be deliver for mankind be it not as ridiculous to marvel there be no transubstantiation of the forskynn into God covenant God declare it as I say to be only a sign and a covenant not be a substance into which any thing cold be transubstantiate be it not as ridiculous to leap from circumcision to the paschal lamb succeed many hundred year after and from thence to half the blood of twelve calf wherewith Moses sprinkle the israelit and have cluttre they together as one matter for their bare consonance or resemblance in sound with the word of Christ institution to make they equivalent in sense end and propriety with this b. sacrament but as I have show in the 68 77. 78. number this debase and disgrace thereof proocee from their hate of Christ express word this be my body which as their own brother observe joan. Schut l. 50. cap. 13. they do so hate that they can not abide either to see or hear they at least according their true signification whereto belong thes speech of Luther will to have impug^^^d the say puissant word Luther tom. 7. wittem fol. 502. which say he in examine and de^^^ing I take marvelous pain and strain every vain of body and soul to have avoid for probe I do well observe thereby I cold notable have interest papacy but I find myself take fast and that there be no way to escape for and the text of the gospel be too to clear and violent by this be demonstrate that good will want not in Luther to have conceive with the sacramentary but say he thes word this be my body can easy be shake much less overthrow by word and gloss devise by giddy brain Luther ibid. I suppose this gall and confusion to be such to m. Rider that I will not here also collect any untruethe further to netle he although every one may judge by the premise whether there be not plenty afford it suffice in general and particular to have discover that the sense end and literalitie or dignity of the owld and new testament be different and unequal and no part of m. rider discourse unsuspitiouse to tend to the abolish of all christian religion therefore let heaven and earth consent to thes word of one of the reform conjuration or of their own holy brotherhod they endeavour by darkness and mist of word to obscure the clear verity and enforce themselves to establish a sentence clean opposite to the word of the Sonn of God tilman lib. they blaspheme with a impudent and unreverend mowth the flesh of Christ they blaspheme barbarous and be culpable of the blood of jesus-Christ and murderer of he they shut obstinate their eye against the clear light and by detraction and malice affirm that to be obscure which they will not behowld s. August c. 16. to which declaration s. augustin subscribe say and they hear so clear and manifest proof which the truth and they have rather stumble their eye be shut against the mowunt of God church then mownt to it Catho priest 1. cor. 11. this be my body which shall be deliver for you whoso do eat unworthy etc. shall be guilty of the body and blood of Christ rider 79. a most learned writer in the like case bring in a athenian history of Pharasylaus a frantic man among the greek who whensoever he see any ship arrive in the harbour think they all his own athenaeus Dipno sophist lib. 12. and take a inventory of their ware and bid they welcome home very joyful as if they have be his own servant and ship after the same manner pardon the comparison you deal in the proof of this question for wheresoever you find in scripture or father this be my body or this be my blood or my flesh be meat true etc. or except you eat the flesh of the son of man and drink his blood etc. or the bread which I will give be my flesh or the like tropical or sacramental phrase which ever carry with it a spiritual sense present you clap hand lift up stentorian voice and cry to the catholic against we poor heretic that all these text of scripture and testimony of father be on your side and prove your carnal presence and condemn our opinion as heretical and damnable and then you register in your note-book as in a inventory all these proof for your own proper evidence when as God know you be neither owner merchant nor faithful and it shall be direct prove that these text of scripture and testimony of father belong no more to the proof of your carnal presence than the merchant ship and good of Athens belong to frantic Thrasylaus but now to prove that I speak that the catholic may see yea and let master Henry Fytzsimon true censure we speak nothing without proof I will begin to examine your slip and sleight in this place of the 1. cor. 11. the four part of the catholic proof by scripture for the real presence fitzsimon alan cop. dial. 6. c. 27. pag. 914. John walshe against m. Gilbert Browne 79. this history of Thrasylaus the application whereof against protestant you may find in Alanus Copus be every body hackney of one that in his own only imagination and not otherwise have good in ship of other but in truth have none very any will think this example less pertinent to we then to our adversary as well because we follow not selfe frantic imagination which they do according Luther last testimony of their word and gloss devise by giddy brain as also because all other claym in Christ word beside we luth. tun 7. Wittemb fol. 502. be find suggestion of Satan father of lie by the confession of the competitor themselves and their shame in practise to defeat we in our right buter in cap. 6. joan. and in cap. 26. math. have make they cry as be deceive like so many Trasilaus Martin Bucer crave pardon of God that ever he have witnese against we and bewitch any with your opinion so do Oecolampad say Oecolampad hess 1529. I will most excellent prince that this right hand of i have be chap off when I begin to write first of the lord supper against the Catholic sense see more hereof in our 41. number in the examination n. 7. n. 18. where be demonstrate that every chief Protestant as if he have run to a wrong opinion as Trasilaus run to wrong ship revoke his imagination and challenge to the commendation of truth and infamy of his former folly therefore when the mean sort of protestant yet persist to challenge truth to their opinion as oft as they find any by-woord of spiritual sacramental figurative etc. in father or scripture although there be with all contain charter party proof and assurance that those good be none of they they be not only Thrasilaus vain claim but frantical withstand sentence give against they by God and man ancient and late friend and foe whereof that in manner of Thrasilaus they refuse all sentence give against their claim and frantical withstand all concil yea and angel and saint that denownce they destitut of all truth and title in the institution of Christ sacrament let this short testimony of one of your own brother be arbitrer Bullingerus Decad. s de Cana. fol. 370. and divi the zwinglians not to be able to believe Christ to be present in the supper with his true body although all the cowncil in the world all angel and saint command it showld be believe thus much to restore thrasilaus frantic in his imagination delude in his supposition and reprove in his claim among his compagnions who can not believe other man good to be impertinent to they but be claim what all the world concil angel and saint do sentence to be none of they thereby imply they to have no other wealth then naked beggarly sign fruitless figure and fantastical and fanatical thrasilean supposition by which as s. Epiphan: testimony in the 63. number specify they leave the substance and like Aesop dog snatch the shadow rider 80. first you bring a piece of a verse so much as you think by the sound of your ear will fit your purpose than you cut off the beginning and end of the same verse which will expound the apostle meaning and overthrow your opinion then you join a piece of the 17. verse with the 24. verse and overskip the 25. and 26 verse which all that you leave out and cut off do first deliver Christ institution second expound his own meaning in every particular point that be in controversy betwixt we and three overthrow your opinion now what move you thus to mangle cut off disjoint and dismember this place of Paul as you do with the text before let the reader after my examination of your error judge but first I must deliver you this general rule observe of allsound divine that all the evangelist and apostle doctrine be pen by one spirit do agree in the matter of the sacrament one expound another as partly you hear a little before so that the three evangelist must not be expound to contradict Paul not Paul expound to contradict they but all due and true in the spirit of humility be examine according to the canon and rule of the word of God you shall find neither darkness in speech nor difficulty in sense but that the simple may know Christ meaning fitzsimon 80. what I have answer in the 43. number against his accusation of any curtayl cut by the waist and subtract may abundant serve for the like of my mangle cut off disjoint dismember this place all be but practice of the lapwing to cry a far of most noysom that you may think the nest of her yongon to be there where it be least which as it be there manifest so here it will be approve remember only his say in this place that what I omit expound Christ meaning in every particular point that be in controwersie betwixt we and overthrow our opinion and that for plain deal I shall have begin at the 23. verse and so to the end of the 29. verse if you ask he wherefore be he not content with what I have produce consider that he have the less to confute and be not bind to answer to what be omit he can answer nothing else but talk of omission cut and curtayling that other may not discern but that he have answer pertinent rider 81. you shall have begin at the 23. verse and so to the end of the 20 verse and that have be plain deal Christ institution pen by Paul deliver we four observation first Christ his action seconndlie Christ precept three Christ promise four Christ caution 1. Christ action he give thanks break bread and take the cup etc. 1. take you eat you 2. Christ precept 2. this do as often as you drink it and both in remembrance of i 3. the minister must show and preach the lord death till he come 3. Christ promise 1. this be my body which be break for you 2. this be the new testament in my blood 4. Christ caution or caveat whosoevor shall eat this bread or drink this cup unworthy shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord thus you see plain without any dismember or curtal Christ action precept promise and caution deliver out of the text out of which place I observe for the catholic better instruction and your confutation two thing against you in this your skip and curtal of the text first the comfort you conceal from they by this mangle of the text a discovery of more puritantcie in m. rider and of Puritan protestation how they be perform 81. first he be convict by his own word fitzsimon that he deal not plain consider he neither begin at the 23. verse nor end at the 29. but will you understand the reason thereof because s. Paul say that himself have learn this institution from our lord to wit by tradition and not in scripture and that he have deliver it former to the corinthian by tradition and not by scripture for I have receive of our lord say he which also I have deliver unto you that our lord in the night he be betray take bread and give thanks brake and say this be the 23. 1. cor. 11. v. 23. verse next m. rider add to the word brake the word bread which be not in the text three by his division into a action a precept a promise a caution nothing towards any edification or profit or learning be afford but a prank discover under the colour of method to distract the mind while he do separate the circumstance which confirm Christ institution of the sacrament to certify his true body be present fowerthly 1. cor. 11. v. 24. this be the 24. verse take you and eat you this be my body which shall be deliver for you do this in my remembrance m. rider use these sleight towards it first when he repeat Christ precept he omit clean do this in remembrance of i towards the bread and as be say in the 77. number of their care of the liquor conjoin it to the drink five he make Christ word this be my body to be but a promise let every understanding determine whether not unreasonable and unlearned the 25. verse be likewise and the chalice after he have sup say 1. cor. 11. v. 25. this chalice be the new testament in my blood do this as often as you shall drink in my remembrance of this verse he have whole omit the first half as also of the next half the name of chalice after drink he add the syllable it which be once do by i in the 51. number thus he controwl my addition this syllable it alter the sense and pervert Christ meaning etc. then he place according his former skill such word among promise the 26. verse be for as often as you shall eat this bread and drink this chalice you shall annownce the death of our lord till he come 2. cor. 11. v. 26. all this verse be entire over-slipped as neither action precept promise nor caveat so that his division be either defective as not comprehend all part or his dissimulation notorious in omit what may be comprehend as well under the precept as any thing else and better under the caution or caveat than what be by he contain marry I find the speech of a minister and his preach substitute in place of the foresay verse which upon my credit be neither in greek or latin text nor ever dream of by apostle evangelist council doctor father but it be only the pure puritancy of Thomas Cartwright l. 1. pag. 158. to affirm it a necessary and essential part of the communion yet thereof thus say the answer of Oxford to the puritan petition pag. 11. but that it shall be minister with a sermon be absurd and have breed in many a vain and false opinion as if not the word of Christ institution but rather the word of a minister exposition be a necessary and essential part of communion o how impossible it be for m. Rider but to be know a puritan now let he take what he can get thereby the 27. verse therefore whosoever shll eat this bread or drink this chalice of our lord unworthy 1. cor. 11. v. 27. shall be guilty of the body and blood of our Lord all this verse he make to be a caution or caveat I shall think it rather to be a threaten prediction second he will not call it the cup of our lord but only the bare cup what be the reason think you because it cold not be call the cup of our lord unless it be allow to contain the blood of our lord or for have be sanctify to our Lord the 28. verse but let a man prove himself and so let he eat of that bread and drink of that chalice 1. cor. 11. v. 28. this verse in his conceit belong not to the institution of Christ which s. Paul have pen because it be not insert neither as action nor precept nor promise nor caution which according to his skill be all the membre comprehend in Christ institution the 29. verse for he that eat or drink unworthy do eat to himself judgement 1. cor. 11. v. 29. not decern the body of our Lord these verse so omit so transpose so corrupt by he yet give audience to his word as if he have so cunning deceive all reader that they do not behold his industry thus you see plain without any dismember or curtail etc. first I inquyer in all these verse what be contrary or repugnant to my profession second what part or syllable of they do the favour his persuasion or the only figurative presence of Christ three how he blush not to attaint i with fraudulent omission cut waste etc. I profess only to deliver my choice proof of scripture for the real presence without bind myself to take more or less than I deem sufficient whether they be consequent together or in several place and he undertake to use plain deal and to have deliver Christ whole institution as it be pen by s. Paul yet to misdemeane himself in this manner I use not accusation of depravation of falsification and other like that it ma^ better by all be understand truth to be against he and no trifle 82. second the error you still hold they in rider in conceal the most part of the text first by follow your latin translation and neglect the holy tongue the greek wherein the holy ghost pen this institution you translate which shall be deliver for you for which be break for you out of which I note first you change the tense that be in the greek that be the present tense for so we have it and you follow the l^tten translation which be the future tense and therefore not so comfortable Christ use a sweet figure of the time present for the time to come enallage to assure our soul and conscience that whatsoever Christ promise be as sure to be perform in his appoint time ^s if it be already do and this tense Christ use to take all doubt from his disciple who in respect of their unworthiness may just have doubt that Christ will not have die and shed his precious blood for they they be such unprofitable servant and miserable sinner but to take away that doubt from they and the church now he assure both that whatsoever be promise by he be as sure to be do as if it be already do and this stay Christ church and every particular member of the same from distrust doubt grudge etc. in and under their several cross because they know there be a joyful jubilee and freedom for they purchase and prepare and shall as sure be accomplish as if now it be perform now your alter of this particle be deprive we of all this comfort again you follow still your corrupt latin translation say del^uered for you whereas you shall say as the greek be and as Christ say break for you for this word break be more emphatical and pierce then deliver for it be one thing for a man to be deliver for to be betray for i another thing to be break in piece for i out of this I observe first the greatness of my sin second the kindness and exceed love of my saviour whether the vulgar latin translation of the bible be to be prefer to all other translation fitzsimon 82. I have three cause not to justify our latin translation compare with the greek against m. Rider one because I be privy that he have no more good greek as I say before than a blind man have sight second because I find that work so learned and sufficient perform by m. Gregory Martin in his discovery and by the preface and annotation of the rhemish testament that neither can I nor will I add or diminish any thing therein Beza in pref. test 1556. molin pa. 30. Erasm c. 6. math. Humfr. rat p. 74. last because by their most learned pillar Beza molin Erasme Laur Humfred etc. the latin be confess far more pure than the greek we have observe say Beza that the read of the latin text of the owld interpreter though it agree not some time with our greek copy yet be it much more convenient for that it seem some true and better copy this one testimony of such a one so great as d. Whytaker say Whytak pag. 12. con Martin he be able to close up all our learned man in a sack and to ding out their brain shall suffice to control and correct m. rider ignorant meddle in these matter there be not a more naked linguist in a country or more unfit proctor for the greek tongue as shall be short testify it be his chance during my be in prison in the presence of alderman jians the constable and other to have present a trial of his skill in greek about the word of the angel to our b. lady I confess that my study be much more in other matter then in the greek tongue yet as they above name be witnese I find m. Rider not only trip in greek but mute from ever after mention greek in my presence of the word break and the be thereof in the present tense I have so infallible assure it to confirm we and to infirm he in the 76. number that to repeat it again here will neither be expedient nor conformable to my brevity careful follow by i as much as the matter will allow and this man stand upon the foresay word rather than upon deliver forget himself a little before say that the evangelist and s. Paul must not be expound to contradict one another and consequent the evangelist say deliver and s. Paul say break there be no diversity whether be use especial the scripture use they as have but one signification break thy bread to the hungry isa 58.7 Thren. 4.4 exod. 12. num. 9 little one have crave bread and there be none to break to they which break be all one as deliver bread to the hungry or to little one and the literal signification of deliver be verify in Christ passion but not of break for he be deliver for our sin but I be able to say that he be also break for we in the b. sacrifice of his body under the form of bread and m. Rider deny such his sacrifice and not be able possible to show any other his break do you think that leave to talk of delivery for break he know what be with he or against he the amplify of Christ promise in the present tense there be no promise in these word this be my body which be break for you show such mate when they can get a word to wander against the truth for Christ use then a present tense to testify the efficacy of his institution of the b. sacrament in which his body be present deliver invisible which be the next day to be deliver visible thereupon they amplify and descant at full whereas upon the true and literal institution of Christ arcord the proper signification thereof they walk so nice luth. tom. 7. defen verb. fol 383. as if they be tread upon egg fear say Luther to stumble and break their neck at every word which Christ pronounce 83. in the first that Christ rider birth and life though both innocent be not sufficient to cleanse my sin in the second Christ will undergo shameful buffet on the face prick of thorn upon his head pierce nail into his hand and foot a bloody spear into his bless side before man sin can be satisfy God wrath appease Satan death and hell conquer this our live Christ will have his body break for we he will not leave one sighein his soul for our sake nor one drop of blood in his body unsh for our sin these comfort be express by this word break which be not nor can be gather by this word deliver 83. in my examination of the creed in the 14. number Pitzsimon I have show that every merit of Christ be of infinite value have be sufficient to redeem a thousand world and that his death and passion be suffer upon his excessive abundance of love which be not content with what have be sufficient but also pour out itself beyond all respect and measure to the last drop of blood in his body for great manifestation of his bountiful charity towards mankind how come my warr-man and say that Christ death itself be not only not of superabundant affection but that beyond his death the very pierce of his side with a spear be necessary to cleanse his sin which be blasphemy against all scripture and christianity refer always our redemption to Christ holy passion I know not whence it can come to he but only to fulfil the say of s. Nazianzen they strive among themselves as if they have no fear to entangle themselves in impious error but that every of they be not behind his compagnions in less offend other answer be in the foresay 14. number rider 84. another comfort be conceal from the catholic in omit the 25. verse in these word math. 25.40 heb. 2.12.13.17 joh. 10.27 the new testament in my blood out of which every man may gather these comfort to himself by particular application first that I be not a stranger to Christ but one of his young brother and not only well know unto he but also as well belove of he which appear in this that he do not only remember i in his last will but also most free and liberal bequeath unto my soul and body most precious legacy where we may find they register and most safe keep in God book and daily pronounce in our creed as remission of sin of both guilt and punishment peace of conscience in this life at the latter day rise of my body from death and dust and of erwards life eternal both to soul and body these legacy be bequeath and contain in this testament which be have not only seal outward with sacrament but also inward with his blood by faith to assure we of the performance of his promise and therefore he add in my blood so that all other testament will bull or pardon which be not seal with Christ blood but with lead or war be but counterfeit label stitch to Christ testament by some false forgery of perjure notary wherein they do false promise remission of sin and the kingdom of heaven fitzsimon 84. m. rider shall pull off with his own hand his mask of consolation by these word the new testament in my blood and acknowledge to all reader his contentment to be but forge and his cause and conscience to be full of desolation by mean of they first then he say in his 78 number that thes word of Christ ordain by one author have one sense one sound one end with these word of the old testament this be the blood of the covenant exod. 24.8 but the sense of thes word of Moses be that the old testament be ratify by true and real blood substantia sprinkle upon the israelit therefore the sense of Christ word must likewise be if as he say they have one sense that his new testament be make at his last supper and his true and real blood be substantia pour into the mouth of his apostle which blood deliver they after as s. Luke say l^c. 22.20 be to be shed for they now sir what consolation have you about yourt hart be not you make yourself to disguise your feign countenance that Christ make his testament at his last supper it be first the confession of say in the same supper be then nigh his death he make his testament how do ground his opinion because say he con. cap. n. 2. pag. 332. that a testament be make avaylable be require first that the maker thereof be at his own liberty for a slave a servant a son in his father government can make no testament this liberty have Christ at his supper and not at his death also he must make executour so do Christ make his apostle by this institution appoint they to dispense the grace of this testament etc. whereas there be no such matter at his death I add that lawful testament be make by man before their death when they be in good memory and not at the instant of their death which according to good protestancy have great occasion in Christ our saviour who at the time of his death they affirm to have be in desperation in torment of conscience etc. as be assure in the 14. and 15. number of the examination be not this a good brotherly help to m. rider consolation by thes word of Christ the new testament in my blood math. 25.40 for a testament be not a testament till the party die and Christ at his supper die not otherwise but mystica as in sacrifice therefore if there be a testament make such sacrifice be to be confess will you have Christ himself manifest his make the new testament at his supper why then at it he say joan. 13.34 a new law I give you mark this sequel upon this plant foundation Christ by confession of great protestant make his testament at his last supper and m. Rider accord thereto confess he in this present place and number to have make his last will bequeath legacy etc. well then I infer both that he shed or deliver his blood at this table and also that he sacrifice himself which in effect be all one for by m. rider confession among his legacy hebr. 9.22 at his supper one principal be the remission of our sin but s. Paul say without shed of blood there be no remission or therefore Christ in his supper shed his blood by which he bequeath such legacy of remission of synn now if Christ as m. Rider say in the precedent number can not cleanse his sin without death and yet that at his supper he bequeath unto he by his last will remission of synn of both guilt and punishment as be say he pronounce in the creed whereof other may be judge whether he understand his creed or no consider that to this day all mortal man do feel the punishment at least of Adam guilt to be unforgiven as to one not only well know by he but also well belove of he as his young brother they be his own word it must follow that Christ be sacrifice I mean incruental to his heavenly father at his last supper hebr. 9.16 both for his make then his testament for where a testament be it be necessary the death of the testator happen as also for shed his blood and fulfil all figurative sacrifice of the owld law in which the blood be not only shed but also the thing sacrifice be first put to death yet this shed of blood be not to be understand in any other then in a mystical and impossible manner no body have engage m. rider to confess this truth but he self wherefore if his pewfellow exclaim at he and say that he have confess the true shed of Christ blood substantia although not in proper form but only under the form of wine understand by shed only the pour thereof into the mouth of the apostle at his supper and also the sacrifice of Christ thereby which be the mass without which his blood can not then be shed nor his testament have be available for hebr. 9.17 it be not of force while the testator without all death mystical or corporal live and thereby ratify all papistry and confownd all protestantcy and which may seem most absurd allow a double death of Christ one at his supper another upon the cross s. August tom. 8. in psal 61. let he answer first for the residue out of s augustin verity for a time may be hide but it can not be vanquish iniquity may flourish for a space but can not continue and to that heinous doctrine of Christ double death let he deny it hardly and say that at his supper be only anticipate in a incruental and incomprehensible manner and mystica not in his proper form but of bread and wine and without violence the same death which succeed in a cruental and violent manner as it be one and the same lamb of God sacrifice in both manner first incruentaly after cruentaly in teach this doctrine first he have it assure to he by the connection of scripture here produce second by a arch Protestant calu. in libel Eccles. refor. Zuing. to 1. canon miss fol 183 Trinit. l. 2. pag. 89. three by the ancient father universally who Caluin and testify to establish this incruental sacrifice and Bibliander certify it be the undowbted belief of the ancient israelit that Christ will institute such a sacrifice in bread and wine therefore gentle m. rider rejoice at those sugar word of Christ this be my blood in the new testament not feign or by dissemble those remote cause allege but for the rich treasure leave perpetualy to God church of so precious a sacrifice whereby force be give to all bull and pardon necessary for remission of our synn in truth I have forget to calculate incident untruth in a long time yet now be constrain to score up at least the 81. gross untruth the 81. untruth that we teach other remission of synn then by Christ testament my good sir afford we some citation of such our doctrine according to your promise to allege book leaf etc. or else we will think that we may lawful say you ride etc. 85. these deceiver must be tell as Peter tell ananias rider why have Satan fill thy heart that thou shall lie not only unto man but also unto the holy ghost Acts. 5.3 in ananias heart there be a wicked conceit in his practice a wicked deceit and for his reward a sudden death you chaplain of the pope do tell the poor people many way to have remission of their sin beside Christ testament and Christ blood which I will deliver particular if I be urge but you be deceive and so you deceive they and because you will keep they still blind that they shall neither see your deceit nor their own danger therefore you keep this comfortable clause from they the new testament in my blood without which there be neither remission of sin nor save of soul another comfort you conceal from the devout meditation of every good christian which be in remembrance of i we read in history after julius Caesar be slay Suetonius Plutarch Marcus Antonius make a oration to the people of Rome in which he show Caesar love and paint out very rhetoricallie Caesar bounty to they while he live but in the heat of his speech he make a pause and show they Caesar robe sprinkle with his princely blood shed by the bloody hand of his cruel and malicious enemy which when the citizen see remember his love present they run upon the murderer and slay they do the citizen of Rome be pagan revenge Caesar death upon his enemy only remember his love and liberality then with what christian courage and spiritual manhood ought we that profess to be christian revenge our Christ death upon his cruel bloody and malicious enemy which so mercilessy put he to death rom. 4. the last verse and these enemy be our sin for he die for our sin which let we mortify nay murder they let we kill surfeit by abstinence adultery by continency cruelty by mercy hatred by love covetousness by alm superstition by religion etc. these and the like consort of sin put our Caesar Christ to death therefore when we hear not Marcus Antonius but any man of God out of the book of God preach unto we Christ bloody passion that die in our quarrel 1. cor. 11.22 and shed his blood for our sin let the remembrance of his precious death and merciful deliverance put we in mind to revenge his death by kill our sin which slay our saviour and endeavour to serve he with all thankfulness in a life spiritual who have deliver we free from death eternal now see what comfort the catholic lose for the lack of this apostolical remembrance of i this come by your omit of that you shall not pass without express the true tenor of it as you receive it of the lord for the profit of his church thus much touch the spiritual comfort conceal from the people by your skip of scripture now let we see what error purpose you seek to cover by this course 85. by this sermon fitzsimon you see what m. Rider can do if he be urge for if he be urgerd he often promise wonder to delate upon Christ passion two thing I say unto he one that he mistake Christ word do this in remembrance of i suppose it to be fulfil by preach for Christ at that time by m. rider confession be not preach but in action second that to such gloss verbal and idle talker thes be Calvin word our gospel of which we vaunt so much cal. in cap. 1. rom. where be it otherwise for the most part then on the tongue where be the newness of life where be the spiritual efficacy note in thes last word what other ever yet sacred and profane call good work here in a puritanical phrase to be call spiritual efficacy note next that m. rider to the scripture here misaply out of the act of apostle foi in a clause of his own to wit not only unto man whereof there be no syllable in the new testament so great a itch vex he to corrupt and deprave that be it canon or testimony of father or scripture itself it must not pass without his falsification thus much be say to this sermon I behowld nothing else worthy consideration therein for they be but frivolous word have some show of piety but deny the effect thereof I be also in great dowbt whether this relation of the roman revenge against they that slay Cesar be not for the most part forge for as I remember they flee and be not together slay so that I admire this man mistake all point of learning of divinity of philosophy of geography of arithmetic of history as well sacred as profane of greek of latin of english of french of orthography of all and singular science and yet to take so much upon he as some time to say I will lay down what you be to believe in spite of pope and popery some time to tax other ignorance and at all time to talk Doctoraly rider 86. first if you have put down these word in remembrance of i and till I come these two have overthrow your carnal presence error for if the bread and wine must be receive in remembrance of Christ than bread and wine be not Christ substantial corporal mat. 28.6 and by way of transubstantiation and if Christ be rise as the angel say and as we in our creed confess and that we must receive this sacrament in his remembrance till he come than Christ be not come but to come be not nor can be carnal and bodily under the form of bread and wine as you fond imagine fitzsimon 86 at the margin of this number a notorious mark of error be place so that it be like there shall be some stuff contain that these word do this in remembrance of i destroy all our persuasion it be so just as for there be not any clause whereby it be much more establish first that he bid we do and not speak do palpable subvert your late surmise of performance thereof by a minister sermon second to bid we to do in scripture be not seldom but very often all one and to bid we to sacrifice as he shall sacrifice or do one for sin 15. luc. 2. and in the new testament and that they may present he to our lord and sacrifice or do for he according to the custom of the law 12. which command a lamb and pigeon or two pigeon or two turtle to be offer at such presentation as appear ample in god holy word conformable thereto say s. cyprian epist. 63. and we must be attentive and to do what Christ do who as be show the number next before do sacrifice Martin pope subscribe say Martin Papa epist. Burdegal c. 3. for this our saviour command we to do or sacrifice in his remembrance in upon a sanctify altar now to the argument of m. Rider Christ teach this to be do in remembrance of he therefore he be not substantia present I answer that it be do in remembrance of his visible passion on the cross which visible passion be no long present 1. cor. 11.26 such to be the sense appear by s. Paul say as oft as you shall eat this bread and drink this cup you shall anownce his visible death till he come whereby appear this remembrance not to be one impediment against the reiteration of his invisible presence in the mass but only against it on the cross second I answer that the remembrance there mention be to be refer not so much to Christ person absolute as to his operation and institution at that tyme for such to be the sense appear not only by catholic thereupon fownd their priesthood but also by protestant thereupon ground their authority to dispense the supper as they call it of the Lord for no other warrant have they in scripture so to do but this only last I answer to gather that one must be absent because he must be remember be some what absurd God word advise we not to forget the law prou. 3.1 Galat. 2.10 therefore the law can not be among we s. Paul be admonish not to forget the poor therefore the poor must have be absent from he be thes consequence be thes our overthrow yes true the great that can be give we 87. and these word do this in remembrance of i condemn all your mass rider that be say in remembrance of he-saint and shee-saint and no saint M^ssale print at Venice 1404. as your pope bishop and in remembrance of pilgrim mariner woman in travail and murrain of beast so that all the foresay mass say or sing in remembrance of saint person or disease be abominable unless you will say which be damnable to think that those saint pope bishop pilgrim etc. die for you but I will cease to speak of those abominable abuse until I come to the controversy of the mass and yet than nothing but what shall be find in your own book who chapter leaf page if not line shall be quote true without fraud or affection another error you will cover in leap over the 26. verse in these word you do show the lord death till he come Chrisostome tom. 4. hom. 27. upon these word this show of the lord death consist h in preach and expound some scripture wherein the communicant must be instruct of the horror of their sin the greatness of God love the price of the precious merit of Christ bless passion which be the remission of sin and our reconciliation to God favour through his bitter and bloody passion whether mass be say to saint and whether it be dangerous now a day to honour saint fitzsimon 87. do not you often tell we that you have your doctrine from the primative father if it be so that you ever know what s. augustin say in this matter s. August 20. con faust c. 21. how may you think thes your argument unchildish these be his word we sacrifice not to martyr but to the god of martyr in that only ceremony which he command to sacrifice to himself in the manifestation of the new tstament I can not blame you to have wink at these word as be little favourable to your imagination and contain all that I say before of Christ institute a sacrifice authorize priest to do the same ordain the new testament at his supper etc. by our especial prayer to saint conjoin with this sacrifice we may not be say to offer the sacrifice itself to they when Caluin have abolish to his power other image of Christ and his saint he allow his own and to some repine thereat he answer cap. 12. if any be offend with this sight that he may no more behold it let he put out his eye or go spedie and hang himself this man also when he have observe diverse protestant Hamsted Fox etc. to canonize the founder of protestancy put they in calendar in red letter etc. he think it time to mollify his hatred against invocation of saint intend that his and his fellow glory may not be finish by their death say although God be only to be invoke calu. in Cateches. cap. Luther lib. 2. colloq. fol. 129. yet be it lawful to implore that man will also send we help Luther think that where ^^ch saint be honour Satan also may be comprise in the same calendar and lytany he devout invoke he say holy Satan pray for we for in no wise have we offend thou most clement devil etc. very for my own part I intend not to exchange my devotion from the old saint towards thes new nor think it fit to be do by other but by the premise appear it be not so heinous a matter to pray to saint as in the begyne of reformation be conceive when you begin m. Rider to speak of our abominable abuse as you say and will allege our book chapter leaf page if not line which hitherto be never perform as oft as any inconveniency be impute to we as be often show let it be do with great fidelity then s. Chrysostome be produce in this place for upon my credit neither have he any such homily upon such word nor any such doctrine in all his work as you adjoin to this citation will the other threaten citation be in this sort time will discover I proceed it have be convenient m. rider that you do show some authority for your say the show of the lord death to consist in preach and expound some scripture for Christ and his apostle and the primative church practise the administration of this sacrament before any of the new testament be write and if as you say Abraham communicate the old testament also then want so that either your scripture here mention must not be any part of the bible or else you overthrow your say in the 46. number that Abraham in who time there be no scripture communicate by faith as also all other faithful and that Christ his apostle and primative church be not of your persuasion in who time nothing of the new testament be vulgar 88 rider and this condemn your show of Christ his death by such idle gesture and dumb show without any glorification of God name or edification of Christ his people that I dare bold say and so god willing will plain prove that from your first which be the begin of your mass until you come to the last line there be nothing but magical superstition heresy and idolatry without verity or antiquity now let the catholic judge what wrong be do they when in stead of a comfortable declaration of the lord death they have a histrionical dumb show without true signification or sense warrant from Christ truth and whereas you exclaim against we for allow trope and sacramental phrase in the handle of this controversy if you have not conceal this phrase this cup be the new testament in my blood the catholic may have see your error and that we in so do only imitate Christ who you shall rather follow than the precept and doctrine of man who precept be no warrant for you nor i to build our faith upon nor for the catholic to imitate and you with we must either say that Christ use a double figure or else most absurd confess that not only the wine be transubstantiate and change into Christ last testament but that the chalice or cup be transubstantiate into his last testament and be his testament substantial proper and realie the accident of the chalice only remain that be to say the height depth weight colour etc. of his cruel threat against the mass fitzsimon 88 I trust m. Rider you will not be so ill as your word will you show in all the mass from the first word to the last there be nothing but magical superstition heresy and idolatry be the psalm of David the song of the angel glory be to God on high all the epistle and gospel be parcel of scripture the creed of the first council of nice the institution of Christ our lord prayer which be all include betwixt the first and last word of the mass but either superstition or heresy or idolatry what spark of Christianity can be in his breast what hand can write that David the angel the evangelist and our dear lord and saviour jesus Christ have commit superstition or heresy or idolatry for it be impossible to prove all from Introib^ to to be such unless also this other savage blasphemy against prophet angel and the lord of all saint be infallible prove but soft m. rider your time be not yet come to abolish dan. 8. v. 12. c. 12. v. 11. s. Iren. con she l. 4. c 32. s. Chrysost. ho. 49. in Math s. hippolyt consume isa 16.6 the daily sacrifice which be reserve as the scripture and father affirm to Antichrist and yet not to abolish it but that the frequent use thereof shall cease in his tyme of m. Rider and every other petty adversary of the mass may be apply the say of the prophet isaiah and his pride his arrogancy and his indignation be more against this invincible sacrifice than his strength for hell gate can not prevail against the faith who principal act and obligation be this sacrifice of the mass I trust in God mercy before I die to justify the least syllable and parcel thereof against the say gate and all thereto belong which be a contradiction of what m. Rider threaten rider 89. now if you can deny a figure in the chalice how dare you for the like or worse inconvenience deny it in the bread this you think to omit hope thereby to cover this your error but it be ill do to deceive the catholic who so liberal relieve you and so dear have love you and whereas you translate chalice for cup tell the people that the chalice consecrate by you be holy than other usual cup and that Christ use in the institution a chalice and no usual drink cup. 89. here be a argument that there be a figure concern the cup fitzsimon also concern the bread I answer out of s. augustin s. August c. 31. Genes. l. 11. for the translation of one word the whole sentence ought not to be take figurative as for example of the new disciple go to Emaus be say their eye be open which be to be understand figurative for they be neither blind wynk nor a sleep before but the residue luc. 24. that they know Christ etc. be to be understand proper and literaly in this point of m. Rider besa in c. 26. mat. v. 26. because the cup stand for what be in the cup as Beza confess in the common meaning of all tong little or nothing differ from a proper speech math. 26. mar. 14. as also because by two evangelist Matthew and mark it be specify express in a literal and proper sense by thes word this be my blood of the new testament no such matter be observe of bread but all circumstance precedent concomitant subsequent manifest the literal and proper signification thereof there be no sequel or censequence in the world in the foresay argument for the liberality of catholic towards we it be say of exorbitant envy I leave to the prophet Ezechiel in his 24. chap. 18. and 19 verse to reply unto it 90. I say in say thus you show yourself ignorant in the greek tongue rider wherein Christ speak it and the evangelist write it poter^on for they all and so have Paul but one usual word which signify a usual drink cup and no charm chalice as you idle and vain inform the catholic and now to your 27. verse which you will couple to your 24. verse which thus you recite very corrupt who so do eat unworthy etc. shall be guilty of the body and blood of the lord but if you have mean plain and true you shall have recite all the apostle word in this manner whosoever shall eat this bread and drink this cup of the lord unworthy shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord whether chalice be ancient consecrate and of what matter they be make 90. I tell you often fitzsimon you will carry your empty cruse so oft to the greek stream that it will come home break what do Christ ever speak greek in what greek will all scholar think your head to have be that will read this certain Christ son of the b. virgin bear in Bethelem live in palestim or jewrie suffer by Jerusalem be never yet say by any of read or reason or want read and reason to have speak greek without further hiss at it so many other no less the 82. untuth yea far great occasion present to do the like let it stand for the 82. untruth and so remain yet this appeal to the greek be not so to be dismiss first our advantage in the greek be specify and assure prove in the preff of the remish testament so that they be superfluous to be repeat by he who follow great brevity and eschew borrow ornament second who be not the adder mention in the psalmist may understand that neither greek nor Latin but wilful corruption be the cause of sectarist except against the sacred scripture now in this language now in that as for example in their bible of the year 1579. 1580. neither greek nor latin obtain of they to put s. Paul name before the epistle to the Hebrew some time against greek and latin they demand to what purpose shall the holy ghost or Luke add this some time against greek and latin Beza act. 8. v. 26. they confess wilful depravation as Beza mat. 10. v. 2. 1556. against the primacy of s. Peter and Luke 22 v. 20. calu. l. 4. Instit. c. 14. n. 26. l. c 3 n. 10. in ps 58. against the real presence as also act 3.21 and Luke 1.6 against justification etc. so that greek against latin be a bare pretence and corruption only be by they intend for the blessing and consecrate fie upon this profane term of charm of chalice s. August l 3 con. c. 29. and in psal 113. s. August who by caluins testimony be the most faithful and principal witness of antiquity the ringleader of divine as they can not deny thus write but we have the most part of our instrument and vessel belong to the administer of the sacrament of gold and silver which by their very application be call holy they be so rich in time of grace and charity Theodoret l. 3. cap. 11. Vid^ prudent s. lauren. as that pagan emperor and their secretary in admiration cry out behold in what sumptuous vessel they honour the son of Marie but one word more of this matter out of Theophilact Theophil in cap 14. marci say he that will take away the precious plate and force that the body of Christ be place on a more abject pretend forsooth the poor let he know of who faction he be namely of judas as he say who find fault with cost bestow for like pretence on Christ but be the sanctify justify and elect reformer culpable in this point let one of themselves and he of the chief inform the truth therefore chief Zuinglian minister of Heidelberg write this of when the silver pyx be moult and make away he cause other to be make of wood and reserve his eucharistical bread in a wooden one and the same so sluttish as be not good enough for a cowherd to put his butter in it for the antiquity of pyx calu. l. 4. c. 17. n. 39 Caluin assure first church and first christianity to have allow and belove they behold how contrarious to all christianity yet how courageous be m. Rider how comformable in himself and his brother to judas his pretence yet how adventurous to seem a reformer of abuse 91. out of which I observe that you will cover rider bread remain after consecration and therefore no carnal presence and likewise the cup and therefore no transubstantiation in either and conceal that which overthrow your carnal presence for if bread remain after consecration than there be no carnal presence but bread remain after consecration therefore there be no carnal presence and because this verse shw to the world that there be bread after consecration therefore you cut off that part of the verse which be very deceitful do and leave this word bread out after consecration to blind the eye of the simple and also you cut off the next word to cover other two error the word be these or drink the chalice of the lord unworthe 91. when I make a Puritan treatise fitzsimon represent as I say in the 76. number the frogg-galyard rebownd up and down from one point to another without ever follow either one tune or tenor I will not couch or comprise that which be precise pertinent but follow and allege testimony of all colour but be of other determination and have a particular controversy to examine as now only of the real and substantial presence of Christ body and not of communion under both form or the like I think good as man when they make a nosegay do not collect all herb therein but such as be sufficient for scent and variety to that present use to dwell in my text and only to cumble or gather what belong proper to that one point in question without range prolixity or tergiversation be this a fault if it be there be never allowable writer but both omit it and commend it well what stuff be now object against we Mary s. Paul speak of the sacrament name it still bread therefore it be not Christ natural body I be full persuade this objection to be so answer in the 56. number and in the 62. that the repetition of rider objection in this place be rather to blot paper to fill empty place to cavil and delude then for any difficulty remain therein for there I show by several scripture thing to bear the name of what they be representation tob. 2. exod. 7. gen. 19 joan. 2. gen. 2. or from what they be change as Raphael be call a young man a serpent be call a rod a pillar of salt be call lotts wife wine be call water Eva be call a bone of Adam and flesh of his flesh so here Christ body be call bread both for the representation and for be make of bread or succeed the substance of bread yet clear in this place be it express not with stand such name to be the body of Christ by say 1. cor. 11. that by eat this bread and drink this cup unworthy they be guilty of the body and blood of Christ himself because they do not discern the body of our lord his body which be to be deliver to death etc. all which signification utter by s. Paul in the same place to certify the name of bread not to specify bread but Christ body this objection may be think out of date and as a crack grot not lawful or currant any long because not to any desert of m. rider travail but to jesus Christ I devote my time employ in this answer I will now beyond sufficiency in this cause tender these word of s. Cyrill of Jerusalem in 4. and I will not have you conceive that it be bare and simple bread bare and simple wine for although thy sense conceive otherwise yet let thy faith confirm thou so that how soever bread be name or appear bread to the sense yet the thing so call be assure to be Christ sacred body but it be expedient to have m. Rider himself bring to disable his own objection he then in the 62. number thus speak it be the usual manner of the holy ghost in all sacrament both of the old testament caveat numb 62. and new to term the visible sign by the name of the thing signify as circumscision it be he orthography so to write be call the covenant etc. grace by the holy ghost say he with the name of thing they represent and confirm if it be the usual manner of the holy ghost to grace the visible sign with the name of thing they represent how be it not m. rider your 83. the 83. untruth untruth by your own disproof of yourself that the b. sacrament contain nothing but bread because for represent bread it be call bread as stale and frivolous be this other reiterate shift to say you shall have recite this and that you will cover and conceal this and that you cut off deceitful this and that etc. for what belldam or bedlam conceit but may do as much to wit to follow headlong a naked refuge which neither cover not defend they but make their want and misery more notorious more of this you may find in the 43. number 92. out of which I note first that you keep this back rider hope thereby to establish your half communion under one kind concomitancy some what young than your transubstantiation both forge by yourselves never know in Christ church for a 1000 year at jest that the catholic may think that the receive of bread be sufficient because you say Christ body must needs even by the ncessitie of concommitancie have blood in it and therefore it be no need to receive the cup which if it be true but I be sure it be most false than Christ be deceive in his wisdom and the apostle and primitive church in their practice which I hope you dare not say for sin and shame and therefore give over these irreligious practice of addition subtraction interposition and vain exposition with new inkhorne-terme of concomitancy and confess Christ his ancient and apostolical truth true 92. it appear in the precedent number that my leave out fitzsimon cut by the waist dismember etc. proceed by my aver the one only point in question of Christ real presence and avoid all divagation impertinent to that point for brevity and plain deal it must follow that all these reprehension be but or digression to dazzle the reader eye that under such mist he may clinch and sneak away from the matter without be perceive of the communion under both kind he tender after occasion to answer it among the parliament 6. article therefore because in vain shall we answer twice when one answer may suffice it shall be remit thither that Christ body shall by concomitancy have his blood conjoin with it he say it be most false must infallible make up the 84. untruth the 84. untruth for concomitancy be by natural signification only a conjoin fellowship our saviour Christ have a true natural body to which blood natural be conjoin in fellowship it must consequent follow that it have blood by concomitancy especial at all other time then during his passion and death but this show that m. Rider be persuade with the residue in the 14. number of the examination that Christ blood be putrify on earth and be never resumpt by Christ at his resurrection I know m. rider for the most part as soon as your word be utter from who they be and upon who they be build in this among the rest I be not ignorant that Caluin be your teacher in he you find in cap. 26. math. v. 27. affirm they be furious mad who affirm any blood to be long conjoin with Christ flesh you there upon be fearful to be furious mad deny the concomitancy or conjunction of Christ blood with his flesh but as the scripture fortowld Prover. 1 God do laugh you to scorn since that which you fear be fall upon you for by deny this concomitancy or conjunction of Christ blood with his flesh you be indeed know furious mad to all they who do not believe the price of our redemption to have be corruptible or to have perish and never be resumpt again such be all worthy to be call christian therefore beware of be bind and leave by concomitancy among the bedlamit of his argument if there be concomitancy than Christ be deceive etc. as he leave it unprove so I will leave it unfollowed rider and therefore they be to new to be Catholic and to strange to be true 93. thus much to give the catholic a taste of the wrong you offer they it lull they asleep in the cradle of ignorance and superstition whereas they will be most willing and ready to obey the ancient (a) (a) Reuel. 14.6 rom. 1.16.2 thess 1.8 the text be the lord not Christ the writer mistake it the author I blame not powerful and everlasting gospel of jesus Christ if you do not mislead they by your wilful error and keep back from they the read of the scripture which hold they and harden they in recusancy but take heed lest you by this ignorance in which you keep they and the disobedience to the gospel in which you fetter they you with they and for they hazard not that doleful taste and torment prepare for wilful ignorant recusant of Christ his gospel where it be say render vengeance in flame fire to they that know not God nor obey not the gospel of jesus Christ now gentleman if you be author of their sin you must be partaker of their punishment which both the lord be mercy prevent now follow another part of your proof draw out of a part of the 37. verse in these word shall be guilty of the body and blood of Christ out of these word some late writer since your transubstansiation be invent will prove two vain question that be in controversy betwixt you and we 1. the first be your carnal presence of Christ in the sacrament the second that the wicked do eat the body and drink the blood of Christ in handle and answer these I shall hardly sever the one from the other b^^ as you infer that the grant of the one confirm the other so must I in confute the one destroy the other and so one answer will serve to confute both fitzsimon 1. and 2. Elench. 5. 39 there be in sophistry a caption call whereby deceitful one will reason as in this manner if you be a thief you be to be execute but you may be a thief therefore you be to be execute he prove one who may be and may be not a thief shall absolute be execute as if it be out of controversy that he be a thief this fallacy be most incident with m. rider against we as in the 91. in this and the next number abundant appear for example if bread remain after consecration than there be no carnal presence but bread remain after consecration therefore there be no carnal presence here be a absolute conclusion upon a conditional proposition if bread remain etc. which yet in Luther opinion of companation will be false the other proposition be deceitful suppose true beyond all controversy that bread remain etc. a second if you be of their synn you must be partaker of their punishment but as he deceitful suppose or rather as I think in my conscience dissemble to suppose we be of their synn which be in controversy one only proof have be requisite in form of argument but that at his hand be to seek wool at the goat house therefore etc. if Mennon Darius lieutenant against Alexander be among such compagnions how often shall he be occasion to cudgel or bastonad they as he do one of his soldier revile and reprehend the macedonian say I keep thou to fight and not to scold for if Memnon like you bereave they of their rail reason that you keep people in ignorance that you will taste as recusant of Christ gospel vengeance in flame fire and other such fanatical naked reproach other fight of their learning you need as little fear as hurt from a serpent who sting and tooth be take away 94. thus you record to the world wonder rider Rhem test 1. cor. 11. sect. 16. and Rome and Rheims shame against God Christ scripture and father that ill liver and infidel eat the body and drink the blood of Christ in the sacrament and your reason there follow that they can not be guilty of that they receive not and that it can not be so heinous a offence for any man to receive a piece of bread or a cup of wine though they be a true sacrament first old father Origen shall answer you who say Origen math. 15. page 27. it be true meat which no wicked man can eat here Origen condemn the rhemist romanist and all late priest and jesuite for hold this opinion injurious to Christ death and all true catholic faith but you may object against Origen and say the rhemist lay down their opinion and give reason to confirm it but where be origens reason by which he prove this former position that no wicked man can eat Christ body math. 26. forsooth it be in his commentary upon your text bring forth of matthew in these word the bread which the Sonn of God say to be his body be the nourish word of our soul out of which this we gather that see this bread or meat be the nourishment of our soul and not of our body he speak of the heavenly part of the sacrament for we know in common sense that bread and wine can nourish the soul but the body and I have prove by scripture and father before that the hand and mouth of the soul be a lively and justify faith which you and all your side can deny but the wicked want now if the wicked have no mouth nor stomach to receive this spiritual food and digest it as the foresay father have affirm why do you say that the wicked and infidel can eat the body of Christ want both hand mouth and stomach and the scripture call wicked man dead man now you know dead man can eat meat corporal chrysost hom. 60. pop. Antioch no more can the wicked which be dead spiritual eat meat celestial and Chrysostome say let no judas stand to no covetous person if any be a disciple let he be present for this table receive no such as judas or Magus for Christ say I keep my Passover with my disciple and to conclude with Augustine Tract. 26. joh. pag. 175. he that abide not in Christ and in who Christ abide not out of doubt eat not spiritual his flesh nor drink his blood although carnal and visible he press with his tooth the sacrament of the body and blood of Christ but rather eat and drink the sacrament of so great a thing to his judgement and the reason follow because he be unclean in heart and presume to come to the sacrament of Christ which no man can worthy receive unless he be pure and clean in heart as Christ say mat. 5. bless be the pure in heart for they shall see God out of Augustine I observe against both your opinion these thing first he make a difference of Christ flesh and the sacrament of Christ flesh for they be two thing and to be distinguish with their several substance and property and not to be confound or transubstantiate one into the other and so the nature of bread perish as you untrue imagine and teach second that the wicked receive and grind with their tooth and swallow with throat the outward sacrament that be the outward visible creature of bread and wine Acts. 15.9 to their judgement or condemnation because they presume to come without a clean heart and conscience purify by faith but the godly eat the heavenly part of the sacrament which be Christ with his benefit because they dwell in Christ by faith and Christ in they by his spirit as have be plain handle before part. 3. distinct. 2. cap. 65. and now I will be bold to urge your own pope decree against you etc. whosoever dissent from Christ do neither eat his flesh nor drink his blood but the wicked dissent from Christ therefore they neither eat Christ flesh nor drink his blood and cap. 69. follow whosoever eat this bread the lord shall live forever but the wicked live not for ever therefore the wicked eat not this bread the Lord now gentleman I will fain see how you can dissproove these father and old pope and satisfy the catholic in this case but I shall have a fit place to speak of the unreasonableness of this opinion in the title of the mass where I must show to the catholic the pope priest and jesuit shameful opinion that you think it no inconvenience not only for the wicked but also for all such bruit beast as cat or dog rat or mouse hog or swine to eat the bless body and drink the precious blood of jesus Christ whether the wicked may receive Christ or no fitzsimon the 85. untruth 94. what a ful-mouthe word world wonder be the 85. untruth thrust out withal that the wicked receive not the body of Christ can ever honest or other countenance a true complaint better than putifar wife or the false harlot before Solomon or the wicked judge their false accusation blame i if m. Rider be not here and every where find accessory in like eloquence to wit in most deceitful vehemency justify a falsehood which be by himself and all other for such account for to be true acquaint with the truth herein whether the wicked receive the whole sacrament understand the doctrine of God church to be express in this controversy above a thousand year paste although m. rider immediate before say s. gregorius s. August l. con. fulg. donat. c. 6. l. 2 con lit. petil. c. 40. in psal 10. theodoret. 1. cor. c. 11. s. Chrysost. ho. 8. in math. in cap. 11. 1. cor. ser. 3. in c. 1. ephes. etc. s. Hieron in psal 54. that it be a invention of late writer by s. Gregory say and the true flesh of Christ and true blood be certain in sinner and unworthy receiver but in essence and not in healthful efficacy s. Augustine more ancient say judas the traitor receive the body of Christ and Simon Magus the good baptism but because they use not well the good by use it ill they perish the same doctrine he else where manifould inculcate Theodoret Bishope about the same time say jesus Christ do not only give his precious body and blood to eleven apostle but also to judas the traitor by s. Chrisostom be say the traitor be make partaker of divine present he also of this matter have write certain express homily plentiful contain judas to have receive the b. sacrament by s. Hierom sweet meat be the body of Christ which he judas receive unworthy what need I any witness to convict the 86. the 86. untruth untruth in this matter then m. rider against himself who so often be make to overthrow himself that he confirm the say of God holy word Micheae l. 7.6 math. 10.25 the enemy of a man be his own domesticalles he then repeat soon after s. augustin word that the wicked press with their tooth the sacrament of the body and blood of Christ thereby eate they to their judgement because they be unclean in hart what do we crave more then that the wicked eat the sacrament of Christ body and blood and consequent not of his figure only to their judgement what heap of doctor and father may I produce to aver this doctrine 1. cor. 11. if in this so clear a case s. Paul so manifest avouch those to be guilty of the body and blood of our lord and to eat their own judgement not who do not believe in Christ or who do abuse a figure of Christ but they who do eat and drink his body and blood unworthy not discern the body of Christ the few testimony here allege and m. rider own interpretation of s. augustin do not command i to forbear superfluity Origen produce by m. Rider Origen in psal 37. tell the 87 the 87. untruth Origen in Psal. 37. untruth to be that he deny the wicked to communicate the b. sacrament he say to the wicked do thou not fear to communicate the body of Christ approach to the eucharist as if thou be pure and clean and as if there be nothing in the unworthy etc. do thou think that in all this thou will avoid the indignation of God do thou not remember what be write that for this cause many be become sick and feeble yea and strike to death continual you behold that m. rider saying be true like dream rather by be true contrarious then as they be by he relate the 88 untruth s. Chrisostom also crave to have number the 88 untruth that he deny the wicked in that homily to communicate Christ true body he only exhort that they who shall receive will omit to be wicked and to that end heap most golden sentence to persuade they thereto be shame and fidelity vanish out of the world can such father by any honest hart be wrest to deny when they affirm to affirm when they deny Aurifaber a Protestant Aurifaber machi^ pag. 7. affirm that Luther on a time complain that of pretend reformation reveal virtue be slay justice oppress temperance tie truth tear by dog faith lame wickedness continual devotion flee heresy remain if Luther have know m. rider deal among the rest think you will he not applaud to himself that he be become a prophet s. augustin who he by ignorance make a pope claim to have the 89. the 89. untruth untruth mark because in say he that dissent from Christ eat he to his perdition for as the gloss contain the wicked receive the body bear of a virgin he be make by m. Rider absolute to affirm in cap. that the wicked do neither each his flesh nor drink his blood the 90. the 90. untruth untruth be that in the three chapter follow any such matter as he inform be either contain or mention I leave and report all arbitrement of such proceed not only to all other but even to my good reformer himself especial if he be not in his furious but in his merry mood wherein diverse time he acknowledge many truth whereof otherwise he have not be so liberal but I must confess by the way that he afford once a variety yet not in true learning but deceitful sophistry say that the wicked have not a lively and justify faith as neither we nor all our side can deny this caption or fallacy be call of sundry demand as be all one as if one will require 1. Elench. 4. note well be Peter a man and a woman if you answer affirmative the sophist thereupon infer that Peter be a woman and if you answer negative he infer that Peter be not a man so m. Rider know that we will not say that the wicked have a lively justify faith for how can they be justify if they be wicked and he be not ignorant but we will and shall say that wicked people may have faith or that they become not infidel or heretic by every act of wickedness and thereupon as if these two be all one he infer that we and all our side can not deny but that they be without faith and dead man and not able to eat spiritual meat etc. how they be able to eat such meat namely not to their benefit but to their perdition be often towld and contain in s. Gregory word before allege this sophistry of his be discover let i I pray you with your licence try whether by good divinity and protestant supposition I be not able to infer against he that the wicked may eat the sacrament the first of my protestant supposition be in epist. Eissingenses that to eat Christ be to believe in Christ say we by the word of God do profess to eat Christ to be alone and to believe in Christ calu. c. 6. v. 47. and l. 4. Instit. c. 17. n. 5. calu. catechism 51. Caluin say we confess that we eat Christ no other way then by believe again in believe that Christ be dead for our redemption and be rise for our justification our soul eat the body of Christ spiritual Robert Bruce say in his sermon by faith and a constant persuasion be the only way to eat the body and drink the blood of Christ inward Peter martyr say the same Bruce sermon pag. 74. p. mart. part 3. pag. 644. 647. and m. Rider and all the holy reform caluinian and Zuinglian church the second Protestant supposition be that faith once have can never be lose Bruce say in person of the rest faith once give by God pag. 279. calu. l. 3. Instit. c. 2. n. 9 10. 12. 12. 13. can not be revoke again whereof see manifold author allege in our examination of protestantry towards the creed the 5. number the three Protestant supposition be this that Christ be as much receive by hear the word preach as by communion nay more say peter martyr etc. I fear not to say martyr con. 2. reg. 5. pag 61. part 3. pag. 547. 644. 683. rather much more by word then by sacrament of which I have ample treat number 39 upon these three fundation or supposition I thus infer who soever believe the death and resurrection of Christ do eat Christ wicked people do believe the death and resurrection of Christ therefore wicked people do eat Christ the first proposition or point be out of the first supposition the second be out of s. Paul 1. cor. 13. that wicked man may have not only faith historical but all faith say he and thereby transfer mountain which be a degree beyond all Protestant faith and deliver their body to be burn 1. cor. 13.4 etc. yet that they be so far from be justify that they be nothing in 3. that their faith be in vain it profit he that have it nothing the former conclusion infallible follow the premise as be in true form of argument second who soever may hear a sermon upon the passion may eat Christ the wicked as adulterer thief murderer drunkard etc. may hear a sermon upon the passion therefore they may eat Christ the first proposition be the very word deliver in the three supposition in cad. and the second be know to all experience and understanding the three infaillible follow the premise three whosoever have faith which can not be lose as they say after it be receive believe do eat Christ the wicked man during the act of his wickedness as fornication etc. believe for he can not loose his faith as be suppose therefore the wicked during the act of his wickedness do eat Christ unless these be pregnant and forcible deduction never be there any in all learning hither to afford as have the matter from themselves and the form from logic let all human protestant now beware to follow such faith whereby the eat of Christ body in this b. sacrament be so disgrace as to be compare with every minister preach and to be worthy receive by every heinous offender so that he do but believe in Christ and that not only after his wickedness but during the very act itself rider 95. this you blush not to print but I protest my hand shake and my heart quake to write it because it be so monstrous and beastly a blasphemy to that bless body and that precious blood that suffer and be shed for my salvation fitzsimon 95. this tender heart gentleman such he be now late by god permission and good s. Patrick be shake and quake to deliver doctrine by we as he say print but indeed only by himself forge if he have hitherto be find to misreport scripture father doctor and all monument by he produce when he have quote their evidence who will credit he when he quote nothing which he fulfil perpetual as oft as any absurdity be impute to we he have say repeat and surrepeat that he will not omit in all matter to allege our author book chapter leaf page if not line the ommission of all which together in this place the 91. untruth amount at least to the 91. untruth I will not forsake this my word of great courtesy to follow the letter in say that for leaf and line we have nothing but load or lie to term this a untruth be more courteous and express sufficient the matter 96. now for this second part of your remish note upon this place which be rider how can a man be guilty of Christ body if he touch not Christ body chrisost Tom 3. hom. 60. and 61. I have rather Chrisostome upon this text in one of his work shall answer you then I his word be these for if he that have distain violate or pollute the king robe whether it be of purple or some other matter shall be as severe in justice punish as if he have rend they even so it shall be with such as receive the lord body with a unprepared and unclean mind they shall be punish with equal torment which such as nail he to the cross out of which I observe first that Chrysostome condemn your carnal presence and corporal eat in tell you they must be eat with the mind not with the mouth but of this we have sufficient speak of before second by comparrison he show you how you may be guilty of treason against the king person though he neither touch nor hurt his person in offer disgrace but to his garment his person be absent and as he that contumelious receive the prince seal though of ware be guilty of the majesty of the prince not which he receive but which he despise so he that eat this bread and drink this cup of the lord without due preparation as aforesaid consider they be seal of Christ promise benefit purchase in his bitter and bless passion commit high treason against Christ though in deed in substance they receive but breed and wine and as a man may be guilty of treason in rent deface or clip the king picture seal or coin though the king be not local in place so the wicked in the sacrament which be Christ seal which be abuse by they they be guilty of God judgement though Christ be not enclose local in the bread and wine and what Chrysostome speak here of the lord supper the same he do of baptism and say a man may be as well guilty of the lord body and blood in contemn baptism which be but a seal of his wash in the blood of Christ though he never wash but in water and allege Paul heb. 10 29 say of how much sore punishment suppose you shall be be worthy which tread under foot the son of God and count the blood of the testament as a unholy thing etc. these father have answer you and I hope will satisfy full the indifferent reader now three sort of man be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord the first be plain atheist that be without God or godliness in this present world and such eat this bread unworthy and therefore be guilty of Christ body and blood 2. the second sort have a historical faith and a general knowledge three sort of man guilty of the lord body and believe that whatsoever be teach in God book be true but they lack apprehension and application to make a particular and holy use of the same and therefore if such come and eat of this bread they be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord 3. the three sort have a lively apprehend and apply faith yet in their life they slip and fall yea sometime very grievous yet they awake and weep with Peter and repent for the same all these be say to eat unworthy but the first two sort unto their condemnation the three sort for their fault frailty negligence and undue preparation be in this life of the lord correct least with the world they shall be damn the two first sort eat only the outward element the last sort eat the body of Christ and drink the blood of Christ and now to your second proof out of saint Paul whether it be treason to break image fitzsimon 96. if as he in this place affirm a man may be guilty of treason in rent deface or clip the king picture seal or coin though the king be not localy in place then consequent and necessary they must be guilty of treason towards God who rend deface or clip his picture seal or coin the necessity of such sequel or inference be apparent consider that any abuse or contempt in the resemblance of a prince be not more injurious to a prince than the like in a representation of God be to God nether be there other cause why God do punish Oza 2. reg. 6. and 13. but profane resemblance of he contain in the ark and all other that sacrilegious misbehave themselves not only towards his figure yea shadow but also towards vessel and ornament belong to they now then tell plain m. rider will you stand to your word or recant they what say you never think say s. cyprian ep. 73. because you have once fail that you shall therefore blush to revoke what say you shall his discourse be starling or no i think I behold you frown and fret at i for seem to think that you will ever reclaim your conclusion therefore be that treason be commit by injury to the picture and person alike then woe and well away to all your brother image-breaker then woe and well away to waler the murderer under-minist of sword who hang on a gibbet the picture of Christ crucify 1603. then woe and well away to m. Rider who only to have stone to build a oven to bake bread to impoverish baker of the city not have idle or without price seventen hundred barrel of corn yearly as he have pull down the fair cross in s. Patrick which all other his predecessor of that profession have permit unviolated and to the same use to have fire pull down all the tree therein this sentence of his give against himself and brother make his own son maio 1604. when he attempt to pull down one image to be by God judgement precipitate from a height and altogether crush and at the same time his servant to be strike with the plague etc. this show that it be no great treason against a king to abuse and despise his picture then against Christ to profane and destroy his image what need this moth to intermeddle with the candle of learning whereby his wing be so often scorch what need he to imply that abuser of the communion according to his surmise be but a bare representation of Christ shall be punish with equal torment with such as nail he on the cross where then will the final rend of protestant be who have abuse other his representation image appellation as well express his death as the protestant sacrament I can not choose but say with the poet. o hateful race of mercenary mate search applaud o that I know you not not weigh how you harm your friend through hate so you the people itch ear befott but by the way what mean this often term of sacrament to be but seal and especial by they who by their profession be bind to believe that they neither seal the body nor soul that they neither bring faith nor confirm it that they be neither fruitful nor needful if otherwise we be mindful of Christ Ochinus pag. 102. Ochinus resolve by the spirit of God and not by sacrament faith to be confirm if seal be accept in stidd of sacrament because this word be not in scripture as your brother before determine tell we so plain and we will not enforce you to grawnt that your supper of the lord which your great doctor p. martyr say in respect of the time it be receive p. martyr in 1. cor. c. 11. pag 293. 294. and of your empty stomach shall with great reason be call a breakfast or dinner be a sacrament now as I tell you before such hate be conceive already among the reformer against this word sacrament as it be convenient you abstain from it for they say bruce sermon pag. 4. 126. westphal in apol. pag. 5. pag. 126. about the ambiguity of this word be rise many tragedy which will not cease while the world last that it be a name proceed from mere folly of man that Carolostad utter reject it and that you must be satisfy with the word of seal which say Bruce God and Christ have give to his apostle etc. only if this have be say before not covert but plain and sensible we have never inveigh against your figurative sacrament in loc. con. c. canan 2. pag. 327. but against your figurative seal and then according to have we be never the near for seal be not find so convenient to specify your doctrine as appear by he in these word the bread be the body of Christ neither natural nor personaly nor realy mark good m. rider nor corporaly nor yet spiritualy again mark I pray you for in the 62. number you be show to be a falconer and therefore may observe your game in your own phrase nor figurative good sir attend nor significative you will loose all your opinion if you take not heed it remain after all these that we say the bread be the body of Christ so that this word sacrament be nethet allow nor the word seal retain but sacrament say Westphalus then only observe when caluinist may shift and lurk under it as in this case term it a brazen wall be at all other time disclaim as note notwithstanding this foist in of the new-fangled word seal and enmity against the word sacrament as else where against the word Christ church Catholic tradition priest merit good work romain real Trinity consubstantial cross bless etc. yet you shall behold our reformer so catonica to censure this lightness as if it have not be his and his brother but our fault yet mistake i not that I seem to disallow the word seal in his natural signification know that it be find apply to circumcision gen. 17.10 rom. 4.11 but what I endeavour be only to tax this translation of word out of the owlde testament into the new without all authority and occasion to prepare a way to exclude all sacrament of the new testament by prove they of no great force than the ceremony of the old law with who they agree in appellation p. martyr 1 cor. 11. his division of three sort of faith be borrow out of Peter martyr nothing belong to any matter in question s. Chrysost. hom. 45. in joan. nothing true and contain nothing needful to be refute last all his former discourse out of s. Chrisostom of treason by the violence towards the picture as much as towards the prince in person although it overthrow every way image-breaker etc. yet how it overthrow the point in question be brief to be declare if say s. chrysostom the defyler of the king robe be no less than the tearer thereof punishable what marvel if unclean conscience receive the body of Christ be as damnable as the crucifier of he whereby observe how this make against protestancy that the unclean receive the very body of Christ that it be more treason against Christ to abuse this sacrament then against a king tear to a king robe it be no less than to crucify he 1. cor. 10.16 the chalice of benediction which we bless be it not the communication of the body of Christ and the bread which we bless be it not the participation of his flesh 97. gentleman you wrong the apostle text first in your abuse of word rider verse 21. second in mistake the sense your word be these the chalice of benediction Paul word in greek that must be judge betwixt we and which we do follow if we will follow Christ be these the cup of thanksgiving and the holy ghost so expound his own meaning after call it the cup of the Lord but you be much to be blame of all good man because you have rather follow some late corrupt translation and use some superstitious inkhorn term late devise and so forsake the old apostolical phrase which the holy ghost use in that holy tongue and in which it be still record for our instruction either confess your ignorance in the greek or your malice against the truth that the catholic be no long seduce by you that long trust in you and to your doctrine again you say the bread which we bless we say as Paul say and the holy ghost pen the bread which we break alas alas what sin do you commit in thus seduce Christ flock and the queen subject who hitherto have build their faith upon your bare word be this plain deal with God heritage be you catholic priest I pray you certify the catholic what tongue or translation have it thus as you pen it the bread which we bless I tell you plain yet in charity that you do belie the text falsify the tongue and seek to keep the people in blind ignorance and superstitious palpable darkness to their everlasting condemnation unless the lord recall they and they repent they Paul word be these in greek and so your own Hierom translation have they the bread which we break but you be so besot with the cross of your finger which you tell the people be the true Catholic blessing that you forget and forgo the true blessing of the cup which be the apostolical thanksgiving to God for our redemption purchase in Christ blood whereof the cup be the true sign again we say as the holy ghost indict it and Paul write it the communion of the body of Christ you say as no learned man of the greek text ever say error in the sense of the text Rhem. testament 1. cor. 10. sect. 4. the participation of his flesh thus much I have show how untrue you deal first in abuse the word of the apostle second in seduce and deceive the catholic let here the charitable catholic judge how you will abuse their ear with fable that dare thus falsify the plain text now come to show how you mistake the sense of the word in the text seek by indirect wrest to make the text prove your error which it deny in flat term and truth for I assure the catholic that nor one word fillable letter or title of this text once sound of your carnal presence you follow the rhemish who in this place thus expound the word of the apostle the cup which we bless that be to say the chalice of consecration which we apostle and priest by Christ commission do consecrate etc. and afterward it follow the apostle express refer the benediction to the chalice and not to God make the holy body and the communicate thereof the effect of the benediction now let i entreat you to answer i and the catholic but these necessary question draw out of this your own opinion 1. first by what scripture do you prove that you be apostle 2. second by what scripture do you prove that you be priest 3. three by what scripture do you prove your commission to consecrate chalice 4. four by what scripture do you prove that the holy blood of Christ be a effect of your benediction of the cup. 5. last by what scripture prove you that this blessing or thanksgiving be refer to the chalice and not to God apostle you be not gall 1. 1. cor. 9.1 2. Acts. 9.15 rom. 1.2 unless you prove these point by canonical scripture to be true which you shall never do they bind no man conscience to believe they or you against the first I thus object that you be no apostle and thus I prove it a true apostle must be call by Christ immediate and that you be not he must see the lord jesus in the flesh which you have not he must have his immediate commission from Christ to preach every where which neither priest semynarie jesuit cardinal not pope can have gall. 2. ephes. 8. as your own conscience full well do know and therefore you be not Christ apostle the true apostle be equal in authority you disdain it nay more you have make against this a new article of the pope supremacy and whole volume of cardinal primacy jesuit excellency and priest sovereignty Tertulian Martion but I will say to you as Tertullian say to Martion the heretic if you be prophet foretell we some thing to come if that you be apostle preach every where and agree with the apostle in doctrine for whosoever preach not the same doctrine the apostle do have not the same commission the apostle have but you late priest and jesuit preach not the same doctrine the apostle do jesuit and priest be no apostle priest you be not first because you will not offer the flesh of beast therefore you have not the same commission the apostle have the mayor have not difficulty the minor be so plain it need no proof the conclusion be inevitable we read of four kind of priest in God book three of they in the old testament and one in the new the first after the order of Aaron and one other after the order of Melchisedech and the three after the order of Baal after Aaron order you will not be and after melchisedech you can not be and concern the three order I will you be as free from the idolatry of that false order as you will be free of the imputation of their heresy the last part of the catholic proof by scripture for the real presence fitzsimon 97. a serpent that be crush in the head wrest and wry himself up and down infould his whole body into many vain circle and turn withal his struggle purchase nothing else but that other may conceive the extremity of his pain m. rider be whole suppress with this powerful testimony of scripture s. Chrysost. hom. 24. in 1. cor. that the chalice of benediction as s. chrysostom also call it be the communion of the blood of Christ and the bread a participation of his flesh with manyfowld wreathe tumble up and down to talk of all by-maters wish we to prove that we be apostle that we be priest that chalice may be consecrate that the holy blood of Christ be a effect of our benediction etc. but especial he be trouble that a word by we be miswrite bless for break exclaim at it as at the most wicked infidelity in the world this be he who say in the 51. number that he be sorry that he must tell we our fault and yet here so carp at a fault of no importance this be he who in tell it commit ten time a great error than it for first even in this point and all his print book where he shall have say the communication of the blood of Christ he deliver the communication not of the blood but of the body of Christ and next the very word bless which he be now to reprehend he deliver as if he be think upon some sister in the lord of that name Bess I say nothing else thereto but that your Fidd for so I think you be wont to name Fideworth your wife may enjoy your mind alone from all bess and business that your bond and can not brook and consequent contain your homeliness in homely matter without ingage they in school point wherein even by your phisnomy you be deny to have any interest such as be this confusion he sustain about the syllable it as appear in the 51. and 76. number by aggravate small and harmless trip of the pen and in that self same reprehension through God providence towards dissembler he not only trip but stumble and tumble into grevous inconueniency himself concern the perfection of the latin translation and the excellency thereof above any greek now extant to much be say for any satisfaction due to m. rider as also for the word bless and blessing of creature and consecration of chalice n. 90. in which matter s. cyprian speak clear say s. cyprian n. 101. the chalice consecrate by solemn benediction and other extravagant controversy both sufficient and abundant be already propound both for resolution concern they and for manifest that as weak and bedrid people never consist quiet but turn from side to side seek repose so m. rider divert from matter to matter to depestre and quiet his disease or craze cause and conscience never remain on the point incontroversie I will confute his say in the margin that only Christ be a priest according melchisedeche order if any one proof be bring to make it seem probable against his bare say let it now suffice that as long as either sacrifice or sacrament of bread and wine remain by virtue of Christ word do this in remembrance of i so long must other beside Christ be priest accord the order of Melchisedech rider second none after M^lchisedechs order but Christ only 98. now (a) (a) 1. Pet 29. exod. 19.6 saint Peter in the new testament set down a four order of priest which be a kingly or royal priesthood but that be spiritual not carnal inward not outward common to all believer not proper as you imagine to any natural order or ecclesiastical function for this be sound divinity which you shall never disprove that the office of sacrificet and sacrifice be either singular to Christ in respect of his sacrifice propitiatory only upon the cross or else common to all true christian in respect of their spiritual sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving neither shall you ever find this word Sacerdos ever apply in the new testament to any ecclesiastical order and function of man fitzsimon 98. take notice right honourable of the council of this soul puritantcie of equality or parisitie here utter against all former and late injunction of our sovereign prince and all parliament statute take notice also right honourable l. chancellor if there be any and the rest of that sort that m. Rider here assure his ecclesiastical authority to be equal to you take last notice all favourer and friend of protestancy that Luther Caluin Latimer etc. be here disavow and disclaim to be either your apostle or to have have lawful commission as neither see Christ in flesh nor have immediate commission from he here also be s. Paul deny to be a apostle act. 3.21 unless he do see Christ in flesh if he do see he here be condemn that doctrine of protestant that heaven must contain Christ so as he can be no where else till the day of judgement which doctrine Beza who the english bible especial of the year 1579. 1580. do most careful follow confess witting to have affirm contrary to the scripture in all greek and latin copy only to frustrate thereby if he can the real presence for if s. Paul do see Christ in heaven the near part of the low heaven be at least 1700. mile off it have be a great miracle and as great to behold he in flesh nether be such m. rider meaning but only they to be lawful apostle who have see he corporaly and be conversant in flesh with he in which sense s. Paul so often assure this to be the 92. the 92. untruth untruth as he aver himself to be a apostle as also all other do the same although in that sense of m. Rider he never see Christ in the flesh a necessary digression contain a declaration what puritant be what they teach and pretend 1. viret dial. 3. daemonum it be general in all late reformer in their first revolt for incure the people benevolence to discommend the tyranny they be keep under by their bishop inform they that such usurp authority be shake off as be repugnant to the liberty purchase by Christ in his gospel they showld be free both from all terror of eccleciastical cowrt and censure recave into their hand the church live confess by Zuickius to Caluin in caluins epistle epist 33. whereby they and all poor and needy people at their discretion may be relieve yea and enrich this plausible motion buzz from ear to ear the light people incline to sedition upon all motion of great liberty by Caluin himself epist. 66. 108. Beza in tract viret dial. 3. especial support by pretext of reformation and love towards the word consent by hart and hand to advance such zealous reformer by who direction they may so be exempt from superior these compagnions find the time and tide favourable spread their sail discourse and exaggerate among the people the pride the superfluity the tyranny the wickedness the ignorance and other corruption of prelate not spare any information true or false public or secret honest or dishonest to make they more odious 2. these instigation prevail first about spire in Germany Surius in an. 1502. where the multitude make a watchwoord among themselves contain they can not be bless by reason of the clergy but those want expert and resolute guide Thomas Munzer a quondam priest Surius in luth. tom. 7. in serm. fol. 270. an. 1553. and Luther disciple excite his auditor by word and example to second he and his fellow phifer a apostate monk who condescend to these persuader not unwilling they present enter into arm and destroy in one year two hundred abbey and castle in franconia alone and although by the prince arm against they above a hundred thousand of they be slay and Munzer take and execute yet this contagious fury upon the same persuasion of liberty to be purchase take such root in France Germany Denmark and Scotland that in France in civil war thereupon undertake hist. fran. l. 9 fol. 208. an. 1568. luth. l. Babil c. sacr. ord. l. 4. c. 20. Beza ep. 41. Zuingl l. 4. ep. f. 186. and li. 1. ar. 42. in the space of three year be confess by principal protestant not so few as a hundred thousand judge thereby of the residue in all other place overthrow the reformer animate they say it be a villainous thing unworthy and wicked that a christian man who be free shall be subject to other law then heavenly and divine etc. again prince be to be depose and the government to be mere aristocratical that the people be only ruler of themselves and to inflame the people to aspire to this dominion be disperse in heap seditious libel and pamphlet junius cont. tyrant toc-sayn Reveil council reg. in subd Hotto Francog etc. whereupon buchan l. 16. pag. 590. hist. scot. magistrate be reject emperor contemn king depose restrain and slay queen expulse country city place fall to rebellion and revolt deny other than Puritan tribute to wit stroke and canon shoot and that hurleburlie every where be excite as upside be down law be abolish slave be lord as in the eye and monument of France Scotland Denmark Flawndres etc. be abundant to all lamentation perspicuous wherein how spare I be to at full against reformer by who all such perturbation happen I leave to such indifferent understanding who be not ignorant of my acquaintance with autheur treat hereof and other circumstance yet not inform but what I do of they 3. among these commotion the people in diverse country and place recover the foresay liberty some retain it in their own hand other resign it willing or unwilling to their clergy suppose they will use themselves with all desyrable and religious moderation in place where the magistrate reserve it and minister adventure to incroache into the public administration against their will they be by the magistrate violent extrude out of their charge and city as Wigandus Illyricus index Faber etc. of be say by Beza Beza con Heshusium cur from city six exile wail Heshus the cause be know he be seditious and for the magistrate defence be allege a Gantois of t^ consistory in Hollande that they do suspect the pretend good form of ecclesiastical government first because they fear lest it will degenerate into a worse tyranny than the spanish inquisition second because they see a censure of manner without law and lawful form of justice @ in no place they be so much overtake in their wisdom as in Geneva by the politic reach of Caluin who be admit 1536. by only title of their preacher and teacher he most deceitful insinuate himself over their government and for be therein too insolent and imperious he be banish within nine month Caluin epist. 6. together with his chief consort farrel and viret with this allegation they will have be tyrant over a free city they will have revoke a new papacy this Caluin himself confess term the senate of two hundred by who he be so exile a tumultuous faction of damn companion yet according to the depth of his capacity he purchase such favourable commendatory letter of all reform place he write so against catholic religion he dissemble such temperate moderation that within little more than two year after he be revoke to his former chardg of teach in Geneva 4. his fiirst favour be to be license to frame betwixt himself and other minister a form of ecclesiastical discipline yet so as to remit it to the consideration of the senate to be allow or no. this form contain that twelve chief town man shall be conjoin with six minister those to be change yearly these to be during life their jurisdiction shall extend only to ecclesiastical cause this form they entitle a consistory discipline it be no soon view and light approve but the manner of it and proceed examine in the senate house great dislike be as soon conceive against it in so much as Caluin confess in labour to support it calu. epist. 54. calu. epist. 73. 82. 165. he be almost oppress also he complain of impediment say we have to many of a hard and untamed neck by all occasion aspire to shake of the yoke etc. but not withstand all possible employment in pulpit public and private conference suborn of suffrage yet the magistrate suspend the execution of this discipline until they have consult with other reform church wherein also Caluin beyond all comparison overmatch they for he prevent their information inveigle the state to who they appeal beautify in such good colour his foresay Consistorial discipline implore the solicitation of the minister there resident disgrace so all repugner epist. 164 165. and so to be brief frustrate all hindrance that what by work abroad what by sly compass at home he purchase foreign resolution and the senate approbation to his contentment all this narration be contain in his own epistle wherein be manifest that never can any attempt be more impugn and yet by slightness of his wit establish than this discipline this ecclesiastical authority disallow the name of bishop priest and canon law exchange they into teacher deacon elder consistorian discipline etc. 5. the cause of this repugnance against it be first by reason they perceive how all other besides Caluin serve only for a show second because under the colour of conscience by degree all law read hereof the order of excommunication in Scotland Ae 2. all authority all controversy be subject to this consistorian discipline three because all small matter be aggravate and punish more tyranica then deserve one instance I think good to out of Calvin own information in one widow baltasars house dance diverse of the best of the city among who be one of the four that year in chief office as also a minister perrin the captain of the town etc. Caluin not be invite to the sport himself summon they all Caluin Farello epist. 71. they for more sear flat deny the matter whereupon say Caluin and they impudent lie to we and to God behold by the way how he prefer himself to God he then adjure they to confess their fault but all in vain after he tender a corporal oath which they refuse the conclusion be Omni in all be commit to prison except the foresay captain who trust time will pacify this angry prince retire but say he agate whatsoever he do he shall not escape he be then return taste of the same sour cup the issue be say Caluin himself that the people perceive there be no escape when the principal be not spare I may here insert how by the same holy consistorial discipline Valentin gentil Budneus in annot. nou. test ^on Bezam and Michael great reform preacher and by Budneus call godly searcher of the truth for displease Caluin and Beza be put to death fowerthly what with itself what with the abuse follow not only civil magistrate but also reform preacher bullinger episcop 10. mar. 1574. otherwise calvin friend signify their great discontentment against the foresay discipline bullinger write thus thereof they imitate in my opinion those seditious tribune of Rome who by virtue of the agrarian law bestow the public good that they may enrich themselves that be that bishop be overthrow they may enjoy their place etc. Gualther Episc. London jeem in epist. episcop ^lien 26. augusts 1574. in ep. episcop tand barlow in his book of the sum of the conference before the king majesty edit. an. 1605. pag 37. Gualther say I great fear lest they bring we first into the government of the multitude which will short be convert in to the rule of a few and last end in a new papacy again I behold nothing to be more ambitious nothing more insolent nothing more untoward than these man etc. again many do repent that ever they admit these man council 6. omit the scan of a apt definition of a Puritan give by one butler in Cambridge that he be a Protestant fray out of his wit I say upon the premise that the puritan now call in our country be such as repine at all other ordonnance and injunction of high parliament and of their sovereign prince endeavour by hook and crook to bring in this form of presbytery and of Geneva Consistorian discipline into England with exclusion of all other authority temporal and spiritual as I be brief to manifest by their own express protestation but first I certify the begynners not so peremptory to have impugn such authority as the successor for the first malcontented reformer with the state seem conduct thereto only by emulation as hooper and Rogers who aspire to be equal with Cranmer and Ridley dislike the communion book publish by they fox act and monument pag. 1355. and set forth another of themselves whereof fox be to be peruse these be Puritan of the mean sort stand only upon tippett cap rotchet and the oath of supremacy the next I find to have succeed be one Samson not he against who cardinal Pole write Saunder l. 7. visib monarch in 1563. pag. 711. but another who refuse a thousand pound yearly rather than he will be conformable to the injunction of late parliament the main pillar of english puritan be and be Cartwright charke reynolds Travers Egerton Gardiner barber field Gellibrand Gilbie spark Knewstubs and Chaderton etc. which three last together with Reinolds be the agent and ambassador for the millenary malcontented faction who become petitioner to his majesty but of these foresay diverse recant for their living sake that now God be praise few or none profess themselves of that conjuration because they sail against the wound some other I can enumerate out of our dublinian but because the title be become so infamous I will not recount what promotheans we have in Dublin whereas therefore I promise by their own express protestation to convict they to malign all other authority beside their own I be now to justify my say promise if first I only acquaint their first manner to come into the good like of the people in their gate they affect a gravity their eye downward unless by way of compassion as at some abuse they lift up the whyt of their eye their apparel neat and of precise quantity and quality their ruff small their countenance sad their word choice and of exquisite and rare novelty you shall hear of nothing but sanctify deify angelical super-celestial thought word and deed many sigh and groan burst from they their reprehension intermeddle with many sugar apostrophe their exclamation chief against plurality of benefice marriage of the clergy their ignorance superfluity etc. all their conference to commend frugality parilitie modesty and sobriety yet if Barrowes and greenwood Barrowes discovery greenwood against Giffor their own brother be true they be pernicious deceaver in all this description of they by their own brother I will keep my hand clean gloss hypocrite with God fast pharisaical preacher cownterfeit prophet pestilent seducer swear wage and mark disciple of Antichrist deluder suborner transformer of good conscience of who Christ be to be understand say you be they who justify yourselves before man luc. 16. but God know your heart they be perfidious and apostate reformist precise dissembler giddy and presumptuous intermedler in all matter public and private stoical and cynical watchman over all action etc. 7. to come now to my promise to show their aspire over all authority and that by their own confession although I may bring a royal and real demonstration thereof out of the sum of conference before mention pag. 80. 81. 82. yet I think more dutiful of the party then to grace Puritan who become insolent at the memory of their rebellious violence by have have power to depose and dispose of such Potentate with the least breath of his mouth first this complaint be confess by viret one of the very founder as appear in several epistle of Caluin of the consistorian discipline viret dial. 3. the minister say he that have renownce the church of Rome in seek to get the magistrate and people favour I crave good attendance to these word aver my first declaration in this treatise against the pope priest and monk disgrace so the state of priesthood and clergy and contrariwise exalt so the state of the magistrate that now they find the smart thereof they overthrow a spiritual pope and erect a temporal pope but I pray you give ear to a strange confession who so use say he such mean to reform the salt of the pope do not reform but deform the church Cartwright the proto-puritan in estimation of England presume and tremble not to say as pastor can not be officer of the common wealth no more can the magistrate be call proper a church officer else where he say the prince submitt his sceptre unto the sceptre of Christ Cartwright 10 cap. art. 23. lib. 2. pag. 420. l. 1. pag. 180. and lycke the dust of the church foot which be more than ever be do to pope this be round puritancy one way by show a insolent pride and strange puritancy another way by speak most mild when they intend most ambitious Travers in discourse of Ecclesiast. discipline pag. 148. 174. Knox in his to England pag. 91. Archibold Hamilton in l. Caluinistica Rennecherius in psal. 2. pag. 72. Travers his scholar subscribe say heathen prince be convert to the faith receive no further increase of their power whereby they may deal in cause ecclesiastical than they have before Knox of Scotland be most resolute in this deposition of prince say that all prince ought to submit themselves under the yoke of discipline that what prince king or emperor shall disannul the same he be to be repute God enemy and to be hold unworthy to reign above his people yet listen to more round and plain deal in this point rennecher say the political empire be but a subaltern regiment and a low and bench to the consistorial discipline by say it be but a subaltern government they intend Erast in farrag p. 36. that king and prince shall only be honourable executioner as Erastus acknowledge of their appointment against all prince and their statute conclude Martin marprelat Martin sen. b. 4. c. 1. that such law as maintain bishop be no more estimable than they which maintain stew etc. 8. their endeavour to come to this supreme authority be sometime by incense the people against the magistrate statute sometime by hyperbolical commendation of their discipline as it and no other be to be think the express prescript of Christ and true religion all other discipline disprove sometime by seditious pamphlet tend to make the state establish and law odious and ridiculous as both tyrannical and replenish two Puritan preacher in Stamford with all superstitious defectivenes the lord superintendent of Lincoln as all other commander oppose himself against the public puritanical fast as appear by a letter date to the alderman of Stamford 5. of September in the same year sudden up start two Puritan preacher the first say open that without the warrant of flesh and blood understand thereby the magistrate and of act of parliament they may proceed in their purpose the second that he be of no spirit who will respect any edict of queen counsel or bishop and that their proceed be not hinder but by profane and carnal wretch concern their commend this discipline to the people understand these speech folloving Gilbie p. 211. the wicked take part with our adversary but the godly join with we this ecclesiastical discipline be the overseer and of the civil government p. 74. that the magistrate do not command his subject any thing either contrary to the scripture or against nature and good manner it will make man to increase in wealth ^ions to the par^^ent pag. 75. 74. 8. 79. it will cut off contention and suit in law the people shall find out the truth and perfection of justice it will bring strength and victory be not these powerful provocation to sedition be not these dangerous deal be not these compagnions to be observe I will be more prolix in this point if the chronicle of Scotland the two supplication to the parliament cartwrights humble petition to her majesty his exhortation to the governor and people of Wales the late supplication of a thousand subscribe Puritan minister to his sacred majesty now regnant the censure of Oxford thereupon their proceed before his say majesty deliver out by barlow their Martin marprelat Mar-Martin the work for the Cooper the cowntercuffe to Martin junior the howl almanach the pap with hatchet or country cuff the epistle to huff ruff and Snuffe hay-any work Miles Monop and now their late survey of the book of common prayer print 1606. without mention of the place etc. be not extant to certify the world of their rebellious intention and treacherous practice whereby already they restrain and endanger even our foresay sovereign king james and for their so do publish a justificacation it be print an. 1582. under the title of a declaration of the just etc. profess the cause to have be only because say they the discipline of the wa^ open impugn when as the king by the persuasion of the enemy of the kirk be induce to make himself and his privy cowncil judge in the cognition of matter mere ecclesiastical etc. out of which their hate against he in their foresay survey they appeach he of perjury to make he odious forsooth because he disallow their discipline which by oath there express he vow to maintain and what they do against our foresay sacred king the same they do against other king and prince whereof one of they boast write to such effect as follow a prince of blood royal overthrow as David be by Sathan into sin Travers in his defence of ecclesiastical discipline pag. 127. endure to be rebuke by the servant of God and lament his offence open before the public assembly etc. who example both a crown king and his son have follow etc. how true say the sacred scripture there be nothing more insupportable than the insolency of a slave get up in the neck of his master alas how far otherwise be prince respect by catholic who be by these man because it behove to sclawnder with their own connatural propriety their adversary to prevent and anticipat a due and ever deserve accusation term enemy to princely authority I refer the reader desirous to know our loyalty and resolution towards our prince to these our assertion first Stapleton subject cap. 20 Contr. 2. l. 5. pag. 196. h^^ding against the apology pag. 303. 306. 307. in his rejoinder fol. 379. Saunder Monarc lib. 7. in an. 1447. and king ought to intermeddle also with those thing which belong to religion and that in a more excellent degree than other christian may to wit by make law for truth and punish enemy of truth second good king may bridle the riot and arrogancy of bishop three Caesari render to Caesar what be Caesar to wit rent tribute subjection let every one remain under another be subject to secular prince be constitute by God through ready and humble obedience this be our doctrine as also that it be a bond of conscience which protestant deny say it to be only a civil obligation to subject themselves to their king and prince joan. 7. and 10. and 20 luc. 23. Christ be slander but wrongful to be a seducer to be a enemy to Caesar to hinder the pay of his tribute to aspire to be a king s. Paul be also accuse act. 14 17.21.24.25 Tertull. in apol. justin in apol. 2. antonin euseb l. 5. c. 1. and 4. hist trip l. 6. c. 27. Paul Diac. l. 16. s. greg. Nazian in as a stirrer to sedition but wrongful in the persecution of Nero Dioclesian Antonius etc. christian be wrongful accuse yea and punish as burner of Rome sacrificer of child eater of man flesh etc. s. athanase be wrongful abuse for a fornicator witch and traitor s. Siluerius for induce the goth to invade the roman empire to be brief it be julian the apostate principal endeavour to have the people persuade the suffering of christian to have ever be for criminal enormity and treachery and not for religion so we may be accuse and censure in like manner but wrongful far otherwise do my sovereign king james towards myself when it please he to exchange my five year imprisonment into a banishement to any other choice dominion than his own by afford not withstand this public testimony of my innocence direct to the l. deputy and counsel of Irland after our very hearty commendation to your lordship and the rest whereas one Henry fitzsimon a jesuit have these five year past remain prisoner in the castle of Dublin his majesty favourable testimony of my innocence notwithstanding my banishment on who behalf humble suit have be make to the king majesty for his enlargement out of prison and his majesty have be inform that he have make so good demonstration of his loyalty and dutiful affection to his majesty and the state as deserve that he shall be use with as great favour as a man of his sort and quality may be capable of you shall therefore understand that it be the king majesty pleasure that you shall release the say Henry fitzsimon out of prison take sufficient bond of he with good surety for his avoid out of the realm within some convenient time to be by your lord limit unto he for his departure and that he shall not at time hereafter return into any of his majesty dominion without licence first obtain by he in that behalf and so we bid your lordship and the rest very hearty farewell from the Cowrt at Whythall the 12. of March 1603. your lordship very love friend l. chancellor l. treasurer l. chamberlain e. Shrewsburie e. Devonshyre e. of mat. l. Cecyll l. Knollis l. of kinless for conclusion other of we if not I how dutiful loyal and subject soever may be banish and yet taint with remote and repine mind towards secular authority as our innocent predecessor have be in manner aforesaid but in our behalf most true and pertinent be tertullians word Tertullian Schup cap. 2. in apol. cap. 31. circa Albiniani Nigriani Cassiniani inven^^^ Christiani we be infame concern the emperor majesty but we christian can never be find albininians nigrian cassinians who be heretic of those time subject to the incident propriety of their Puritan brother as if he have say for these time we can never be find lutheran caluinian zwinglians but especial puritan who peculiar spirit it be ovid. in Hermione which sea and land and proper kingdom truble the printer to the reader after this verse of Ovid let the gentle reader turn to the reply to m. rider rescript page 65. paragraphe 3 begin at these word but if I will abrupt etc. and continue to page 71. and end at paragraphe 2. at these word etc. which omission and error happen partly by receive the copy in sundry piece partly also by misunderstandinge the author direction and so take the same verse of Ovid in the aforesaid 65. page of the rescript paragraphe 1. for this in the confutation page 230. paragraphe 2. 10. to know whether I have impertinent digress or wander all this while from the matter betwixt m. Rider and i as you behold he to deny inequality betwixt apostle preesthood in the new testament all preestly function but what belong equal to all christian man and woman his hate of the name of JESUS also of cross and blessing which protestant as appear in the censure of Oxford and Cambridge against puritan pag. 11. confess to be most ancient justifiable and convenient ceremony his affirm a minister sermon to be necessary in time of communion number 81. and all other point of puritancy in all point of his writing so you be to understand this last speech against priest to be the substance of puritancy which before I in particular I will conclude this discourse with a pleasant information on s. Mathies eave 1602. according to the english computation I take the air in prison on the northester to be m. rider repair to visit m. Browne I request he to ascend after a few word he i to inform he in a matter make doubtful to he by a great state man whether I be a jesuit or a priest or both I answer that I be unworthy both he reply will you prefer yourself before a single secular priest I answer I never have yet controversy about preeminency with any he now be at a demur I crave like favour in resolve a not unlike doubt of i whether himself be a bare minister a dean or both he affirm he be a minister only and no dean as be a papistical titel I reply than you be a Puritan in as much as you refuse the name of Deane but as you hold the deanery you be a Protestant at that time he hearty smile at the conceit of that discourse and so depart not long after his majesty come to the crown of England and like a burn child fear the fervent ambition of puritan object himself against they the name of puritan sudden become odious thereupon many well-benificed puritan will at that time exclaim against their consort as seditious schismatic I inform some of the crew of m. rider former conference who acquaint he therewithal who in great impatience according to his ordinary manner and give i the lie call i ttaytour etc. challenge i thereof deny that ever he dislyke the name of Deane or ever be favourer of any point of puritantcie for justify myself I will now deliver his own word contain as evident concourse with they as his wit be able to specify and consequent I will desire the great credit to my former relation what other fault soever I have all my acquaintance will justify i that I ever from a child abhor theft swear and lie rider the name and office of priest abuse by priest 99 and therefore you deceive the people by this name of priest which be no more proper to you then to every believe Christian but it be likely you will give i occasion to speak of this in the controversy of your mass and therefore I will here be the brief in this place whether m. Rider be a Puritan of this point much appear number 122. 99 it be ordain and observe among the consistorian that no name be use which agree with paganism or papistry by this foundation they eschew the name of archbishop bishop dean priest etc. hereby say Cartwright Cartwright lib. 1. p. 112. in his reply pag. 159. Waitg defence pag. 772. Caluin will have shake at the name of a archbishop and have tremble at the name of a Bishope he also for the name of a priest say that translator shall be most careful that the people shall not once hear the name of a priest who then which all this while you have not understand must be our church officer according to pure consistorian discipline Cartwright in his thesis set out under the name of Martin and his child certify say these mart. 12. the church be now to the world end to have no other office in it but of pastor doctor elder and deacon here again be priest exclude and in all late translation of the bible for the name of priest you shall find but the name of elder except they will mention priest of jew or gentle and then you may be sure as also if there be any reprehension annect thereto never to fail of the name of priest 1. tim. 4. only I find in the bible of the year 1562. the word of s. Paul to Timothy neglect not the grace give thou with the imposition of hand by the authority of priesthood their pen to have dribled out the word of preesthood bible an. 1562. I know not by what chance I will not deny they their right commendation when they deserve any but what have m. rider to do with all this puritantrie forsooth he will needs be as deep as the best first by say the apostle be equal mean thereby the same shall be among the clergy and consequent no archbishop bishop etc. to be allow second by say there be no priest in the new testament have any ecclesiastical function of which godwilling I will treat in the answer to his rescript three by say any priesthood in the new testament be common to all believer whereby also woman be make priest as much as man nether be this allowance to woman only from m. Rider for Luther express permit luth. tun 2. lib. eccl. fol. 362. 369 372 3^3 p. mart. 1. cor. c. 11. v. 5. Zuingl to 1. in artic. 17. fol. 27. harbour 1559 H 2. Beza annot in 12 Rom. and cont. Cartwr l. 1. pag. 190. fenner defence pag. 135. and justify that they may preach baptize and consecrate and among many other thing he dispute against s Paul who commend silence in woman in the church in these word otherwise how shall Paul alone withstand the holy ghost who say joel 2. your daughter shall prophesy and act 21. philip. have four daughter that prophesy the same doctrine be plentiful in Peter martyr and in horn call bishop of winchester harbour etc. but think you among the rest so teach that our holy puritan jack will want their holy puritan ^ills in their consistorian discipline no I warrant you they must have their vessel of case when the spirit move they yea they must have or widow to be account among church commander and officer as Beza Cartwright and other first determine for upon better deliberation they be now account not commander but church servant such as junius say junius Eccle. l. 2. c. 4. be more fit than man to be about sick person and to help they I must now convict all these he and she priest of m. Rider in show out of their own flat and pregnant evidence that in the new testament there be a order of preesthood to which be conjoin a spiritual function not allowable equaly to all christian fulke therefore shall be my first witness say we refuse not the name of priest as it come of presbyter etc. it be odious to some that know not the true etymology thereof Confut. of the Rhem. pag. 46. defence of the english pag. 163. 185. Colloq. worm and ratish artic. protest eccl. Bucer reg. pag. 67. Haerbrand loc. com. pag. 699. calu. l. 4. Instit. c. 4. n. 2. 4. Osiand loc. come cap. 10. Hemingius inst eccl. Hunius in come ep. tit. gerlach in hyperas dan. p. 30. jud. num. 16. this testimony from such a doctor give a great tract to m. rider credit a far great discredit be in the Oxford answer to the puritan petition pag. 12. the term of priest to be justify and that by the note of Geneva upon isa 66.21 for the name of a Bishope and his pre-eminence above ordinary minister thus speak the whole assembly of protestant a Bishope shall be choose out of many priest who shall rule the church Bucer say the name of Bishope be peculiar attribute unto those chief ruler of church Haerbrand say it be a most profitable order for the welfare of the church if every particular province have bishop and bishop their archbishop Caluin himself say bishop to have be choose etc. that by equality as it often chance dissension shall arise and that to belong to the conservation of discipline omit Osiander henning Hemberg Hunius and especial Gerlachius who call they hypochrit and anabaptist have a vain persuasion of knowledge and foolish arrogancy and reprehender of s. Paul who malign the name and different degree in ecclesiastical function and many other principal protestant I conclude with melancthon of who Caluin have such opinion as he say of his own belief in any point note thereby how firm and well found it be Simo Philippus calu. defen. 2. con Westph i su^ if Philip declare in any word that I be not of his mind apol. confess August pap. pag. 305. I will straight recant I will to God say Philip melancthon I will to God it lie in i to restore the government of bishop for I see what a manner of church we shall have such ecclesiastical policy be dissolve I perceive that hereafter will be a far more intolerable tyranny than ever be before a woeful remorse melancthon that by thou and thy partner mean it lay no long in thy power to restore it such be caluins remorse when in a like cause he say Calu epist. Farel 6. God do let we no^ see etc. what hurt we have do that by headlong inconsideration and rash vehemency we have so cast of the pope o that the fear of God and not other impulsion have wrest these wretched bond slave of Satan to confess the truth and amend the abuse as much as in they remain that they have not be if god judgement will so permit eterna condemn by these evidence among which the censure of Oxford by the vicechancellor the doctor proctor and head of house confirm by the suffrage of Cambridge betwixt which two university be there say pag. 31. more learned man to be find then among all the minister of religion in France Flanders Germany Poleland Denmark Geneva Scotland this censure I say aught most to mate and dismay m. rider mind for be contrary to all the sort may be conceive how false and condemn be m. rider and other puritan doctrine against priest and bishop vocation and function as they say not distinguish from every ordinary believe man or woman as also whether it be probable that he utter such puritanical word as I have impute to he for if he be now find concur with their doctrine he be the lyker to have then before it be count odious consent with their speech but I mean for perclose or conclusion to propownd he a interrogation if as Cartwright say imposition of hand be a ordnance of God Cartw. l 3 pag. 232. Demonstr. c. 7. and 9 traver discipl eccl. f. 52. jun. loc. cit. which c^^ not be take away and as your demonstrator and Travers teach no imposition no minister how can you maintain all believer who never have such imposition to be equal with they in function who have it will you say with junius that imposition of hand be but a shake the elect into the assembly by his right hand or will you say with the church of Scotland that albeit the apostle do use imposition of hand 122. history of the church of Scotland pag. 557. yet see the miracle fail you judge the ceremony not necessary if you depart from Cartwright and Travers from god acknowledge ordnance from the apostle custom than I bid all english puritan to discard you as a english Puritan into Scotland but why do I so advise as if by dispensation you can not be license to be of all fashion and to say with english now and by and by with scot and backward and forward I pray you all not to be ignorant that they can dispense one with another to dissemble as to take degree with all ceremony most odious to their doctrine so as they can remain in their office yea and wear cap tippett etc. and yet be never the more reform to protestancy I will give two infallible instance thereof one of Thomas Cartwright the other of Beza two pillar of puritancy I have d. Cartwright lib. 2. in the epistle say Cartwright the advice of more than a dozen learned minister all be puritan who consider if I have the office of a doctor in the university be of opinion for the good may be do thereby I may swallow the fond and idle ceremony which accompany it to which I yield snape in his letter to barbon to which agree snape after his examination before the commissioner an. 1590. say I hear some whisper already yet among they who favour the cause that t. Cartwright have counsel the brother rather to use those corruption then to leave their charge Beza fevardent con Brovault entremangery cap. 14. pag. 327. Colloq. montpel p. 150. 268. 388. when he induce the duke of to invade France to provoke he the rather he public make profession of the Lutheran belief whereof the foresay duke be a member and favourer and in depart without effect his pretence he say that he have singular deceive Tronkens bolt the drunken noble of Almain of which dissimulation be challenge by they of Zurick he answer they that it be lawful so to cog lie dissemble and deceive to establish their religion so that the protestant as I say have no cause to applaud to themselves when any puritan become conformable to their injunction for by these precedent they be allow to counterfeit delude cheat and dissemble as they listen and therefore not to stand in danger by be of any fashion or cut of puritantrie english scotish or whole Anabaptistical to shift their room or rank so that only they temporize and applaud in countenance to the predominant humour then in prime and preeminence yet you shall never find any more bitter inveyghe then these dispenser against the pope dispensation which neither can be nor ever be grant to do any thing unlawful whereby we always account all our dissemble hypocritical catholic as remote from God and godliness how soever we be belie to dispense with they when they conform themselves to protestant for their temporal commodity as ever be any heretic or infidel to conclude their former hatred against the name of priest have make they deny even that Christ himself be ever a priest in this world socinus in lib. con. Volan pag. 81. Christ plain be not install a priest till after his death yea after his ascension whereby that ever he offer sacrifice for we that ever he be our redeemer that the scripture manifold aver his priesthood be true be blasphemous deny rider 100 three in what place of scripture do Christ give you commission to consecrate chalice or to make any chalice more holy by your charm consecration than Christ cup be in his bless institution which have none of your consecration for this the catholic must know by the premise former handle that your consecration be not like to Christ consecration for either Christ blessing or thanksgiving with the whole action of Christ in the institution be sufficient to consecrate or insufficient if you will afford Christ that favour that it be sufficient then you be frivolous and whereas we use the same sanctification Christ do how dare you say we i^ defective without blasphemy to Christ institution but this your usurp title of sanctity which you attribute to yourselves in make the people believe that you can make one cup water salt or season more holy than a other by your finger blessing be untrue and a Pharisaical brag this maintain your priesthood in glory pomp and worldly estimation but have bring many of silly catholic to beggary ignorance and gross superstition four by what scripture can you prove that Christ holy blood be but a effect of your consecration or benediction of the cup if Christ blood be a effect of your cup benediction than your cup benedicton be the cause of Christ holy blood o helli^^ and damnable divinity as if a sinful ignorant priest can by his magical consecration make the holy blood of Christ my saviour which be shed on the cross for my sin now catholic look to yourselves I mean to your soul for this be the doctrine of Rome and Rheims fit to be teach in hell by fiend then maintain in earth by priest you can not prove it either by scripture or father five and last by what scripture do you prove nay by what ancient father that this blessing or thanksgiving be refer to the cup or chalice and not unto God scripture you have none and father of the first six hundred year never hear of it and that the catholic may see the antiquity and verity of this our doctrine and the novelty and heresy of you I will only produce but two learned father with we against you and forbear to allege the re^^ till you give i further occasion fitzsimon 100 we be no protestant to use charm or other such sathanical unlawfulness if we have be first inform in our belief by the devil as all chief protestant be declare to have be numb 4. exam. if we buy and sell devil as Conrade Riss otherwise as appear by Schlusselburg lib. 2. theol Caluin a. 7. Conrade lib. German joem Hessum b. 2. where as be discover this counterfeit Conrade so be show a huge rabblement of reformer use under false name to publish venomous pamphlet tell how Luther buy a familiar devil of Carolostad for a Florin arch. Hamilton cal. lib. 2. c. 48. pag. 308. if we have be as the scotishe minister be by Hamelton say to be whole addict to nigrommancie a old propriety of heretic say Tertullian in the 53. numb then these charm phrase may have some hold against we whereas now they be reflect to the inevitable disgrace of your cause further answer for our consecratcd chalice be to be inquire in the 90. number and other matter I find not in all this discourse require either resolution or regard in deed I find he say he use the same sanctification use by Christ that we usurp sanctity to ourselves and our consecrate cup that we be maintain in glory and thereby many catholic beggar that Christ blood be a effect of our consecration that our divinity be hellish and damnable and fit to be teach in hell that we can not prove the benediction to belong to the cup that the first father never hear of such our doctrine to all which I can say no less the 93. untruth then that all these being most untrue may by liberal allowance stand up for the 93. untruth very never do I read before to my knowledge so many disjoint matter shuffle together without method or measure but some one of they at least will have relation to the subject in discourse now let all man woman judge what have all these relate point to do with our controversy of wine to be the communication of the blood of Christ and bread to be the participation of his flesh or how do all these tergiversation avoid impugn or reprove that which be in controversy 101. Chrisostome upon this place call it the cup of blessing rider because when we have it in our hand with admiration and a certain horror of that unspeakable gift chry. 1. cor. 10. we praise and bless he because he have shed his blood that we shall not remain in error and have not only shed it but make we all partaker of it in like sort do photius and Occumenius expound this word which we bless photius and oecumenius which have in our hand bless he which have gracious give we his blood that be we give he thanks or which we prepare when we bless or give thanks now the catholic may see by the ancient father who yourselves do brag of that they condemn your cup bless exposition and the catholic may see a^ in a glass that we join with the scripture and father in the true sense of these word the cup which we bless and that your exposition be erroneous and superstitious and therefore to be recant by you and shun by the catholic and my reason be draw out of the foresay father not make on my own finger fitzsimon 101. s. chrysostom advertise to all the world that you here deliver the 94. ^he 94. untruth s. Chrysost. in c. 5. math. hom. 11. untruth both because he have no such matter as you infer as also because else where he have express the contrary say note well m. rider for every clause of this speech will wound your profession vessel as Balthasar teach we who drink in sanctify chalice be depose from kingdom and life if then to transfer these sanctify vessel to private use be so dangerous in which not the true body of Christ but the mystery of his body be contain how much more the vessel of the body of Christ etc. here you have sanctification of vessel such not to be profane Christ to be otherwise with we then with the israelit and our vessel to have his true body how like you all these towards your imagination photius you produce against yourself by his say that Christ gracious give we his blood why then he give not only a figure of his blood oecumenius have no such matter as never expound any word beyond the 9 chapter of s. Paul epistle to the corinthian either of the second or the first and so be discover the 95. the 95. untruth untruth where be the promise citation of book and chapter leaf and line whether you or I will or Noah our deal will be judge when we deal unsincer and impious for other exclamation of such citation and discourse I can not think they convenient when your deal be so notorious only I will entreat the glorious s. augustin s. aug. l. 2. ciu. c. 1. ^ 5. c. 27. to give you your answer and let you be go say s. augustin will refel as oft as they with a impudent forehead neglect what they affirm so that any way they contradict our disputation how infinite toilsome and how fruitless it be you behold it be easy for every one to see to answer what he cold not conceal and what be more talkeative than vanity yet therefore it can not compare with truth because if it will not be silent it can exclaim more than truth 102. first he say that benediction blessing or thanksgiving rider be refer to he that shed his blood for we I hope you will not say the cup shed any blood for we 2. second this father say that blessing God and praise God be all one and therefore when we say the cup of thanksgiving we follow Christ Paul the greek text and the old father and when you translate it the chalice of benediction it be flat to Christ Paul verity and antiquity and there be as great difference betwixt your opinion and the old father faith as betwixt praise with mouth and cross with finger nay as much as betwixt your superstitious chalice and our soulesave Christ for so if you mark the father word the difference stand the text itself offer we three thing in a comfortable distinction and you will confound they with your new imagine transubstantiation 1. the first be Christ body crucify and his blood shed with all his purchase benefit 2. second our communion and fellow ship which all believer have in that crucify Christ and those soulesave merit 3. three the outward seal of those benefit which be call the cup which we bless and the bread which we break to witness to the world and to confirm to ourselves the fruition and possession of all those benefit now if I shall say that the bread and cup be outward seal be our communion with Christ the wicked will laugh at my folly though the godly will pity my ignorance in the truth or my malice against the truth and the reason be this because the seal be thing outward and the communion of Christ body and blood be thing inward the one sensible the other spiritual and intellectual and as much difference be betwixt they as there be betwixt outward and inward sensible and intellectual so much difference there be betwixt the outward seal of Christ body and blood and his body and blood and if the seal can be change into the communion of Christ body and blood but remain still in their several nature and substance every one perform his several distnct office much less can they be real and substantial change into Christ body and blood which be thing more remote but most impossible and if you have add the next verse the apostle have make it plain in show you a double communion seal in this sacrament the first our communion with Christ and his benefit the second our communion among ourselves 1. soli. 2. omni. 3. s^per which both be proper only to god church and to every one of god church and always to god church now let the learned judge whether you or we misconstrue scripture wrest father deceive Christ flock and the queen subject and pervert the true meaning of this Text. and now to the next 102. be not this a worthy proctor for protestancy fitzsimon he bring a allegation of three father and thereupon he infer say first he say which he of the three can you conceive by these word his meaning be of s. chrysostom but he have no such matter but clean contrary as appear in his affirm in the precedent number that vessel be sanctify and separate from profane or common use which sanctification be that we call blessing second he tell the text among other comfort offer we Christ body crucify and Christ blood shed which he will never be able to expound but by say as we say that it be give we by the break of bread and the benediction of the chalice or wine contain in the chalice of his talk of seal he have neither write nor scale for it towards this or any other sacrament of Christ in all the new testament for the communion betwixt he and his brother I have speak in the examination of the creed to say that chrysostom affirm benediction in this place to be refer to he that shed his blood for we that this text offer Christ body and blood with all his purchase merit that the bread and cup uz. it in the cup be not our communication with Christ etc. these I say be beyond untruethe and in proper name riderian discourse s. Cyril say the mystical benediction make Christ corporaly to dwell in we by communication of his flesh li. 10. in joan. c. 13. such communication m. rider not only understand not but also deny may not then the wicked laugh at his folly and the godlypitie his ignorance the second proof by council and father catholic priest this council consist of 318. father Nicen cap 14. 363. no rule or custom do permit th^ they which have not the authority to offer the sacrifice shall give it to then that offer the body of Christ rider 103. gentleman you be possess with a threefold error which be the cause whe^ you read the scripture counsel and father you misunderstand they your first error be when you understand that speak of the outward element which a mean of the inward invisible grace your second error be when you refer that to the visible part of the body which they intend to the invisible power of the mind and soul with these three seph^ticall point you pervert all the fath^ you bring for this purpose and deceive the catholic three your former two error beget a three error which be your mistake the state of our question and so whereas you shall prove the manner of Christ presence in the sacrament you offer to prove the matter but of that we have speak before thus if you will read the scripture father and counsel with these 3. caution or derection you shall easy see how far thus long you be go from the truth and mislead the queen subject now with God permission we will proceed to the due examination of your proof as it be allege out of your own Colen print 1561. which you can deny it be in the first tome and the fourteen chapter and the two hundred fifty five page of the first edition and the chapter begin thus then follow your fraction very abrupt in the midst of a sentence the sacred council be advertise that in certain place and city the deacon do reach and give the sacrament to the priest all this you leave out and then follow your weak warrant no rule or custom do permite etc. I pray you what one word of this prove your carnal presence let i know it for my learning and the catholic better instruction if you will gather out of this word sacrifice than you be deceive for that council in another place call it Eucharisticum a sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving not propitiatory and if out of these word the body of Christ the council expound their meaning in that which you omit and purposely conceal when they call that sacrifice and the body of Christ by the name of sacrament give by the deacon to the priest for the deacon deliver they after consecration to priest add still be sacrament not the body or blood of Christ make of bread and wine by the priest for the sacrament and Christ body differ as much as the lamb and the Passover circumcision and the covenant the wash of new birth and regeneration for the one be the outward seal the other the inward grace and here be another error of you of the second and three kind in refer that to the mouth which be proper to our faith and still mistake the matter for the manner the second proof of catholic for the real presence by council and father the first part of the second proof of the council of nice 103. I crave remembrance be retain fitzsimon how protestant account this first general council of the world contain 318. most famous father Beza epist. thecl 81. but a congregation of sophister as before be declare in our examination of the creed Cartwright so famous a Puritan as none of that crew but reverence his remembrance as may appear in the survey of pretend discipline wherein one call he the most reverend another make a sermon cap. 29. pag. 379. and sing psalm for his releasement another say the government by he set down be command by God another thank God to have see he another expect to travail 50. mile to see he by way of derision say such council to have be a notable and famous council Cartwr l. 1. pag. 93. and in the same place tax it for error in discipline this advertisement show in general this council to have displease they now to the particular application to our controversy we say this testimony show on our side first that priest offer a sacrifice which deacon can not and consequent that it can not be only a thanksgiving both because such sacrifice of thanksgiving belong to all alike as soon to a deacon as a priest as also because it can not be exhibit into the mouth of another second that this sacrifice be the very body of Christ but all this say m. Rider be nothing because the council make mention of a sacrament and eucharistial every twigg shadow be a grateful shelter to a jonas in extremity but this small consolation wither by these word of s. Gregory record in the decretal Decret. 1. 1. quest. 1. c. Latine and sanguine christi for that be they term sacrament because under the coverture of corporal thing divine verity more secret do the health of the say sacrament which therefore be fruitful make in the church because the holy ghost their remayne do work the effect secret of the say sacrament of which the sacrament of bread and the chalice be in greek call the eucharist which in latin be interpret good grace and what be better than the body and blood of Christ by which sweet and sound testimony m. rider as a conye be ferret out of all his evasion for the be eucharistial and the be a sacrament and the name of bread and wine be find to consist with the body and blood of Christ and rather to atestifie it then to exclude it because sacrament have their name from sacred and secret good include under the coverture of corporal thing which be verify in our sacrament include under the form or coverture of bread and wine s. chrysostom 1. cor. ho. 24. both elder than s. Gregory and also a natural grecian signify the sense of eucharistical to be all one and hallow or bless say when I say benediction I say the eucharist your supper endure no benediction therefore it can not be signify by the word eucharist nor the word eucharist belong thereto so that by degree all word belong to this sacrament as sacrament itself sign spiritual eucharistical mystical be as earnest abandow your profession as by it the substance of sacrament be abandon in the mean time the foresay testimony confirm also that thanksgiving in this sacrament be rather to be take for benediction than benediction for thanksgiving Ephesinum in epist. Catholic priest and this have 20^ father we approach to the mystical benediction and we be sanctify be partaker of the holy body and precious blood of Christ 104. this your proof be true quote pag. 535. and the epistle begin thus rider Nestorio cyrillus etc. the council call it a mystical benediction no miraculous transubstantiation and this neither prove your opinion nor disprove we for you say you be make partaker of the holy body and precious blood of Christ and so say we but you say with the late church of Rome that you be make partaker of that holy body and precious blood by your mouth tooth throat and stomach and we say with scripture father and the old church of Rome that we be make partaker of Christ body and blood by the hand mouth and stomach of our soul which be a lively faith in Christ crucify as you have hear before and thus you refer that to the visible part of the body as your mouth tooth and stomach which the scripture and father mean of the invisible power of the soul as our lively faith be the spiritual hand mouth and stomach thereof and here be your error of the second kind and so your two testimony out of these two counsel be proof neither proper nor pertinent bring only to dazzle the eye of the simple and to amaze the mind of the weak but I refer the badness of your cause and the weakness of your proof nay your disproofe to the censure of the indifferent reader only give the reader this note by the way that these counsel be call by the emperor not by the pope nay the pope be not precedent in these counsel but other bishop choose by the emperor and in the council of nice the pope legate have but the four room no better account be make of he for in deed he then be no pope but a archbishop thus the reader may see that these counsel be against you and now to your testimony out of the father the second part of the second proof of the council Ephesin 104. the force of this testimony appertain to prove fitzsimon that by the mystical benediction we be make partaker of the very holy body and blood of Christ and consequent that there shall be benediction use in this mystery and that we shall not think what be here sanctify isa 3. c. v. 3. contain only a bare figure and only a bare appellation of such body and blood all this he avoid without any difficulty because forsooth the word mystical be find together with the residue certain it be a rare exception as if one will say in the three chapter of esaias and three verse there be mention of mystical speech therefore in such chapter and verse there be no literal verity for what hindrance to our controversy be the word mystical I find in the last evidence of s. Gregory that the eucharist by who soever good or bad it be dispense yet be a sacrament because the holy ghost do quicken it mystica by which be demonstrate that the word mystical do rather help then hinder our purpose and rather hinder then help their imagination who deny any thing to be mystica quicken by the holy ghost in this mystery what other string have m. rider to his bow to trot forsooth to the pope supremacy and to fail as filthelye in that as in the rest of which supremacy there follow a peculiar article wherein it be to be ample discuss first who tell you m. Rider that the pope legate have but the four seat in the council of nice where be your oft promise citation of autheur book chapter leaf line will you never ride otherwise then like yourself can the church of Rome call by s. cyprian no very partial friend to the pope supremacy s. cyprian epist. cornel. 45. epist. 55. Petri the mother church and root of the Catholic church the cheyre of Peter the principal church can Anaclet before s. cyprian and both long before the Nicen council magdeburg centur. 2. c. 7. 139. ibid. 781. 782. attribute to the roman church primacy and excellency of power over all church and the whole flock of Christ even by testimony of protestant can it summon general concil bear preeminency in they confirm or desanull they can the Nicen council seem to Beza Beza in trac 1579. to make a way for the horrible papacy of Rome slide on and underlay the seat of the harlot a old mark of a heretic to speak thus of the roman sea as appear in our first number that sit upon seven hill and yet possess but the four place in dignity in the Nicen council saye and write what you listen m. Rider you need no long a visor your face be of proof for gather untruth I may be think forgetful but in truth although I will fain forget they as I do often dissemble they yet I can not remove they out of either my mind or eye as long as I read his book so exorbitant replenish with they in the number in 6. he attaynt we with a threefould error whereof we be free for every one be to be account in the right until he be prove in the wrong which be not do against we that may well stand for the 96. the 96. untruth untruth soon after he inform as if it be also prove that the b. sacrament and Christ body do differr as much as outward seal and inward grace the 97. and 98. untruth which make the 97. untruth the 98. be in this number wherein he say the council call the b. sacrament a mystical benediction no miraculous transubstantiation for it express affirm such sacrament to be and to be make a lively flesh and the very flesh of the word what be a miraculous transubstantiation if this be not the 99 that the scripture and ancient father the 99 untruth and old church of Rome do specify the receive of the b. sacrament to be only by the hand mouth and stomach of the soul and not of the body the 100 that these two evidence be our own disproof the 100 untruth the 101. that the pope be not precedent in general concil the 101. untruth either by himself or his legate but other bishop choose by the emperor the 102. that the pope legate the 102. untruth have but the four seat in the Nicen Concil. the 103. that then the pope of Rome be not pope the 103. untruth but only archcbishop of which we be to dispute in the testimony of s. Leo follow not long after these strange exorbitant absurd treatise consider may not I worthy say tom. 2. s. Athan fol. 262. as he in s. athanasius demonstraverit at I believe no eloquence can restrain there mad fury who be carry away by error but although you allege a thousand and those invincible proof you shall in deed truth but you will not reclaim the forger of falsehood be not this verify in m. Rider what wonderful exception suppose he betwixt he and the clear light strive against he most forcible what argument and proof do he struggle against and by what delusion and deceit one say true joan. maxen resp. ep. possess although truth always remain unvanquished ^et falsehood never leave to assault it the flesh be feed by the body and blood of Christ Catholic priest Tertullian 200. that the soul may be sit in God 105 out of this thus you frame a argument as sometime and old roman friend of you do to maintain your carnal presence rider the soul be feed by that which the body eat but the soul be feed by the flesh of Christ therefore the body eat the flesh of Christ in the sacrament I may as fit invert this argument upon you as a learned man of our side once invert it say as the soul feed upon Christ so do the body but the soul be feed by faith therefore the body be feed by faith which be very absurd and improper yet as partinent and as proper as you and here you shall remember the old distinction of the father speak of before the sacrament be one thing and the matter of the sacrament be another thing outward the body eat the sacrament and inward the soul by faith feed on the body of Christ as in baptism the flesh be wash by water as that old father say in that place that the soul may be purge spiritual so our body eat the outward sacrament that the soul may be feed of God again it be not general true that whatsoever the body eat the soul be feed by the same and if you will propound but particular this instance of eat only in the sacrament than the argument prove nothing stand upon mere particular moreover the body and soul be feed by the same meat in the sacrament but not after the same manner for the body be nourish by the natural property of the element which they have to nourish but the soul by the sacramental and supernatural power as they be sign and feale of heavenly grace and we grant that the soul be feed by the precious body and blood of Christ but not after a carnal manner as you say but spiritual by faith again a mean scholar in God book may see this phrase be figurative and therefore the sense spiritual for how can a soul be fat in God will you say it be a corporal fatness such as be proper to body I think you will not I know you shall not than this place be impertinent bring neither savour of sense nor suitable to that you allege it for if you will have read the same father in the same book follow page 47. print at Paris 1580. he will have tell you so for say he the word which be make flesh which be Christ this word Christ must be swallow whole by hear must be meditate upon or remember by understind and digest by faith now you see Tertullian of your own Paris print aunwere you and expound himself and see no man can better expound Tertullian his meaning then Tertullian himself therefore have I bring he from your own catholic press of Paris to condemn all jesuit and priest that shall set a literal sense upon a allegorical phrase only to deceive the simple plain catholic and to abuse the godly learned father by a ignorant and sottish construction and now to the rest of your profess that follow the three part of the second proof of Tertullian fitzsimon 105. the 104. untruth that we frame any argument upon tertullians word the 104. untruth and especial such one but since we be invite by example thus we argue the mayor shall be your own word the faith of the first five hundred year be the ancient true and Catholic faith but that the flesh and not only the soul be feed with the body and blood of Christ be the faith of the first five hundred yea two hundred within which Tertullian attain the time of Christ year that not only the soul but the flesh be feed with the body and blood of Christ be the true and Catholic faith the minor be the word of Tertullian which herein be so plain that woeful and vain be m. rider wit and pain to struggle against they he tell of a old distinction that the sacrament be one thing and the matter of the sacrament be another be it true or false be not the word clear that the very flesh be feed by the body of Christ and such distinction nothing pertinent to affirm or deny they second if the body outward eat the sacrament and that as after in he follow the body and soul be feed by the same meat in the sacrament and that he grant the soul be feed by the precious body and blood of Christ how can it possible be deny but that the body also eat the body and blood of Christ to affirm that we hold the soul to feed carnaly on Christ be in manner declare to ride that be to forge and shamles to slander for we only teach that the soul feed on Christ corporal body not carnaly but realy and true and yet spiritualy but not only spiritualy so that without any wrong it be to be account the 105. untruth to say that we teach otherwise the 105. untruth shall not such a imputation have two or three or at least one quotation of some one old or young noble or obscure sacred or profane of our writer it be so oft promise so oft threaten but m. Rider will perform these promise in his print book when he perform other promise the frustration whereof in London be otherwise encounter then in Dublin in merchand write book when these be make Catholic that be not puritanica cancel without a benediction but christianly mark with a fair cross than all other promise will also be more Christian like accomplish and many a merchand rejoice and many a long expectation satisfy but say he Christ record to Tertullian be to be hear to be meditate remember and believe and so Tertullian faith he have answer himself and his former say that the flesh be feed by the body of Christ all this he quote yet I doubt not very faithful for I find Tertullian print at Paris to have the book of resurrection out of which my testimony be bring so far beyond the 47. yea and 407. page even in that I can not make unto myself any conceit how these last word be say to be in the same book follow and yet but in the 47. page at this I stand not only I crave all courteous wit and wysedom to observe how and whether at all Tertullian be make to answer himself and we by this late allegation unless he will suppose that every thing answer every thing for if what may be hear meditate remember believe can not be receive corporaly then the messiah Christ our saviour can never be receive in the bless virgin womb nor into the house or habitation of any other yet our belief assure the contrary and consequent the say of Tertullian that our flesh be feed by the body of Christ remain in his full vigour although those other word be true nay rather they be more thereby verify for if Christ be hear or believe his say the bread to be his body shall not be disinherit can you be content to hear the former testimony avoid by every by and impertinent word that they be mystical sacrament eucharistical and therefore not true and can you not accept like manner of answer in this place I refer you to Luther opinion of like their wont answer mention in the 47. number although the former word of Tertullian be insupportable to m. rider claim and that he struggle in vain against they yet I will second they with this conclusion out of the say Tertull the bread take and distribute to his disciple he make it his body say this be my body I will fain behold m. rider skill in wrest these word from our purpose with any show of probability his wont manner of wrest without probability which posterity will I suppose by his remembrance name ride be as I think loathsome to his most love friend to find in he and lewd to be follow by he catholic priest God have leave we his flesh to eat and his blood to drink that we may be nourish by that cyprian mart 249. by which we have be redeem rider 106. a blind man may see that you never read this in cyprian yourself or else that you understand they not for cyprian say not God have leave we his flesh but he have leave we his flesh to eat and his blood to drink I pray you pardon i to ask you which be the nominative case to the verb be Deus no but if you have begin seven line soon as you ought in deed to have do at etc. you shall have find the right nominative case that there may have be not only a gramaticall concord but also a theological harmony and then the sense have be plain for it be he that die for his enemy that leave we his flesh etc. and that be Christ not God the father but you begin after your accustom manner in the midst of a sentence mistake the nominative case to the verb and so lie down heresy for divinity for God the father have neither flesh nor blood but if I shall help you with a charitable construction by attribute that to Christ deity which be proper to his humanity yet you still have wrest the father and abuse the reader but thus cyprian be to be read Christ have leave we his flesh to eat and his blood to drink so we confess it we believe it and we teach it but to be eat and drink spiritual by faith not corporal not gutturallie as you imagine for this be the inward invisible grace of the sacrament that you propound now how this flesh and blood of Christ be to be eat or how Christ flesh and blood be natural substantial and real under the form of bread and wine which be our question you can prove by cyprian and so still you propound the matter to we when you shall prove the manner to we and here be your error in the three kind if not in more before specify and here you bring a testimony out of cyprian cyprian caena nu. 9 where he speak not proper of the sacrament but of the threefold martyrdom which he gather out of the death of Christ and therefore you show a great weakness in run to that tractate whereas you may have speed better if you have list near home for if you have read or will read that father upon his treatise of the lord supper he will have either change your mind or harden your heart but howsoever discover your error and that the eat of Christ flesh and drink of Christ blood be not a gross corporal swallow of his bless flesh and precious blood as you deem but that what it be to eat Christ flesh and drink Christ blood the eat of Christ flesh be a certain eagerness and a certain desire to abide in Christ etc. and three line before this he say our abide in he be our eat of he and the drink be a certain incorporation into he and in the latter end of the treatise you shall find that father touch the point in question betwixt we how Christ must be eat as often as we receive these holy mystery we whet not our tooth to bite or chew but break and divide this holy bread by a sincere faith etc. and four line before that say he the food of Christ flesh must be eat with purify mind say not with wash mouth and a little before that he say the wicked lick the rock but neither suck honic nor oil etc. that be to say they eat the sacrament but not the inward grace of the sacrament thus I hope the indifferent reader be satisfy that your proof be not pertinent to the matter in question and therefore show the weakness of your cause and the wilfulness of your mind that will seek so stiff to maintain fable with wrest father transubstantiation be but in deed a fable for cyprian place that you bring handle the visible grace of the sacrament and in this place which I bring he touch the manner how that grace be to be receive that be with faith as we say not tooth as you teach etc. and so cyprian agree with himself and we with cyprian join against your carnal opinion and thus have answer cyprian with cyprian and show you your oversight and mistake of cyprian I will come to the examination of your next proof the four part of the second proof of s. cyprian 106. first I be blame that when I shall have say Christ fitzsimon I say God whereby every one may conceive that I be not of their opinion who deny the godhead of Christ relate in our examination of the creed I thank Christ my god and lord that I be reprehend but for sucht fault as consist with truth and piety Christ then have leave we his flesh to eat and his blood to drink say s. cyprian which m. Rider say he confess he believe he teach then to the next clause that be shall be nourish by that by which we have be redeem to which m. Rider be mute or dumb and consequent offend in one he be make guilty of all so that to believe part and not the whole be unprofitable in the mean time s. cyprian testimony can not be avoid for if by Christ body we be redeem then by Christ body say s. cyprian we must be nourish a figure a representation a appellation redeem we not therefore a figure appellation representation in this sacrament nourish we not not only through faith and the stomach of the soul be our soul redeem but our body also to resurrection and glory by the true suffer of Christ real and corporal body therefore not only in faith or only according to the stomach of the soul be we nourish but by the true participation of Christ real and natural body into our body to nourish they and to sanctify together the soul yet say he cyprian tell that the eat of Christ be a greedy desire to remain with he and that with our tooth we tear he not but with a sincere faith we kreake and divide he which we ever before and now profess and aver for who think Christ true and real receive to exclude his spiritual and incorruptible receive let our 34. 40. 42. 46. 54. number bear record that we teach not otherwise then as s. cyprian here do to wit the corporal receive not to be a capharnaical tear rent or bite of Christ but a true real participation of his body into we under the form of bread and wine to the sanctification thereby of our soul if any require what be a capharnaical tear by the capharnait conceive and by sectarist imagine s. Cyril l. 4. c. 22. in joan. certify say add immanes they suppose Christ to induce they to the savage manner of wild beast and to have incite they to eat the raw flesh of man and to drink their blood if you will kill sectarist you can not wean nor win they from like gross and carnal construction of Christ word but to the former purpose that I may not play a protestant part say you see this teach and that teach this here and that there when it be neither so nor so I will allege s. cyprian word brief but plain s. cypr. faithful to justify my speech in the most spare interpretation which any adversary may afford say s. cyprian which our lord give to his disciple not in appearance but in nature or substance change by the omnipotency of the word be make flesh you m. Rider say there be no proof in cyprian that the natural substantial and real body of Christ be under the form of bread the 105. untruth that now by s. cyprian be assure the 105. untruth he in express term say the bread remain only in appearance bread and by Christ omnipotent word in nature change be make his flesh the 106. the 106. untruth untruth be also by s. cyprian almost in every syllable of the foresay allegation certify when you affirm that he with you and you with he agree in this point for there can not be great opposition against you the 107. untruth contain in few word the 107. be by s. cyprian certify when you inform that according his opinion the wicked eat not the body of Christ he manifest say that s. cypr. ser. 5. with gape jaw and breathe their wickedness they invade the body of Christ and this to have happen because and etc. before fulfil penance for their fault before purge their conscience by the sacrifice and hand of the priest etc. they adventure to approach this time papistry and it of those time be find will you will you comformable this make to term cyprian blockish dial 8. and 11. and reprobate he be in deed a block in their way and a reprover of their impiety thereby so gravel their cause that their greave and groan mind must have vamp out such reproach there be no doubt leave of the verity of the flesh and blood of Christ catholic priest for now by the assurance of our lord and certainty of our faith Hyllarius lib. 4. and 8. 370. it be his true flesh and his true blood 107. gentleman now we must needs commend you rider for you give testimony with the truth and we against the late church of Rome and yourselves now you come near the quick in deed and therefore speak both the truth and true this be the manner how Christ must be eat by faith but you shall have add the next line follow and these that be sanctify bread and wine be thus by faith take and thus drink bring this to pass that Christ be in we and we in Christ so now you say with hyllarie that Christ dwell in all they that receive he by faith your own proof be one our side and so by this your own warrant you witness to the world that there be no place for the corporal receive of Christ by the wicked as Rome teach it because Christ dwell not in they nor they in he and so because this your proof prove one part of the matter in question against yourselves that Christ be to be eat or receive by our faith not by our mouth or tooth I will address myself to the examination of your next proof the five part of the second proof of s. Hilary fitzsimon 107. when I perceive some say of i to have content m. Rider Laert. l. 6. I mistrust as Antisthenes that I have utter some foolishness consider that flattery and falsehood do content and gratify the multitude and truth breed rather their dislike but all be well for it be but a feign pretext of contentment let we in the name of God join issue upon s. hilary suffrage all that m. Rider have therein to applaud unto himself be that there be mention of faith therein that such faith assure the verity of Christ true flesh and his true blood to be in the sacrament be no impediment for m. rider to have say all to be for his purpose and so to gallopp gallant away from examine the matter any long but as the proverb be the baker you may know he to have imitate melancton by leave his preach and apply his bake and public sell bread to the exceed detriment of the free baker a whole year together in Dublin must not so part from the pillory for s. Hilary nail his ear fast in say very we receive the word make flesh in our lord food manner how be he not to be think natural to remain in we s. hilarius lib. 8. nos@ sumin^^ if he who be bear of Marie be true Christ then we under this mystery (@) true receive the flesh of his body if m. Rider can pull out these nail without tear his ear that we true and therefore not only figurative receive the flesh of his body if he be Christ and that ^e natural remain in we and therefore not only by conceit especial s. Hilary say Christ will not it shall be understand by concord of our or unity of our will but which he repeat fover (@) five time and by natural propriety if I say m. rider can decline or remove from these torment nail then to incountre he in one of his own lilian sentence for other he know none he shall be our wise Deane who every word shall be a delphian oracle I have rather s. Hilary confute he thus alone then by other amplification to confound he the 108. untruth appear say the 108. untruth that we witness to the world that there be no place for the corporal receive of Christ by the wicked as if forsooth none can be wicked that have faith nor any able to receive Christ but by faith whereby first all protestant be make free from wickedness and it be next give for a riderian sound sequel s. Hilary say that by our lord testimony and assurance of our faith Christ true flesh and blood be receive therefore who soever be not faithful do not receive Christ true flesh and blood which sequel if it be currant why also not this by faith and hospitality Marie Magdalen and Martha receive Christ into their house therefore Anna Cayphas Pilate can not receive he otherwise then by faith and hospitality the 109. the 109. untruth that this proof of s. Hilary prove we shall not receive Christ by our mouth nothing remain in the world of the body and blood of Christ Catholic priest but that which daily be make by the priest on the altar 108. gentleman I perceive you be soon weary of well do Athan. lib. cap. 7. 375. in your last proof you confess a truth with we 109. even against yourselves but now you leave father and bring fable 110. rider and so produce one fable to prove another fable that be you produce one fable of the crucify of the image of Christ like opinion like proof and the miraculous abundant gush of water and blood out of the image his side that cure all disease in all part and place of the world to prove your carnal presence of the sacrament by your feign transubstantiation for answer to which first I say when father help not you bring fable that you shall fit have place this proof in the rank of your feign miracle follow or in your question of image hereafter but to cover the foolery and forgery thereof you couch it amongst the ancient doctor and father of the church thereby hope to have he pass with more credit but I will show first that you have not deal well nor true with the author of this fable nor with the catholic of this kingdom because you have leave out such word as will wound both your credit in this case and spoil your cause beside your translation be nothing find you leave out in two line these four word and you leave out because belike it be but a adverb of likeness and so because be not you think it be better to leave it behind then to bring it to your hurt second you leave out for your author say by the hand of the priest and you leave they both out and say lest the people shall think and say if only the priest make it than it can neither have flesh nor blood and so the miracle be mar and therefore it be better to leave out and to say by the priest for than may be understand not only all the member of his body and intention of his mind but also the gesture and motion of both require to the conception of such a wooden saviour and last you leave out spiritual he say not carnal and therefore this proof be very unschollerlike allege when our question be of a presence carnal you produce a presence spiritual this word make for we but that we scorn and know it sinful to bring in such forgery for proof in a question of divinity for this you shall have bring in thus which be daily make by the priest spiritual now how this proof fit you let other censure shame make i silent this fable contain seven chapter of the crucify of the image of CHRIST do by the jew for envy to CHRIST who no soon pierce the image his side but the word be which you may see John 2. verse 6. contain two or three measure or firk nes a piece which show it to be a notable loud and lewd legend forthwith gush out both water and blood in such abundance that they fill many vessel with the same and this blood be carry into all the part of the world through Asia Africa and Europe and cure all manner of disease upon sight of which miracle the cruel jew repent and be baptize and present there be a holy (a) day make in remembrance thereof which be keep with no less solemnity than the feast of easter and the nativity of our lord as the author say then in the seven and last chapter come in your proof which conclude a peace among the clergy touch the truth of Christ blood for now say the author there can no other flesh nor blood of Christ be find in the world then that which be daily make by the hand of the priest spiritual upon the altar but this your proof be not true translate according to the latin but because it be a loudelie I will neither reprove you for your defective translation nor correct it for any man direction (b) (b) like translation like truth for I see no reason to bestow a true translation upon a false miracle or forge fable other circumstance as where this image be say to be keep and bring soorth etc. I refer the curious reader to the foolish (@) forge author but that all the catholic of this kingdom may see the reason that move i to think it to be a fable be these all of they gather out of the body of this fable false father upon athanasius reason 1 the first reason be the occasion for no small error spring up in those day touch the blood that issue forth of Christ side on the cross so several place and person false challenge to they self that every one have a proper piece of Christ cross athanasius print at Paris 1581. pag. 534 etc. so our jesuit and priest now will persuade the Catho one sort of priest say that they have the right blood and another sort of priest in other city say that they have Christ very blood that issue forth of his side and so the contention among the priest grow to be very hot as it be this day betwixt you jesuit and priest about other matter whereupon the whole clergy meet together at Caesaria in Cappe^^cia for the appease of this dangerous broil the reverend father be no soon set but upstart don Petrus bishop of Nicomedia and say reverend father I have a little book here of athanasius which I great desire to present to your fatherhood view and consideration the holy synod answer we be very well please and desire it may be read thus concern the occasion which be a solemn synod to appease a foolish superstitious contention among the lie covetous priest of that age when every hedge-priest will persuade the simple people that he have in his vial the very blood of Christ which be of force to pardon their sin reason 2 the style of this agree not with the book which be know to be athanasius work a mean grammarian may see it and discern it and therefore it can be his work reason 3 athanasius write a most sharp tractate against idolatry when he be live and now they will father this fable upon he after his death and therefore it can be his work for so we shall wicked charge that godly father either with recantation of truth contradiction in and with himself or open maintenance of palpable idolatry it be take to be athanasius work only upon the credit of the pope stipendary reason 4 chaplain Petrus bishop of Nicomedia as you may see in the title page 554. and therefore be not his work by open confession the time bewray the forgery for this thing shall be do by report of your reason 5 own story seven hundred and threescore year after Christ Sigebert in ann. 755 under Constantine the five yet colour with athanasius name as write by he that be dead four hundred year before this matter happen and therefore plain and palpable forgery it be imagine to be do some twenty year or thereabouts before the second reason 6 council of nicene as a preparative for the plant of image in church 2. Nicenae tom. 3. in which council it be accord perform and this fable register in the same as a sure foundation for such a building and a fit proof for such a proposition now let the indifferent reader peruse at his leisure but the seven chapter of this treatise and he shall scarce read one line without a lie yet superstition blush not to in this fable into this father work but if we shall tender such proof and preach such fabulous stuff for sound divinity to the people you will call we sot and souleslaier but for Christ sake and the people salvation confess your error and forsake they with these lie fable it be no shame to forsake sin but it be dangerous when sin forsake you and so to your next proof the six part of the 2. proof of s. athanasius 108. fitzsimon you have often perceive a fordwarne in m. rider to reprehend leave out and put in begyne and end at this place and not at that here also the same and with like infortunate success be observe first he blame that we leave out as if I shall think that no wisdom or learning will think that a fault there be no manner of use of it to any purpose or against it second that I omit by the hand this omission also shall not offend he both because it show against he that not only by the faith but also by the hand of the priest Christ be upon the altar second because he omit it himself immediate in these word which be daily make by the priest three he blame the omission of spiritual which be contain have well consist with our doctrine as well because we believe that spiritual and corporal may consist together which be manifould show as also because we teach his be on the altar not to be a sensible corruptible and capharnaical be but a true substantial real yet invisible be whereas contrariwise he be bind to affirm that in his sacrament Christ be neither corporaly nor spiritualy and consequent spiritual be omit by i to my own hindrance and yet not to his advantage for fox martyr to who m. Rider have bind himself to consent do thus instruct the difference of doctrine between the faithful and papist concern the sacrament be that the papist say that Christ be corporaly under fox act and pag. 1529. or in the form of bread and wine but the faithful say that Christ be not there neither corporaly nor spiritualy the same be the opinion of as appear in the 96. number say the bread be the body of Christ in loc. come c. n. 2. pag. 327. neither natural nor personaly nor realy nor corporaly nor yet spiritualy nor figurative nor significative it remain after all these that we say the bread be the body of Christ we must keep these man at a bay and at one resolution and not suffer they to wander now to the word spiritual then to the word mystical after to the word figurative for this be the most sovereign remedy to help and hurt they that you keep their nose to the gryndestone of one settle profession otherwise you shall ever find they ephes 4. in wickedness and fraud work the circumvention of error as the apostle say that be run into all digression and variable doctrine according to the prophet psalm 11. the wicked walk in circuit for the word sacramental which be their last refuge I report to the 103. number to manifest whether it have not also abandon they and leave they forlorn the 2. parcel of the 6. part 109. m. rider confess the general belief of all christian towards this history out of which our last testimony be produce in so much as there be a solemn holy day make in remembrance thereof leave to confute or examine the word whereby in it be declare that the body and blood of Christ be make on the altar he betake himself to a impertinent disputation whether s. athanasius be the thereof as if the matter approve by 350. father in the second council of nice have no other authority but by be write or not write by s. athanasius the three parcel of the six part of the second proof 110. for a man of m. rider quality it shall seem strange if he will oppose himself against such venerable authority without urgent and undoubted proof his first motive not to believe it be that there be error spring concern the blood issue from that image for reform whereof a council be assemble be this a reason to deny a matter what mystery of religion be there but error have spring touch it and why shall concil be collect but to reform error how wise the first exception be let God and man judge the second reason of he to distrust it be that the style be not the same which athanasius observe else where but this may proceed from the interpreter and the like argument may be make that s. Paul be not of the epistle to the Hebrew nor s. John of the Apocalips because their style be alter yet few sober protestant but will blush to misdoubt they to be the the three reason athanasius write against idolatry therefore he write not this idolatrous history to this I answer that worship of image be not count idolatry during s. athanasius his life Nicephorus lib. 6. c. 27. witness Nicephorus glorious testimony to that effect say Zenaias an. 493. 493. o desper at mind and impudent mouth vomit out that voice the image of Christ and they that please he not to be reverence wherefore the write against idolatry before Zenaias your opinion patriarch may proceed from a commender of worship image for by who be ever idolatry abolish but by the defender of such worship have ever protestant convert any country from idolatry how be they name what history recount then tertullians say of they be daily verify prescrip. cap. 42. and this to be their employment not to convert pagan but to pervert believer and to make it their glory if they can cast down they that stand and not to lift up they that be fall the four reason be the book be esteem to be of athanasius by credit and report of Peter bishop of nicomed therefore it be not of athanasius by open confession a fit therefore for such a scholar the bishop of nicomed do commend it as the book of athanasius therefore by open confession he say it be not the book of athanasius how do he then commend it to be the book of athanasius that it be say this bishop to have be the pope stipendiarie make the 110. untruth that it be confess therefore the 110. untruth the 111. untruth not to be s. athanasius his work because it be say to be his work make the 111. untruth the 112. untruth the 113. untruth that it be report by our own history to have happen under Constantyne the five makeeh the 112. untruth the 113. untruth be that there be scarce a line in the 7. chapter of such book of s. athanasius but contain a lie I remember one mistress kirie a english woman who dwell in s. Thomas street in Dublin 1580. to have be reply unto by a poor beg woman who have crave her alm for the sake of god and our lady when the say mistress Kirie say she will give nothing for out lady because she be better than she herself mischief say the beggar take the worst of you both the same may well be say of the most lie line in your book or this here specify notwithstanding this assure discovery of his reason to be most frivolous and ridiculous or rather lamentable yet I think of the matter according to the annotation of Baronius upon the 9 of November that it be not s. athanasius of Alexandria that be thereof but some other yet very ancient of that name and all may think that this m. rider exception against the be no more to the matter then if one will say nothing to be true who be unknown Catholic priest Damascen lib. 4. orthod. ^ap. 14. 391. let we approach in ardent faith lay our hand in manner of a cross and let we receive the body of he that be crucify rider 111. you leave out for it be in the father let we come and approach to he which be in heaven not on your altar or in your miraculous accident and then show the manner how in ardent faith not with mouth tooth and stomach Damascen flat show the impossibility of your carnal presence so this father be against yourself for the manner of receive of Christ which be spiritual not corporal and in the same chapter the same father say that Christ body be unite to the godhead descend not from heaven to the earth and therefore can be in your sacrament corporal and carnal and as fire and heat be in a burn coal so and more near be Christ humanity and divinity join together so that he which shall touch the coal shall taste of heat and he that shall eat Christ humanity must also eat Christ divinity which be damnable to think for a man to eat and devour his God but because this your impertinent proof be your apparent disproof I will proceed to the next the seven part of the second proof of s. Damascen 111. I have see many nimble rider gambole over stool and stock in Dublin on shrovetuesdaye but such stool and stock as Damascen object against m. Rider in the place by i allege so light vaunt over I never can hitherto observe I may seem to catholic faulty that of so much as Damascen tender I afford so little and but one testimony only whereas every line of half the chapter may testify the great opposition that may be against m. Rider but my affection to brevity and the sufficiency of what be bring to any man not wilful obstinate enforce i thereto now at least attend what Damascen deliver first discourse by many argument and example of the powerful word of Christ he demand s. Damascen lib. 4. orthod cap. 14. what possible may be object but that he may make of bread his body of wine and water his blood second discourse how some may require to understand the manner of such conversion of bread and wine into Christ body and blood he say and I answer thou also that the holy ghost intermeddle and work those thing which surpass the uttrance of speech and conceit of understanding three discourse whether Christ loca descend from heaven to be in the sacrament he say not that his body assumpt descend from heaven but because the very bread and wine without such descension be change into the body and blood of God whereof he add that the manner be such as by no reach of reason it can be conceive fowerthly discourse whether good and bad do receive such mystery he answer they do thou good in to the remission of their synn and everlasting life the bad in to their pain and punishment five discourse as if he be a prophet to prevent heretical opinion whether the bread and wine be only a figure or sign of Christ body and blood he answer in no manner bread and wine be a figure of the body of Christ fie upon that but the very body of our lord conjoin with his divinity whereunto he add that Christ say not the sign of his body and blood but his body and blood six discourse of the manner to approach he prescribe the humble and devout manner contain in the testimony or allegation which I first propound these let nay these mountain interpose in m. rider way by Damascen yet his fly Pegasus or horse namely his deceitfulness find no difficulty to transport he beyond all and to cause he to affirm that the passage be plain and favourable but many dream they be far voyage when they be find far deceive in the mean time as you a little before have observe his great sympathy and union with puritan so now I crave your attendance to perceive like concourse with infidel and such heretic as make Christ divinity to have suffer Luther tom. 7. serm. eucharist fol. 335. Auerroes that wicked infidel say Luther load with sin accuse we christian as the most wicked of the world for eat and devour of our Cod. what say you be not the same reproach to we by m. Rider be not this a perfect agreement with impious infidel but I will fain have his resolution if as he say before n. 96. it be like treason to offend against the picture of the prince as it be against his person why it be a greavous imputation to eat Christ himself then to eat he according to the protestant imagination in his representation figure or picture let he escape the brunt of this objection without fail in what he say before or what he say here and his wisdom shall be account great than accustom for thus I make it in form of argument he that receive Christ seal unworthy say m. Rider n. 96. commit high treason against Christ therefore it be as grevous a offence to devour his seal unworthy as to devour his body because say he it be like offence to disgrace his garment as his person and consequent in eat their supper as the seal of Christ they offend according his discourse no less than in eat Christ also if they may eat the seal without offence so as lawful may they eat his flesh he assure they that unless they will eat not his seal but his flesh they shall have no life in they second if as he say what be do to Christ humanity the same must be do to his divinity how can he avoid whereas that Christ according to his humanity be whip pierce and put to death but the same must be think fulfil against his divinity o glorious and godly friend of Christ divinity how we and our doctrine determine that Christ both according humanity and divinity be eat and receive without detriment and corruption already be so often relate as it need not to be here repeat the residue of such blasphemy against the death of Christ divinity as be here infer against the word of Christ and his institution that we shall eat he that be religious receive he into our stomach may be find plentiful in the examination of protestancy the 114. untruth towards the article of our creed the 114. untruth can not be deny in say Damascen be against we this bread be bread before the consecration but when it be consecrate catholic priest Ambr. sacramenti^ lib. 4. cap. 4. 400. of bread it be make the flesh of Christ 112. all this we grant to be true but you come not to the point rider whether Christ flesh be make of bread by way of transubstantiation that be by the change of one nature or substance into another by this be our question but you dare not touch it because you can prove it but see you recite father by piece and patch take that you think will fit your purpose and leave that which will cross your course or weaken your cause I will for the truth sake and the catholic good add that out of Ambrose which I be sure some of you will wish out of Ambrose if you have read a few line more you shall have hear he tell you another tale and have expound himself in this place in the same chapter his word be these if there be such a force in the word of the lord jesus that the thing which be not begin to be how much more can it work this that they shall be the same they be and yet be change into another thing and then bring in a example how a thing may be that that it be and yet be change thou thyself waste but thou be a old creature after when thou be baptize thou begin to be a new creature will thou know how a new creature every one say the apostle that be in Christ be a new creature learn then how the word of God be accustom to change every creature and when he will he alter the course of nature if you have read or know this you will never have allege the other for his example be this as he that be baptize suffer no material substantial or corporal change rhough he be bear a new spiritual and put on Christ dist. 2. consecr cap. page 432. but he his change not lose or alter the body or soul which he have but in attain the grace which he have not and so the change be accidental not substantial as from vice to virtue so in substance the bread and wine be the same they be before but in accident or quality they be turn into another thing of common bread make a sacrament so Chrisostome amplify the change of bread in the eucharist chrisost in matth. hom. 83. he add immediate withal even so there be the like change of water in baptism as of bread in the lord supper but that be not of substance but in quality respect or use and so in this and this change be not in cast away the substance of bread or wine Dialog. 1. cap. 6. but in cast grace unto they as Theodoret say not change nature but add grace to nature Ambrose cap. 9 but who can better expound Ambrose his meaning then Ambrose himself who say before the blessing of the heavenly word it be call another kind after the word of consecration the body of Christ be signify do not say be the body of Christ but signify the body of Christ and else where Ambr. 1 cor. 11. in eat and drink we signify the body and blood that be offer for we and again he say Ambr. lib. 4. cap. 4. etc. which be a figure of the body and blood of the Lord but of this we have sufficient speak before and thus now the reader may be sufficient satisfy that the change be not natural but mystical not of substance but of accident and quality and so bread remain in substance but be change in mystery and so be bread make the flesh of Christ not by your miraculous transubstantiation but by mystical and apostolical benediction or sanctification not in change the nature of it but add grace to it as beforesaid and thus Ambrose have answer Ambrose and if you will read he without partial affection he will withdraw you from this your imagine opinion but now to that which follow the 8. part of the second proof of s. Ambrose 112. first he affirm that all we produce out of s. Ambrose be true yet that we want in word our purpose of transubstantiation he may be ashamed to disable the right honourable deputy and concile to who he dedicate his book in exhibit before their eye the most manifest the most palpable and the most forcible allegation that can be imagine for transubstantiation and such one as possible can not be true but transubstantiation must be acknowlege yet to dazzle their eye and delude their judgement as if he will persuade they they do no wise see in those word what all judgement must needs conceive unless they be bewitch for what be transubstantiation but a conversion of one substance into another no thing of the former substance remain and in these word of s. Ambrose be not it say that bread be before consecration and not remain after it but contrariwise that it be make the flesh of Christ and consequent transubstantiate be not the word follow select out of s. Ambrose to testify by example a conversion of one substance into another thereby to persuade our belief of such conversion of bread into Christ body this be to use the l. deputy and council as the jew use Christ in buffet their profession with main stroke in the mean time as if they have be buffman blind demand they that they shall tell what have smite they or be against they or rather enforce they to believe by such stroke they have not be harm but rather great pleasure and much advantage for s. Ambrose the easy to prove such conversion of bread and wine he exemplify by many other conversion of Moses rod into a serpent the river of Egypt into blood of the read see into that firm solidity that they stand of themselves divide of jordan return against nature backward etc. after which he bring the creation of heaven and earth make of nothing by the puissant word of God whereupon he infer if God word can make thing to be which be not how much more can he make of thing that be thing to be and by consequent how unchristian be it to think but his word this be my body this be my blood do not convert bread and wine into his body and into his blood and then he conclude s. Ambros l. 4. c. 4 and 5. and lib. 6. c. 1. therefore that I may resolve the it be not the body of Christ before consecration but after consecration I say unto thou that now it be the body of Christ 2. cor. 6.15 what society be there betwixt light and darkness what agreement betwixt Christ and belial what participation betwixt the faithful and the infidel that be betwixt s. Ambrose and m. Rider s. Ambros tell by so many proof and example a true conversion in so significant word of bread into Christ body by consecration m. rider deny such conversion and such consecration nay believe he and Ambrose have not a word against he but if he be red say he without partial affection he will withdraw we from our opinion and make we think no otherwise then as good protestant with what affection then do and the centuriast dial 8. and 11. centur. 3. c. 4. pag. 54. and 81. calu. in and Zuingl to 1. Epichir canone fol. 183. Cartwr l. 2. pag. 513. and lib. 1. pag. 94. s. Hilar. l. 1. Trinit. read he when they say he be be witch by the devil with what affection do Caluin and read he when they profess he stand for papist in establish this incruental sacrifice with what affection do Cartwright read he when he say the bring in of his authority be a move and sommove of hell and that he hold diverse thing corrupt but because all may know who be a good reader without partial affection I will define he in the word of s. Hilary he be the best reader who do not wrest that to be contain in evidence which he before presume to be understand but he who expect the exposition of doctor now s. Ambrose by Catholic and Protestant doctor be allot and assign to i against protestancy whether then of we have read he without partial affection this say therefore against such authority make the 115. untruth the 116. the 115. untruth the 116. untruth the 117. untruth s. Ambros lib 4. c 4. and 5. and lib 6. 1. the 118. untruth the 119. untruth that we have not show whether Christ flesh be make of bread the 117. that the instance of such conversion mention by s. Ambrose shall be dislyke by we the 118. that he bring our spiritual change from a old creature to a new to impugn the corporal change of bread into Christ the 119. that s. Ambros prove the change in this matter to be only in quality for in the same place he say that wine the 120. untruth be make the blood which deliver the people the 120. that after consecration Christ body be signify present (@) 12^ untruth shall therefore not be present the 121. that because there be a figure mention therefore there be not a substance as appear in 31. 39 42. 46. number ^he 122. untruth the 122. that it may be collect that bread still remain it be express say by s. Ambros when consecration be pronounce of bread be make the flesh of Christ and in have by such assignation obtain s. Ambrose give ear to know how great a treasure I have purchase and that by a old and great reformer even Pelagius himself s. aug. li 4. nupt. and concup c. 3. Pelagius b. Ambrose in scripture Pelagius so praise Ambrose as he say b. Ambros bishop in who book principal the roman faith reshyne who among the latin as a beautiful flower flourish who fidelity and pure sense in the scripture the very malignant dare not reprehend Catholic priest chrisost hom. 51. in cap. 4. math. 410. not only the sacrament but the body of Christ be propound unto we not that we shall touch it only but that we shall eat it rider 113. gentleman it be in the 51. hom of the 14. chapter of Matthew not in the four though it cost i great labour to find the place yet I blame not you it may be the writer not the author and if it be the author it be but the slip of his pen and therefore in discretion pardonable still you run from the manner to the matter but you allege it very impertinent and improper still prove the matter never deny and skip the manner which I urge and you shall answer but if you have read a few line more Chrysostome will have tell you the manner how Christ be to be receive not by your mouth tooth throat or stomach but with great faith and a clean heart you stop before your full period this father be whole with we and therefore unadvised bring in by you which be in you still a great fault and will keep still the catholic by this your mean in great blindness and doubt who believe when they hear you allege one sentence of a father that all his work be suitable to that judge he to speak on your side by the sound of the ear not by the touch of knowledge whereas if you will read a father yourselves from the begin of a controversy to the end though it be painful unto you yet it be profitable unto you and the catholic than you shall see the thing plain by the father expound which be by you often and too much wrest read this father upon the seventeeth homily upon the ten of the hebrew and 1. cor. 11. hom. 27. and you shall find he there condemn your carnal presence mass with your sacrifice whereby you may perceive in this point your opinion new and doubtful and our religion old and certain but though this place be impertinent to prove the main which be our question yet it prove with we against you that Christ must be eat by faith spiritual not by the mouth carnal and that overthrow one of your chief pillar and so to your next proof the 9 part of the second proof of s. Chrysostome 113. consider I request you christian reader fitzsimon a desperate deal in my gentle friend m. rider you may well remember how fox and nu. 108. n. 96. 96. 108. reject all other manner of Christ be in the sacrament beside a sacramental manner which Caluin nu. 96. say be the brazen wall against all encounter of adversary to his opinion you also may well remember how m. Rider rely to the phrase sacramental think n. 103. etc. as oft as it be mention so oft to stand for his purpose s. Chrisost. hom. 51. in cap 14. math. now here in this testimony s. chrysostom as he seem wrest from they this word sacramental deny Christ to be only as a sacrament and affirm that beside the sacrament we both eat and touch the very body of Christ what then be m rider as I say desperate deal to leave the matter and bid we read else where here and there and we shall find wonder there be a certain preacher in Paris a preacher in Paris woe for point his audience to autheur by he name himself not produce any allegation out of they but say seek here in such a one and there in such another and you shall find store whereby he be name by all general the poster over to seek where nothing can be find judge you whether my cavaliero be not his scholar can such a main assault and by that golden mouth Chrysostome as m. Rider worthy term he have no better resolution now in deed that I may always deal upright s. chrysostom towards any other than such mate do not in the place cite say not only the sacrament but not only the garment whereas therefore with they the sacrament be make no better than a garment or bare representation of Christ and that s. Chrysostome instruct s. Chrysost. cit. that not only any such outward garment be in the sacrament exhibit unto we but his own body not only that we may touch it but also eat it and be satiate it seem all one sense against such as I say compagnions to have translate sacrament or garment for they compare the sacrament to Helias cloak and inform that it be not more conjoin with Christ body Witaker against m. Martin pag. 11. than such cloak with Elias he be translate and the cloak remain with whereby as I imagine m. rider know what I can reply if he have make any difference betwixt sacrament and garment leave such translation uncontrowl but think you that m. rider to the passage of Chrisostom allege have say nothing you be deceive for he answer that we run from the manner to the matter marry he tell you not how but because those two word have some consonance in sound have only couple they together as hunter do hound of like colour and proportion he take his leave and be gallop away I have some time note the same refuge and evasion to the same word in Latimere of who fox pag. 1325. col. 1. num. 27. deliver his answer say it be true as touch the matter but not as touch the manner of the thing the same be repeat in the 70. number follow in a plain contradiction of itself in this former place so that it serve as a common place or answer to all objection and as a harborough against all foul weather as well for friend as foe for be it to the purpose or against it yet they that know not what matter and what manner be may surmise some answer give but I pray you gentle reader to conceive the matter of the b. sacrament be Christ body and the manner to be substantia realy true present therein and therewith whether have I decline either the one or the other allege s. Chrisostom as before second he answer that the receive shall be according to s. chrysostom with a great faith and a pure hart to which I reply port of those word there in deed to be mention to wit with a great faith the residue to be a patch in that place of m. rider make and foist to the rest next I reply the word immediate follow s. chrysost hom. 5. in cap. 14. math. to expound s. chrysostom and all other father commend a faithful receive to be clean opposite to protestantry the word be and for to approach by say be not that th^^ shall only receive the body propound but also much more that th^^ shall ^uch with a clean heart and so repair as to Christ himself protestant imagine that no body of Christ be propound to be receive and that repair shall not be as to Christ himself but as to his bare appellation figure resemblance what right have they any more to talk of receive by faith expound thus by the father do they not know s. chrysostoms mind and consequent of the rest that the faithful receive Chrysostom hom. 60. pop. be to include Christ substantia and not to exclude he witness these word not by faith alone but in very substance what have protestant to claim in s. chrysostom he say that Christ allow his flesh hom. 45. in cap. 6 joan. lib. 3. sacerdot. and to be touch and chew with tooth he say that Christ sit with his father whereat he exclaim o o o miracle o bounty of God and in the in the very same instant of time be handle by all man hand what can the pope himself or great Papist say more repugnant to the hart and foundation of protestancy in this controversy therefore the 123. untruth can not be deny the 123. untruth in say in the margin that chrysostom be whole with protestant alas m. rider be you ignorant how contrary such say be to Cartwright cart. lib 2. pag 524. 525. 526. item pag. 107. lib. 3. pag. 89. 90. affirm it be dangerous to allow chrisostomes proceed alas be you ignorant or a despiser of the prophet word what shall be reserve for a deceitful tongue sharp arrow of the powerful with coal of desolation true as the wiseman say or rather the holy ghost proverb ^ God need not your untruth that for he you shall utter deceit or which be all one to affirm to have they favourer who as instant and earnest as they may disprove and condemn your persuasion as the chief of your own fraternity acknowledge towards s. chrysostom the 124. untruth be the 124. untruth that it cost you great pain to find our allegation as we have quote it for although the four number be put for the may have drive you to pain yet the 51. homily be specify upon s. Matthew it have be sufficient to ease you of other pain than what the find thereof ingener in your guilty mind the 125. untruth be the 125. untruth that the allegation be impertinent and that we run from the manner to the matter this be often propound but never expound in all your book to my remembrance you tell but once and that by glance that the matter of the sacrament be Christ and all his merit n. 121. such matter s. chrysostom in our allegation certyfi to be in our sacrament deny his be only sacramentaly or by faith only and affirm to be Christ himself he that sit at the right hand of God and that in manner aforesaid it be time now for variety sake to invent two other word of one consonancy or to tell in particular where we omit either matter or manner deceitful for your bare affirmation have crack their credit the 126. the 126. untruth the 127. untruth that chrysostom after a few line will have tell we not to receive Christ by mouth or tooth of stomach the 127. that I stop before my full period for the suffrage allege end at a full point and what m. Rider adjoin be not in any one point in all that homily the 128. the 128. untruth that this father else where condemn our doctrine marvel not to find untruth more plentiful in this his distort the father from we for as it be a loud untruth dislyke as appear by all learned protestant in the world to claim the father as friend or approver of protestancy and adversary to the Catholic romain truth so can it not be support but by infinite untruth in discuss the particular how often this be verify in all this treatise towards s. chrysostom in particular appear manifould Catho priest Cirill in joh. lib. 4. cap. 13 423. we ought rather to believe in Christ and humble to learn of he then like drunke^ sot to cry out how can he give we his flesh rider 114 gentleman I wonder you bring in this for your proof alas this be nothing pertinent to our matter in hand we cry not how can he give we his flesh for we know that he give his flesh for we substantial on the cross mystical in the sacrament and spiritual in his word and therefore this may have be rather well spare then ill apply nay by your leave there be no such sentence in that place as you precise allege some such sound of word he have but no such carnal sense but read the chapter through and these marginal quotation Cirill lib. 4. cap. 14. 21. 22. 24. lib. 11. cap. 26. and you shall plan see how you be deceive for what soever he speak in all those place be nothing else but to confirm and explain our spiritual union with Christ our head and for that purpose bring in for example the near and natural union and conjunction of the vine and the branch head and member and so of Christ and all believer so this be less pertinent than the rest shall have a more short yet a sufficient answer then the rest the 10. part of the second proof concern s. Cyrill alexandrinus fitzsimon 114. any other adversary have m. rider as I have he now over the hip how will he canvas he first by the 129. untruth the 129. untruth he deny such word to be find in s. Cyrill in that place let his friend thereat blush for he s. Cyrill in joan. l. 4. c. 13. because himself can not in the name of God how can these word of s. Cyrill be otherwise interpret all the dictionary doctor in his parish can not more faithful translate these word then as our allegation bear let all excusation of man reach be conjoin and it will not salve this denial but either it must be from profound ignorance or bottomless impudency i a little before advertise n. 113. that m. Rider resemble the preacher in Paris call seek here seek there where nothing mention can be find whether now also it be not notorious belong to his deal I resign to every one examination if before I have encounter any short chapter as now I do one not very long I will have translate they or part of they some one time or other to testify his frivolous assignation and vain flourish in his extremity once for all acknowledge by the foresay allege chapter of s. Cyrill faithful translate whether the fear of God and regard of all examiner of his fidelity have not abandon he the 13. chapt. of the 4. book of s. Cyrill upon s. John faithful translate to testify the fidelity of protestant citation the jew therefore do contend among themselves say how can this man give we his flesh to eat Christ therefore say unto they all thing be plain and right to they who as it be write have find knowledge but to fool the most easy thing seem obscure but the honest prou. 8. hearer and wise what he have understand he commend to the treasure of his mind not be let by any conceit and if any thing they be hard by much and often seek and demand at leinthe he obtain imitate hunt hound which here and there seek their game Esa. 12. the prophetical word note the wise man to be inquisitive say search seek and dwell with i for we be always so to inquire that we may dwell with he and not be bear to strange opinion but thus the malignant mind do not for what soever it understand not straight through arrogance it reject as frivolous and false yield to nothing nor think any thing above itself such as we shall find the jew to have be for it behove they who have perceive the divine virtue and power of our saviour by miraculous sign willing to embrace his speech and if in any thing there seem difficulty to seek their solution they do altogether the contrary and how can this man give we his flesh of God not without great impiety they cry together and it come not into their mind that there be nothing impossible to God 1. cor. 2. for whereas they be carnal as Paul say they can not understand spiritual thing but folly to itself seem so great a mystery but I pray you let we make great profit by other man synn and yield strong faith to mystery never in so high thing let we once think or utter that how for this be a jewish word and cause of extreme punishment therefore Nicodemus also when he say how can these thing be he hear worthy be thou a master in Israel and be ignorant of these therefore by other man offence we be instruct when God work let we not demand how but leave the knowledge and way of his work to he alone for as no man know what god be according to nature yet be justify by faith by believe that he will reward he that seek he so be ignorant of the reason of his work whereas by faith he doubt not that he can do all thing he shall obtain no dispiseable reward for this good disposition and true so God exhort we to be dispose by his prophet isaiah my cownseil be not as your cownseil nor as your way isa 53. be my way say our lord but as heaven surpass the earth so be my way above your way and my thought above your thought so he who in knowledge and virtue from God be so excellent how may he not work so miraculous that the reason of his work surpass the conceit of our mind do not thou behold what be do by man of handy craft they seem to tell we some time incredible thing but because we experience they to have fulfil like thing we light believe they may do they how then be they not worthy of great torment that contemn God maker of all thing as to say how in his work who they know to be the giver of wisdom who the scripture have we to be almighty math. 19 if therefore thou o jew will yet cry how such thy ignorance I imitate willing will crave how wen thou out of Egypt how be Moses rod convert into a serpent how be the leaprie hand sudden restore to former state how be water change into the nature of blood how go the father dry through the seize how by wood do the bitterness of water change to sweetness how do water issue out of the rock how do jordan stand how do invincible Hierico fall by a cry only innumerable be the thing in which if you require how you must necessary overthrow the whole scripture contemn the doctrine of the prophet and the writing of Moses himself wherefore you ought rather to believe in Christ and if any thing be hard humble to learn of he then like drunken sot to cry out how can this man give we his flesh do not thou see when you say these thing that together with that voice great arrogance be discover behowld christian this be the chapter which say he be read through will testify that we be deceive this be the chapter which as he say contain nothing but our spiritual union with Christ bring in for example the conjunction of vine and branch head and member etc. this be the chapter which he wonder that we will allege for our proof this be the chapter which be nothing pertinent to the matter in hand you perceive yourselves the 130. 131. 132. 133. untruth the 130. 131. 132. 133 untruth most malapert avouch to abuse your patience and to deceive your soul you perceive his confident appeal to post to seek here and there where he and his cause be utter destitute I will to God I can set before the eye of all man the golden chapter and instruction of primative father in manner as this of s. Cyrill that all may perceive how by reformer they be betray by false pretence of reformation forsooth according the doctrine of the primative father when and whilst they be a seduce to deformation of all primative godliness and religion which by the primative father be most commend the bread which descend from heaven be the body of our lord Catho priest Hieron Hedib q. 2. 4^4 and the wine he give his disciple be his blood 115. this place in deed be in his three tom. pag 142. rider there be a learned and godly woman propose twelve question of divinity to Hierome wherein and of which she desire resolution for in those day it be lawful for woman and all man to ask doubt touch religion and for their further instruction and consolation may read God word and free confer touch matter that concern their salvation and this great blemish your roman doctrine that will have neither man nor woman to read divinity and the reason be this lest they shall see your error and forsake your profession for this be your strong tenure mark this you catholic to keep they in blindness with idle ceremony dumb show and latin service but I trust in Christ short to see most of their eye open that will discover your privy plot and discourage your haughty stomach and general forsake your new religion be in deed but man invention this be the second question of the twelve but you omit some word and cut off some which obscure the matter but if a little charitable chide will make you more painful in your book and less careful to please man humour I can find in my heart to bestow it upon you but you be now forewarn I hope you will be here after better arm or better mind which I wish with all my soul as to myself but your proof be thus in Latin if therefore the bread that descend from heaven be the body of the lord and the wine which he give his disciple be his blood of the new testament which be shed for many for the remission of sin then let we cast away all jewish fable here you omit and and of the new testament which be shed for many for the remission of sin all this you have leave out which be ill do what now can you gather out of this to prove that Christ body be make of bread and his blood of wine no substance of either creature remain but only Christ carnal presence as he be on the cross sure here be not one word silable or letter to prove it but the contrary you wrong the father so to mangle he yet as you deliver he it prove nothing of the manner of Christ presence that be in question but the matter never in controversy for say she to this learned ^^ther if therefore the bread which come down from heaven be the body of Christ so she speak of Christ divinity that come down from heaven for his humanity do not and our question be of his humanity by transubstansiation in the sacrament so that this proof nothing sort your purpose and the blood here speak of be his blood of the new testament shed on the cross not in the sacrament once for all not for any that please the priest and therefore as she say let we cast away jewish fable so in God name for the love of God truth and of the people salvation cast you from you all munkish fable and forge legend that have mislead the people into this blind superstition and join with we to teach Christ precious flock the old apostolical and catholic religion command in God word and practise in the primitive church that you with we and we wi^h you and all in the lord may now in this plentiful vintage so labour in the lord vineyard his church according to our talent receive that every one of we may deliver his talon with advantage of many soul and then we shall be pataker of that sweet say well do th^u good and faithful servant enter into thy master joy which God grant to we both and so to the next as follow the 11. part of the second proof concern s. Hierome wherein be discuss who and how we allow and disallow to read scripture and heretical book and whether protestant or we do most symbolize with jewishness fitzsimon cart. lib. 1 pag. 103. lib. 2. pag. 303. 502. lib. 3. pag. 89. 90. caus ^ial 8. and 11. Fulk against d. Bristol pag. 15. 54. 115. CArtwright say there be not such sincerity to be look for at Hierom hand as from other that go before he that he be a cownterfeit that he often strain the text and for milk some time draw blood say that he be no less damn than Lucifer fulke that he be but a railer saint Hierome in this allegation teach the wine give to the disciple to have be Christ blood in the self same resolution to Hedibia he say the bread which our lord break and give to his disciple to be the body of our saviour else where he say s. Hieron Damas it be our very saviour who flesh we be feed withal and who blood we drink come forth m. rider and play your wont part come tell we what you oppose against this first you run half way in your tale before you stumble at this block in one only word at leinthe hemm and speak out your mind sure say you here be not one word syllable or letter to prove that Christ body be make of bread and his blood of wine not one word letter or syllable man let other man wit and eye be judge how courageous the 134. untruth the 134. untruth be deliver but sure the baker and the pillory once again must not be suffer to part so slight but that we may examine his cause by parcel and yet not in prolix or tedious manner that woman may ask doubt touch religion be as lawful now as in those day that they may vulgar read God word or the scripture seem a untruth at least it be not prove but only affirm by m. rider word the value whereof be know that be be not think convenient s. Hieron 103. I guess by these word of s. Hierome of who now we treat only the art of scripture say he be that which every one challenge this the chat old wife this the dote old man this the babble sophister this on every hand man presume to teach before they learn it nay more ancient say Tertullian tertul. praescripe etc. all be puffd up all do profess knowledge the very heretical woman how malapert how audacious to teach to dispute etc. of which in our 99 number how like you m. Rider this dislike towards your woman scripture but plead well for they and make much of they for in my own knowledge you have need to seek credit among they consider that few or none of they how base soever but disdain the marriage with the minister of the word and accept of they only for want of other they may you say free confer touch matter of salvation if you mean in the church s. Paul cross your say forbid woman to speak in the church it not be say he allow unto they the 135. untruth be that our roman religion will have no man nor woman read divinity God bless we the 135. untruth how wise this man discourse if this be affirm in good earnestness but because godly divinity of or sound doctrine tend to salvation may be know allow by we let these follow assurance to this present purpose in controversy for all lawful circuit shall have a referencie always to the centre testify saint Agnes even by testimony of s. Ambrose tell her audience this document of divinity that s. Ambros ser. ^0 Paulus Neapoludiaconus s. Maria Aegiptiaca the body of Christ be consociate to her body Maria Egiptiaca request before her departure and in vase of the divine body and life give blood in a sacred vessel other you may find of the female sex in Garetio Garetius in 3. class attain such divinity towards this mystery that great Protestant doctor never can reach unto the keep away of certain book you say to be our strong tenure first I answer the phrase of tenure in that sense wherein at seem intend be new and impropre how soever it bring i in the memory how you reprehend minister hicoxe for keep a trull and he you for you know what you call he base and he call you counter whereunto if you conjoin your word tenure it may be forget how close the counter in London and you marry together and diverse will or may think by such conjunction thereof with tenure that his meaning be only that you song a counter in London and in Dublin reach to a tenure and your meaning only that he song a base and never can reach high without any other mystery contain in your word for my part I leave you in your sweet consort and will answer further to such strong tenure the 136. untruth that it make the 136. untruth nether shall you escape in this place from receive a foil at venerable beda his hand say in cap. 7. proverb iuo p. 4. cap. 84. he be only permit to read heretic book who be so found in the catholic faith that he can not by craft or delight of their word be pervert also as I observe among yourselves you debarr diverse book of we from read as be know to every mean conceit ryfel man house for they and forfeit all they you find as lord over all man good and the lutheran do as careful debar your book in all their dominion Schlusselburg l. 3. art. 4. th. Caluin show that caluinian Lutheran book and lutheran their book and body and the same to be do by other reformer against reformer appear in Gretser Praefat. and lib. whereby be testify that we may as well as you or lutheran debarr such book as be by we know to be hurtful if not against the wise yet against the simple you know that I abstain from discover inconueniency succeed in our country by vulgar intermeddle in scripture whether chief protestant find it very commendable calu. in nou. test an. 1567. or convenient I appeal to these word first of Caluin that he confess Satan have gain more by these new interpreter than he do before by keep the word from the people second by Luther who late experience be more to be account than first unseasoned persuasion say Luther l. 1. con. Zuing. and Oecolamp ^ if the world continue any long it will be again necessary for the diverse interpretation of scripture now use that for the conservation of the unity of faith we receive the decree of concil and fly unto they by this appear all tenure and cawtion use by we concern the use ^r refuse of book among vulgar to have be deserve for the ^ther point that we will have no man to read divinity you mistake we for Richard hunn Puritan of who in the 124. num^er who damn say fox university with all degree and faculty you ^ave bind yourself to the same verdict by make such the foremenn of your quest. we create doctor of divinity we find ^choles and lesson to attain it all the university of the world ^re fruit of our faith how then be we say to dislike that man ^hould read divinity where be divinity but among catholic Erasmus ep. inf. germ testify Luther and melancton to ^ave condemn all science as sinful and Smidelin affirm the same hatred against degree of divinity among the zwinglians Wicleph have a distinct article that university study college degree be ethnical superstition and diabolical Luther serm. tit. say that have in the supin whether these reformer or we ^e hinderer of man to read divinity by these evidence may be assure gather ignorance m. rider be affect not by we but ^y such repyner against school and learning that you will fain bestow a little charitable chide upon we to make we more diligent shall by we be account a favour for hitherto it have have little show of charity which you have use against we say our religion be sandy superstition wicked and damnable heresy and irreligion our consecration full of uncertainty absurdity blasphemy our whole doctrine hellish and damnable and fit for to be teach in hell by fend then in earth by priest ourselves but liar deceaver heretic idolater charmer and magician etc. therefore we may be glad to have charitable mitigation of these grevous reproach yet I repeal my word rather choose for this cause your hate then your honour your contumely then your compassion your often and vain frequentation of another couple of word only for their consonancy without all occasion do argue there be little store where such estimation be have of such frivolous repetition how often in speech in letter in print book have I hear forewarn forfortify I will allow your reflect the mention of jewish fable against our profession if you can find any ^ust cause to apply it to we as I have to you I intend to make you seem a viper by make your own brood and conceit not to have issue but by tear your bowel remember how I have prove in the 36. number and often beside not only your profession but your person to endeavour to equal the sacrament of Christ with jewish ceremony make Christ to have be as effectua receive in Abraham time as since his institution of the b. sacrament how can this be but a jewish affection remember how by chief protestant mention in the 18. number of my examination and after in the 78. I have declare their hate against the new testament and their invitation to depend only upon the old how can this be but a jewish affection remember how in the say 18. number of my examination I have show other protestant to convict the puritan Patriarch Caluin to judaize and thereupon diverse book be late extant print at in Saxony an. 1586. with these and like title Caluin tend to jewishness Christian^ judaei a admonition out of the word of God that caluinist be not christian but only jew etc. how can this be but a jewish ^ now for varities sake learn in another phrase touch the same how most principal caluinist have renounce Christianity and be fall to jewish circumcision Conrade Schlusselburg Theol. cal. and in catal. heretic as Alemannus Ochinus V^la^^^ Gribaldus Adam Newser gregorius Paulus etc. many more who will not undertake the pain to be circumcise be by relation of protestant as much enemy of the deity of Christ our saviour as any jew how can this be but a jewish affection Massonum episcop. lib. 4. in nicol. 2. second learn how protestantry have original from a jew name josephus Albo familiar with first public founder of your opinion against the b. sacrament whereof their argument altogether agreeable against our doctrine may be a sufficient evidence cornel. Bertram politia judaica 1580. the turkish Alcoran print in Germany by the direction of protestant cal. harm in math. c. 26. v. 26. Beza in 22. luc. 20. Bibliand l. 1. paschate Israel pag. 25. 26. 30. Vrban in 2. resp. 2. lib. eclegm c 7. Tremel Bezam and Biblian loc. ^it that they be altogether consent in frame they three learn that a great part of the holy Puritan Consistorial discipline be borrow from a jew name Cornelius Bertram who dedicate his book of the jewish policy to Beza and print it in Geneva as appear by the say book fowerthly learn that the careful print of the turkish Alcoran by melancton and Bibliander can likely have no other intention then to induce christian people to embrace jewish circumcision require in that book five learn that Caluin Beza Bibliander Vrbanus Regius and Emanuel a jew do affirm that Christ institution of the b. sacrament differ nothing from a old jewish ceremony practise from before the time of esdras which ceremony the foresay translate out of the jewish Talmud unto which altogether in form and fashion by sit at a table by omit Christ word ^f institution by other concourse mention in the 68 number our protestant by all mean possible strive to conform themselves last learn that puritant peculiar a jewish affection ^y name their child according to a jewish practice in so much ^s a certain late Protestant note these Puritan nice name survey of the pretend holy etc. cap. 11. pag. 156. the ^ord be near more trial reformation discipline joy again sufficient from above free gift more fruit dust. to which if I will join the ^ames of cherubal and hollibal in my own parish you will ^ndoubtedly smile but I can not trace these man phrenesy without hindrance in other more profitable employment also by ^heir translation so earnest concur with the jew that diverse protestant have be occasion to reprehend they in that behalf ^s Laurence Humphrey Castalio etc. without further apostrophe m. rider upon great and urgent Humfred lib. 1. rat interpret pag 178. lib. 2. pag. 219. Castal defence pag. 227. ^nd evident approve occasion by mean of such inclination of protestancye towards the jew I will use your own word let we cast away jewish fable and join with we to ^eache Christ flock the old apostolical and Catholic religion command in God word and practise in the primative church what agreement can you require in i more then to jump and concur with you in one form of speak yet perhaps you have rather than the price of ^he prebendary wherewith you will have corrupt i to concur in one form of speech with you that I do not in this manner concur by make your own word like young viper tear rip your own entrail yet have I no desire to grieve you but only to gravel the error that your understanding I deserve thanks if you can conceive good office I can not hate the person of one sometime delude consider my own misfortune to have be miscarry I be defile I confess with the same or like error which now I discover and prosecute but ignorance of childhood and blind education deceive i m. Huetson term i therefore a and discommend i for leave the gospel to be subject to Antichrist the whore of Babylon the pope his answer be in the end of the 61. number yet I say again to he in s. augustin word s. August psal 36. conc. 3. what great stir keep thou I be more severe against my harm than thou what thou do discommend I condemn I will thou will that at thy error may be overpass why do I spend think you that read this calm comfort against a cavil caveat so precious time so much pain only to confound my error and to do some satisfaction to truth and religion which I impugn Catho priest August Aduersar cap. 9 430. the mediator betwixt God and man jesus Christ with faithful heart and mouth we receive give we his flesh to eat and his blood to drink although it seem more horrible to eat the flesh of man then to kill and to drink the blood of man then to she will it rider Paris print pag. 264. 116. AVgustine write against that pestilent adversary of the law and prophet who object that because Abraham by adultery with Agar break the law therefore either the law be not good or else the universal promise make to God by Abraham be of none effect confute he by scripture and reason tell he that the promise be make in Isaac not in Ishmael and disprove he for dislike such figure similitude and comparison as it have please the holy ghost to use for the plain express of the near union and conjunction that be betwixt Christ and his church and say what will this pestilent adversary say when he hear Paul speak they shall be two in one flesh he will scorn and deride it ephes 5. but it be a great mystery speak of Christ and his church for say Augustine we understand by the two son of Abraham and the two mother two testament though in respect of time and ceremony diverse but in respect of the substance all one and the same and also by the near union and conjunction betwixt man and wife we understand our natural union with Christ and that without any obscenity or absurdity maugre the beard of the adversary then follow you proof even in the midst of a sentence very untowardly I will not say negligent and yet you omit one word which though it be small in show yet it be in this place of great consequence for as you allege Augustine it be nothing material to confute the adversary of God grace thus Augustine speak and so you shall have say as the mediator betwixt God and man etc. and thus after your wont manner you leave out the point material and begin in the middle of a sentence leave out beginning and end neither respect what go before whereof and wherefore he speak the thing nor what follow after to prove and disprove the thing so speak of and this your neglect the coherence make you fail in the sense and inference for this word which you leave out show plain that it be a similitude and I hope you know that similitude be no sillogisme and as there be no obscenity or absurdity in the similitude of marriage they true shall be one flesh so in like case here be no absurdity or inhuman caniballisme in this similitude of the sacrament use to express our union with Christ for though it seem more horrible to eat the flesh of man then to kill man and to drink his blood then to shed it yet we without horror or absurdity eat the flesh and drink the blood of the mediator betwixt God and man jesus Christ and if the adversary in Augustine time or you romanist now will know how this may be so do without slaughter of Christ sin to our soul or offence to the world Augustine tell you in that place cord and ore with a faithful heart and mouth so that now you see Augustine scope and your drift clean contrary the one to the other for Augustine bring it as a similitude to express our spiritual union with Christ by faith you wrest it as speak of the corporal and guttural eat and drink of Christ body and blood in the sacrament under the form of bread and wine with our mouth and stomach many place you have unfit and in deed untrue allege yet show in none of they less learning and true meaning then in this for this be your great fault that wheresoever you see or hear in scripture father council or history Corpus and or such like word or phrase present you infer and so persuade the catholic that there be Christ carnal presence in the sacrament never examine the circumstance of the place or the end wherefore they be allege and thus you err not know or wilful contemn the state of the question the sense of the holy writ and judgement of the ancient father I be sure you never read this place of Augustine yourself but snatch it out of some late ignorant and foolish idle munkish or franciscan Enchiridion and my reason why I think so of you be draw out of Augustine himself for a few line before this your proof he call the sacrament holy sign not the thing themselves as you do and so distinguish that which you confound and within three line after your proof if you will have read he you shall have hear he record to your great discredit in this case that this your proof be as other former example be that it be speak figurative according to the rule of sound faith and religion now let the reader judge betwixt you and i whether of we be in the right August in this place as in the place former allege be against you still Augustine say the sacrament be holy sign and so say we but you jesuiet and priest say no they be the thing themselves Augustine say it be speak figurative and so say we you say no but proper Augustine say that this opinion be square out for pattern to Christ church by the straight rule of sound faith and so say we and as you allege your proof you say no and make a flat opposition betwixt Augustine faith and your faith and yet you will brag of father and that they all speak on your side and you all follow their saying when they neither speak for you nor you imitate they and so though we follow scripture father and primitive church yet you call we heretic and you that wrest scripture falsify father that have neither with you consent antiquity nor verity yet will be catholic and thus if a man shall have hire you to have bring a place out of Augustine against yourselves you can no better have fit yourself or your setter on then in this who very plain deliver the manner how Christ body and blood be to be eat and drink that be with a faithful heart and mouth not with our material mouth tooth and stomach as you untrue teach and thus hope the catholic will less trust you in the rest that have so gross deceive they in this I will proceed by Christ assistance to the examination of your next proof the 12. part of the second proof concern s. augustin 116. first it be allow by Caluin that s. augustin be fitzsimon calu. lib. 3. c. 3. n. 10. l. 4. c. 14. n. 25. 26. and in psal 58 v. 2. Beza in c. 3. rom. v. 12. the most faithful witness of antiquity the prince say Beza of all ancient divine no less of greek than latin so that it be a importan point to know who part s. augustin take ^artw lib. 1 pag 98. lib. 2. pag. 513. psal 78. v. 13. second the arch pillar of Puritan Cartwright say that augustin sentence be approve unadvised for the^^ a window be open to bring in all popery this be one great step to attain s. augustin to our side ^ Augst. ser. 2. apost and 26. 27. in joan. consen Euang. l. 3. c. 1. 4. in psal. 33. in cap. consecr. dist. 2. s. aug. in ps. 98. ser. verb. euang. beda 1 cor. 10. l. 3. trin. c. 4. cap. Consecr. dist. 2. cap. what need any long delay in this matter when never any child of the Catholic romain church cry more loud then s. augustin to pope and popery in the word of the prophet we thy people and the flock of thy pasture-ground will confess ourselves thy everlasting in the first 14. number he be find teach to receive the true body of Christ not only spiritualy (@) in a visible sacrament in in truth itself in the 38. numb he be find teach that Christ in the 6. chap. of s. John ample treat of the b. sacrament contrary to m. rider denial thereof in the 32. (@) he be find teach that Christ according to the letter be in diverse place at once in the 46. number he be find teach that the body of Christ be not only a figure but also the verity and that the same body which be bear of the b. virgin Marie be give to be eat in the 54. number he be find teach that we eat our lord yet in such manner as we harm he (...) our eat but rather arm and help our soul by such divine participation in the 63. number he be find teach that to preach Christ and to eat he be very different contrary to m. Rider affirm both to be all one in the 64. number he be find teach that we shall confess faithful what be before consecration but bread and wine after consecration be the fle^^ and blood of Christ in the 70. number he be find teach that it (@) Christ flesh and blood which be receive under the form or likeness of bread and wine what more may be say or more effectualy and more opposite to protestantcy by any pope or Papist in the world now let we give ear to m. Rider first he fetch a long carrier of half his chapter before he ever stoop at this allegation out of s. augustin next leave what I have say he tell what I shall have say when I play the puritan as I say before his direction will be more convenient to leave the matter and to dally round about up and down off and on three that it be a similitude and therefore no syllogism I tell you before in the 43. number what logician he be a^^ust 1. topic. 14. read Aristotle good sir and he will tell you that similitude may well be argument nay read the new testament and find Christ argument to have be usualy but similitude at last he affirm plain that augustin tell we shall eat Christ with faithful hart and mouth why I ask no more but that it be grant not only by heart but also by mouth Christ may be eat but like a bad cow he strike down with his heel all this milk even in the very next word which make the 135. untruth that s. augustin be contrary to we the 135. untruth but I pray you what be the reason forsooth say he because he utter thes word as a similitude to another intention yet again let it be grant he to have utter the word and for the intention whatsoever it be it be know that he will not and can not lawful for any purpose ratify or insert false doctrine so that if the word be find his mind be notorious express when no footing can be found on these silly if ever hitherto any reason have be silly shift and no answer frame or forge to this forcible allegation then burst out the 136. untruth the 136. untruth that we have allege many place unfit and untrue yet show in none of they less learning and true meaning then in this but I ^ay as often before that I take no great assurance of your be trample by these allegation then by your pretend that I show small learning and not good meaning in they for what bedlam beldame but might in impudent resolution say as much ^f she have no other evasion and who behold not but in this ^aying and in such manner be the very depth of infamy detect the 137. untruth follow close by the 137. untruth that we have never read the ^lace in s. augustin but snatch it out of some ignorant monkish Enchiridion what may be say to this facer of a bold cownte^ance in a cold cauterize conscience nothing fit and short ^hen out of the poet no couradge new but less thy shame be find yea the very derision of the name of monk be not only a demonstration of his be abandon by s. augustin but a testimony of ^is combination with old heretic s. aug. tom. 8. in psal. 132. against who s. augustin manifould defend the profession of monk yea and such ^heir very name whereof let these few proof be witness worthy do the name of monk displease they because they will not dwell in consent with their brother Petilianus and i then Petilianus proceed with a malicious mouth ^o dispraise monastery and monk reprove i also that I have institute that ^ind of life all his whole work be replenish with mention Tom 6. cont. petil lib. 3. c. 40. commendation direction and defence of such profession all be one for my cavaliero he have a resolution to trample all truth un^^^ foot Remi^d in con. Molinai fol. 76. such be a like Protestant not long since who be admonish of his unmeasurable lie he answer (@) long as I can I will indomadge let it remain hide as long as it may these lie will avail among the people o woeful yet general o true yea shameful protestant intention what other can be his intention that say by the 138. the 138. untruth untruth s. augustin to affirm it which be say of our sacrament to be figurative speak he only so say of s. Paul word of marriage they shall be two in one flesh or where s. augustin call in the word of the apostle marriage ephes 5. the 139. untruth a great sacrament in Christ and his church to interpret it be but a great mystery or by the 139. untruth to refer the word holy sign to this our sacrament which s. Augustine refer to the former sacrament of marriage or by th^ 140. the 149. untruth untruth to avouch that notwithstanding all these palpable evidence for our side and against our adversary yet that s. Augustine be opposite to we and we can never if we have be hire have bring a more repugnant testimony I can not conceive but every one Catholic and Protestant do perceive such a^ aforesaid to have be his intention to indomage to remain hide as long as may be and to that end to have debar i three whole year all use of print although he have warra^^ to the contrary and in this mercenary manner of popularity (@) seek to content for the present tyme it be more bright clear than the son at midday I proceed full of haste and loathsomeness to write against man of such intention Gellius lib. 1. who (...) lavish and unbridled that it flow only with a most odious puddle or stream (@) word wherein none shall contend with they the conquest be against the conqueror and the victory his that be overcome I find it by experience most assure that Nazianzen relate of old reformer to be as real among new reformer Nazianz. 2. pace (@) among they the strife be not as if they (...) err impious but that they contend to surpass on another in this (@) this approve say if I shall as often reply as occasion do require at every leaf of this book it may be repeat ^n what darkness of ignorance in what sluggish carelessness have they be Catho priest Leo epist. 22. anno. 366. rider this Leo be the 13 Archb. of Rome and twenty more succeed he b before any usurp the name of pope Nomb. 23.8 as not to have hear by hearsay nor by read to have find which in the church of God be so plain as that the mouth of child do tell the body and blood of Christ to be true in the bless sacrament 117. gentleman you mistake the epistle it be in the 23. epistle pag. 74. beginning in the 12 line print at Louvain 1575. and see it be both your twne proof and your own print if upon due examination it make against you you must think God deal with you as he do with Balaam who when he make acco^nt for gain to have curse God people than God put into his heart and utter by ^is mouth a blessing to his people you make account to have here overthrow the truth established error and strengthen your credit and God have put into your heart and you have subscribe with your hand to confirm the truth confute your own error and discredit yourselves and more to the world wonder and the foil of your roman faith even by a bishop of Rome against who you can take no exception so that now the catholic shall see that your carnal presence be not know to the first bishop of Rome for the first five hundred year and therefore it ^s not catholic and you shall see how untrue you not only quote he but allege he nay wrest and enforce he to speak that after his death which he never mean ^uring his life so that from the first to the last you deal neither true with the book of God nor the work of man and as Christ say to the scribe and pharese Matthew 15.6 you ^ave make the commandment of God of no authority by your tradition so you ^esuits and priest have make neither scripture ancient father council nor pope of ^nie authority by your new and false construction addition and subtraction etc. but now to the examination of your proof but I will first show to the catholic the occasion why Leo write this and there ^hey shall see how great you be deceive in mistake Leo and much abuse their simplicity and the credit they repose in you the occasion why Leo write this epistle be this that whereas the error of the manichee have great infect the church of God throughout all Christendom they deny Christ manhood and teach that his body be not a true body but a fantastical body he ^n a charitable manner send epiphanius and Dionysius two public notary of the church of Rome to the clergy and people of Constantinople request they that ^uch as profess these damnable heresy may not only be excommunicate from sermon and sacrament but also be banish from their city for fear of further in^ection for say he such as believe not that Christ have take our nature and flesh ^pon he believe neither the verity nor virtue of Christ passion and resurrection and then come in your proof which proper must be apply to such heretic (@) deny Christ his manhood to be bear of the bless virgin and hold that his body be not a true body but a fantastical body and not to we that believe both again you have not true translate this place for thus it stand in the author and after ward in what darkness of ignorance in what sluggish carelessness have they remain as not to have learn by hearsay not hear by hearsay as you translate that the truth of the body and blood of Christ among the sacrament of our common faith be not keep back even of the tongue of infant it seem you have this out of some man notebooke by hearsay not by your proper and diligent read of the author hmiselfe and my reason why I think so be these because you mistake so much and translate so untrue yet will not I take exception to every particular fault 1 first you say it be in the twenty epistle it be not so but in the th^^^ and twenty and therefore I think you never read the author 2 second you say hear by hearsay the author say learned by hearsay 3 three you translate for mouth it shall be tongue yet if the re^^ have be true I will not have except against this 4 four you change a noun into a adverb veer for true for truth and transpose it also out of that proper place to alter the sense of Leo the bishop of Rome which be great wrong to the dead author and live reader 5 fif^he you change the singular number for the plural sacrament for sacrament 6 sixth you quite leave out two word of great consequence and (@) 7 seventhlie you add this word bless which be not in the author 8 eighthlie you point it not right consider the author speak it only by way of interrogation which premise be fault great and gross which show plain that you ne^^^ read the author himself but borrow they forth of some other man paper and therefore you sin grievous in persuade man conscience to take there thing at your hand for truth and faith when indeed you tender they nothing but thing ^^^sled from all faith and truth now gentleman do you deal plain with the world in bring this pla^^ against we do ever any of we deny that Christ be bear of the virgin Marie and conceive by the holy ghost you can charge we with it do ever any of (@) teach that Christ body be fantastical neither do you ever hear it then in this as in the rest you wrong we deceive the catholic and abuse Leo sometime pope but I will show you plain that this bishop of Rome and this your proof confute and confound your own opinion and confirm we read page 7. 8. in the same epist where he bring in the sacrament of redemption and of regeneration first Leo say the truth of Christ body and blood be in both the two sacrament as well in baptism as in the lord supper and as he be real in the other and what presence of Christ be in the one sacrament there be the like presence in the other as have be prove before but least this will ma^^ the fashion of your transubstantiasion and carnal presence therefore you trans^^^ it in the singular number not in the plural second you have leave out two word of common faith bec^^^^ no man shall see it be then as Catholic opinion to believe that the truth of Chri^^ body and blood be as real in baptism as in the lord supper yet in both spiritual in neither corporal but you will say I abuse the reader because Leo never speak of this word spiritual or spiritual and therefore I wrong both the author and reader I answer as (@) the prophet answer Achab the king when he tell eliah that he trouble Israel (@) say the prophet it be thou and thy father house that have trouble Israel in that you have forsake the commandment of the lord 1. king 18.17.18 and follow Balaam so gentleman it be not I that wrong the author that be dead or the people that yet live but it be you and your confederate that follow Balaam of Rome God keep you free from follow Balack of Spain and that the reader shall see I will prove that Leo join with we and we with he and both of we with Christ truth against your trash I will make he speak in his own defence and utter that which you conceal it follow immediate after your proof in the next immediate word after this manner in the same page because that in the mystical distribution of that spiritual food this be give and receive that we which receive the virtue of the heavenly meat we pass into his flesh which be make our flesh gentleman this you shall have add to your former for the author join they together the one to accompany the other in God service and in deed the latter to express the former but now let we out of this but compare the old doctrine of the old bishop of Rome and the doctrine of the modern pope and his chaplain 1 the old bishop of Rome say the food in the sacrament be spiritual and heavenly the late pope jesuit and priest say that it be carnal and material 2. the old pope say the distribution of that spiritual food be mystical you say presbiteriall 4 they say in old time that the worthy receiver of this spiritual meat be transform into Christ his flesh the late pope and you his echo say no but the sacramental bread and wine be transsubstantiate and transnatured into Christ flesh and blood the bishop of Rome bring in this to prove Christ humanity conceive by the holy ghost and bear of the virgin Marie against heretic who teach the Christ body be fantastical and you allege the same place to prove Christ humanity to be make by a sinful ignorant priest and that of bread and so contrary to scripture and creed will recreate Christ of a new matter which be as blasphemous and heretical the old bishop and church of Rome hold so Tertull. contr^ Martion lib. 4. that the sacrament can not be true sign of Christ body unless he have a true body and because thy be true sign therefore Christ have a true body and the late pope and popeling teach that Christ body be make a new of the sign and so confound the sign with Christ body and in deed maintain heresy as gross as the manichean for they hold that either he have no body or a fantastical body and you hold that there be no sign in the sacrament but that they be transubstantiate into Christ body and blood and so Christ body be daily make of a piece of bread John 6. which must needs be a body fantastical not a true body as our creed witness and as in the manner of eat Christ body you disagree not much from the capernait so in the case you differ not much from the Manicheis now will I say as the painful owner of the vineyard say isaiah 5. 3^ now therefore oh you inhabitant of jerusalem and man of judah judge I pray you between i and my vineyard so oh you inhabitant of this worshipful city of Dublin and you loyal subject of Ireland and all the learned and well mind of both England and Ireland judge I pray you charitable yet true betwixt i and these my adversary and if you refuse to censure we and this our conference according to the truth than I say as David say to Saul the lord be judge between thou and i 1. sam. 24.13 so the lord be judge betwixt we whether of we have more true and with great sincerity of truth and conscience behave ourselves in this matter for his glory discharge of our own conscience instruction and salvation of the catholic the last part of the second proof concern s. leo. Fi^zsimon 117. master rider as the hare be wont before he seat himself in his form have a great desire to strain himself to great leap and gird towards the end yet all will not serve as far as my remembrance serve i sidneis Arcadia I read in sr. Philip sidneis Arcadia a pleasant fiction of one Dameta who have earnest provoke one Clinias to combat think that he will not accept the challenge but Clinias be with much wook animate to answer he Dameta except against the promise performance of Clinias that it be not in such time place and manner as it deserve by he now to be allow let my Dameta prove i a Clinias if and when he can for I be sure I can now discover he a Dametas in relent in the main provocation and except at trifle most timorous and impertinent Plutarch in as Plutarck declare that malus orator a bad orator answer nothing to the argument carp at the voice or paper negligent write so in most perfect resemblance m. rider omit the answer to my argument carp and wrangle at some impertinent point about the write of they as before now and after appear cic. lib. 2. Heren such deal be proper to calumnier say Cicero to leave the matter and strive about wander word concern Leo how favourable the learned protestant do account he to their profession let this testimony of Beza intimate Beza in confess cap. 7. cap. 12. it be manifest say he that Leo in (@) epistle do clear breathe forth arrogancy of the antichristian romain Sea etc. farr of another opinion be amos patriarch of Jerusalem when he say joan Moscus in c. 149. for I have find it write that the most bless and equal to angel pope Leo that govern the church of Rome etc. the protestant account he comparable to devil and we to angel which be difference sufficient to know who account he a friend and who a foe therefore approach we to learn how friendly m. rider have find he who so learned and principal of his sort account (@) adversary first he say we have put the 22. for the 23. i account not my writing so absolute beyond all other man but the such a small slip may escape my examination when I over-redd the book after the engross thereof by one from who a far great fault in discretion have be supportable but sure in my own extract the quotation be unfaultie you shall perceive beside all former gross corruption in my reprehender sufficient in this very parcel to counterpoise far great defectivenes than a misfigure of 22. for 23. after which reprehension he run headlong during fifty line of his discourse into his wont wonder digression of our shame if our own allegation be find against we of the occasion of such word of s. Leo of our falsehood towards God and man etc. next he tell how and against who our allegation shall have be apply and how by great lykelyhood we have never read it but purchase it by hearsay whereof he yield eight reason to any indifferent judgement not unworthy to have he cap with a hood of eight colour for who beside he will except against a translation wherein the pith and substance be faithful observe whether the rind or circumstance be more or less where be either sacred or profane translation but take unto themselves that liberty and be it not most detestable to chant on such fanatical exception and at the same time in the same correction to fail most filthelye it be often and at every such reprehension before declare here also it be conspicious for out of the latin he omit this whole line which in the church of God be so consonant in the mouth of all when that he take upon he to translate the sentence most exact according as s. Leo deliver it their hatred against the name of church whereby in the bible of the year 1562. it be entire exclude and their want of universal consent blind he not to behold this line or enforce he to dissemble it true I resign from the bottom of my hart my first answer whole to God sacred providence be his gracious gift that it have that perfection as not to be subject to any other cavil and that in their seek to carp and when they can not do ever redound to their infamy and utter confusion as ample appear in the 51. 76. 97. number now if we have misfigure 22. for 23. what inference be it that therefore we never read the author after he demand do ever any of they deny that Christ be bear of the virgin Marie I answer that to appear in the examination of that article of belief then a second question be propound whether ever any of they do teach Christ to have a fantastical body to which likewise I answer that diverse of they have so teach by make his body devoid of all blood by affirm his body as much in Abraham time as after to have be receive in communion by grant his body to be conjoin with we realy yet not corporaly etc. which be infallible assertion that he have a fantastical body and consequent by grant such allegation available to disprove the teacher of a fantastical body m. rider as often before so now by teach the same give sentence against himself by attaint his inevitable untruth the residue concern s. Leo shall be understand the 141. untruth the 141. untruth be that after Leo twenty archbishopp of Rome succeed before either he or they usurp the name of pope witness this to be a clear untruth first m. rider against himself say about the midst of this chapter that we abuse Leo some time a pope here Leo be a pope and here the same Leo and twenty his successor be no pope second witness the whole council of chalcedon Concil. chalcedon act. 3.4.6 in these word bishop in place of my lord most bless and apostolical Leo of the universal church pope of the city of Rome I be precedent in this synod have appoint consent and subscribe be not every word of this testimony think you a terror and a torment to m. rider opinion first to view and understand his former untruth of pope by the subscription of 630. father who be in that council by who that Leo be pope be maintain against he second by perceive the pope of the city of Rome entitle apostolical lord of the universal church three by observe such roman pope legate although but a bishop to have be precedent of the whole general council etc. this testimony be long before the time by m. Rider determine of phocas emperor first bestower of supremacy upon roman pope if reformer do not lie the 142. 143. 144. 145. 146 untruth the 142. untruth be that he will show this allegation of Leo to be against we the 143. untruth that we deal false with God word and work of man the 144. that we have diminish the authority of pope and father the 145. that the error of manichee have infect all Christendom for never be any heresy so universal much less it of the manichee the 146. untruth that s. Leo say the truth of Christ body and blood to be as well in baptism as in the eucharist for first this man that often blame i if I allege not word next before or after my purpose although they have not be pertinent he himself overskip above a hundred line to find out some silly shroud remain never the less as naked as the wood cock who only beak be cover the word be the church which issue out of the flesh of her spouse when out of the side of he crucify flow out blood and water she receive the sacrament of redemption and regeneration in which word there be neither baptism nor eucharist signify but only declare that the passion of Christ by similitude of effect call a sacrament have be a redemption and regeneration to the church what affinity have such word with they by m. Rider late relate what a decretal and obstinate proceed be this against perspicuous truth and in desperate depravation to falsify father so witting to deprave evidence so contrarious it be filthy to have seek so far and depart so destitute the usual artifice of such doctor be when they be press and suppress with any authority to search most careful some word in the place allege whereby they may in some show evacuat the brunt of such authority be so infatuate with loathsomeness and hatred against Christ institution that thereby be as Luther himself say become mad and gyddye luth. tom. 7. fol. 397. what soever they take hold of although it be but a straw yet they imagine it to be a spear and that at every stroke they kill thousand never can a father express better the qualite of his child the 147. untruth be the 147. untruth that s. Leo by mention the word spiritual do exclude all our doctrine this untruth be at least a dozen time detect and therefore need no further refutation it be clear that s. Leo here say the verity of the body and blood of Christ and consequent not a figure only to be one of the sacrament of our faith not unknown to child which also s augustin confirm and s. Leo to put it out of doubt that he have rather endure any martyrdom then think otherwise he advise christian general s. Leo Serm. 6. 71. as by no mean to doubt of the verity of the body and blood if you require the cause of his knowledge he answer for that be receive by mouth which be believe by heart these word m. rider be peremptory no gloss no rack no quirk can avoid they but that they leave you a spectacle to God angel and man full of shame and confusion for your unadvised claim and canterized conscience the 148. untruth the 148. blasphemous untruth be that the body of Christ make of bread be a fantastical body for in the 46. number m. rider be make to convict himself of such untruth by find according s. augustin to be no other body than be bear of the virgin Marie tertul. l. resur such beastly accusation do well inform what you be because as Tertullian say for your apostrophe to the city of Dublin and imprecation to God to judge betwixt you and i for the first Dublin know you too well and few of your sort better not only for your former hindrance of the baker therein but also for your transfer their trade of merchandise into your house and liberty among your son in law they be foreigner and very flesh worm in Dublin such as neither bear sess nor press watch nor avarde toll nor custom and in the mean time suck the juice of the city into their private purse under the warmth of your wing to use your phrase and in the protection of your liberty so then Dublin shall be very seaseles not to know you familiar and particular for the next be not headlong in such importunate provocation against your soul God often permit sentence of hipocritical imprecation to take effect let your brother in the lord Schlusselburg lib. 2. fol. 68 Schlusselburg against your own brother in the lord John Amand even in our purpose and matter inform you say the say John Amand to have cry in public sermon pray brother and hearer that God instant cause i to die a ill death that I further seduce none if I be faulty teach this error and thereupon he be strike with a cruel colic and breathe out his miserable soul polid. virg. l. 8. hist. Anglic. I refer you for brevity sake to the ruthful example of earl Godwyne relate by Polidore virgil whereby you may be reclaim from such execration against yourself to our purpose one of Dublin regard your strange deal and dispute pertinent declare it in a borrow verse out of f. cotton treatise of the sacrifice do you bring old he scorn or new he fret or hard you find he dull or plain he shrink or past all doubt he storm and stand wilful thus much for the father as a skantling or taste Catho priest leave the surplus to the curious reader I may have recite martial epist Burdegalenses cap. 3. Anaclet epist general Dionysius Areop. cap. 3. page 3. who live within the compass of the first hundred year but I observe (a) (a) I pray you observe verity I think your meaning be 500 year otherwise it can be true brevity as by the next proof shall appear 118. 119. gentleman martiiall neither in this place nor in the ten chapter follow say any thing against we but for we rider and as I think altogether against you for marshal reprove those that honour such priest as sacrifice to dumb and deaf image which near touch your freehold and dissuade they from it say marshal for now you ought much rather to honour the priest of almighty God which give you life ^n the cup and bread this be that which you think knock we in the head but first ^et it be examine and then censure 1 first you must prove that you be priest of almighty God which you shall never do as have be plain prove 2 second you must prove that you give life to the communicant in the cup and bread which be impossible and unless you prove the premise the allegation ^s impertinent 3 three and last if the priest can give life in the cup wine or bread than it be clear that the substance of bread and wine remain and that will knock but the brain of your miraculous transubstans^ation now master in allege marshal you be bring into a labyrinth get out as you can for if you ever have read martial you will never have allege he in this case for in the end of the same chapter he show to Sigebert and to other new convert from idolatry to true religion that Christ be sacrifice three manner of way first by himself on the cross once for all second by the cruel jew who cry crucify he crucify he three by we in remembrance of he thus marshal tell you that in remembrance of Christ be not Christ now if you will needs sacrifice Christ after marshal opinion you must choose one of these three after the first if you will you can after the second I be sure you will not and after the three you ought but do not thus your proof mend as sour ale do in summer worse and worse even like a coney in a net or a bird among limetwig the more they stir the fast they stick but you can help it see the cause be bad how can your proof be good but in God name leave wrest of father deceive of catholic and come to the confession of your fault and recantation of your error and you shall glorify God edify his people and save your soul which God grant for Christ sake for Anaclete I have not see he and therefore can censure he Anaclete but if he be ancient he will speak with we if he be a late writer he be a weak witness and at first except against and unless he live within the first five hundred year after Christ he must neither help you nor hurt we and for Dionysius Areop because he speak not one word for you Dionysius Areop^ therefore I have no reason to speak one word against he and whereas you say these father you have bring as a scantling or taste I tell you plain scant a taste of any trick and the father you have not bring with you but leave they behind you because you know they will witness what they shall not what you will then you say you will leave the surplus to the curious reader by your leave it be better to be curious then careless for if the reader have not be more careful than you be ovid. lib. 1. pag. 1. it have be inform chaos and as Ovid once say but now to the rest a confirmation of all our former doctrine by disciple of the apostle particular by martial Anaclet dionise etc. fitzsimon 118. first m. rider request we as we observe brevity so to observe verity I promise in the mercy of God that I will not fail therein nor for a thousand world will falsify or deprave any point of truth witting God be my witness and my conscience that I seek not nor aim at worldly applaud or preferment my cause need no sinister defence the gat of hell can not can not and may not hereafter prevail against it when I abjure Christ and religion then will I puritan-like psal 4.3 Esa. 28.15 1. tim. 4.2 mea^ and love vanity and seek for a lie plant my hope in a lie and speak falsehood in hypocrhysie this request from he who as if he hate verity eschew it and yet here require it as if he affect it and have want it in our deal be a double offence because as s. augustin say s. aug. psal. 63. dissemble equity be not equity but double iniquity the 149. untruth for it be both iniquity and dissimulation second in the 149. untruth he say that unless we understand by the first hundred year five hundred year it be untrue but contrary I say again by testimony of s. Ignatius s. Ignatius epist. 5. that Dionysius be disciple to s. Paul Anaclet to s. Peter who both suffer in the year 69. martial by most writer account one of the 72. disciple of Christ and consequent they all three be within the first hundred year after Christ and so our say true so that m. Rider can meddle with no kind of doctrine but in correct he be find lamentable unskilful the 150. untruth three in the 150. untruth be say that Martial speak nothing against but for protestantry I infer thereupon that then you have recant protestantry for in the 99 number as be then a Protestant you deny priesthood in the new testament now as no Protestant you consent with martial that there be a priesthood and priest by who life be give in the chalice and bread as a Protestant before you have ever deny Christ to be the same in the eucharist who be crucify now as no Protestant for you have pro^essed to consent with martial you profess s. martial epist. Burdegal c. 3. what the jew by envy do sacrifice think to can^ell his name from upon earth that same we do propound upon a sanctify altar therefore have wise recant beware of be a relapse to your former vomit and never to deny any part of all this hereafter fowerthly he that have here profess himself conformable to s. Martial he that have before tell that the old and new testament 56. 62. 9^ give the name of one thing to another for resemblance sake behold how here he knock out as his swagr phrase be the brain of our transubstantiation because forsooth the body and blood of Christ be call bread and wine why be you so forgetful ^id not your own mouth in your pretend exposition of the 6. ^hap of s. John say this bread of life Christ be the true bread Christ and his flesh be all one and the same bread etc. and why may not s. Martial call Christ bread as well as you I never find one be so forgetful and contrarious to himself better describe then in f. cotton epigram before his treatise of the sacrifice sum you his word he forgett pinch you he fume cite you he hate be they now deny he affirm if but now affirm he rebate for the point of commemoration or remembrance it be in the 81. and 86. number abundant discuss for discomend our proof and affirm that we be take as in a net it displease i not for never think I any proof so strong as what by your like be pretend weak nor my doctrine and profession more at liberty and out of danger then when by such it be disable in not know Anaclet you testify what your skill be in the primative pope s. Anaclet epist. 2. Ital. among who he be of the first in time and dignity by he you may learn that priest be handler of Christ body you have no reason you say to speak against Dionysius because he speak not one word for we yes m. rider it be for we great that the priest must s. Dion hierarchy Ecclesiast. cap. 2. and 3 first make his confession after have place the sign upon a holy altar by which sign Christ himself be not only signify but receive then that the venerable prelate come to the altar and sacrifice then that after elevation of the sacred host he communicate himself and distribute part to the assembly which be in one word to say mass if by your own confession you have not reason to speak against all this than you will also be destitute of reason in impugn we any long for our confession for our sanctify altar for our priest for our mass for our elevation and in one word for all our papistry as I answer a little before so now I answer again that I have never better opinion of my answer that it be neither careless nor defective but exact and insuportable than I have by your reprehension of it for that be your last refuge to make vaunt your victory reproach your reprove which be as Cicero say to retire and fly dissemble a triumph and when you be confound to pretend you have confute imitate certain be wound in their bowel who Aristotle relate aristoteles lib. 3. animal in and by lawgh to perish so you notwithstanding outward applaud God know and every reasonable man have as foul fail and as forcible be foil as ever need any enemy of God and godliness nether want I in the next word of Ovid a more pertinent reply then wherewith I be in the last line attaint but I will aspire to great victory over he then by Ovid help for I forgive his accusation without any feel thereof s. Chrysostome have long since arm i against such reprehension s. Chrysost. hom. 2. Antiochen have any one say s. Chrysostome injury thou and thou not feel it nor lament it nor endure any hurt thereby thou do rather strike than be struken yet if he have any sparck of modesty or wisdom he will have say to himself out of Horace horat. 1. epist. 18. ter. in Adelph contemn thy own skill commend not nor it of other condemn but Terence say a conclusion of these two principal proof out of scripture and father 119. do not marvel christian reader fitzsimon that m. Rider so confident claim the father as his favourer who be so find to have no interest or title in they remember the dishonest woman most impudent and peremptory claim of another woman child before Solomon remember this our purytan predecessor like claim to the primative father so perfect deliver by dioscorus as you may say not one spirit only but also one mouth to have utter the word relate by he and repeat by m. Rider they be of such agreeable sound and suitable sense Concil. chalcedon immediate Constantinop I be abandon together with the father I defend the doctrine of the father I depart not a jot and I have their testimony not simple nor slight but in their own book yet this protestation of dioscorus be perfidious and most impious dissemble for as a principal heretic he have depart from both father and christian faith and be condemn a Eutychian heretic theod. lib. 4. fab. conc. Chalced. s. vigil l. 4. con. Eutych s. Basil in in 7. such as affirm Christ divinity to have be crucify and bury and tradition to be of no estimation wherein also our sectarist as appear in the examination of the creed voluntary conform their imagination now what part of m. rider caveat be there but the former word of dioscorus be therein verbatim in a manner engross the whole consent of all sort of protestant Lavatherus in visitatione Genebrard chr. l. 4. pag. 526. excremiss^ 200. spongia pag. 100 and 250. Eodinus in Statius lib. 11. which amownt to above two hundred sect for the very lutheran even by the report of La^atherus their visitor do in his time alone attain to a hundred and four score disclaim the father the father themselves disclaim all part of Protestant doctrine the knowledge of the grave and learn protestant to the contrary the testimony of his own conscience can not retain he but as Statius say it precept on run the head long horse neglect restrain rein and renew both dioscorus claim and impudency in affirm yea and that I may use to he a Lancashyre phrase in threap and bear in hand that it be blindness and ignorance to contradict he that the primative father stand not assure for he neither content therewith but to be know every way to concur with ancient heretic he manifould repeat these word follow of they mention a thousand year past by Vincent Lyrinensis who golden book he also commend to we to read as whereby to know he to be in the right whereas no other book so much discover he to be in the wrong and justus Caluinus a famous and principal Protestant impute his conversion to be a Catholic to no other book so much as to the same thus then say the say vincentius Vincent Lyrin. profane she nou. cap. 26. and you shall perceive some of they to say come o you fool and miserable people who common be call catholic and learn the true faith which none understand but we which have be long hide but be now of late reveal and show what can any Catholic or right believer speak more confident towards his true belief will you give ear to m. rider word of like mowlde and honesty you and your late rhomish catholic do quite dissent from Christ truth and owld romish religion and therefore remember whence you be fall and return to the ancient truth by which word he neither go beyond nor astray from these former heretic as true pronounce they as they it be impossible at this discovery of his deal but his mind say out of Plautus Plautus in cap. to my guileful frawd there be no shroud remain what then be his intention in publish his caveat whereby be to ensue such infamy and confusion as he can not be ignorant may have succeed I answer the same which be relate in the 116. number of one of his brother in the Lord who be challenge of his exorbitant lie answer Remund Rufus in con. fol. 76. as long as I can I will indomadge it shall remain secret as long as it may among the people these lie will be currant such be Stratocles the athenian who in all post haste return home from the battle wherein the athenian be overthrow certify the contrary that they have vanquish their enemy whereupon triumph of joy be appoint and great feast and gratulation use within two day after the truth be reveal and every one offend with Stratocles for his lie he answer I have more care to content you two whole day then respect to have towld one lie so be it with my cavailero he esteem more the joy for a moment by being a learned doctor and great confuter or gladsoome relator of false victory by untruth how great soever than the disgrace which may ensue which he think he will avoid as long as he may and when he cold no long to defend his dissimulation by example of Beza and Cartwright allow in such case to be lawful to neglect all truth and fidelity as appear in the 99 number the three proof that the chief protestant do believe the real presence Catho priest and allege all the father for the maintenance thereof 120. 121. 122. 123. this true be worthy admiration that none of the father Luther tom. 7. defence verb. fol. 391. whereof there be a infinite number but do speak clean contrary to sacramentary and though the father all with one mouth affirm yet the sacramentary harden themselves to deny they and they will never utter this that Christ his body be not in the bless sacrament if they have any regard of the scripture and be not their heart full of infidelity fol. 390. I true will give the frantic srcramentary this advice ibid. fol. 411. that see they will needs be mad they shall play their part rather whole then in part therefore let they make short work and raze out of the scripture these word this be my body which be give for you for touch their faith it be all one if thus they keep it Christ take bread and give thanks break it and give it to his disciple say take eat do this in remembrance of i for this prove sufficient that bread be to be eat in remembrance of Christ this be the whole and entire supper of the sacramentary in vain do the sacramentary believe in God the father God the son Luther tom. 2. fol. 263. and God the holy ghost see they deny this one article as false of the real presence whereas Christ do say this be my body the whole opinion of the sacrament the sacramentary begin with lie Luther in ep. joh. Haruagium Typograh rider Cons. dist. 2 canon in page 429. and with lie they defend the same gentleman you know Luther be a monk and though he recant popery and utter condemn your transubstantiation as a fable have neither scripture nor father to warrant it yet he stick fast in another error fit name (a) (a) Luther heresy be in Rome before Luther be bear consubstantiation which error he also suck from the pope own bte as you may see in his distinction for you in your transubstantiation teach that of the substance of bread and wine be make by the priest the very natural body and blood of Christ no substance of either remain but only the outward form Luther by his consubstansiation say that Christ body and blood be receive together in the bread under or with the bread both substance and accident of bread and wine remain now I pray you how fit this your purpose you will say in this that Luther hold a real presence true but Luther deny your real presence as a fable and yet his opinion be far wide from the truth we regard not Luther censure against we for Christ his spiritual presence no more than you do for his comdemn of your transubstansiation and Luther be more to be commend than all the pope cardinal priest and jesuit in Christendom who with Augustine though he do err yet will not persevere in error as you and they do tom. 1. page 1. lest he shall be a heretic and therefore in his epistle to the christian reader say in this manner before all thing or first of all I beseech the godly reader and I beseech he for our lord jesus Christ his sake that he will read these my work judicial and with great compassion and pity and let he know and understand that I be sometime a monk as if he shall say if I have err or do err impute that to my monkery and popery which in deed be but a forge of bless and a legend of lie the priest think every real presence to be their transubstantiated real presence but because you say Luther hold a real presence therefore you conclude against we with his testimony because you call he a chief Protestant persuade the catholic that either some chief protestant be of your opinion touch your real presence or else that there be a jar among ourselves touch the same and because few of you have read Luther as appear by your omission transposition and your imperfect translation and therefore in this point know not exact the difference betwixt yourselves Luther and we I will plain and true set down the three several opinion touch this question that the reader may see wherein the difference one from another or agreement one with another consist the manner Christ will shall be by question and answer as follow 1. 1. question what be give in the lord supper beside bread and wine 1. Aunsw 1. answer first you say the body and blood of Christ second Luther say the body and blood of Christ three we say the body and blood give in the sacrament 2. Quest. 2 Quest. how be Christ body and blood give in the sacrament 2. Aunsw 2 Auns you say corporal Luther say corporal we say with scripture and father spiritual 3. 3 quest in what thing be Christ body and blood give 3. Aunsw 3 Aunsw you say under the form or accident of bread the substance be quite change the accident only remain Luther say in with or under the bread neither substance nor accident change but both remain we with scripture and father say Christ body and blood be give in his merciful promise which tender whole Christ with all his benefit unto the soul of man seal and assure unto we in the worthy receive of the sacrament 4. 4 quest. how must Christ body and blood be receive 4. Aunsw 4 Auns you say with the mouth Luther say with the mouth and faith we say according to the holy scripture that Christ must be receive by faith and there lodge and dwell in our heart for whatsoever Christ give by promise m^st of man be receive by faith 5. 5. quest. to what part of man be Christ body and blood give 5. Aunsw 5. Auns you say to your body which be absurd Luther say both to body and soul which be impossible we say to our soul for the promise be spiritual the thing promise spiritual the name to receive they spiritual so the place into which it must be receive must needs be spiritual not corporal not that the substance of Christ body be vain to our spirit but that those precious benefit purchase for we in the crucify body of Christ must be unite to our spirit by faith this doctrine be apostolical sound and Catholic upon which we bold may venture our soul and salvation ^ Quest. to who be Christ body and blood give 6. ^ Auns. you say to the godly or godless believer and infidel as have be above say 6. Aunsw Luther say both to the godly and godless we say only to the godly believer as heretofore have be prove ^ Quest. what do the wicked eat in the lord supper ^ Auns. you say accident of bread and Christ body 7. Luther say the wicked eat bread both substance and accident 7. Aunsw and the body of Christ also we say the wicked eat nothing in the lord supper but bare bread and drink nothing but mere wine be the outward element of the sacrament as for the inward grace of the sacrament which be Christ crucify with all his merit they eat not they receive not because they have neither a lively faith to receive he nor a purify heart by faith to entertain he and therefore they only eat as judas do and as Augustine say Tract. 59 John page 205. the godly eat bread the lord the wicked only the lord against bread of the the Lord 8 Quest. what be it to eat Christ body 8. 8. Auns you say carnal to eat Christ flesh with your bodily mouth etc. 8. Aunsw Luther say carnal to eat Christ flesh and spiritual to believe in he we say with the scripture that to believe that all Christ merit be we and purchase for we in his passion this be to eat Christ body as have be already prove 9 quest. what be it to drink Christ blood 9 9 Auns you say carnal to drink his blood 9 Aunsw Luther say carnal and spiritual we say with the scripture it be to believe that Christ blood be shed on the cross for our sin 10 quest. how be bread make Christ body 10. 10 Auns you say by transubstantiation 10. Aunsw Luther say by consubstansiation we say by appellation signification or representation as aforesaid 11 Quest. where be Christ body 11. 11 Auns you say every where both of you err 11. Aunsw for then Christ shall not have a true body Luther say every where both of you err for then Christ shall not have a true body we say according to scripture and creed only in heaven 12 Quest. how be Christ every where 12. 12 Auns you say according to both nature 12. Aunsw but both of you speak monkery and popery Luther say according to both nature but both of you speak monkery and popery we say with scripture and father as have be prove only according to his godhead now gentle reader you see the agreement and difference that be betwixt the papist lutheran and protestant and how impertinent I will not say unschollerlike this be bring against we which neither help their carnal presence nor hurt our faith touch Christ spiritual presence and now to the rest that follow the three proof that the chief protestant do believe the real presence and allege all the father for the maintenance thereof fitzsimon 120. this proof be so important by how much it be grievous and extraordinary to be overthrow by his own brotherhood it lay m. rider upon to strain all his sense and employ all his power to frustrate so many assault and especial when his own domestical or rather his patriarck have conspire against he first therefore he say that Luther be a monk and therefore by Luther request all error and among the rest this of the real presence ought to be impute to his be a monk and so all be think well defend to which for answer I revoke first into memory what be deliver out of Luther in the 117. number of the manner of answer of these people how every thing to they seem a full and bastant resolution to all objection luth. defence verb. fol. 381. 382. 394. 405. 406. Besyd which else where he say they will say any thing boast of any thing confident affirm any thing but prove nothing unless it be by frivolous brag of the most clear truth in which and they observe no mean or end and and let no man say he believe their protestation and brag for it be certain that they lie and lie again second for answer I say the be of Luther a monk long before not to be a lawful pretext among protestant to avoid all opinion of he nor his request to have pity towards his quondam be a monk to be transfer from what particular point he in that place apply it unto for otherwise nothing he say shall be approve by any protestant Martin taburnus Calvinist Luth Tom 7. Wittemb fol. 502. and Tom 8. jen^ Germanico fol. 174. confess Tygur 3. fol. 108. it therefore that by no study conjoin thereto ardent invocation of God as he to have do Martin taburnus s ayth nor by any other mean although he careful inquire all occasion to harm the pope thereby can otherwise seem to he but a heresy even then when he have as he say himself one foot in his grave how can the dislike of this opinion be impute to his some time be a monk ay say he will carry this testimony and this glory to the tribunal seat of Christ my that I have with all earnestness condemn these fanatical man and enemy of the sacrament in what place soever they be under the sun etc. and again luth. in epist. jacob bremen an. 1546. to i the most unhappy that the blessedness be sufficient blessed be he that have not go in the of the sacramentarian and again libel con. and and sacramento we account in great earnestness heretic and stranger to the church of God all zwinglians and sacramentarian who deny Christ body and blood in the venerable sacrament of the eucharist to be receive with a corporal mouth this he affirm who all the learned protestant that ever be so much extol yea his very adversary to Caluin calu. arbitr. con. l. 1. pag. 192. Beza in Illyricus in c. 14. Apoc. Amsdorf in 1. tom. luth. in prefat. alber. con Carolostad l. 7. b. d. 8. Cyriacus con steph. agric. fol. 6. a jewel def. apol. par. 4. c. 4. n. 2. fox in Whitak con. campian pag. 191. the 151. untruth he be a Elias out of who mowth God thunder his truth which Alberus in like word confirm to Beza he be the principal instrument of christianity in Germany to Illyricus he be the angel flee through the midst of heaven and have the eternal gospel of who be mention in Apoc. the 14. to Mathesius he be the supreme father of the church to Amisdorfe he who never have his like in the christian world to Alberus a very Paul to he and Illyricus again a second Elias and one sufficient alone to appease God wrath to jewel melancthon jonas Pomeran Whytaker and fox he be the light of the world a saint the father of truth Luther what ever shift be find Luther will be secounde and much more report in our first 20. number what be m. Rider compare with all these nay with the mean of these the next answer to Luther be that he enter into another error of companation which by the 151. untruth he say Luther have suck out of the pope own breast for first there be no such chapter as he cite for proof in all the decretal second have there be any error mention in the decretal to have be by the pope condemn and not by any pope or Papist defend be it not a riderian and ridiculous sequel that such have be the pope doctrine and suck out of the Pope own breast because the pope mention it by way of abominable doctrine by he condemn as for Luther other error let his disciple make apology for they against m. Rider and for his be against we we howld it a great honour but what be that to you who ringleader he be if he do not persevere in error as you say how can it be but his last and loud condemnation of your doctrine do not make such doctrine to be confess a error and not erroneus condemn by Luther Luther by your confession remain in no error and condemn and detest it as both erreneous and heretical how our opinion the sacramentarian opinion and Luther opinion be report fitzsimon the 152. untruth 121. in the very first relation of our doctrine issue out the 152. untruth do we say beside bread and wine Christ to be in the b. sacrament or rather without bread and wine you bear we witness yourself before your reply to the 6. of s. John that we teach all bread and wine to be transubstantiate and thereby you register now against yourself this say untruth in the same first answer the 153. untruth you adjoin the 153. untruth that you teach the body and blood of Christ to be in the supper witness your own word at the 103. number the sacrament and Christ body to differr as much as the lamb and the passover etc. which have no more union than the wine that be sell and the ivye garland that be a sign of the sale thereof join also these two I pray you together that Christ be not give but in his outward sign and yet that the body and blood in the supper be give not only by sign but as you say realy and true give and not give only in sign and not only in sign but also in substance be not this fast and loose pass and repass off and on and with and against be not this a pretty riddle in your three answer to the second question burst forth the 153. untruth for you do not say nor can say spiritualy unless you depart from your first martyr to who you have oblige yourself to consent and from as appear in the 108. number also our answer be not entire deliver for we affirm not only corporaly but also spiritualy in your three question and three answer be contain first the 154. untruth the 154. 155. and 156. untruth that scripture and father say with you second the 155. untruth that Christ in this institution make any promise three the 156. untruth that Christ by any promise assure all his benefit to the worthy receiver for there be no such matter in the 4. question the 157. 158. untruth and first answer be the 157. untruth that we say Christ to be receive alone with the mowth as manifowld be testify in the 4. answer be the 158. untruth that whatsoever Christ give by promise must be receive by faith for he give damnation to the wicked infidel which he have often promise yet they have no faith he give resurrection to our body in his promise yet body have no faith he give health food attire by many promise to his servant which can not be receive or use but only by their body he give baptism and grace to child yet they have no actual faith he give by promise food to the fowl of the air to the fish of the sea and to the beast of the earth can these be say to have faith yet I confess they may have as much as puritan and have none at all o rich deanery of s. Patrick how will thou groan if thou can feel the heft of the divinity of thy dean wherein such falsehood stand for infallible principle and such impiety be term the word of the lord how many untruethe therefore be imply in these word none of mean capacity but must perceive in the five question and first answer be the 159. untruth the 159. untruth that it be absurd by our body to receive Christ as also that we exclude the receive by our soul in the three answer to the 5. question be the 160. untruth the 160. untruth that either such institution as I say be a promise or a thing spiritual alone and not also corporal the residue be disprove in the premise and consequent the 161. untruth that it be the 161. untruth that any may venture their soul upon such doctrine towards the next question let it be understand what we say to be say according the salvation of the godly and damnation of the ungodly or else it will be a further untruth that it have be prove by you that the only godly believer receive Christ be the 162. untruth the 162. and 163. untruth to the 7. question and three answer it be the 163. untruth that Christ crucify be the inward grace of the sacrament both because Christ true give his disciple his body uncrucify as also because Christ be a substance can not be grace which be a accident although he be and well may be call the giver of grace and fain will I know two thing mention in this answer of you to the 7. question first why you say Christ crucify with all his merit to be the matter or inward grace of the sacrament consider Christ ordain it before his be crucify second why you allow any other his merit besyd his passion consider that in the 83. number and 14. you affirm only his passion or rather the wownd of his side to have be fruitful for your redemption to the 8. question and first answer it be the 164. untruth the 164. untruth for we say no such matter of carnal eat but of corporal true real and substantial eat and that not only by mowth but also by charity and faith the 165. untruth be the 165. untruth that you say with scripture in so say both because there be no such scripture in owld or new testament as also because it be false that all Christ merit be you or that all be purchase only by his passion for many yea infinite the 166. 167. 168. 169. and 170. untruth be purchase before his passion in the 9 question be the 166. untruth that we say carnal and the 167. untruth that you say with scripture in the 11. question be the 168. untruth that we say Christ body be every where and the 169. that scripture or creed say he be only in heaven in the 12. question be the 170. untruth that we say Christ according to both nature to be every where the sum of this answer to Luther authority be that Luther have fail like a monk and that the father of Protestant truth as themselves term he be but a father of error a good verdict for the name of protestant here take from the lutheran we will examine how right it be do who be in deed protestant and wherefore so call fitzsimon luc. 8. 122. be you get in from puritan among protestant you have not observe the conseile of our when you be invite to a marriage to keep the low place I must therefore dismount you into your rank first the name of Protestant spring upon this follow occasion when the reform profession have purchase many follower as it be no more marvel to behold number to follow a doctrine of liberty than water to fall from a height when a gap be open and the emperor Charles the five will feign understand the ground of their persuasion Sleidan lib. 6. fol. 101. 102. 109. lavather in pag. 19 they join their head together and make a collection of opinion to which they protest to stand to which book be deliver to the emperor at Augusta otherwise call Auspurg 1530. some thirteen year after Luther have apostate and the great part by manifowld protestant whereby the name begin promise to avow the say book the book to this day be call the confession of Augusta and the only defender thereof be call protestant nether do the zwinglians in Helvetia claim this name but be know by the title of sacramentarian neither the genevians or french reformer but be know by the title of huguenot nor the flemish rebel but be know by the title of ghewe second concern this name of protestant they to who it do belong have double cause to applawd great to themselves such only as I foreshow be the lutheran and they only that be consent to the foresay confession of Augusta the first cause be that the zwinglians the english the french etc. have seek Brentius in appendice and that as by their own report be testify with tear to be admit into their concord yet that they never will admit or tolerat they as appear upon the article of the creed in the communion of saint and when they blaze abroad that they have the good like of they the protestant take it most injurious and as a great slander sharp refute it Exam. nu. 19 the second cause be that their very name of protestant be so much affect even by they who be opposite unto their profession as appear in England as that they covet it and strive for it in deed the cause why that name have first access into England be because the first reformer who resort thereto tindal Frith barns Cranmer etc. be of the Lutheran stamp with a peculiar small diversity now m. rider be you a Protestant if you consent with the augustan confession and so be a Protestant for otherwise you can not than you must recant all your opinion against the real presence and consent with Luther but you perhaps will distinguish english protestant with Thomas digges your brother Puritan Thomas digges in his humble motive 1601. from all other by call they state protestant and so intrude and incroache among they but you can not for you have impugn the blessing of the cross as a magical charm which they allow numb 53. Numb. 62. you have impugn baptism to be a true laver of regeneration make it only a external sign or seal and that only to the faithful which they disprove as they may the scripture instruct they thereto and say mat. 3.11 mar. 1.8.16.16 luc. 3.16 joan. 1.32 act 2.37.38 etc. 22.17 tit. 3.5 1. pet. 3.21 to be contain therein the holy ghost remission of sin eternal life it be the holy ghost laver or font of regeneration and renovation whereby and by the word of life we be cleanse from sin and save etc. to which the doctrine of the communion book accord in these word this infant the communion book print at London by tho. Vawtroller 1574. in the troth of private baptism com. book in ^he form of public baptism who be bear in original sin and in the wrath of God now by the laver of regeneration in baptism be ascribe into the number of God child and make heir of eternal life again that by that sacrament child be regenerate and graff into the body of Christ congregation and make partaker of the death of our saviour so then baptism be more than a external sign and not only of the elect among true state protestant from who m. Rider have sequester himself in no manner or way the name of Protestant be belong to he also he have impugn out of minister the communion number 68 the word of Christ institution which by state protestant be allow and use in all their communion book fowerthly he impugn inequality among the clergy five the name of priest six that in the new testament by imposition of hand or otherwise there be any function more belong to some than other whether they be man Numb. 98.99 or woman which be altogether rank puritancy and the very quintessence of the holy reform consistorial discipline and yet this man so plain a puritan will take to himself the name of a Protestant imitate the nature of Polypus a fish which borrow the colour of whatsoever it stick unto whereby not being mistrust it deceive and receive all prey pass by so my Puritan be a man for all time and profession will loose nothing within his reach although he shall change his shape and name from Puritan into a state Protestant num. 100 and back again whereunto he have his warrant and dispensation as I say from Beza and Cartwright now as I believe m. rider be fall into deep confusion of he who have mount at the marriage afterward come luc. 14. with shame be content with the low place for separate himself from catholic and intrude among protestant from who he be as the new phrase of soldier bear reform among puritan by who I think in my conscience but that they care more for number than participation in their he showld be cast off 123. be not think you this a great alchemy to change and convert every thing fitzsimon to his purpose let we bring scripture father and all testimony to warrant our doctrine they be say not to be for our purpose but against it let we bring scripture father and his own brother disprove his imagination they be say not to be against they but for he but that it may be know the 171. untruth this to be the 171. untruth first here be declare that by faction of opinion the real presence be deny a thing say m. rider in the 28. number never deny by we nor ever in question betwixt protestant and Papist now at least these protestant here allege write to the late queen of England in this allegation show two untruethe contain in m. rider denial one that it be never deny the other that it be never in question yea in the same place they request her majesty to beware of the pharisaical leaven of they so deny it as by they the word of Christ most plain most evident most puissant be overthrow if I be at leisure I will worthy persecute such denial according to their desert but in truth I be not at leisure be often employ from morning to twelve of the clock in hear confession in exhort and catechize in perform office of charity in not omit the domestical employment incident to one in his three year of probation in so much as when I afford any pain to resolve m. rider article it be only at vacant and unperceave time by other this proof that protestant approve the real presence shall be due fortify by all chief protestant and most approve of all country in the world first the master author of the contrary opinion say an. 1579. dist. 2. cap. beren fox Acts. pag. 146. and and i in hart do believe and confess by mouth the bread and wine which be place upon the altar Thevet vie lib. 3. fol. 128. gal Malmsbur lib. 3. papyrius masson in anal. Francorum lib. 3. in philip. ^ege Gerson con. Romant an. 1369. Wicklephus epist. joan. Lincoln huss lib. con. Wicklephistas by the mystery of sacred prayer and word of our Redemptor to be substantia convert into the true proper and lively flesh and blood of our lord jesus Christ not only by sign and virtue of a sacrament but also in the propriety of nature and in this belief he die as diverse relate so that here be the head of m. rider opinion fall from he second Wickleph thus say against they who slander he to be of a contrary opinion at and Sacerdos rite but I believe and will descend to my death that after the lawful priest have usual pronounce the sacred word over the bread that under the form of bread be the true body of Christ three John huf profess that and Christ by the unspeakable virtue of his word do bread and wine into his flesh and blood what a learned reader and dictionary maker we have of m. Rider that in this pillar of reformation omit to find the word of transubstantiation be to be observe fowerthly Hierome prague say in consecratione and prag Pognium epist. leon. Aretinum before consecration bread in consecration and after the true body of Christ of these three the first Wickleph be by fox acknowledge a choose man raise by God to lighten the world the other two fox act and mon. pag. 390. and seq. Oecolampadius in be capital and calendarie saint with fox five Oecolampad say and hesitatione and etc. simple and without stamer let we believe to be present and to be contain under this bread the true body and under the wine the blood I do not say a figure only fie upon that blasphemy again epist. Lantgrau hess an. 1529. I will most renown prince this right hand of i have be chap of when I begin to write of the affair of the supper six Bucer say act Concil. Luther Wittenberg in and and and Ch^^^ and Sanguis with bread and wine be the body and blood of Christ prefer and be receive true and substantia he also write upon saint John Bucer in cap 6. joan and cap. 26. math. calu. in haerm evang. and l. 4. Instit. c. 17. n. 11. and crave pardon of God that ever he bewitch any with the contrary opinion of the sacramentarian 7 Caluin say in vain will God command he to eat bread and affirm it to be his body unless the effect do accompagnie the figure therefore not only in sign be he show but in substance etc. this be caluins opinion during Luther life to be by he favour and when after his death he have change it as now it be by caluinian profess yet be he so doubtful and distrustful of his proper opinion as to have it depend upon on man good or bad like calu. defence 2. con westphal melancthon declare in the least word that I swerve from his judgement I will sudden surcease be not this a pitiful counterpoint to m. rider opinion yet will he shake all off as light as a breath of wound nothing of all this will be against he nothing of all this will be for our purpose all will be say to be impertinent fiction and wrest mangle dismember and corrupt allegation other answer neither will he neither can he give for there be no life nor doubt remain in the matter i comfort myself with the say of Cicero Cicero no juggler especial in this age remain long unknown and against his slander and reproach which be the sacred and great confidence of his cause I have this defence out of saint Bernard s. Bernard the opinion or knowledge the good have of i together with the testimony of my conscience be sufficient against the mouth of they that speak wickedness the second part of the three proof how english Protestant martyr confess the real presence fitzsimon Tacitus li. 19 123. consider how m. Rider be employ in this answer I must with Tacitus account he and in a most eager sowldiour and obstinate against all extremity first he trot to his old wander declaration of the occasion of such allegation as if any occasion can make any affirm false doctrine or if true doctrine deliver by indirect occasion shall therefore be account untrue but that the good man mistake the occasion and altogether mis-informeth his reader in this matter may be gather by these short demonstration follow the first be that if as he say they have intend not to meddle with the matter of the presence why will they condemn the opinion of they who do not believe such real presence can ill be do that good as that life or living may be preserve thereby may come thereof the apostle flat teach the contrary nether be the authority of Beza or Cartwright who grant as be declare such allowance to cownterfet for help the word Christian or religious now the principal protestant renounce the figurative imaginary presence as heretical and profess to believe the real and substantial presence for as much say Sr. John ould castle as I be false accuse of a misbelief in the sacrament of the altar I signify here to all man that this be my faith concern that I believe in that sacrament to be contain very Christ body and blood under the similitude of wine and bread yea the same body that be conceive of the holy ghost bear of the virgin Marie over this confession be by fox write the christian belief of the lord Cobham if it be Christian fox act and mon. pag. 512. how be not the contrary thereto unchristian if it be unlawful how be it profess at time of death can all the wit of man any quircke or chincke to decline this contradiction but that in a term christian confession of a Protestant principal martyr the Puritan profession against the b. sacrament be condemn such and in like term even by fox own relation be the protestation of the l. Cromwell that he die in the Catholic faith of the whole church not doubt of any sacrament thereof whereunto also fox give the like title of a true confession of the l. Cromwell and for rob. Barnes he be a most resolute Lutheran and therefore must have be as opposite as his master to the sacramental supposition yet I come near and omit Ridley hooper Rogers Latimer the duke of Northumberland and other great saint with fox I crave in courtesy of m. rider to give satisfaction if Crammer be not against his opinion how do he pronounce sentence against John Lambert and Anne Askew principal for be of his opinion fox confess the chief condemner of they to have be Crammer and Cromwell perhaps he will think to escape with a turn of a fox say that to have be compass by the pestiferous and crafty counsel and stratagem of bishop gardener that by the gospeler themselves the gospeler shall be condemn good ghospeller they must have be in the mean time but I be now so upon the chase as I can not so light loose my game why then in king Edward day the foresay bishop as he say be cast into the tower do the say Cranmer condemn joan of Kent what fox or wolf can avoid that but that Cranmer be thereby know no friend even then to any of the foresay Anne askew disciple I will not in vain have be some time of your profession and have touch it and be defile with the pitch thereof for which offence I daily and most humble crave pardon of my dear and sovereign lord and but that of the same pitch I will light a toarche to they that be in darkness and in the shadow of death to direct their foot into the way of peace let we therefore pursue more of this kind to have the true portraiture of m. Rider place before all man eye Catho priest magdeburg in epi. eliz. reg. among faction of opinion some late take away the body and blood of Christ touch his real presence contrary to the most plain most evident and puissant word of Christ rider 124. gentleman this concern not we it may fit be invert upon yourselves for we deny not Christ spiritual presence teach in the scripture and receive in Christ primitive church but we deny your imagine carnal presence never record in God book nor believe of ancient father nor ever know to Christ spouse the primitive church as you have hear true prove but this be your great fault usual practise that whether in scripture or father you hear of Christ body and blood and his presence or real presence you imagine present without further examination that it be your carnal presence which thing be grow up with you from a private error to a public heresy Catho priest fox in Martirol Kemnitius in Exam. conc. trid. cenira tan Eucharistia tyndall Frith bane Cranmer leave it as a thing indifferent to believe the real presence so that the adoration say Frith be take away because there then remain no poison whereof any aught to be afraid of yet Kemnitius upon the assurance of the real presence approve the custom of the church in adore Christ in the sacrament by the authority of saint Augustine and s. Ambrose in psal 98. Eusebius etc. saint Gregory Nazianzen and say it be impiety to do the contrary so that the brood be of such agreement we have the less occasion to embusie our brain to confute they gentleman by piece you repeat some of their word not know at it seem the occasion and so you utter mistake the sense which be this these godly martyr perceive the flame of persecution to burn so fast and mount so high as it be neither bound in measure nor mercy and only for a new upstart opinion have no warrant from God word they in a christian and brotherly discretion exhort the learned brother only to preach that necessary article of our free justification by faith in the personal merit of Christ and touch the lord supper to teach to the people the right use of the same yet not to meddle with the manner of the presence for fear of danger if not death but leave it as a thing indifferent till the matter in a time of peace may be reason at large on both party by the learned provide ever that poisonful adoration be take away the premise consider what can you now gather that prove with you or disprove we nay here be nothing but against you altogether for if you have deal true with the dead martyr or the live catholic these collection and not you you shall from hence have gather 1 first these martyr teach with their breath and seal with their blood that your carnal presence and transubstantiate Christ be neither commandment give by God nor article of our faith ever teach in the primitive church but a late invent opinion devise by man 2 second they wish the brother consider it be but man invention and never record in god book that therefore they shall not hazard the loss of their life which will tend so much to the prejudice of Christ church 3 three they wish it to be take for a season as a thing indifferent yet not absolute but with these caution 1 first that adoration or worship of the creature be quite take away which never be do by you and therefore they hold it not absolute indifferent 2 second till the church of Christ have peace and rest from your bloody and butcherly slaughter wherein the matter may be decide not with faggot but scripture which be not grant in their day and therefore you great wrong the dead when you make they speak that thing absolute which be limit by they with condition now I appeal to the indifferent reader whether you desserue not a sharp reproof thus to dazzle the eye and amaze the mind of the simple catholic by violent wrest the writing of the martyr persuade the ignorant they shall either dissent in this opinion among themselves consent with you or vary from we whereas both they and we now and then consent with scripture father and primitive church in unity and verity of doctrine against your dissension pestiferous error and open blasphemy of m. rider bind himself to consent with the first Protestant martyr and of how many and monstruous belief he make himself thereby 124. they and he then and now say he consent with scripture fitzsimon father and primative church in unity and verity of doctrine against our dissension pestiferous error and open blasphemy perhaps before I part I will make he beshrew the finger of he that print this protestation although I know stow in chron. 1549. it be not the printer fault omit word let we repair to work the last name joan knell of Kent shall be first confront with m. Rider fox Acts. pag. 398. 571. to see if he will stand to this word this joan as also do Peter the german a other his martyr deny Christ to have take flesh of the b. Virgin m. rider word be that he consent with Protestant martyr in unity and verity of all doctrine it must then follow that he deny the same since that I deal against a puritan I will allege one of the same sort William cowbridge fox pag. 570. because he affirm as fox confess no bishop to have any more authority than priest as also because as other puritan can not tolerat any honour to the name of jesus so can not he to the name of Christ but say that it be a filthy name alan Copus dial. 6. c. 17. and all that do believe in the name of Christ be damn also that Christ be not redeemer of the world but deceiver thereof which with many other like article he profess at his death as be not only affirm but also prove by Alanus Copus alias Nicholas Harpsfeld against fox all which m. Rider have bind himself to believe fox loc. cit. fox pag. 1151. tom. 1. luth. in disp. baptism Art. 3. Gagninus l 6. hist. fran. item Gerson tr. 3. in mat. Paul aemil. l. 6. hist. gal. Genebr in chron. an. 1280. by his former word three John Wesell deny the holy ghost to proceed from the father and the son yet he a foxian martyr fowerthe Haux deny baptism of child to be necessary to salvation yet he a foxian martyr yet melancthon and he a foxian confessor pronounce it be fury to affirm that child may be save without baptism five as Gagnin relate deny resurrection heaven hell Christ in the sacrament more than in a stone and that God speak more in s. augustin then in Ovid yet he be a foxian martyr and by he make a great bishop which other can never have know so he make sr. John ould castle l. Cobham by his own absolute authority as well allow to make lord and knight as martyr and confessor fox pag 942. 943. 944 six Frith the learned and excellent martyr of fox affirm the real presence no article of belief affirmative or negative although the express scripture record it and offer say fox to Sr. Thomas More to believe the real presence without the adoration John clerk fox in his Caleddar 12. 13 14. Novemb. july 3 item act pag. 111. col. 2. num. 26. and Alice Potkins defend there be no other sacrament than Christ hang on the cross Antony person Testwod and other assure the word of Christ this be my body which be break for you only to mean the break of God word among the people all this by his former word my cavaliero be bind to believe for these be foxian martyr with who he say he be consent in unity and verity of doctrine so be again William cowbridge alan cop. dial pag. 6. 633. fox pag 738. say that neither the apostle nor evangelist nor sour doctor of the church have hitherto reveal how sinner might be true save so also be Richard Hun say that poor man and idiot have the truth of the scripture more than a thousand prelate and clerck of the school what say you m. Rider will you affirm the same according to your word and bond there be no remedy your obligation be to do it but I will know whether you now hold with the idiot rather than the scholar true in any consequence you can not both for such promise and for be scholar yet if you disdain to be a idiot which your bond have make you and perforce Minerva will intrude yourself among clerck listen how your martyr in unity and verity of doctrine fox pag. 738. come over you he damn say fox the university of Oxford with all degree and faculty in it so that unless you take to be a idiot your martyr condemn you to be brief in this ruthful obligation print against yourself to stand to such confederate beside your make you self idiot etc. you must aver with John Teuxburie ibid. pag. 935. that it be impossible to consent to God law that all thing be equal belong to all that the jew of good zeal put Christ to death etc. of all other mention in the of the creed be all for the most part saint of the same stamp add calendarie you have bind yourself fast to ratify their damnable blasphemy and to consent with they in unity and of doctrine you be to justify all that they have affirm or else your print protestation will bewray your puritanical faythlesnes in performance of your promise 125. and next you bring in another learned protestant Cheminitius rider who you say allege Augustine Ambrose and Gregory Naziazen to approve your adoration in your sacrament intimate to the world that we shall either allow that in you which public we preach against or else that we shall be at a discord among ourselves touch this your opinion but the matter be exact examine out of these father themselves and not by your enchiridion or hearsay the catholic shall see you wrong we and abuse they and first it seem very plain you never see or at least never read Chemnitius and my reason be these first you know not so much as his right name much less his precise opinion they 2. canon 6. page 434. for you misspel his name Kemnitius for Chemnitius which have be a small fault if you have right allege he touch the matter for your tridentine canon command a external or outward worship of Christ in the sacrament under the form of bread and wine and Chemnitius he condemn your outward worship for idolatrous and teach only a inward spiritual worship and to prove what I say I will true allege your cannon then Chemnitius his examination of it and then let the catholic but judge indifferent whether of we deal more true and sincere in this case this be your canon that be if any man shall say that in the bless sacrament of thanksgiving that Christ the only beget son of God be not to be worship with that outward and divine worship which be proper and due only to God as well when the sacrament be carry about in procession as in the lawful use of the same page 435. 436. 437. let he be accurse Martin Chemnitius examine this your canon first condemn your feign transubstansiation and show the reason for say he unless the church of Rome have devise this transubstansiation you shall have be palpable idolater worship the creature for Christ and therefore she imagine that the substance of bread and wine be quite change into Christ body and blood no substance of they remain lest the simple shall spy their idolatry second he express condemn your outward worship as idolatrous and show there that Christ must be receive by faith and worship in spirit and truth page 444. line 2. 3. 4. and afterward he say for the true inward and spiritual worship of Christ be comprehend in the word of Christ institution do this in remembrance of i now let the best mind catholic see your unjust deal with both quick and dead pretend that either Chemnitius as you say allow your outward worship in your sacrament or that we jar among ourselves touch the same which both be untrue for you hold the worship to be outward he and we inward you carnal he and we spiritual and brief if you will yet read he diligent you shall find he utter condemn your carnal presence and your external worship approve the one to be a fable the other blasphemy and thus much for your ignorance touch Martin Chemnitius who it seem you never see but only take he by the ear as water-beares do their tankard again you say that Chemnitius upon the assurance of the real presence approve the custom of the church in adore Christ in the sacrament by the authority of saint Augustine Ambrose in psal 98. by Eusebius and saint Gregory Naziazen charge as many as do the contrary with impiety to every of which thus I answer this psal according to the Hebrew be the 99 psal and upon this place s. Augustine write aug. in psal. 98. as I will allege he of your Paris print his word be these which take flesh of the flesh of Marie and because in that flesh he walk here upon the earth he give to we that flesh to eat to our salvation for no man eat that flesh unless first he worship it now let we examine this place and see how that fit your purpose first the flesh of Christ that Augustine will have worship must be thus condition 1 first it must be bear of the virgin Marie but you be make of bread and therefore not that true flesh of Christ which Augustine speak of and so not to be worship without idolatry 2 second that flesh of Christ which Augustine will have we worship walk visible with his church here upon earth before Christ ascension and until you can approve unto we by canonical warrant such a Christ in your sacrament as walk upon the earth and die on the cross Augustine will not have he worship which you shall never be able to do during the world 3 three that flesh of Christ which Augustine will have we to worship be give to we for our salvation which I hope you will say if you say true be actual real and in deed upon the cross and in the sacrament mystical or by representation as have be prove out of your own book thus you wrest that which Augustine speak of the bless flesh of Christ to your fabulous suppose flesh make by a priest whereby you wicked abuse the learned father and deceive the simple reader for this flesh of Christ which be conceive by the holy ghost and bear of the bless virgin must be eat with the spirit and adore with the spirit as Augustine there speak and neither adore with your external apish worship nor eat with your corporal mouth but to speak according to scripture and father the very eat of Christ be the true adore or worship of Christ because as he be eat so he be adore but he be eat spiritual by faith for faith be the chief branch of God honour your next author be Ambrose upon the 98. psal which you imagive prove your external worship of Christ in the sacrament 125. I be glad that Kemnitius be avow to be a Protestant fitzsimon to m. rider like for thereby we may perhaps have some desire sport the reprehension of our spell Kemnitius for Chemnitius for Crantzius as a little after appear may have be spare if m. rider by God good providence have not be reprobate to confusion in all matter and science whereof he have make any mention of his ignorance in scripture in father in history in orthography in greek in french in latin in english and now in spell against my will he will needs convict himself ignorant first then I answer that k. in greek be all one and c. in latin and therefore may indifferent be take second that german name such as be Kemnitius and Crantzius be write indifferent by either c. or k. and that these two foresay name even by the author themselves be more write in our manner then according to m. rider conceit which also be observe in Bellarmine Stapleton and all other famous controvertist let he repair but to the college and inquire for the metropole of Crantzius and find it as I have write after in all his life let he abstain from such fanatical exception for if they be available that who misspell be ignorant in the matter how cold m. rider know how and when to be silent not know to write silence but silence how can he profess himself a scholar write the name amiss scholar how can he tell what circumcision be he write it circumscision which never scholar will have do that after will object less misspel to another in what wisdom or learning or latin do he learn to write lattin for latin intolerable for intolerable subtle for subtle etc. but of his palpable ignorance in latin after well now to he forward of Kemnitius he say it be untrue that he jar with m. rider or contrary wise which if it be not revoke speedy m. rider must recant and affirm with Kemnitius that the opinion against the real presence be Kemnitius in joan. Georgium Marchion Brandeburg 24. joan 1584. 2. par. exam. conc. trid. sess. 13. c. 5. blasphemous impious condemn second Kemnitius say in Cena there be none that doubt the body of Christ to be adore in the supper but he who with the sacramentarian to who Kemnitius be diametrica opposite deny or distrust that Christ be in the sacrament whereunto what think you may m. rider reply forsooth that Kemnitius allow only the internal adoration which be a untrue and a silly excuse for be not the adultery of the mind as unlawful as it of the work yes true if Christ be true or the common doctrine of divin and philosopher that the external act add nothing to the malice of the internal act although by other circumstance it may be conjoin with more offence in be external then if it be only internal wherefore it have be madness in Kemnitius to have allow internal adoration and not external it be also as short after appear forge untrue the 172. untruth make up the 172. untruth but say he Kemnitius be against we I answer that be our glory la^ in ore it be no commendation for we such wicked sectarist shall commend we but a great benefit that they impugn we now will you behold the promise sport by m. rider account Kemnitius his good friend it appear by his impugn with tooth and nail the allegation which by Kemnitius be produce in proof of adoration will you m. Rider be so uncourteous towards your friend will you make we behold a jar where you say there be none will you be a continual against yourself of untruethe he acknowledge if you observe he well that Kemnitius charge they with impiety that deny the real presence or adoration of Christ therein whereunto he promise distinct to answer first that point of the real presence and of such impiety he gambole over nimble without stumble thereat this then be the 173. the 173. untruth untruth that he fulfil not that part of his promise second he translate and denounce out of s. augustin what so often before he deny be ever say or thought by s. augustin or other in six hundred year after s. augustin that Christ give that very flesh to we to eat which be bear of Marie and wherein he walk here in earth add thereto that none eat that flesh but he that first adore it the 174. untruth yet by the 174. untruth say m. Rider that wicked we abuse s. augustin how can we abuse he who not we but Kemnitius allege to prove Christ in the b. sacrament shall be adore how do we abuse he who not we but m. Rider translate so as Kemnitius have inform and as we have ever confirm what after he wish we to prove that in the b. sacrament be Christ who be bear of the virgin Marie and visible walk and be give to our salvation he may find it beside this evident proof by himself translate prove in the number 37. 40. 43. 46. 71. the 175. untruth be the 175. untruth that faith be the chief branch of God honour first saint Paul express say that charity be great second if it be not untrue the chief branch of God honour will be not in God himself nor in Christ his son nor in all heaven for faith be not in they or in heaven but that which follow faith to wit not to see God any long in in a dark resemblance but face to face three consider how impertinent such unfaithful infidelity towards s. Paul towards God honour and towards truth and reason be intermeddle in this place our to be call a breaden God fabulous flesh and our adoration of he but external apish worship be point fit conjoin with such disdain towards God sacred word and honour whereby contrary to all belief God be say not to have in himself but out of himself his chief honour yet philosophy teach honour be not in he that honour but in he who be honour if any will understand more of s. augustin mind towards the adoration of Christ in the b. sacrament let he peruse the augustinian confession collect by Hierome torrens confess August c. 6. l. 3. @. 5. to have it manifest abundant let it now suffice that he teach dist. 2. c. the most healthsom sacrament of the body of Christ to be honour importunate 126. but gentleman why deal you so untrue with God heritage in a matter of this importance do Ambrose ever write upon this place I tell you no rider Ambrose in deed write upon the psalm till the end of the seventy one psal and there break off and recontinue at the 118. psal but never write of the 98. or 99 psal as you untrue deliver for Chemnitius say thus thus speak Ambrose upon the same five verse of the 2. lib. cap. 12. page 157. worship you his footstool but he say not that Ambrose write upon that psalm but upon a verse of the pfalme and not in that tome but in another and yet not of a worship external as you teach but of a spiritual worship such as Christ teach in the four of John for if you have read Ambrose you shall have hear he speak thus in this place we will speak only of the spiritual worship of Christ so Ambrose utter if you have understand he right condemn your external worship of Christ but because August write upon this psal expound Ambrose his opinion upon that one verse worship you his footstool etc. and both against your external worship I will only desire you to read your own Augustine or your own print both thorough and deliberate and then I doubt not but you will see your error and reform your ^udgement of Kemnitius his citation out of s. Ambrose and Eusebius fitzsimon 126. here be good stuff saint Ambrose do not write upon the 98. psalm because he do write but upon a part thereof if therefore one buffet m. rider upon the ear he can not be say to have strike m. Rider because he strike but part of he the 176. 177. 178. untruth the 176. 177. and 178. untruethe be first that we deal untrue with Ambrose we only tell he that Kemnitius so allege he second that Ambrose be ill allege to prove Christ shall be externa adore for he say express the flesh of Christ which this day we adore in the mystery and that be the same which the apostle in our lord jesus adore again which I have add out of s. Ambrose to deprive m. rider of all cavillation about the word mystery ought to judge that he be our very lord who blood in the mystery he drink also he false inform that s. Ambrose in that place profess to speak only of the spiritual worship of Christ and if he have so speak it have be for our purpose that the adoration of Christ in such mystery which be eat and drunken be not only external but also spiritual for towards such mystery as appear he allow such external adoration and for avoid of other small untruethe m. rider may have better inform since he will needs digress to that purpose if he have say saint Ambrose to have write his commentary not consequent to the 71. psalm but upon the first and then upon the 35. 36. 37. 39 40. 43. 45. 47. 48. 61. and 118. let other judge what his skill be in s. Ambrose by have so as he show to the world conceive of his writing rider Hieron Eccles. (@) in Eusebio Emeseno tom. 1. page 296. 127. but now let we see how fit you allege Eusebius to prove your external worship of Christ in the sacrament saint Hierome make mention of Eusebius Emesenus bishop of emesa in Syria who write in greek very learned and live about the time of Constantius about the year of our lord 342. and be bury in Antioch yet some very crafty have stitch certain latin homily upon this greek father sleeve and work upon he a strange wonder in make he speak Latin at least five hundred year after his death that be ignorant of the language during his life but here I will not take upon i to discuss whether this be Eusebius Emesenus the syrian or Eusebius that canisius say be a Frenchman canisij cron. in 500 dist. 2. consecr. canon page 432. in fine your first decree print at a r^s and your last at Louvain something differ in word and period and peradventure and peradventure not flourish at that time or whether it be gratian Eusebius but this be most sure that gratian do grace his canon with his name but which of they any or noon of they it shall neither help nor hurt because we w^l examine the matter not the man the canon be this that be and when thou come to the reverend altar to be feed with spiritual meat look upon and consider with thy faith the body and blood of thy god honour it with great reverence and receive the whole body with the swallow of the inward man 127. like deal be use towards Eusebius fitzsimon both in omit parcel of his word record in the decretal allege and put for but especial for infer by a riderian sequel that because Eusebius persuade to use faith admiration and internal receive of Christ he shall therefore overthrow our doctrine that there can be any real corporal or substantial receive of he and that the real presence be by he disprove yet Eusebius himself in the same place ample teach that Christ invisible convert the visible sign into the substance and not only into the figure of his body and blood by the secret power of his word which word to any hart not veil to any understanding not deprave to any behoulder not reprobate may suffice but not to reform illuminate doctor another prank be to omit these word contain the adoration towards such mystery that the body shall be ever honour in the mystery which be once offer for redemption and to propound the very end of the chapter to a clean contrary intention that no such body shall be honour in the mystery which have be offer for redemption be this sincerity be this promise fidelity to bring a clause in the end of a chapter to overthrow the conclusion and whole scope of the chapter 128. now examine Chemnitius his doctrine and your opinion rider he bring in this canon to approve the spiritual eat or worship of Christ in the sacrament and you allege it to make good your external tridentine adoration of your breaden God behold every word of this your own canon be a witness against you for the meat be spiritual the man be spiritual the manner be spiritual the sight be spiritual and the worship or honour be spiritual here be nothing corporal or outward as you say but all inward and spiritual as we teach whether Kemnitius allow external adoration when Pixes begin of the triumph of feast fitzsimon 128. to amend former deal he advise to examine Kemnitius his deal and our opinion and that we shall find he to commend only spiritual adoration this face out of the 179. the 179. untruth untruth shall be discover to the detestation of all such writer the very word of Kemnitius be Kemnitius in exam. conc. trid. par. 2. etc. and and and Epicureis it pertain to true confession that we shall public profess our faith devotion and hallow both by voice and other external signification whereby we declare what we conceive of the fruit and substance of the supper with what reverence of mind and devotion we approach what food we believe there to receive by such external confession we sequester ourselves from the sacramentarian and epicure the contemner of these mystery we do excite some to reverence that no occasion be give either to the simple of profane cogitation or to hog of tread these mystery the external irreverence be a sign of a profane mind and not discern the body of our Lord now appear the conscience and fidelity of my Anaxagoras affirm every thing contrarious Kemnitius profess they be epicure hog and profane contemner and not discerner of the body of Christ who be adversary to the external adoration of the b. sacrament m. rider in say he consent with he and that it be untrue there be any jar betwixt they must in like manner by such title call all the impugner of such external adoration let the whole state of England Irland and Scotland take notice of this his secret reproach they if also he will say that Kemnitius disprove the external adoration because he approve the internal I report myself whether that be not to ride or anaxagorize to the last profession of Kemnitius in the mean time smile not and I will show you a pleasant inference of m. rider that the adoration can not be but spiritual because the man come to receive the communion be spiritual one will think that the man to receive be not only spiritual but also corporal and therefore that the adoration may be not only spiritual but also corporal also if such sequel be forcible no protestant hereafter shall bow their corporal knee to the supper or to God himself nor put off their corporal hat nor hold up their corporal hand because the adoration can by his say not be corporal to any spiritual thing adore o riderian reason how pleasant you be 129. and so to the next witness which be Gregory Naziazen his word be these she call upon Christ that be worship on the altar where the mystery be celebrate I pray you what can you gather out of this to prove your external worship of Christ in the sacrament with cap thump and knee Gregory say she worship Christ therefore you will conclude it be your breaden Christ too hasty a conclusion to be true or do you think she worship Christ as enclose in those mystery sure no for Gregory say it be in the dark night since approach to the altar (a) (a) the pyx be invent by innocentius 3. 1214 and Gregory Naz. write 567. joh. 4.20 exod. 3.12 at which time there be neither priest stand by the altar mystery upon the altar nor the pyx hang over the altar and therefore she worship Christ that be call upon at the altar in the celebration of the mystery not that he be enclose under the form of those mystery no more than the mountain wherein the father worship be either god substantial or that God be enclose in that mountain under the form and shape of the mountain but the mountain be the place where God be worship and so the altar be the place where Christ be call upon and worship not that Christ be there local by a corporal descension but that he be worship there be call upon and serve with a spiritual ascension and if you have read Gregory Nazianzen a little after you shall have read that Gorgonia his sister carry about she still some piece of the figure of the sacred body and blood of Christ as it be the custom of that age and with her repentant tear she bedew the same not that she external honour the same here Gregory call the sacrament but a figure of the sacred body and blood of Christ therefore it have be idolatry to have worship it Esaie 42.8 yet notwithstanding your missaleadge and misunderstand of the premise as also your dissent from scripture father and ancient pope and irreligious dangerous jar among yourselves you easy disburden your brain from further answer think you have confute the protestant and satisfy the catholic and so strike up your victorious plaudite in this manner so that the brood be of such agreement we have the less occasion to embusie our brain to confute they here gentleman you call we a brood we will take it in the best sense for we confess we be Christ his brood hatch under the warmth of his merciful wing come unto he like hungry chicken at the heavenly clock and all of his preach ministry to receive that promise meat which endure unto everlasting life math. 23.37 joh. 6.27 and as for your pleasant rhetorical conceit express under this word agreement it show that in a merry mood you have not forget all your verbal trope and figure antiphrasis but when you can show plain wherein the protestant jar among themselves or dissent from the scripture and primitive church in matter of faith then bestow upon they these bite figure in the mean time your jar among yourselves nay your revolt from scripture and all primitive practice be make now so manifest to the catholic it stand you upon for the discharge of a good conscience to confess and recant they for cure they you can and thus much concern your unfortunate success in allege some of our chief protestant as you term they and now to that which follow fitzsimon 129. he prove that Gorgonia adore Christ upon the altar because it be dark night as very a riderian reason be this to every one understanding as the former for why may not any adore as well by night as by day otherwise if in darkness God can not be adore how do Tobias or any blind man ever adore God and may not the lamp there present have supply all want of day time s. August ser. 215. and 155. saint augustin exhort that oil and wax shall be offer by the people to the use of the church and signify the use of burn thereof to import that Christ may vouchsafe to lighten and nourish the fire of charity in we s. Isidorus lib. 7. c. saint isidor tell that the light and lamp burn in the day time in the church be to testify our gladness that Christ vouchsafe to be our true light which illuminate every man joan. 1. Eusebius and Nicephorus recount when in the church not the temple euseb l. 6. c. 7. and Niceph. lib. 5 c. 9 which long before be destroy of Jerusalem there want oil to the lamp Narcissus bishop thereof demawnd water bless it consider this old papistry say Eusebius about the 340. year after Christ be turn into the fatness of oil yield a great cleerne of the light then accustom what other proof to this effect I can bring if I know no more than be in Durantus of the ceremony of the church may be conjecture durant Eccl lib. 1. c. 8. yet for all this m. rider short after will tell you that Eusebius deny all miracle after Christ accension so then although it have be night adoration may have happen if not otherwise at least when light be present the 180. untruth but let we go forward to the 180. untruth that the pyx be invent by innocent the three 1214. witness against this untruth the word of s. cyprian who be near a thousand year elder than those time s. cyprian lib. lap^^ c. 5. when a certain woman attempt to open her coffin or pyx in which the holy of our lord be by fire burst out thereat she be terrify not to touch it calu. l. 4. Instit. c. 17. n. 35. durant cit. c. 16. Caluin confess and Durantus demonstrate the use of such pyx from the time of the apostle the 181. untruth be that Gorgonia find no mystery upon the altar the 181. untruth witness to the contrary s. Gregory in the same narration yea and m. rider against himself that with her repentant tear she bedew not what he say she adore in heaven but what she have purloin from the altar which be not a figure only but (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) which succeed all type and figure Suarez disp 46. sec. 4. in 3. p. q. 75. a. 1. of the old law or if you will have it to be a figure let it be also the thing figure according as be so often foreshow that both may consist together for by no circumstance or word of figure will s. Gregory have the body of Christ to be exclude admonish we without doubt and shame to eat the body and drink the blood s. greg. Nazian. 2. 42. if we have any desire of salvation and for no word of flesh to refrain our belief and not to be offend by they which be of Christ passion as if he have say let not they hinder thou who tell it be a foul fact to eat the flesh of Christ nor be not move if thou be say to tear or torment Christ as in his passion or if thou do not think that Christ be eat by thou in any corruptible or passive manner be not trouble for the residue thus far have we be conduct by occasion of Kemnitius who I only say to have be adversary to such as deny Christ to be adore in the b. sacrament and for his persuasion therein to have allege these foresay father if he have misalleaged they the fault have be he but to thwart and impugn the contrary opinion they themselves can find sufficient out of the father without misallegation whereas to contradict our opinion they can not find a word o immortal and omnipotent lord the jesus Christ thy name and bounty be evermore extol that of thy infinite clemency towards my sinful soul it please thou to deliver i from all heresy in general and particular against my adore thou in the b. sacrament glorious adoration so apparent and reasonable as even to sectarist themselves be otherwise wilful blind so shine as victorious to overcome their malice and lead of they Kemnitius Bucer Brentius Oecolampadius Peter martyr Kemnitius in 2. exam. s ss. 13. c. 5. Bucer in act colloq. ratispon brent in apol. conf. Wittenberg pericope 2. Oecolamp in lib. Martin in disp. pag. 173. and many more captive that when they will as Satan balaamitical hireling curse thou God and truth wrest they by acknowledge such adoration necessary to bless thou and curse they that impugn thou glorious solemnity of by which Christ dear chaste and unspotted spouse the Catholic church triumph over all their heresy who deny the real presence or who believe it yet not otherwise then during the present use thereof or who misbeleve the plenary perfection thereof in one only kind or who exclaim and bark at the religious cost and devout honour towards Christ in that sacred mystery or who deny transubstantiation or who affirm any bread to remain together with the b. body of Christ or by any other impiety do hold any error against the Catholic doctrine concern Christ reality and reverence appertain to this mystery all which heresy by that solemnity adoration and conservation of the heaveniy host without the use of the chalice be discomfit trample and overthrow glorious and thrice glorious mystery so clear so true so general acknowledge and so powerful as can not be darken but by slight cloud present vanish by the perspicuous and manifest attestation of God word as can not be falsify by any deceit depravation or corruption of giddy brain as can not be but acknowledge by all sort of heretic how much soever give up to a reprobate sense as that hell gate can not prevail against thou but that thou do amaze every horse and strike every his rider as the prophet fortould into folly Zachar. 12. fox page 586. act and monument the six article establish by act of parliament 1540 at the plant of the protestant faith Catho priest rider 1. that there be the real presence of Christ natural body and blood in the sacrament under the form of bread and wine 2. that the communion under both kind be not necessary 3. that priest by the law of God may not marry 4. that vow of chastity ought to be observe 5. that mass be agreeable to God law and most fruitful 6. that confession be necessary the foresay parliament and every one say publish preach teach dispute or hold opinion against the first of these article be adjudge a manifest (a) (a) be burn and lose his land and good as in case of high treason heretic and missbleever in the (b) (b) they but lose life and good as in case of felony which be then a favour rest rigorous punish 130. gentleman I expect that your proof shall have ascend to the first five hundred year after Christ ascension and now they descend so low that there be small hope either of your recall or recovery I may just take exception against this your parliament proof because it be many hundred year too young to prove our matter in question yet in respect it be a act do by all the noble and learned of the land and lest the catholic shall think it unanswerable I be content to admit it yet still keep my ordinary course in examination of the proof by scripture father and the ancient bishop and church of Rome 1. article 1. the first article be sufficient confute in the premise already handle 2. article 2. the second article cross Christ bless institution and therefore be abominable and your parliament say it be not necessary to salvation to minister or receive in both kind as Christ and his apostle do Reuel. 22.19 Dist. 2. canon fol. 430. but you know there be a woeful curse pronounce by God spirit against such as add or detract to or from Christ testament and your own pope gelasius lay flat sacrilege to their and your charge for this your half communion contrary to Christ institution say either let they receive the whole sacrament or else let they be keep back from the whole because the part of one and the same mystery can be do without great sacrilege the beginning of your canon call this half communion superstition and the late part call it sacrilege yet say your parliament proof the receive in both kind be not necessary to salvation then I say if it be not necessary why do Christ use it if we shall not practice it why do he command it now if either Christ commandment do this or the pope law can prevail with you follow Christ his institution if you care for neither Christ nor pope than the catholic may see that you be antichrist and antipope and deny Christ write truth and the primitive practice of the church of Rome and the best that you can make of yourselves be not ancient roman catholic but new upstart romish heretic and so to your three article how m. Rider behave himself towards act of parliament and of his impugn communion under one kind act of parliament since protestantry command to believe the real presence 130. yet more puritantrye fitzsimon to wit to confess these act proceed from all the noble and learn of the land and yet not to let they pass without his examination nay without his condemnation of they all to be heretical the first article that in the b. sacrament be the real presence of Christ natural body be say he sufficient confute this to be the 182. untruth he himself against himself shall the 182. untruth say numb 28 that Christ be realy in the bless sacrament a thing never deny by we nor ever in question betwixt Protestant and Papist if it be never deny or in question how can it be sufficient confute all the glue in Christendom will never make these two to stick together atleast then the one of they must be untrue I take upon my reputation if this last be true or untrue the first that he have confute it sufficient or insufficient be in the eye of all man and of all profession most untrue to the second although it be as be say a act of parliament of all the noble and learned in the land yet in the examination of our Puritan it be abominable he prove it first by our own pope and one of the decree that the form shall be receive both whole or refrain both whole I answer the decree to be fulfil by priest as only to they the speech be intend in receive both form whole for more instruction in this matter why heretic do communicate not in one but in both kind luth. Tom 3. Germ. jen. fol. 274. attend reader their impulsion thereto if say Luther the council of Trent have allow communion under both kind he will in spite of the council of Trent maintain the contrary if the Catholic church have permit the clergy to marry he will maintain such to be more in God favour who will retain two or three whore than who will conform themselves to the church yea he will command under pain of damnation that none by permission of the council shall marry tom. 2. Germ. fol. 225. in art. 500 ser. 4. also that he will approve transubstantiation but because he will not consent with the church yet that he will rather accept thereof then consent with the sacramentary if the pope thou not to eat flesh on Friday and in the lent keep thy liberty in no case obey he but say in spite of thou I will eat thereof follow this in all thing according to my example etc. brief this contradiction of the pope profession and opposition against he Zuingl tom. 2. sol. 296. be by say to be and the foundation and chief party of reform religion the same motive to have give the first entrance of their gospel into England fox Acts. pag. 977. the very apostle thereof as they esteem he tindal witness in these word of a letter to his scholar John Frith he smell a certain counsel take against papist but that Frith must understand that it be not for God but for revenge and to enjoy the spoil of the church thus much out of the very root of protestantry may acquaint we by what instinct they impugn our doctrine as well in general as in the foresay article in particular now listen why single communion be use whereas it ever have be believe in God holy catholick-church that Christ whole be contain in either of both the form of bread and wine for after his passion Suarez tom. 3. in 3. par. quest. 80. disp. 71. sec. 1. 2. and 3 neither his blood be separate from his body nor the body devoy of blood but where the one be there be the other the practice of primative christian be indifferent to communicate either under one form or under both according to the diverse commodity present know they have as much benefit by the one as by the other for all be one and the self same Christ s. aug l. 5. con faustum c. 6. s. Leo ^ serm. 4. quadrage not long after first christianity spring up the heresy of the manichean who condemn the use of wine say it never come from God by mean of the manifold abuse insue thereby which be the old heresy of Severus according s. August she 24. and s. Epiphan. she 45. and be now a turkish error as appear in the Alcoran Azoara 3. for disprove and thwart of which error the church frequent communion under both form general to avow the form of wine to be good in succession of time that heresy be vanish there bud another error that Christ be not entire in either form but in both together as if his body be now separate from his blood against which error the church Concil. Constantien sess. 13. Concil. trid. sess. 21. c. 1. Concil. Basil sess. 30. to testify that either of both be perfect Christ and as fruitful in one form as both sway to the contrary side by first practise then determine that only the priest shall receive under both form and the lie people but under one of bread for the form of wine it seem not so convenient both for the danger of shed in the give thereof as also for the danger of sour if it shall be keep long in any vessel for the use of the people especial of the sick the power of the church in this decree be warrant by the word of s. Paul say let a man so esteem we as the servant of Christ 1. cor. 4. and dispenser of the mystery of God be then such dispenser and have such impulsion the prelate of the church fulfil and follow such decree and practice for the confirmation of all that I have say first be present that Christ some time minister under one form and some time under both this at his supper that to his disciple at Emaus who in the break of bread which be the b. sacrament by most principal father and doctor persuasion be know of they sudden vanish away second the apostle continue in prayer and break of bread that be act. 2. in communicate the b. sacrament yet without any mention of the use of wine the same appear to have be the general practice of all christian so to be content with the b. sacrament under the form of bread as not to have covet the use of it under the form of wine this appear by serapion who be near his departure euseb l. 6. hist. c. 36. and crave the b. communion the priest as Eusebius say send he only a part of the eucharist without any consecrate blood second by the use of christian in first time when they have little commodity of priest or church they take home to their house the b. sacrament under the form of bread without the other form as appear by Tertullian cyprian Hierom and augustin in Suarez loc. cit. three by the use of pyx as I late say prove and confess from the apostle time make for the conservation of the b. sacrament under the form of bread durant lib. 1. c. 16. there be no such for the form of wine yet as I forewarn the use of the chalice be indifferent allow to lay people as partly appear by the request of Maria Aegiptiaca numb 115. according to the several commodity of place until by reason of danger as I fortould of sour and shed and of error increase the church restrain it from the lie people also because the priest do offer a sacrifice in remembrance of the death and passion of our jesus Christ who blood at that time of his passion be shed and separate from his body he ought to consecrate and receive under both form for the better explication of such effusion of Christ blood which be not needful by the people rcceave it rather as a sacrament then sacrifice this doctrine so godly and religious be impugn by heretic as appear brent in confess Wittenberg art. euchar Kemnitius in fine only to thwart the pope Brentius and Kemnitius accord to that part thereof that Christ be whole under either of both form whereby I take no confirmation but to show they have no conformation in their be against we also in k. Edward time when protestantry be most free from the dregs of puritantrie the communion under both kind or form be not think so absolute requisite Statut. an. 1. Edward 6. cap. 1. luth. ser. Eucharistia constant. sess. 13. rodolph ab. s. Communione but if necessity do otherwise require it may say k. Edward statute be allow in one kind also Luther in his sober mood can teach and that to be sufficient to the people to desire and receive one kind as much as the Catholic church ordain and give to be brief such to have be the receive custom of God church these verse of rodolph abbot of s. Trudon 450. year past do confirm be it a caveat that priest to sick or sound of lay folk give not Christ most sacred blood for it may shed and silly thought will simple ground in either form a like Christ not to have stand 3. article 3 the three that priest by the law of God may not marry rider 131. 132. I may not here make any stay only touch a point or two and so away this article be contrary to holy scripture ancient father the practice of the primitive church and the canon of the pope in the old testament the marriage of the priest be record and commend jerem. 1.1 exod. 18. the holy prophet jeremy be the son of a priest Zippora be the priest of midian daughter and marry to Moses the lord magistrate Luke 1.8.9 again in the new testament John Baptist be the son of Zacharie a priest and the scripture touch marriage give rule without exception or limitation to avoid fornication let every man have his wife and every woman her husband 1. cor. 7.2 and to the hebrew he say marriage be honourable among all man and the bed undefiled but whoremonger and adulterer God will judge whether continency of the clergy be ancient command 131. the too the that m. Rider fitzsimon as a Puritan have against act of parliament transport he from all patience and purpose which shall be betwixt we for I only allege the foresay act to testify that the real presence be even since protestantry command to be believe which be the first article of the six and the residue be suitable and conformable thereto against such late protestant as be degenerate from first planter of protestantry I record they together only by their conformity to ratify the article in question without any intent or expectation that I shall be occasion to defend act of protestant parliament by i object against protestant but as I be before by he enforce to defend Kemnitius my adversary so now I be to defend opposite parliament well then in the name of Christ let we not forsake he in all his vagary he be now not far from home first he confess the say article a act enact by all the noble and learned of the land yet that the first be refute the second be abominable the three be contrary to holy scripture ancient father the practice of the primative church and the canon of the pope and the other three as repugnant to Christ truth as the rest second he tell he will make no stay but touch a point or two and so away whereof and of the next that in the old testament the marriage of priest be commend there be no such matter therein amount the 183. the 183. untruth untruth in deed in the old testament as be not so perfect a state as the new priest marry yet although they be employ only about figur and shadow of the substance and truth deliver in the new testament they be nevertheless bind to continency during such their employment and not only they but also the people when they will partake of such figurative mystery as for example Achimelech refuse to give David the proposition bread unless he have understand that they be 1. reg. 21. undefiled people especial from woman and when the priest of the old testament be occupy about their function 1. Paralip 24. luc. 1. Caluin l. 4. c. 12. n. 25. they be remote from habitation and wife at which consideration Caluin can confess the priest of the old law to have be command to purify themselves beyond the custom of man yet can he not find it allowable in the priest of the new law notwithstanding any will think s. Paul word more belong thereto say no man serve God employ himself in secular affair but of s. Paul mind afterward although s. John Baptist be the son of a priest yet be it not true that if so happen in the new testament or that he be son of a priest of the new testament for the new testament be make only at the last supper before Christ passion before which both Zacharie and s. John Baptist both die now let we attend to his objection out of scripture against the continency of the clergy and not exact at his hand any exact knowledge in matter of new or old testament fitzsimon 132. to avoid fornication I grant every man may hate his wife if he enter no other bond contrary to have a wife or if be free from such bond he can not otherwise avoid fornication for otherwise the very next line before do assure it be good for a man not to touch a woman 1. cor. 7.1 second not long after he advise even the marry themselves when they will be vacant to prayer to observe continency three follow for such as be not marry and widow it be good they will so remain as s. Paul do himself fowerthly that we be dear buy shall not make ourselves subject of man but he without worldly care whereas if any be marry he be careful of the world and how he may please his wife and be divide as also the woman towards her husband this and much more have s. Paul in the very chapter whence the foresay objection be borrow whereby the continency of the clergy be ratify and testify to be necessary if we covet to have the clergy be vacant to prayer to follow that which be good to be without worldly care to think of thing which be of our lord how they may please God to the other objection I grant likewise that marriage be honourable among all man for none ought to dishonour it but to account it a great sacrament in Christ and his church hebr. 13.4 also it be honourable contract by all who have not otherwise devote themselves to a high state of perfection or by law of God and his church be prohibit to marry within certain degree as for example although the scripture speak without exception or limitation yet you be not so far go m. Rider as to allow marriage to be honourable betwixt mother and son sister and brother the grandfather and grand-dowght and if you be forward in such puritantrie as to allow such marriage to be honourable calu. l. 4. Instit. c. 19 n. 37. you forsake Caluin the founder of your holy consistorial discipline account they very dishonourable hitherto nothing appear against the not marry of priest if they have devote themselves to a high state than it of marriage and especial if they have plight their promise or vow to live chaste thereby to be more vacant to prayer careful of the thing of our lord how they may please God and be more free from the care of the world for of such as have so oblige themselves to great perfection mat. 19 s. August l. c. 23. and have geld themselves that be say s. augustin such as by a godly purpose abstain from take a spouse for the kingdom of heaven and have enter obligation of vow if after they will marry s. Paul say 1. tim. 5. they have damnation because they have infringe their first faith if therefore it can not be honourable to forsake attentive prayer to God and be careful of please he and fulfil the first faith plight it can not be honourable also for such to marry who have betake themselves to such state of life and undertake such obligation for what honour can there be in purchase damnation hereby appear that the scripture either have not or to m. rider skill afford not any advice or commendation of such man marriage 133. and the same apostle point out to all posterity rider that the author and upholder of this article be liar and hippocrit heb. 13.4 1. tim. 4.1.2.3 and the forbid of meat and marriage to be the doctrine of devil and this be only proper to the church and Chaplens of Rome as now they stand in the view of God angle and man whether we forbid marriage or meat 133. by a testimony of s. Paul he endeavour to prove fitzsimon 1. tim. 4.1.2.3 that the uphoulder of this article against priests marriage be liar and hypocrite let such as he confess to have be all the noble and learned in the land give he thanck for this courtesy we grant the forbid of marriage and meat to be a doctrine of devil if they be forbid absolute or as thing abominable ay but not if they be forbid for great profit of spirit and glory to God that we do not forbid they absolute be know when we account none fit for God service as churchman but such as be beget in lawful marriage and when we eat such meat out of fast day as we eschew in fast day this argument a that who forbid marriage and meat in certain person and time they absolute forbid they you shall behold how ridiculous it be by these few weak inference 18.7 etc. God word and his church law and also prince decree do forbid as be to every one know marriage betwixt father and daughter mother and son etc. by your rule take without limitation that marriage be honourable among all and forbid marriage be a doctrine of devil do not you blaspheme against God and his church and injury your prince for their forbid such marriage next the apostle forbid the eat of blood act 15.20.29 c. 21.25 and strangle meat for which in presence of the constable and a Puritan Sadler who name I can not remember and other your devout doctor John laney Cutler maintain in may last 164. that it be unlawful to eat pudding or hen who neck be crack the law of prince forbid to eat flesh in Lent and certain day of the week and physician forbid diverse meat by your general rule that the forbid of meat ' be a doctrine of devil do not you make the apostle prince and physician devilish doctor because I intend God willing in my reply upon these point to dwell some what long let God word the church law decree of prince the apostle the 184. untruth and physician testify that it be the 184. untruth to be only proper to the church of Rome to forbid marriage and meat as aforesaid rider 134. do not Tertullian write two book to his wife in the first he give direction unto her touch his good and possession if he shall die in the second book direct she in her widowhood either to live sole serve the lord or else to marry in the Lord but in no case to marry as some do for honour or ambition with the gentile who I pray you ever check or control he for so do whether Tertullian do write to his wife and whether he be for or against priest marriage fitzsimon 134. yes true Tertullian write to his wife and by writing testify that to justify marriage of the clergy m. rider unfortunate as often before have fish for a serpent to his cause in steed of a eale first because Tertullian Tertullian lib. 1. have separate himself from his wife by mutual consent to become a priest persuade she that by no persecution after his death she shall marry again he erroneous think second marriage betwixt christian to be unlawful second by inform she that to be God servant it be necessary to be free from marriage allege example of christian and ethnic admit only chaste and virgin to their principal service of devotion three by be to vehement in dehort from second marriage as appear in several book can then in wisdom this man Tertull. lib. exhort who not only by doctrine but by example eschew and abandon his wife to be a priest and affirm it to be necessary for serve god more perfect be witnese to ratify that he that be a priest may marry whether I admonish or Noah this wisdom will be consider also good m. rider review the first book again and find other content therein then you here specify for what you produce be either not at all there find or no part of the occasion or purport of write that book Tertull. prescript I do not pervayle that Tertullian of these man say this be to be their employment not to convert ethnic but to pervert we they seek great glory if they procure they that stand to fall then they that be fall to rise for who do not behold how by most contrarious depravation or ruin and fall be by they follow 135. Ignatius the martyr commend the apostle and other minister rider epist. 5. page 34. who ever blame he for it nay your own pope and canon condemn you and your parliament proof for thus they record to your disgrace (a) (a) Dist. 56. canon fol. 67. col. 4. and 68 col. 1. when therefore we read that priest son be promote to the popedom you must not think that they be bastard bear in fornication but son bear in lawful marriage which marriage be lawful for priest before the late prohibition and this day be lawful still in the east church here your own pope record that priest be marry and that their marriage be lawful and that pope have be priest son bear in lawful marriage and that there be a prohibition to the contrary make by man but no scripture or warrant from God whether s. Ignatius do favour priest marriage and whether the apostle be marry fitzsimon 135. first you mistake the number for it be the six epistle second you mistake the word not dispraise by interpret clean contrary to commend for s. s. Ignatius epist. 6. Ignatius advise virgin so to follow the best as therefore not to condemn marriage as be execrable and affect so to himself the sanctity of Helias jesus nave Melchisedech Hieremie John Baptist and of his belove disciple of Timothy tite Clement who die in chastity as not dispraise they who have be marry three you mistake the time of the apostle marriage employment mat. 19 for when Christ have call they they forsake all say s. Peter in the name of the rest and Christ aver they have among the thing forsake quit their marriage conversation reply thereto pertinent say everyone that forsake house or parent or brother or wife s. Clemens alex. l. 3. strom. s. Hierom l. 1. in jovin etc. etc. shall receive a hundred sell and possess life everlasting Besyd which insinuation of our saviour himself that the apostle who have wife have forsake they for his service sake it be also general testify by the father that after their vocation they never converse matrimonia with their wife if than their have of wife by their vocation to apostleshipp be turn into a divorcement any may think that none after such vocation can hereby be allow to marry but rather otherwise and consequent that by his own allegation his cause continual be overthrow next in interpret our canon much be follow for when it be only a dispensation that a priest son endue with other virtue and gift as five suffrage to have he advance shall be once patient tolerate not thereby to make it a rule and be affirm that other beget of priest have be high bishop who truth inform m. rider to interpret to be pope but not that it shall be conceive of their son get in fornication but only in lawful marriage he tell and translate you must not think priest son be bastard bear in fornication God be praise that he make priest to have no bastard but in lawful marriage yet this gloss be not only contrary to this text but also contrary to the gloss extant in the book dist. 56. gloss @. osius say all these example to be understand of such as their parent in lay state or in the order have beget when it be lawful for they to their wife the further part of the text that lawful marriage be allowable in every place before the prohibition to which word m. rider by good sincerity conjoin late and in the oriental church to this day be prove to they to be lawful shall be short after God willing discuss 136. again there be two other canon of the pope rider Dist. 28. fol. 32. that will batter down your paper rampier of human constitution the first begin thus if any man teach that a priest may contemn his wife under colour of religion let he be accurse and the second canon immediate follow which do second this if any man judge that a marry priest ought not to offer or to do his office by reason of his marriage and therefore abstain from his oblation let he be accurse whether all that may not contemn their wife may converse with they carnaly and whether some time marry man may not be priest 136. first fitzsimon if any learned man will but peruse this distinction and the precedent and consider how upward of twenty several text forbid bishop deacon priest religious subdeacons to marry and such man as be marry not to be assumpt to preesthood and priest do otherwise to be depose although he be never so much a affectionate friend of m. Rider yet will he and can not but censure he not to seek to inform truth of matter but to obscure it as much as he may second he know not how to countenance his allegation but when it be a canon of the apostle he name it a pope canon for so it which he now cite be deliver melancthon in confess August art. 23 and in apol. conc. Trullan can 48. 2. conc. Turon can. 8. dist. 31. cap. even by Philipp melancthon a great Protestant and in the canon law before the title of the foresay text be contain that it be take from among the canon of the apostle I grant that a priest shall not contemn his wife but according his obligation express in several concil be careful of she provide for she and content she but as be there signify without any suspicion of carnal now mark this riderian sequel a priest may not by pretext of religion whereby he be bind to be continent despise his wife from who he be depart for so by testimony of the foresay concil it be to be understand therefore a priest may marry or have be marry may carna converse with his wife who will not pity his father loss if he have be at any charge as he be not able for his son bring up for although a son can not despise his mother yet follow it not that he may marry she three the next canon concur in the same exposition that one be marry before be not thereby disable from be priest there be nothing in every country more usual and Dublin be well acquaint that m. hall of good memory and m. g. b. of rare virtue have be marry yet both exemplar priest and at this instant of my writing this a gentleman call mr. Anselmus of exceed ability be marry and his wife live and new enter into a cloister of nun after have live 30. year with his foresay wife in invioleble continency only for more exact devotion towards God she as I say enter into religion he also be become priest and jesuit with who I be daily familiar to my great delight and edification he be as great a mirror of piety as miracle by his foresay voluntary divorce to all these country in which he be know rider Dist. 31. fol. 34. 137. also be but one man confound a whole synod of your bishop and learned man as your pope record witness and by scripture enforce they to subscribe that priest marriage be lawful here you see truth be great though in one against many and prevail whether persuade the council of nice to allow priest to marry fitzsimon the 185. untruth 137. that truth as you affirm may be great and prevail let it be present confess that it be the 185. untruth that be confess by record of pope to have confound a whole synod of our bishop where be such record how do they confess any such matter will fitten fill all leaf if not most line of your book second let it be confess that you have grant the first council of nice to have be a synod of our bishop and learned man 1. Esdr. 4.41 conc. 1. nic. can. 3. truth be great and prevail three let it be confess that the council of nice in the three canon forbid priest to have any woman in their house beside their mother sister or aunt how then be it confound or govern by to the contrary fowerthly whereas none of the 20. canon of the council of nice nor Eusebius socrat. lib. 1. c. 8. Sozomen lib. 1. c. 22. nor Ruffinus more ancient than Socrates and Sozomen out of who gratian borrow his tale of nor any other report any such matter s. Epiphan. she 59 and in epit and whereas s. Epiphan assure that the church and ancient canon have always avoid from priesthood any begetter of child s. Hieron ep. 50. con jovin and lib. con. vigil Luther lib. 1. s. Basil epist. 17.1 Esdr. 4.41 and s. Hierome testify in the oriental church and Egypt not to have be lawful for priest or deacon to use their former wife nay whereas Luther acknowledge that the foresay council will not follow the advice of and last whereas s. Basil will not permit by reason of the former three canon of this council a priest 70. year old to dwell with a woman how can it be deny or avoid to be the 186. untruth the 186. untruth that they have subscribe that priest marriage be lawful truth be great and prevail I omit that the author of this invent history Socrates socrat. lib. 5. cap. 21. bellarm. l. 1. cap. 20. s. greg. l. 6. epist. 31. socrat. and sozom. loc. cit. and Sozomen be find often time trip as in Socrates appear thrice in one chapter and first against this sacred synod as incomparable Bellarmin learned according to his wont demonstrate and of Sozomen be testify by s. Gregory yet not withstand that they be far from report any comfort to the Protestant cause for they both recount that affirm that it seem to he convenient it shall be decree that the clergy after their ordination shall not be permit in any case to marry according the ancient Conon and only crave that other marry before may use their wife this allegation therefore seem to favour protestancy as the tender of a piece of bread in one hand with a cudgel ready to strike in the other hand be a favour to a dog truth be great and prevail 1. Esdr. 4.41 138. and to come near home unto you with domestical precedent rider esdras 1. cap. 4.41 bern. in fol. 2. col. 4. about the year of our lord 1130. be not eight learned man all of they immediate archbishop of Armachan in this land and all of they marry who utter refuse this tyrannical and dyabolicall romish yoke of force single life nay in those day the nobility and gentility of that province defend that true religion with their sword against the pope and they refuse to receive order bishopricke or decree from Rome where upon you may see that Bernard then in the pope quarrel call the nobility and gentility of that province a wicked and adulterous generation and say it be a devilish ambition of the peer and mighty man and a curse succession 8 immediate lord archbishop of Armachan marry mark this you noble man and gentleman of Ireland imitate your ancestor in true honour that eight bishop successive all marry yet they all learned and preach the gospel and minister the sacrament and yet neither they the nobility nor gentility care two penny for the pope blessing or curse o o lord how far be the nobility and gentility of Ulster and that province nay the most part of the kingdom change from that old apostolical religion and become slave and idiot in superstitious service to that late italian priest the pope God enemy and the queen butcher then they draw their sword against the pope to defend the truth now too many of late draw their sword for the pope against the truth the lord open their eye to see the truth and give they heart to renounce this new heresy and cleave to the apostolical roman verity then will all of they be as ready to fight the lord battle against the pope as many of late fight the queen battle most honourable against the Spaniard of m. rider grant of the council of nice to be we and his claim of predecessor in Ulster fitzsimon 138. in say have confound a whole synod of our bishop and learned man the council of nice whereof speech be make be thereby bestow upon we none dowbt thereof before 1. Elizab. that it be due unto we until in the first parliament of our late queen it be claim to protestantry also by m. rider appeal to the father of the first five hundred year of who the council of nice be ever yet account the principal part it may seem to any that will believe he that we have no interest therein now of his liberality as appear he bestow the say council upon we and thereby upon himself a most infamous confutation of his woeful claim of the primative father a small matter with he to be contrary to himself but be it so great a gift as to be so thankful for it Whitak pag. 12. con campian Beza epist theol. 81. yes say Beza the Polyphemus among divine by m. whitaker opinion as then which the son never behold any thing more holy or more excellent since the apostle departure now for recompense of this incomparable treasure contain in this gift Genes. 25. hebr. 12. will you see a profane Esau exchange a rich inheritance for a mess of pottage he will needs have ancestor in our northern Ulster such as s. Bernard say by sathanical ambition reserve the archbishopric of Armach among their family which execrable succession say s. Bernard have continue s. Bernardus in s. Malachia in fifteen generation and when they have not any of the clergy in their linadge the wicked and adulterous generation they be the word of s. Bernard by iniquity worthy of all death want not to wit in name and usurp church revenue bishop of which sort without order but not without learning eight marry have be before Celsus whereby I observe the order and word of s. Bernard but brief ensue the dissolution of ecclesiastical discipline and overthrow of religion and Christianity for reformation whereof saint Malachias by a vision from heaven be choose and accept by the king other bishop and the faithful of the people to his charge but the council of malignant and child of belial repugn and purpose to kill both the king and he at length the chief of they struken by thunder with three other and the rest disperse Malachias enter his bishopric and have by singular and powerful mean appease his enemy he reform abuse the successor and recompense seek by m. Rider all this confusion by ulster relation b^le in his century persuade m. rider to accept upon his credit for all be take out of he be the foresay intruder into church dignity o how far be these diverse from they of the council of nice certain I will not scarce have consociate my enemy to such for if the be only rebellious to ecclesiastical discipline and usurper of church fruit and intrusion into church office and profane sacred place if the doer thereof be marry can satisfy you for ancestor you may enter into your list or catalogue all sect and sort of old heretic all turck and jew and army of malefactor as be such o o how much be these inferior to the three hundred and eighteen father of the council of nice for my part I will not refuse your demand nor deprive yond of such confederate yet if I can I will exempt you from their ruthful lot now to answer the circumstance tender by you and to the form whether the foresay eight learned man be not all successive archbishop I say first chat the history do not contain they have be any such successive unless you will have they puritanical bishop for in the text of s. Bernard they be say to have be without Ordres therefore they can be neither Catholic nor protestant bishop as appear n. 99 I can the soon think they to have be Puritan bishop the rather for be without order as well because they do not allow any distinct order of clergy as also because they be enemy to all order and the disorder disturber of all well order common wealth and breader of confusion second that they be name by s. Bernard no bishop but in figure representation and appellation as you say Christ to be in the b. sacrament for if you may say Christ not to be otherwise in the b. sacrament 1. cor. 11. notwithstanding his word of be true present the same who be deliver in his passion I may say be bowlster by the law of God church and such proof as I have produce n. 99 of imposition of hand that they can not otherwise then as aforesaid be archbishop next I let pass your sweet revile of the tyrannical and diabolical roman yoke three the nobility repugn against the pope be add to the text by a 186. untruth for neither pope the 186. untruth nor Papist assault they how can they then defend themselves with their sword against the pope especial not hate of papistry but love of sacrilege be their impulsion to such uproar the 187. untruth be the 187. untruth that they refuse to receive order bishopric or decree from Rome for neither be any proffer nor any such refuse record if Bernard so sharp reprehend they in the pope quarrel for not be subject to the pope order or decree in the name of jesus why do you in your preface inform your reader that s. Bernard tell the pope to his face that his supremacy be unlawful o o how far be these word repugnant to those that those eight preach the gospel and minister the sacrament be a addition of your make as also that the nobility and gentility care not two penny for papal blessing or curse whether they come to such infidelity or Noah there be great want of fidelity in your depravation of the history as s. Bernard afford it that they change their old apostolical religion if you mean according as your author inform they to have change as you shall be tie to your relation and the sense thereof unless you will be account a falsifier rather than interpreter what you call owld apostolical religion according to your conceit be according to truth and your author s. Bernard devilish ambition dissolution of ecclesiastical discipline overthrow of religion and christianity etc. o o how far be these word of the author dissent from these word of the interpreter that they be become slave to the late italian priest the pope God enemy and the queen butcher I know not how wise a speech it may seem to any this I be sure if they be slave by be only catholic for other slavery I think the pope expect not at their hand it shall not repent they for to serve God be to reign and I can wish that as they affect to be account such so they will better effect the duty belong to such if the pope be no true god enemy than he be late the 188. untruth or the queen butcher the 188. untruth may to all man seem be calculate that then they draw then sword against the pope to defend truth the informer of the matter the punishment send from heaven the former protestant resolution relate in our answer to your preface that truth be unbegotten till Luther time the 189. untruth do conjoint register for the 189. untruth whereas you provoke the noble man and gentleman of Irland to such ancestor in their true honour you flat persuade they to insurrection and rebellion for if they they they will endeavour to kill their king and such bishop as he will establish they will enter into devilish ambition etc. for so do they by information of s. Bernard to who you will induce these to conform themselves from the profound bottom of my hart I beseech the omnipotent saviour of the world long to preserve his sacred majesty now regnant against such puritanical and other their disloial and desperate design long since not unknown to his wisdom nor unfelt to his person nor parent 139. and that golden mouth father Chrisost. upon this place of Paul rider chrysost hom. 2. upon first of Titus that a bishop must be the husband of one wife ask this question what move Paul thus to write to Timothy he answer himself say the apostle intend to stop the mouth of all heretic that condemn marriage show that the thing in itself be faultless and a thing so precious that a man be marry may be promote to the holy function of a bishop and your pope Gregory say plain writing that if marriage must be dissolve because of religion yet say he you must understand that if man law grant that yet God law forbid that whether s. chrysostom and s Gregory allow priest marriage 139. I grant as before be say in the 133. number fitzsimon that to forbid marriage as damnable be unlawful and heretical and devilish which be not do by we as there appear but in old time be do by tatian Martion and Manichee and late by such of who afterward second s. chrysostom tell you that the cause why the husband of one wife may be bishop and not of more than one be that he who have more than one never be good instructor or master of the church who may not persevere in love towards his wife she be dead so that it be suppose the wife shall be dead from affection towards who keep or violate the one may be elect bishop and not the other he to be bishop who conserve such affection and not he who have reject it also in the 136. number other answer be find that a marry man live without any suspicion of carnal may not only be bishop after his wife death but also during her life three s. chrysostom himself answer in form to your argument say s. chrysost hom. 2. job. he say the husband of one wife not so as that now shall be observe in the church for a priest must be adorn with all chastity certain I do not believe that a man may be more often discomfit by his own comfort than it happen to my antisophist for here the gowlden mouth s. chrysostom bring to avouch marriage of priest be find most repugnant thereto as ever before also the like be do towards s. chrysostom and all other let we inquire whether he thrive better in the comfort out of s. Gregory first to my think he shall not because I remember to have red in s. Gregory s. greg. l. 6. c. 1. in lib. reg. pauli they to err who for the speech of s. Paul let every on have his wife think it lawful for church man to have wife second to my think in say s. Gregory to be we and that he maintain marriage not to be dissolve according to God law be to confess that he himself have not say true before in say the old father to be his friend or that our doctrine condemn marriage for if one of we maintain this point of controversy how be every one of we say to be against it for the honour of God m. rider leave collusion and impostur in abuse your fraternity with such juggle doctrine be fast and loose off and on up and down without rhyme or reason three s. Gregory say not that if marriage must be dissolve but etc. if any say that marriage for religion sake may be dissolve although law of man accord thereto yet the law of God do forbid it to wit as he there expound that without mutual consent they shall divorce themselves for any pretext to enter into religion and neither be this against we not allow the contrary nor for he to approve marriage of priest because it speak only of the continuance of marriage inviolable unless mutual consent be grant before any man attain to priesthood or religion so that it be far more for our purpose that he that can not get his wyf consent to be divorce can not be priest and none priest but if he be marry which have such consent to remain divorce fowerthly the latin or syntax of s. Gregory be misreport for he can not use the masculine to Theotista a woman by call her Patricium but the feminine according to good congruity by call her patrician all be one to m. Rider who be loath to have to great knowledge in that papistical latin tongue Luther P^mer lib. magdeburg cap. 7. and cent. 11. c. 7. as shall after appear five if any covet to have a pattern of m. rider choose of proof if he be learned and a Protestant he may peruse Luther Pomeran the Beza martyr melancthon Caluin Brentius Kemnitius jewel Fox Du plessis etc. in treat of priests marriage if he be a Catholic Beza and martyr 1. cor. 7. melanc Conf. Augustana art. 23. ca^uin 4. Instit. c. 12. n. 23. brent in Conf. Wittenberg c. 3. par. exam. jewel con. Harding fox act etc. plessis l. con Eucham pag. 307. Michael Medina 5. Espenceus in lib Clictoveus Sacerd. hosius dial eod. Didac lib. vlt. Cochleus con. calu. alphon. a Castro l. 13. she ver. heres. 4. alb. 15. Ce^tur. 6. c. 7. col. 388. and cap. 10. col. 686. fox act. and mon. pag. 386. and will find the objection of protestant answer I report he to beauty three part of the first tome lib. 1. chap. 19 and seq. and chap. 22. and seq. of the book follow to hardings rejoinder fol. 170. and to other catholic refutation mention in the margin against such heresy last to acquaint the unlearned with his choice in this matter for if I will delate it in every occasion I shall augment to much this volume let he compare the silly objection bring by he out of s. Gregory of who we treat and the huge accusation bring by other against priest continency because forsooth as they say it be so subject to abuse as s. Gregory abrogate it by a contrary law as s. Vdalricus be say to testify especial for that in seek fish in his pond instidd of fish there be find six thousand head of priest child smuther to conceal their parent lechery this objection have carry some weight with it and be find in fox and every other of that sort not only fox but ass write of this matter only m. rider over ride all substantial stuff stop and stoop to snatch every bait whether it be to his behoof or to his bane if he have omit it because he have find it confute in Bellarmine etc. it may be excuse but the not find of all the residue of be guggle stuff confute in Bellarmin etc. show that he be to good a rider to be so good a reader as to have ever peruse he now then to answer this forgery so vehement aggravate by his brother I say to it as to like untruethe that one part thereof supplant another for the forge thereof live not a hundred year near the time of he to who he be say to have write as appear in Bellarmine second no such law or memorial or mention be extant in s. Gregory resp. Illiryco alan cop. dial. 1. cap. 23. s. greg. l. 1. epist. 42. or in any treat of his life as johanes beda Sigebertus ado etc. three s. Gregory confute it himself confirm the Catholic doctrine in this behalf by command subdeacons themselves not to be receive to holy order unless they will vow continency fowerthly some time those head be say to be find in Sicily some time in Rome etc. other stuff besides rail at the parliament proof by he confess to be the act of all the noble and learned in the land say they to be unlawful and horrible doctrine of devil repugnant to Christ truth and the pope to be a bloody murder italian priest and fox saint to be innocent lamb cry for revenge against their murderer whereby you perceive again that he account they of a good belief and the like not worth the take up by any sincke-sweeper I can not find or perceive whereunto I may reply therefore to discharge my promise I will acquaint the truth of this point of or unmarry of priest in the east and west church rider 140 now you see scripture father pope practise of the primitive church and precedent of godly bishop and priest witness with we against you that the marriage of priest be lawful and honourable and your parliament stuff unlawful and horrible the one have the warrant from Christ the other be the doctrine of devil from which recall yourselves your confederate and novice lest in abstain from lawful matrimony you fall into damnable adultery which the lord prevent for Christ sake and thus much for the first three article Catholic doctrine of the not marry of priest fitzsimon 140. first it be to be understand that the determination of the church be authorize from God as if it be his own act he that hear you hear i when you receive the word of obedience of God by we you receive it not as the word of man luc. 10. 1. thess 2. 1. joan. 4. but as it be true the word of God he that know God hear we he that be not of God he do not hear we in this we know the spirit of truth and the spirit of error etc. second it be to be know that the church from the apostle time have eschew marriage in the clergy and follow ver. 35. 1. cor. 1. ver. 33. s August lib. 5. cap. 26. donatistas or continency that according to s. Paul it may enable they without impediment to serve our Lord for he that be marry be careful of the thing which be of the world how he may please his wife and he be divide three say s. augustin and it be a godly and golden say a to dispute of that which the whole church do observe whether it shall be observe or not conc. 2. Carthag can 2. an. 396. 2 leone 4. d. c. be most insolent madness four that it proceed from the apostle time of innumerable proof extant to that effect I will only these few 1. out of the 2. council of Carthage and it please that bishop priest and deacon or they who administer the sacrament even from their wife shall abstain and keep integrity that what the apostle teach and antiquity observe we also shall continue in which word all that we say of the be of the apostle doctrine and practise in the church and command to posterity be contain conc. Neocaesar 312. leone 4. d. 20. 2. Neocaesar presbyter if a priest marry a wife let he be depose from his order this council be more ancient than the former and testify how heinous a punishment it have be that a priest shall marry 3. Concil. Concil. 325. Elibertinum in Hispania and it please altogether to forbid bishop priest deacon and subdeacons to abstain from wife conc. Aquisgran an. 816. cap. 6. Maguntin an. 888. cap. 10. Wormatiense 868. cap. 9 s. clem. can 27. s. calixtus 1 gratian. d. 27. c. siricius ep. bellarm. s. August con. donatistas lib. 2. c. 7. and 23. and epist. 118. and not to engender child this council be in the west the other two in the east and south yet concurrng in one doctrine and for the north the concil of Aquisgran of worm and mayence in Germany not only follow the same doctrine but also the same word and these concil be partly before siricius and cettayne of they also before the council of nice in vain do Flessis willet and such other draw the original of from siricius and the say Concil. for s. Clement in the canon of the apostle calixtus the first siricius etc. be near the time of the apostle themselves do certify if that may serve our veneral minister distrust the antiquity thereof long before therefore by the rule of s. augustin and what be not find in the epistle of apostle nor concil of their successor yet be keep through the universal church be believe not to have be deliver and commend but by they by this rule I say find still one more ancient than another testify the obligation thereof can be no other than a apostolical tradition five omit all other proof of father who by life and writing be conformable to such will of the apostle as among the whole troop how much every one be more singular otherwise so be he also in chaste life as appear by induction I will be now content with s. epiphanius and s. Hierom only suffrage s. Epiphan. item she 59 epiphanius continent holy preesthood for the most part be of virgin or solitary person or if these be not sufficient towards the charge of they who live continent from their proper wife and if any from the begyne have be a continent widow he may have place of a bishop priest deacon Subdeacon what of Egypt and the seat apostolical which either receive virgin into the clergy or continent or if they have wife they leave to be husband long before say Origen hom. 23. in lib. num. ilus it be his part alone to offer the continual sacrifice who have devote himself to continual or perpetual chastity nay the pagan and most lascivous poet can say tibulus 2.1 by these testimony dear belove reader unless thou be perverse and unsatiable thou have that be command by the church be thereby also command by God himself that the apostle teach it to be observe that concil of east west south and north concur in the observation thereof that the disciple of the apostle testify the necessity thereof that other unspitious assurance aver the same thou perceive also that the objection against it be as light in themselves as they and their life be light from who they come who be licentious and fleshly Libertins do only seek for cloak to their shame woman as of Samson David Solomon and the child of Israel so peculiar of the foresay mate be the stone of offence or scandal and of apostasy according to the say of God word 19.2 Wyne and woman do make wise man in their own conceit to fall from belief beside all which thou have late out of Luther before that he will have teach but to be opposite to the pope and if the pope have allow it he will maintain whoredom to be more lawful 4. article 4 that vow of chastity ought to be observe 5. article 5 that mass be agreeable to God law 6. article 6 that confession be fruitful rider 141. 142. these three article be as repugnant to Christ truth as the rest the five article Christ will to my next treatise shall be handle the four and six article as you hereafter give occasion now let the catholic consider how unmerciful and unmeasurable the bloody bishop of that italian murder priest shed the innocent blood of so many saint because they will not say and subscribe that these six article be in deed heretical be apostolical and catholic be this the plant of the protestant faith no this parliament be establish for no other end but to supplant they and therefore these six article be fit term Whipe with five string the whip with six string where with your forefather whip to death these innocent lamb for neither conspiracy nor treason but only for the word of God and for the testimony which they maintain but they cease not to cry still for vengeance against those murderer say how long lord holy and true do not thou judge and avenge our blood on they that dwell on the earth Reuel. 6.9.10 but thanks be to God those channel of innocent blood shed then in England by the pope direction have quite for ever banish out of England the pope and his superstition and as the mother that will before Solomon have the child divide be not the true mother for the church of Rome that delight so much in blood 1. king 3.17 etc. can be the true church time will not permit to write the damnable fruit that this filthy munkish chastity yield but of that when opportunity be offer yet still nothing but what your own friend record whether late sectarist or catholic be great discommender of matrimony 141. if catholic be discommender or condemner of matrimony it appear by the premise fitzsimon whether sectarist be or Noah let it now be conceive first they can not abide that matrimony shall be a sacrament for they allow but four sacrament in their first confession of Augusta tender to Charles the five 1530. namely baptism the supper Augustana 1530. Lossius in cathecismo 1557. luth. Serm. matr. Melanct. in loc. com. a 1536. 1552. 1558. Sleidan l. 20. absolution and order in deed after they foist in matrimony and last confirmation and unction wherein they be go before they in our country who allow first but three and soon after but two and now they these two by make they no better then base and beggarly ordonance as be oft above declare not esteem they any thing necessary to salvation nor much behooveful but as bare external sign so that matrimony by be none of their sacrament be according to their conceit not so much as a base and beggarly ordnance or a bare fruictless external sign peruse but the number quote and you shall find they to think no otherwise for true I esteem it a point of religion in God cause and religion hall in chron. a 8.28 fol. 228. to belie the devil himself I may hitherto therefore conjoin a pleasant alteration of religion say now you see friend that four sacrament of seven be take from we and short you shall lose the other three also except you look about you for now they be all make no better then take away second for the marriage of priest never can the state of our country by all vehement and importunate suit that may be make obtain the child of priest to be legitimate the most that ever I be able to learn they have obtain be in k. Edward day only to be exempt from temporal punishment incident to their sacrilege in marry and in the same act of parliament Statut. 2. Edou 6. cap. 21. 1548. I find it affirm to be better and most to be wish that priest will abstain from marriage which true be a secret condemnation of their marriage to be unlawful as also that their child can not be legitimate so many statute of former law and parliament condemn they for as great a condemnation be it in the late day of q. Elizabeth to have be upon the point to have all priest yea and minister marriage utter forbid as every one know which as I take ensue for the most part by promote puritant tell of their fellow that they do lease out church benefice land 2. admonition to the parliament pag. 23. and house for bravery and bryb to be bestow upon their wife or child or officer or servant etc. and thereby alien at church living from church use and their successor how much can I if I have not compassion towards some certify in this matter what can I say of they that stout preach against marriage of the ministry against plurality of benefice etc. who now be environ abundant with stock and store of the one sort and the other God be praise to our subject of discourse belong that marriage three be great disparage by late sectary allow so many breach thereof as if it import no great bond for you may find in Luther Luther tom. 5. in 1. cor. 7. fol. 111. 112. 122. 123 in proposit Serm. l. Christ Germ. in repet pag. 280. Vrban reg. in loc. come matr. canon ge^even 1560. martyr in 1. cor. 7. Bucer in c. 19 math. luth. Serm. Ochin dial l. 2. dial 21. pag. 200. 204. 205. exod. 20. duty 5. math. 14. mar. 6. 1. cor. 6. 1. tim. 1. ephes 5. Galat. 2.4 Bucer and the genevian resolution to which p. martyr Ochinus and other accord these cause of divorcement and of new marriage during the life of both party first to have mistake one another to have be virgin 2. any unkind forsake betwixt both part 3. any long absence of either 4. any great forwardness of either 5. dislike of parent towards the marriage 6. if either refuse or may not fulfil the act of marriage 7. if the husband can not beget child that the wife may use another help and let she lie with another or the brother of her husband say Luther and let the child be father upon the father as he be call in conceit 8. by allow saecular people to have many wife Paulus Paul say Ochin who bale say England when it have he be happy when it want he be unhappy forbid bishop and priest to have many wife but permit they secret to the residue go tell these man that God forbid adultery and fornication that it be not lawful for these Herod to have their neighbour wife they be live that such as be divorce must remain unmarried during the life of their former spouse and other such assurance of god will and word they will clap this text in your tooth false brother that have steal in to spy our liberty which we have in Christ jesus and by this liberty for which all this hurly burblie be follow the very minister themselves be not content with one wife as confess silu. Czecanovius say o good God what incredible thing have I see and c and among many other enormity of adultery and murder he say be cur in Lutheranis one of they he have kill his wife with poison to use other woman be demand why he have commit so great a crime he answer marriage in Lutheran priest not to extinguish wander lust this make the Anabaptistan minister George David to four wife who he have first Hortensius Mowntfort anabap. Hamilton in calu. C^rfus l. 2. c. 35 fol. 236. nichol. burn scot. disp. etc. c. 29. fol. 143. to have add ten more and most of the people to have have by his example five six seven eight this make Knox the Puritan apostle of Scotland who have be some time a galley slave first to have abuse his own mother in law second be thereupon banish into England to have wallow in all lechery and hear of sedition in Scotland to have return as to such carrion such crow repair accompagny with three woman sister three not as yet content to have commit a rape upon a young girl and after by a trick of witch craft familiar among the brother to have make she his holy four vessel of ease this liberty against the bond of marriage make Luther confess luth. in Colloq. mensal fol. 400. 526. tom. 2. ibid. fol. 125. by the vehemency of lust and love of woman besyd his Catharin that he be almost become mad and say he who soever be importunate by sathanical thought for to repel they I he to think upon some young maid I will not specify any of the disciple nor as much by the ten part of the doctor themselves as I may cull out of Luther banquet conference Colloq. in mensal Bolsec in cal. Zuing. to 1. fol. 115. publish by himself I will leave Caluin to be know by Bolsec his own and his fellow incontinency and for conclusion I will only deliver at this time the abominable declaration of Beza who Travers the Puritan term the best interpreter of the new testament of his uncertainty Travers in his defence of ecclesiastical discip pag. 86. whether more he shall follow lechery or sodomy and his final resolution in prefer sodomy as he have publish himself let none excuse it as if it have be do during his papistry for in his Creofagie Beza in creof pag. 58. in Pref. confess Schlusselb cal. fol. 93. long time after his read in Lausana he avow and confirm the same in his translation of the five psalm he conform his style to the same and Schlusselburg assure that and and he spend all his time in fulfil his lust describe his love revenge his corrival as apply nothing but the same the impious elegy of Theodore Beza his doubtful deliberation whether he shall follow more adultery with his Claud wife to one in Paris in the street de la Calend ensign Banc or zodomie with german Andebert a boy of Orleans and how he prefer zodomie 3. and 4. be absent why do thou Beza s^aye Andebert be absent why do thou here delay Paris do retain thy love sweet treasure Orleans do keep thy most deli^som pleasure how do thou then linger in vazelay town endure thy little sweet candida far from thy power and little Andebert thy pleasure sweet flower no adieu vezelay I listen no more in thou dwell also father and brother I bid you farewell for I can want vezelay and yet not be hinder my father and brother and all my kindred but not my dear and Andebert but whether I pray you shall I soon prefer or to whether soon myself transfer shall any before candida obtain such grace shall not rather Andebert have first favour place how then shall I myself into two part divide whereof the one forthwith to candida may slide and the other to Andebert may speedy ride but I know so greedy to be my candida as fain she will whole enjoy she own Beza so willing of his own Beza be Andebert that Beza be his only own by good desert but I so in my mind embrace both he and she as whole of both I wish to visit either and whole they both to enjoy together but one I must prefer by great necessity o over hard case and great extremity but since there remain thereof no remedy Andebert I grant chief favour first to thou and if of such unkindness complain what then one sweet embracement will ease all her pain of priest marriage in the oriental church and of late sectarist seek their favour 142. I request all reader desirous of the truth fitzsimon to observe diligent this short declaration follow as it happen ever before when new sect bud in any country so for every one province revolt from God church for every country infect for every diminution of religious authority God almighty in his admirable providence multiply hundred for one and augment the dignity and jurisdiction of his church at the same time with reparation of the loss above all comparison Satan may obtain of God to impoverish first a job but can not after hinder that God shall redouble all his substance first constantin gift and decree in favour of religious authority be by diverse of his successor revoke and infringe especial by honorius and valentinianus God call to faith and religion anno. 495. France with their king submit his dominion to Hormisdas pope about the same time the arian infect small parcel in the east and about the same time all our country come to christian religion in the west second justinian by theodora his wyf impulsion anno. 732. banish pope Siluerius and the grecian begin to apostate from religion or at least to fall to sundry erroneous persuasion at or about the same time when Leo isaurus also and other impugn ecclesiastical jurisdiction Charlemaigne Pipin and other be excite by God to most religious course and the occidental empire be separate from the former tyrant the authority of the church more than ever before amplify and all Germany and the north part of the world be lighten with Christianity brief after the last council of Florence the grecian fall to hateful heresy and emulation and make up a schismatical church or rather Synagog repugnant to the roman Catholic church God send they first the scourge of the turck who subdue they and to this day far beyond all belief most cruel oppress they so when Luther anno. 1500. and his brotherhood conspire into like insurrection and that betwixt the grecian and they part of Greece and Germany Sleidan in his history of Charles the five be as silent as a fish of the conversion of the indies revolt from God church then God of his wont goodness in abundant recompense bestow upon these part where religion be profess most exact namely upon Spain the infinite region rather than realm of the world whereof America only never before know surpass not only in wealth but also in amplitude the residue of the earth which all our predecessor have ever before know and upon his church he bestow all these country in subjection of religion and loyalty as by their late legation from the most remote part of the world to every eye and ear be notorious when three prince of japonia in the name of all the rest render their homage to sixtus pope in Rome have employ three year travail to come thereto 1585. now the premise forewarn when protestantry consider the obstinate schism of the grecian against the roman church on one side and their own nakedness and the particularity of their faction on the other side they seek as people in extremity respect not by who or how they be countenance to be grace with the approbation of the greek church but they be as unknown illegitimat by they most disdainful reject behold what succeed upon this their endeavour god almighty Bredenbach lib. 7 c. 18. awake as out of a drowsy sleep two chief part of the say grecian church to wit the whole patriarchal portion of alexandrie the southeast and the ruthenian the north-east part of the grecian church to prostrate themselves before the last pope Clement in all devout submission which be public and with incredible solemnity perform in Rome tom. 6. and 7. the theatre of the world as be ample specify by the worthy Baronius and know to all Christendom I need not dwell long in the relation thereof only let all catholic magnify the mighty bounty of God towards their profession that when adversary revolt from it for every one subvert thousand infidel have be convert and no few schismatic reconcile Bredenbach lib. 7. c. 18. justus calu. in pag. 12. the censure of the greek church give against protestantrye how desirous the protestant endeavour to conceal it and how much they be grieve and gravel thereby I leave to Bredenbachius and justus Caluinus to for conclusion a part of the schism of the greek church against the roman church consist in their admit marry man to receive holy order bellarm. to 1 par. 3. l. 1. c. 19 and after receive they to retain their wife provyde always that if they come chaste to holy order or that their wife die they can never after marry this their lecherous impiety be contrary to all primative christianity as appear they so desperate embrace as through it and for it notwithstanding all the calamity they sustain by turk all the refutation of their error by catholic all the mean that can be wrought hitherto they have not be nor might be reclaim yet god heavy hand over they the continual sting of their conscience behold their offence their disdain towards late heresy as fear to stray more and other sundry manifestation be sufficient proof that their schism be their own infamy and rather the glory of the roman church then otherwise that when other church like chaff be bear away against it by heresy it as sound corn remain to furnish the heavenly banquet when other house build upon sand be by rain fall wynd blow and sea surge overthrow it in state and soundness not only against the despite and fury of man but even against hell gate as Christ have promise remain inviolable nether as now appear mat. 16. do the grecian even in the foresay concur with protestant marriage of priest who as Luther say not only before order but after and not only for one wife but for two three four five and six luth. in proposit be allow to into matrimony contrary to the former belief and practice of grecian how lecherous soever and not only for this point but also as great or rather great condemnation afford they of their heresy against the bless sacrament say Lutheranae c. 10. in Eucharistia presence presence it be the judgement of the holy church bread and wine by virtue of the holy ghost to pass and be change into the body and blood of Christ not that Christ descend from heaven that he may be present in the eucharist but that by the pass and change of bread into his body he be make present a heavy sentence as bring contempt where contentment be expect in stidd of consolation a condemnation and a testimony of hatred against protestantry to be universally in all the world the four proof denier of the real presence condemn as heretic Catho priest 143. IGnatius Smyrnenses and Theodoret dialog. 3. medium do make mention of certain denier of the real presence but so as they have none to accord unto they also iconomachi as may appear out of the 7 council do affirm that the sacrament be but a image of Christ and they also have no follower only in the time of Leo the nine about five hundred year past who thrice recant such opinion as eronious maintain the only spiritual presence and he in three counsel be condemn in conc. Turon victor 2. in conc. rom. nich. 2. in Concil. rom. the council of Trent remain for the rest that have ensue rider gentleman you shall have bring Theodoret before Ignatius because Theodoret only report some such thing out of Ignatius but Ignatius himself have not one word of it and it seem still you never read Theodoret because you say medium not know in which of the three and thirty chapter it be to be brief that which you think make for you be in the chapter which be but a sacramental metonymy as the rest of the father use and you will wrest it to your literal and proper sense which be still your error speak of and confute before but read Theodoret dialog. 1. cap. 8. and he will expound himself and confute you and for Ignat. I have read his twelve epistle upon this occasion twice over and from his first epistle to his last there be no such thing in that reverend archbishop and martyr but the contrary which make i to wonder with what conscience you can belie so godly a martyr and abuse the catholic your love friend and as for your iconomachi they be very impertinent bring in this place your title of image be more proper for they yet that you may see they fit not this purpose I refer you for satisfaction to the pope own synod and decree synod 2. act. 5. pag. 549. begin at and after follow the pope decree Petrus presbyter etc. read this act and decree and they will give you satisfaction of your impertinent allegation and if the pope can content his chaplain than you be male content in deed whether ancient denier of the real presence be condemn as heretic fitzsimon 143. my objection against m. Rider consist in two important accusation the one that the denier of the real presence as soon as they take up such opinion be condemn as heretic the other that when they take it up they have none to accord unto they so that only Ignatius and Theodoret can find but a glawnce of such opinion which vanish for want of follower in such manner as Tertullian Philaster Epiphan augustin Damascen etc. in their calculation of heresy can find none so unfaithful as to distrust the truth of Christ real presence to this urgent accusation m. rider only answer first that we shall have bring Theodoret before Ignatius in deed as I have say before when I be a Puritan writer I will follow their preposterous proceed and place Ignatius that be three hundred year before Theodoret yet both be within the first five hundred year behind he and Theodoret that allege another monument I will place before the monument writer as if he be a prophet to foretell what shall be write second he answer that Ignatius himself have not one word thereof whereunto I reply that the great our loss by not have so much of his writing as be find by theodoret. three he answer that it seem we never read Theodoret because we say about the midst of his three dialogue not know in which of the 33. chapter it be i reply that the late chapter be more long than the former I have not stray in specify the midst in the 19 chapter also it be but a riderian sequel you know not the chapter therefore you never read the matter in our 135. number I that you mistake the number of s. Ignatius epistle will you therefore be confound by your own sequel that you never read the word three he answer that the point of the objection be but a sacramental metonymy to which I reply that this answer be m. rider ignominy to use obscure word unexpownd and nothing to the matter what sacramental be I have often before declare for metonymy it be thus define by Festus etc. metonymy be a figure when it that contain be signify for it that be contain etc as if you will say drink of this cup mean the liquor in the cup this denomination of the cup for the liquor be a metonymy now have unmask m. rider word I may be license to examine how they serve his defence against the accusation out of s. Ignatius for he think as Agar abandon her child under a bush gen. 21. remain remote till it have die to leave the objection without any other consolation then that in place it in a obscure shadow and retire far from it lament his own extremity but I will supply to he the office perform by the angel to Agar and say gen. 21. take up the child mean the foresay objection by he forlese contain in these word of Ignatius Eucharistias and they allow not eucharist and oblation because they do not confess the eucharist to be the flesh of our keeper jesus Christ compare m. rider tropical answer to this accusation and tell after that it be out of the compass of both the tropick limit the zodiac so that the son of plain deal can not reach to be direct over it here be then agars child Ishmael revive to the Puritan opinion against the real presence a fierce fellow his hand impugn they all gen. 16. as the scripture tell Ishmael to have be so that m. rider expectation that it shall have die by be place in a dark thicket of remote word be frustrate and it now a fierce and cruel adversary to they that deny the eucharist and sacrifice as prove they in their first original to have be apparent heretic the foresay denier of the eucharist to be the flesh of Christ be the first of that opinion yet in deed they be persuade rather that the eucharist be not Christ flesh because they think he have not flesh then if he have any that his word so pregnant to testify such truth have not make the eucharist to be his flesh and by consequent the heresy of these time be condemn in they not otherwise but by anticipation to wit for deny the eucharist to be Christ flesh and yet confess that Christ have flesh and for it disprove as heretic to come again to his affect obscurity what use or effect do the word of m. rider import that the speech be but a srcramental metonomye to defend they and their imagination thereby ether the metonomy be to be refer to the person or to the persuasion or to the condemnation of the person and persuasion or to the condemner of their condemnation in any way in the world that it can be imagine it be no more to any purpose profit or defence than a single netwoorke or loom apron to cover a naked freeze body but why shall the deal be defensive or plain in such a meaning why shall he discover intelligible that which discover his cause most pertinent and infallible and not rather as he do fall to a puritanical evasion in pretend to say much when he have say nothing at all but a metonomy that be a naked figure without all substantial content fowerthly he answer that elswher Theodoret will expound himself and confute we to which I reply that this be at least the 191. untruth for neither the one nor the other be in all theodoret. the 191. untruth nether can he confute we but by first confute himself also if he do so expound himself and confute we m. rider have any regard of his credit shall have bring such confutation and omit his void and blind mist of a sacramental metonomy in place thereof five he answer that we belie Ignatius to which I reply that I attend according my experience of many great discourtesy endure at his hand calu. particip pag. 1171. as before be show this abuse consider in the same case I find it use by Caluin against but m. rider for recompense and satisfaction will take this 192. untruth the 192. untruth in his own mouth confess Theodoret to have in his 19 chapter what we have allege in who then be the lie he dare not to say that it be in Theodoret be a most venerable father within the first five hundred year and he can not say it be in i who have only certify and that true as he confess what Theodoret allege out of s. Ignatius there remain therefore that he can bestow it no where so well as in his own lip where it be in a proper free howld and habitation of inheritance there it be as in the most imprenable scon out of which verity be banish and have lose all jurisdiction of which sconce the tooth be the wall the lip the rampart and the beard the trench there it be as a cock crow on his own dunghill who as the lion king of beast can not terrify so be falsehood in that mouth tooth lip beard and dunghill not surmowntable by verity therefore we must let it there and in that manner remain without controwlment for if you chase it out of such seat it will fall into the throat and never be expel to the next as grevous objection that iconomachi infamous heretic who in deed be the ancient forefather of the protestant persuasion among such as confess our Christ to have have a true body affirm the sacrament be but a image of Christ have none to credit they he answer first that they be impertinent bring into this place to which I reply that the proof bear title whether ancient denier of the real presence be condemn for heretic and it be show that ichonomachi be such denier and so condemn it can not possible be avoid but m. Rider know not as be inevitable apparent in his whole book what or when be any thing pertinent or no his second answer shall make my imputation in the sight of the world assure by his advise i to read the pope own synod and decree to give i satisfaction of my impertinent allegation mark reader I instant request you to what act and satisfaction he send i namely to it wherein nothing be contain but such execration of his doctrine as follow 2. act. 5. imagine anathema etc. they that pervert sentence of scripture belong to idol against image execration they that term image idol execration they that cry christian woorshipp image or god execration here be the pope own synod and decree that tell i by m. rider opinion that I have not allege well my allegation against the iconoclast because forsooth they be condemn for deprave the scripture against venerable image and because they say that christian do worship image as god and that image and idol be all one do not these canon and condemnation rather late reform heresy than any way in the world direct or indirect concern any answer to my evidence what! be all impertinent awnswer although new condemnation of reformer due satisfaction to all objection against reformer be all frivolous objection of reformer insupportable thunder clap against all lawful opposition will it be ever your condition as Luther himself your father of truth declare to have be of your brother to think every straw a spear and that at every stroke you ding down army but of such pay master unless you accept such payment there can no other be have in the mean time antiquity be find to have condemn such for heretic who affirm the sacrament to be but a image of Christ etc. his make Lirinensis to be against catholic Bernard against the supremacy the father against the real presence this council condemn the iconoclast or image breaker as hateful heretic to God to be as a satisfaction for he against we what be it other then gallant and riderica to ride in manner fortould affirm like Anaxagoras whiet snow to be black ink and every thing clean contrarious if his meaning be that the iconoclast because they be impious against image can not also be impious against sacrament or against any other mystery and thereby but belong to one allegation he show himself to be so simple as not to know that one impiety dispose to another which every other how foolish soever be not ignorant of alas poor Puritan profession what proctor have thou choose who direct thy adversary to find thou condemn and make thy condemnation for impugn their doctrine to be to they a hurtful satisfaction rider 144. last you bring in poor upon the stage to bear his faggot and recant his error of the spiritual presence of Christ in the sacrament which we have sufficient prove before to be by scripture father and pope the true presence and now you bring in siliee his recantation too be our confutation I pray you let i ask you but one question can a reason draw from a particular conclude general if it shall I will reason thus with you Bonner Standish with other preach stout against the pope supremacy in king Edward his day therefore the pope supremacy be nor lawful will you admit this kind of reason these juror be too young to g^ue evidence and too partial to be trust with the trial of this issue I think no no more do we the other for shall one man weakness inconstancy and fall from the truth conclude general against the truth God forbid but you will object and say it be not one man but three several synod but I pray you remember that subornation of witness and pach of juries do in westminister hall be most severe punish in that most honourable starrechamber and shall not the fope and his follower be call to a account one day before the great judge jesus for the suborn of witness and pack of corrupt jury to deface Christ truth and to maintain their own forgery the catholic demand a proof out of scripture and father for the prove of your roman opinion touch Christ real and corporal presence in the sacrament and you bring in the pope stipendary chaplain gather by the pope summons to uphold the pope rot decline kingdom and every one of they at least 1100. year after Christ^ ascension and one of they within this sixty year to prove a thing do a thousand year before now I give Ireland catholic this friendly caveat not to cleave to the pope romish religion but to Paul roman religion and not to rest concontent wi^h the name of catholic until they have the doctrine that be apostolical and catholic and now to your five proof be your last refuge and least help his recantation and condemnation 144. for his first answer fitzsimon to this recantation of the first late head of his opinion who can never fashion any monstruous body thereto of adherent he say a particular do not conclude a general which be true what miserable conclusion have he make in his whole book when if a figure be to be grant in one word thereby be conclude that all the sentence be but figurative if there be like form of speech and sound of letter in the old and new testament thereby be conclude there be no more liberality or substance in the new then in the old if spiritual sense be affirm in any one sentence of scripture or father thereby be conclude nothing be literal if any one prelate and any one book yea the very antiphonary be worthy to be reform the life of all catholic be thereby conclude to be lew and all their doctrine devilish if any sentence yea impertinent be allege out of any father the town the province the kingdom that region of the world Europe africa Asia be infer to hold the same although neither person nor place nor province of such region as appear in our 60. number when asia be make to hold a opinion without any of all asia specify for be author thereof be number what say you m. Rider can reason draw from a particular conclude general you insinuate that according to learning they can not spit out man and let truth have once a clean seat in your mouth and confess in plain deed that they can not and consequent confess that your inference hitherto have be at least frivolous and unlearned second I reply that this recantation and condemnation of be not particular the condemnation be by three whole concil and the recantation be calu. in joachim as Caluin confess by the parent of the sacramentarian opinion in his own behalf and of his child in so much as thereupon to the time of the albigense and John Wickliff few or none can be find taint with that error second he accuse Bonner and Standish to have dissemble in their belief I think in my conscience the accusation be untrue and the rather because there be neither witness nor author beside his own crack credit to aver it but let we suppose it to be true all that follow thereby be that they borrow puritanical dispensation to themselves mention in the 99 number to do contrary to their conscience deal plain in God cause and tell the world whether the late thousand subscribe Puritan have not all of they draw in their horn and sway with the tyme how many time do Latymer and Crammer recant up and down so then such do puritanize three he answer that subornation of witnese and pack of juries do in westminister hall be punish in the star chamber thereby imply that the Pope subornation of his stipendary this be conceive a good word that it be so often repeat chaplain shall be punish for condemnation of to which I reply first out of s. augustin to be a old wont of sectarist s. aug. 22. faustum and what soever against themselves out of their own book or of their doctor deed and recantation be allege that they doubt not to affirm out of a impudent and sacrilegious mouth that it be foist in by depraver I do not thereby that m. Rider be such unless he be guilty second I will be instruct willing in the cause of his knowledge how all the bishop of the three concil whereby be condemn be find to have be the pope stipendary chaplain Peter of nicomedie be make the pope pensioner as also s. Bernard and all that can be allege against protestant but why (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) m. Rider say so therefore it can not be otherwise if you distrust he or his saying you be infer to be traitorous superstitious etc. three how find he among his spiritual revelation that the pope rot kingdom decline for as I show not long before it have to our seem never in three age former be so far extend as in this last and more and more follow on the same tenor four in what Chronologie find he that every one of the say stipendary chaplain live at least 1100. year after Christ ascension the council 2. be in the year 1055. the council Nicolao 2. be 1059. and the council under Gregory the 7. be 1073. not after Christ ascension but after his birth if therefore the 34. year of Christ life before his ascension be deduct from the first of these concil which be in the year after his ascension 1021. and after his nativity 1055 it must follow that every one of the foresay stipendary chaplain have live four score year after give sentence against because every one of they be by he affirm to have live at least 1100. after Christ ascension and consequent they not be prelate in concil before their age of 20. year at least all of they be make to surmownt a 100 year which sure in so great a number of prelate have be a rare grace and miracle and a great likelihood that God the giver thereof will recompense to the sight of the world their zealous employment and approve it as most laudable but in deed hondred in m. rider account be some time easy find a stray then in a pinner shop at hand notwithstanding all this shall stand but for the 193. untruth the 193. untruth now I come near to find all small untruethe tend to one capital untruth over whelm his whole discourse and convert all his allegation into a main sea of one falsehood you have as I trust consider often his assurance and faithful information that under the warmth they be his word of innocentius the three his wing our transubstantiation in the synod of Lateran be hatch at least 1200. year after Christ ascension that the pyx be invent by innocentius the three 1214. that brief all our opinion be forge by innocentius the three n. 67. here be his foundation for claim antiquity here be his corner stone of the whole frame of his travail that innocent the three forsooth be first broacher of our doctrine all which babylonian tower by this division in his own tongue not understand himself be undermine and utter subvert some time he say peremptory that innocentius the three have invent it and yet that other pope have pack jury and suborn witnese to condemn for be opposite thereto above a hundred and forty year before innocent the three live the first condemnation thereof be 1055. and innocentius and the Lateran council but 1215. some time that our opinion be never know nor dream of before innocent the three and yet the authority of they that profess it be so great as to see all prelate in the world to be stipendary chaplain against they that deny it these be as coherent discourse as advise resolution as constant information that be they alone they shall not only persuade other but m. Rider himself to be worthy of as great reprehension and confusion and punishment as Aristo sustain by the athenian for unworthy and foolish write her commendation but be conjoin to so innumerable of the same sort how may he escape not to fall into desperation of be otherwise account then a rider you get not any rethorical apostrophe at my hand to this his confusion nor yet any help to get he up again after this his disgraceful stumble against the head of his own opinion during his leap short at the fownder of our doctrine but if you of his profession will assist he to rise I doubt not by God grace to he to this iournye end and so often to occasion you to support he in his slipprine as affection can require and yet to renounce he in the end as past remedy and recovery the five proof of many miraculous testimony of the real presence Catho priest rider 145. gentleman you know in school a sit be ever before in architecture the foundation be before the build in Christ divinity man philosophy and common sense the cause be ever before the effect but you contrary to divinity reason and philosophy will have a thing to work wonder above nature which be not in neither have any be at all for you will make the simple people believe that your transubstantiate Christ work miracle and yet you have not nay you can prove any such a Christ and if there be such a Christ he be none of we for he be never bear of the bless virgin nor shed one drop of blood for our sin and therefore we renounce he as none of our saviour of many miraculous testimony of the real presence fitzsimon 145. he tell in the very entrance to this disputation of miracle that the real presence be not not to be find or of no be next that he renownce Christ transubstantiate a woeful denial and woeful abjuration for the first he that can face out that Christ real be be never in question that both they and we hold Christ real presence in the sacrament how come he now to affirm that it be contrary to divinity reason and philosophy to suppose that the real presence have any be at all and to distrust the very first question of the real presence for the very title of this disputation do bind he to treat of no other controversy whether it be among thing of be or no the 194. untruth let this contradiction be the 194. untruth to increase the late mention ocean his other blasphemous abjuration of Christ transubstantiate I leave to his reply to who it belong if I will admire any point of infidelity or any desperate course of reformer which continual use have make i long since not to wonder at I will exceed remain astonish at their impious resolution against the point of miracle some time they affirm they to be so necessary as they who without they will encroach into the office of doctor and preacher to be etc. presumptuous rash heretical imitator of chore and Dathan worthy for their intolerable and devilish arrogancy to descend into hell take more upon they then John Baptist Zuingl to 2. Ecclesiastes fol. 52.53.54 more than Peter Paul and Christ jesus himself to which say of thus consent Brentius brent in cap. 13. luc. hom. 6. and hom. 76. resurr. ibid. luth. to 4. in c. 35. isa in loc. come 41. pag. 394. act. 19 v. 14 15.16 luth. to 4. in c. 34. isa the gift of work miracle have this use especial that it be a testimony and confirmation of a doctrine reveal from heaven to which also Luther and express subscribe some time they be heavielie and earnest impugn all they that require such proof of miracle at their hand profess a new doctrine unknown by their manifold confession since the time of the apostle and wherefore shall they not they be know the son of mention in the act not able as Luther confess to heal a lame horse or to work other miracle then to draw after they to their licentious doctrine great multitude apt to such miracle worker say s. Hieron con. jovin l. 2. do not brag that you have many disciple that bad people delight in your persuasion it be a show of licentiousness for they do not so much approve your speech as they yield to their own vice Aelian l. 13. variar. hist. and conformable thereto Socrates answer the harlot Castilia object against he that with all his eloquence he can not divert any of her lover from she say it be no marvel that they be perverse be more apt draw downward to vice then upward to virtue at our miracle report unto they 1. cent. 6. c. 13. p. 815. 2. pag. 16. 3. pag. 814. 4. pag. 816. 5. pag. 810. what exclamation have they nay rather what blasphemy have they not o say the centuriast credulous and blockish people o juggle contrary to the word of God o owgly darkness Bezam volum. 3. p. 146. l. 61. Danaeum to 1. resp. 785. to 2. 1421. cal. in pref. Instit. math. 12. s. aug. l. 10. ciu. c. 18. s. Ambros. in ser. SS. geruas and Prothas s. hier. con s. victor l. 2 wandal joan. 14. mat. 10. mar. 6. mar. 16. psal vlt. psal 14. v. 5. and v. 1. etc. so again they and Caluin say that our miracle be either feign or fantastical or by witchcraft as much say the pharisee of Christ miracle the pagan of they of the christian the arian eunomian vigilantian against the catholic as s. Ambrose s. Hierom s. victor etc. recount these two assurance we have in defence of miracle to cownterpoise all that Satan and his suckling can object first Christ promise that his disciple shall do the thing he have do and great than he have and that they shall cure the sick raise the dead cleanse the leoper and cast out devil second that all chief father be recompter of miracle and writer of admirable life of saint in every age from Christ time mitating s. Luke admirable and miraculous relation of the act of the apostle which David advise say praise God in his saint as also animate they to follow such devotion because in he that glorify they that fear our lord he shall dwell in his tabernacle and rest upon his holy hill it be hard to name any of the father who omit to treat of miracle then to specify they who be reporter of they not only the ear but the eye of all catholic be full of certainty in that point I desire to answer m. rider objection in particular without dwell in confirm light to be in the sun or water in the sea only let the inconstancy of heresy not be unknown also in this point for Caluin some time say that the apostle do term right miracle the seal of doctrine in hebr. 2.4 and 2. cor. 11.12 and other do confess that they establish faith and scripture martyr in 38.41.489 Kimedon 225. if it be so very protestant have great cause to distrust their doctrine as be unseal and unestablish for miracle they utter be know to want beside the former whereof they shall little glorify rider part. 2. auns. 1. q 1 page 119. 146. it be strange to see the difference of the old church of Rome and this last giddiepated church of Rome the last church of Rome think that church to be no true church unless she work miracle but I pray you hear old Rome censure of new Rome opinion (*) he that work miracle without the unity of the church do nothing the israelit be in the unity of the church and do no miracle the magician of Pharaoh be out of the church and yet do like thing to Moses therefore true miracle such as Moses wrought may be do by such as be not member of the true church and so consequent miracle by old Rome confession prove neither any such wherein they be work to be the true church nor the worker true member of the same and then it follow Petrus etc. Peter the apostle wrought miracle and so do Simon Magus many thing yet there be many christian that can not work miracle as Peter do or as Simon do and not withstand rejoice that their name be write in heaven now for the catholic good let we examine the faith of old Rome the old church of room teach we to be assure of our salvation in this life the new church of room to doubt of our salvation in this life the child of Israel wrought no miracle yet the true church Pharaoh his enchanter work miracle yet be the false church and that many of Christ flock that neither work miracle as Peter do yet they rejoice for that they be assure that their name be write in the book of life and thus much for your own pope against your own miracle and do not your own doctor lyra tell you plain that (b) and so in like manner it come to pass (a) (a) upon dan. cap. 14. page 222. but Lira print at Venice have that sometime in the church the people be often most shameful cozen with feign and false miracle devise by the priest or their follower even for a temporal gain which shameful shift of cozen and covetous priest Lira wish to be severe punish by the chief prelate and to expel it and they out of the church and your own (c) (c) Alex Hales part. 4. quaest. 53. member 4. doctor for that be one of his title record more special juggle then this say in your very sacrament of the altar there appear flesh sometime work by the nimble conveyance of man sometime by the work of the devil so that if there be any flesh in the sacrament of the altar whether visible or invisible it be either wrought through the priest legerdemain or the devil cunning and craft now gentleman you have bring your miracle to a fair market I trust after a while the discreeet catholic will nor give you a halfpenny for a hundred of they Tharasius the precedent of that idolatrous council demand of all the learned in that synod why their image then do not work miracle Nycen sin 1. act. 4. answer be make out of God book that miracle be only give to the unbeliever if you be too busy with your feign miracle we will make a whole superstitious synod yet to brand your church and her child in the forehead for unbelief in old time it be know by miracle who be the true christian and who be the false but now the work of miracle be take away altogether and be rather find among those that be false disguise christian note but two thing out of Chrysostome first miracle be now quite take away next only they remain with false christian in the false church so if your church will have miracle by chrisostomes censure she be a false church and all in that church be false christian but if your miracle be true as all god and Christ miracle be than the change must be as well of the form as of the substance when Moses rod be turn into a serpent it be a serpent in deed and no likeness of a rod remain exod. 4.3 Iho. 2.9.10 these prove your miracle to be false and so when Christ turn water into wine there be neither colour nor taste of water remain and so in all true miracle but you will have in your sacrament a change of the substance of bread yet the accident as whiteness roundness thinness taste August lib. 22. cap. 8. line 3. 4. August lib. 3. cap. 10. and relish notwithstanding remain which be impossible and not only contrary to the word of God but also to the faith of those primitive fathers^ and Augustine urge this matter very euangelicallie say whosoever he be that yet require wonder and miracle to bring he to believe the truth be himself a wonderful miracle that the world believe yet he remain still in unbeelefe and Augustine else where tell you flat that in the sacrament of the lord supper there be no miracle read he and follow he and this be not to pass untouched that as your miracle be false in themselves so they be invent and do to a most wicked end which be to confirm your false doctrine of real presence purgatory pray to image and the like trash which be clean contrary to Christ miracle for their end be twofold the first to confirm our faith in Christ divinity and the other joh. 10.30.31 to assure our soul of salvation through his name these thing be write that you may believe that jesus be that Christ the son of God and that in believe you may have life through his name what miracle be reprove by Catholic writer fitzsimon 146. if you have due consider the style of m. Rider as perhapp you may hardly find any more worthy for soundness and method to be consider you may find among other point that when our decretal seem to favour he than they be old and every parcel of they be a pope canon and when any late doctor be by he allege against we of our own profession than they be ancient and contrariwise when any who live long before such be produce by we they be term late one only brief example be to be at this present specify when lyra who live 1320. be thought to deny the 6. chapter of s. John then be it say old Lira say that the 6. of John etc. treat not of the sacrament contrariwise when we have bring three whole concil condemn they be except against as be late although according his own computation they have be three hundred year elder than Lira he have the best gift in that to make old young affirmation negation disproof approbation truth falsification decree denial and to affirm all to be for his purpose how assure soever he be oppress thereby like Tarleton who affirm that his mistress cast a chap knife at his head for some proffer sauciness have do it for a favour that light may be find among any writer of this tyme now then for his first allegation and all his inference thereupon although it be not to be grant that magician or sectarist can work true miracle if in a liberal disposition I accord unto they what be he the better let the faith of old Rome the phrase be so pleasant as it be reiterate condemn miracle do out of the unity of the church do not the faith of late Rome as earnest condemn they also do not s. Paul condemn the miracle of transfer mountain etc. if one be not in the unity of charity 1. cor. 13 what need then so frivolous a labour to so small a benefit in seek out impertinent sentence in defect of direct resolution of which no syllable belong to mend the bringer cause or to mar it of their impugner thus much at least we grateful receive from our own s. augustin who be no pope but of m. rider make not against our miracle but against they that be not in the unity of the church such as Puritan be not only in respect of the universal church but also in respect of their own first Protestant synagogue so far be it that s. augustin word be against we that they always sting and destroy they principal that distort they against we and when you affirm these word thus much from your own pope and from the old church of Rome how advise be you to deny that the pope of the old church of Rome be not our own pope I pray you to solder these two together your own pope not your own pope concern the allegation out of Lira I be persuade as much as Lira that both abuse may happen and be to be punish where and when they happen what difficulty then be contain in his allegation against we nether be it other than a riderian sequel there be a ill abuse by miracle therefore no good use there be deceit commit in point of devotion therefore no devotion to be follow for so you may prove that law physic eat drink weapons apparel preach etc. be not to be use because they be some time abuse in the next citation which by want of the book I can not now of the sacrament according to your translation of the altar and apparence therein by man procurement and devilish operation you take a licence to add to the text the word of the altar yet you blame i for add the word bless before sacrament because it be not in the author you infer next like yourself upon this proposition some time by abuse there be apparition if there be any flesh in the sacrament of the altar whether visible or invisible it be wrought through the priest legerdemain or the devil cunning and craft first without doubt the sequel be riderial that be far beyond be ridiculous and preposterous for if it be allowable will follow as reasonable some time m. rider have be know in London to use legerdemain and all to have abuse diverse by the deceitful suggestion of the devil therefore in all other place whether he be visible or invisible he be to be account not see but by legerdemain and deceit of the devil if your curse be no better than your discourse you will as bad deserve the name of the one as you be far and for all I can understand ever be from obtain the other second do not you start from your word in the 35. number and in your rescript that as we believe to receive Christ realy so you do also yet now you profess that you do not believe he to be receive visible or invisible in the sacrament and that if he be therein visible or invisible it be by legerdemain can he be realy and yet neither visible nor invisible not to be unsuitable in your proceed you make the next stuff of one livery with the precedent by diverse dishonest deal first you say that Tharasius be precedent in that Concil: which make the 195. untruth the 195. untruth for he be neither first second nor three therein as appear in the begyne of the first act second by the 196. untruth the 196. untruth you affirm that it be a idolatrous Concil. it be a puritanical propriety to be saucy and malapert towards concil and parliament the 197. untruth as be before testify three it be the 197. untruth that Tharasius demand any such matter he only propound it as a objection by these word etc. some one will say etc. and answer it himself to himself say that miracle be grant to the not believer the 198. untruth by the 198. untruth you add the word only whereby may follow if what be grant to the not believer the same be grant only to they then m. rider unless he be a unbeliever have no eye head arm no wit or moral honesty because all these be grant to the unbeliever which by his addition be all one and to be grant only unto they and consequent he have all the same must by his own word be a unbeliever he partake such thing as by his deduction only unbeliever have but m. Rider if it may please you let Christ himself expound the say of miracle or sign to be grant for the unbeliever not to exclude they from the believer for say he etc. mar 16.17 but such as believe these sign shall follow and consequent only to import that they be grant to unbeliever to convict they of falsehood yet remain with believer not to such intent but to confirm and comfort they in their religion to which end the word of s. augustin be appliable which short after you allege and misalleadge he that yet require prodigious wonder to believe thereby m. rider make false latin in s. augustin allegation be himself a great prodigious wonder who believe not the whole world believe we require not wonder to believe thereby but enjoy they by Christ promise to assure the weak and comfort the feeble in faith good lord what benefit can your belief receive by this sentence of s. augustin not only no world but no country nor no city nor no house be now or ever before entire of your belief easy may I answer s. chrysostom if any such matter be in that place but it make the 199. untruth the 199. untruth that he so say likewise it be a riderian sequel sign be find among those that be false christian she be a false church and have all false christian which will have miracle first it be against Christ former word that believer shall not want sign second if the sequel be allowable that what church soever will have miracle both it and all therein be false the Lutheran Staphil in respon. con. Scihmidelin pag. 414. Lindan dial. 3. c. 1. Bolsec in cap. 13. and caluinian church be false and all therein because Luther covet to work a miracle upon one possess and Caluin by raise his man brule from dissemble death Luther to his own extremity and Caluin to the true death of his man then also fox church and all thereof be false by forgery of some of his martyr speak without tong burn without pain and be martyr and yet alive long after as for example John Marbeck by fox in his first edition be make martyr together with Antony parson Robert testwood Henry filmer and many rare point of his martyrdom relate especial his pleasantness in go to the fire yet he be find alive long after alan cop. dial 6. pag. 697. fox have no other excuse but to confess himself deceive and to rail against they that warn he thereof call they carper fox act and mon. pag. 1114. wrangler exclaimer depraver whisperer railer quarrell-pyckers corner-creeper faultfinder spider-catcher etc. now as I say by m. rider be of fox church according to unity and verity of doctrine as he say himself and fox seek false miracle and martyrdom as hereby appear to his church it must follow by m. rider own sequel that such church and all thereof be false why shall such unfortunate disputer every moment make to confownd themselves intermeddle at all with matter of learning he proceed in the same vain and vanity of reason say all god and Christ miracle as if they be not all one in the point of miracle do change as well the accidental form as the substance as it happen in Moses rod and the water turn into wine if any will bid he prove that Moses rod do not retain the leinthe it have before after it be make a serpent or the water in Cana Galileae the quantity and moistness of water when it be turn to wine to what plunge will he be drive you may hear he say it be unpossible and contrary to the word of God and faith of the primative father but for other proof you shall as soon wrest it out of a block and if it can be prove that in they God have change both substance and form as it can never why shall a general conclusion contrary to his late confession in the 144. number that learning do not allow such reason be draw out of particular when Christ resuscitate three dead he change their substance make they of carcase to be live creature mat. 9 mar. 5. luc. 8. yet he change not their form so when he make bread to become his body he change the substance of bread but not the external form contrariwise when he be bear when he walk on the sea when he become invisible both at their seek to throw he down a rock and to make he king when he issue the sepulchre when he enter among his shut up disciple when he ascend he alter the natural form or quality of his body but not the substance thereof whereby appear that according to his pleasure and omnipotency he may alter the one without the other and as much and as little as it please he as also that it be the 200. and it a blasphemous untruth the 200. untruth that such change be or be impossible to his divine majesty whereof peruse what be say in the examination of the creed upon the word almighty whereas he say s. augustin urge this matter very evangelica by his former sentence it testify very evangelica that m. Rider be very prodigious among christian in not believe according to the belief of the whole world or which be all one in the Catholic belief so that he may fill his paper he care not how little important or how much impertinent how little to his benefit or how much to his discredit and confusion will be his saying according to which his vain of vain writing he add that s. augustin tell flat that in the sacrament of the lord supper there be no miracle the 201. untruth s. August in Psal. 33. o what a flat lie for the 201. untruth be use towards s. augustin he that ample and profess testify Christ to have bear himself in his own hand not metaphorica but according the letter and deliver all other document record in the 116. number how be he make to doubt of a miracle in the miracle of miracle yet of s. augustin opinion concern miracle I will wish Bellarmine to be read c. 14. and if s. augustin have ever otherwise surmise yet the same have be a opinion repugnant to protestantry Caluin lib. 1552. l. ineund rat fol. 97. cal. l. 4. Instit. cap. 17. n. 32. ibid. num. 24. and n. 10. 11. Eezam Creoph fol. 66. 67. for Caluin himself acknowledge sublime this mystery to be so supernal or sublime that it can not by wit or conceit be comprehend again I be not say he ashamed to confess this mystery to be high then that I can either comprehend it with my wit or declare it with my tongue a little before he say it be a slandre of the adversary that he do measure this mystery with the squire of human reason conclude to his difciple m. rider in these word Christ true with the substance of his flesh and blood do give life to our sowl in these few word who so perceive not many miracle to be contain be more than a dolt I will be loath to have be such godfather to m. Rider as his own father in God make himself by give he such a uncourteous name for his deny miracle in this mystery the zwinglians profess no less sublime in confession gal pag. 35. and this mystery to be so high that it surmownt all our sense and all the course of nature what need great confusion or disproof then when his own ghostly father pillar of his profefsion namely Caluin and contradict his assertion to the residue there need no answer if any other have m. rider at such advantage how much may he exaggerate his overween himself in think his reach natural to have attain that comprehension of this sacrament wherein other find such sublimity as to acknowledge it most miraculous Eusebius recount that in the persecution under severe Catho priest lib. 5. cap. 1. that it be a great accusasion against christian that they do eat man flesh because they believe that they do receive the body of Christ 147. gentleman in that book be five and twenty chapter rider and not one word of this matter in any of those and again you mistake the time for Severus then govern not if it be under Severus it shall then be in the six book where you shall find forty five chapter yet there also be not one word of this yet if you mark this that you bring against we if it be to be find in Eusebius it make nothing against we for though the pagan be as gross in the matter of the sacrament as Nicodemus be in the matter of regeneration it be neither miracle nor wonder but a thing too common now and then and for true christian to eat Christ flesh spiritual by faith be or aught to be no miracle in the church but the practice of the church whether m. Rider understand any hard Latin fitzsimon 147. of m. rider skill in greek whereby he affirm Christ to have speak greek who never speak other language during his abode in this mortal life then Hebrew as not converse with ethnic or gentile such as then the grecian be as if greek and hebrue have be all one as his knowledge in they both be all one we have already treat his skill also in scripture cowncil ancient father scholastic history grammar orthography be not obscur notify at least he that glorify of his grammarian travail he that make the latin dictionary whereunto he add nothing former unuulgar but ridiculous word be he ignorant of the latin tongue let it appear by his say that euseb have not one word in the place by we allege how christian be accuse for eat man flesh in the same place by we cite thus relate euseb the foresay accusation use by infidel against christian Thiesteas and they forge false against christian to have Thyestes refection or supper etc. by which metaphor be insinuate their eat of child flesh because Atreas have compel Thyestes for a heinous offence to eat this own child which figurative locution be beyond m. rider capacity he deny euseb to have any such matter before you betake yourself to new grammarian labour or dictionary invention learn to understand a plain metaphorical relation of a matter that your denial thereof because it be not in plain Dunstable term be not repute if not profownd impudent yet profownd ignorant or contrariwise when you in your first sermon in Dublin five time produce or make long sculptile which showld have be short and not long after brufe and break Priscian head in say for whereof the l. chancellor rebuke your audacious temereity in intermeddle with that papistical language unacquainted to such capacity be it not your part to forbear from intermeddle therewithal why will you wade further in so unfortunate a ford wherein you have be so public overplunge since friendly will not avail but that be by your name a cavaliero you will also be adventurous I will instruct yourself and other who perhaps will be therefore more thankful of some few as great slip and trip of ignorance in latin testify in this discourse as may wrest shame out of impudence itself omit in your very dedicatory epistle the say of Poscolo to contain false Latin not by his ignorant composition but by your bad application by say of prince and man of state whereas be the singular number can never be in concord with prince or man of state be the plural number which first sentence be answerable to your first sermon first where you treat of active and passive doctrine you affirm that signify to you yet it be against all skill in latin for it signify to they and not eye but in all owld grammarian labour be answerable to you second in your margin upon Lira his suppose say the six chap. of s. John not to concern the b. sacrament you say where as you shall say a gross absurdity in a professor of skill in latin especial in he who deliver a discourse of Christ doctrine rebownd from active to passive and back again as a tenise ball from wall to wall but it be god judgement that he shall be find stumble into a passive for a active that have make Christ discourse impertinent wander from active to passive in the 67. number he interpret to be it be credible which be to make a negation a affirmation it be express it be not credible in the 69. number be show how he cold never understand the latin of transubstantiation consider that it be so rife in writer he confess he can never find it another instance be in your rescript in these word all which I pray you wish he to mend they and to mend be latin woorthly to be much mend as be against all grammarian concord that shall govern other than one case wherefore it shall be several other incongruity in speak and interpret be former specify and these so far beyond all excusation of not only unskillfulnes but also blindness in the latin tongue that I may seem to deal favourable in not ride m. rider more vehement in this point accept therefore kind that omit other exclamation I register up the 203. untruth the 203. untruth whereby euseb be deny to report what we have allege so also whereas it be of a great antiquity which euseb repeat in the five book of his history then in the six what frivolous exception be it to say the time be mistake if not only in Severus time but also before the accusation of pagan that we do eat a child flesh because of our eat the b. sacrament be usual I say usual as before both euseb time and Severus appear in s. justin and Tertullian to which effect thus flout in Minutius justin in apol. 2. antonin in fine Tertull in apol. c. 7. Prateol num. 7. minut. Felix in Octau a pagan and in his derision a perfect Puritan say a infant shroud in a cake of flower be give to they that be make christian o how well do this infidel word concur with m. rider blasphemy against our breaden God our Wafre God and c what sweet predecessor these man have of their doctrine and deal but of this we have treat in the 111. number rider 148. but if you have read Eusebius yourself diligent you shall have find that in the five book and seven chapter he will have tell you that then miracle cease 2. cap. 58. and be not in God church and he produce old father Iraeneus for confirmation of the same you bring in Eusebius to maintain miracle and Eusebius himself deni^th they this be your old fashion to enforce the father to speak not what they will but what you please but read that place well and remember that Eusebius record that church wherein miracle be wrought not to be God church and so by his opinion your church of Rome must be plant in the suburb of Babylon not in within the gate of Zion whether Eusebius affirm true miracle to have cease fitzsimon 148. who will not think this report of euseb impertinent in this place see our allegation concern not miracle the 204. untruth first than it be the 204. palpable and pregnant untruth that euseb deny miracle in that chapter or any where else therefore let these word of the say chapter be witness whether m. Rider have not defy all truth daemonaes and in and some do cast forth devil assure and true so that themselves purge from bad spirit have come to belief and be receive into the church other have foreknowledge of future thing vision and prophetical prediction other by imposition of hand do heal the sick who do mistearme good evil and evil good light darkness and darkness light why shall they not make affirmation to be negation and disproof to be approbation be it because euseb affirm in s. time there be miracle therefore he deny they after speak clear and honest m. rider do not you fear your conscience when you write this to affirm the church wherein miracle be wrought not to be God church but since you have appeal to euseb to he you shall go I will once again exalt the baker to the pillory and make no other than the witness by himself allege to nail his own ear first m. rider say euseb to deny miracle in God church euseb himself say the contrary in these word euseb l. 5. c. 3. etc. many other miraculous operation of divine grace which in diverse church as yet be do etc. lib. 6. c. 29. second he tell how a pigeon descend from heaven upon flavian to have he choose pope three he relate how constantin the great and all his army do behold a bright cross above the sun with this inscription lib. 1. Constantini by this sign thou shall overcome and how Christ himself command he to have such a sign bear against his enemy for a salfegard I report i to all mind and understanding whether this be not a miracle and such a one as to the breaker of cross shall be dreadful wherein what portion m. rider deserve be before signify for brevity sake I omit to show how euseb put many other nail in his ear be assure that he can not be light deliver from these few and other before rehearse a jew present at mass which saint Basill do celebrate Catho priest Amphil. and Guitmundus in be convert by see a child divide in the bless sacrament 149. I find in Basill pag. 171. that he write thirty chapter but your munkish I never see rider neither do I care because he be a forger of false miracle and thus I prove it the fabler say the jew see a child divide in the sacrament that can not be Christ for he be a perfect man before his passion and if it be any beside Christ or if it have be any in Christ his likeness it must be do as your own author say a little before either by man sleight or the devil illusion but to be brief and yet plain a liar have need of a good memory this must needs be a very shameful lie whether Christ be a man may notwithstanding appear in the likeness of a child 149. in this discourse fitzsimon Metaphrast de Arsenio Paulus Diac. s. Gregorio abb. Villanaeus s. Ludovico Vincent lib. 30. spec. c. 24. Guitmundus lib. 3. because there be great sport tender by m. Rider I will first brief satisfy the reader which be desirous to learn the truth that not only these former but many other recount how Christ visible appear in the b. sacrament and common in likeness of a child as Metaphrast in the life of arsenius Paulus in the life of s. Gregory abbott treat of the priest Villaneus in the life of s. Lewes etc. I s. Vincent and Granado to avoid tediousness now let we attend first how m. Rider prove a forger because say he Christ be a man and therefore can not appear divide like a child as good a argument may be make against the act of the apostle that Christ can not appear to s. Stephen stand we believe he to be sit at the right hand of his father until he make his enemy his footstool likewise also against s. Paul that he do not see Christ in the way to Damascus for the same reason alas m. rider if angel who have no body can appear young why shall Christ body diminish his power that he can not do the same his second proof that this apparition be a shameful lie be because the mass be a patch and hatch say he four or five hundred year after s. basils death and therefore that s. Basil can not say mass which have it be true whereas s. Basil die before the year 400. after Christ it must follow that the mass be perfect hatch and patch before the year 900. after Christ which be 300. year before innocent the three so often by m. Rider protest to be the hatcher thereof so that himself almost in every point be a witness that himself be untrue but that he have great reason to grant this to be the 205. untruth the 205. untruth I will from the apostle time true and perfect mass in substance ceremony and name to have be frequent in God church as far as before my come to the particular treat thereof which ensue any may lawful expect at my hand rider 150. for how can Basill that live about the year of our lord 367. say your mass that be in hatch up and patch together at least four hundred or five hundred year after his death tom. 6. Biblioth. in lib. archip. euch. li. 2. pag. 405. as shall God will be prove unto you out of your own book in my next treatise of the mass and so you feed the catholic with these lie legend in stead of holy scripture a as for Guitmundus he have neither one word of saint basils life nor of your miracle yet he have some other thing as foolish and as untrue or else he have not be make archbishop for his pain wherein he great seruice the pope how ancient the mass be fitzsimon 150. it be know often and sufficient that m. Rider have bind himself to recant if I make good by scripture or father of the first five hundred year the doctrine we profess in the controversy by he object Hesich in levit. l. 4. c. 9 lib. 10. c. 13. among which the mass be one of the principal Hesichius first of the apostle in general teach Epiphan. heres. 79. that on Whitsonday they accomplish what be write in levitic and deuteronomy of the new and voluntary oblation when they celebrate the sacred mystery which the act of the apostle do aver in these word (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) Acts. 13. they be offer sacrifice to our Lord which also Erasmus confess to have be mass and it be prove by the whole grecian church and father upon this text not otherwise term the mass than a liturgy this Hesichius live within the first four hundred year but particular shall convict and certify the same s. isidor in Eccles. l. 1. c. 15. A^dias in s. petri. s. isidor and he also a father within the limitation say a s. Petro the romain order of the mass be first ordain by s. Peter and abdias confirm that he say mass in Naples and Antioch these two witnese be also within the limitation s. Andrew in a certain epistle to the church of which epistle before 100 year be mention by s. Wolphelmus abbot s. Bernard and Algerus thus testify himself to have say mass s. Andreas in ep. Achaiae I every day do sacrifice to omnipotent God who be live and true not the smoke of frankincense nor the flesh of loo bull but the immaculate lamb in the altar of the cross who flesh after the whole multitude of believer have eat the lamb which be sacrifice remain entire and live this testimony be to clear to need large interpretation three s. james by testimony of s. chrysostom and the council of Constantinople be the first that leave in write the mystical sacrifice Illyricus lib. lat. pag. 73. which his only liturgy the syrian do use upon solemnity nether do this want the very approbation of Flaccus Illyricus so great a Protestant confess both such liturgy mention and the syrian have thereof abdias in s. Mathaei s. Mathiew be kill at the altar say mass say abdias who julius interpret what say you m. Rider be these lawful proof or no you will perhaps except against they that the express name of the mass be not contain in they wherein you will show yourself willing to wrangle for as s. augustin say what be a more perverse part s. August epist. 174. then to strive about the name where the thing itself be certain know and you will think he to cavil in the close of s. Patrick who when any thing be well affirm of m. Deane will deny it to be understand of you because forsooth your name John rider be not express but because I be willing to grant all your honest motion I will condescend that you shall have as ancient evidence for the name of mass yet brief because in the peculiar treatise of the mass you know s. ignat. epist. I particular treat thereof s. Ignatius that glorious martyr say offer it be not lawful without the bishop to offer nor to sacrifice nor to celebrat mass s. Clemens epist. 8. s. Iuo. lib. 2. the same be ordain by s. Clement s. Higinus martyr say all church ought to be consecrate with a mass s. fabianus martyr who as I show you before euseb by yourself allege testify to have be choose pope Garetium by a dove descend upon he say and the sacrifice be not to be receive at that priests hand who can not accomplish the prayer action and other observation in the mass because I affect and follow the most succinct discourse possible I remit the residue belong to this point which already be make more than evident to the article of the mass short insue now let m. Rider be demand whether the mass be hatch and patch four or five hundred year after s. Basil in his rescript towards the midst or no yes say he in his rescript Durantus Guido be the mass founder o muse what stepp-mothers have you be to m. Rider he that consent that it be hatch and patch within five hundred year after s. Basil do thereby affirm and say that it be five hundred year before the founder thereof for and Durantus if they be diverse and Guido be no less than a thousand year after s. Basil or else that himself fail in the antiquity thereof no less than 500 year a man be a wolf to a man that be m. rider be continual make as his own wolf to devour himself in the rescript 44. number the like disproof be afford by Kemnitius Catho priest amb. 1. obit. Ambrose speak of a happy preservation of one from drown for devotion towards the same 151. in deed Ambrose tom. 5. pag. 720. write a treatise of the death of his brother Satyrus rider wherein he show the great mercy of God always towards his church and child in preserve they from danger and among the rest he bring in a example of a great number of passenger that in a storm suffer shipwreck among who there be one see the danger desire of some fellow passenger to give he some part of the mystical bread for in those day it be a superstitious custom wicked tolerate to carry some part of the sacramental bread about they which piece of bread when he have enclose fast in his garment he leap over board and do swim safe a shore this now be your wonderful miracle out of which let we see what may be gather the best note say a learned writer be that he be a good swimmer but to overthrow your miracle I will allege Ambrose his own word in that place first he call it but only a help of his faith and if he have think it have be Christ as you untrue teach he will have call it the author and finisher of his faith and therefore he take your host not to his maker as you teach nor his present preserver but a strengthen of his faith and that you may see it be true which I say afterward he call it the divine sacrament of the faithful and therefore he think not as you do that Christ be localie in the sacrament and again there be no miracle in this because other passenger that have not such mystical bread escape safe to shore as well as he for if the have of that host preserve he the lack of the host shall have drown the rest if your host can do the lesser much less the great and it be very strange that the catholic be so wise man in all other matter shall be so sot in this as to think that a wafercake consecrate by a priest or pope shall preserve a man from drown in water when it can preserve any good follow from be drink with wine but to the rest as they follow whether s. Ambrose esteem it a miracle by the b. sacrament that his brother be not drown 151. I inform you reader fitzsimon that m. Rider have form in this parcel of his discourse certain argument which be know I admire if you prepare not your attention as careful as to hear a new play you have have so good demonstration of his talon in argue but first according to his custom he begin at a manifest untruth which amownt to the 206. that he that be by s. Ambrose his testimony preserve the 206. untruth desire but of some fellow passenger to give he some part of the mystical bread whereas s. Ambrose say that it be a demand make to they who he have know in holy order to give he that divine sacrament of the faithful note m. rider fidelity which translate these word to signify only some part of the mystical bread not that he may curious behowld or view in which word s. Ambrose allude to the presumption of the bethsamit of who God destroy 5070. for look into his ark which be a assurance that he will not have his mystery vulgar know to the people the hide secrecy 1. reg. 6.19 but that he may obtain the help of his belief for he cause it to be tie up and bind it about his neck and so do cast himself into the sea not seek a plank of the dissolve ship by which he may be holpen because he covet the safeguard of only faith nether do his confidence fail he nor his opinion deceive he to conclude preserve from the wave and bring to land etc. in this discourse so distinct and religious pen by s. Ambrose m. rider say there be no miracle contain if you covet to know the cause of such his knowledge he will tell you because it be only a note of a good swimmer o subtle conceit but his text control his gloss by insinuate that he be bear into the haven and that first not mention that he do or can swim his second proof be that s. Ambrose or his brother do not conceive that divine sacrament of the faithful to be Christ what be his reason because forsooth it be call a help of faith and not the author and finisher of faith o gentle and wise exception s. Ambrose say that his brother covet the divine sacrament of the faithful that he may obtain a help to his faith and m. Rider assure when he have undertake to allege s. Ambrose his own word that he call it but a help of his faith leave out s. Ambrose his own word that divine sacrament of the faithful mark it well good sir first that s. Ambrose call his brother deliverer the divine sacrament of the faithful true and real tie about his brother neck and not only in his faith second that have he call it so as m. Rider wrest what sequel can be more riderian or ridiculous then that Christ may not be the of our faith because he be the help of our faith next he say Ambrose call it after according to truth it shall be say before the divine sacrament of the faithful therefore he think not as we do that Christ be localy in the sacrament be there ever such a therefore but none may gather fygg of bramble nor other argument from Puritan capacity the answer thereto shall be only to direct the reader to the 112. number where we have show s. Ambrose perspicuous testify his opinion that Christ be localy in the b. sacrament and that therefore it be the divine sacrament of the faithful because it contain his divine body a three argument be that in the former narration there be no miracle because other be save as well as s. Ambrose his brother good still I answer first it be more miraculous in Satyrus the brother of s. Ambrose because it be record that he have save himself and other and not other he second that other may be more skilful than he in swim and therefore that his delivery may have be more miraculous than they minut. foelix in Octau a four blasphemous argument be that the b. sacrament he call it as the pagan in Minutius n. 147. towards the end a wafre cake consecrate by a priest can not save any from drown because it can not save any from be drink for answer I only revoke to memory the blasphemous say of the jew against Christ he can save other but himself he can not save so m. rider faith jewish mat. 27.42 that because he do not save some from be drink therefore he can not save other from be drown be it not as lawful to say Christ save not himself therefore he can not save other fie on these pagan phrase and jewish blasphemy 152. so simple people foolish carry about they holly Bread cross crucifixse rider this and such trash whether cross holy bread or this be allowable 152. if m. Rider do not continual tender occasion to confound his cause fitzsimon let this point among the rest bear witness in his margin this he write so simple people foolish carry about they holy bread cross crucifix this and such trash if his own argument be good that mispel do ignorance of the thing itself it be clear that he mispel holy bread and this know not what he be write against first concern cross notwithstanding that England in all standard flag and targett honour they that Elizabeth late queen retain they in her chapel that m. Rider himself ample assure they to be traitor no less who abuse the picture robe stamp or standard such as the cross be of Christ than they who assault the very person of the prince yet here he say it be simple foolishness to bear any regard to cross or such trash let all the state of England and Irland take patient that they be by these word declare to be simple people and to do foolish for carry about they their cross banner let they make new Puritan dean and exalt that censorial sect and after stand assure to have all wise observation beg to bedlam for folly and nothing to be pure wise but out of the Puritan stamp and of the precise fashion I also advertise it to be a part of his rhetoric when he will persuade any autheur to defend his cause to honour they with some glorious title some time without all reason as to call late Lira by the name of a old father etc. some time deserve but nothing pertinent to his behoof as when he will prove priest marriage to call s. chrysostom that golden mowthed father and else where that reverend chrysostom omit all ample treatise in defence of the cross which be afford by the worthy Gretser in his volume cruse I will brief allege this gowlden mowthed father this reverend chrysostoms word and the wood on which the holy body of Christ be place and crucify why do all the world so strive to have it as they that can purchase any parcel thereof they enclose it in gold man and woman and hang it on their neck be thereby think honour and rich defend and protect what say you be that gowlden mouth father and reverend chrysostom a Papist or a Protestant be our devotion in his opinion but simple foolishness trash and c I can long swim in this plentiful matter of the reverence and devotion towards cross from the apostle time upward have all godly father and doctor to bear up my chynn if this one testimony of s. chrysostom by m. Rider commend do not seem bastant and powerful to disprove his bare wise accusation and have I not to treat again thereof in the article of image but because he be in Irland and that it may be know of what religion owld irish man be I will give one testimony beyond my word out of coelius sedulius by his own inscription know to be Scotus Ibernensis a scot of Irland say in Carm. Paschal neve that none mistrust the form of the cross to be adore as for Agnus this it be to be consider that the gentile or infidel use to hang at their neck certain stamp or cownter with filthy and dishonest shape to defend they against charm and incantation as appear in Varro himself Varro lib. 6. it seem good to God church since that such as be convert will not easy quite this foresay folly to change superstition into religion as by like occasion be do for candle on candlemass day baron tom. 1. pag. 606. and certain feast convert to God honour that they may not be retain against his honour therefore in remembrance that we be redeem by the lamb of God that take away the synn of the world who live a virginal and innocent life for our example and by his death sanctify our soul by the spiritual unction of the holy ghost maffeun in 7. be by Christ sacred spouse frame in resemblance of all these a image of a lamb in whit virgin wax temper with holy oil such image be call a Agnus Dei. of which sort when to Charles the great be present one by Leo the three he receive it as be his duty no otherwise then a precious treasure with no less piety and devotion also do the emperor of Constantinople receive one from Vrbanus the five proceed against it in a solemn procession of the clergy and Laity and carry it in a triumphant godly honour into the city these emperor although very ancient be simple foolish papist account such trash in protestant estimation and such sacred ressemblance in Catholic opinion worthy of all regard and reputation shall God almighty be so changeable as in the owld testament notwithstanding his forbid to honour idol yet so to allow devotion towards remembrance of his benefit as to honour David for his piety towards they and to punish 5070. bethsamit only for curious view of they and Oza for presumption to touch the case of they and now may not abide remembrance of far great benefit perform by his dear belove son but that they shall be in his sight simple foolish trash he that advise nothing more than to have we remember he and to place he as a memorial upon our arm and heart thereby to be ever in our eye and understanding he that for all great benefit fulfil towards the israelite admonish to erect monument and holy day to retain they in the mind of posterity be he now less love towards himself have he now repent his course and be become opposite to they that by external sign retain his gift in grateful representation how far against reason have sin and heresy blind and transport reasonable man to suspect God to be changeable in his proceed because themselves be inconstant variable so they that be bear against the stream do esteem themselves stidfast and both the shore and town and tower to move by the mutability of themselves of holy bread s. Paulinus and s. Hierome s. Paulinus in epist. 8. Hieron in v. s. Hilar osbernus in v. s. Conrade in in five s. Wolphelmi theodoric in v. s. hildegard lib. 3. c. 9 Metaphrast in Decembri in v. s. Marcelli Tom 3. conc. l. pag. 569. and of late time s. Elphegus archbishop of Canterbury s. Marcellus Abbot s. Hildegardis and many other have afford so ample testimony of the virtue and estimation of it that a thousand rider can not impair the dignity thereof nether can there be any thing more authentical than the form of benediction thereof use in Concilio can. 9 in these word o lord our holy father omnipotent eternal God vouchsafe to bless this bread with thy sacred benediction that it may be to all health of body and soul and a defence or protection against all disease of soul and body I will willing have all Catholic to hold it for a principal rule that be there no other authority to justify these holy and hallow thing yet that they shall esteem they very grateful to God by be impugn by such as m. Rider be for if they do not displease and often displace Satan he will not be so importunate in his follower to deride and disgrace they this rule have I follow myself to my exceed benefit to be more devout towards such devotion at which they be most discontent withal Catho priest lib. 8. cap. 5. Sozomen recount how a woman not believe that Christ have transform bread into his body be in danger by transformation of bread into a stone rider 153. some such thing there be but you miss sozomons word sentence and purpose and apply it still to your host the priest tell Sozomen that in give the sacramental bread to a woman she take it in her hand and privy give it her maid behind she which the maid no soon touch with her tooth but it turn into a stone believe it that listen and the print of the tooth be this day to be see in Constantinople I pray you gentleman be this your host Christ body if it be as you teach but fie it be a false lie then be Christ body turn into a stone and to be see at Constantinople under the form of a stone as well as at Rome under the form of bread whether m. Rider or I do misreport the relation of Sozomen fitzsimon 153. you have get m. Rider the habit or facility and perfection of falsify that now it be ingraft in you as a second natural inclination it shall appear now both towards Sozomen and the very sacred scripture itself be both most shameful corrupt the history of Sozomen be thus relate s. Hieron in Chr^^^^ s. aug. h^^ 52. Epiph. she 73. l. 2. c. 35. The^ l. 4 h^r fab. a certain man of the macedonian heresy such as deny the holy ghost to be consubstantial to the father and Sonn have a wife of the same sect the man after he have hear John chrysostom teach what shall be believe of God praise his doctrine and request his wife to believe as himself do but whereas she rather conform herself to the word of noble woman then to his usual entreaty and that he labour as common woman be more perverse and obstinate to be convert then man in vain unless say he thou thyself to i thou shall never hereafter enjoy mark this you marry folk of meddle and different belief among who such threat be know to have have more force than any faith or religion my conversation the woman hear this so contrariwise from true belief to a false our woman be draw more by their husband like threat then let by the displeasure of God and his church promise her consent and communicate the matter to her esteem trusty maid and use her help to deceive her husband wherefore about the time of the mystery Sozomen lib. 8. cap. 5. the faithful know what I mean she reserve what she have receive and as be to pray incline herself her maid behind she secret give she the bread which she have bring as by eat whereof she shall seem to eat the holy mystery in her hand this bread when it be put to her tooth harden into a stone the woman terrify fear lest she shall have more hurt by that which by God judgement have happen run to the bishop and accuse herself show the stone have the impression of be bite and appear to be of a unknown kind and have a admirable colour and together with tear crave pardon she promise to consent to her husband and if this seem incredible to any the stone itself be witness which yet remain among the relic of the church of Constantinople thus far Sozomen recount be it not then the 206. loud and palpable untruth the 206. untruth that we miss sozomen word sentence and purpose be it not the 207. untruth the 207. untruth that she give her maid the sacramental bread which be a false translation of the word mystery behind she and that it be the maid under who tooth the bread do become a stone if there can be any escape but that either infidelity in deal or ignorance in understanding be here pregnant exhibit I desy neither credit nor reputation during my life be it the wife or maid which with tear promise to be agreeable to her husband or be the husband a husband to both his wife and his maid now follow a riderian sequel worthy of consideration the bread which the maid secret give her mistress say the be turn into a stone therefore say m. Rider Christ body be turn into a stone and to be see in form of a stone in Constantinople 154 o hellish divinity but I say unto you priest and jesuit rider as Paul say to the false Arch-Iesuit Bariesus o full of all subtility and mischief child of the devil Acts. 13.10 and enemy of all righteousness will you not cease yet to pervert the straight way of the lord but still like Elimas seek to turn Christ flock from Christ faith of his evident deprave god wooord 154. no reader do not blush at this last dishonesty fitzsimon but faint at the next he will not likely often be find true towards man relation who be often find a depraver of god own sacred word you have consider his exclamation against the hellish divinity of Sozomen which in deed be not sozomen but m. rider his own yet if it have be hellish or Noah he that bind himself to be try by such witnese and suitable to their resolution can not after repeal or start from they that now which I blame be that he have quote the residue of his chapter as a text of scripture and imprint it for such in a distinct letter he have add and alter pervert and divert the word and meaning above all reprehension take your bible and peruse yourselves his quotation and his application and look how handsome these fellow can make scripture of their own brain and as many protestant of a calm condition confess deliver you their fanatical dream for the write oracle of God as appear in the examination of the creed the 4. number as also in the reply to m. rider rescript pag. 65. 66. 67. 68 dear belove and that unfeigned think in this case with Seneca Seneca l. 4. bon. c. 38. that it be no lightness to depart from a know and damn error I may be deceive but I think your capacity sufficient inform how erroneous and damnable this man deal be to be account by who proceed you may discover the residue of his sort and therefore you may just be justify from all levity in depart from they Catho priest Crantzius lib. 5. c. 9 and a certain duke of Saxony upon alike occasion do become a Christian rider 155. ALbertus Krantzius hamburg you misspell his name write I have read diligent the nine chapter of every five book of these the history and there be no such thing in any of they therefore you be to blame still to abuse learned man to be the author of these fable and the catholic most of all to believe these fable whether Crantzius be belie by m. Rider or i fitzsimon 155. here also be a ordinary riderian argument he have red what Crantzius have in his chronicle and find not what I allege therefore that I still abuse learned man and the catholic most of all as if one will say to a allegation out of the gospel I have red s. mark and have not find what be allege therefore it be not in the gospel the whole writing of the allege shall have be peruse and examine before such sequel and especial with that word still showld seem forcible brief they have more book in the college of Dublin then m. Rider have red and particular they have the Metropol of Crantzius according as I cite and spell so that you do and shall find he nappy in think Crantzius only to have write his chronicle second in his correction of my spell three in his accusation that I have abuse the learned and catholic by my father the foresay matter on Crantzius and consequent you may say with the prophet psal 75. rider or they which be mount on horseback have nod this to be brief be the relation of Crantzius Crantzius lib. 1. cap. 9 what therefore say the king he treat of charlemain speech to Wedekind duke of Saxony have thou see which delight thou to have view he as he be yet ignorant of christian thing reply I have see whereat I marvel thee before two day of a heavy countenance be uncertain what have happen that may molest so great a King it be the remembrance of our lord passion that make the king of a sad countenance again say he I have see thou this easter day first sad and most pensive about thy employment in prepare himself to the b. sacrament but when thou do approach to the middle table of the church thou do appear to i of so joyful countenance that I be amaze at the miracle of such sudden alteration for it be wonderful to behowld that in the hand of a priest in rich ornament every one receive into their mouth a beautiful little child who I perceive to approach to some joyful and in haste to other repine and with countenance displease and yet enter into their mouth and not return what this shall be I do not yet conceive then say the king thou have well proffit there be some what more show to thou then to all the priest and we all then have his apparel change take he by the hand he teach he the great mystery of piety of the sacrament of the altar whereby he be convert god grawnt all other former ignorant of this mystery to receive like benefit by the same as Wedekind do let it not seem strange that Christ shall appear like a young child after his ascension it be no more impossible or inconvenient then that God almighty shall appear like a owld man their propriety of innocence and eternity be cause of such their apparition without invective or enforce accusation m. rider you have Crantzius testify ample all that I deliver succinct and in a word for of my disposition I be never prolix in my writing but some time in a line do include as much matter as my deliver in a leaf and the rather in my first answer to you I follow brevity that without toil if it can not be without tediousness you may over run disproof of your protestation now also I will make no inferrence upon the premise against you for my own behalf for a plain text need no gloss but will abrupt examine the next leave all reader behowld Cicero word in Lucullo to be true in my defence and that I follow not such reason as depend upon conjecture and by skill of disputer be wrest off and on and contain no force of persuasion no I have another cause then they who have but exordium commune a common exordium as fit for the defendant as the plaintiff Iren. l. 5. c. 27. vinc. lir c. 42. luth. in f. 144. n. 19 and 75. and no other proof then peremptory protestation that they only and first understand the scripture and that all other have be deceive and you shall find all the principal protestant abundant in this vain but I will hold i to my text Catho priest optatus lib. 2. Donatist optatus report a grievous punishment of abuser of a facred host 156. OPtatus in deed speak of two profess donatist Vrbanus and Iducencis rider who come into the country of Mauritonia and enter the church at the time of the celebration of the holy communion command the eucharist to be give to their dog but the dog grow mad present set upon their own master and rend their flesh with their tooth a just judgement of God for their vile attempt of holy mystery but how dare you say that this be your consecrate host optatus say it be Eucharistia the eucharist that be to say the whole mystery of thanksgiving and not a part which be cast unto dog but optatus say not that Christ be local enclose in that bread and you still continue your wont course that wheresoever you find this word it be your church and where you find this word that be your consecrate host whether optatus commend or condemn protestantry fitzsimon 156. you have confess sufficient to overthrow you to wit that God have show such severity for abuse against the eucharist so holy a mystery by the name of eucharist have be ever understand our b. sacrament of the altar as appear in the 103. number out of s. Gregory out of he and all other and the inviolable truth dare we affirm it be our consecrate host it be testify by optatus that Christ be localie in those mystery whereas he infer for proof thereof the punishment which ensue we claim the word church to belong to we both by other assurance and by your hate against it before demonstrate the break down of altar the violate of vow virgin the profane of the holy mystery the cast out of sanctify oil all these together record by optatus so ancient a father do tell that the donatist be your predecessor and such as they persecute to have be we for what have protestantry to do with chaste profess virgin altar holy oil and c when no wrest nor wreathe will avail it be strange you will trouble yourself in vain when I hear you in manifold place of your book use the word of the donatist relate by s. augustin 34. and cap. 1. and else where when as I say I hear you and donatist concur in these word that we have corrupt the judge that we have feed our stipendary chaplain to give sentence against you that you be suppress more by authority than verity then can I allow that donatist and you be of consociation which I can never find in optatus by any sign figure or shadow extant in his writing 157. but a lass you deceive the catholic rider for you have neither the true church because you lack the sincere preach of God word and the lawful use of his two sacrament which be the two unfallible mark of Christ church nor yet have you Christ sacrament as he leave to his church but as they be disguise and profane by the late church of Rome which do as far differ from the primitive practice of the ancient church of Rome as Christ institution differ from man invention whether the Puritan church have the sincere preach of God word and lawful use of the two sacrament and thereby be sufficient assure to be the true church 157. if you will to this place repeat what be present in the number 124 you will find m. rider fitzsimon by they to who he have tie himself to consent with all to deny baptism of child and any other sacrament to be allow besyd Christ hang on the cross also repeat what be deliver in the first 39 number you shall find he and his brother make the sacrament of the new testament no better then weak and beggarly ordonance last review if it please you the 62. and 122. number and you shall find he deny all benefit of sanctification by baptism say it to be only a sign and that only to the faithful so that child have no faith of their own and the merit of other not profit according to protestantry any besyd themselves and all justification be in their opinion only by faith he can not but maintain child either not to receive baptism or not to have any profit thereby it be say he a bare sign only to the faithful or they to be justify without their own faith let such assurance suffice that he have not in his church the lawful use of the sacrament which according to their name shall make thing sacred now be we to examine whether his two mark here afford be competent alone to testify the true church in which point of assign the true mark of the true church I find the whole brotherhod at great variance luth. tom. 7. trac eccle. melancthon in resp. artic. Bavaricae calu. Instit. l. 4. r. 1. n. 9 first Luther number 7. mark as he say requisite the magdeburgian require but four melancthon exact but three Caluin but two as m. Rider in this place number they yet with a diversity that Caluin specify not the sacrament to be two or three or four but indeterminat as also that he do not assign these two mark as unfallible of the true church but only of some church say wheresoever these two note be find thereto be some church will you now behold the soundness of these two note calu. inst. l. 4. c. 1. n. 7. first by Calvin own confession they which be adopt although they be not yet bear or baptize yet they be say he member of the true church but such have neither the word preach nor use of the sacrament for not be bear they can not be baptize nor be capable of a sermon unless as puritan claim more power to their own sermon then to Christ n. 39 63. so now they will also have in their sermon the virtue which s. John Baptist experience in the word of our lady to wit that they showld be understand or conceive by child before such child be bear therefore the true church in her member may be without these two mark second how can I be assure that I have the word and sacrament true unless I know they by the true church and not the true church by they three I find the same note by testimony of s. augustin propound by the donatist to testify their church to be true s. aug. epist. 48 and in 3. yet all Christendom profess that they be execrable heretic I suppose in so perspicuous disproof superfluity to be needle and therefore will leave these note discover to be notorious insufficient the great note of a true belief be Vincent Lir. 3. that it be universal ancient consent universal as well for be command by Christ to be publish through all the world as for be so specify in the creed in the word Catholic ancient as be thereby warrant to be Christ own church if the gate of hell may not prevail against it for if it continue still it be know thereby as gamaliel say to be the work of God consent because as s. Paul say the church of God have not the custom to be contentious as also because as there be but one God so be there but one law and one only faith last we be know manifowld to be the true church as be before manifest say the ancient and glorious martyr and doctor s. cyprian misbelief cypr. l. 1. ep. 3. can have no access be he consent with Catholic bishop say s. Ambrose who consent with the roman church if then most assure that be the privilege of a true church not to be able either to fail in continuance or to fall to misbelief and to be consent with the roman church who do not behowld blasphemous to be their audacity that term such church the seat of pestilence the whore of Babylon or our church not to be the true church can such roman sea not be subject to misbelief and yet apostate into idolatrous infidelity can it be once the tuchstone of truth and Catholic belief to consent with the roman church and yet be now a tuchstone of a suspicious and idolatrous belief to consent with the roman belief have Christ be untrue or deceive who promise the gate of hell shall not prevail against his church build upon s. Peter which all the world acknowledge to be no other than the roman church wherein he s. Paul and s. John have preach and s. Paul in one and the self same day render their soul to God if there be nothing else to aver it yet the vanity and frivolousnes of their claim that will defeat we aught to seem sufficient for every one retain by good law his inheritance if the proof of pretender thereto be find void and unlawful we have now testify the two note or mark here and by Caluin pretend to be insufficient and gentle m. rider you that affirm we lack the foresay note what wisdom be it in you not to justify it by some proof nay what simplicity be it in i to expect any either riderian or other in impossibility of have any for unless we take as a sufficient proof your faith truth and honesty which many merchant will refuse to take for their seely ware unless we believe your bare protestation that your cloud be very apparent that your night be bright light that your dream be document of scripture that goat be sheep that falsehood be truth our expectation of any other proof will never be accomplish at least you may in patience be content that I collect the tie of your untruethe and calculat the 207. belong to your depravation the 207. untruth denial affirmation accusation etc. in this place Catho priest read Gregory Nazianzen in his funeral sermon of father mother and sister and you shall find miraculous demonstration of the real be of Christ rider 158. you still abuse the ear of the simple Gregory have no such matter as you speak of wrought by your charm host if you mean the spiritual real be of Christ in your sacrament this Gregory be dead 500 year before your corporal presence be know that be none of you and if you mean of your corporal presence of Christ alas Gregory never know it but gentleman you be to blame to urge these fable to prove a matter of faith you have allege nothing that will weaken your cause more than this whether s. Gregory Nazianzen believe the spiritual real and corporal presence fitzsimon 158. mr. rider in his text and margin warrant that this s. Gregory who live within the first 400. year after Christ be more ancient than our corporal presence and dead before the knowledge thereof 500 year so that by this account 900. after Christ our corporal presence be unknown yea else where by say that innocent the three be first thereof three hundred year mare be add before it have any acquaintance in God church all the and purport of this book consist of proof by scripture concil father history sectarist themselves do confirm and convict this to be the 208. gross untruth the 208 untruth and now s. Gregory Nazianzen himself shall ratify the same to the world to signify that m. Rider have in a desperation to be account ever faithful cast his bridle rain upon his horse neck to license he to run into the wilderness of untruethe d. greg. Nazian. s. Pasch. and 1. in julian. and depravation say he eat his body and drink his blood if thou have any desire of life and distrust not for the speech which be of flesh behold careful how we be advise by s. Gregory to eat his flesh and drink his blood and not to be distrustful that there be mention of flesh whereby we may grudge whereto after he add that we shall not be let for his passion as if he will have we think that Christ be not receive by we in any passable or hurtful manner to himself and that we shall be constant firm and unmoveable notwithstanding the speech of Christ adversary to the same effect say Theophilact in cap. 26. Math: and because we be weak and do grudge to eat raw flesh especial man flesh therefore bread in deed appear but it be flesh all this will m. rider say to be nothing all to be impertinent and will rail and stamp at it as most absurd but he will not I trow so steal away the sense of reader but that they will perceive his shift now to be naked and nought else but earnest pang of a desperate decay doctrine the pope in the mean time that be now can say no more for Christ real and corporal presence than Nazianzen and Theophilact 159. but if you will have the world to believe your miracle rider you must give over these juggle trick and show we what sick man by your host you have make sound out of who you have cast devil Acts. 28.5 what serpent you have touch as Paul do and yet be not sting which of you have drink drink deadly poison and be not kill which of you speak with new tongue that be never by time nor tutor teach unless you can do these miracle mark the catholic must esteem you no better than juggler and yet by your leave if you can do all these and more to unless your doctrine be answerable to Christ his truth Galath. 1.9 the apostle will account you accurse and we must not believe you whether in wisdom we shall by m. Rider be provoke to miracle 159. s. Paul distinguish the diverse gift of the holy ghost fitzsimon teach that diverse and not conjoint they be among Christ disciple say 1. cor. 12. but to one be give the speech of wisdom to another the spirit of knowledge according to the same spirit to another faith in the same spirit to another the gift of heal in one spirit to another the work of miracle or virtue to another prophety to another discretion of spirit to another the kind of tongue etc. this distribution among all faithful show that of every one the speech of wisdom or knowledge or faith or the gift of heal or miracle or prophecy or discretion of spirit or diversity of tong be not rigorous to be exact now to our m. rider for prophesy I find in deed you puritan will seem to be expert by your supplication to his majesty to have prophesy allow in rural deanery as appear in the sum of the conference set forth by William barlow 1605. pag. 78. but I will give three half penny for every ounce of good profit any receive by your Puritan prophesy unless they esteem profane and vain speech proffit to impiety to be good profit contrary to s. Paul 2. tim. 2 or that which he say in the next chapter follow proffit to the worse err and drive into error to be gainful and profitable and I pray you my good friend why shall you demand these testimony of our vocation unless you be able to find they in your own do not think but I can show a diversity in our work of miracle beyond your fraternity let i be instruct for my learning can you or any for your flock or hear in this case say what s. augustin say in our behalf s. augustin ser. in these word if you say to any of we say s. augustin thou have receive the holy ghost why speak thou not all tong he ought to answer I speak with all tong because I be in the body of Christ in the church which speak with all tong the same answer serve for all other sort of miracle for in our church m. rider every one do daily behold the blind to receive their sight the lame their limb the sick their health yea the dead their life yet not by every one of our church but by several to who God according to his good pleasure have divide such gift your miracle both for all and some be such as your church invisible your church such as your miracle false and end in confusion look what end the miracle of the son of be say to have have in the act of the apostle Acts. cap. 19 v. 13.14.15.16 the very self same have your two pillar Luther and Caluin in their intend miracle I therefore conclude with you in your own word at which for their importance you say in the margin like a fawkener mark unless you can do these miracle the catholic must account you no better than juggler etc. Catho priest I trust this will suffice for aver the consent of the catholic with the father of the primitive church which be the first article we be provoke to prove rider 190. I know you be utter deceive and I trust this will suffice the godly learned and in different reader that you and your late romish catholic quite dissent from Christ truth and old Rome religion and therefore remember from whence you be fall and return to the ancient truth while God give you time which god grant etc. how suitable the last word of m. Rider be to they of ancient heretic 160. first you affirm that we be utter deceive fitzsimon as hitherto we have through the whole writing of we both discover that we be never strong than when you assure we be weak never true than when you protest we be false never more approve then when you say we be most disprove never more secure then when you inform we be in great danger so now we may be certain persuade that we be in the right the rather for your proof-lesse say that we be utter deceive if you have not be such as m. Sabinus chamber testify before and after you will never have bring your Oxford conclusion therefore you be deceive without some premise or proof every woman or child may say as much when they have no thing else to answer but I leave your judicial style to every one consideration and compassion to your conclusion I will confront like word of owld damn heretic come o you fool say they and miserable man Vincent Lir. in con. profane heres. who be common call catholic and learn the true faith which have be hide many age heretofore but be now reveal and show of late etc. what have we be if we have consent to they what proof or virtue be more in your word then in they therefore because we yield to they shall have be heretic and have but allurement from you no better than they also because many seducer be go abroad we will refrain you both alike and remain upon the rock to wit say s. augustin the roman church s. aug. cap. 17. against which the proud gate of hell shall never prevail conclusion when Luther do behold his writing to have convey he into a labyrinth of perplexity some time by their be censure by all Christendom for heretical and thereby burn and he make odious sometime by bind himself to manifold denial and affirmation which in process of time he perceive to be erroneous then in shameful grief he burst into these word luth. in presat Germ. sup. r Tomos etc. I willing will see all my writing perish and among other cause one be because the example of all my brother who writing benefit nothing do terrify i for I do not behold what profit the church have receive when out and beyond the holy bible very many book be collect which his say together with what follow do manifest that Satan and pride transfer he captive to his destruction for say he Tom 2. jen. fol. 273. I never have great and more grevous tentation then by mean of my sermon for I think thou only have begin all this by this tentation I have be often swallow into hell o heavy and dismal remorse and torment of conscience the great butcher and mangler of a guilty mind how be thou not able to reclaim that hart which thou be able so to devour other grevous lamentation before his death for his unhappy writing be testify in the examination of the creed num. 7. the like remorse have Beza when he say Beza in colloq. Monpelgart pag. 260. I will all writing publish which seem to be against peace concord or truth be abolish alas Beza so will I from the bottom of my hart that thou have thy demand both in such intention and in such execution not as be but as I shall have be such to have be the mind of melancthon be testify by Wolfangus Agricola when he say posset he will not refuse the loss of any if he can revoke his writing but now be so deep entangle he find no retreat these lamentable and unfortunate success and terror of damnation in the end upon and after their giddy course when so great pillar of the deform I will say reform crew do acknowledge how often think you in his mind do m. Rider covet that he have never put pen to paper Oecolampad hess 1529. 1. comment in psal fol. 215. Oecolampad cry I will most excellent prince this right hand of i be chap off when first I begin to write any thing of the treatise of the lord supper renew renew the same cry m. rider who first as be evident show by inconsideration in advertisement n. 9 and n. 130. insinuate you you yourself I mean in plain term all the state and lord of the council to be fool heretic etc. second you direct we to most repugnant to your profession testify it to be against the Catholic church and assure 3.4.6.114.143 we to be thereof and by so testify leave you forlorn and abandon of all excuse or shadow of your apostasy and impiety in be against our belief 3. you have by necessary inferrence imply your own profession to be wicked and damnable late base and counterfeit num. 16.25.34 4. you have betray your profession num. 30.31 by the testimony of all the chief of the same to a jury condemn you and they 5. you have violate corrupt deprave num. 38.81.154 and falsify the sacred scripture themselves perspicuous to all man eye and above all excusation or tergiversation 6. you have paragon or compare the mystery of Christ gospel with all sacrament and sanctification thereof to base beggarly ordonance of the old law num. 36.63.78 7. you have disdain the word of Christ institution of his b. sacrament and correct they with a new institution of your own num. 68 8. you have deny the whole merit of Christ life and death Exam. n. 14. and impute your salvation to it which happen after Christ death 9 you have make Christ institution by your active and passive commentary num. 76.77 to contradict itself and to be absurd and false 10. you have make prince and people great and small who ever do break image of Christ num. 96. to be traitor against Christ 11. you have testify yourself manifould to be a Puritan that be a seditious resister num. 99.122 by your own private diversity of judgement to prince and parliament ordonance of late reformation and deadly enemy of protestantry which have be establish 12. you have bind yourself to believe num. 35.108 123.124 125. and not to believe Christ realy yet not realy spiritualy yet not spiritualy sacramentaly yet not sacramentaly literaly yet not literaly etc. in the b. sacrament 13. you have concourse and consociation with jew and jewishness in yourself and your patriarch num. 115.119.160 as also with the most heinous heretic and also disprove and condemn all and every one of the most famous protestant num. 122.123 and by they you as be refute which also be do against and by your own confessor and martyr num. 124. 14. you have enter bond and obligation in print to aver in unity and verity of doctrine all that ever may be blaspheme against God and godliness 15. you have most puritanica censure the act of parliament since the suppression to be heretical abominable repugnant to Christ truth to ancient father and the practice of the primative church num. 130.131 16. you have contrary to your claim and it of first protestantry disavow the general council of nice from you to we and have allure the nobility of Ulster in Irland num. 138. to they who intend to kill their king and rebel against his constitution brief what untruethe denial interpretation argument contradiction impudency and impiety you have besyd all the former run into they be not so obscure or seldom incident but all that favour your profession may think you be hire or of yourself intend to disgrace disable and condemn your and there cause since you can not deny any silable of these imputation you may worthy cry the cry of Oecolampad etc. you may worthy shun the light of the sun and thereby profess plain and simple that heresy have no defence but in a lie and can but by lie and darkness be protect and that come to light it be sudden discomfit invincible and infallible spouse of Christ the Catholic church I resign and devote my travail and writing to thy sacred doom with thou I say and unsay commend and condemn all doctrine by i or other profess a reply TOM. rider rescript and a discovery of Puritan partiality in his behalf I be unfeigned disgust Fitzimon in the traverse of m. rider untruethe as be a subject loathsome to any religious disposition and prejudicial to other more convenient employment and have dispach myself of the refutation belong to his caveat ay to take no acquaintance of his last rescript but to leave he a spectacle to God angel and man by the only manifestation in such my answer already impart but perceive his say rescript to be brief and only to huddle up controversy by i already discuss I will shape he a further succinct disproof yet not only of he but also of the censure of the Puritan collegist of Dublin how I showld name this his pamphlet I long dowbt till at leingth I find a occasion of name it postscript or rescript in thes his word of his caveat preface my next treatise shall manifest it to the world by way of a postscript to which I will annex a rescript what be promise in those word be perform rideria what I seek for to wit the title of this discourse in those word be tender rescript it seem rather to be term as contain often rescription and reiteration of the same thing 1 to all priest jesvite and to all or any rider that be so ordain by roman authority or that favour the same the grace of God sanctify spirit touch your heart that you may see the feeble foundation of your new sandie-superstition and turn to Christ ancient apostolical religion 1 title concern the inscription of m. rider rescript 1 it be by m. Rider make a reproach that priest Fitzimon and jesuit be ordain by roman authority a happy reproach and more desyrable than the title of Potentate for priest can not take that honour to themselves say the apostle heb. 5. and from who cold they more fit receive it then from he who s. s. Ambros. in come 1. tim. 4. Ambrose assure to be the ruler of the house of God which be the pillar and firmament of truth who justinian the term iust. in eccles. collat 9 conc. Chalced. act. 16 the chief of all priest the head of all holy church who the whole calcedonian council in the year 480 entitle the head of the universal church to who s. Hierome boast profess s. hier. ep. damas. Petri to thy beatitude that be to the chair of Peter I be consociate in communion be not this right to incur the curse utter by the prophet isaiah woe to you that call evil good isa 5. and good evil put darkness as light and light as darkness put bitter as sweet and sweet as bitter for what these reform man account honourable jo^ 10.1 to enter into the flock and not by the door and contrariwise dishonnorable to be ordain by roman authority truth and owld christianity thereof the contrary to wit such suppose dishonour to be as appear most honourable and their pretend glory to be most inglorious for thereupon optatus in way of disdain say Optat. vand l. 2. to the donatist declare to we the begnine of your sea you that the have of the holy church s. cypr. l. 1. ep. 6. and s. cyprian in like manner upbraid the novatians because succeed none they be ordain of themselves in deed it be a heretical honour of victor the donatist l. 1. con parm. to be a son without a father a soldier without a captain a disciple without a master a follower without a predecessor according to which honour if m. Rider will be a Lutheran he can name his ordination first from Luther from he to melancthon from he to Pomeran from he to mayor from he to Schlusselburg if a Caluinist he may begin at Farell from he to Caluin from he to Beza if a Zuinglian from he to bullinger from he to Peter martyr from he to Gualther if a Puritan from Cartwright and so one end you if he be a Puritan as he be open detect to be dangerous position pag. 113. he be bind to renounce all other ordnance as the donatist renounce all other baptism than it which be administer by they of their own sect as the deposition of Richard Haugar manifest but it alone which be according the presbyterial discipline but what need this circuit m. rider say as be often show that all christian be priest alike and consequent it import not whether he be order or not order in Rome or in the class of Northampton Warwick or London where puritancy be most in fashion so then we must let he remain disorder or as best like himself since that he abide not but to be out of the jurisdiction of that church of which say s. Hierome above a thousand year a go s. Hieron in ep. he that eat the lamb out of this house be profane he that do not gather with thou do scatter but because as to other phrase so to this of sandy superstition m. rider be tie choose rather to be variable in his belief then in his phrase we must once at least examine the reasonableness thereof first then I find in our saviour a say whereupon it may seem that m. mat. 7.16.27 Rider have ground these term every one that hear these my word and do they not shall be like a foolish man that build his house upon the sand and the rain fall and the fludd come and the wynd blue and they beat against that house and it fall and the fall thereof be great this may in deed belong to that profession mat. 16. which be not build upon the rock against which the proud gate of hell can never prevail such be they that build not upon the church of Rome which s. cyprian s. Hierome Arnobius Hippolytus s. cypr. l. 1. ep. 3. l. 4. ep. 2. s. Hieron ep. Damas Arnob. in ps 106. hippol. dorotheus in Synopsi prosper lib. s. cypr. lib. 1. ep. 3. s. aug. in psal. con. Donati prosper dorotheus etc. do term Petri Petri Petri the cheyre of Peter the place of Peter the seat of Peter to which church for the promise make to Peter that the gate of hell showld never prevail against his faith say s. cyprian to the roman faith error not to have access and of which church say s. augustin upon the same assurance of our saviour this be the rock which the proud gate of hell can not surmownt which also time itself demonstrate true only of the roman church obtain say again s. s. aug. c. 17. augustin the top of authority heretic in vain bark round about it together with infidel turk jew ambitious emperor and malignant emulatour so that the event confirm the word of Christ to be true and the word have perform the truth of the event that to build upon the church of Rome s. math. 7.25 be to build like the wise man upon the rock and the rain fall and the fludd come and the wind blue and they beat against that house and it fall not for it be found upon a rock who then must be the builder upon the sand all they that be not in the foresay church that be found upon the protect rock of Rome for the rain fall from above that be the decree of the Catholic church do wash and waste away all their fanatical fantasy as appear by induction in the heresy of the arian pellagian donatist etc. the fludd that be the succession of time over view the fruit of their life and doctrine do bear away their pile and prop of estimation whereupon their hypocritical building consist the wine that be their own mutual contradiction and contention do ruin and prostrate the haughty habitation and bring it as a second proud tower of Babylon by disagree tong to utter destruction yea and oblivion this we have perceive from the begin in all building and frame erect besyd the rock of the roman church that now we can not dowbt of the like destruction to they of these time which already we behowld to crack and sunder in their fundation by dislike their scripture sacrament service communion book ceremony translation and in vain form reform deform they as always learning and never attain to the knowledge of truth 2. tim. 3.7 so that we may well say and they in shame can not deny it that all the figure of their figurative opinion like letter and line draw in sand by such vain fludd and wind be daily deface and already utter forget in many province where they vain to have have stidfast foundation thus much for the title rider 2. gentleman it be not unknown unto all or most of you that in Septembre^ 1602. my fryendly caveat to Ireland catholic against the insufficient answer and proof of master Henry fitzsimon jesuit touch the corporal presence of Christ invisible flesh in the sacrament of the lord supper present itself to the view and censure of the world which be also deliver to master fitzsimon his hand he promise a present confutation if I will procure his nephew carry to be his clerk to engross the same which present I obtain of the right honourable the lord lieutenant and within fifteen day after come to master fitzsimon he show i twelve sheet or thereabouts write in confutation of my work promise i that within a month I shall have a perfect copy of the same but what shift and delay since he use to keep it from my particular view which he offer to most man fight I have rather his letter if need be unfold they then I write they proclaim still with his stentorian voice to every corner of the kingdom that rider be overthrow horse and foot which when some of his best favourite have tell i I urge he then more earnest assure he unless he give i a copy I will recall his clerk 2 title whether it be true that I use slight and delay to confute m. rider 2 he that appeal to s. Vincent Lirin Fitzimon as to one that do adward the title of Catholic to reformer to s. Bernard as one that do disprove the supremacy of the pope and now in his title allude to our foundation as forsooth upon sandy superstition and the same new all man may know he to be inconsiderate or ironical in speak of all thing contrarious and perverse will you behowld he to follow on in the same tenor he tell first that upon the view of his book I promise a present confutation but that after I use many shift and delay to keep it from his particular view and yet blondr abroad in a stentorian voice that rider be overthrow horse and foot of all which nothing be true but that I promise a present confutation of his caveat of the residue part be improbable and part impossible for it be improbable that I be close prisoner in the castle of Dublin showld proclaim in a stentorian voice to every corner of the kingdom that rider be overcome and how cold m. rider persuade himself that I together be in the castle from which he know I do never in five year depart and also abroad in every corner he not be able to believe that Christ himself can together be in many place or be my voice there without my person or be my agent for i none have access to know my mind but this hyperbole or amplification of he come from fear and guilty conscience because that which one fear he augment Seneca in agam. cic. Milone and and they always think their punishment before their eye that have offend he know good occasion of fear that all man do discourse of his confutation and so affirm that I have do what I cold not do although I will and as I say it be impossible that I showld use sleight and delay to make my word good consider thes two request the one to the l. deputy the other to the Puritan collegist that they have i in their hand will be arbitrer in our cause and be so impartial towards my profession yet that so soon I offer to stand to their arbitrement and any arbitrary penalty they showld denownce if I do not make my word good the letter to both contain as follow first it to the l. deputy earl of Devonshyre verbatim in this manner right honourable our most singular good lord occasion of my presume to write to your honour be tender by m. rider book in which it please he to specify my name he have choose your honour and the rest of her majesty privy council to patronize his labour and I also for my part refuse not to abide your honour censure and arbitrement what Varus geminus say to Augustus they that dare plead in his presence be ignorant of his greatness and they that dare not of his benignity I may convenient invert and apply to your lordship they that adventure to stand to your arbitrement be audacious towards your profession and they that do not be timorous of your disposition and uprightness we be at issue in a matter of fact as be late in France before the king betwixt both profession that they of we be to be tax for impostor who in our labour have wrest pervert and falsify the primative father of the church which may easy be discern both by only peruse the volume of the father and by verdict of all chief protestant in the world who we undertake to testify the foresay father to stand with we against m. Rider vouchsafe of your especial affability but one half day trial and it shall appear that either he be of who Homer latinize speak solu^ or for his presumptuous dedication of his book to your honour that he deserve to be treat as Aristo who the athenian punish for unworthy ^reating their commendation or as the silly po^t who Lucius Silla both warn and wage never further to write or last as Ch^rilus who verse alexandre consider and find but seven good adward for each of they a piece of gowld and for the residue so many buffet I true be of s. Gregory mind say who although weak wowld not contemn the tooth of this Leviathan unless the terror of secular power do maintain they it be a double drift for what these persuade by flatter word those do enforce with smart sword deign noble lord but to suspend so long the sword and faintness and falsehood in this matter will soon be reveal god almighty preserve your Ho: to his and your glory from the prison 28. Septem. 1602. your honour humble client to command assure in Christ Henry Fitzimon this letter be deliver within 10. day after that m. rider book come into light the most honourable deputy be of fervent desire to further the disputation send for m. Rider show he the letter and find he relent from the point he send i word by m. Henry knevet his gentleman usher that if I will in deed come to trial the only mean to be to entreat they of the college upon the credit of their cause and champion to sue for such disputation and they themselves to be Vmpyers a hard condition but necessary in that place and tyme so then in great distrust of other but without all suspicion in myself for what enemy will betray another appeal to his fidelity I write this letter follow to they of the college but endorse to d. challenor wor. cousin the letter great man in confidence of their cause have resign their conference and controversy to unequal judge in sundry respect Origen submit his proceed to one infidel arbitrement and prevail against five adversary so Archelaus bishop in Mesopotamia by like arbitrer do vainquish Manes so last do the israelit surmownt the samorit by who example I have adventure to appeal unto and endure your and the college adwardisement in this controversy betwixt m. Rider and i that whither of we have pervert dissemble or deny the effect and substance of author by we allege concern the consent of antiquity in m. rider cause or i must stand to any arbitrary reprehension and condemnation it shall please you to denownce wherefore I crave that it will please you to certify whether you will deign to be vmpyr to adward according to equity and indifferency whereunto that you condescend the rather I advouch and so godwilling will manifest that also all chief protestant in the world do stand with we in this controversy confess the ancient father to be we and opposite to m. Rider let not my extraordinary confidence procure any inconvenience or pulpit commotion and exclamation that posterity may understand our course to have become christian I expect your answer commit you to God with affectionate desyers of your happiness 7. Novemb. 1602. you to command in Christ Henry fitzsimon to this letter I receive a mere puritanical answer full of sugar affect word vain apply and all the matter wreathe in obscurity with this only parcel to the purpose concern the judgement that you will have our college for to yield the answer as tuoch the cause between m. Deane rider and you provide always that you make we no party when we shall see your book and have some small time allow to compare the same by the mercy of God we promise faithful to perform it without all respect of person and partiality to the cause and I will to God that what effect eutropius find and those that vouchsafe they self to be hearer of his judgement the same such among any of we may feel and find that do err from the truth of God of ignorance or of knowledge for the lord arm be not so shrink in but that he may make we yet of a Saul a Paul to who grace I affectionate leave you Nouem. 9 1602. your cousin desire in Christ you may be his brother l. challenor behowld the puritan letter in style and point of themselves to testify to all the world that I be in prison not be able to shrink out of their hand or punishment whensoever it showld please they to cite or condemn i yet do proffer urge and importunate the be confront to m. Rider in manner aforesaid let any therefore judge how rider it be assure that I many sleight and delay from come to this conflict only I request all reader to retain in their mind the judgement by i appeal unto to have be concern the allegation that m. rider falsyfy deprave and deny as well his own as i in maintain that the ancient father stand for protestant and not for catholic such to have be the state of the question from the begin both his first challenge and these two appeal of i and his own confession follow do evident certify rider 3 wherevupon within two day after be in May last he send i by his clerk a scroll blot interline cross and assure i not withstand within three week after to have a perfect copy which now be ten month since notwithstanding my many letter more messenger and twice myself desire it yet I can get 3. title whether m. rider pretence concern the legible copy be true Fitzimon 3. to make m. Rider confute himself I will allege certain of his word in his dedicatory epistle to the lord of the Concil. they say he speak against they that do contemn his writing that will censure before they see be like such wyseman as will shoot their bolt as soon at a bush as at a bird now a little after in this place talk of my copy he say the high in the land have a view of his scroll and the reverende and learned diligent peruse the same what their opinion be of it I silence for a season by thes two clause say I either m. rider must confess that my copy be legible or that the high in the land do not peruse it diligent or if they showld censure it without such peruse it as be legible that by his say they can be no wise in that than such wyseman as censure before they see and shoot as soon at a bush as (@) a bird if he can gambole over this block without break the shin of his pretence he shall have my suffrage to bear the ball on shrove-tewesday concern the copy by i exhibit to m. Rider you may understand that when I peruse his caveat and at the first sight consider his spirit to say any thing for his reputations sake and according to aver the most desperate untruethe that any bear countenance of a man may utter I wroote to he the very next day in most instant and entice term that if he have any courage in his cause he showld procure i one to extract my lucubration and I will with unexpected speediness make notorious our several deal he no soon require it than it be grant and withal a warrant to protect any else that will dispute with he and that the printer may publish he and my intermeddle as he confess within fifteen day I have dispatch twelve sheet in refutation of his caveat of which during his be present I read part to himself and proffer in the place to show the author themselves correspondent thereto he absolute refuse all examination and disputation for as both the constable and his own man venables will not deny he never come at i without a covenant that we showld not confer in any matter of learning to which his own testimony follow accord that in word I showld be to hard for a hundred request that reciprocat we showld communicate our argument one to another and conjoint imprint they at our several expense to this I willing accord God do know not upon any presumption of my talent but only upon the assurance of the Catholic belief whereupon I be found although be the mean of a thousand and as a man of straw yet in that height be more dreadful to they then any scarecrow in one open field to the dastard fowl after this mutual promise his mind be trouble with what I have then show to he he cold never abide that I may enjoy the use of the print always allege that according to my promise he must first have peruse what I will print by this mean retract his reciprocation to i for equal deal it be his ordinary refuge in all assembly that I may print what I listen if I will first present he with the sight of my writing so then the 4. of February follow in the same year according to their date my copy contain two quyer of paper have first keep a extract for myself I have another copy out and deliver to he judge also whether it be a reprehensible delay to spend four month in the make of as much as replenish two quyer of paper and in re-copying the same in as many quyer all these pain and charge must I have be at he have upon i the wring vie and follow it eager that if I will not sustain I showld loose my game now what excuse think you cold further be invent forsooth my copy be not legible yet you late have see he say that it be and it be not it be not and it be and after you shall further behowld he assure that it have this and it have not that and take upon he to tell many legible point thereof notwithstanding the print be debar beyond all promise yet thereby if he will suffer my travail to have pass it both may be legible to his heart desire and he not point at for not dare to answer objection against his caveat unless he may first have they a time to be well consider which foul imbecility in a professor of learning his own master in Oxford at this time my dear brother m. Sabinus chamber do testify to have be ancient in m. Rider these be his word under his hand m. John Rider come to i to Oxford about the begin of lend as I remember in the year 1581. recommend by my awnt by who he be then maintain he remain there till the act which be celebrate always in summer ordinary after the 14. of i none and the same year he pass bachelor and master of art by mean of I know not what juggle and perjury I never have any scholar more indocile and unskilful before his awns^ering I must have instruct he in all that I will oppose and yet the next day he be never the wise the kind office that my awnt and I do he if he deny he must be profownd impudent this I testify under my hand at Luxenburg 24. decemb. 1604. in the end he say that the chief point of my profession be dare to delude for justify of himself he propownd demand which be examine will show the former declaration to be true and it will appear to contain nothing but a dazzle mist betwixt man sight and ^is filthy fly from the point according to the say of I ^rece lucret. l. 6. he in deep mist infowld dim smoke rider 4 he also appeal to the college to be umpire betwixt we whither of we have allege scripture and father with more truth and whither be have alter the state of the question as I charge he afore 4. title whether it be true that I refuse to stand to the arbitrement of the college and what arbitrement the collegist afford 4. there be a jealousy betwixt they of the college Fitzimon and m. Rider my appeal to their arbitrement be a heavy load upon his reputation they apparent not be partial in my part of the cause and yet he loathe to stand to their kindness therefore first to gain time and delay he will be try no where but in Oxford when this evasion by all man as ridiculous be hiss at and that in all meeting at his own table and every where else his slackness to a public conflict be reproach all other vain excuse vanish of themselves he at leingth be constrain to encroach under the lee and into the frindshipp of they of the college what pack there be betwixt they I know not but this I know that he that never dare before stand to their arbitrement at that time seem forward to resign his cause to their decision if any conjecture upon probable occasion be allow in this conference they of the college inform he that he have utter betray himself in the main point of the controversy but yet that one only refuge remain to wrest the matter of Christ true presence which my allegation do to the name or term of transubstantiation by which all late papist do express such presence of Christ in the b. sacrament that if I showld not discover this foist in the question of the name in steed of the question of the matter m. rider may be well support against my proof whereby the matter and not the foresay name be aver such to have be the quirk of all their consultation and the only hope whereupon m. Rider hang his confidence by diligent observation of the circumstance may be collect but as I say never before the month of Apriel 1604. can m. Rider be purchase to abide the arbitrement of his own pewfellow the collegist now be my banishment by his majesty license to the disgust and distrust of m. Rider lest that be out of his gryph I will publish the certainty of all our course and to the great terror of he because I certify all protestant repair to the castle that I be sincere determine to do no less than he fear at my first leisure and commodity whereat new exprobration at every incowntre fall upon he he make that wise rescript to which now I answer which be make the right wor. mayor of the city not be ignorant of all circumstance although to his immortal infamy a most timorous Catholic as one that most exact know their impiety yet for worldly fear conform himself thereto challenge he public of dastardliness in wound a man bind trample on one in restraint and triumph against one not permit to resist by write public against i who be not allow to defend myself for according to Seneca in his proverb it be a silly and short commendation to brag of victory without a adversary or as Faustus some what plain say the victory obtain by treachery do never avail m. rider thereat bluster into choler assure he in the public market that even to my face he will confownd i to be guilty of all tergiversation use in the proceed if the mayor will vouchsafe to he to the castle to which motion the mayor condescend in the mean time invite he to dinner lest that he will relent or repent his wont resolution at dinner time the mayor send one of his sergeant to certify i distinct of all the foresay occurrent I answer notwith stand my former alienation for the foresay schism of the mayor not deny but he have otherwise ever oblige i that I will most willing that such motion in any case shall not be overslip but bring to examination in May 1604. the mayor justice Palmer captain Godl the councelor Cook be within hear and other to the number with they of the guard of about a hundred stand in the castle cowrt I be sumon by my keeper to appear some little pause there be before I come and sudden m. Rider begin to glorify that he know I dare not come at length I come and inquire their pleasure m. rider declare that he come to have a promise legible copy or my subscribe to that which I have deliver or my go to trial before they of the college to the first of these three point I answer his own mowth showld confess the copy to be legible which I prove in manner premise to the second that if I cold not prove his falsification of my private letter I will subscribe to my whole answer which when I do prove as all or any then present will avowch so direct and perspicuous as he blush and they all blame he for abominable falsification I tell they there shall need no such approbation consider that our issue shall be not upon the futur but even upon the caveat and my allegation therein contain in legible print to the last of go to the college I accept it at that instant reach he a gowld ring which he showld not deliver i but in that place he take it and now as julius Caesar say when he have pass the river Rubicon Sueton jul. Cesar^ the di^is cast their cold be no tergiversation either we must have go forward with main force or we can not retire without both foil and dishonour what be think you the issue m. rider will needs restore i my ring pretend that he must have licence of the state to so public a act which licence he doubt not to obtain at their fit the day follow nay say I you have have licence from the begin to this disputation by lawful warrant as you show i yourself so that I will not receive my ring until you present it i unless you have other excuse in place accord his own consociate the reform crew what in wail what in rail seek to draw or drive he from so ignominious revolt from the trial by himself first seek in three year space daily boast of at this time before my departure to be effect or not at all and then disclaim in the face of the world until needle new licence may be obtain but he divide up and down sparkle of rail rage give they leave to say their pleasure and to swallow their displeasure and threaten if I will not receive the ring to throw it away which notwith stand I will not accept allege the bargain for a lawful disputation to have be full and authentica contract and now to be irrevocable but he will not retain it and so the mayor take it into custody till hope and speech of a disputation vanish be not then this provocation of our jubelio a perfect imitation of the challenge betwixt Francis king of France and charles the emperor his defiance before he send it he cause to be open read Pontus heuter (@) therein give to the emperor the lie and dare he to the combat by a herald public dismiss from the place he think the emperor Charles will not hazard his fortune upon so dangerous trial as be of a more settle disposition but Charles the of valour receive this affronte return the king herald with promise to send speedy answer to the King and according allow of the combat in a indifferent place and specify the weapon and time he send therewith his imperial herald instruct he full of all circumstance the k. Francis suppose by the emperor deliberation as be contrary to the french feru^r that he will not accord understand that the emperor herald be come will not give he audience but in public assembly the herald consent so that he shall public report his answer thereat t^e king understand the content in silence smuther the matter now the next day the council sit m. rider be call as his own phrase be to repetition and attaint with gross error by sir james fullerton and with great ignominy by sir Richard Cook for betray in a manner their cause into such disproof as that it cold never after be bring of or disengage all the council conjoint rebuke his presumption condemn his demeanour reproach his ignorance and his over-matching himself he think first to stand in the defence of his writing in the very express word of the owld heretic Felix that he will be burn himself s. aug. l. 1. Felice c. 12. and his book if any thing be write by he erroneous next when he be for such palpable impudency to be imprison he become so abject as every one may stand with m. Rider a foot and equal his haughtiness at that time I think convenient to sue for reparation for all defectivenes by he plead against i but he in so miserable countenance come to meet i implore that I will not exasperate further the state against he that I refrain for what reparation need further when by the high in the land to who he have consecrate his caveat and by who he say in his rescript my answer be peruse and censure a authentical sentence in open council chamber be public give against he I neither be present nor produce any disproof that in the controversy betwixt he and i he be faulty surmownt and condemn thus God in his providence wrought without my cooperation that all the honour may to he folly be impute that he shall be condemn by they who all man may condemn of folly not to have support he unless they have in their wysdom judge he beyond all defence and unable to be license towards trial even themselves be umpyre after this public sentence give by the state on my side he repair to the college for some protection against the infamy incident to his condemnation then be friendship to be try then be brotherhood to assist S^p. 2.12 then be the say of wisdom rethorica amplify and and and let we circumvent the innocent because he be unprofitable to we and contrary to our work and do reproach against we the sin of the law and diffame against we the wickedness of our discipline upon his solicitation this sentence follow be among they conclude be hereto for the 7. of Novemb. 1602 earnest entreat the sentence of the college and of late solemn appeal unto before the right wor. m. mayor of this city of Dublin and other wor. person by one Henry fitzsimon jesuit prisoner in the castle and John rider Deane of s. Patrick to become judge and umpire between they they have promise to stand to any arbitrary reprehension and condemnation we shall denownce whether of they in their handle the controversy of transubstantation as the same be public print in Dublin 1602 have pervert dissemble deny the effect and substance of the author mind concern the consent of antiquity in the same we who be appeal unto after due search and deliberation have do hereby public declare and testify that the say fitzsimon have allege no council father or antiquity for 500 year after our saviour ascension that prove transubstantiation whereas allegation be bring by the say dean in the same time that evident convince the contrary from the college this 15. of May 1604. this sentence among themselves agree upon all the difficulty be how after the foresay act of the council it may either be think available or adventure to be publish therein this course be hold the mayor be request by m. Rider to send for it to the college he by no entreaty dare to disable the opinion of the state and of himself instruct m. rider how notorious the cause be make already and how frivolous such sentence will among all be esteem I neither be in place nor any bond of m. Rider know to abide the collegial arbitrement they not know what else to do with their sentence they send it free and unwished to the mayor and he to i with a letter of the specify circumstance 5. and to this end write with his own hand a letter to his cousin m. rider doctor challenor to that effect which letter be extant to be see but yet neither college nor I can come by sight of his but he and his favourite blaze it abroad that I be confute and yet I can see wherewith when I see master fitzsimons do but dare as the chief point of his profession be than I urge he with my last letter wherein I make to he these demand first to have a legible copy according to his promise make to i both by word and writing otherwise how shall I know what be oppose by he and must be defend by i second that if he will not deliver it to i you that he shall keep his touch with the college and let they have it and it shall dispense with break promise to i or word to the like effect three that both of we may charitable in God fear for the satisfaction of Christ flock without gall or malice print correct and equal bear our several charge with the printer according to the number of sheet page and line according to the proportion of every man labour last if none of the reasonable premise will be grant by he than I desire he to put his hand to this blotre scroll and but say it be his own work yet with this necessary addition for without this addition and subscription he may give i one thing to confute and deliver another to his favourite and may after my travail to confute he deny this scroll to be his work as now to give i a legible copy he will fain deny to be his word and yet I have the write of his own hand to witness against he the promise of his own mouth now gentleman whether my request be reasonable and his denial unjust I pray you judge betwixt we without partial affection the high in the land have a view of his scroll and the reverend and learn diligent peruse the same what their opinion be of it i silence for a season though many of no mean place and judgement be privy to it but this I must true say unless he will father it under his hand I can not proper call it his deed but all man may see the weakness of his cause by the withdraw his hand and the breach of his promise and if he be not aftay of the weakness of his cause or ashamed of his sluber and insufficient handle of the same why shall he deny a double promise so much to the blemish of his priesthood and profession 5. title of the villainy and iniquity of these puritan in this judgement Fitzimon 5. if you please to read over my epistle of appellation to the college you may find a recital of certain infidel that have adward right to christian against their own sect when they have engage their word to be true arbitrer then which preoccupation to have they deal upright I can not any more convenient for as I say what barbarian jew or cannibal will betray one commit himself to his fidelity when he need not to be in his danger but now we need not to exemplify in Hannibal (@) l. 25. and 30. of who Livy say that he never stand to his word but while it be profitable for he we need not reproach the punical compare with the puritanical perfidy witness but his excellent majesty that now reign in his book of kingly instruction to his son how perjure how treacherous how inhuman be the puritanical spirit act of pralament i^ Scotland c. 7. etc. witness the condemn treachery against his person in Rutheven 1582 and in Striueling 1585. besyd all other treason against he and other in Scotland witness our own challenors andronical treason against doctor Haddoc a second Onias 2. Machab. 4. after give he the right hand with protestation of friendship yet secret train a to apprehend he jerem. 9.8 fulfil the say of the prophet jeremy in and in his mowth he speak peace with his friend and secret he lay ambush for he so then if they use any legertie treachery and dishonesty in this cause which we examine whereof I refuse no enemy to be judge it be but a usual act of punical puritancie but let we matter in order first they affirm there be a late solemn appeal unto they before the right wor. mayor of Dublin there be I say none such only I alone have consent to go according to a ancient appeal to the college give to that effect a ring but my provoker in public presence repeal to a further licence also I crave of they how be they solemn appeal unto without form of appellation without themselves or any for they to accept our appeal without bond of both party and other requisite ceremony second whereas I alone have appeal unto they and m. Rider ever repeal from they and never enter into bond to stand to their decision he himself neither in his print book not private letter mention any such appeal or bond and refuse public to give i any gage of come to trial before they behowld how with face of a puritanical wernish such double appeal and forge bond be fraudulent by they here protest they be now engage to show such obligation of m. Rider of a true and not falsifyed date if any regard of reputation and sincerity remain in they three they affirm that the case resign to their decision be of the controversy of transubstantiation and the consent of antiquity in the same fie upon all falsehood what will all the world think when to infer a partial and proditorious sentence such shift one controversy for another by a reform deformation of cownterfet evangelist to who sincerity the adversary party have confident rely be disfigure for as it shall short appear even by m. Rider himself we be at no diversity for the name of transubstantiation but for the signification thereof so that to rack the controversy to the name by none can be account but a profownd dishonesty can not the first occasion of this disputation to wit whether the ancient father stand for catholic or protestant it be imprint by m. Rider in his caveat and rescript or my express the case in my letter to you that you be only to judge whether for the consent of antiquity in m. rider cause or i he or I have pervert dissemble or deny the effect and substance of the author mind in our allegation cold not the terror of disproof as for fear of God or shame I will not object they against you can not fidelity which even according to Cicero among all nation cic. Roscio be common the common sanctuary of all and according to Valerius Maximus valer. max. l. 6. in be the oracle and certain pledge of human safeguard hinder you from change as false apothecary do when they intend to poison be it that you such juggle to be the only counterpoise of m. rider c edit consider that scripture father concil history protestant jew and infidel be irrefragable condemn he in the matter signify by the word of transubstantiation although they have not the word can not you suppose that the very Protestant discrete reader perceive he so overthrow in the matter will also condemn you with s. augustin say s. aug. ep. 174. what be a more contentious part then to strive about the name where the signification be apparent but let Cicero a pagan convince what you be in these word cir. l. 1. Heren and Is be the right quality of forge impostor to chawnt upon word and to adulterate they from their signification five they resolve that I have allege no council father or antiquity prove transubstantiation in this again they deprave the question commit to their arbitrement in two manner first the pervert dissemble deny of the author mind in our several cause be by they to be judge and not what I prove or not prove second by intimate that I intend to prove the name and not the matter of transubstantion for the position of m. Rider be that transubstantiation or the corporal presence of Christ body and blood in the sacrament be never by the ancient father by which even he who you defend have destroy yourselves show that he consist no^ in the word but in the signification new explicate it with the disjunction or take that fling as a reward of m. rider Mule nay you shall not by your leave be quit of he so s. Ambr. l. 4. Sacr. c. 4. we allege s. Ambrose say the bread be bread before the consecration but when it be consecrate of bread it be make the flesh of Christ say m. rider thereupon all this we grant to be true but you come not to the point whether Christ flesh be make of bread by way of transubstantiation that be by the change of one nature into another by this be our question so that not the word of transubstantiation but the change of one nature into another by be maintain to be the question and consequent the former infidelity of the collegist be evident even by m. Rider contestate yet again they shall have from their belove brother 2. reg 20. judic. 14. 1. Machab. 13. a joabs kiss to Amassa a dalilaes tear to Samson a Triphon feast to jonathas in this his answer to the foresay word of s. Ambrose he grant all to be true but require a conversion of one nature into another by the foresay word in such grant of truth he give perspicuous the lie to both himself and his supportor for if it be true that by consecration the bread be make the flesh of Christ then must the nature of bread be convert into the flesh of Christ and so one nature transubstantiate or convert into another which also s. Ambrose in all that chapter intend to prove s. Ambr. loc. cit. say Moses his rod be change into a serpent and again into a rod note the river of Egypt into blood and again into river etc. and can not then the word of Christ transform bread and wine the heaven the earth and sea be not nor any creature and by a word they be make he command and they be create if then of nothing his powerful word can make thing to be how much more can he alter one thing into another the change then of one nature into a nother or transubstantiation according to m. rider mind and i be true I say that disproof be give by m. Rider against himself in pretend that the ancient father within the first five hundred year have no such matter and against the judgement of the collegist in his favour contain that I have prove no such matter Besyd which sufficient confutation of their arbitrement even by m. Rider let all the rest of my proof in sift m. rider caveat without recapitulation of they in this place declare these puritan to be the schismatical collegian or uncircumcised gymnasi in Jerusalem of who the scripture say 1. mach. 1.16 and and they have depart from the holy testament and be join to the gentile and be sowld to do evil not at this time for any price but to dispawne m. rider credit last they affirm that allegation be bring by m. Rider in the same time that evident convince the contrary to wit that no transubstantiation be acknowledge for 500 hundred year after Christ but first the late answer of m. Rider himself to the place of s. Ambrose who live within 400. year after Christ confess it to be true wherein the change or transubstantiation of one nature into another be plain verify such his answer I say do refelle this favourable sentence as false next I crave of these puritan not how some time they dare control the contrary sentence of the state for that demand will imply a ignorance of their general inclination which be by i else where detect how at least they dare condemn in such covert contradiaction so malapert the wisdom of the state as either to be ignorant of such m. rider sufficient proof or know they of not confront we together to so manifest advantage thereby of the public cause by my be convict by they and in particular how injurious they have make sir james fullerton to the whole profession that not only he do not commend m. rider proof in their manner but that in great vehemency he do condemn they to be guilty of all defectivenes to these demand if they refuse to answer by word yet they will never escape the infamy engender in the mind of all that will look on they by not dare to justify their no less punical censure towards i than their desperate presumption against the body of the council in so thwart their act and discretion valer. max. l. 6. c. 3. Helinand l. 15. hist. this judgement have it be under king Cambyses how he will punish it appear by his memorable justice against a corrupt judge who skin he cause to be flae of and to be nail on the chair of judgement then elect the very son of the say judge and install he in his father office and seat he will he now to learn how to judge by such his father example if as I say a Cambyses have the collegist in hand for this judgement by themselves by he who false they defend by the state by all learned of the world detect to be treacherous filthy and unchristian how will he uncase and dismember they but I leave they as they be rider I deal not so with he in print his book with i not one word of his ay omit 6. but to my last letter this be his last shift and as he think a sufficient excuse that unless he may print alone I shall have no copy but this be nave speak of at first neither be fit to be yield unto by i at last now you may see plain that master fitzsimon be afraid of be call to repetition he will pass the press with a if any man must see his labour before they be print than they shall not pass indeed his last be so sift that nothing be leave but dust and if this be well bolt I doubt not but prove it bran he think to deal with i as he do with other that I will take any thing of his bare word no so I may be deceive as well as they be now but if it will abide the touch of God bless word and the primitive practice of Christ church I will allow it as pure gold otherwise I esteem it if it be like his former as dung in the street or dust under my foot for I assure you gentleman if you will but read over his first labour considerate or second scroll and trace his text with God truth and every authority with the original author you shall find they like the sand of Tagus in Spain a show without substance as that be a gravel like gold but he will print alone because his book will pass for currant and catholic through the hand of the ignorant and simple who be conjure not to read i lest his error by they be discover they may be convert to God truth and his reputation weaken and thus prefer earthly policy before heavenly piety but let he subscribe to this scroll and as I have be long since so I be still ready to join with he in the press but let i entreat you that you will in a brotherly manner for he be careless of my counsel admonish he to review his labour indeed yet fit for the pedlar than the printer first for his alteration of the state of every question second for misalleadge curtal and falsify scripture father and late writer often untrue seldom pertynent write every thing like a with according to his own wit to serve his graceless turn though it be against the know truth I will but give you a taste of one or two and leave the rest to be deliver by he or discover by i 6. title of other untruth and false vawnts of m. Rider 6. have canvas sufficient the breach of my promise fitzsimon of put my hand to first I know not what for I be ever know free to trust as much if not more then I ought that unless I have apparent cause to fear depravation I will not subtract my subscription to any thing of i next I think he mean of the legible copy he conclude it argue weakness of my cause a shame of my slubber and insufficient handle of the same a blemish of my preisthoode and profession I answer nothing to all this but that if he will have permit i to print my book it will be legible it will need no subscription of my hand it will testify that I be not ashamed of my cause and priesthood he must rather be most ashamed and terrify most who dare least have his cause make open know he say next that in my last letter I contain that unless I may print alone he shall have no copy also that so to do be never speak of first neither be fit to be yield unto by i at last to these two assertion the word partly of my epistle partly of his own shall be oppose that his sincerity thereby be detect in his letter as I take it to i 27. of decemb. 1603. thus he write your next exception be unless you may print you you mean no publication m. fitzsimon this will be grant I dowbt not provide ever I may print i with you in the same volume sheet form and page every one of we correct his own copy and bear his own charge suitable to the sheet page and line but if you desire to print your own without i which thing the world know I do not your request be unreasonable smell of faintness and tergiversation you behowld his word to i not that I do intend to print alone but that if I do so intend it be unreasonable etc. to which conditional suspicion in this his rescript by a riderian honesty make a absolute accusation thus I present answer your dowbt to be at charge with print my labour or that you shall not be insert with i or that we shall seem to think that you have not of yourself confute your and your bethrens cause I say such your dowbt you may at will depose as want all desert and occasion I tell he as you behowld that I intend to conjoin and insert his writing with i he publish that I write to he that unless I may print alone he shall have no copy pardon he for this it be but his ordinary condition to mistake or at least misreport absolute for conditional grant for denial affirmation for negation one matter for another to the next that it be never speak of at first that we showld have the free use of the print neither be fit to be yield unto at last by he first I oppose his own word in his print epistle of his caveat you shall have my good leave and love and my best furtherance to the state that after you have reply to this it may be print as also your person for further conference protect here you have the talker of promise if he be the fullfiller many will be glad in print promise the print to our reply without condition of legible copy without the before never hear of manner of print above express without any unreasonablnes pretend in the performance and now you behold he confident deny such promise either to have be ever make or to be reasonable both be in print his say and his deny and be opposite at least the one of they must be untrue Ezech. ^3 14 I say with the prophet I will destroy the wall which you have ^abed without mortar and will make it even with the earth and the foundation thereof shall be reveal and it shall fall for when the mortar of truth want in any relation how be it that the height thereof be never so great yet it will short fall and the false foundation thereof be public reveal thus much in this point for his contradict himself now for his false vawnt my answer to his challenge he say be so sift that nothing be leave but dust and if this be well bolt he dowbt not but he will prove it bran first I answer to the phrase that it be in part borrow in part natural it be borrow from that arch Puritan Martin marprelat say of he and his brother that they have leave nothing to the protestant but dust and bran have take all the fine flower away it be natural Martin marprelat both from his father be a miller and from himself be a baker a speech in season it be pity that he have change white for black a second melancthon to have forsake his book to be a baker Cochle^ and sur. and Colloq. Alt^mburg fol. 360. but one that for have so many barrel of corn without all function as himself say more than have every believe Christian without any charge shall be command to sell double size to that of our poor Dublinian baker that buy their corn in the market and must bear sess and press watch and ward etc. but why may not s. Augustine sentence have place in this arbitrement against my writing s. aug. l. 5. con faust c. 11. veilent who eye error lead to our chaff only for wheat they may behowld if they whereof our fraternity s. Gregory be of a different disposition to both these puritan s. greg. l. 8. ep. 37. Martin marr-prelat and m. Rider as well in all thing else as in think other man flower and paste dainty in respect of his own and if you desire to be feed with delicate food read the small treatise of s. Austin and in comparison of his pure flower you will not effect our bran as for answer to m. rider vawnt I say only that my first and last answer be subject now not only to his censure but to other man it will appear whither his boulter be course or Noah or his bread make thereof be white or brown and for all his repetion of the same promise and other reproach I say as a gentleman say to a piper that eftsoons reiterate the same song he have once give he four penny friend vary they note if thou will have i increase my groat yet this I add that among other parcel of wisdom sundry evidence by m. Rider be afford that my copy deliver to he be very legible for at every step he carp according to his manner thereat with like success as the gugion carp the bait on hook and line rider 7. the first positition which master Fitzsymon be urge to prove be this that the corporal presence of Christ body and blood in the sacrament be never teach by the father of the first five hundred year after Christ now m. Fitzsymon know it impossible to be prove by he or any in the world because it be hatch seven hundred year after that he alter the state of the question and say that Christ be realy in the bless sacrament and thus start like a break bow from the manner of the presence which he shall prove to the matter of the presence which be never in question betwixt protestant and Papist and so in this scroll hudle up many father speak of the matter of the presence to the worthy prepare receiver by faith but not one word of the corporal presence page 11. and to be receive by the mouth and most fond and childish will maintain the opposition to be betwixt real and figurative not betwixt corporal and spiritual beside he show there to prove his presence a great deal of ignorance in a little philosophy nay fooloso-fie all which I pray you wish he to mend they and with his pen lest they come in print to his shame and utter disgrace and I assure you and all that read this master fitzsimon with all his word and wit or rather witless word have not prove one syllable in question nor infringe any authority that I bring against he 7. title whether the corporal presence of Christ be hatch twelve hundred year after Christ Fitzimon 7. my whole writing be replenish with above a hundred disproof of this paradox shall I now resume they superfluous shall I dispute against he that only for purchase of time during his not be confute audacious affirm what all christian as well catholic as protestant do deny and deny what they affirm he be in fact and word disable by the state for his enorm ignorance and be so assure already disprove let my treatise be peruse and no reasonable man but will judge such satisfaction to be manifowld exhibit whereby this labour may seem to be well spare and now shall foolish be waste worthy say s. Austin s. aug. l. 6. con faustum cap. 8. in altogether a like case often to repeat the same vain thing to he be no shame but to answer often even true thing I account it ablame again responsi^ perhapp our first answer a little prolix will so instruct the reader that in other answer many word of we will not be require which as I say to have place in our reply to m. rider caveat impudency itself will not gainsay 8. our second position be this rider that god church have not their service in a unknown tongue but in such a language as every particular church understand master Fitsymon know this to be true yet willing to say something for fear of silence and censure alter the state of the question and say that scripture and service have be in unvulgar tongue but he shall have show that they be unvulgare and unknown and not understand of that vulgar where they be practise yea and that within the compass of the first five hundred year after Christ his ascension and then he have say something but now omit the circumstance he have fail in the substance and so prove just nothing and I pray you admonish he of his falsify of beda wrest he to prove his latin service whereas his word be these this island say beda search and confess at this present time one and the same knowledge of the high verity and true sublimity with the tongue of five nation that be to say the saxon briton scot picte and latin who tongue by meditation of the scripture be become common to all the rest I pray you entreat he with all his jesuitical and transmarine logic but to make out of beda one sound syllogism in mood and figure to prove the matter in question and then I protest unto you gentleman I do not spite he for his envy but pity he for his ignorance thus to abuse the dead father and live reader and all to underprop decline error 8. title whether beda be falsify concern scripture in the late tongue 8. m. rider will whether I will or Noah fitzsimon prove himself riderial of my proof what they be may be gather in my treat whether the mass have ever be in the late tongue that divine service have never be in the vulgar tongue to be at the capacity or handle of the vulgar he in this place affirm that I say scripture and divine service have be in unuulgar tongue but shall prove that they be unuulgar and unknown of that people wherein they be practise have you ever hear the like I show say he that they be unuulgar and yet I be will to prove that they be unknown of the common people who be the vulgar sort but the common people must not then it that be unuulgar be unknown to the common people he that teach a fool be as one that glue a po^-shard he may well propownd learning to his brain but never glue they and it to hold together Eccli. 22.7 beda l. 1. c. 1. the word of beda be this island at this present to the number of the 5. book of Moses with five sundry language do study and set forth the knowledge of one perfect truth that be with the language of the english the briton the scot the pict and the latin which by study of the scripture (@) make common to all the rest if of these word say m. Rider with all my jesuitical and logic I can make one sound syllogism to prove scripture to have be in a unuulgar tongue I shall be to he Magnus Apollo a great prophet you behold what a high preferment be offer to i for so small pain in the thing itself although to the party it may be a hard task by reason that Eccli. 23.20 the man accustom in word of reproach in all his day will not be instruct never the less if I can by a vulgar similitude I will this easy matter to his capacity there be no doubt but if four diverse family by right do draw water out of one common well you may well say the water of those four family not to be in the private possession of any one of they so beda say that the latin tongue become common to four diverse nation by their meditation of scripture do not he intend that the meditation of scripture be not in the private language of any one of they a enthimene be less than a syllogism and yet this hard riddle be dispatch in less than one and consequent I must be more than a great Apollo to m. Rider I have rather by much to enjoy my old privilege during his preiudicate conceit that he esteem i a apostate rather than a Apollo a than a prophet a dowlt then a doctor for his great dispraise be my desire disblame only I will know how in the singular number become in his translation who tong in the plural number and whether it befit the sense of beda his sentence or no rider 9 our three question be that purgatory and prayer for the dead be not know to Christ church to this he say that purgatory and prayer for the dead be believe but say not within the first five hundred year general of the church and therefore say nothing to the matter in question and to prove this matter among other writer he bring in that learned man of God master Caluin and thus false allege he in these word lib. 3. cap. 5. n. 10. yea and Caluine confess that above 1300. year past it be a receive practice to pray for the dead but let we hear how true nay untrue and unchristianly he deal with the dead father and late writer page 245. for caluines word be these record to master Fitzsymons great disgrace for falsify they and abuse the simple therefore when our adversary object unto i that 1300 year ago it be a receive opinion that prayer shall be make for the dead I do ask they again by what scripture what revelation or example they do it for here want not only testimony of scripture but what example of holy man soever they allege they show i no such thing must not all man condemn master fitzsimon wicked be that opinion that by falsification must be maintain Acts. 136. thus false to allege any author to maintain his own heresy God help the poor ignorant subject of this miserable land that be compel to believe this jesuite nay jebesite yea a second bar jesus that seek by these wicked mean to turn the lord flock from the lord foul but he that be bring up in any of the brazen face college of jesuite and so swear to the supremacy of the pope may bold falsify and misconstrue God word or man writing because easy for his service do for the pope he may have pardon from the pope but I beseech you wish he if there be any spark of grace in he cease to delude God people and the king good subject with these falsification and at last forsake this bad course of spiritual cozenage or else God spirit and good man will forsake he and let he take Christ counsel sin no more lest a worse thing come unto he joh. 5.14 9 title whether caluins confession that the ancient a thousand three hundred year past commend prayer for the dead be a falsification 9 so m. fitzsimon both as a dreadful judge and a as worthy squire in all vehemence assure such confession of the man of God to be untrue unchristianly false allege a record of my disgrace wicked mean to turn Christ flock from Christ fowld if any spark of grace be in i I shall cease to delude God people and the king good subject with these falsification with this bad course of spiritual cozenage etc. but if Caluin be a man of God or Noah he as well requyte m. Rider for this undeserved defence as m. Rider requite the collegist for their perfidious protection of himself each of they control the wrongful excusation seek by their own brother to cloak their deformity first then Caluin have the word Ant testify the time of prayer for the dead to be above thirten hundred year past m. rider over-gamboled it second Caluin profess it to be the doctrine of the father and thereof allege the example of s. augustin and s. monica and only deny it to be in the scripture which he specify by the word nimble also m. rider overskipped to translate this word three m. rider report caluins opinion to be that what example of holy man soever we allege they show no such thing Caluin the man forsooth of God confess the example of holy man to be for the prayer of the dead but in his opinion to have therein endure human infirmity to have be bear away into error monica to have have a owld woman foolish desire augustin unadvised to commend it to be imitate etc. now then reader no less foe than friend Caluin profess that I have not falsify he and m. Rider protest the contrary be not caluins defence a lawful purgation that I have not wrong Caluin be not m. rider know thereby to have gallop astray rom. 7. May Boleslaus king of Polonia be enorme lecherous the holy bishop stanislaus public at leingth rebuke he the king in revenge endite s. stanislaus for wrongful usurp a farm he in his own defence show the evidence of his lawful title thereto but the witness fear the king displeasure dare not justify their testimony well quoth stanislaus since that doubt seem to be make in this matter I will produce within three day Peter the party decease three year past who it concern to avert the truth of all circumstance the assembly deride his promise but he full of faithful hope in God providence after prayer and fast resuscitate Peter and both together before the king declare the lawful bargain Peter return to his sepulchre depart in peace yet after all this the king Boleslaus send soldier to murder the godly and they thrice from above resist the king himself kill he as he be s^ying mass dismember and disperse his part which eagle defend until by their lightsomeness the cracovian clergy find they and place they in order of themselves they unite as if they have never be separate all this history for the most part of the holy martyr s. stanislaus on who day I write this answer without presumption be it speak s. cyprian in conc. Carthag be appliable to my cause I rebuke m. rider for his adulterate truth and follow the concubine heresy by divorcement from the spouse of Christ he in spleen calumniate i that I have wrongful usurp a farm of caluins writing none of my witness dare for the state to approve my cause I be therefore constrain to Caluin himself to testify that I have deal upright his verdict of himself will any now distrust s. optatus l. 6. envy have place it be easy to the discontent to reproach but always say s. optatus when a crime be object manifest proof be requisite but this m. rider never observe it be sufficient for he to impute falsification proof beside his word if you require you lose your attendance the least that I can say be with God word m. Eccli. 7. contradict not truth by any mean and of the lie of their unlearnedness be confound for all this confu^on and heinous rail against i next the fault of contradict truth proceed of mere ignorance in not understand the crooked latin of Caluin wherein what he false deny as in the treatise of the mass I have ample demonstrate to ^e find only in scripture m. rider by palbable unlearnedness understand absolute and universal of all as well scripture as father this make i that I look for no reparation of my good name notwithstanding all the former exprobration I only say as titus Tacitus say to note valer. max. l. 7. it be easy to reproach i whereas I be not to reply you m. rider have learned to revile I have testimony from my conscience have learned to contemn your rail and as you be lord of your tongue so be I of my ear the word that be intermeddle in this point but he that be bring up in any of the brazen face college of jesuit etc. be thus speak by a man either bring up in brazen nose college of Oxford wherein his countryman be only train or at least which to all man be know if not often bring up thrust down in the iron face cownter of London for debt and chea^ing what think you will not another beside a jesuit have such evident advantage and inequality over he interchange some quipp with he but one bring up in the jesuit college wherein the great number of prince in Christendom be bring up can not esteem a minister late besyd all other infamy by public court condemn for a simoniacal cosener in sell one and the same benefice as Beza do his priory to two or three diverse to be a equal copesmate for he to contend with all for bring up concern the pardon a and which the pope will give for lie and falsify in his behalf I answer first the priscillianist owld maxim s. aug. she 70. to be now the puritan often practice jura swear for his wear the secret do not utter I have show it before that it need not to be confirm they also be so perjurious and not only untrue as in treat of they I have declare Caluin as Ochinus term he a earthy God and pope if he may not forgive they a and from fault and pain as himself assure he can not they be in a ill case 5.4 Zach. 5.3 since that God almighty threaten revenge for their perjury if he can forgive they be their pope we have great occasion to think our pope power as ample as also be already prove second the old heretical lesson of reproach the pope and his pardon luth. Tom 6. fol. 215. mathesius in hist. Lutheri conc. 11. pag. 123. Luther confess that all reform preacher do present and principa learn all of they know how to inveigh against the pope monk and priest so that it be no marvel that m. rider among the rest have learn this first fundamental lesson of his profession last as in the present case it be even to wink understanding notorious that the falsification object to i be void and need the no pardon so in every other case be it perspicuous that the pope can give no remittal of fault but by penitent confession of the delinquent and consequent with purpose of amendment as for a falsification of this kind every other priest may do no less wherefore it be likewise notorious that this exprobration concern the pope be in his case no less frivolous they impertinent that wicked his that opinion that by falsification must be maintain I think to be most true I will it have not only be marginal but also textual as be more important and pertinent than any other part of all this discourse ephes. 4.25 for the which cause say the apostle lay away lie speak you truth every one with his neighbour but in this case I can not entreat you to omit it s. Basil ep. 10. and ep. 73. first because as s. Basil in a like case say to i the say of Diomedes seem now to be say entreat he not because he be froward for haughty mind without dowbt by how much they be treat gentle by so much for the most part do they become more insolent for this m. rider I can not entreat you to deal upright your disposition of itself be inexorable but the second cause be that lie be intrinsical and inseparable to your profession s. cypr. ep. 69. and and and as if say s. cyprian with they fall and profane and place out of the church from who breast the holy ghost be depart anything else man befownd but a deprave mind and deceitful tongue and venomous hatred and sacrilegious lie but you may lay in our way the late word of s. optatus that heinous attaint you at least lawful proof be not omit I therefore say that m. Edmond Buny confess our church to be that from which you discend or be fall which have continue from the apostle age to this present Luther also confess it in one of his last book Bunie in his treat to pacification towards the end all good of christianity to have descend to they from papistry to every one sense it be so evident Luth in lillo in An^bapti^ that you be fall from we that I loathe to declare it then which reproach to be separate from we (a) (a) s. aug. ep. 42. and l. 1. c. 5. Catech. as chip (b) (b) ^ cyp. l. as branch (c) (c) s. opt. lib. 1. for as exunte as departer forth (d) (d) Tertull. l. 4. con Martion s. vinc. c. 37. s. Iren. l. 3. c. 4. isa 28.15 as late the holy father s. augustin s. cyprian s. optatus Tertullian s. Vincent Lirinensis s. none more vehement and ignominious against owld heretic so then it be prove that you be fall from we we be now to know that such wynd-shakes defend themselves as the prophet speak in make a lie their hope and protect themselves by a lie and for they that depart can not commend we say s. cyprian s. cypr. ep. 25. or shall we expect that we shall please they that displease we as rebel against the church do violent employ themselves in solicit the brother from the church by which premise be imply that if the cause be wicked that must be defend by lie the cause of the lapse of the depart or of the runnagat from Catholic religion must be wicked the cause of m. Rider be such apparent must be wicked the cause of one so often find in prodigious untruth must be wicked which may suffice for this point 10. four rider that image and pray to saint be then neither teach by those father nor receive of the catholic church here master Fitzsymon according to his wont manner say that image and saint be worship but how fond he endeavour to prove his wrest opinion by misallege father and bring in of fable I defer to mention it hope by your good persuasion he will mend it 10. title whether it be true that I mis-aleadged father and allege fable to confirm the worship of image fitzsimon 10. you have m. rider authority that I do both the one and the other but not without riderian verity that be to tell ever the contrary what I have say of this matter in my first book of the mass will show to every one that scripture father and antiquity do justify and certify the worship of image cap. 4. tit. 5. beyond all occasion of my misalleadge father and allege fable in confirmation of they but if both new and owld testament be produce to that effect if all monument of doctor father and history be it not easy to affirm without all proof or probability contrary to all certainty and notwithstanding great remorse of fidelity that all be but forge what idiot but might do do as much to wit upon his bare word to depestre himself thus of disproof to deny more in one hour than all the learned in the world may prove in one age to that end that his omission be know to have proceed from a guilty conscience and impossibility to answer my proof to that effect I have insert the substance of they in the treatise of the mass or else will here have exhibit they for he that seek so seelie to take howld on the testimony of beda Caluin etc. where not withstand as well occasion as appearance of all contradiction as be show most palpable want and yet follow they so eager what think you if he will seem wise will he but glawnce at allegation if they be in deed false and at relation that be without doubt fabulous but of his abuse the understanding of reader by so palpable delusion so contentious every where maintain besyd what be before say some what may follow if it will please he or his consort to be thankful for a profitable example thereby to leave these exorbitant forgery by they use in lieu of other answer I present this history record by Cesarius and other towards their amendment Caesar l. 3. c. 37. joan. Heroli ser. 24. Trinit. two merchant of Colen confess to their ghostly father two foul although ordinary offence lie and perjury in say and swear that among all other they alone have sound and cheap ware from place of great request from woorkman of great fame from other perfection most esteem in the mean time know that their ware in deed be inferior to they of their neighbour and have never be from place woorkman and other commendation by they vawnt their confessor according to his duty instruct they of the heinousness of those crime so effectualy that they be sorrowful for their former life they promise to abstain heedful for the future time from all and particular that they will neither lie nor forswear in buy and sell in the beginning they find themselves somewhat interest thereby until God have full prove the firmness of their resolution but after in small process of time their trade customer and wealth increase so exceed that they come to incomparable wealth so if our reformer can refrain from the same offence in utterance of their merchandise in write and deal plain without inhawnce gloze or return their ware without detract and belie the provision sufficience and substance of their neighbour store or beguile thus their customer I assure you thousand more will peruse their stuff and their traffic will be much amend 11. the five position be this rider that the mass which now the church of Rome do use be not then know in the church master Fitzsymon know or else he be ignorant in Durantus Guido and the rest of the mass founder that it be impossible to prove the mass to be either apostolical or catholic and that in the first five hundred year it be not hatch under the warmth of the pope wing for then he be scarce bishop of Rome but that be be to his own knowledge patch up in many hundred year after those 500 by sundry pope and therefore master Fitzsymon very wise pass the matter over without one text of scripture to prove it for know in his conscience that the mass never come within the letter of Christ will he will not afford it the least warrant forth of God word and for the father that he allege I be sorry that a man that have so fluent a tongue shall have so bad a mind to wrest the father so speak that after their death which they never know in all their life 11. title whether the mass now use in the church of Rome be know to the ancient church m. rider deny it to have be know Fitzimon before innoncent the three tyme but in the two book precedent even the innocent may judge whether such be not for the folly thereof a innocent opinion and for the impudency thereof a sycophant protestation when that m. Rider have threaten before as often appear so wonderful the mass that he will show from first to all to be magic etc when he have promise to travers it at the first occasion in (@) caveat n. ^8 when he have take upon he as a little after follow that he have follow i close in every line word syllable and letter than not only not to accomplish his threat not to embrace this opportunity now offer not to produce one word of all my proof and to deny that I have allege any out of scripture I know not what it be if it be not to ride as fast as his titt can gallopp and that he may not ride alone Luther have send this sentence as a foot boy to he luth. in asser Teu ho. art. 25. he that once lie he be not most certain of God and in all thing be to be to suspect as I say my treatise of the mass will further totaly and severally for what part soever thereof you peruse it alone will discover the foresay ride not only m. rider to be untrue but that Seneca in epist. great be the power of truth which by itself defend itself against all wit craft industry and treacherous ambush of man if denial be disproof if the dissemble our argument be the dissolve of they if hypocritical protestation be allow for lawful plead then our cause and case will loose their process but if truth may have due regard and proof their deserve credit and right but a lawful judgement then falsehood as a disguise queen upon a stage the pageant be end will be discover to have be but a cowntrefett than dissimulation will be unmask then word will be value according the lightness of their weight as I say my too book of the mass compile upon the occasion of such denial dissemble and delusion be commit to the regard of their truth the credit of their proof and the judgement of their equity let they be accept but according to desert and they and I will c^aue no more nor other perhapp require great satisfaction rider 12. the last question be of the pope supremacy and whether the pope of Rome have universal jurisdiction over all prince and their subject in cause temporal and ecclesiastical with this master fitzsimon deal as with all the rest and for the first part he say that the pope supremacy be acknowledge but tell you not within the first five hundred year and therefore be able to say nothing to that first part in question but impertinent misalleadge some text of scripture speak either touch Peter faith which he shall hold not one word of his supremacy which he never have and there he will cunning suborn the father to prove Peter pretend supremacy and the pope usurp supremacy but all in vain for he take they by the sound not by the sense as shall appear Christ will in sift they if he dare show they and for the second part of the position he fall quite from the proof of the pope jurisdiction to the largeness of his possession which be never in question as Sicilia Sardinia etc. here you see his weakness that can draw out of the lord quiver one shaft in defence of the pope supremacy 12. title whether my proof of the pope supremacy speak of the first five hundred year 12. you have sundry evidence that m. Fitzimon Rider be neither lawful judge nor witness in this article it appear particulary in his deny it that scripture father protestant especial the centuriast in great prolixity do profess if there have be no other proof than be in my first title to this rescript what think you be not they alone a stumble block to humble our rider into the sink of confusion I will but quote the centuriast show from age to age the pope of Rome to have have and practise supremacy of the whole world cent. 2. c. 7. col. 139. col. 770. 778. 779. 781. 782. etc. 10. col. 1262. and add to the foresay proof in my title a few more that even those who be loath to conceive m. rider to be what he be convict may be as loath to dowbt of the matter that he contradict for even by the centuriast aforesaid be confess that the pope of Rome summon general concil that they be the precedent in they that they confirm they and some time in part sometime whole cent. 2. cap. 7. cent. 5. c. 7. etc. when there be occasion disannul they live in the first hundred year after Christ ascension say cap. p. 1. d. 22. Petrus and the most holy roman and apostolic church not by the apostle but by our very lord and saviour have obtain the primacy as he say to b. Peter the apostle thou be Peter and upon this rock will I build my church Origen towards the same time say Orig. ho. 2. who shall be more high of the apostle than he who be and be call their head the same question in like phrase be inquire by s. Austin who s. aug. joan. c. 6. as all other except only certain obscure reformer that first deny s. Peter to have be pope of Rome and after upon contrary knowledge revoke their denial do attribute to the roman cheyre all prerogative of s. Peter as by diverse evidence yea and imperial decree be succinct touch in the first and second title to this rescript and not omit in our answer to the caveat and so the father say s. Iren. l. 3. c. 3. s. cypr. l. 4. ep. 8. s. hiero. ep. 57 damas. s. aug. ep. 162. s. innoc. ep. 93. s. aug. s. Greg in con. s. prosper l. s. Irineus every church must reyle to the roman church s. cyprian it be the mother church s. Hierome it be the chair upon which the church be buld s. Austin it have the pre-eminence of the apostolical chair s. innocent according the ancient rule it shall oversee all church s. Gregory by God appointment it be prefer to all church prosper Rome by pastoral honour be make the head of the world to all these think you will m. rider have nothing to answer yes I warrant you he have answer already all these be take by the sound and not by the sense the phrase be pretty and be a riderian answer to all which if you will not accept you must have no other because it be their opinion as even Luther of the very sort say although they touch not one argument luth. tom. 7. defence verb. fol. 394. 397. yet that they have answer the matter pass well and such be their greediness to defend their credit that it make they giddy and frantic in such sort that what soever they take hold of though it be but a straw yet they imagine it to be a sword or spear and that at every stroke they kill thousand a true man can never have speak of they more true in this the rather to be believe that none can be better acquaint with the child disposition than their father Lucretius but their reform error allow they no other shift that he affirm i to have fall in proof from the pope jurisdiction to the largeness of the pope possession for the first part it be now detect to be what it be for the second I ask all reasonable understanding how can I more pertinent satisfy his insidious article that the pope claim not temporal jurisdiction over all prince and their subject in cause temporal then by rehearce the few place whereunto he pretend temporal claim those I say to be Rome Cicilia Sardinia Corsica Petri in Thuscia Massam Trebariae lamb ariminum beneventum Perusium Auenienam Castelli Tudertum Ferariam Cl^macum of which in some he have no temporal command as in Cicilia in other whereof many be but mean town he so rule as they be never so much content nor happy under other government and consequent the great credit may be give to the book of dangerous position 30. 97. that the rule of puritan have wrought more mischief in Geneva in thirty year they the pope of Rome in five hundred he be no Papist that so speak but the author of a book by public authority in our late queen day approve and it need no confirmation to he that know even by Calvin own confession and by many other that Caluin and Farell calu. in be banish with this out of Geneva they will have be tyrant over a free city of which their seditious and rebellious disposition all country where they be city or other place do witness their rule in deed not to be papal but pharaonical and pharisaical these foresay territory I name principal that all may behold no pope hitherto to have claim jurisdiction in our part over prince and their subject in cause temporal thereby to judge the better of the impertinency of such malicious extravagant insert by my cavaliero and of the little wisdom of our challenor who to be a doctor can find no matter in divinity or other science of disputation but out of all divinity and partly contrary to it these only three ridiculous thesis be in part blasphemous paradox that Christ descend not into hell the church of Rome have apostate Irland be not Peter patrimony 13. and last of all I pray you tell he rider that I will not digest his omission in answer the matter in my preface all of they be so material as those two testimony out of August agolertus complaint of the blasphemous error of the pope antiphonary which show the heresy of the pope pronounce by his own chaplain as also for the filthy life and lewednesse of the pope and his cardinal exclaim on by his own commissioner 1538. Meritricum as also that the pope own palace of Lateran by the pope own proctor his confession be become a most filthy stew these thing he will omit and foolish frame to himself a by-matter out of the question to prattle on as against Luther but omit to answer i in this point that I urge he withal which be this that Luther opinion of consubstantiation be popery Cons. dist 2. cap. in and that Luther foolish heresy be hold and maintain in Rome 273 year before Luther be bear as the pope own record to the pope shame witness again he have omit to answer to those twenty several opinion of the pope doctor touch consecration one differ from another in opinion and so no consecration and therefore no transubstantiation and so his Massing be but a mockery and he must mend his answer concern August and lyra upon the six of John or else he be overthrow horse and foot indeed tit. 13. of m. rider blame my omission and attaint Luther of heresy 13. he request all priest and jesuit in the country Fitzimon to tell i that he will not digest my omission to answer the matter in his preface all of they be so material first I have answer they abundant and so little to his appetite that I warrant you he have rather swallow down his old sustenance the gruel of wiggen new from the fire then have have his stomach charge therewith for be he one ostrich that can digest iron and steel yet the matter now request to his digestion be make such a ingredient or so contrary to nature and so vehement work upon the stomach that it will burst the midriff and burn the bowel if it may not be instant quit away by purge or surfeit read my answer to his preface and behold how untoward he have mistake all matter the correct of a unknown book by a Catholic from error insert therein by heretic as his own author profess that he make a blasphemous error of the pope book the pope reform vice and chase occasion of evil he term filthy life and lewednes of the pope and his cardinal the diverse opinion of the manner of consecration he affirm to be a flat denial of consecration the affirmation of s. Austin and Lira he interpret to be a negation and in this last point as in all the rest so the word of his conclusion in this place argue a wise and well style penn-man he must say he mend his answer concern August and lyra upon the six of John or else he be overthrow horse and foot in deed as if he will seem to say in nothing else I be ovetthrowen all thing else go well in all other matter my overthrow be but feign but in this I be forsooth overthowne in deed in deed m. rider in deed this be a judicial discourse and a conceit worthy to be register in a book of your make next I will willing be inform what obligation I have to answer these very material point of m. rider preface he have entire gambole over my preface and never so much as once salute it in pass by but rather with a squint regard give thereto turn his back towards it certain so great reciprocation in i do presuppose a obligation from he or else some unknown inequality must excuse three in the name of jesus what have either any much less all of these material point as he speak to do with all or any of the article by he propound let i not be trust if I can comprehend by what engine or cable they may be hale thereto but a totter religion like a giddy drunkard must waver to by matter whether we will or Noah and let among all other disgression this opinion of Luther which he call a foolish heresy of which a little after testify his simplicity and senselensnes in not know what be with he or against he Luther opinion of consubstantiation say he be popery and be hold and maintain in Rome 273. year before Luther be bear first his author inform he that it be not popery by confute it as oposit to popery 2. that it be teach in Rome and maintain his author tell not only himself dream it 3. in deed I find in the first book of Guitmundus and in the 2. cap. 43. of Waldensis that after his second recantation affirm it but can any be find besyd m. Rider that make his opinion popery he be by pope and popery to the shame of all his favourite so often condemn as a rank heretic in my first four proof and m. rider answer thereto in his caveat be approve that all the world yea and m. Rider himself account he a Protestant and now I must forsooth as a material matter justify his opinion as papistical but if nothing else be convenient write by m. Rider I can not blame his puritanical verdict that Luther opinion be a foolish heresy to wit that the bread remain with Christ body in the b. sacrament for such his censure Luther by howlding one heresy witting to be a heretic act and M^^ pag. 500 joan. Day 1563. do also censure and condemn all the first planter of protestancy in England Latimer Frith barns Cranmer etc. as be lutheran to be also heretic it censure jewel to be a heretic by profess that Luther come first to the true faith which be once have jewel in the apology exam. bale cent. 1. pag. 66. 72. cent. 8. pag. 678. in the epistle prefix horn in the harborowgh in the last oration of the discipline print an. 1593. lond. by John wolf pag. 3. 13. say the faith of protestant can never be lose it censure John bale to be a heretic by make Latimer the first apostle of England before who say the book of conference betwixt Latimer and ridlye none preach the true faith of Christ and the gospel it censure horn to be a heretic say that Luther beget truth and last it censure m. rider himself to be first a plain and perfect Puritan to who all profession of reformer beside their own even it that be now profess in England be antichristian and diabolical and none but betrayer of God do defend it whether it come from Luther or Caluin without the presbyterial approbation next to be untrue in this verdict that Luther hold a heresy or at least in his caveat in these word n. 120. Luther be more to be commend than all the pope cardinal priest and jesuit in Christendom who with Austin though he do err yet will not persevere in error as you and they do lest he shall be a heretic here it be say he hold a heresy there that he hold none can both be true in this censure of m. Rider there be a secrecy to many unknown which I will brief unfowld the zwinglians or such as affirm Christ body to be only in the sacrament in figure and representation perceive the lutheran in great reputation and authority and their own proceed to be great blemish by be by they contradict Schlusselburg l. 2. a 13. fol. 144. and condemn they with tear abundant shed before the earl of hasse implore to be avow brother by the lutheran what their repulse be epitome 1564. pag. 82. you may gather by these word follow whereas the zwinglians do boast that we do acknowledge they our brother that be by they so impudent and vain forge that we can not sufficient admit their shamelessness for true as we do afford they no place in the church so much less do we account they our brother find they possess with the spirit of lie and contumelious against the son of man this be the wring of lutheran against the sacramentarian that how heretical soever they make they now that they be by they disdain yet that diverse time they lamentable implore to be entertain in their brotherhood and be by they scornful disclaim but this be not all the secrecy of this matter for m. rider be a Puritan and no Protestant but when the time and tide require may boast that if zwinglians have have such affront yet that caluinist have not be contradict to which you may answer that even the former sentence comprise they as be sacramentarian or enemy to Christ real be in the sacrament also adjoin that Beza himself by testimony of Smidelin most earnest present Smid^lin in epitome colloq. Montisbel an. 1588. pag. 64. in the year 1586 to avow the lutheran for brother if they will mutua accept caluinist into their confederation nay their case be much more condemnable who both lutheran and zwinglians do persecute and not only prosecute although I loathe to enrol their blasphemy in my writing yet to redeem my assertion of such their condemnation and in deed to make they as odious as their case demand to all they that only for show of truth hitherto comply with their opinion I think good to specify the blasphemy and abomination of caluinist condemn even by zwinglians 1555. 3. by the whole state of berna which also then condemn Calvin institution and other work calu. l. 1. Instit. c. 11.1 (@) 1. and 2. etc. 1. synn be commit not only by God permission but by his will ib. c. 16.17.18 2. all sin by who soever commit be god good and just work 3. iniquity be not fulfil by man by will or intention or proper force but by the holy ghost 4. the will of God be often contrary to his commandment 5. ibid. and l. and l. 1. c. 1^ n. 1. l. 2. c. 4. and l. 1. c. 23.24 ibid. ibid. the will of God be the principal cause of the perversity of man 6. the devil lie by the ordonnance of God 7. and God suggest dishonest desyers with effectual decree operation and will 8. the impious do more fulfil the work of God in their iniquity on their own 9 God have create the most of the world to damnation ibid. by the absolute decree of his will 10. by his absolute decree he ordain that Adam shall sin all which doctrine not only in seed but in bud crop and shoot to have be towards harvest in Cambridg among puritan teach that all such person as be once true justify conference before the King pag. 4^ though after they fall into never so grievous sin yet remain still just though they never repent they because forsooth they have do the will of God the work of God etc. the dean of Paul jan 14. 1603. not only assure but also prove before the king majesty so that from first to last it be a lawful excuse in a unlawful matter that m. Rider term Luther a heretic and that the puritan term so the sacramentarian consider that they be so odious by they condemn that in these few line he name so often the pope divide under he the office of pope chapelin to one of pope proctor to another of pope record or to another of pope doctor to another etc. partly it honour the pope partly it torment he that so repine reformer to the pope do offer the sacrifice of the lindian to Hercules who s. Nazianzen 1. in julian. to curse it be their piety neither with other honour do they worship that God it be a praise to displease the wicked and sen. epist. 77. in prove^ act. 9.5 2. reg. 17. a injury wrongful infix be the doer infamy it also torment m. Rider to kick against the prick he may soon with Achitofel by his malice destroy himself then hinder David to prosper a sea may roar against a rock but when it beat against it what remain but a fret and vanish froth that to happen in the pope case be affirm by s. Austin say s. aug. vtil. cred. c. 17. the pope to obtain the height of authority heretic in vain bark round about he nether be all the defender of papistry either chaplain proctor or doctor to the pope but many if not most such as leave great estate do eschew dignity and exchange wealth for want in deed among reformer the contrary be observe they but of the base sort and preach to purchase and have purchase leave to preach rider 14. and whereas I bring the old church of Rome condemn the late church of Rome for their feign miracle with lyra Alexander de Hales chrisost and Augustine approve the same against he master Fitzsymon so smooth pass they over with two hundred error more which I shall hereafter tell he of it he mend not by this your gentle admonition now my earnest suit to you be this that you will admonish he to mend the premise who have be hitherto careless of good counsel be bewitch with a self conceit which indeed be but a deceit and if he think my term too tart thank himself it be against my humour his breach of promise and foolish brag of victory without verity enforce i to use these term to edge he to aunwere and to show his learning or ignorance wisdom or folly and that the world may see if he scorn your brotherly admonition that brag be a good dog more tongue than tooth more talk than truth but you must needs deal with he by write for otherwise in word he be too hard for a hundred of you for you shall find he old dog in and and thus hope after your counsel he will leave his wont gad rove from the matter and follow i close in every line word syllable and letter as I have and will do he Christ willing I commend you and he to the blessing of our merciful God who I beseech for his Christ sake so to touch your heart from heaven that you all may renounce your new popery and fear God in Christ with we according to his Euangelical truth from my house in saint Patrick close this 30. of March 1604. you so far as you be Christ and the king ready to treble these kindness JOHN rider a fa^t escape in the print namely page 7 line 16. tit. 14. upon the residue of the rescript to the end 14. Fitzimon say Seneca his judgement have no authority sen. ep. 77. where he condemn that be condemn this sentence m. Rider have not only force but inevitable violence many way against you you pretend two hundred error yet show none and be besyd condemn by public authority what credit will be give by catholic to your word when protestant discredit you the two hundred error be but the spot of cownterfet blood upon josephes coat gen. 37. who jacob after will find unspotted and know the deceitful envious brother to have be as treacherous in sell he as in lie to their parent by his coat and as for the point of miracle I believe it to be so answer as that m. Rider will blame no further want thereof that I do not follow your counsel be the same mercy of God towards i which be towards the late name joseph that he follow not the allurement of his adulterous mistress s. cyprian in Carthagin your reformation be a disloyalty towards the spouse of the church and divorce yourselves as concubine from truth to follow licentious sect and error roboams example shall make i never to follow 3. reg. 12.3 the young man that be they that be upstart in religion such as stray be turn into vain talk desirous to be doctor of the law 1. tim. 1.7 not understand neither what thing they speak neither of what they affirm I have choose for my cownselor the word of God to be my compass and card in his holy ark by which I learn to divert and ply from you as from the rock and shelf of certain ruin by these sea mark follow place at your entry observe those that make dissension and scandal contrary to the doctrine which you have learn rom. 16.17 1. joan. 2.24 Galat. 1.9 hebr. 13.9 rom. 16.17 that which you have hear from the beginning let it abide in you if any preach otherwise then you have already receive be it accurse be not mislead by variable and strange doctrine avoid they for such do not serve Christ our lord but their own belly and by sweet speech and benediction seduce the heart of innocent by thes cownsel I be prevent from be cownseiled by you Tertull. l. prescrip. let the chaff of light faith be bear away as far as they listen with every breath of tentation let the blind be guide by the blind mat. 15 14. into the same snare let waver child be carry about with every wound of doctrine ephes. 4.14 in the wickedness of man in craftiness of the circumvention of error let the denier of know Christ and his word blush mar. 8.38 luc. 9.26 Eccl^. 6.10 and shrink to acknowledge he in this adulterous and sinful generation let the trenchoure friend depart in time of tribulation isa 51.12 2. tim. 2.12 mat. c. 10.38 c. 16.24 luc. 9.23 c. 14.27 let the timorous for a mortal man that be to wither as hay forget his maker as for i I hope to reign with Christ therefore I know I must sustain with Christ I pretend as a disciple to follow Christ therefore I must take up my cross hate my father and mother mar. 8.38 luc. 9.26 2. tim. 2.12 wife and child brother and sister yea and my own life in comparison of he I attend not to be deny of Christ before God and his angel 2. tim. 4.8 therefore I know I must not deny he or be ashamed of he before man I aspire to a crownee of justice therefore I must endeavour to fight a good fight rom. 8.39 to consummate my course to keep my faith for conclusion I say that neither death nor life nor angel nor principality nor power 1. cor. 10.13 nor thing present nor thing to come neither might nor height nor depth nor other creature by the mercy and help of my faithful God that will never suffer we to be tempt above our power shall be able to i from the charity of God which be in Christ jesus our lord nor to conform i to the cownsaile of the reform sedition you affirm that you must deal with i in print and not by word prou. 6.2 because I be to hard for a hundred in speech I say that and you be engage by the word of your own mowth and take by your own talk you can not conceal the confusion you have ever in talk with i when at every word I disprove and disturb your conceit which you heedful provide to happen most seldom and speedy to be abrupt I do but appeal to m. Tristram eccleston constable of the castle whether it be so or Noah if he will not disgrace his goss sip at lest m. alderman jyans m. Luke she esquire and other can tell the plunge you and minister Baffe wallow in at our last meeting so then to God be the glory and never to i you feel the brunt of my word at that time by your own confession to be irrefragable as for the print you provide not to taste how it will have prove but how you shall have feel it if you will have endure the trial I leave to be judge now that I may without you permission make it know what or how much or how little that will be to your profit I trust at like opportunity you will certify as you have now do of my word to perclose the whole and to conclude the late point pertinent in token that I be not very self conceit as ever before I have desire to speak rather in the word of scripture and father then my own so I will now conclude in the discourse of b. s. Austin s. augustin l. 2. (@) ciu. c. 1. altogether and as if it be of set purpose belong to this effect if the weak sense of human custom dare not to resist the reason of manifest truth but to wholesome doctrine as to a medicine will submit the weakness thereof until by God assistance the faith of piety entreat it be heal there shall not be requisite any long discourse to convict the error of vain opinion by they who be in the right and susficient can express their meaning but now because so much the more the disease of erroneous mind be great and dangerous by how much they defend their unreasonable conceit yea after full satisfaction as much as from man to man be due whether forever excessive blindness whereby they discern not thing apparent or for perverse obstinacy whereby they will not endure thing evident to he reason and truth of necessity we treat more ample clear matter as if we deliver they not to be view of behoulder but in sort to be feel of handler and yet wink at they nevertheless what end of alteration or mean of speak will there be if we will think it requisite always to answer they that contradict for they that can not understand what be say or be of so hard a opposition of hart that although they understand they will not yield such do contradict according as be write and they speak iniquity and continual they be vain who condradiction if I will as oft refel as they with a stout forehead resolve not to care what they say so that howsoever they gainsay our disputation how infinite how miserable and unprofitable it be you behold thus I conclude in opinion and speech of s. Austin opt. m. b. Patricio to the temperate protestant reader I confess myself to have be long time bring up in protestancy and also to have wade therim with resolute confidence profess it in Catholic country not without as well danger as firm intention to have die for it and when I do abandon it it be not for any great temporal preferment as be know public by what I then be and what possibility I have in respect of what I now and do pretend to be the cause of my first conversion from it be principal because I observe the form of belief call the creed and the reform gospel to be in all article altogether opposite one to another I report i even to your arbitrement therein after read my examination of the protestant belief towards all the article of the creed whether I have mistake or no next as after I addict myself to the diverse controversy of both side examine they curious with their allegation I be much more confirm to be a Catholic by view besyd the creed all the whole doctrine of christianity from Christ time hitherto to be whole repugnant to reformation eber in pref. come Philippi ep. cor. and when reformer pretend the contrary that they and the ancient do not disagree in religion such imposture I find to be so enorm sycophantical and hypocritica pretex that I blush to have ever be of that profession which cold never purchase or retain any virtuous mind but by such forge and dissemble to be that most which according truth and plain deal with all vehemency it contradict and be least so be it plain confess by Eberus who succeed Luther and melancthon in wittemberg of reformer be so deform with so manifowld and great confusion and scandal as that it be nothing less than what it profess last when I come to God holy book the divine scripture and compare they in their original to the translation of reformer and these to they I then in deed view all to be treason and trap all to be a transfiguration of the angel of darkness into one angel of light or his doctrine of liberty to bear most undeserved the title and countenance of the doctrine of piety and in the mean time true godliness to be as Christ in his passion blaspheme deride spoil crucify and bury so with i it also rise the three day and appear after with hand side and foot pierce in such palpable manner that of a dowbtfull disciple joan. 20.19 by so manifest revelation I then and now say my lord and my god as he then and now answer my soul because thou have see i thou have believe I have now inform why myself renownce protestantry if you please I will tender some further important occasion whereby you may also know what to determine towards the same they in the balance of a pure eye and not according any preiudicate persuasion and sway with they only according their desert as you tender your sowls salvation when reformation pretend to exclude papistry as they term the Catholic profession they allege against it that it be forsooth idolatry superstition magic that it be a follow of Antichrist the cup of the whore of Babylon a stamp of the beast of the Apocalips etc that the ancient father wear pernicious dreamer dote fool idle trifler fanatical writer falsifyer depraver blasphemer etc as be show in my first preface now for their own authority and warrant to abolish papistry and to establish their reformation they assure affirm the word of the lord God book and the holy scripture to be their direction the love of Christ and his truth to be their impulsion the doctrine of the apostle and their belief to be their intend reformation so that the nick of all their con consist in fine file and forge dispraise of papistry and as curious sugar deceitful commendation of protestantry approve themselves as s. Austin say s. aug. l. 1. confess c. 14. and l. 7. c. 20. nectan most delyt some vain not so much read as nor eloquent in heresy as empty of verity this whole imposture if it be find false must not the frame or building erect thereon be also esteem to incline to destruction omit to prosecute Luther confession luth. in disp Lipsiaca Eccio that this reformation be neither begin for God nor for he shall be follow first than I say in general that their bible by their own verdict have not be the word of God nether will I allege for proof thereof Zuingl fol. 412. sur. in chron. adan 1523. Lindan dial. 1. pag. 84.85.98 etc. any catholic but themselves in Luther translation I may affirm that John Dietenbergius have collete 874 and Emserus 1400 falsification and that bishop Tonstal have gather in the only new testament of tindal two thousand depravation I abstain from object one of we against they that themselves of themselves be both witness and judge I will begin with England and such therein as be Carlisle in his book that Christ descend not into hell and be most esteem Carlisle then for who credit Puritan deny the descension of Christ into hell say of the translation in England th^y detort the scripture from the right sense they show themselves to love darkness more than light browghtons epistle to the counsel Browghton who be of the feruent sort of puritan brook not to dwell in England as be a country drown in error but come to Midleburg in Zealand and ^her write his book admonish therein the lord of the counsel of England in the book of the say conference by William barlow d. of divinity and dean of Chester pag. 45. print by v. s. 1605. pag. 46. in like word to the former that the bible of England be foul corrupt and now late the 13 of jan. 1604. according our computation at Hampton court in the sum of conference before the king majesty thus speak the of the queast of puritan d. Reinolds that there may be a new translation of the bible because those that be allow in the reign of k. Henry the eight and edward the six be corrupt and not answerable to the truth of the original to which accord his majesty say as be there express that he cold never yet bible 1588. see a bible well translate in english but the worst of all he the Geneva to be which his judgement the translator of the bible in english profess to translate the Geneva bible and yet decline from it in very many place Luke 3.36 act. 1.14 c. 2.23 c. 3.21 etc. as by the quotation may be gather be ashamed universally to conform themselves thereto do apparent confirm and justify thus than we have for the first consideration that the scripture hitherto deliver in England be corrupt Witaker pag. 15. rat Campiani pag. 15. love darkness more than light and never well translate even by their own declaration of Luther translation for the owld testament he himself in several clause say that it be no word of God belong to christian Moses luth. serm. mose 10. precep lib. 2. con and vet^ ecclesiaste Mosen in mose pertinent etc. Moses pertain nothing to we seditious preacher affirm that the owld testament be also to be observe preacher not to i but to the jew preach thy Moses not a title or point of Moses belong to we the law not to concern we but the gospel yea even the ten commandment not to belong to we etc. this be plain deal out of the word of God to shuffle and cut away all the owld testament but what Luther think you of the new testament listen to himself rownd and resolute declare his mind luth. serm. Pharisee and publ. and in 2. proem test not unworthy do I admonish the reader in my prologue of the new testament that they shall abolish this false opinion that there be four gospel and only four evangelist for I say that the gospel of John be only be wi^full and true I may allege besyd thes blasphemy against so much of the owld and new testament his like impiety towards the epistle of s. james the Apocalips etc: but what need any specification of parcel when he determine in express term luth. in assert in Bibel Buhel Babel the Bibel Bubel Babel together with the scripture be nothing be not this a strange manner of translate and reform scripture to make they not to be any word of God or of any importance but all the bible to be only a bubble and a Babel what great modesty or sincerity may be attend in caluins translation when he tax thus the apostle and evangelist altogether calu. Instit. l. 4. c. 8. @. 4. calu. in c. 19 joan. v. 23.24 in cap. 2. mat. v. 15. in c. mat. v. 13. in c. 8. mat. v. 17. in c. 27. mat. 9 in cap. 6. Luce v. 40. calu. in prefat. test gal. 1567. if they be apostle let they not babble all that they listen of the evangelist he also say they intempestive to wrest allegation to depart from the right meaning of they to shuffle abrupt many sentence into their writing to term impropre to use word impropre whereupon most true say he against himself and his like I confess that Satan have gain more by these new interpreter then by keep the word from the people to conclude his odious exprobration I must report for a woeful conclusion towards all late translation the say of zwinglians or tigurin no translation yet extant nor which will be here after be the exact word of God and the express meaning of the holy ghost which if any temperate mind either of catholic or protestant may now distrust to be true in all their translation I can not imagine what satisfaction great to be resolve may be either imagine or require since that it be prove as s. s. aug. l. 11. con faust. c. 2. Austin say to Faustus and his consort you be the rule of truth what soever be for you be true what soever be against you be false let their etheocleal discord next present themselves to your consideration God give some apostle some prophet othersome evangelist thes. c. 4. v. 12.13 and othersome pastor and doctor to the consummation of the saint unto the work of the ministry unto the edify of the body of Christ until we meet all into the unity of faith and knowledge of the son of God such teacher of one uniform permanent doctrine always to continue our reformer may not possible be account first because of their long interruption without predecessor which in profess their novelty they both acknowledge fulke lib. lat. con. Stapleton and maintain say it to be of small importance although they can not allege any ancestor yet by the word of the apostle be intimate that there showld be a perpetual succession of pastor and doctor from the apostle upward to the wordl end to continue the knowledge of the son of God second because as be often and evident show that thes doctor of reformation be every day more remote from all meeting in any unity of faith themselves deny it not their own evidence assure it they in their quiet word do plain profess it as by these declaration be testify georg. Maior in and a the papist object against (@) the scandal of our discord I confess it to be great then by any tear may be deplore I confess the weak mind to be trouble thereby that they dowbt where truth be and whether there be any church of God distinct from the gentile fere the evangelical doctor do more brutaly and cruel contend among themselves Chytreus in deprau August Conf. nic. Selneccerus in prefat in Catol Concil. a. 4. true the world be loathsome to i chair pulpit and seat begin to displease i in which thes venimouse hate and contention tend to ruin be find Wigandus lib. they be neither flock nor tow but the capital point of christian doctrine that they contend about and that until the great day of God they may never better agree Schlusseburg in proem both their chief superintendent Schlusselburg profess and their several meeting frustrate in attempt agreement at Smalcald ratisbon Constance Zurick arove Basile worin Mompelgart Rochel Hampton do so that if either the apostle may be trust or themselves of their discordant and unreconcilable belief which by such discord be know not to be the one faith of one God ephes. 4. cant. 6.8 s. aug. epist. 166. the unity of one spirit the one hope of our vocation the one dove and spouse of Christ we must be reprobat desperate if we will not inquire and repair to the chair of unity in which be place the doctrine of verity in three place be be to observe that if beside their translation among themselves account to be corrupt and that they will be otherwise for the time to come and consequent the faith build upon they for who may know when the ground be hollow whether he have found his building safe or no to be uncertain and as experience show waver also their kingdom be divide not for flock or tow but for the capital point of christian belief as themselves profess if I say beside this discovery of their profession not to be from Satan by be condemn in owld heretic the great enemy of God and assurede confederate of Satan I trust that no reasonable reader will use any long deliberation whether it be convenient to persist in protestantry or no only this I in the mean time forewarn that as we accuse they to raise up owld condemn heresy so they impute the same to we but not otherwise then with sear conscience only to prevent and anticipat our accusation of the like in they for only by pope of Rome as the magdeburgian themselves confess have all general concel to condemn heresy be collect and till Luther time heresy which ever must have be 1. cor. 11.29 that they also which be approve may be make manifest by no reformer cold be condemn for their profess novelty and late acknowledge gospel whereby they cold not have be at least when such heresy must have be confute nether will I wish a more urgent provocation to abandon pretend reformation then to confer and examine such their collusion in taint we with owld heresy with their allegation and proof whereby they aver it in like manner as I have ever say Juel unexamined writing among all late reformer for in deed all late of they be abject in comparison of he to be the most dangerous mean to pervert catholic but be confront with author by he cite and his intention once detect they to be a most forcible reduction of they and other from be protestant now then to the point before specify first the ancient father condemn owld heretic for denial of many book of scripture the (a) (a) s. Iren. l. 1. c. 26. s. Epiph haer. 30. ebionits for their deny all s. Paul epistle the (b) (b) s. aug. l. 33. con faustum c. 3. and 7. manichean for denial of the gospel of s. Matthew the (c) (c) s. aug. haer. 30. alogian for denial of the gospel and Apocalips of s. John the (d) (d) tertul. depraescrip^ s Iren. l. 1. c 29. s. Epiph. haer. 42. s. Hieron praef. in ep. marcionit and the arian for denial of the epistle to the Hebrew to be s. Paul etc: what then think you will be their opinion of late reformer for denial of thes book follow to be authentical scripture in the owld testament all the book of Moses Tobi judith Hester Baruch wisdom canticle the two book of the maccabee in the new testament the three first evangelist the epistle to the Hebrew of s. james the 2. of s. an. 1579. in the of the epist to the heb. calu. come in ru^h in pref. tower disp. the 4. day conference Whitaker con rat Camp. pag 10. calu. and Beza in cap. 8. joan. bible a 1 62. 1577. 1^79 1580. tertul. con Martion l. 1. in princip. Peter the 2. and 3. of s. John s. jude the Apocalips besyd parcel as the prayer of Manasses the song of the 3. child the story of Bel and part of s. john gospel namely the six chapter which Caluin say he cold never be persuade to be s. john and the history of the woman which Caluin allow but Beza endeavour to confute in Luther late allege to this effect in the tower disputation in Whitaker say that he cold not see by what right that which be any time discredit to be scripture showld by time win authority of scripture which may be apply to all the part of scripture now mention in Caluin and Beza and in most late bible thes foresay book be make suspitiouse and apochriphal Martion by Tertullian be call Must ponticus the mouse of Pontus for his nibble the scripture as the mouse nible cheese therefore if these lopper or shredder of scripture have live in his time he may they cormorant or wolf not for nibble like a mouse small crumb but for devowr great gobbet in canceling whole and volume of god sacred word notwith stand the terrible curse in the Apocalips and deuteronomy in prohibition of such presumption Apoc. 22.19 4.2 can then any not ignorant of their mangle or dismember thus the scripture but abhor and detest that profession which have no other refuge then when it be repugnant to God holy word to say that his word be not his word or which be all one that his authentical scripture be not authentical but apochriphal and ^hat they believe not this they care not for that they pass over that as a dream give attendance I pray you to part of their modesty and that of the principal in spea^ing of sacred scripture we pass not say whitaker for the Raphael of Toby Whitaker con campian pag. 17. neither do we acknowledge those seven angel which he speak of ^he same that Raphael record savour I wot not what superstition i little care for the place of neither will I believe free will though he affirm it one hundred time as for the book of maccabee I do care less for it then for the other judas dream concern Onias I let pass as a dream what child but may say as much against any parcel of scripture and what jew but will tremble to say as much of certain scripture never doubt of in God church at least since the 3. carthaginian council which be 397 next scripture tradition by reformer disclaim be to be exhibit in most brief manner to your deliberation as be of equal authority when they be undowbtfull with scripture and contain little less mystery of our belief then scripture for by they we know the mystery of unity in Trinity luc. c. 1. v. 2. of the baptize of child all content of s. Luke gospel which he profess to have receive by tradition the whole creed of the apostle the christian keep of the Sunday in steed of the Sabbaoth of the jew the perpetual virginity of our lady the communicate in the morning fast the communicate of lay people especial of woman etc which be not express in any write word of God but only know and believe by the unwritten word or tradition of which say s. Paul therefore brother stand 2. thes. 2.15 and howld the tradition which you have learn whether it be by word or by our epistle what cold be say more manifest in commendation of any part of our belief according to which say s. Basil I account it apostolical s. Basil s. c. 29. in to continue firm even in unwritten tradition to who all the father be conformable and when the gnostic Martion Cerdon Arius eunomius s. Iren. l. 3. tertul. prescr and in Sarpiaco s. Basil loc. cit. c. 27. s. Epiphan. she 53. s. aug. l. 5. con max. aerius Nestorius and other owld heretic oppose themselves to tradition deny and disdain they they be disprove and condemn thereby by s. Tertulian s. Basil s. Eiphan s. Austin etc. to be detestable heretic I do therefore only crave what will they affirm of our reformer not abide the name of tradition but when it may have one odious sense translate in lieu thereof instruction constitution ordonnance (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) in greek mat. 15. v. 2.3.6 by themselves be translate a tradition in s. Matthew in D^n. 311. when it bear a odious construction and their dictionary in english do translate tradition thereof yet in this place of s. Paul they will not abide it to be so english what can be one impious corruption if this be not after despise scripture and tradition as the chief help from God lest there showld want any hindrance betwixt our salvation and we nothing can after more preiudicia be deny than our have any free will for by denial thereof all our action be make fatal and God be make as before by Caluin the tempter nay inforcer of we to evil and not our own concupiscence contrary to the apostle s james we be make deaf towards all god promise jac. 1.14 or threaten as be undeserved by we negligent towards all his commendment as be not to be fullfi lead by we but by God every one slothful to prepare himself to any good or to avoid any evil whereas say Luther it be not in his power even to make his own way more wicked because forsooth he be apply not according his own inclination but according God disposition as well Paul to be convert as judas to betray and if either god shall punish we or any magistrate condemn we for any offence commit against their law it shall be account a injustice in they to torment we for that which be not in our power to have do otherwise beside all which absurd point of licentious freedom and unbridled lewsenes towards all dissolution by denial of the freedom of free will also be imply that God shall never be pray unto either for forgiveness of our sin or of grant his grace towards any good by we intent we neither cooperate to the evil or good of our own action and consequent they not be we but god he shall be accessory to need pardon and not we nay according s. Bernard s. bern. ser. 3. resurr. take away our will and there will be no hell therefore for take away all regard of sin and good work of heaven and hell of God and man law their cold nothing be more proper then to inculat no freedom to be in we but that we be lead by fatal necessity without controwlement to think say and do what soever proceed from we this than seem a important and plausible heresy to Satan to suggest unto his minister even from the begin of Christianity thereby to intoxicat the world wherefore he suborn first Simon Magus s. clem. l. 3. recogint s. hier. in pref. con. pellag s. aug. c. 35.70 s. bern ep. 194. Concil. Constan 8. a 27. Roffen. in art. 36. after Bardisanus than priscilian than Peter Abailard than Wickleff than Luther and after he all this late crew and in particular they of Cambridg as before appear by whytaker to disclaim and deny the freedom of our will against who s. Clement s. Hierome s. Austin s. Bernard the council of Constance the bishop of Rochester and manifowld other champion of Christ dispute and utter disprove their satanical heresy but what powerful dominion Satan have and have in and over such reform writer you may conceive most pregnant by their deceitful corrupt all scripture approve the freedom of will in defence of the say infernal error first whereas it be say in genesis gen. 4.6 of Synn and under the shall be the concupiscence thereof and thou shall rule over it the english bible of the year 1579 translate this speech of God from pertain to sin bible 1579. to some rule of Cain over I know not who say unto the his desire shall be subject and thou shall rule over he can any excuse be find for this depravation I will only allege out of the whole bunch joan. c. 1. v. 12. a like corruption in the new testament s. John say as many as receive he he give they power to be make the son of God for power which signify the freedom of our cooperation to God vocation the english testament translate new testament 1580 prerogative and Beza dignity protest his intention therein to avoid thereby free will by sophister say he gather out of this text and reprehend Erasmus for not do the same if then reader this adulterate at every occasion the word of God to maintain every of their error which be testify to be old damnable heresy be not sufficient to reclaim thou from they at least in this matter to thy own cogitation these main text of scripture follow to be assure that thou have freedom of will to be make the son of God as s. John say and that do otherwise thy perdition be from thyself and thy help only from God 1. I have propound to you life and good benediction and malediction therefore choose 2. choice be give you elect this day oze 13.9 1. 30.19 2. joshua 24.24 3. 1. cor. 7.37 4. isa 66.4 5. mat. 23.37 6. rom. 7.18.19 what please you to who you ought most to serve 3. not have necessity but have power of his own will 4. what I will not say God they have elect 5. how often will I have gather together thy child as the hen do gather together her chicken under her wing and thou will not 6. to will be present with i but to accomplish that which be good I find not for not the good which I will that do I but the evil which I will not the same I do unless our saviour s. Paul Moses isaiah oze and the whole bible replenish with like assurance be able to resolve any Christian what be to be believe of freewill and other christian doctrine more than late reformer I have no expectation to revoke any from his error but if they be allow to bear any arbitrement in our controversy ps 57.5 s. Iren. l. 1. c. 20. s. clem. l. 5. recog. 49. s. aug. she 54. theodoret. l. 1 she 9 s. Hieron 1. con pelag. s. aug. she 51. and 53. s. aug. l. 20. con faust c. 3.17.18 Damasc she 80. l. 6. con parm^ Euthim part 2. tit. 23. her 17. petr. Clumac sacrifici^ s. aug. she 53. s. Epiph. she 75. s. bern. in can ser. 66. I dowbt not to assist some unless that adder like they stop their ear against the holy incantation of God truth but that I may aver this confederacy of late reformation with old heresy in a succinct manifestation their solifidian justification borrow from Simon Magus from Valentin chief of the gnostic from eunomius from aetius testify and refute by s. s. Clement s. Austin and Theodoret will it further delight thou their hatred derision and persecution of monk learn from the circumcellion donatist manichean will thou justify it be by s. Hierome and s. Austin so long ago condemn their malice against the mass and church ornament descend from the manichean messalian donatist bogomely Petrobrussians as faithful record and assure s. Austin Damascen s. optatus Euthimius Peter etc. will it seem to any christian mind here after commendable their denial of purgatory the old heresy of the aerian armenian Apostolicals by s. Austin s. epiphanius s. Bernard so sufficient refute may it now seem warrantable their cavil and contradiction against Lent tertul. praescr and in Scarp s. Hieron l. 1. con jovin s. Epiph. haer. 53. s. Hieron con. vigil sozom. l. 5. c. 20. socrat. l. 3. c. 3. Niceph. l. 16. c. 27. s. aug. l. 2. con Petil c. 51. and 61. s. Hieron Marcel err s. Epiph. haer. 49.14 opt. l. 2. euseb l. 6. c. 35. theodoret. l. 3. fab. she and other appoint fast day the condemn heresy of the gnostic eustathian aerian jovinian so odious to Tertullian s. Hierom s. epiphanius may they now be grateful their absurdity and profanation against image relic and invocation of saint the old impiety of julian Zenaias the persian Vigilantius Iconoclastes and other elsewhere mention rebuke by s. Hierom Sozomen Socrates necephor etc: who may repute otherwise then reproachful their reject with the donatist the number of seven sacrament auricular confession with Montanus the ceremony of baptism and confirmation with the novatians holy order with the pepusit matrimony from be a sacrament with the apostolicals extreme unction again with the novatians who I say esteem of s. Austin s. Hierom s. Marcel s. epiphanius s. optatus Eusebius theodoretus but together with they must damn and these persuasion by they so much detest brief if temperate Protestant caluinist seem true unto the at least believe they say the lutheran Smidelin colloq. Montisbel an. 1588. pag. 64. Stancarus in praef. l. 1562. fulke against bristowes motive pag. ^5 pag. 54. to have resuscitate damn heresy out of hell if contrarywyse lutheran be of more reputation wi^h the believe that the caluinist Timotheianorum Theodosianorum Gaianitarum and Macarianorum have allow for their Catholic faith the heresy of the arian eutichian apollinarist Timothians Acephalists theodosian gaianit and macarians John Scutz subscribe thereto say in 50 in pref. a. 6. a. and q. 3. a. b. Sacramentarismus in qaum the sacramentarian profession be a ^akes or sink of many heresy the last rage of Satan etc. if Fulke of England bear any credit with the believe upon his word that Austin and Epiphan we be deceive in esteem aerius a heretic for deny prayer for the dead that s Hierome rather rail then reason against Vigilantius who be a good man and his opinion sound which be as much to say as that in deed they of fulks profession consent with those who s. Austin s. Hierome s. epiphanius and all ancient christian condemn as heretic which be that which I undertake to discover as a sufficient motive to win and wrest every not desperate mind Christian from such their profane conspiracy and heretical consociation s. Hilar. in psal. 138. so that at length from first to last you may perceive the say of s. Hilary confirm and cogitation deceitful be the doctrine of heretic under the name of God blaspemous under the pretext of religion impious under the show of verity erroneous in who invention and design the only spirit of contention abide nothing do they endeavour for man salvation nothing do they purchase for hope nothing do they for peace then which assure say the premise consider their need no further confirmation in this matter to such who behold the reform scripture to be acknowledge no word of God the reform kingdom to be in itself divide the confederation of reformer with old condemn heretic they be not so desperate as to build upon such confess corrupt scripture nor so obstinate to conspire with such so contentious nor so unchristian to partake with such enemy of religion jesus Christ convert you a advertisement to m. John rider himself consider say Ecclesiastes the work of God that none can correct eccles. 7.17 who he have despise by this sentence upon such satisfaction as God have by i afford towards all your doubt will it hereafter be know whither God have despise you or no. otherwise although you be as yet perverse yet the scripture affirm not to be impossible but only that hardly eccles. 1.15 the perverse be correct I find in Origen and s. Austin s. aug. l. 4. con. donat. c. 16. this subject worthy handle why upon competent resolution sectarist be not reclaim first because not invocate god they tremble and fear where ther^ as no fear at all to wit of worldly confusion psal 23.5 destin^ and contention say Origen be froward and the settle purpose of resist although thing be manifest origenes lib. 1. con for shame of depart from wont opinion second the debility of their purpose and their obstinacy towards supernal inspiration whereby as the slothful man they will and they will not prou. 13.4 make they heavy and remiss in shake away and disburdon themselves of all delusion wherewith they be before entangle isa 37.3 so that as the prophet speak the child come to the point of birth and there be no force of their bring forth to which may be reduce their false surmise that the way of virtue and verity be in deed a yoke but not sweet a burden but not light that the commandment of God be not above their power mat. 11.29 30.11 1. joa. 5.3 Prou 21.25 Prou 26.13.14 or that they be grievous so desire kill the slothful man dream to himself that a lion be in his way and a Liones in his journey he like a door turn upon hinge wallow in slothful intention now to be open to God holy inspiration now to be shut against they three many worldly commodity concur together their disingage themselves out of this slimy mud or birdlime or brier the separation of their heart from this their treasure to be brief their reduction from all impediment be thereby great retract for the rich shall hardly into the kingdom of God mat. 13.22.6 ^1 19.23 1. tim. 6.9 s. aug. vtil. cred. c. 1. consider that wilful they fall into tentation and the snare of the devil and many desire unprofitable and hurtful which drown man in destruction and to our purpose in hand apt say s. Austin he be one heretic that for some temporal commodity and especial for his glory and authority either invent or follow new opinion which whether it have place in they of our country that comply and conform themselves to the present time I have rather that m. Edmund Bunie minister at Bolton Percy in the liberty of York showld certify than any other I now perceive say he Bunie in his treatise of pacification towards the end that man howld with we rather for respect of state and civil commodity then of conscience and belief a disgraceful reproach no less to the profession that by only commodity which be no great mark of a good christian doctrine it have follower then to the adherent hebr. 12.16 that as profane Esau they sell their birth right for one dish of meat I have also else where show other minister to confess the reform gospel to have most follower only that more commodious they may abandon themselves to all dissolution whereas therefore m. rider in your particular no opinion cold probable be ground that upon any competent resolution you will be revoke also it be to i one odious employment to prosecute and continual reproach your defectivenes finalye their be great difficulty to imprint in english and manyfowld my ordinary employment from be vacant to study it be with they that command i long deliberate whether this answer showld at all be imprint and have it not be that the collegist by their puritanical censure do avow your write against i and thereby engage the common cause upon your success it have indeed absolute be conclude my time and talon not to be due or to be devote in reply to such who whole streingth consist ampullosis in bluster exclamation and who whole intent be no other then Persius satyra 5. that your volume swell with only childish bubble of more they childish error so that m. Rider if you bring here after no other streingth than it of the horse in the Apocalips who might be in their mouth and in their tail rail and scorpion like sting Apoc. 9.19 you be not to expect any opposition in i or correspondence for Sabell l. c. 9 Herodot l. 4. Gell. l. 6. c. 11. the psillians be eternaly ridiculous to have arm themselves against the troublesome wynd do warn i from imitate their silly simplicity but if you leave figurative stuff and once write realy and substantia any thing worthy of rejoindre I oblige myself to refel or ratify it as I best may and it shall require I will give you one instance or two of preposterous exaggeration that not only all other but you may acknowledge yourself to be one of those of who our saviour say they tithe the mint math. 23.23.24 and cumin and anise they strain a gnat and swallow a camel leave the weighty thing of the law judgement and mercy and faith because you enforce and threape blasphemy where none be swallow thousand in your way as none at all and consequent as I say put your confidence in such sicophantical or sophistical exprobration no less vain then untrue you may not expect that I showld contradict you it may also be that for affinity betwixt your amplification now to be discuss and the altogether like in one Sr. Edward cook book of report which be late come into my hand I may extend my examination to both that your shame be diminish in be so well accompagny first you for your part upon a mere dream or deceit of your own do thus write you think it not inconvenient cat and dog caveat num. 95. rat and mouse hog and swine to eat the precious body and drink the precious blood of jesus Christ thus you blush not to print but I protest my hand shake and my hart quake to write it here together in a burn feure and a cold ague in the one your hart quake and in the other your hand shake you torment yourself no less but rather much more undeserved then unmeasurable for who tell you that we think it not inconvenient what you lay to our charge in what one author of we be it imprint now if I convict that we hold it most inconvenient any part of the heavenly sacrament to come to such danger have not you improperate all this like yourself Tertull. l. c. 3. fifteen hundred year ago Tertullian say calicit we unwilling endure any parcel of the cup or bread to fall on the ground I appeal to the commentary upon this place that if Tertullian now speak not of the b. sacrament yet that his regard towards such parcel of bread and wine be only for relation thereto Orig. ho. 13. in exod. but Origen of the same time be more express say and etc. we prevent the profane of all part of the b. s. Cyrill Catech. 5. sacrament with all caution and reverence s. Cyrill of Jerusalem about thirten hundred year pass thereof say cave be ware lest any parcel fall from the for what thou lose esteem as lose from a member of thyself s. aug. l. 50. hom. ho. 26. ser. 252. temp. conc. trull can. 102. also say s. Austin with how great anxiety do we observe when the body of Christ be minister to we that no part thereof fall to the ground out of our hand so that what you say we think not to be inconvenient I show to be in our opinion impious and sacrilegious and as impious do we esteem their error or rather blasphemy that affirm Christ glorious body in the sacrament either by man beast element or devil to be corruptible anoyable or passable whether the form under which it be contain be abuse or Noah by man or by beast but shall I show how old predecessor to late reformer namely the donatist think it not inconvenient to present to be eat of dog the precious body of our saviour s. optatus affirm it s. l. 2. con Dona fol. 23. and that they have so do their dog become mad and set upon and slay their impious and sacrilegious master namely two ministerial superintendent Urban Forin and Felix idicre in the year 366. shall I show how at home in England in the presence of Thomas Arundel bishop of London of the bishop of Norwich of duke Thomas of Oxford be then l. chancellor of England and in open court a tailor of worcester think it not inconvenient to affirm about the year 1384. that a spider be more to be reverence Thomas Waldensis l. con Wickleff joa. garret cent. 14. than the b. sacrament I have unsuspitious author thereof but what be the conclusion at the same instant a great and most ugly spider descend from the roof of the plac and by all vehemency will have enter his mouth which although with m^e difficulty he avoid yet can not he escape to be burn for a heretic these be they and not we that think it not inconvenient that cat and dog etc. shall eat the precious body of our saviour or that it shall be more regard than the most loathsome creature and this m. rider be your often fault to make your brother assertion to be our opinion next for sr. Edward Cook he certify that f. h. garnet late execute have write out of the tower with the juice of a lemon in this manner I have be often examine but nothing have be produce against i but yet it be expedient that one man must die for the people I pray you by the way to remember that by these word he assure his expectation of death to know thereby what fidelity be in relation of his execution assure the contrary upon these word write sr. Edward Cook Sr. Edw. cook in his book of report that he never hear a more horrible blasphemy proceed from a atheist make his hair to stand on end to think of it what man in all the troop of atheist d. whitgift a pag. 31. pag. 51. with who d. whitgift confess the english congregation to be replenish not so great a blasphemy as this I know that a ravenous lawiour easy do imboulden his tongue I know that Martialis l. 12. s. Hieron in ^a 23. Hieremie the lawyer fit to bitter wrong be hyperbolical but fain will I know how any boldness or bitterness can fashion or forge a blasphemy in this place of s. Michael the archangel we read even that he dare not to infer the crime of blasphemy against the devil himself but legisperiti and jude. 9 luc. 5.21 luc. 11.46 mat. 23.2 the lawyer and scribe have infer it against Christ himself and now also a lawyer be find that make it in a man for know the measure of his foe in who clouch he be a blasphemy only to apply a sentence speak by Caiphas signify that he expect to die but it may be that Sr. Edward surmise the meaning of f. garnet to have be that by his death the people shall be redeem for so in deed he in that persuasion may exclaim at his blasphemy but I can not think that the mean clerk under he much less himself can be so absurd to think any Catholic so impious unchristian and if such be not his surmise very I can not conceive how otherwise by any construction the foresay word may be make blasphemous much will such alchemist have draw towards their exaggeration if f. garnet have say with s. Paul that he rejoice in suffer for the collossian Coloss. 1.24 and do accoumplish thing that want in the passion of Christ in his flesh for his body which be the church whereas they exaggerate when no occasion be give and but a vain occasion be by themselves pretend s. Gregory Nazia^zen inform that if the crime be forge then be it sycophancy if forge then be it calumny if any exprobrat without just punishment then be it blasphemy if be reproach then be it sclawndre but m. attorney case may seem according s. Nazianzen near as yet to blasphemy by how much for his heavy imputation without all proof no punishment have hitherto be inflict but at least in the doom of s. Nazianzen he hardly escape to stand for a sycophant thus much for Sr. Edward Cook only for resemblance in prodigious amplification with m. rider and to enable he to comb his head if there be no other impediment than the before mention stiffness of his hair for this blasphemy which if it will not serve I will add that as the ephratheans can not pass jordan which signify the river of judgement nor the watchful galaadit signify heap of testimony as not be able to pronounce Shibboleth judic. 12.6 which be interpret aene ear of corn but Shibboleth without the aspiration H so I trust for the point of blasphemy the say word by he pronounce like a ephrathean want the aspiration H that all remain at the river of judgement and acquaint with the true pronunciation of the late Shibboleth or ear of corn will give he no credit in such dissimulation of a blasphemy my second instance m. rider of your exorbitant invective where not only all occasion want but also the blame redownd only to yourself be of these your word against my be a jesuit this jesuit nay jebusite rescript n. 9 caveat yea a second bar jesus else where that false arch jesuit Bar jesus which word give i occasion to defend the jesuit profession I know not why thereof I may not a little delate to occasion you and your brother to be better conceit of jesuit if you love truth and sincerity and if you do not at least to manifest how undeserved you malign we of that order we strive to preserve you and you to destroy we we of love search your salvation to the danger of our corporal death and you of hate persecute we to your own and other perdition I confess first that jesuit be odious I believe also offensive to sectarist reformer which they themselves manifest in expel they first and further of all other in malign their name in diminish their fame in indomage their mean in calunniate their life in every way by a peculiar hatred pursue they and most rigorous persecute they when they have such power but in this hatred be the jesuit pride because as s. Hierome say s. Hieron in ep. s. aug. it be proof of great dignity when all heretic detest any be it not a praise of s. justin martyr to have have opposition to Triphon of Origen to Celsus of s. to Valentine of s. Cyprian to the novatians of s. Nazianzen to eunomius s. athanasius to the arian of s. Ambrose to auxentius of s. Hierome to Vigilantius and of s. Augustine to the pellagian and manichean if any other religious shall more partake this dignity the jesuist will have such holy emulation as the noble s. Secunda have when junius donatus cause her sister s. Ruffina in her presence to be most horrible scourge say what do thou thou impious man and enemy of God why do thou so honour my sister and dishonour i where as I profess Christianity no less than she and for this particular prerogative many follow the jesuitical standard anno. 260. neither have I otherwise great impulsion there to then for the same next I certify that I can not imagine how jesuit may better endeavour to deserve the love of man than they do for by their second rule next their own salvation they shall intend to advance by all mean possible the salvation of their neighbour and to that purpose be indifferent towards all place where the great glory of God may be seek whereby through cold and heat seize and land they be at a beck to forsake house and home yea they that otherwise be great prince and noble to inquire to Christ flock the lose sheep which their labour the benediction insue do assure to be most acceptable to God be it but for three hundred thousand late christian in japonia alone where before the jesuit come among they about three score year past there be not any one that ever hear of Christianity to the same purpose in all place where they be their whole time and study be employ to catechize child as soon as they can speak to bring they up as soon as they can read or write through all science to rescue they from sin provoke they to frequent the sacrament to counsel they in their doubtfulness to comfort they in their distress to reconcile they in their controversy and brief in supply their spiritual and corporal want by all possible mean whereunto they entertain as many workman as their estate by any measure be able to support omit thereby hospitality towards all other by who in their opinion God honour and the good of the common wealth will receive less assistance and lest that wealth or sloth hereafter shall pervert their first fervour all the chief father of they namely the profess beside the ordinary vow of all religious poverty chastity and obedience do make these peculiar vow never to permit any change in their poverty unless it be more to restrain it never to suffer the teach of child to be omit but rather to do it by themselves never to linger at commandment of the pope even without all mean to travail for the conversion of infidel or heretic into all country how barren barbarous or remote soever etc. last the say profess father when the burden of teach be to heavy for themselves by infirmity or year they follow voluntary poverty and beg that other of great streingth be under the heavy charge of teach may enjoy the commodity of all the rend bestow until they also be become unwieldy to that toilsome office or be to preach write or govern in some house thereby to be exempt from all distraction and hindrance incident to they that together be to teach as also to live by alm to these profess father they be the principal pillar of jesuit as soon as their church and house be once furnish for the present time they neither expect nor accept any revenue but always depend upon voluntary alm the residue by every fit increasement of their revenue be bind to multiply their number that the place be more due serve in all religious office and when the town wherein they dwell may spare any to be absent they be send to all village round about to fructify for our saviour now because that by these holy employment Satan sustain continual loss the world lose many follower sin be diminish virtue daily augment who can blame the imp of Satan the admirer of the world vanity the thrall of sin the emulator and envier of virtue to detest defame and persecute such impugner the jesuit so that if any particular jesuit not withstand his institution to the contrary 1. tim. 2.4 have ever or shall hereafter be once a soldier to God entangle himself with secular business and thereby blemish his order and so many prince either founder or follower thereof or if either garnet or other be in any state-maters assure attaint Aristophanos from my heart I say with Aristophanes in all manner condemn he truss he on the lader hang he scourge he flay he rack he pour vinegar into his nostril for no torment be sufficient for he that leave the discipline of peace degenerate or rather apostate into reform rebellion caluinian conjuration puritanical prodition such be their turbulent and natural spirit Ovid in Hermione which sea and land and proper kingdom truble for they be the gospeler who reformation say Martin mar prelate in the book of dangerous position pag. 140. and Erasmus in his epistle thirst and can not be quench without blood yet to be tolerate in the begin nothing but peace be in their mouth nothing but invective against the most peaceable as against peace breaker be in their declamation but of this subject we have else where discourse and now the world know sensible by many woeful destruction of common wealth by many daily conspiration that not jesuit but puritan preach seditious combustion of all place and desolation where in they may have foot but if I will now abrupt this discovery without specify the particular paradox of the say spirit as well concern religion as concern state fest pomp. I may be blame in manner as Sulpitius Galba blame his horse stumble in the entry of a long journey in say thou begine to faint before thou have well enter into thy travail therefore I will enlarge this declaration with their own blasphemous article concern the foresay two point that by themselves they receive a Apocalips or revelation who be wont as our saviour say of they that do evil to hate light joan. 3.20 and extravagant to gloze upon the Apocalips of s. John s. aug. ago Christ c. 16. only as s. Austen observe in owld heretic to raise up darksome mist and thick cloud betwixt themselves and the truth which be hardly perceive even of a stay and quiet mind and first concern religion they affirm of glory to be to the father survey of the book of common prayer 1606. pag. 47. the say glory be to the father to the son and to the holy ghost to be a vain repetition of the the not to be say Richard alison in his book of puritan dedicate to sr. tho. henege 1590. the answer of Oxford to the petition pag. 12. nay not for save life itself whereupon say the accademist of puritan some omit some refuse to repeat some condemn this the lord prayer of the name of jesus supplication to the king in the 3. point the answer to the petition pag. 14. no minister showld be charge to teach their people to bow at the name of jesus of Christ a a the survey of the book of common prayer pag. 59 Christ to be all one with s. Michael no other than Christ to teach the church all thing c c Cartwright in the 2. reply pag. 191. that the jew b b ibid. pag. 99 apostle and disciple have be most senseless to think he to be the ever live God who they behold to be a simple and miserable man d d survey pag. 118. these word to be untrue in God the son who have redemee i and all man kind e e ibid. pag. 119. the death of Christ not to be effectual to redeem all universally of the holy ghost f f survey pag. 106. the holy ghost only baptize effectualy so far as the minister can discern and that before any baptism be to be minister g g pag. 99 the holy ghost not to teach the church all truth but only Christ h h Hampton conference an. 1603. pag. 14. ibid. pag. 16. 28. the holy ghost to sanctify only the elect I I survey pag. 116. who he sanctify never after to fall totaly from grace or syn to need to repent of the gospel ecclesiastical discipline pag. 13. tho. Cartwr in his epistle to the church of England the answer to the petition pag. 20. the gospel of Christ jesus to be of no more importance than the consistorial discipline of puritan without which the church to be no church the faith no faith the gospel no gospel of the sign of the cross survey pag. 102. 103. s. aug. tr. 118. in joan. Ezech. 9.4 the sign of the cross to be a part of the beast mark it to be superstitious unprofitable blind and not use in the forehead before the 2. of Edward the 6. to my think by the beast they shall understand God consider the cross or letter t be by the prophet declare to be the mark of his elect of baptism a a survey of the book of common prayer pag. 87. 88 104. 125. baptism not to regenerate not to belong to infant b b pag. 56. 107. 112. 125. not to be available but by only minister c c pag. 100 not acceptable to a tender conscience with the sign of the cross @ not to be necessary absolute e e pag. 105. without it salvation not to be dowbtfull the use of conditional baptism be more ancient synod can 84. conc. Cartag 5.6 conc. Africa c. 39 and conc. wormat c. 70. survey pag. 88 f f 112. not to have be use conditionaly before the year 1161 g g 106. not to be more necessary then former circumcision of godfather and godmother godfather and godmother to be papistical such to be only witness and not surety of confirmation confirmation to be a corrupt follow of the apostle the same to be unwarrant unprofitable survey pag. 128. 129. Hampton conference pag. 10. idle vain make by english protestant a sacrament with imposition of hand survey pag. 117. 118. addition to the late catechism e. awn 3. as a sign sign and seal and a inward spiritual grace of the eucharist a a survey pag. 129. communion by Luke 22.29 to belong to all christian and that by act. 20.7 on each Sunday b b Cartwright l. 1. pag. 158. answer to the petition pag. 11. a minister exposition or sermon to be a essential part of communion c c survey pag. 117. the supper to be a maintenance of our spiritual regeneration of penance no sin forgive but by be not impute survey pag. 87. pag. 116. hamp confer pag. 28. survey pag. 116. by rom. 4.7.8 no sin in any once justify to need repentance or to deprive from grace of bishop to be member not of Christ a a the arraignment of barrou 20. 1593. but of the devil and of Antichrist b b alison against puritan artic. 15. minister of the word to live by alm only c c barrow arraignment the church to have no head in earth d d alison artic. 14. no oath to be take before bishop but only before magistrate e e ibid. art. 12. every private man to have licence to preach and expound the scripture f f hampt confer pag. 34. survey p. 114. bishop not only minister of confirmation g g survey pag. 89. the name of priest in all the new testament never to belong to the minister of Christ h h survey pag. 5. hamp Conf. p. 36. bishop dean archdeacon as such to be no member of the church I I survey pag. 127. they to have no proof of scripture k k admonition 2. and 3 all that proud generation must down of marriage survey pag. 132. matrimony even by english protestant be vain make a sacrament and God thereby make a liar of extreme unction survey pag. 129. extreme unction also by english protestant most absurd to have be practise and prescribe in the 2. of edw. 6. of sacrament in general a a survey pag. 120. 121. false to be say in late catechism even of english protestant sacrament to be necessary to salvation b b ibid. as also the say protestant to imply wrongful the be of more than two sacrament c c survey pag. 104. also they to err in say sacrament to be mean of grace and not only pledge of assemble to church barrow arraigument 20. apr. 1593. the assemble of people to church by ring bell to be antichristian of ceremony survey pag. 98. 99 Hampton Confereuce pag. 67 no ceremony only significant and not seal in the gospel yet in Hampton conference they affirm the contrary have I not be deprive of the often mention survey by some deceit as also of the collection I have thereout gather I have produce many like article of puritance which upon recovery of the say book shall after God willing be record now to their disprove of their brother belief Puritan against the late profession of England a a browghtons advertisement to the lo. of the counsel of corruption 1604. the public english translation cause million of million to reject the new testament and to run to eternal flame b b ibid. it pervert the holy text of the owlde testament in eight hundred and eight place c c ibid. it be inferior to the Koran d d Hampton conference pag. 45. 46. 47. the english bible ill translate all together and they according Geneva to be the worst e e ibid. they contain very partial untrue and seditious note to much savour of traitorous conceit as of allow disobedience to king and tax asa for depose his mother and not kill she a b c @ Theridamas be no right religion establish in England @ they be all infidel that go to late church of England the two admonition to the parliament @ it shall be easy for Sodom and Gomorrha in the day of judgement then for the court of parliament by which the protestant religion be confirm d d alison 4.5.6.7.8 the english congregation consist of all sort of unclean spirit and be no member of Christ e the regiment thereof be unlawful perpetual government of the church pag. 339. allege much more of this kind and antichristian f their sacrament no sacrament g it be a very Babylon Puritan article against state out of the answer of Oxford and Cambridge to their petition pag. 28. 29. 1. that the supereminent authority of the king must be confine within the limit of some particular parish and then to subject his sovereign power to the pure apostolical simplicity as of a oversway and all-commanding presbytery 2 that his meek and humble clergy have power to bind their king in chain and their prince in link of iron and in case they see cause to proceed against he as against a tyrant 3 all appeal in cause ecclesiastical and what do they not make ecclesiastical must final lie not unto the prince but unto the assembly provincial 4 that they allow the supreme magistrate not but only to maintain their proceed but not to command that final the king submit his sceptre unto the sceptre of Christ and lick the dust of the church foot last that some of high place yet alive and othersome dead have feel the smart of this their profess doctrine in their own experience and have see the worst of all this put in execution thus far out of their own evidence I blame they not here to confess that some alive have see the worst of all these put in execution consider first in France how in Geneva and Cabillon Genebrard an. 1560. 1567. 1570. 1575. petr. Frat. con. def. reg. and Relig. they not private but synodica resolve the kill of king queen prince and nobility and the spoil of all the church in France second how by their two first civil rebellious on both side in France only be slay above a hundred thousand christian as for Scotland who of any knowledge be ignorant how the queen dowager than regent be rebellious contemn and violent hasten to death sur. an. 1560. who know not by who the king and queen secretary be kill in their sight the king himself his majesty father murder the queen great with child of his majesty design to death with a pistol holinshead hist. of scot 1566. dangerous position lib. 1. c. 6. if it will have take fire force to she crown and sceptre to a bastard at leingth exile to her final destruction who a a b. 1.2.3.4 parliament sect. 1584. cap 7. and 1582. besiege surprise and imprison his majesty deprive he of his guard violent subject he by oath in his minority to their discipline censure he by excommunication intend his destruction by the earl gowrie and make he as himself declare a b b Hampton conference pag. 4. and p. 20. king without state without honour without order where beardless boy will brave he to his face c c the answer to the petition pag. 13. @ 8. and pag. 20. who fast and mourn upon the five of August when all good subject feast and rejoice in memory of his majesty his wonderful escape from be murder you willing will say they be papist and jesuit but the chronicle the parliament the monument of reform brother and as be say a little before d d the answer to the conference pag. 29. many yet alive in their own experience do proclaim to the world and to all posterity perfidious puritan the viper e e s. Chrysost. hom. 46. in math. as s. Chrysostome most convenient term their predecessor of all common wealth wherein they be harbour because they never deem themselves lawful bear until they rend the bowele and breed the death of both their temporal mother the common wealth and spiritual the church I say that all do agree perfidious puritan to have be the conspirer the conductor the principal delinquent and executioner of all such abhominablet reason and machination 2. joan. 1.3 whereas therefore his majesty may say with the apostle what we have hear what we have see with our eye what we have perceive and our hand have feel etc. we announce to you marvel not to hear he in these grievous term follow to deliver the true portraiture of puritan (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) or his maiestios book to his son pag. 41. 42. edit. Kingston take heed therefore my son to such puritan very pest in the church and common wealth who no desert can oblige neither oath or promise bind breathe nothing but sedition and calumny aspire without measure rail without reason and make their own imagination without warrant of the word the square of their conscience I protest before the great God and since I be here as upon my testament it be no place for i to lie in that you shall never find with any highe-lande or border thief great ingratitude and more lie and vile perjury then with these frantic spirit etc. Knox in his 2. blast and 3. proposition print in Geneva an. 1558. all which John Knox the Proto-puritan in Scotland confirm by these word nether can oath nor promise bind any such people subject to the bless evangel to obey and maintain tyrant that they understand by tyrant their lawful king of different religion appear every where by their style and in particular 1563. mich. Fabrit. cp. Beza fol. 62. by the 40. canon of their synod of 20. minister at Cabillon and berna in these word until it shall please God in who hand be the heart of king to change the hart of the french tyrant etc. that also it be a article of their religion Erasm cp. infer Germ. fox in the end of his calendar Erasm lib. 16. ep. 11. to advance their gospel by guile and treachery Erasmus one of fox confessor although Erasmus reclaim Lutherum I renounce Luther I cleave to the roman church dowbt not to affirm by who word I be make mindful of my Puritan m. rider in who discourse nothing be more often repeat then that he be a man and fraud without fetch or fraud whereas not withstand for one replenish and fraud the London counter prison often embrace he Dublin senate house or Toulsel denownce he a sir and now last for like and fraud as Beza use in sell his benefice to diverse and such enormity he be depose from his ample deanery of s. Patrick and be also like in time to pass from hold a provostrie to be howlden in a provostrie the premise consider concern Puritan as well towards religion as state we will conclude in the word of the accademist of Oxford answer to the petition pag. 28. confirm by the express consent of the university of Cambridge as be say in the title say look upon the face of all the reform church in the world and wheresoever the desire of these petitioner do take place be it due consider first how well their proceed do suit with the state of a monarchy and then how poverty on the one side and lack of learning on the other do creep upon the whole clergy in those dominion to which be so pregnant so unsuspitious so inexcusable at testation of themselves of parliament of king of university of chronicle I need add nothing to any not voluntary blind unless perhaps this only inference out of Platus as a pericope or to all that be say leave to themselves to make english thereof a most royal and real manifestation of the contrary spirit of the jesuit contain in itself beside the public assurance thereof important reason of the truth and a clear resolution of any doubt that may be conceive be in this defence follow of the present french king whereby notwistanding the great extremity use against all the society in France yet their innocence as well of he that be execute as of all the rest be to all the world at leingth reveal I will relate it as he give it and after translate it that m. Rider and all minister may behold the accusation of jesuit vulgar spread to deserve small estimation for who of what integrity soever can be innocent if it be sufficient to accuse s. Cyrill l. 10. con julian. it be as s. Cyrill say prone to every varlet to forge and rash to accuse as in the case of of our saviour the apostle Mardocheus Susanna etc. be to all man notorious thus than he say the same translate that certain ecclesiastical be adversary to jesuit always unlearnedness have hate learning I have observe when I begin to speak of their restitution two sort especial to oppose themselves heretic and bad ecclesiastical which indeed give i a great provocation to revoke they that they of the high bishop sheake well and reverence he I also do the same neither be I ignorant that they of the supreme bishop authority neither speak nor teach more than other divine and the catholic church do teach beside they teach nothing that the clergy shall not give i my due nether be any ever find that of they learn the destruction of king wherefore all that be object to they be nothing thirty year and more be run over since they have train the youth in France and a hundred thousand of their scholar have either end all their study or become lawiers or physician of all these have any ever confess to have hear or learn of jesuit any such matter I add that there be minister of the heretic that many year have live among jesuit inquire of they what they think of the jesuit life very it be to be think that they will speak most slanderous be it but only to excuse their run away from they I be privy it to have be demand of they and they to have answer the jesuitt proceed to be inculpable as for their teach it to be public very few other will submit themselves to such trial and his conscience must be secure that dare to abide his adversary verdict of Barrery that will have kill i it be so untrue that a jesuit have hear as you say his confession that by a jesuit I be forewarn of the whole design and another jesuit intimate to barerie that he will incur eternal damnation by such attempt of castle by no torment can ever be wrested any thing against Varad or any other jesuit which if it be not so why do you spare they and do not execute they they be both in your power and prison but let we yet without condescend thereto admit that any of they have be faulty be all apostle for one judas to be punish shall I be think guilty for all theft and crime commit by they who have some time be my soldier etc. by this royal record learn m. rider that only for the smart fear to your fester ulcer the jesuit be odious to you chirurgeon to any grievous main or lightsomeness to blear and affect eye wherefore Celius as glasse-worme breed son in the pure grain and rype rose so envy nible or gnaw at they most who be good and who by virtue become glorious Syllius l. 17. o detestable ruin to mankind o envy smother all increase not suffer great desert to have their praise but as I say before plin. lib. 18. c. 16. your envious rancour make we as the graecian grass the worse we be use the more to flourish all our grief be for your interest thereby because as democrates say democrates the malicious do torment themselves as their own enemy if you can content yourselves spare not we who in deed wowld be extreme afflict Soneca Remed. for if Marcus Cato if the sage Lelius if Cato the young if both the scipio do condemn we but now to displease such be our great commendation to lie in wait and seek impiety in the just man house or in the society prou. 24.15 by forge how can it be but most desyrable s. Ambros. l. 2. interpell c. 2. 3. because our enemy intend to diffame we and not find any true occasion to they be constrain as s. Ambrose in like case say to forge false accusation therefore m. rider since that it be public know by all chief prince in the world affect and erect the jesuit in their common wealth and commit their conscience especial when they be most burdonsome to their sincerity and moderation that they can not be but godly learned and temperate for otherwise they will not so general and continual be admire for your own reputation sake how soever other the jesuit have impious restore the athenian temple erect by epimenides to contumely cit. l. 2. Ezech. 18.18 and impudency yet refrain you from attaint they since God be determine to suffer calumniator to perish in their iniquity and least that in the mean time you become to your profession a Balaam to Balac by bless they who it will have you as a mercenarian to curse otherwise experience will teach you that the hardness of the flint be to none better know then to they that strike it and that what soever iustle against thing strong and insuparable it struggle to the proper harm of itself to perclose my I fear as I say fruitless pain in your behalf s. aug. op. 162. either towards your reclaim from error or from misconceit of jesuit I say with s. augustin the heretic himself though swell with odious and disdainful pride and frantic with the testivenes of impious contention as I admonish lest he deceive the weakling and little on we that he be avoid so I refuse not by any mean possible to seek his amendment and reformation this mind not only I but every jesuit be of by obligation of our profession but say s. Hierome s. Hieron in ezech what avail it to teach if the hearer refuse to be instruct every one say he shall be judge according his desert thou if thou teach not he if he become not conformable which Hieremie the prophet confirm cap. 33. Hierem. s. Ambr. ser. 85. in most vehement term of protestation in regard thereof in the word and intention of s. Ambrose I have rather they to be accountable for obstinacy then that I shall be condemn for negligence s. aug. l. 1. trin. c. 2. and 3 it will not loathe i if I stagre to seek nor confownd i if I fail to learn wherefore whosoever read this where he be likewise certain let he proceed with i where he likewise dowbt let he inquire with i where he find his error let he return to i where he discover my error let he revoke i your well willer according Christ jesus Henry fitzsimon to the constant confessor of Christ now afflict for religion I have receive joial champion of Christ your several letter declare your afflict estate and your fix resolution therein to endure all calamity and to suffer the great extremity even of torment and death itself rather than to renounce the Catholic faith I may affirm that as I exceed rejoice to hear many of you say with s. Paul if we be immolate we rejoice philip. 2.18 and the self same thing do you also rejoice and congratulat with we so in regard of your exorbitant suffering I may also say with job I do some time weep over he that be oppress and my soul do condole with the poor job. 30.25 what you do crave at my hand be only to you with ghostly instruction towards subjection and not towards sedition to that you resign yourselves to your oppressor and not to resist they to induce you to fulfil your duty towards God and not to infringe your duty towards your prince seem to i so reasonable as neither can I nor will I suspend expect satisfaction that be in my power long than so as it may come to your notice to my think most convenient by be insert in my book against m. Rider which to you be dedicate and be now in forwardness towards you my method shall be according the principal particular of your information with more succinct brevity by how much in the resolution of f. person especial of the last edition many chapter be direct to the consolation of afflict catholic whereof I great commend to your careful read it against suppose difficulty it of fear of persecution and it of example of true resolution now then orderly to your complaint as at several time and by several of you they have be certify do I answer afflict catholic 1. 1 presuppose your compassionate disposition r. f. we certify your reverence that short after your departure namely 28. of septemb 1605. be publish without all allowance of any parliament to that effect sundry proclamation of speedy banishment to all priest of death to they and to their receiver whereby many priest abandon we and many of we eschew they if any remain and of utter ruin to any profess himself a Catholic by any duty or fact of his profession what soever by which their severity towards we find in they one opinion it to be a niceness and inconsideration in we to feel any oppression much more to complain thereof we be harden to tolerat their great violence as we best may and for our further constancy desirous to have your fatherly direction the author 1 I shall not deserve the reputation of be a member of Christ church 1. cor. 12.25 unless the say of s. Paul if one member suffer any thing all the member suffer with it may be verify in i for who of so flinty a nature and senseless disposition but the so excessive persecution of a people to all law so subject to all office so forward in all trial of loyalty so trusty to all defence of their prince and country so affectionate as that their ruler have often profess their servile and patient subjection not only to strive with but also to surmount their commander iniquity and extorsion but to every part of this first clause we be to have regard that first you note exact the particular time and other circumstance of your affliction be commendable and according the desire of s. Clement and Fabian primative pope and Damaso who ordain to that use certain notary or clerck who most diligent shall and record all particularity in the time of persecution which studious observation I request you still to follow second that your calamity proceed without all allowance of parliament or ordinary course of law only by bare proclamation do argue such to be the godly disposition of your nobility and the whole state of the country as that impiety and wrongfulnes can never presume to have their allowance the like in first Christianity happen in alexandrie euseb l. 6. c. 34. by testimony of Dyonise bishop thereof say before any edict or lawful permission of the emperor be obtain a whole year our persecution begin etc. whereas then you will be loath that any shall suffer beyond you or testify more their affection to their saviour and lord than you now that you know in this mention wrong that you be not incomparable or without corrival strive with they to patient with no less commendation than the alexandrian of who after deserve whereto s. Peter do imbowlden you in these word 1. pet. 3.13 who be he that may hurt you if you be emulator of good that be if you strive in all duty towards God that no other surpass you nether do you want example of tolerate their surmise of daintiness in you that you feel and especial that you complain of any smart for when God almighty be to deliver the child of Israel out of the servitude of Egypt exod. 3.7 it be say he for the austerity of they that be overseer of the work for when the israelit will sacrifice to God it be object against they that they be wanton exod. 5.17 and vacant and because they perform not their impossible task they be also whip so a man accuse the people of Israel who be in subjection and servitude under king Assuerus Esther 3.8 in all submission that it be not expedient they shall be insolent through licentiousness towards these also be you emulator in good that you repine not at what soever any before you have for their profession endure if your pastor or ghostly father have abandon you for terror of any proclamation by the assurance of Christ they have be mere hireling the good pastor say our saviour give his life for his sheep but the hireling and he that be not the pastor who own the sheep be not joa. 10.11.12 see the wolf come and leave the sheep and fly and the wolf raven and disperse the sheep and the hireling flee because he be a hireling and he have no care of the sheep if you also have eschew your ghostly father for timourousnes and threat of man first you have be far inferior to abdias steward to k. Achab 3. reg. 18.4 and jezabel for he when by jezabels sacrilegious impiety the prophet of God be persecute he I say alone preserve and nourish a hundred of they in feller under ground second you have lose the reward belong to your say ghostly father or which be all one the merit of hospitality which you may have use to Christ in person he that receive you say Christ to his disciple who he send to fructify in his church receive i mat. 10.40.41 and he that receive i receive he that send i he that receive a prophet in the name of a prophet shall receive the reward of a prophet three you have be thereby in evident peril of great damnation than which be due to the very sodomite and gomorrhean which also our savioure in the same chapter foretell say whosoever shall not receive you mat. 10.14.15 nor hear your word go forth out of the house or city shake of the dust of your foot amen I say to you it shall be more tolerable for the land of the sodomite and gomorrhean in the day of judgement then for that city in these duty the scripture exempt we from law of man command say a certain magistrate we command you act. 5.28.29 that you showld not teach in this name and behowld you have fill Jerusalem with your doctrine etc. but Peter answer and the apostle say God must be obey rather than man that you have a settle resolution to tolerat all extremity rather than to abjure your profession deserve much commendation in that especial the word of s Paul be to be understand patience be necessary for you that do the will of God you may receive the promise hebr. 20.36 and reason lead you thereto for it be a fix decree of God that if we will reign with Christ we must suffer for Christ 2. tim. 2.12 if we will be crown we must combat lawful 2. time 2.4 if we will be confess and avow by Christ be for God and his angel we must confess he before man luc. 12.8.9 it be know that the cup or chalice of Christ be sour that his standard be the cross that his crown be prick that his livery be read as of one that have tread the press and that his path isa 63.2 and of all his saint be the way of continual tribulation who then to be a Benjamin to Christ will not be content to have his cup find in his sack or to be on either of his side gen. 44.12 will not with the child of Zebede profess himself able to drink of his chalice mat. 20.22 who will to bear the victorious cross of Christ will not with heraclius emperor find himself in his bravery not to be able to move it but in his outward poverty with ease to transport it permit himself to be spoil of all state and magnificence 1. pet. 5.4 who hear in God assure word promise that when the prince of pastor shall appear we shall receive the incorruptible crown of glory and that bless be the man that suffer tentation for when he have be prove he shall receive the crown of life but in the mean time will endure thorn of reproach jac. 1.12 crown daily his ear who consider the most aspire arrogance of aman Hoster 6. ^ to have only intend to be adorn with the king apparel to ride on a horse appoint for the king saddle to have the king diadem upon his head but in all christian modesty shall be content to be of one livery with his God and all his dear belove satisfy to be mount on his god fair horse which be the cross of sufferance and acknowledge himself abundant glorify to wear his god diadem which in this world do only pierce and torment last who hear the broad way to lead to perdition mat. 7.13.14 psal 24.4 and the narrow way to conduct to life but from his hart will say with the prophet thy way o lord to i and teach i thy path afflict catholic 2. minister by who these proclamation be urge against we convert all their pulpit rail against the magistrate that now have the sword in their hand they do not destroy we promotor also pretend all forwardness to persecute we all unthrift bankrupt drunkard ho^r master and scurf of the kingdom offer themselves to be earnest spy zealous accuser adventurous assaulter of we nether r. s. a gentleman of your acquaintance after consume his whole estate in game and disdain to fulfil base office against we the author they that usurp the office of priest and preacher not be thereto canonica order by a lawful bishop but break into that function by unlawful favour or force s. Iren. l. 3. c. 3. tertul. praescrip. s. cypr. eccl. n. 7. s. aug. ep. 165. and con. ep. Manich. c. 4. joan. 10.10 s. aug. petil. l. 2. c. 83. contrary to all due election and holy ordnance they be as all principal father do interpret the thief or heretic that come not in among the flock by Christ the door but by violent intrusion such say our saviour come to steal and kill and destroy therefore s. augustin demand of they why they boast of clemency consider that they never can but they will hurt and if they be at any time mild that it be as the kite when be repulse from snatch away the chicken she counterfet the dove therefore their come into the flock to steal and kill and destroy be forewarn we be not to marvel that they fulfil their intention when opportunity be present and that your minister be the very thief so specify by our saviour these follow information of their own brother may be your assurance sebastianus Castellio in lib. c. 16. pag. 98. edit. an. 1578. brief they conspire with all to shed blood but by a strange hand because say they it be not lawful for we to kill any this be speak of caluinian who their brother in this and all other respect declare to resemble the scribe and pharisee for all impiety and arrogancy joan schutz lib. 50. in serpent pag. 155. for it be not sufficient for they that they have murder the sowl with false opinion but wheresoever they may disturb public peace and procure the body also to be slay they omit no diligence thereto that also the Lutheran minister be guide by like instinction and none of the brood free from this bloody spirit Lavath in 4. 1561. pag. 49. a. these word of do who and what they please they reject vex condemn banish and almost nail to cross and gibbet they almost enforce into flame and fire last if the magistrate will but for three day lend they their sword most cruel thunder lightning and thunder bowlt which will persecute to the three generation will ensue I add this testimony of Caluin himself to make the matter irrefragable calu. in admexi^ vlt. add joachimum and in harm they accuse the slackness of prince that with their unsheathe sword they do not forth with abolish the memory of their brother not believe Christ to be in the sacrament Erasmus who they make a saint in their calendar thus write of their whole crew of evangelical reformer as they will be call without exception Erasmus in I never enter their church but some time I have view they return from their sermon as if they be puff with a evil spirit in their countenance breathe all rancour and cruelty in manner as soldieour depart from their general exhort they to a conflict can you then afflict brother expect other measure at their hand nay rather rejoice that they who do undowbted impugn piety destroy god holy house corrupt his scripture profane his sacrament and blaspheme his church be the fire brand of combustion the intiser of destruction the bellows of spite and indignation against you such be the fruit of that tree approve it say their gospel thirst blood Erasm Germ. dangerous position pag. 140. Martin mar prelate ratify it profess reformation can not be without blood gaspart Colligni assure it repeat often I come not to send peace but the sword when therefore they swell with spite against you and their follower come from their sermon with eager famine joan. hay demand 4. Ministres tob. 12.13 and sharpen tooth to ruin and devour you you have occasion to glorify God because for be acceptable to God it be necessary that this tentation must prove you 2. tim. ^ 12 because for live godly in Christ jesus you must suffer persecution because if you have be without discipline whereof all be make partaker than have you be as God word affirm bastard and no child heb. 12.8 tertul. in Apologet. c. 42. also for the residue of your pursuivant and betrayer they be as conformable to the old enemy of christian as your profession be the same of old primative and often persecute christian Tertullian declare such promotor to have be public ba^d^s juggler magician euseb l. 4. c. 25 cheater etc. and Meliton specify they at another time to have be impudent and perverse sycophant and revenous thief learning can never have a enemy but one idiot nor virtue but a s. cypr. ep. 55. n. 1. nor religion but a infidel therefore think with s. cyprian say it import not who betray or rage whereas God permit thou to be betray who he appoint to be crown nether be it reproachful to we to suffer what Christ suffer even of our brother neither be it glorious to they to judas concern the gentleman r. s. of who you inform I admire little that he who now above six year have imitate their dissolute and libert in life shall at leinth profess their barren and broad belief for one depth tend to another and as Cicero say cic. brut. in some so great be the perversity that have find corn yet they choose to feed on ackorn so do the prodigal child forsake the abundance of bread in his father house to feed on husk among swine alas that the branch of so noble a stock shall sequester itself from the lyfe-giving vine joan. 15.5 and ent or graft itself in the dead solifidian figtree upon which Christ find but leaf only say never grow their fruit of thou for ever and in which as affirm mat. 21.19 eccl. 34.11 he that be implant or graff will abownd with wickedness I will humble request almighty God that he resemble not the dissolute young man who the comical poet long since thus describe the beardless youth his regent lose to horse and hound incline to wander round thirst for new content ply to vice perverse to his advisers sound lavish play with unthrift all his good and rent haughty wanton waver headlong to new intent but how be not their triumph lamentable that rejoice of his fall into their misery it be say long since by Christ every branch in i not bear fruit joan. 15.2.6 such as long time he have be know to be he will take it away again if any abide not in i he shall be cast forth as the branch and shall wither their extremity be to be deplore who when they purchase the only wither and cast away branch the light chaff and no sound grain of corn the dead carcase and no live member they applaud as at a rich prize let we at least amend his condition which as I daily crave at God divine bounty so I most instant commend it to the earnest prayer of all that shall hear or read this answer afflict chatolicks 3. during their preparation continual threat be blunder abroad that papistry be now with all speed to be abolish that the gospel be to be establish that every one maugre his profession shall come to church etc. church be repair upon such assurance minister and their wife and child as also promoter and catch pole take upon they high look and furnish themselves with unwonted apparel and other provision in confidence of their increase revenue what soever we have either land or house or horse or jewel etc. they eye and predestine to themselves either by way of fine or bribe or mortgage the author first concern their vaunt to extinguish religion they do no more than before they diocletian and maximian who be then the only and most potent infidel emperor of the whole world these two employ all their wit and power to suppress christianity which beyond all admiration augment by suffering and prevail by destruction when the two roman emperor so oppose themselves will not seem to have employ their travail in vain they have command all christian through all place to be most cruel torment to death Finaly to persuade that they have vanquish they for perpetual memory of their noble victory cause to be engrave in marble pillar among other title of glory tom. 2. anno. 304. pag. 850. edit. an. 1591. the name of christian abolish the superstition of Christ in all place extinguish the worship of the god amplify but find by daily experience that the blood of martyr be the seed of christian tertul. scapula^ and in apologetic and that they do strive against the stream they both together for save of their credit surrender their imperial dignity conceal which after be know the cause to have be that truth and piety have utter confound they like be the dismal threat as also like impiety and like success of Luther say that if he may preach but two year long his evangelical doctrine Cochleus in act 1525. there shall not be find pope cardinal bishop monk nun steepel bell mass etc. yet experience disprove this prophet notwithstanding his preach two and twenty year beyond the prefix term there be never more filial affection towards pope more officiousness towards cardinal more subjection towards bishop more reverence towards monk more benevolence towards nun more expense towards church steeple and bell and more fervent devotion towards the dreadful sacrifice of the mass then be now at this present be above a hundred year after Luther vain prediction but while they vain vaunt against our profession they unfeigned acknowledge one to another which in vain they conceal it be to every one notorious that themselves do sensible vanish in epist. I call to witness their own word whersoever we turn our eye behold the troop of Christ almost nothing be so frequent as new dissension of our teacher increase error in praefat. in catal. Concil. a 4. and recantation of our principal doctor another say pulpit begin to disgust i wherein such poison hatred and contention tend to ruin be observe joan. Spangebergius in an. 1562. another say hence forward they will acknowledge no god to wit because they decline from their Protestant profession which late they have receive but this notorious decay be acknowledge in express term by Gallus Gallus in praef. apol. hom. say by the just judgement of God true religion and the church do perish not by arm of enemy Amsdorf in confession Wormatia 1557. not by argument of heretic but by our own treachery infidelity carelessness Finaly say Amsdorff all thing nothing more than that the gospel be perish among we and that in place of the gospel will remain mere and enorm error to the same effect it be to be understand that when the puritan begin to multiply and dangerous to impugn parliament protestant so call because they frame their profession according to parlamental statute the say parliament protestant to make they odious reveal principal by two book all Puritan design as well display what their consistorial discipline be as to what destruction of all religion it aim one of these book be entitle the survey of the pretend holy discipline the other dangerous position by virtue of which book and of other of like subject as a treatise of ecclesiastical discipline the remonstrance the 5. book of the law of eccl. the answer to the abstract etc. the cause of puritan seem so detestable to the state that ever since more and more they in their wysdomes thought good to suppress they now in the last year 1606. the unquiet puritan collect all abuse that may be object in the profession of parliament protestant they have dedicate their say book to his majesty appeal to his oath by the great name of the lord in pag. 23. that he will defend according his power all the day of his life under the pain contain in the law and danger both of body and soul in the day of God fearful judgement the altogether puritanical liturgy of Scotland this book in requital of the former seruey against they they have also name a survey of the book of common prayer now to our former purpose that protestancy and puritancy be together decay be aver in this new survey first pag. 160. they relate that the late archbishop of Canturburie upon remorse utter these word good lord when shall we know what to trust to and that sudden he be surprise with a palsy be carry from the cowrt and die short after a plain demonstration that all their profession hitherto invent want all assurance and fade away like a smoke brief in the say survey the puritan acknowledge their own delusion also to be at a say the time decline fast to popery these time be decline to popery pag. 52. pag. 105. whereas therefore their threat of our decay be but like the die candle which before quench cast out great flamm in the name of God i. joan. 2.24 Galat. 1.9 that which you have hear from the begin as s. John advise let it remain in you to which s. Paul accord if any preach otherwise then you have already receive be be accurse for if you be wise you will not for any threat exchange the sure foundation and rock against which the gate of hell shall never prevail for the sandy foolish man choice which for rain fall thereon for wound blow mat. 16.16 mat. 7.27 and fludd come be ruin and surmount such as be this new invisible profession by the rain of man will like a figure form in sand deface and by wynd of opposition and fludd of oblivion upon the point to be utter overwhelm so that their church which they say first be invisible because they can produce no predecessor among christian that ever have believe as they do be now again by their own confession vanish out of sight this epigram shall be allow to be after a short time true you hold your church invisible till Luther time with Luther also have it lose all beauty prime and now invisible it grow with Luther dead so invisible the membre and the head invisible in deed they be as deep in hell for utter darkness darken all that there do dwell so first it be obscure as fetch from lightles pit it be so again as drown where Lucifer do sit 5. reg. 1. 5. 9 19 if your minister and promotor like Adonias before their time have furnish themselves insolent they be not therefore great to be malign for that sinner by impiety come often to wealth psal 72.12 the prophet David fortould say behowld the very sinner and abownd in the world have obtain riches upon which place say s. augustin s. aug. in psal 72. how many be they that by riot as ox and cow do march to their destruction and sing prou. 1.33 and dawnse do dispose their voyage to hell prosperity of fool will destroy they say the proverb for as follow in the wiseman sap. 14. 28. either while they rejoice they be mad or true they foretell lie in their madness they blaspheme God and his saint and his people in their prediction of lie among other may be number if they tell that you will apostate from religion honour they as true pastor defy papistry and that so do you will do according to the gospel they occasion i to remember one selius in martial who infer there be no god because forsooth that he often blaspheme he yet thereby live in great prosperity martial li. 4. epig^ no God heaven vain affirm selius and proud it for that he be prosperous deny they and always glorious Cicero be able to say of such man cic. l. 1. office the most of such be forgetful of equity when they fall into the aspire desire of rule honour and glory so that they do but according to the wont of arrogant people when they insult upon vain expectation I wish for their creditors sake that it be never hear what Caluin well experience in the like of himself and his brother write of his fellow minister I will faithful translate part of his plain declaration omit the latin this time for brevity sake Caluin lib. pag. 65. 66. some of they say he write as I say of minister wonderful cunning to snatch leave they forlorn in nakedness to who they promise mountain of gold some what alm they receive either they spend it in whore or play or other riot some what they borrow they consume lavishlye in idleness and in these crime they have often assistance of their wife some uncleanliness ensue wherewith this answer shall not be defile only as I say I crave that our minister and catchpowl defraud not their creditor afflict catholic 4. although their doctrine to every one be know to be uncertain even among themselves and they in continual discord yet they strive to enforce we to renounce our belief they propound no other belief out of controversy among themselves which we may safe profess for every part thereof the author I esteem it a especial favour of God divine bounty that although they bend all their power and industry to deprive you of teacher and book yet that he supply by natural reason that you perceive their doctrine to be waver and consequent unlawful for s. Paul in assurance thereof Apostolicalye advise we hebr. 13.9 with variable and strange doctrine be not lead away I have before show their doctrine to be uncertain in as much as the late archbishop of Canturburie survey of the book of common prayer pag. 160. in desperate manner exclaim good lord when shall we know what to trust unto the puritan who among you rule at least in good will the roast in the end of their late survey do affirm that they neither will nor may consent to the religion commend in the book of common prayer the humble petition of 22. preacher in London and the suburb thereof conjoin as one abridgement to the foresay survey first because they can not make any reasonable sense of part of it second because it contain contradiction three because it contain untruethe fowerthly because it aver doubtful matter five because scripture be disgrace in it six because manifest untruethe as scripture be teach therein seventh because it injoin unlawful ceremony eight because it contain prayer implicate contradiction nienth because certain epistle gospel collect savour of superstition ten because it corrupt translate scripture I may add more whereas therefore innumerable be the puritan in as much as a thousand preacher for every minister among they must be such oppose themselves to the other protestant and all these do contradict the Protestant profession hitherto establish you have reason to admire and all the world to be astonish that you shall be enforce to believe what so many of themselves think to be so impious pag. 163. nay I add somewhat more out of the foresay survey see say they some of the bishop themselves namely the bishop of wincester profess they will not subscrib to every thing contain in the book of common prayer etc. then say I no catholic have any reason to subscrib thereto until at least they among themselves have other consent then with Edward to destroy what Henry have determine with Elizabeth to disprove Edward belief and with his majesty now reign to control the belief of Elizabeth for if the scripture by they publish must after be amend as former corrupt and the communion book as false be correct they be often amend and correct as such I can not conceive how all the frame build upon such foundation by good consequence must not also be false and corrupt as for their dissension I need discover no more than be already say in treat of the communion of saint what will be the issue thereof luc. 11.14 Christ declare say every kingdom divide against itself shall be make desolate I can not therefore blame they that they will rather be impudent some time in deny such division to be among they or in affirm it not to be for any material point then by profess it to condemn the impiety of their whole cause but it be conceal only in woodcock manner the beck be hide and all the rest discover for it be not for cap or surplice bell or organ that now they stand but say they a little before because the form of religion establish be senseless imply contradiction contain untruethe aver doubt commend false scripture injoin unlawful ceremony use incoherent prayer allow superstitious epistle gospel and collect and deprave scripture what can be main and important imputation and improbation if these be not and all this they a firm even of the book of common prayer now explain by his majesty authority pag. 26. and pag. 161. which their detestation of the say book be so abundant in their heart that by their mouth yea and writing they impeach all bishop and other minister that justify the say book to be dumb dog and idol shepherd the shame and bane of the church of God pag. 166. and the 2. epist. of the 22. London preacher pag. 159. etc. by idol in this place understand the say book of common prayer as by this their 198. quere or demand be insinuate whether reasonable and indifferent man may not think that bishop make a idol of the book of common prayer etc. before I perclose this point I can not but require of our puritan how they be not ashamed that in their millenary petition to his majesty they profess themselves Puritan petition @. 1. the number of more than a thousand greave under a common burden they have so shrink in the trial as 1. Novemb. 1605. there can be find but 277. to be as much as in question but 70. to be deprive of their living survey pag. 161. but 113. not suffer to preach and about 94. to be under admonition be not these fit compagnions to who you shall yourselves who in so short a time without all torment can command themselves to conformity with that which they have before so exorbitant condemn of all defectuositie rather embrace the advice of s. Paul say therefore my belove brother be stable and unmoveable 1. cor. 15.58 that now we be not child waver and carry about with every wind of doctrine ephes 4.14 afflict catholic 5. to proceed with more dreadful ostentation nothing be omit that may seem convenient to terrify timorous mind many commissioner and not a few of they of the base sort be appoint martial law and marshal with compagny of horseman be ordain to scour the country to make away priest and rogue it be death to travail from place to place without passport and by this course as every martial might so many do for revenge and malice put diverse without all form of process to death another lawless be by search door chest cuppboord be break and rifle and house ransack like a fort win by conquest it be the sport of searcher to behold the tear of house howlder the tremble of all the family and to hear the scrithching of woman and child small box and caskett must have be search for priest all that come into their net be fish our jewel for be Agnus this our silver bowl for be chalice out best attire for be church ornament a three be by fine in several cowrt some in one day be compel to feed the greediness of officer of four diverse cowrt and our refuse the oath of allegiance as for it of the supremacy to satisfy the puritan it be suppress be make a matter of the star chamber these fine be unmeasurable to our quality yet if we consent not sudden to satisfy they first they clapp we up into prison and then they themselves in all tulmutuous manner resort to our house take notice of all our substance value every thing at a ridiculous rate to all but to they that be entitle in the good and of all together gold merchandise corn howsowld stuff evidence apparel they make up their fine if it exceed not all the mean of the party convey away as much as serve their own turn and intend to return by some pretext or other if their remain any thing to their advantage the author a lamentable declaration wherein the commissioner marshal search synes violence oppression and impoverishment of innocent subject do altogether make up a noble persecution comparable to some of they of primative christian I read a relation of Dyonisius bishop of alexandrie record bv Eusebius in his history and altogether like but that it contain far great calamity sustain by primative christian information deserve for your consolation to behold the faith then persecute yet to flourish and in vain to be impugn to be impart to you euseb lib. 6. hist. c. 34. before any edict or proclamation of the emperor for the space of a whole year begin our persecution wherein it seem the great sacrifice that they can offer to their idol to imbrue themselves with the blood and slaughter of christian they crush the body and pick out the eye of old and in the end stone he because he will not recant they draw the virtuous Quincta to their temple and when she detest their sacrilege they trail she by the heel through the street bruise she against the stone after they tear she with scourge and in the end they also stone she to death then with one consent without all commission or warrant they rush into the house of godly christian every one betray his neighbour and extrude he out of door ransack and spoil all his wealth and howsehowld stuff purloin what soever be to his purpose or all that be precious and throve into the street or fire the residue so that every corner seem a place give up to the pillage of ravenous enemy etc. this be in deed a merciless martial law not subject to the law of all nation nor to it of the twelve table among the roman deut. cap. 13.6 c. 19.15 nor to it in God law that etc. none without lawful witness shall be condemn to think that you be so use in a christian common wealth wherein every one be foorthcoming upon all citation and warning and wherein justice without all impediment may hold her natural course pardon i it can for the enormity sink into my mind neither will it enter into the conceit of any christian imagination that the rigour of justice shall not be think sufficient sever against innocent catholic without extend against they the martial iniquity or lawlessness which be no where follow but where effusion of blood or probable destruction of a whole army be prevent by a hasten private execution without ordinary process and if it be true survey of the book a common prayer pag. 123. which I read in the puritan survey that parliament act may not be explain but by authority of parliament and consequent law make by parliament as all true law if I he not deceive shall be can not be infringe but by contrary act of parliament then have I great cause to distrust this information by how much puritan the bloody trompetor to all cruelty against catholic do repute by this testimony such violence to be unlawful because it be not warrant by any act of parliament I take hold in this place of part of a speech have at Norwich 4. of August before the assize to testify what their own opinion be of promotor print at London this very year 1607. under the title of the l. coke his speech and charge towards the end wherein be say the promoter be both a beggar and a knave a little after their office I confess be necessary and yet it seldom happen that a honest man be employ in it a good verdict or rather a good sentence be from that sage judge but concern your heavy disaster if such course as you speak of be follow it be most pertinent to dismay dastard mind I say dastard mind for the just christian be confident as a lion prou. 28.1 say the word of God add after prou. 30.30 which as the strong of beast be never terrify at any incowntre therefore in the business of God or profession of our belief say Christ fear you not they that kill the body mat. 10.28 and be not able to kill the soul again see that you be not trouble for these thing must be do mat. 24.6 brother shall deliver brother unto death and the father his son and the child shall rise against their parent and shall work their death and you shall be odious to all man for my name but be that shall endure to the end shall be save a most happy conclusion of the former sorrow and fare great good then in comparison whereof the great grief may not be the chief gain rom. 8.18 so esteem s. Paul say for I think that the passion of this time be not condign to the glory to come that shall be reveal in we so that all that ever you have or may loose by such adversity account it more gainful then have you put it to great usury Christ jesus be our assurance thereof mat. 19.29 affirm every one that have leave house or brother or sister or father or mother or wife or child or land for my name sake shall receive a hundred fowld and shall possess life everlasting which s. Paul as every true christian be bind do believe when he say philip. 3.7.8 the thing that be gainful to i those have I esteem detriment yea but I esteem all thing disproffitable for the pass knowledge of jesus my lord for who I have make all thing as detriment and do esteem they as dung that I may gain Christ so do the Hebrew believe they to who the same apostle gratulate the spoil of your own good hebr. 10.34.35 you take with joy know that you have a better and permanent substance do not therefore lose your confidence which have a great remuneration which be so true as be affirm by the truth itself what merchant adventure all their stock what husband man spend all his seed what usurer expose all his wealth what gamester hazurding all his thrift upon uncertainty but may exclaim at we if we think that stock lose which be lay out for so excessive gain that seed perish which be spend in so fertile soil that interest desperate which be assure by more than bond of the staple and that chance distrustful which can not possible mischance judie 7.20 4. reg. 2.23 Gedeon have be unwise if for spare earthen pot he will have fail of so great a victory Elias have be mad if he have account of the loss of his cloak when he be in the way to paradise gen. 39.12 joseph have be indiscreet if he have prefer his garment to his danger 1. reg. 25.22 Abigail have be destroy have she not prevent to utter ruin with loss of part of her substance therefore to come to the eternal triumph let we not regard the destruction of our earthe-pitcher to go more free to heaven let we not stagger to let fall from we our superfluity to be undefiled from sin let we be content to escape naked to redeem a great and eternal inconvenience s. bern. hom. in etc. let we abandon our corruptible commodity and mammon of iniquity for if the former word of our saviour as s. Bernard say fill cloister with religious and desert with hermit when they may have enjoy their commodity peaciblie and together follow the duty of their profession towards God what remiss slackness nay what distrust of Christ promise and what disdain of his dignity and disloial impiety towards so divine a redeemer and lord will it be for all worldly respect together to abjure yea or to dissemble our belief and expectation their search priest in box and caskett do either that they believe you can do more than God almighty by seem to imagine that you can convey a man body into a unnatural straitness whereas Christ say they can not dispose his body into a small host or else that they be now more faithful towards Christ power to that effect than they be before and so infer that by his supernatural power and providence priest may be hide where natural reach can not conjecture which be not by they much misconceave for some time although at other time priest fall into their snare yet say s. Paul to such surprise philip. 1.28.29 be you in nothing terrify by the adversary which to they be cause of perdition but to you of salvation and that of God for to you it be give for Christ not only that you believe in he but also that you suffer for he and that always as I say they do not misconceive but that supernaturaly priest in our time may be and have be preserve this relation follow assure I have be present when diverse worshipful person have corpora depose the truth thereof and the principal party mention be yet live with that reputation that impudency itself may not except against they for deserve any discredit in Dona Moor seven mile from Dublin in Irland m. Richard Bealing justice of peace dwell when catholic be persecute under the lord Graye about the year of Christ 1580. he be a eminent person be accuse by syr. r. d. the blind knight and blood sucker that he harbour one Patrick a priest even then to be find in his house searcher be in all have send for at that time james Fitz Maurice doctor sanders and diverse other come into the country have make the state jealous towards matter of religion as they environ the house the mother of God our b. lady appear to mistress Bealing say send instant to syr. Patrick that he discend into such a cave or seller and that remove a stone in such a corner he further descend by stair where they shall conduct he which she although once or twice admonish suppose it to be a dream neglect till at leinth in visible manner with admirable beauty and brightness the immaculate queen of heaven object herself and renew the commandment so district that she prompt procure it to be fulfil be a godly priest of unspotted life and rare zeal my quondam school fellow who of purpose I visit upon his death bed and from himself beside all other receive the assurance of this declaration when he remove the stone he find in deed the degree or stair of five or six step guide he to a small neat chamber of some 20. foot long and 12. foot broad wherein a bed and chair be due place he be bestow in his cabinet the searcher come in with all diligent inquiry seek every place of the house every cellar and corner but all in vain after three day frantic to be frustrate and weary to inquire without hope of their purpose they depart by mistress Bealing be repeal out of his wherein he have all that time abound with spiritual delight they cover again the place never after by any inquiry be able to find so much as any show thereof remain wherefore at least some time narrow and unnatural place may by God divine providence serve to conceal miraculous what he will not have discover whereof innumerable like instance may if brevity permit be allege and as for the several courl to which you be draw it be no marvel that you have disdain thereof for what have the innocent catholic to answer in the king bench where crime against the crown or common wealth be examine what in the star chamber where perjury impostur slandre be punish especial their case be not that they have perjure but that they will not perjure what in the common plea where controversy between party be decide they common be so rightful as rather not to claim their due then to have any thing due upon they what in the escheaker where fine toll and tribute be exact they never be slack to any satisfaction of that kind what in the chawncerie where profession be make to mitigat the rigour of other court and to diminish their duty by conscionable moderation there ^^ing no such matter intend towards afflict catholic but rather the contrary and so of the residue in the mean time the comfort of the say afflict catholic be that all these extremity be not only now know to Christ but also by he be long ago fortould say they shall deliver you up in counsel mar. 13.9 and in synagog shall you be beat and you shall stand before precedent and king for my sake for a testimony unto they since therefore he declare mat. 5.11.12 that bless be you when they shall revile you and persecute you and speak all that nought be against you untrue for my sake be glad and rejoice for your reward be very great in heaven the least that you may do in all the court be to say with the prophet David I have announce thy justice in a great congregation psal 39.10.11 behold I will not debar my lip o lord thou know thy justice I have not hide in my hart I have speak thy truth and thy salvation etc. afflict catholic 6. infinite be the affront that we sustain if we walk abroad or frequent our neighbour we be tax to be to public and popular if we be retire and private at home we be censure to plot secret machination if we be of cheerful countenance we be calumniate to be feed with foreign hope if we be mournful we be condemn to be mal-content if we be frugal and spare we be misdeem to detest their conversation if we be lavish we be malign for our abundance if any malign and molest we he be zealous if any condole or compassionate our calamity he be dangerous if any will frustrate our claim debt or other right it common suffice to object that we be recusant the author I have note in my accompagny some time the army that every nation as they be more noble do covet the vawntgard in danger of conflict with such honourable ambition that some time they break into contention for it such emulation as I say before be most commendable in Christ quarrel that every one aspire to be of the most afflict you therefore without partiality compare your adversity with they of primative christian may find your measure so mean as that you be to complain rather of want then of excess to all the particular allege it may first in general be say that as you esteem not a reproach of one frantic the misconceit of your pale to be read and your read to be pale by one that be blind or goggle eye or that behold through miscoloured spectacle so shall you rather compassionate the frenzy of their error and the blindness or skewdnes or miscoloured spectacle of their profession than any way feel their censure during their be so distemperat delude you will have they judge right of you their judgement be pervert towards Christ his church his sacrament and all his truth pray therefore with Anna mother to Samuel repent with Magdalen fast with s. johan Baptist although Heli condemn you of drunkenness Simeon the Pharisee of unworthiness to aveere Christ and the jew of have a devil next s. Basil seem to comprise the principal of all your molestation in these word s. Basil ep. 73. forgery without all fear be bruit abroad truth be obscure and they that be in deed accuse be sudden condemn without judgement but they that accuse without all examination be credit but what be this to the oppression of your constant predecessor euseb l. 5. c. 1. who be as they write themselves by public edict prohibit to enter into any common house booth market or to come abroad out of door s. justin in Apologet. every christian say s. justin be exclude from his possession and in all the world none permit to live in quietness which venerable beda in the act of the say justin martyr thus relate they can not buy aught to their need nor sell in public place yea water be to they deny unless with great disgrace to idol they give frankincense by impious offence couradge therefore my heart but not for my provocation but for the glorious apostle s. Paul who as in doctrine he animate most noble so in life he be a most heroical example by his own testimony 2. tim. 47. say I have a good fight I have consummate my course I have keep the faith concern the rest there be lay up for i a crown of justice he I say have lay before we the worthy combat of first believer hebr. 12.1 thus infer and therefore we also have so great a cloud of witnese put upon we lay away all weight and sin that compass we by patience let we run to the fight propose unto we which be speak by that worthy instrument of God praise it may seem presumption to add any thing thereto and a unworthy imagination of your zeal to think any further incouradgment to be requisite afflict catholic 7. they not be able through God mercy to pervert any one of we of any account to their profession they at least for their own profit can invert and their profession to our further encumbrance for beside imprisonment fine bribe exact in general they extort 12. pen for every one of competent age that be absent from their church or sunday or holy day now the holy day which before they can not abide that God may be glorify by and in they they urge now to be observe that themselves may be advance by they the author the variable application of their doctrine goodman lib. how we ought to obey superior magistrate be deserve by you observe when it be for their purpose as in queen Mary day they find it unlawful that woman shall reign but in q. Elizabeth day that unlawfulness be lawful Knox in (@) appellation pag. 36. conference at Hampton pag. 81. in Scotland they find it lawful that the queen dowager grand mother to his majesty may be supreme head of the church but when they multiply and catholic be suppress even by testimony of his majesty they not only change their doctrine but also violent deprive she of all liberty to use even in a private chamber her conscience so they encroach into Geneva as appear in treat of puritancy your challenor can not first allow any marriage of minister but now the spirit have so move he that after once be marry and plentiful multiply he have take a second wife do not puritan by their own confession to their immortal infamy dispense with their conscience as they write they elf in respect of time to subscrib to the book in supplication to his majesty in apr. 1603. some upon protestation some upon exposition give they some with condition rather than the church shall be deprive of their labour and ministry it have be true to have say rather than their riotous life shall have be deprive of fat benefice and plenty yet now we to the number of more than a thousand etc. do forsooth find great enormity and abuse in that whereto we have before subscribe but there need no further evidence when we have the guilty acknowledge as now for former and they the mean respect that they have chap and change unlawful to be lawful in their profession his crime otherwise this theme may worthy be more ample prosecute to come to the only point by you propownd synod Dord an. 1574. dear 48. of feast they have be in deed most variable first in their synod of dordrect in the 48. decree be say it be conclude the only Sunday shall be keep cornel. schult l. 9 hierarchy Anacriseos a second synod of they allow only above sunday the feast of the nativity another at Midleburg synod Midleb an. 1581. decret. 51. in the 51. decree permit the nativity and the ascension another in the electoral Palatinat add the two monday next easter and whitsontyde and in the foresay supplication of puritan to his majesty supplication to his majesty an. 1603. they again disallow all other except fondaye for they crave that the lord day be not profane and the rest not so strict urge where upon the answer of Oxford inquire the awnswer of Oxford pag. 13. will they have man upon holy day go to plough or ^art as some of their humour have cause their servant to do on the very feast of Christ nativity survey of the book of common prayer pag. 65. and this be the doctrine of their late survey wherein first they declare that minister proclaim any other holy day than the day of the lord do communicate the especial honour of the lord to another second that thereto they have no warrant of the word pag. 66. three in the 52. quere or demand they inquire whether any holy day on fix time though only and immediate unto the lord may be sanctify so as at no time thereof any work may be do fowerthly pag. 67. they conclude that it be all one to make any holy day without God express appointment as to violate any day holy by his appointment yea that it be as great idolatry as it be in the israelit pag. 68 to have set up a calf five that if the translation of the sabbaoth into Sunday be not justify by scripture it be not lawful for christian to sanctify it for the justify whereof these only to their seem be the principal fundation joan. 20.19.26 first that Christ appear to his disciple the door be shut and say peace be unto they second they cite the first chapter of the act and 13. verse wherein I find no mention of Sunday or reason of sanctify it for therein be only relate how the apostle go up to a chamber 1. cor. 16.2 and do abide therein three because s. Paul wish collection of alm for the necessity of the poor to be collect on the first day which be our Sunday of or after the sabbaoth behowld these feeble reason be by they exhibit that way be make to take even the sunday away no impediment thereto be specify in any of these reason and so as appear in the examination of the creed they behave themselves towards the divine mystery of the trinity and unity sound it on the weak proof it have of scripture as if there be no other and in the end Stancar lib. Trinit. and Schlusselb cal. show those proof to be no proof of any force and infer thereupon that Christ and the holy ghost be not coequal to the father which sacrilegious impiety be with all heynousce charge on Caluin by his own brother and Schlusselburg and for their proof they cite Genes. 3.15.22 Genes. 18.2.3 gen. 19.24 num. 24.17 isa 4.2 isa 43.24 isa 50.4.6 isa 53.8 isa 63.1 jerem. 11.19 jerem. 31.22 dan. 2.34 Osc. 13.14 joan. 10.30 joan. 14.1.28 in all which place and many more what soever proof be by the ancient father bring for Christ eternity or divinity he deflect into a contrary sense or disgrace they for manifold insufficiency contrariwise he seem to find Synephim p. hadriani ^ang^ l. 3. c. 6. pag. 306. but one only argument for Christ eternity which be that God by his people wowld be term father and consequent must have a son whereby not withstand no eternity of Christ be gather at lest before God people be create this a gument be leave to the decision of the first that will ponder it Caluin thereby insinuate that the eternity of Christ have no better proof and so as I say be it the intention of puritan to find the sanctification of any holy day whatsoever upon argument of no worth that in the end they may be think to be without all lawful allowance by the premise you may behold that your Puritan minister such as almost only be among you think in all their synod and other resolution no such holy day to be yet for 12. pen of each parishioner their mercenarian conscience to be able to find all their synod and resolution false which show they in the mean time to have perfect liberty of such conscience as may strive with the rain bow for variety therefore they be sufficient know to blow can and heat from one mouth which be so notorious in all the reform brood that themselves write eberus prafat in Comment. Philippi epist. cor. some of their preacher to inflect turn and return their religion to the will and wantoness of their lord and congregation who contentment they search more than the glory of God this Eberus next successor to Philipp melancthon expound his commentary upon s. Paul write of the brotherhod who Peucer son in law to the say melancthon testify Poucer paula^ Torgensibas a 1574 to have be himself and mayor so mutable as that in a instant quite change reject that which even now they hold for certain they will aver the contrary so that from first to last their variable doctrine according to every time and commodity be detect you may have consolation that these be your infester to who profession it can not but be a credit to be repugnant afflict catholic 8. of the few that have shrink in this trial either by God judgement or by some other secret cause they be little respect and less advance by the adverse party and in themselves so great a remorse be observe that neither in countenance nor in hart can they be comfortable whereby very many have take occasion to remain more setle in their profession the author it argue a great wisdom in his majesty and the state not to esteem our chameleon compagnions when they become false to their religion theod. l. 5. c. 38. for as the glorious Hormisda say to the k of Persia Tripart l. 10. c. 30. sir your majesty deceive himself in affect our renounce Christian religion for if we become treacherous towards God we shall never be loyal towards man Niceph. l. 14. c. 20. so ever will it be experience in all other apostate and gnathonical sycophant of king who they will approve Ennius as Ennius say with fortune do change their fidelity retire when the barrel be empty Constantius a most famous emperor and father of constantin the great Arrian lib. 2. in consider these flexible parasite to be as arrianus affirm a everlasting destruction to king as feed their ear with lie their eye with hypocrisy and their understanding with error he to be free from they use this most industrious and prudent stratagem whereas he only in mind favour christian it never be know but that he worship idol as all emperor before he use he summon all christian of his court euseb l. 6. c. 32.33 l. 7. c. 10. to his presence to who they be assemble he say whereas many of you or all do despise the worship of our god and follow Christ this be now to advertise you that either you must renounce your christianity or depart from my court take therefore in this place your choice either to yourselves to my appointment and then yourselves on this side or persist obstinate in your profession remove yourselves to that side diverse renownce sudden and shamles their religion but the most of they present constant profess their fix resolution to be rather not only to loose the emperor favour but also their very life then to abjure their saviour which be perceive by the emperor convert himself to the apostat he say you wretched miscreant that have for uncertain expectation of base fortune falsify your faith to God I can never but expect faythlesnes from you towards i and therefore instant avoid out of my sight and contrariwise you other remain loyal towards your god I elect you as most trustful about my person and fit to be which afterward he fulfil towards they place in all office of trust in the common wealth what will this most judicious emperor have do if he shall be hold so many catholic with Clisophus to counterfeit lamb because k. Philipp of Macedon limp with Carisophus to offer his face to k. Dyonisius his spit protest that his spittle seem to he as sweet as honey with Lelius to offer to Cesar to form and deform himself to every fashion and fancy and for his sake to be ready to tear his brother breast to out his father throat to murder his wife yea god to despoil and temple all to burn jucan doubtless he will disclaim and disavow they for be of his cowrt or with who any honest man may covet conversation so will Frederick the three emperor who be demand of all his favourite who he most affect do answer s. greg. l. 1. ep. 33. such as fear i no more than God almighty according to which say s. Gregory the great he will be only faithful to thou that love thou more than thy gift whereas therefore say the wise man wickedness be timorous sap. 17.11 and give testimony of condemnation for always the trouble conscience forethink cruel matter whereas such fickle and faithless friend do find as the prophet say that they have put a lie for their hope isa 28.15 whereas they approve the certainty of holy job say job. 3.13 the hope of hypocrite shall decay and of salomon the hope of wickedman shall perish prou. 10.28 can you blame they to be of heavy hart and countenance can you blame he to be heavy pensive and almost frantic who state the foresay holy job thus specify job. 15. the sound of terror be always in his ear and although it be in time of peace yet he always expect some treason against he he believe not that he can rise again from darkness to light expect on every side the sword to come upon he when he sit down to eat he remember that the day of darkness be ready at hand for he tribulation terrify he and anguish of mind inviron he even as a king be environ with soldier when he go to war s. Chrysostome avear this description say of one have such hellish conscience s. Chrys. hom. 8. pop. Antioch his accuser he always carry about with he and as he can not fly from himself so neither can he escape from the inward accuser by which he be continual persecute and scourge with incurable jerk o miserable plight whereby that endless worm do butcher and gnaw the mind in Scythica Prometheus martial l. 1. as love owg gorge bird in endless need on prome bind on Caucas rock do always feed not so the quiet conscience not so the secure conscience say the holy ghost prou. 15.15 1 cor. 1.12 1. joan. 3.21 be as a continual banquet the testimony of our conscience be our glory when our conscience do not reprehend we we have confidence with God as if it shall be say when security of conscience want in lieu of banquet their be a continual loathsomeness when the testimony of conscience be not good but reproachful for glory be to be expect confusion when the conscience do not defend but reprehend for confidence incroch despair according to which say s. augustin s. aug. in praefat. ps 31. and in ps 34. he who the guilt of conscience do pinch retire back from hope and hope nothing but despair bless therefore they who other man harm do make to be ware and who by the anguish of these cain by the perplexity of these antioche and by the despair of these judae do eschew the guilt of conscience by which anguish of mind perplexity of thought and despair of salvation be engender afflict catholic 9 we can not conceive by what mean it happen but true we find it that such be the deceit of our impugner as they so the ear of his majesty that our information our agent and our sufferance can not attain to his knowledge nether be any find that dare repair to declare our calamity to he our former agent be imprison and not dare to avowch the answer that his majesty give unto we upon our suit of indemnity for our be catholic which be say they that we shall not be molest if we will be loyal for our ancient unviolated profession we be assure manifoud that neither his majesty allow the hundred part of our vexation nor his deputy or the chief of his council but only that it be inflict by hungry upstart and in particular the precedent of monster the chief justice etc. who as they impious molest we so they slanderous suggest by all likelihood all misconceit against we and as we say before thereby prevent all our declaration of their persecute we that either they be not hear or at least not believe the author I be the apt to believe and to answer you that you remove from his majesty his deputy and the chief of his state the rigour that be follow against you his word to i be a assure warrant contain in his speech to the parliament that he will not be a Roboam to catholic or on that will molest they more than his predecessor for the word of a king 3. peg. 12.14 Isocrat orat. 1. say Isocrates to k. nicocles be more to be trust then the oath of another which the rather I be persuade of that in his royal breast wherein be treasure the pure blood of princely honour derive from all or the most principal Potentate of Christendom nothing but mildness can by all likelihood be entertain I late propound to you a worthy fact of the emperor Constantius now understand as commendable a deed of Constantine the great his son he be inform of exceed abuse of his under officer do proclaim that all of what degree soever that may evident prove any injury extorsion c. theod. l. 9 t. 1. Sigib l. 3. occid imp. or offence of his judge familiar or servant shall confident inform against they he oblige himself both to punish the delinquent and liberaly to reward the informer which if kings of these time will our balaams Architofels herodiase and such other as abuse prince ear by false advice and accusation and solicit the destruction or disturbance of their subject by malignant and ambitious suggestion will be avoid our crommell treacherous cownterfet their prince letter for their own private lucre will be exclude 2. reg. 10.3 no messenger to k. Hannon will be violate no bribe no extorsion no villainy will be accept or commit brief king without all cloud or mist as from a height like the son among planet will reign and regent and all the under sphere will keep their regular motion and all by they govern their tranquillity and due constitution if your precedent of mownster and your chief justice as you mistrust do exceed their commission by be injurious so do pedro las vinnas under Frederick the second who he do not only advise but direct but for abuse his say authority at leinth his eye be pluck out of his head Peter Broca govern under Philipp son to s. Lewes or rather some time over he and he for his insolence during his authority be hang Lewes of Luxenburg earl of s. Paul and great constable of France rule and in a manner reign but for abuse his prince favour he lose his head to come homeward cardinal Wolsee duke of somersault lord Cromuel earl of Essexe in England earl moray and earl Morton in Scotland in France the prince of Conde the admiral Colignie the lord montgomerie in Flanders the prince of Orange the Compt Egmond the Compt de Horn the lord lumey etc. what bring they to utter ruin and miserable death but want of moderation in their dignity or irreligion against catholic I say nothing how Drury Wallop sir Ralph laney heth etc. partly die sudden partly be so bury as they be not find to be bury or at least be so intolerable stink as they be cast sudden away but this matter some time be to be discuss particular and till then to be defer as for your agent imprisonment it be altogether likely that it be without his majesty notice malice and machiavellian policy dare often to attempt a great injury than that Nicep. hist. l. 13. c. 33. when pope innocent in the cause of s. chrysostom send diverse bishop and other as his legate to the emperor Arcadius Eudoxia wife to Arcadius with her adherent cause they secret to be apprehend imprison revile rack and spoil of all they have and when they do not prompt deliver their leter one Valerius violent wrest they away break thereby a thumb of one of the bishop can not then your agent unknown to the king as all the former sacrilege be unknown to Arcadius by some of Eudoxias spirit be violate they who you affirm to be timorous to agent for their country let they blush thereat remember Hester and judith although woman yet for their common wealth audacious cic. lib. 1. every honest man say Cicero undertake danger travail and vexation for his country and friend let they the noble general Terentius theod. l. 4 cap. 28. he have subdue glorious the armenian and be often victorious the emperor Valens admonish he to pretend some great matter in recompense of his labour why then quoth Terentius since it please your majesty to respect my pain and of your benignity to proffer we my most desire contentment I crave the content express in this supplication therein be only contain that the catholic may enjoy one only church in Antioch the emperor offend with that demand break the supplication advise Terentius to require some more important dignity no say Terentius gather the piece of his supplication I accept these break piece of your majesty for my full satisfaction for cic. Milo worthy man do not so much follow say the late allege Cicero the reward of their good desert as the desert themselves whereas you grudge at the baseness of your impugner as I say before such be fit to impugn religion as be of base quality it be now more than 10. year since reformation begin in all which time if in every place where they prevail none but the base be find that will be of the ministry and none that will match with these how Euangelical so ever they and how eminent soever these but the base will you have other to be their promotor or catchpowl but of the base yet I will not deny but cic. in philip. ^ whereas every servitude be miserable it be most intolerable to be subject to one base and shameless as the late earl of Essex a man of great gift if he have not want moderation endorse upon a petition present to he to obtain the synes of certain recusant a base gain so will fame register to posterity over the remembrance of your molester a base occupation in the mean time feed your memory with the worthy precedent lay before you by the thrice noble Sames Tripart l. 10. c. 32. he be of great wealth as beside other riches have in his retinue a hundred slave the promotor in hope of the foresay base gain accuse he to the emperor that he be as in deed he be a very fervent Christian the emperor examine he and in vain labour instant to pervert he say at leinth same be thou for thy obstinacy thy wife and all thy whole retinue from hence forth shall serve in all slavery the most abject of all thy slave who have single out of the whole crew he make absolute lord of same be and all his estate judge yourselves what servitude what unspeakable drudgery Claudian 2. entrop what misery he sustain under that imperious upstart for no brutal beast his fury less do slack than caitive creep upon his master back s. victor lib. 1. the like happen to Satyrus lord steward of Hunerick k. of vandal his king not be able by any procurement to pervert he from his profession at leinth deprive he of all his estate and give his very wife to the mean of his groom I may then repeat again the word of s. Paul hebr. 12.1 and therefore we have so great a cloud of witnese put upon we lay away all weight and sin that compass we by patience let we run to the fight propose unto we whether it be with the loss of our life or that which be more of our liberty by subjection to slave afflict catholic 10. their diligence in preach be reduble but to their small profit for ordinary in every sermon by some on thing or other they condemn some part of their former profession so that for one that commend any sermon three of themselves do discommend it true among we they be never less esteem or in less possibility to purchase any to their religion they be so impious towards God and dishonest towards man in so much as all most honest do loath to conver with they their word from their thought and their work from their word be always repugnant the author of their preach and of what they preach now we need not delate consider they themselves as I have else where show have not full determine what they may preach when they be consent upon their doctrine which be for ever impossible then will it be fit time that we discuss the subject of their sermon and not before as long as they blunder fable of friar and nun of cistern full of child head of pope joan of papal pomp of their own fiction it be a sport to behold with how devout mirth they will all pag. 161. without danger of after reckon return to their lodging but now they must make repetition of their lesson and as their late survey complain some time for their folly a hundred and thirten be together debar from preach a happy prohibition it be know the place instant to become most unhappy wherein they have audience witness the book of dangerous position the puritan to have wrought more mischief in Geneva in 30. year then the pope of Rome in five hundred pag. 30. pag. 95. so that now Castalio a brother doubt not to say of Geneva and the minister thereof Beza in Colloq. Mompelg Smidelino edit. 1588. pag. 64. o Babylon Babylon o Egypt o aegypti and o Babylon Babylon o priest of Egypt and enchanter of Babylon another testimony be out of Smidelin say they that hate lie and disturbance of province and the church let they eschew this spirit which be a liar and murderer io. 8. other of their own do reproach their minister that they omit their invective against we have no matter more frequent in sermon than love matter and that in such abundance Wigand Germ. 6. as Wigandus affirm one of they to have cite above 20. verse out of Ovid book of the art orlove Hamilton be to be peruse of this matter I will add one approbation hamilt confuse l. 2. c. 29. of the effect thereby insue report by Cochle of such enormity that in verity my mind grudge to read it and much more to relate it Cochleus in Luthero c. ^9 in and i woman and maid in public way as bitch to encounter man and to say come and bull i etc. but beside that which we have say before to the second article or complaint and else where let it now suffice to allege one only general declaration out of Henry bullinger a principal brother henr. bullinger in proem Finaly by these sermon of contentious minister the simple and miserable people gather small profit for they do not as be be meet thereby edify or strengthen their belief or acknowledge their sin or eschew they or amend their life but rather they be trouble and perplex and become stubborn and be make worse so as they affirm not to know what at leinth be to be believe by they etc. wherefore I conclude without further manifestation of their impious preach the rather that to every on his knowledge their deal being clear and these testimony allege be both perspicuous and insuspitious nothing else need to be in this matter inform the conclusion of the author 12. for the ground of all consolation in this point there be nothing to be account more comfortable then as I show before by persecution that we be dispose towards the high estate in heaven the word be great yet true by the testimony of our saviour luc. 22.28 say you be they that have remain with i in my tentation and I dispose to you as my father dispose to i a kingdom to which effect in the answer to the first article of your complaint I have show that without suffer for Christ we can not reign with Christ without lawful combat we can not be crown without profess Christ before man we shall not be profess by Christ before God in the answer to the second I have confirm that by persecution we be prove to be acceptable to God to live godly and to be his child and not bastard and so in every of the rest I have to my power manifest that it be the great favour of Christ the prerogative of his benjamin the title to sit at his side the livery of his favourite and the narrow path through which have enter in to heaven himself and all his saint be not these consolation to the most desolate and dastard mind what calamity soever it do endure a second impulsion be the ardent zeal in other manner of tribulation of our predecessor the primative christian in respect of who I may use the word of s. Paul hebr. 12.3.4 be not weary faint in your mind for you have not yet resist unto blood such be their fervour and forwardness that each of they learned of the same b. apostle to say afflict catholic 11. they have late as it seem fall in dislike with their oath of supremacy for which so much blood be shed and so many catholic impoverish and imprison and now they have make a new oath full of vehement and dreadful word as I do from my hart abhor detest and abjure etc. and that oath also be sudden exchange into a nother in deed of more temperate style but we know not if of different substance these oath they urge we to swear our loyalty and subjection be never violate and we intend never to violate they and have besyd occasion not to swear any of their oath consider that the very correction of they in so short space do argue a condemnation of the former by the late and consequent of they that have swear the former as also may short happen towards they that will swear the late the author it be their manner universally to be every day changeable as new advantage appear or show of inconvenience arise of Eberus and mayor thus write Gaspar Peucer son in law to melancthon Paul Cre^ium in artic. 1574. in one moment variable that which now they hold true and assure be reject they embrace the contrary of other brother Eberus inform eberus praef. in Comment. philippie in ep. cor. turn and return their religion to the will and wantoness of their lord and congregation domestical witnese be most desyrable and pertinent such as in this point d. dove can not be deny to be d. dove persuasion pag. 31. who word to this effect be careful to be consider when the mass say he be first put down k. Henry have his english liturgy and that be judge absolute without exception but when k. Edward come to the crown that be condemn and another in the place which Peter martyr and Bucer do approve as very consonant to God word when q. Elizabeth begin her reign the former be judge to be full of imperfection and a new be devise and allow by consent of the clergy but about the middle of her reign we grow weary of that book and great mean have be to abandon that and establish another which although it be not obtain yet do we at the least at every change of prince change our book of common prayer we be so wanton that we know not what we will have this as much as d. dove may in wisdom affirm and as little as in truth and plain deal may be affirm I will aver his testimony but with one suffrage out of the late survey of the book of common prayer whereby the book of communion aforesaid now last in his majesty reign yea after the conference at Hampton jan. 14. 1603. correct survey of the book of common prayer pag. 159. 160. be demonstrate to be most deficient and faulty which confirm the speech of d. dove before allege in that survey I say be say the late Archbishope of Canturburie as be credible report take such a grief when the communion book shall be alter discover by these or like word good lord when shall we know what to trust unto desperate perplexity of the protestant that he present fall into his palsy be carry from the court and die short after let d. dove call this mutability wantoness in not know what they will have let the Puritan survey impute it to desperate perplexity in not yet know what they shall trust to how soever it be acknowledge it be too apparent in their book and oath as impudency itself can not deny it that in their whole profession no stability or stidfastnes can be observe as for the oath of supremacy you have well note it to have be a bloody and ruinous oath to catholic and shall have be so still if diverse of their own profession have not as after shall appear be entangle within the compass of deny it manifold act of parliament make it high treason to deny the say supremacy even to a woman an. 1. eliz. c. 1. an. 5. eliz. c. 1. an. 13. eliz. c. 1. etc. Holinshed an. 1. Eliz. pag. 1802. 1569. etc. Stous pag. 1192. etc. manifold relation of their own approve chronicle and manifold indictment of catholic execute in most butcher like manner for such denial to the knowledge and memory of million yet live be so many disprove daniel to the impious judge that deny any catholic to have be execute or trouble for matter of conscience or otherwise then for treason but I omit to unfold more concern this oath of supremacy it be now suppress that I may more ample discuss the other oath by you mention they be in prime first therefore you may understand that his holiness have by two breve utter condemn the say oath Paul 5. 1. octob. 1606. and 1 septemb 1607. as be grievous wrongful to God honour opposite to the catholic faith and hurtful to the salvation of our soul against two which breve and a letter of Bellarmin to the same effect there be publish in London by public authority a apology an. 1607. entitle which be to say a threefowld wedge to a threefowld knot in which the Apologist endeavour to justify the say oath and to refute the pope and Bellarmin this book I receive after have otherwise answer this point of your letter not know whither this present answer may in time come to the remote printer so that such incertainty and the haste thereto annect and my other employment will procure this discussion to want some perfection and exactness which otherwise the subject and my goodwill will require Holinshed in rich. 1. and 2. pag. 476. and pag. 1005. second understand that every k. of England as in like manner all other christian king from about the time of s. Gregory the great at his coronation do swear in particular to maintain the catholic faith and to defend all privilege and liberty grant to the church and clergy that ever be grant from k. Edward the confessor to that time and towards the laity or all other subject that he will administer to they equity and will abrogate all unjust law and custom which ceremony finish the archbishop of Canturburie loud inquyre of the people will they submit themselves to such prince whereto they condescend he anoint he gird he with the sword crow he put a ring on his finger betrothe he to the common wealth and give a sceptre into his hand adjure he by God omnipotent that he undertake not that charge Sleidan l. 1. an. 1519. alex. in chim fol. 106. 288. Mass^nus in henr. 1. conc. fol. 6. c. 3. without intention to accomplish such plight protestation conformable in all respect be the oath of the emperor k. of France and the residue with this particularity in the k. of Spain from the year 686. that he swear never to suffer any heretic to abide in his realm and this oath for great solemnity be give in write and place upon the altar as of certain emperor of Grece zonaras Zonar to 3. in Anast Dicoro and Michale^ R^ngabe v.s. th. Cantuar. and other intimate and of the k. of England appear by this speech of s. Thomas of Canturburie to k. Henry the second be mindful of your protestation which you make and put upon the altar at westmonaster to defend the liberty of the church etc. and for more manifestation of their settle resolution to fulfil their promise the k. at least of Polonia declare after the coronation end Bodin rep. l. 2. c. 9 Simo if which God forfend I shall violate my oath the inhabitant of the realm shall owe i no obedience which be according to the rule of law nether be any bind to his oath Decret. greg. tit. 24. c. 21. and 29. if the other party fail in his obligation three understand that at the prince will conc. late c. 43. and in c. there be a oath due to he by his lay subject for they of the clergy be exempt by the general Lateran council and this some time they make by themselves some time by their noble and magistrate some time rather by some real sign of howld up hand lib. 1. Gest. saxon. in fine 936. throw up hat acclamation etc. then by any verbal speech how soever it be make or not make the law of God and man do determine and resolve that allegiance subjection loyalty which in any equity may be demand be due and belong to prince not only for policy but also for conscience this be and ever have be rom. 13.5 the doctrine of catholic not so of our adversary as be manifest in treat of Puritan plotts they malign all monarchy and admit only their consistorian discipline which say his majesty agree with a monarchy no better than the devil with God hampt conference pag. 79. 4. 20. as whereby king be keep without state and honour which be confirm by the puritanical synod at Cabillon in these word Prateol in Alphab l. 2. c. 22. and those three plague and chip of the world the pontificial church nobility and law to be banish out of the christian common wealth conformable to which say Beza Beza in ep. 37. 40. that he hope in God to see a new France the whole generation of former people and prince be abolish so that according to puritan we shall have no loyalty subjection or subordination to prince as not be to have any prince that may command four understand that our formentioned Apologist for the oath of allegiance produce needless many canon especial out of the cowncell of Toledo to certify the duty of subject towards the prince do heedful avoid the most pertinent instruction to the matter in the say cowncell although it lie in his way in these word of s. isidor the oath that wicked and unadvised be make be not to be observe conc. 8. c. 2. s. isidor in 22. q. 4. in unlawful promise revoke thy word change the purpose vow dishonest it be a wicked obligation that by wickedness be keep for by this doctrine we may have learn either not to swear any impious oath or what by impiety of weakling have be swear by piety and religion to be break which have answer the most of his exception against the two breve of the pope have testify his commend the oath of allegiance to be only for that which it hand commendable without intermeddle the poison with the potion and notify a sincere intention of manifest the truth that those spanish cowncel do not patronize any heretic but provide for the safety of a catholic and christian king against any moorish or jewish usurper no other country more or before that have by general consent depose king only for be heretic as be by they do towards Swintill and Richimer in who default they exalt Sisinand but this be not to his purpose nor what he have allege to any purpose against our doctrine or demeanour be happy his majesty a catholic the Apologist be a caluinian may find for his purpose this decretal doctrine of Caluin cal. l. 4. Instit. c. 13. @. 21. as soon as any be illuminate with the knowledge of the caluinian truth instant he be free from all obligation of obey church or prince of which position store be present by Caluin in the same place without more favour towards a good prince then towards a bad whereupon Lanoy be found incense the rocheller to reiterate their rebellion only because some other of their brother have revolt and they answer that the k. have give they liberty of conscience and thereupon that they have swear fidelity and allegiance to he Lanoy reply you can not keep any promise opposite to God glory poplin l. 37. f. 203. nay we assure to observe any such oath will be a double sin as it of Herod to give his daughter the head of johan Baptist whereupon the ever disloial rocheller after such their oath make in july before Genebrard 1567. 1575. m. Pig l. 7. c. 17. rebel in januarie next in sue as also their brother what oath soever they make to rest in peace they dispense with they as aften as the least advantage appear five understand that what word you deserve term vehement and dreadful in the oath enforce upon you they not to belong to any point of our doctrine but altogether to be a part of the doctrine of our adversary as partly before appear and be manifest in these their article Buchanan pag. 6. 13. obed. pag. 25. survey of pret^ h. discipline p. 283. 284. dangerous position l. 4. c. 3. 4. bellarm. in ep. the minister may excommunicate the great prince and he that be excommunicate be not worthy to enjoy any life upon earth it be good that reward be appoint by the people for such as kill tyrant as common there be for d as have kill wolf or bear etc. that such doctrine have be hold by catholic the Apologist although he lay down beauties demand where be it ever hear that ever a pope either command to be kill or allow the slaughter of any prince whatsoever yet lawnce only at the friar that have kill the k. of France he wind from the matter to carp at pretend contradiction in beauty controversy but neither if a friar yea or pope in matter of fact shall transgress may therefore it be say to be a impious heretical and damnable doctrine or position of we as the word of the oath import that any such transgression shall be commit six understand that of these oath of allegiance although the first eschew the name of supremacy and the second the name of pope yet in substance both of they to be all one with the owld oath of supremacy this the Apologist most stout and vehement deny but unknown to himself he dance in a net for how may these word of the oath be interpret otherwise then to impute supremacy to the k. and to deny it to the pope I do utter testify and declare in my conscience that the king highness be the only supreme governor of this realm and all other his highness dominion and country as well in spiritual or ecclesiastical thing or cause as temporal and that no foreign prince person or prelate have or aught to have any jurisdiction power superiority pre-eminence or authority ecclesiastical or spiritual within this realm etc. if his majesty be only supreme governor in all spiritual and ecclesiastical thing or cause if no prelate have any jurisdiction ecclesiastical then loud and palpable must be these untrue assertion of the Apologist apology pag. 47. this last make oath only meddle with the civil obedience of subject to their sovereign only in mere temporal cause the say oath concern in no case the pope supremacy in spiritual cause ibid. pag. 52. there can not one word be find in all this oath tend or sound to matter of relgion ibid. pag. 62. etc. who do not behold how impudency do these man into voluntary confusion to defend falsehood but although we will silence how much this swear supremacy of the k. sound matter of religion yet his brother yea and his majesty himself do testify that among themselves it be a principal point and article or religion to profess the contrary it appear first by willet willet synop contr. 7. q. r. d. Morton par. 2. Apol. l 4. c. 18 p. 340. d. field pag 228. d. Sutcliff subu p. 119 and con. Kellison p. 41. 42. 102. d. cevel against the plea of Innoc pag. 103 109. d. down ep. Dedic contr. con. bellarm. hooker l. 5. eccl. pos. 77. bel. motive l. 2. a. fol. 78. 81. hamp confer p. 82. 83. nether do we give unto the prince absolute power then no supremacy to make ecclesiastical law second by d. mortion a general council be the supreme judge three by d. field the supreme bind and command authority be only in bishop in a general council whereunto consent d. Covel d. sutcliffe d. Dowram hooker Bel and all those preacher mention by his majesty that preach even before himself eschew to he the supreme head of the church God grant these opposition make the Apologist know to himself for sure they detect he to other to be of the describe by Terence such as swim with the stream and sway with the time if prince will be supreme head of the church to justify that their determination if they will in substance so remain but in show disclaim to challenge any such prerogative to justify also such dissimulation upon all these premise I conclude that see the head of the church condemn the say oath see also the Apologist fail so foul in justification of they theodor. l. 4. c. 19 in depth of constant catholic resolution you be to say with s. Basil he be in like manner solicit to some unlawfulness by the emperor Valens that you esteem much his majesty favour with piety but piety debar that it be pernicious and for your loyalty that you will never fail to it at all occurrent but to swear these present oath that you may not because they contain one abjuration of his authority to who jesus Christ have commit the charge of all his flock s. Nazian. 1. in julian. so that the oath represent the sleight of julian the who not be able to constrain christian to worship idol place they in the portraict of the emperor before who they bow reverent thereby cause diverse by deceit at least in one indirect and remote manner to worship they which if they do not then be they afflict as despiser not of idol but of the emperor so now with a lawful allegiance the oath imply a secret lawless abjuration which be therefore not accept you be accuse to be disloial and enemy to your sovereign dignity but as I say give he that be Caesar and to God what to God belong the archpriest fall be no block in your way no more than it of Origen or Tertullian to the primative church conc. late c. 43. he do against his privilege and his fidelity for which he be to answer as you be to be reward reciprocat by Christ our saviour for profess he before man courageous and give i credit they that have swear the oath be not esteem even by the state so trustful as they that have not but as sir John perrot say to one shrink schismatic accept the oath of supremacy among manifold resolute refuse it believe i I shall trust thou least of all this because I know that in thy conscience thou think as the residue yet dissemble to give i satisfaction cic. Rosc come he that belly his conscience consent as light to perjury I have rather think they grieve by want such pretext to impoverish you then more confident of your loyalty after receive your oath who then shall we from the charity of Christ tribulation rom. 8.35 or distress or famine or nakedness or danger or persecution or the sword a little after be a speech rather beseem a celestial spirit than a mortal weakling and such as whereby every mind of any christian generosity shall learn what to think and do in Christ quarrel I be sure that neither death nor life nor angel 38. nor principality nor power neither thing present nor thing to come 39 neither might nor height nor depth nor other creature shall be able to separate we from the charity of God which be in Christ jesus our Lord these be the thought and word beseem as I say all worthy champion of Christ which not only by man of strong resolution but also by woman and child be most constant fulfil when Barbara Agatha Agnes cecilia Catharina Lucia Dorothea apollonia Margarita christina and innumerable other virgin for the most part of eminent degree and when vitus and mamme of seven and Flocellus of ten year owld and such other despise the terror of rage lion the sting of serpent and tooth of tiger when they the scorn the stripe of rivet scourge the tear of burn rake and hook when they contemn the burn fornace the boil lead the drown precipitation butcher quarter of man whole malice and shall not we then think very abject of ourselves if in God cause any loss of temporal good any affront any suspicion any oppression may move we to repine therefore that which may seem to you most heinous that be put to death or torment they do taint you with the odious name of treason and not with the title of martyr s. Ambros in ps 118. s^r 21. that impair nothing your merit for in vain say s. Ambros be he persecute who be impugn without offence be he afflict as a malefactor whereas he be laudable in that trial be he torment as a enchanter who glorify in the name of God the name not make nor mar the martyr but the cause if then you aspire to their crown who before be commend to your imitation s. aug. ser. 47. I say with s. augustin let it not grieve you to who in mind you do think happy to be the effusion of your tear and blood whereas the eternal fire of hell be thereby extinguish and whereas the robe of your soul be thereby blanch according to which be say in the Apocalips Apoc. 7.14 these be they that be come out of great tribulation and have wash their robe and have make then white in the blood of the lamb think that in the furnace of adversity for godliness if you be earth you be streinthn if you be iron you be unru and if you be gowld you be purify ^say 58.2 last if you be they of who the prophet say they day by day do seek i and they will know my way as a people that have do justice and have not forsake the judgement of their god think whether you do not wrong to God that without amendment of your fault you will have the freedom of innocent psal 38.12 haste 14. 6. be you ignorant that for iniquity God have chastise man and that therefore we be deliver up into the hand of our enemy because we have offend in his sight Tobias then resolve you tob. 3. 4. because we have not obey thy precept therefore we be ahandon to the spoil to captivity to death to a speech and to a reproach in all nation so do Achior in inform Holofernes as oft as besyd their own god they worship any other god judith 5. 18. they have be forlorn to a prey to the sword and to reproach so last do Baruch what be it Israel that thou be in the land of thy enemy Baruch 3. 10. 11. 1^ that thou become ancient in a strange land that thou be pollute with the dead that thou be repute with they that discend into hell thou have forsake the fontaine of wisdom for if thou have walk in the way of God thou have without dowbt dwell in peace upon the land so that if you will know the way of God you must do justice and not forsake his judgement if you lament to be a spoil etc. obey his precept worship God alone and walk in his way and as the psalmist say apprehend discipline lest God be angry and that you perish from the just way psal 2.12 which because you seem more willing to fulfil of late then former as appear by your godly resolution mention in your letter and by your constant stand for truth you may I warrant you available exclaim in the word of David sinner have unsheathe their sword they have bend their bow that they may beguile the poor and needy and upon psalm 36.14 these word receive from above answer the enemy of our lord sudden as they shall be honour and exalt fade they shall vanish away as smoke that be 20. as another prophet expound they shall be as if they be not and the man shall perish that contradict the. not that it be always intend they shall perish in person which we never ought absolute to desire but only in profession and not only because of your amendment may we presume of such divine bounty but also lest they shall say God become proud and say our high hand and not the lord have do all these thing deut. 22.27 by which their become insolent the spirit of God instruct be in the person of David to implore of God to avert his wrath and their opposition say do not o lord abandon i from my desire to the sinner they have consult against i forsake i not least by chance they be exalt psalm 137.9 Finaly whereas you find themselves to profess their shame that they have depart from the mother church of Rome as they term it in thes public and plain word d. Covel in exam. p. 185. we be sorry that their weakness he speak against Puritan take offence at that which we bowl as a honour and virtue in the church of England namely that we have spare and as it be unwilling dissent from the church of Rome etc. in all joy of mind for a sovereign consolation not with stand all extremity specify you may applaud to yourselves that you abstain to depart at all from that church which as Christ assure neither in more nor less shall be ever overcome either by one error or many or by any other power of hell gate or which be all one which never be to have spot or wrinkle how little soever and be in nothing to fail but to confirm all other it be assure that have you offend in one you have be make guilty of all 2. 10. although such one dissension from that church have be never so spare or unwilling follow and upon this confession I say first to doctor Covel it be in deed near to honour and virtue spare and unwilling to dissent from that church but a true honour and virtue have it be not to dissent at all and as by dissent in one point the self same guiltiness be incur as by dissent in all so there remain no other manner to be free from all guiltiness but to consent again with that same church in all Christ make it not a pillar of truth without be altogether sound and free from every crack he make not that church his spouse without exempt it from every spot and wrinkle he build not that house upon a rock not to be permanent in some but in all trial of seize wynd and rain he assure it not against the infernal gate but that no error or force or fraud of hell jac. 2. 10. can prevail either first or last against it therefore he that offend in one towards it be make guilty of all because it be altogether privilege from defect second I say to you puritan bel. in the downfall of popery pag. 134. that in the depth of all error and folly you the rite and tradition of this church for whereas you confess as to deny it have be profound impudency that you know not your bible to be the word of God but because you receive it for such by a tradition of papist for from who else can you have receive it you be as you affirm but in the infancy of your gospel I require thereupon whether you hold such authority or certification in avow the say bible to be infallible or no what soever you answer you remain engage for if it be infallible in that point such infallibility must come from the former promise of Christ which be general do assure infallibility in all other point as well as in that and then curse you for depart from that infallible foundation if you affirm that such allowance or tradition be fallible then have you no infallible certainty whether your bible be authentical or Noah the survey with 177. as enjoy it only from authority in your opinion but fallible answer i only this one quere which be your own new-fangled term for a demand and I protest before God and his angel and the world that I will consent with you the god of mercy and truth be with we all amen 26. sept. 1607. you to command in Christ henry fitzsimon