


THE SYNOPSIS OR EPITOME OF SVRVEY METHODIZED.
SECTION .I.

Of the Materials of Possessions, the seuerall kinds of Earths, Waters, Stones, Minerals: the Crusts and increase of Grounds, the peculiar ordering, mastering, manuring and imploying of seuerall Soyles, the due bestowing of Graine, Herbs, Plants; with the diuersitie of Ground-plots and Edifices.


CHAP. I.
SVruey in generall is an Art wherby the view and trutinate intimation of a subiect, from Center to Circumference is rectified.
The Suruey of Possessions (the subiect of this Treatise) is the Arte by which their Graphicall Description is particularized.
This Suruey is Symbolized and distinguished into Actiue and Passiue.
Actiue.The Actiue may be referred to the Feudigrapher, and consists in Operation and Estimation.
The Operation is Mathematicall and Mechanicall.
Mathematicall.Mathematicall Operation is a part of Suruey by which the dimensions of the Plots propounded are performed.
Mechanical.Mechanicall Operation is the Manuall acting and proiecting of the workes.
The Estimation of Possessions is Materiall and Legall.
Materiall.The Materiall part is conuersant in Estimating the valuations incident to the subiect, by relation to the Materials, and Elementarie parts of the Plot.
Legall.The Legall part prescribes Methodicall and Iuridiciall confines to the whole course of Suruey: and comprehends the Symboliographie or Clarke-ship, and penning of the Suruey with the Rectifying of Euidences and Records.
The seuerall functions of these partes are diffused thorough the whole Processe ensuing.
And so much for the Actiue part.


CHAP. II.
Passiue.The Passiue part of Suruey, hath reference to Possessions, as they consist of parts Essentiall and Accidentall.
Essentiall.The Essentiall partes comprehend the matter and forme coincident to Possessions.
Matter.The Matter comprises the Elementarie composition and constitution of Possessions: and in discussure thereof, the Materiall parte is most conuersant.
The Matter is either Naturall, whose state hath admitted of no substantiall alteration, other then the hand

of Nature hath impressed therein: or Artificiall, transformed and chaunged from the Natiue and Originall Habite by humane industrie.
Naturall matter may bee diuided into Appropriate and Communicate.Naturall.
Appropriate is that which is peculiar and proper to some certaine person, place, or other particular limitation; and hath reference here to Earth and Water.
In the Earth the Qualitie and Composure thereof are to be considered.Earth.
In the first the Species and Habitude require to bee iudiciously obserued.
The Species of the Earth is either Vulgar or Pretious.Species.
The Vulgar is either Simple, as Clay, Moulde,Vulgar. Moore, Grauell, Sande: Or Commixt; as Creachie, Claulkie, Clayie, Sandie Earth.
Pretious Earth is that which consists of a middle Nature twixt Stones and Mettals;Pretious. and all sorts thereof are Friable and conuertible to Powder: And these are either Liquable or Not-Meltable.Liquable.
The first are Iuices Concrete; as Salt, Alume, Bitumen, Vitrioll.
Salt (Naturall) is found either in the Earth or Water. Of the first kind is Salt Armoniake, Sal-gem,Salt. Sal-niter, and Indian Salt.
The other sort is digged vp in Fountaines, Riuers, Washes, Salt-Meeres, Sea-shoares.
Alume is either white or blacke,Alume. The first (and best) is either Liquid or Compact.
Liquid Alume is the soft, fat and limpid Roch (or Red) Alume.
The Compact is ether Sugar like, or Shiuering.
The blacke is a kinde of Alume wherewith gold is purged and purified.
Bitumen is either hard, as Asphaltus, Pissasphaltus,Bitumen.

Rosin; Or Liquid, as Naphta, Petroleum, Amber, Vitriol, Coppras.
Not-meltable.The Pretious Earths, which are not Meltable, nor indurated into Stones nor Mettals, are Stibium, Azure, Auripigmentum or Arsenicke, Sandaracha, Calx, Playster, Chaulke, Coale, Canole, Marle, Oker, Terra-sigillata, or Lemnia, Armenia, Germanica, etc. Tuckers or Fullers Earth, Argilla or clay for Pots, Gallie and Thacke Tiles, Bricke, Water and Tabacco Pipes, Purslaine.
And thus much for the Species.


CHAP. III.
Habitude.THe Habitude of the Earth dependes vpon the inherent disposition and temperature of the same in Heate, Colde, Moisture and Drinesse. For although in regarde of the Colde and Drie substance and Nature, whereof the Earth generally consists, it may be saide to be of one temperature; yet vppon occasion of the diuersitie of Situations, Affinitie, Intercourse and participation it hath with things of repugnant qualitie, it purchaseth and acquireth contrarie qualities.
And therefore it would be also peruestigated, whether it be light,, loose, softe, fatt, oylie, slipperie, mouldring, cleauing, tough, stiffe, moorie, leane, barren, fertile, water-swallowed, soale bound, constipated, or what other due or vndue poize nad proportion of temper predominates.
Composure.The Composure of the Earth comprises the Base and vpper Crust of the same.
Base. Pregnance.The Base of the Earth offers due obseruation to peruestigate the Pregnance wherewith the Earth is imbowelled, whether it bee Prime; as in the precedent

Species; or Concrete, as in Quarries and Mines.
In the first discouer, what Ragge, Freestone,Quarries. Milstone, Grind-stone, Syth-stone, Emeril-stones, Sanguinin-stones, Hones, Tutch, Ieate, Slude, Slate: What Marbles, as Alablasters, Ophites, Porphyris, etc. Also what Gemmes, as harde Adamants, viz. the Cenchros, Macedonicke, Cypricke, Siderite: the flammid Carbuncle, purple Amethist, greene Emeraulde, and Opall Paderas, with their Trineuned luster: the vyolet Hyacinth, Skie-coloured Saphire, Lustrie Diamonde, shining Topaz, starrie Calchedonie, sparkling Rubie, golden Chrysolite, splendid Asterite, various Achate, horny Corneol, greene Iasper, pellucid Onyx, cerule Tarqueis, candid Crystall, harde Blood-stone, attracting Loade-stone, white yellow and Falerne Agate.
For the second note, what Mettals or Minerals,Mines. are therein generated? whether Pure as Golde, Siluer; or impure as Leade, Tinne, Brasse, Iron, Steele, Lattin, Copper, Coperas, Quicksiluer, Stibium, Antimonie, Chrysocolla or Boras, Minium or Vermilon naturall, Sandaracha, Verdigreece, Salt, Allome, Brimstone.
Also Coale, Canole, Colours amongst the Minerall Oare of Gold and Siluer, as Sil, Azure.
The vpper Crust is the Soile or Seale of the Earth through which the irradiation of the Sun penetrating,Crust. corroborates and cheeres vp the Natiue heate with temperate calefaction, which together with the infusion of moderate showers and moistures, soaked from soilings enlifens the radicall humour, and doth so foment and ferment the whole Masse of Moulde, that Dame Vesta is inuited and extimulated to inuest her selfe in her richest Roabes of painted brauerie, and to produce and power foorth her Cornu-copia of selected plenties.
The Crassitude.The Crassitude of the Soale, is diuersified in seuerall Plots, and particular Modulets, as from 3. foote, to @ foote more or lesse, and is distinguishable from the Base by compacture, by qualitie, by colour, by extention of the roots and fibers of grasse, herbes, plants. And vpon this Crassitude of the Crust, together with the Qualitie and Habitude of the same, doth the production principally depend (although the estate of the Base (by reason of the imparture of the innate facultie) be not vtterly excluded all importance of fertilitie) and offers due obseruation, what Trees, Plants, Shrubs, Graine, Grasse, Herbes, Weeds, Mosse, and other Vegitables are in each Plot voluntarily or plentifully produced.
Inuesture.And hence dimaines the Inuesture of the earth, which giues consideration of the Grouth and Repletion of productions, both Vegetant and Animall.
GrouthIn Grouth, the thriuage, verdure, fruitage, prematurance etc. of particular Vegetables are regardable; as the boaling, spreading, arming, timbring and tapering of trees, braunching and bearing of Plants, Bushing of Shrubs, prolation and seedage of roots and herbs, depth and colour of grasse, etc. For thereby (sans further search) the Species and Habitude of the ground, wherein they grow, are ingeniously intimated.
Soils known by their productions.For if they prosper and thriue in burgening, sappines, flowers, fruit and the like, according to their seuerall kinds, in extraordinarie good proportion, it implies that either the ground is very fertile in generall, or that they are implanted in Plots Sympathizing with their Natures.
As the high timbring Oake dilating mightie armes in large extent, denotates a rich and battle soile; where on the contrarie, the knurly, crooked and crabbed harde sparing starueling, bewraies his barren and hungrie bedde.
The large and loose grained timber of the red Oake

and frusshie Ash showes a light, moist, rich and deepe soile: the like doth the largenesse and waterishnesse of rootes and fruit.
But the firme and solid graine of the white Oake and tough Ash, signifies a more fast and close ground. @
High grounds produce wood of a more beautifull-featherd and better graine, than the low, except in Apple trees and Peare trees.
Rest-harrowes growing rancke and rooting farre abroad, intimate a fat, fruitfull, and long lasting soile.
The lowe stubbed Heath, argues a barren grauellie cold ground, the rancke and high showes it to be a more warme and tillable; and commonly the white flowred Heath hath better layer, than the purple.
Diuels-bit, Eye-bright and yarrow by plentie in repletion, and mean in proportion, point foorth a Sandy earth, of moderate heat and moisture, and a sweet shallow and wel-swoorded Crust: and thus are these herbes frequent in the Irish Soile.
Grounswell, Thistles, Nettles, and other weedes by their rankenesse show a rich tilth.
Blackish, misliking and vnkinde herbes show a leane hungrie and bitter, or sowre ground.
Burnt and scorched herbes, and harsh, reddish, blewish spirie and prie-grasse bewray a cold, vnkind, rough, starued and baked, or soaked soile.
Base herbes, and rough sandy stone, denotate a leane greety sandie or grauelly ground, according to the Poet:
Nam Ieiuna quidem cliuosi glarea rurisVix humiles apibus casias roremque ministrat,Et tophus scaber etc.
Iuniper demonstrates a chalky, drie and meane seat.
The knagged Mosse mattes and cloathes the barrennest Mountaines with horned shoots, but promises that the Minerals of Iron, Leade, Tinne and Coale, shall Counteruaile the infertiltie of Soile with the rich Ballaste

enwombing the intrals of his spacious Base.
And thus much for the obseruations to bee collected from the grouth of Vegetables.


CHAP. IIII.
Animalia.THe qualitie of the Soile is also not obscurely intimated by consideration of the breedage of the Animals therein produced: for it is commonly seene that Cattle, Fowle, Fish, and other liuing Creatures doe differ and varie in colour, Bone, proportion and other peculiar attributes according to their places of Breede.
The large limbed Neate, Horse and Sheepe betoken that they had their breeding in fat and rich soiles. But the small and sound Sheepe, cleane limbed Horse and Beast of meane bignesse bewraies a harde Country and shallow Crust.
In Ireland, where the soile is not deepely rancke, but moderately fertile, both in tillage and forrage, their Cattle and all other liuing Creatures (Men and Greyhounds onely excepted) are of a meane and middle stature and proportion, suitable to the soilage.
Yet the Sheepe of Cotswolde (quamuis situs sit and collinus and gracilis) are of great bone, large Necks and square Bulkes.
But according to the Nature of the Countries, diuers Animals are famoused for peculier parts: so Virgil saith.

--Virosaque Pontus
Castorea, Eliadum palmas Epeiros equarum;
Continuo has leges aeternaque foedera certis
Imposuit Natura locis etc.

So wee haue the Ripon Colt, Northerne Bilder, Scotch and Welch Nags, Irish Hobbie, Spanish Iennet.
The English and Frizeland Steedes, Barbarian-Coursers, Cappadocian Hunters.
The Sicilian Horse is praised for swiftnesse as are also the breede of Libia and Siculia, the Moorian for valour and courage, the Dutch Mare is in request for the Caroach, and Thessalonian Mares for battell.
The Parthian Horse is famed for nimblenesse and dexteritie in running: The Median is exceeding faire and great: the Sardinian faire and nimble: the Misseean is goodly, shapie, easie and submissiue.
The Marsh and Holland Oxe is preferred for draught, the Lancashire and Darbyshire for tallow, hide and horne, and these are short legged, of square bulke and black haire, the other are tall, and (for the most part) party-coloured.
The Methol Rabbet is famed for fatnesse and fleshinesse: the Cotswould weather for large body, deepe, fine, white, and soft fleece: Norffolke Mutton for sweetnesse, but Lemster Ore merits the preheminence (though it be short) for a purely-fine, soft and crisped Staple.
The Goates of Angori are hung with shag ground-deepe, but those of Morroco haue their haire of ordinary length and refined smallnes.
English For bignes, strength, and fiercenesse. Mastiffes, Gase Hounds (or Lurchers) and Tu^blers, are in special request: so Westphalian Bacon.
Russia breeds white Beares and blacke Foxes, and Island white Partridges, Phesants, Faulcons, and Hares. Pegu carries the Palme for Parrets, and Muske-Cats, and Ceiland (nigh Calicut) for Elephants.
The Vandall Trout is held in high esteeme, and wee approoue Wytham and Ancam, this for Eeles, and that for Pikes, English Pikes, and Oysters.
So the Barbarie and Pembrokeshire Faulcons, and Tercell-gentles, Island Ierfalcon and Ierkin, Irish Merline, Goose-hawlke, and Cocke of the wood, English Hobbie, and Sparrow-hawlkes.
And in regard of such diuersities coincident to many creatures, by reason of their Countreys of breede, it is remarkeable to obserue the seuerall particulars peculiar vnto them: as in Horses their stature, courage, cleannesse of limbes, soundnesse and seruiceablenesse; in sheep their bulke, depth and puritie of Staple; in Neat their bone, hide, and haire, in Rabbets their furre and fatnesse: and the like of other things according to their kind.
And thus much of earth appropriate.


CHAP. V.
WAter Appropriate is either Commorant, viz. confined within the plot.Waters. Or Current, not terminated within the limits thereof.
Comorant. Stagnant.The first is either Stagnant, as standing Pooles, Ponds, Lakes, Loughes, Meeres: Or stillant, viz: Springing or bursting forth of the bowels of the earth, as Wels, Fountaines, Bathes, etc.
Fluent. Current.The second is either Fluent, as Rils, Brookes, Riuers, springing, and appearing with their first source within the bounds of the Plot:Influent. Or Influent, viz: dimayning from elsewhere, and flowing or passing by or through the precincts and confines of the Plot. And to this place may also bee referred all sweeping or floating Waters, which flit and fleete to and fro with wind-catches,Floating. such as bee the Waters falling and descending from Vplandish countreys by land-floods surrounding Fens, and other Flats.
And both these sorts of Current Waters, though they passe thorow, and beyond both the plot and Priuiledge of the same, yet so farre forth as they may be prescribed and intituled to the bounds or liberties thereof, they are thereunto appropriate. So much for Matter Appropriate: Communicate followes.



CHAP VI.
COmmunicate Matter is that which is participable to the Plot together with other Places,Matter co^municate. and may bee referred to Water Transient and to the Climate.
Waters Transient are Riuers, Brookes,Waters Transient. Flouds (whence so euer dimayning) which passing beyond the extention and priuiledge of the Plot are communicably imparted to it, and to some other.
The Climate may also not improperly bee admitted as Communicate,Climate. in regard it may be said to bee the same (and in some sort not immateriall, by reason of the inseperabilitie thereof) sans manifest change, in a greater circuit then the limits of one Lordship, or an ordinarie Plot, doe vsually extend vnto, yet in the Suruey of whole Continents and vast Countries the Climate is not excluded from Appropriates:Latitude. But howsoeuer you distinguish, it is not impertinent perticularly to be penned downe, viz: in what degree of longitude and latitude the Plot is situate, and also in what Ayre, as Pellucid, milde, subtill, cleare, sweet, persant, soone hot and colde, healthfull: Or grosse, close, foggie, sharpe,Aire. fenny, vaporous, vnholesome: in what proportion of heat, colde, moisture, drinesse: what windes, stormes, gusts, are most remarkeable: what ordinarie effects and accidents, are vsually obserued to ensue, and succeede vpon immoderate fals of wet, or long continuance of drowth: And what Diseases as Catarrhes, Feuers-Fluxes, etc. are most frequent and common. And the like for Cattell.
And besides these and the former obseruations and distinctions,Nature of Waters. there is a peculiar intimation to be made of the nature and goodnesse of Waters.
Clay-waters are sweet, thick, fat, and potable, requiring the least proportion of Malt for Brewing.
Waters which haue a stony and grittie Current, doe by strayning thorough the same become cooler, pure, sweet, holesome, and light of disgesture.
Springs dimayning from thicke sand, and slender grauell, quickly gather mudde, and they are not durable, pibbles and grosse grauell affoord good and pleasant waters, were they of continuance.
The Marle grauell, stonie sand, and redde stones produce best Waters.
The red stones with Plinie carry chiefe preheminence for euerlasting Springs, and water, coole and simply the best.
But the particular notifying of the Natures of ordinarie Waters, may bee with facilitie effected by the exact knowledge of the peculiar attributes, and properties of good Water.
Cognisance of good Water.The best Waters are those that deriue their Sources, and Originals from Rockes, or stonie Fountaines irradiated with the Orient-Sunne, sliding in channels of hard and compact grauell or sand, repleat with redde stones, or blacke and burnt carbuncle stones, of limpid cleerenesse, light in poize and disgestion, quicke in conuersion of heat and coldnesse, cooler in Summer then in Winter, sans taste, smell, and colour, yet readily taking tinctures and qualities infused, leauing no discoloured spots by standing simple in a cleane vessell, nor excrements by decoction, by imparting neat and pure complexions, sound breasts, and cleere voices to the natiue Inhabitants.
Aquae Calidae.Besides these ordinary waters, there be Aquae Calidae, other waters indued with medicinable qualities acquired by vertue of some Minerall, from whence they dimaine: as Bathes, Wels, Fountaines, springing from Mines of Nitre, Sulphure, Allome, Bitumen, etc.
There be also Waters both vpon the Coast and within the land (as at the Namptwich, etc,) of so brackish a Brynage, that they wil be conuerted to Salt by boyling.Brynage.
Other waters tho they be not conuertable in approued measure and goodnes to Salt, yet they haue vertue to augment and refine salt which is boyled in them: so the Zeelanders boyle Spanish salt in Sea-water, to the increase of 45. in the hundred, that of Portingale 35, and that of Brouage 25.
Some Fountaines creame with a liquid Bitumen, like to the lake Asphaltus, as at Pitchford in the Countie of Salop.
Now for Repletion,Repletion. it intimates howe and wherewith the Plot is fraught, stored and replenished both with Vegetants, and Animals: viz.
For woods, how peruiable, how penetrable, how enterlaced, as Timber with Tinsell, Coppice, or vnderwood: what Trees, Plants, Shrubs: what Fruitage, Mastage, Gummage: what Hawlkes, Fowle, Venery, etc. are therein found and produced.
For Pasture, and Meadow; how and with what Herbage the Crust or Sword is matted, mantled and swarthed: what decrement by Mosse, Weedes, Water, Stones, etc.
So in Waters, the kinds, goodnesse, and store of Fish, and Fowle, both peculiar and common, would bee recorded.
And thus much may suffice for the Naturall Matter; It followeth to entreat of the Artificiall.


CAP. VII.
THe matter may also be said to be Artificiall,Matter Artificiall. in respect of labour and industrie conferred vpon or about the Subiect and Adiunct of the Plot.
These incidents to the Subiect are comprehended vnder Tillage, and ground Plots.
Tillage.Tillage generally taken may comprehend all maner of husbandings of grounds, but it is heere limited to Vertilage and Fertilage.
Vertilage.Vertilage consists in Deluage and Fictilage.
Deluage.Deluage is applyed about preparing, and putrifying of the Earth by stirring, tossing and turning of the same, according to the Poet.

Et cui putre solum, namque hoc imitamur arando: viz. Vt arando solum sit putre: Neque enim (inquit Columella) aliud est colere quam soluere and fermentare terram.

And this Deluage is distinguishable into Caruage and Scaphage.
Caruage.Caruage comprehends all sorts of plowing of Grounds, as well ordinarie, viz. for Graine, Hempe, Line, etc. As Extraordinarie, viz. for Woods, Woade, Dyers-weede, Rapes, Cole, Saffron, Mill, Millet, Panick,Scaphiage. Amilcorne, Spelt-corn, Garences, Dewgrasse, Iobs-teares, Comin-seede, Annise-seede, Worme-seede, Cotton-seede, Canarie-seede, etc.
Scaphage is the digging, deluing, and preparing of the Soile with Spades or other handie-tooles for the sowing, setting, planting, and propagating of Seedes, Hearbs, Plants, Trees, etc. and is most conuersant in Gardens, Hort-yards, Hop-yards, Vine-yards.
And here it is expedient to animaduert what choice, selected, and endenized Hearbes, Plants, Fruits and Phisicall Simples be implanted and bestowed, with their Growth, Repletion, Fruitage, Fecunditie, with Contriuage both of Plots and Plants.
Fictilage.Fictilage is the forming and transforming of ye Matter in form or substance; as in making of Tile (for thack, roofe, crest, gutter, pauing) Brick, Pots, Tabaccopipes, To^nel or Conduit-pipes, Glasse, Purslane, and other Plasmature. If therefore the Plot doe affoord any Earth or

Clay, which may be accommodated to such purposes, it behooues to record the same.


CHAP. VIII.
FErtilage consists in the enriching of the Soyle,Fertilage. and the Rectifying of the Production. And in pursuite of this practise, diligent consideration must be had of the variation of the Plot, from the due Habitude of a rich and battle ground; to the like and equall condition, whereof, it must be endeuoured by appropriate meanes to reduce the same, or at least to correct and qualifie the vndue Habitude in the eminentest exorbitance.
And it shall not bee amisse to particularize the Natures and qualities both of good and badde soyles, to the end their distinctions may be facilized.
The Nature and goodnesse of ground is diuers waies be-tout and manifested; as by the mixture, temperature,The Nature of grounds how known. colour, compacture, touch, weight, taste, smell, etc. together with the voluntarie Production and Repletion of the Plot.
Such a diffused mixture of Clay and Sande,Mixture. moysture and dryeth, heat and cold as confounds their distinctions of deriuing appellation, from the eminent predominance of any particular qualitie inherent in the soyle, carries a generall approouement of goodnesse.
Virgill infers the best layer for Tillage to be an Earth which is blackish and darke, not too compact,Blacke. of a deepe crust, viz. fat vnder the share, though it goe a deep pitch, well putrified and resolued, etc.
Nigra fere and presso pinguis sub vomere terraOptima frumentis etc.
And Mancinellus saith, it must bee neither moyst nor drie, waxing black after the plow, easie to be tilled, and where Rooks runne fluttering after the share at the verie

heeles of the holder, and that not of ranke, but moderate fruitfulnesse, with which the deprecation of the Poet, doth not vnfitly concurre, where he shewes that moist layers, are knowne by ranke and aboundant grasse.

Humida maiores herbas alit, ipsaque iusto
Laetior: ah nimium ne sit mihi fertilis illa,
Neu se praeualidam primis ostentat aristis.

But notwithstanding the preheminence giuen to the blacke and darke colour,Red. some are induced to preferre the red layer, and so much the rather for that Adam (who was immediatly created of Earth) importeth Earth of a redde or ruddy colour: And experience also giues instance of diuers such soyles (though not so frequent to confirme euerie man in the same opinion) of wondrous worth and fertilitie, amongst which the Territories of the Towne of Armagh in Ireland, are famoused for lasting and perpetuall battlenes, as hauing time out of minde, as appeares partly by their vaste dung-hils, pestering both yards and streets, without any kinde of manuring, yeelded plentifull increase of grasse and graine, howsoeuer the Natiues attribute this continuing richnesse of the soyle to the speciall benediction of their Sainted Patron Saint Patricke.
Compacture found by the stowage.Some let not to conclude in commendation of the Soile vpon the bare experiment laid downe by Virgil for distinguishing betweene open and rare soyles, and such as are condense and close, where he wils to sinke a pit in some solid place, and to take out, and breake the earth, and after to tread it in againe, and if it swell aboue the former height, they iudge it rich according to the proportion of the supereminence, if it prooue euen and flat, they esteeme it meane, if it settle vnder, in^ertile. But the Poet commends that which is rare, and not condense, for producing of grasse and plants fit for broouage, and browsage of sheepe, and for Vines; and that which by

filling the Fosse appeares to bee compact and dense, hee intimates to yeeld large and tough furrowes, and destinates it to Tillage.

Rara sit, an supra morem sit densa requiras,
Altera frumentis quoniam fauet, altera Baccho,
Densa magis Cereri, rarissima quaeque Lyaeo;
Ante locum capies oculis, alteque iubebis
In solido puteum demitti, omnemque repones
Rursus humu^, and pedibus summas aequabis arenas:
Si deerunt, rarum; pecorique and vitibus almis
Aptius vber erit: sin in sua posse negabunt
Ire loca, and scrobibus superabit terra repletis
Spissus ager; glebas cunctanteis crassaque terga
Expecta, and validis terram proscinde Iuuencis.

And the fat soyle he saith, dissolues not,Moulding. being laboured in the hands, but becomes clammy, coheres, and cleaues to the fingers: and that Earth that by moulding in the hand doth clift and cleaue, and resolue into powder, or moulde, argues a barren, and leane layer.

Pinguis item quae sit tellus, hoc denique pacto
Discimus; haud vnquam manibus iactata fatiscit,
Sed picis in morem ad digitos lentescit habendo.

The poize and colour (saith the Poet) are euident,Weight. but the scorched and noysome chilnesse of the soyle is bewrayed by the voluntarie growth of Pitch-trees, Ewes and blacke Iuie:
--At sceleratum exquirere frigusDifficile est; piceae tantum taxique nocentesInterdum, aut hederae pandunr vestigia nigrae.Taste.
For deprehending and finding out the taste of the Earth, Virgil prescribes a generall Specimen in his conclusion for triall of salt and bitter soyles; viz. to fill close wicker baskets with the earth and water, and then to runne and straine through the water by treading or pressing, and so by the taste of the water to iudge of the Earth by the qualitie imparted:
--tu spisso vimine quallosColaque praelorum fumosis diripe tectis;Huc ager ille malus dulcesque a fontibus vndaeAd plenum calcentur, aqua eluctabitur omnisScilicet, and grandes ibunt per vimina guttae,At sapor indicium faciet manifestus, and oraTristia tentantum sensu torquebit amaror.
Ponticke Worme-wood bewraies a bitter and barren soyle, according to Ouid:
Turpia deformes gignunt absinthia campi,Terraque de fructu, quam sit amara docet.
Smell.If somewhat before Sunne-set in the first rain-fall ensuing a drought, or in earing, the Earth shall breath forth an aromaticall odour and sweet sauour, it is held an infallible signe of a temperate fertilitie: And that ground which exhailes and breathes-forth exile and fumie vapours quickly vanishing, which attracts humors and selfely expels them, which inuests and cloathes it self with a close swoord of fresh-greene grasse is parabile, gentle, and plyant for the plowe, good for graine, Elmes, Vine-yards, and Oliuets.

Quae tenuem exhalat nebulam, fumosque volucreis,
Et bibit humorem, and cum vult ex se ipsa remittit,
Quaeque suo viridi semper se gramine vestit,
Nec scabie and salsa etc.

Cato in two significant Epithites (sed per transennam) comprehends the seuerall attributes,Pulla and Cariosa. both of a good and bad soyle, viz: Pulla and Cariosa.
Plinie disentrauerses the meaning of Pulla to imply a blackish, gentle, mellow, and tender soyle, and such a one (saith he) is determined to be best, both for Tillage, and worke, because by Tenera is intended a soft and plyable earth.
Production.And amongst other signes of a good soyle, hee enumerates Wall-wort, Skeg-trees, Brambles, the little wilde bulbous Crow-toes, (called our Ladies Cow-slip)

Clauer-gras, Trefoile, Melilot, Oakes, Wilde Peare-trees, and Wildings, to betoken a temper appropriate for Wheate and White-Corne. And this is the more probable, if they be plentifull in number, and ranke in growth. And both he and Virgil, commend the soyle to bee singular good for Corne, where woods haue been lately stocked vp:
Aut vnde iratus siluam deuexit arator,Et nemora euertit multos ignaua per annos:
The qualities of a badde soyle are implyed in the Epithite Cariosa,Barren layer. which Plinie explaines to import a Wood-like rottennesse, viz: drie, spungeous, ful of holes, rugged, hoarie, olde, and hollowe.
And Virgil affirmes, that the barren ground waxeth pallid and whitish after the plowing:
At rudis enituit impulso vomere campus.
To these may be added salt, bitter, chauning, burnt, parched, soale-bound, choaked, colde, and wet spewing grounds.
To conclude:Characters of rich soyles. Out of the premisses it may be colected, that the best soyle in generall, consists in a wel-seasoned mixture of a blackish moulde which is light, deepe-fat, sweet in taste and odour, murling, plyable, mellow, of moderate warmth, not stowable in the primer continent, shining blacke after the share, dulcique vligine laeta, and rich in radicall humour.
So much for the knowledge of ground.


CHAP. IX.
THe Nature and qualitie of Grounds thus layde downe,Enriching. and the present state and Habitude duely considered, the meanes befitting for the Enriching of the Soyle will be more euident.
The enriching of Grounds doth consist in Clearing and Chearing.
The clearing of the Ground is conuersant in disburthening the Soile from incumbrances and annoyances, as Water, Stones, Weedes, etc.
Surroundings.Surrounded grounds may be won by Sewing them with competent Draines, Tonnels, Goats, Sluces, and such like, if the Water-fall be sufficient; otherwise some Enginarie aide must bee assistant to mount the water by Screwes, Pullies, Poizes, by causing Vacuums, or reinforcing of Spirits into narrow straights and Cylinders.
And to retriue the difference twixt the line of Leuel, and the Circular or Water-leuel; to the Earths Semi-diameter (viz: 3436 4/11 Italian Miles) squared, add the square of the distance propounded, from the square roote of their Totall take 3436 4/11: the Remainder is the difference.
Bogges.Spungy and boggy grounds must be intertraced (corresponding to the Current or Discent) with Trenches of some eighteene inches breadth both at toppe and bottome, and where the toughnesse of the swarth or turffe wil permit some spare spaces, may be vnder mined; but to preserue all the sweard, you may couch good coggles, al-alongst the Trenches a competent height, and the soddes vpon them, so the water will soake and draine thorow: And this practise is most approouable and peculiar in mildring Clay, which otherwise by shooting and melting downe into open Trenches, would choake vp the water-passages.
Stones.For Coggles, Flint, Pibbles, Shingles, and other stones hindring the earing, and oppressing the graine or grasse, the conceit (in Aiax) of setting hable Vagrants to earne their Almes, is not vnworthie imitation, whether to the Lime-kill, house, high-way, ponde, foord, or other vse.
For Vegetable impediments, as Bushes, Shrubs,Bushes. Broome. Bryers, Furres, Whynnes, Broome, etc. they being once rooted vp by dogging or grubbing, the Plot must be well plyed with the Plow, and sewen some Crops successiuely after: to which earing if well-soyling with good Marle, and Stall-dung be added, they will bee vtterly extinguished, though they be rooted in a barren, hot and drie soile, their proper element; but the cause being remooued (vt supra) the effects of producing these bad burthens must needs surcease by consequence.
The infusion of Lupine flowers in Hemlocke iuyce caste vpon Shrubbe roots, is said to kill them; but this is too curious.
Linge, Heath or Hather, in salt, sandie,Heath. drie and barren soyles will die and decay, if the distemper inherent be reformed by manurings with fatte marle, rich and rotten moulde, etc.
If they grow in grauelly colde Earth, they require Stable dung, but in grauelly colde Clay drenched with blacke water, Lime and Chalke worke best effects, by soaking vp the superfluous Water, killing the Heath and comforting the Earth.
Brakes Brakin or Ferne,Ferne. though it cannot be cured with avulsion, by reason of the ranke power of regerminating or increase, retained in euerie particle of their roots, which are so recurued as they are not possible to be plucked vp without some Remainders: Yet being cut downe in their infancie, and cast vpon their own roots, they will suffocate and destroy themselues, especially if they be therewithall Sheepe-folded and ground-fedde with ruminant Cattell.
Flags, Sedge, Rushes,Flags. and other weeds abounding in boggie and spungie grounds, doe wither and waste away, by the superfluous moisture which breeds and feeds them, being drawne forth by draynage; but if the Plot be pestered with Alders, you labour in vaine to euacuate

the wet before the Trees or Bushes bee eradicated, for their roots do naturally attract so much moisture for their nutriment, that all the ground adiacent will be eft-soones choaked with a continuall cold wet.
Thistles.But the former weeds with Thistles, Hemlocks, and all sappie weedes cut downe in Wood-seare, and often mowne againe whilst they are tender, their roots will putrifie and rotte ouer-burthened with affluent iuyce wanting due and woonted passage for growth: and the Thistle stalke, must not be permitted to rest greene neere to the earth, for by the euaporation thereof, it will adder-like reuiue and roote againe.
BurresRich Grounds pestered with Burs, Hemlocks, Nettles, and ranke weeds are commodiously disburthened by sowing them with Hempe, Line, Mustard-seede, etc.
Rushes.Rushes, ranke sower grasse, Prie and Quitch-grasse, Mosse, Weedes, etc. In waterie colde Clay, are destroyed with Marle, Lime, Chalke, Vraic, Soote, Cole-dust, Soape and other Ashes, Shauings of Horne, Burning of Beate.
Mosse.Mosse generally is destroyed with Doues and Hens-dung, and it putrifies being turned-in with the Plow: But Bushes, and Shrubs, must bee also remooued, for by their oft-droppings of wette retained after showers, mists and deawes, the swarth or turffe is so infrigidated and chilled, that being continued for or conuerted to meadowe, or grazing, it eft-soones reassumes his mossie habite, though the Plot bee not naturally prone and inclining thereto.
But a scurffie hungry Mosse and small Lung-wort, dispersed ouer an hot, drie, and heartlesse ground, is best destroyed with a slimie, and oylie Marle.
Ant-Hils.Where Mosse, Ant-hils, and Mole-hils doe abound, it is excellent husbandrie to eare it, and sowe certaine Crops of Oates, for they prepare all lay-grounds, especially if they be sower and soaked with wet.
And for Ant-hils I haue obserued a rich increase of Oats (in an indifferent soyle) sowne in the very mould of the hils (being many and great) castabroad and well harrowed without plowing-vp the plain turffe, the summer season proouing not too drie.
The quartering of the sweard of Ant-hils, casting their ballas't, and playning their Plots for pasture, are so frequent and approoued, as there needs no demonstration.
Wilde Oates pestering and pilling of Tilthes, are best destroyed by Summer fallowings.Oates.
And so much for Clearing of Grounds.


CHAP. X.
THe Chearing of Grounds consists in the curing of their infirmities,Chearing. inherent naturally or by acquisition, and in the refection, and refreshing their weake and languishing vertues.
Clayes and all grounds distempered with colde and moisture, are cured and cherished with stable-dung,Cold and moist. Doues-dung, folding, burning, lime, soote, iron sinders of the furnace beat small and sowen thinne, and with Coale, Ferne, and Soape-Ashes.
Barren hot sandy-soyles, and hot drie Earth producing parched grasse and dwarffie Mosse,Hot and drie. doe craue stal-dung, street-soyle, pond-mudde, rich mould, fat marle, Mawme or Riuer-slubbe, scowrings of hedge-rowd Ditches, slimie or moorish earth or Murgeon to helpe all defects.
And Virgil saith,
--Arida tantumNe saturare fimo pingui pudeat sola:
Nor is the sheepe-folding and foddering, and the Compost of putrified Henbane, Hemlockes, leaues of Apple-trees, willowes, etc. of lesse efficacie.
Brittle and fickle Mould of meane temperature

twixt hot and cold,Brittle Mould. is best soyled with well rotted horse-dung.
Spewing.Spewing grounds ouer-soaked with sower moisture are well releeued by being sowne with Oates, for by their arifying and drying qualitie they sucke out and consume that noysome humour.
Boggie.Boggie and spungie grounds are not a little setled, fastened and firmed by frequent ouer-flowing them with Fords or Land-flouds,A Paradox. affording a fatte and slimie substance or slubbe.
Stiffe-Clay.The stiffe colde Clay craues Ashes, especially of roots stocked vp, Chaulke, Sea-sand, Malt dust sowen thinne on the tilth, lime incorporated with Stable-dung, salt.
Soal-bound.Crust-clung and Soale-bound soyles craue Caruage for prest and peculiar Gaole deliuerie, this lightens and looseth the soyle, and enlargeth and prepares way to the operation of the radicall humour, and consequently serues in lieu of Compost.
Chapping.Chapping grounds, chinking, or chauming with Cranies are cured, and stiffe-cold spuing grounds, are admirably relieued and fertilized, by burning the stubble, fegge, or turffe; whether that by closing vp the Chinks, it auerts the extremities of wet, winde, frost, and Sunne, whereby the seede might be suffocated, blasted, starued or parched, or the soyle distempered; Or that it exhales and purges forth, and euaporates al hurtfull and pernicious humours; Or that it pinguifies the soyle, and imparts to the seede some secret nutrimentiue power; Or that by stirring vp the natiue heat of the Earth, it reuiues the radical and vliginque humour, and by opening and enlarging the obstructed passages, and vaines, giues entrance to the airie spirit, and iuyce that quickens the graine:
Saepe etiam sterileis incendere profuit agros,Atque leuem stipulam crepitantibus vrere flammis:Siue inde occultas vires, and pabula terraePinguia concipiunt; siue illis omne per ignemExcoquitur vitium, atque exudat inutilis humor;Seu plureis calor ille vias, et caeca relaxatSpiramenta, nouas veniet qua succus in herbas:Seu durat magis, and venas adstringit hianteis,Ne tenues pluuiae, rapidiue potentia SolisAcrior, aut Boreae penetrabile frigus adurat.
But generally all grounds, be they neuer so barren, are much bettered by burning the dryed heapes of the turffe or swarth delued, howed, pared, or plowed vp and dried, and after spread all ouer the excoriated Tilth, whether it worke as aforesaid, or that according to Plinie, it burnes vp and destroies the Seminarie of grasse and weedes, which would robbe and depriue the soyle of the rich Iuices and vertues which should feede the graine.
And the excellent effects deriued from this Beat-burning,Denshiring. haue brought the same into such approoueable request in Deuonshire, that of the frequent vse and fruitfull practise thereof in those partes, the name of Denshiring deduceth the originall.Meddowe
Sommer-cating doth greatly enhearten weake Medowes, and restore their decaying heat and vigour impeached by yeerely mowing.
In the North of Ireland,Kreatings. they do with much conuenience, by kreating and shifting their Boolies fro^ seed-fur til haruest bee inned, both depasture and soile their grounds, and preserue their graine from destruction by their cattell, and them from the Wolfe and Wood-kerne.
And the sowing of the seede of Trefoyle, or Clauers,Sowing of Seedes. Melilot, Prunel, Milfoyle, Ribwort, Septfoile, Cinquefoyle, etc. Mixed with Murling Mould, doth much inrich Meddowes and Pastures both in Forrage and Fenage.
Sea-sand diffused amongst infertile Tilthes,Sea-sand. infuses animall power of such efficacie, that it produces Crops equiualent to burthens of very battle Glebes.
And Rest to a meane layer, serues no lesse in lieu of Compost:
Nec nulla in terra est inaratae gratia terrae:
Also,
Alternis item tonsas cessare noualeisAshes.Et segnem patiere situ durescere campum.
And all Emacerated Soyles are much amended with fatte Ashes:
--NeueEffetos cinerem immundum iactare per agros.
And there is so much attributed to Rest and Ashes for inriching of soyles, that they are numbred amongst the three things seruing to increase productio^s of Crops:
Laetas faciunt segetes stercoratio, intermissio and cinerum sparsio.
Of diuers Ashes we haue before (and shal hereafter) vpon speciall occasions, made mention for their approoued efficacie in seuerall distempers. And Plinie reports that Ashes are in such request, for soylings neere vnto Po, that they burne their Horse-dung to make them; but wee are too wise, holding it ridiculous to innouate, nay to imitate any thing not approoued by continual practise, howsoeuer we haue authenticke records from antiquities to animate vs thereunto.
Rich Soyles.Wee willingly wish the fruition of soiles parallell to the Territories of Bi^acium in Affricke, which is so plyable to the Plow, that after a good ground showre, a sorry Asse and a silly old Trot, may roundly trot away with the Teeme, and so plentifull in production, that it yeeldes increase one hundred and fifty folde, but wee would grudge at the stubbornesse of the ground in a dry season, when wee found it scarce tillable with a strong Teeme of Oxen.
Or we could plausibly approoue the light and easie Tilage, and rich Graynage, by Winterton in Norfolke: the Austrian soyle tilled with a single horse; the fruitfull Plaines of Podolia where they sow but euery other

yeere (the shaked corne seruing (like Rapes) for the second seedage) the Hungarian treble haruest, the fertile Meddowes of Komora (Iled with Danubius) which produces grasse man-high, yet farre short of the Meade vnder a Bourne neere to Salisbury, where the production extendes to sixteene foote.
The Meades of Interamna, yeelding yeerely foure Mathes of Hay, etc. but we would not with like alacrity imitate the industrious paines of the ingenious Chimists, who by their diligent and intentiue husbanding their fertile fieldes, support their strangely populous Territories in farre greater wealth and plenty, then can be deriued from their trebled fruitage and afluent vintage, without their own extraordinary industry and diligence.
In rich soyles we are slacke and supine, neuer practising any new or invulgar inuention (how probable soeuer) to helpe Nature and fertilize our fieldes, but wee plod-on in the common Road of habituated husbandry, and so oftentimes come short of that proportion which good husbands reape in a farre meaner layer.
In barren and harde Countries,1. Lime. wee are force perforce vrged to some industry more then ordinary: As in the Countries of Salop, Denbigh, Flint, etc. they fetch Lime stone foure or fiue miles, to burne for battleing, and Sea-sand sixe miles to scatter on their Tilthes, in Cornewall, Deuon, Somerset, etc. And in some partes of Hartfordshire (not to defraude the industrious of any praise due to diligent devoires) they fetch Mault-dust further, and shauing of Horne aboue twenty miles,Mault-dust. Horne-shauings. to strow vpon their Arable (though it be a good soyle of it selfe) to kill the weedes, and cheare the soyle, and therby doe much increase their Crops.
In Denbighshire, and else where, they plow vp the Crust of barren soyles in thinne Turffes, with a broad winged share, then dry it in round heapes, and about

September,Burning of Beate burne in and disperse the Ashes all ouer the bared and Excoriated groundes, and thereby refresh their faint and hungry sterility, to an incredible production of Oates.
In Flintshire, they soile their sandy layers (both blacke and red) being seckie,2. Lime. tough and wet, with lime made of a dunny gray stone, hewed forth of the Rockes and broken with yron malls (though the smooth hard beach on the Sea-shoares burnes to a purer white) and after burning, lay it thicke vpon the layer, leauing it to be slecked with the next showre, by which being dissolued and then intermedled by the plow with the soyle, it puffie-lights and party colours the same, and produces diuers rich Crops; The vse thereof is also well approued for their Claies in thinner quantitie: but they teasil their perring wild sand with stall dung.
Slecked Lime.About Workensope in Nottinghamshire, their best Compost is slecked Lime (sixe quarters to an Acre) sowne vpon the Tilth, for two Crops, for Winter corne in Sommer, the other contrary, and this giues good increase, not so much through the imparture of any fastening facultie, as by fastening the wilde loose sand of their light, hotte, and red layers: And though the small show of winter verdure giues wanne hope, yet his faire May-florish reviues the drooping spirits of the doubtful and wauering experimenter, with ful assurance of a rich vesture for haruest.
The quantity of Compost.And generally for the quantity of dung, it is held best to Manure oft and little, for ouer dunging burnes away the heart of the soyle.
The better the soyles are, the lesse Compost they craue, but grounds not dunged grow cold and weake, howsoeuer some are so battle in fertilitie, that their ranckenes cannot with continued tillage be sufficiently abated; as the Territories of Tacape mentioned by Plinie.
But, to speake somewhat of the qualities of Compost, there are diuers kindes of dung,The quality. and sundry opinions touching their goodnes and efficacie.
Marcus Varro attributes the chiefe esteeme to the dung found in the Bartons of mewed Blacke-birdes,Birdes. both for tillage and forrage.
Pullen and Landfowle are commended for their dung, but all water fowle reiected.Poultry.
Columella commends Pidgens dung,Doues. and with vs it carries chiefe preheminence for due prizall of worth.
Many giue the first place to mans excrements (the Ballast of Ajax) but the excessiue heate therof would be qualified and abated with the sweepings, parings,Ajax. and filth of house floares.
Some preferre mens Vrine, when hide-haire hath beene soaked therein, with Lime in a Tanne-fat, others commend the Vrine mixt with water.
Diuers affirme the Asses dung to bee best, most prepared,Asse. and presently fit for the earth (whereas other dungs require time to putrifie) but Plinie is contradictory.
But for generall approouement, the Treddles of Sheepe and Goates may passe for current.Sheepe.
Next followes the dung of Neate,Neate and Horses. then of Horses and Mules.
The Ordure of Swine is current with some for good Compost, but it seemes by Columella,Swine. that it best fits the Asse-pasture, whose forrage is Burres, and worse baggage, but doubtlesse the immoderate heat therof burnes vp the radicall humour of the soyle.Lime
For Lime I haue spoken sufficiently before of the Moderne vse thereof, nor was it in lesse request amongst the Heduans and Pictones for fertilizing their fields.
Cato prescribes an Artificiall Compost of Litter,Compost. Artificiall. Lupines, Chaffe, Beane stalkes, Leaues and Branches of Mast-holme, and Oakes laide to putrifie.
Optimum Stercus.But as Oculus Domini saginat equum, so dayly experience approoues Domini Vestigia to be Stercus optimum.
Vegetables.Dane-wort, Hemlocks, dead-leaues, ranck-weedes, Ferne mowne in August, Sea-weedes etc. withered, cast on Tilthes and foulded with sheepe, doe very much profit. And no lesse beeing cast into the Cratch-yard all Winter, and bestowed on the fallowes next September and October.
Vraic.And Vraic or Orewood, (Alga Marina) is diuersly applyed for soyling. In Ireland they rot it in great heapes, from Sommer to Sommer, and then cast it on their Tilthes for two or three Crops.
In Anglesey, they plow it in without putrifying for two Crops in any soyle.
In the Ile of Gersey, they dry the weede for fewell, and with Ashes fertilize their fallowes no lesse then with Marle.
In Cornewal they vse both Orewood, Sea-sand, and Sea-flubbe for soylings,
Sata.The very fruites of the earth being sowne doe serue well for batling, as Buck-wheat or Brancke, Pease, Vetches, Beanes, Fasells, Madder.
Sic quoque mutatis requiescunt faetibus arua.
And Columella saith, Medica agrum Stercorat.
Lupines.The sowing of Lupines is no lesse approoued for bettering the Tilth, but especially if they be turned in with the Plowe, and so left to putrifie, about their flowring.
And because white corne is commonly a soaker of the soyle, the Poet counsels to sowe it after Pulse and fatning graine.

Aut ibi flaua seres mutato sidere farra
Vnde prius laetum siliqua quassante legumen,
Aut tenueis faetus viciae, tristisque lupini
Sustuleris fragiles calamos, Syluamque sonantem.

Saffron.Nor is Saffron inferior to fatning graine, insomuch

as their bulbous rootes doe so inrich the ground, that after three yeeres continuing the same with Saffron, (as Master Camden affirmes) at the rate of eightie or one hundred poundes new (but twenty dryed) vpon an Acre, the soyle about Saffron Walden, produces great store of Barley, for some eighteene yeeres without Compost, and then againe refuses not his former fruit.Pillers of the soyle.
But Wheate, Barley, Woade, Vetches, Fenigreeke and all Pulses, plucked vp by the rootes, are great impairers and soakers of the soyle: And Line, Poppy, and Oates doe burne and pill the Tilth. Solo virus Ciceris and Lini; the one with his salt, and the other with his hotte qualitie. Tremelius. The Poet.

Vrit enim lini campum seges, vrit auena,
Vrunt lethaeo perfusa papauera somno.

And Theophrastus saith, that Oates by their drynesse and multiplicity of rootes, doe arifie and extenuate all Soyles.
And in this place it shall not be impertinent,Marle. to make some mention of Marle, sith the good approoument both of the ancient and moderne vse thereof is such, as may iustly challenge to be had in no meane esteeme for manurings.
Plinie affirmes that there are but two kinds of Marle in Nature, viz. either hard and churlish,Two sortes of Marle. or gentle and fat, and these are tryed by the hand: and both for graine and grasse (though we say Marle kills both weedes and grasse in arable) held in good request.
And the various sorts of Marles, found out by inuentiue wits, doe all of them fall vnder the two former kinds, whether they bee white, red, Columbine, stony, Sandie, Clay-soyle, etc. or what others.Leucargilla.
The white Clay or Marle is fat, sharpe and mordant and yet the best. It is vsed for moist cold grounds in Magara, as our Chaulke with vs.
And the white Chaulkie Clay,Tripela. vsed by Gold-smithes

lies deepe in Britaine, and lasteth for soyling eighty yeares.
The Fullers Chaulky Clay mixed with a viscous and fattish Earth,Gliscomargon. is another white Marle, and is better for graine then for grasse, yet, howsoeuer it suppresses weedes and grasse in corne (as all Marles doe) the Tilthe, after haruest be inned, growes so growthsome that it yeeldes an after-math, for Crowen Hay.
This Marle continues the soyle in good plight thirty yeeres, but if it be laide on ouer thicke it choketh the ground.
Capnumargos.The light red Marle intermingled with some stony gritte full of Sand, fertilizeth both Tillage and Forrage for fifty yeeres.
In Anglesey they approoued red Marle, and in some places white, to refresh and giue life to the spent and tired Glebes.
Columbine or Pidgeon Marle, lies in lumpes and cloddes,Pelias. but with Sunne and Frost, it resolues and cleaues into thinne slakes or flakes, and serues both for corne and Hay.
In some parts of Ches-shire, they bestow forty loades of Doue-discoloured Marle vpon an Acre,The quantity. and this being Frost-mellowed and spread abroad, dissolues and incorporates with the Glebe, and so fattens the Sandy and hungry Soyle, that it repaires the charge of three or foure pound, with rich increase for twelue or sixteene yeeres. Insomuch, as to farme this wel-nigh worthlesse ground, they will Marle, Till, and Seede it for halfe the increase: And they let and set such Marled grounds, vnder twenty yeeres at an incredible rate of monies in hand.
Stony Marls.Stony and Grauelly white Marle, found amongst Springs and Fountaines, causes infinite fruitfulnesse though it be rough, but if it be laid on too thicke, it parches the very ground.
And Sandy Marle serues (for want of other) chiefely in cold moist and weely grounds.Sandie Marle.
The dry Marle sortes with moist Soyles, and fatty Marle hits the dry and leane.
For Soyles of middle temperature it skils not whether you vse the White Gold-smithes Chaulke, or the Columbine Marle.
But generally most Marles, (saith Plinie) craue to follow the Plow, that their medicinable vertues and substance may the sooner and more greedily be attracted and receiued: and a medly of dung were not amisse, to correct the ouer-rough hardnesse of maine Marles.
The Vbians enrich most fertile grounds, with any earth digged from three foote depth, and lay it foote-thick for tenne yeeres.
At Chatmosse in Lancashire, their vliginous and soaked Mosses doe recompence their meane ayre with vnctious Turffes, Wood for woorke, fewel and Candel and fat Marle to manure their Soyles.
And were we as iudicious in inuention, or industrious in imitation of the diligent, as we are supersticious in plodding in habituated and accustomed courses of husbandry, we would endeuour (all idle pretenses abandoned) to make seuerall Soyles serue interchangeably,Intersoilings each to other in true validity of Compost, by inter-soyling or seasoning the one with the other.
As Grauell and Chaulke, Clay and Sand, So light and sadde, tough and friable, hot and colde, battle and barren, etc.--Yet Plinie saies it is a meere folly and wast expence to lay fatte earth vpon leane and hungry, or dry light and thirsty vpon ouer moist and fatte.
But land-flouds,Waterings. fatte Riuers and Gusts of water participating of a slimie and muddy substance, induced and brought into Meddowes and pastures in the spring by draines, dams, inuersions from towne ditches, sewers,

wayes, streetes Tilthes, do very much comfort and reuiue them.
So Virgill:
--Huc summis liquuntur rupibus amnesFaelicemque trahunt limum.
Also,
Et cum exustus ager morientibus aestuat herbisEcce supercilio cliuosi tramitis vndamElicet: illa cadens raucum per leuia murmurSaxa ciet, scatebrisque arentia temperat arua.
The Riuer. Nilus.So the Egyptian Soyle (though it bee a blacke and battle layer) deriues the aboundant fruitfulnesse from the Riuer Nile, whose inundation supplies the want of raine, and feedes and fattes the Earth with the slime and mud left behind it.
But I shal be taxed for this tedious penning of those petty experciments, and therefore I will omit to speake of the parti^ular bestowing of Salt, Soote, Ashes and Powder of Hornes, Oistershels, etc. the infusion of Lupine flowers, Wine Lees, and the like, and so much the rather because their cost or scarcitie derogates from their goodnes in efficacie.
This may therefore serue for chearing of grounds, and consequently for enriching of the soyle.


CAP. XI.
Rectifying.THe Rectifying of Production, is accomplished by bestowing the grounds to purposes, suiting their appropriate Natures with due regard to the Sympathie and Antipathie, betweene Seedes and Soyles, Plants and Plottes.
Sande.The great fast Yellow Sand, is not vnfit for Graine The close Sand with some earthy mixture is good for Grazing; The White and dry for Woodes and Wilde

fruits; But a loose and light Sant swords slow and thin, yet with rest and lecking sommers it yeelds good Corne:
More particularly:
Wheat craues a fat Clay (and dry to make it hard and compact) and durty Seedage.Graine.
Barley loues a mellow Clay and a dustie March.Barly.
Rie suits with a Sandy soyle and drownes i'th hopper.Rie.
Beanes looke for a strong moist Clay,Beanes. if you expect stiffe ware and great Burthens.
Pease presse for a putryfied Clayie mould of meane strength.
Vetches are fruitfull in Creachie Countries.
Lentills like well of a leane and vntilde Sandy Soyle and a dry season.
Lupines loue dry Sand and Grauell and neede no Plow.
Oates doe well in a leane dry Clay, though they peele a better and prepare a moist.
But for rough dry and barren soyles Buck-wheate is best to fill the measure and manure the fielde.
Spelt-corne in a fat moist layer degenerats from bad to better viz. in three yeeres space to Wheat.
Tare, Cich and Mill loue moisture, this with loosenesse, that with fatnesse, the first with leannesse.
Pannicke is pleased with a leane grauelly or stony Earth, so it be light and moist.

Medica in putri solo hyeme decocto and stercorato vno satu amplius trecentis annis durat. Plinius.

Rice requires to be sowne in a fennye and waterish layer.
Saffron ioyes in a free Chaulkie or red sandie soyle, indifferently husbanded, but manured with Neats and Doues dung.
Woad and Blaunch would haue a strong ground, and this brookes well the roughnesse, yea in the coldest

clime, but the other must haue it in good plight.
Commin couets a layer that is fat, hot and putrified.
Hollie, Worme-wood or Wormeseede, loues both labour and a hot clime.
Caruwaies craue a good cleane and manured ground.
Anni-seede must haue a blacke rich mellow-mould, or a battle and well-dunged earth: and those and other earely sowne seedes, doe neede a thin strowing of Horse dung to rebate the force of frostie coldes.
Mustard multiplies well in a plot repleat with grauelly rubbish, but it would be moist and battle; and wel tilde also for the whitish seede.
Rapes require a broken-vp lay and a rich layer.
Hempe lookes for a fat moist laboured land plowed plaine and deepe.
Line loues a meane depth, but a very fine light, gentle and fat mould, yet a leane layer refines it, and Plinie commends Grauell.
Roots.Rootes require fat, cleane, loose and light grounds, as Potatoes, Earth-nuts, Turneps; and this in sandy layers, growes more sound, firme and delicious.
But clay produces sound, dry, delicate and large-Parseneps, and enlarges the Parslies Roote.
Onyons, Chiballs and Chiues thriue well in a red short, murly and moistish earth.
Garlicke delights in a dry vndunged but laboured ground.
Sowbread likes both labour and Compost: so doth Teasell with flattes two foot and an halfe deepe.
But large and long-rootes must also haue their layer deepe and well dunged in the bottome, if you would enlarge their growth: as for these Meateable Rootes, Parsnep, Carrot, Skirrot, Radish, Goates-beard, Caruwaies, Mirrhis.
And the like for Medicinable Rootes, as Endiue, Succory, Scammony, Aristolachia.
But if you intent a plot for seedage, let their beds bee incorporated in a medley of mould and dung.
Liquerice runnes downe with straight smooth rootes in a light loose battle and cleane laboured bed of 4. or 5. foote depth and bredth wel manured withstal-dung and Columbine Marle.
Madder respects not so much the strength of the grou^d so it be light moist sandy free well-dunged and digged 6. foote deepe and broad.
Eringoes shoote forth long rootes to a large but shallow extent, in a rough dry sandy and stony shoare.
But generally strong and long rootes neuer Sympathize with firme hard and solid soyles; nor the fibrous and flender with light and loose layers.
Artichokes, Beetes, Beanes of Egypt prooue best in fat moist and laboured plots.Olera.
The fat Ground for Phaselles or Kidney Beanes and Carduus Benedictus, with moderate warmth for Corianders Mandrake and Balme, with labour for Spikenarde, with moistnesse and lightnesse for Lettice and Purslaine, with spunginesse and cleannesse for Asparagus, with closenesse for Basill.
The Coley-florey, Rape-cole, Muske-melon, Cucumber, Gourd, Pumpion, Thorne-Apple, Apples of Loue, Spinnage, Arach, Sun-flower, etc. must haue horsedung labour and a fat layer.
Leekes looke for a loose, plaine and battle plot.
The meanly fat with dunging and digging, for Cole-worts, and Cabbage.
Sage is suited with cold clayie Earth.
The leane layer for Asarabacca, Time, Cammamile and dry for all, stony for two last, with rubbish for Capers and Orobus.
The stony grauell gratifies Fennell.
Rubbish with fine dry earth is a repast of best relish for the Rose, if rough brickie and hot, for Rue.Hearbs.
The rough dry and barren for Plowmans Spikenard.
Rough leane layers suite both Sauouries.
The Chalice or Chin-cough Mosse creeps along the barren dry grauelly ditch banckes.
The dry earth for Peionie, with sand for Paunces, sand and stones for ground-Pines, Mullein, Egrimony and (if grauelly yellow) for Neuewes.
Dry stony layers are destinate to white Saxifrage, Bugle, Lauender.
Rosemary and Iesamines rampe vp in a rotten earth, mixt with rubbish or broken tiles and bricks.
The moist layer for Conuall-lillie, Peruincle, Bistorte, Orpon, Pimpernel and meanly fat for Mints and Calamint, with compost for Chiruill and (if olde) for Margerom, if battlef or Dragons, and Liuerwort, if stony for Harts-tongue, if laboured for Peniroyall, if light for Endiue and Succory, if coole for Muncks Reubarb, and Betony, if stony and sandy for Parsly, according to the Etymologie.
The Fenny waterish Soyle by lakes and Pooles fits Comfrey, Tornesele, Butter-Burre, Marsh-Mallow, Clownes Wound-worke.
The Boggie, Sandy and Sunny plot, suits with Sun-dewe, Marsh Whorts.
Spungie lowe grounds are good for Hops (so is a crumbling fenny layer) vntrencht and wet for the Ozier-Hope which will parrallell the profit of the best Wheate in a rich soyle of equall extention.
The Knot-berries and Cloud-berries climbe and clad the tops of Moutanous fells.
Marigolds, Clary, Melilot, Spoone-wort content neither for place, clime or layer.
Trees.And all soyles are acceptable to Burrage, Buglosse, Violet.
The Apple askes a fat moist mould, blacke and Ashcolored.
Peares, Peaches, Wardens, a good clay.
Plumbes presse for a loose layer,
The Apricot, a hot sand, the Cherry a cooel and moist with some mixture of clay.
The moist plot fits the Ash, Agnus Castus, Tamariske Quince, Seruice.
The Grauell if moist is best (and sand not amisse) for the Elme, if ston for the Almond.
The Chaulke layer for Iuniper and Yew, though this brooke a light barren soyle.
Knee-holme thriues in a rough, dry barren earth.
The stony solid Clay is for Fig-trees.
The blacke soft soyle for Chesnuts.
Philberds, loue dankish places, but Walnuts hate them, and wish a hot soyle though meane in fatnes.
The Medlar and Corneill contend for a sand and fat crust.
The sandy nitrous soyle serues best for Dates: Sandy, light, leane and brittle for Mirrh and Mirtle: but these brooke no colde Regions.
Pome-granates, presse for Compost and hot Countries.
The Bay and Mulbery, beg a temperate aire, and this earnes after fat manurings, the other rests satisfied with a leane layer, so that it be solid.
The mountanous hils, delight the Almond, Seruice, Firre, Larch.
The Quince ioyes in the Plaines, so doth Beech, though Birches keepe the Hilles.
But the Indian Moly replenishes the lowly Vales.Sunne.
Diuers Plants couet to bath in Sunny rayes, as the Figge, Apricot, Peach, Plumbe, Quince, Cherry.
All whcih produce more delicate fruits being spread vpon a South wal, to shield them from Northerne iniuries, and reflect the Sunne-beames.
Nor doe many Hearbes with lesse pursuit of affection,

presse for the Sunnes enlifening comfort, as the Peiony, Goates-bearde, Sothernewood, Rue, Fennel, Lauender, Isope, Mints, Saffron, Carnations, Pinkes: Also Roses, Hoppes, Time, Spikenerd, Sage, the great Sun flower and the Ozier.
But Turnesol with opposite eager eie al daylong gazes in Titans face nere daunted with his eye-dazing lustre according to the Poet: Herba velut Clitie semper petit obuia solem: contrary to the Pudifetan which droops by day, etc.
In aprico quide^ aere multa faelicius viv unt, quae densa et crassa consistunt substantia, quoniam sole, ad calore^ lentum suum excitandum, and adducendum indigent.
But the shady reposure refreshes the Bay, Tamariske, Red Winter Cherrie, Liuerworte, Harts-tongue Betony,Shade. Margerom, Smallage, Asarabacca, Sowbread, Auens, Dragons, Mandrake, Peruincle, Orpin, Pimpernell, Basill, Strawberries, Louage, Spreading Time, Garden Cresses, Cum multis alijs quorum tenuis and subtilis facultas nimia aeris tenuitate dissipatur and disperditur, ideoque denso optime gaudent aere.
Yet Vegetables Sympathize with plots differing in temperature from their Natures.Sympathies.
The hot and dry subtile Cedar crownes the tops of the stony and snowie-cold Mountaines.
And hot and dry Hearbes are produced in cold moist soyles; as Pennie-royall, Margerom, Betony, Landcresses, English Saxifrage, Marsh-mallow, hedge Hyssop.
The dry Adders-tongue, Cowslip, Prime-Rose, and Teasill, ioy in moist and dankish places.
The hot and dry Smallage, Bitter-sweet, and Clownes Wound-worte, delight in colde and moist ditches.
Nor can the grauelly colde of rilling fountaines, extinguish the hot and dry temperatures of the water Cresse, Becabunga, Agnus Castus, Butter-Burre, Gaule.
The Bog-berry retaines his colde and dry astringence, and Rosa-Solis his hot and dry causticke qualitie, maulger the loose moistures of their layers.
Calamus Aromaticus hotte and dry craues a moarish couch.
The dry (though cold) and astringent Queene of the Meddowes replenisheth the watry moist plaines.
The White Poppy colde and moist, couets a hot and dry place.
The colde Mandrake and Sycomore couet hot Regions.
The Cucumber, Gourd, Melon cold by nature couet hot stable-dung.
So Apples of Loue, of Aethiopia, of Peru and Mad Apples relinquish not their cold and moist temperature, notwithstanding their hot regions and Horse-dung.
Peculiar Composts are also requisite for refreshing of seuerall vegetables.Composts, Peculiar.
Rue and Sage doe battle with bucke or other Ashes.
Rosemary requires Sheepes-dung, horne-shauings brickie rubble, Tartaror Wine lees.
Liquerice loues Stall-dung, and Saffron the same, and Doues dung.
Fresh mould medled with horne-shauings, is the best bed for the Vine.
Lime-stones fertilize both Vine and Oliues, and the drooping Vine reuiues with the owne Ashes.
In planting of trees it is good to mixe Sand-stones and old shells with the mould and dung, the reason is rendred by the Poet.

--Quaecunque premes virgulta per agros
Sparge fimo pingui and multa memor occule terra:Spiritus Intrabit and Seminaria Plantarum erigent vigorem suum.
Aut lapide^ bibulu^, aut squalenteis infode conchas;
Inter enim labentur aquae, tenuisque subibit
Halitus, atque animos tollent sata: Iamque reperti
Qui saxo super atque ingentis pondere testae
Vrgerent: hoc effusos munimen ad imbreis:
Hoc, vbi hiulca siti findit Canis aestifer arua.

Nitre and Oile doe make Beanes great, tender and sooner sod.

Semina vidi equidem multos medicare serenteis
Et nitro prius et nigra perfundere amurca,
Grandior vt faetus siliquis fallacibus esset,
Et, quamuis igni exiguo, properata maderent.


Quidam si (faba) triduo ante satum vrina et aqua maceretur praecipue adolescere putant. Vino semina perfusa minus aegrotare existimant.

Antipathies.But as there is affinitie betweene Plants and Plots, so is there a kind of Enmitie and naturall repugnance.
The Rose and Colewort abhorre grauell and sand; nor do the Chesnut and Fennel brooke too sandy a layer.
And dung it selfe is an enemie to Penny-royal, Rue, Ferne, Garlicke, Flower-de-luce, Plumbe, Cherry, Vine.
Neither doth Isope or Sage delight in dung or fat soyles.
And although diuers Vegetables are indifferently bestowed in soyles aires and climes, not so precisely suitting their propper exigence and that with good successe; yet could Plots of peculiar temper be conueniently contriued, no doubt their productions would bee much bettered either in quantity or qualitie.Chiefe Productions.
And hence it comes that we haue in cheife request the Heston Wheate, Fulham Parsenep, Hackeney Turneps, Sandich Carrot, Walsingham Saffron, Workensop Liquerice, Birtport Hempe, Kirton Pippin, Cambridgeshire Pearemane, English Hops, Hony and Iuniper, Halliwel Mosse, Teukesbury Mustard, Droitwich Salt.
So forren fruites, drugs, simples. etc, are as farre famed as fetched, for preheminence in meliority, acquired by appropriate ayre and layer; as Candy Oyle, Oliues,

Cipres, Zeilan Cloues, Palestine Dates, Arabian Mirrh, Banda Nutmegs, Malauar Cinamon, and Pepper, Stagonian Frankencense, Iaua Saunders, Persian Bezar, Canarie Sackes and Sugers, Oruieto Muscatell, Cracus Tabacco, China Rice, Ruber be and China-Rootes, Quito Mechoacan, Italian Sowbread, Chauchinchina Purcelain, Prussian Amber, Venice Turpentine, Spanish Cordoua, Malta Cottonwool, Camba Turbith, Syrian Scammonie, Norway Firres, Apulian and Tarentinian Wooll, Apulian Barley, Oates, Hearbes, Melons, Lemons, Siuill Orenges, Indian Ebony and Iuory,
So Masticke of Chios, Sene of Alexandria, Potatos of Virginia, Zarza parilla of Peru, Lacer of Syrene.

Hic segetes, illic veniunt faelicius Vuae,
Arboreifaetus alibi, etc.
Nec vero terrae ferre omnes omnia possunt.

Experience also shewes that the Change of Soyles for Seed, is not the least point of Fertilage;Change of Seede. as to bestow Clay Corne in sandy soyles and contrary.
So the leane Vine is best fitted with a fertile soyle, and the fertile with a leane.
The thicke and rancke braunching Vine, must bee restrained from immoderate spreading with a solid and compact layer: the thin brauncher needes a battle soyle to enlarge the Dilation.
And Plinie saies that in Venafrano their Vines are best fitted with a glareous soyle, viz. dry, leane and creachy; but in Betica the fattest layer is fittest.
But the exact and full knowledge of seuerall soyles with their due and peculiar mastering, subduing, preparing, compassing and imploying, with their seuerall orders and seasons for fallowing, twifallowing, trifallowing and seed-furre; as breaking-vp, stirring, crushing, setting-vp, casting-downe, requires more copious handling in some peculiar volume. It shall suffice in this Compendium, to haue giuen onely this superficiall

toutch or taste, relinquishing the pervestigation of the secrets of Agriculture to more capable and ingenious spirits.
And hetherto of Tillage; Ground-plots succeede.


CHAP. XII.
GRound-plots are proiectures, eleuations, and all fundamentall contriuances,Ground Plotts. destinated and accomodated to some speciall and proposed ende. And they are either Internal as Vaults, Cellers, Caues, Sincks:
Or Externall, as Groues, Arbours, Bowers, Cabinets, Allies, Ambulatories, Mounts, Mazes, Snailes, Cocke-Pittes, Bowling-Greenes, Moates, Pondes, Stewes, Draines, Dammes, Sluces, Iitties.
To these may be added Rampers, Counter-scarpes, Rauelins, Forts, Flanckers, Vammures, Curtins, Parapets, Sconces, Caualires, Pallisadoes, Bulwarks, Bastions and such like fortifications.
But I haue beene too prolixe in the Subiect: I will be more compendious in the Adiunct.


CHAP. XIII.
Adiunct.LAbour and Arte imployed about the Adiunct comprehends the Leuying and Erecting of Edifices, and Engines, in or vpon the Subiect or Plot.
Edifices.Edifices are either Principall; as Minsters, Monasteries, Churches, Chappells, Pallaces, Courts, Castels, Manour and Mansion Howses, Mesuages, Watch-Towers, Lodges, Cottages;
Or Collaterall, as Darie-howses, Conduit-howses, Stables, Barnes, Granaries, Maltings, Mil-howses, Doue-Coates.
Also buildings of Pleasure and prospect; as Tenniscourts, Banquet-howses, Towers, Theaters, Amphitheaters.
And buildings of Monument, as Piramides, Laberinthes, Obeliskes, Statuaes, Tombes.
Engines are either Militarie; as Battering-Rams,Engines. Sowes, Horses, Tortuses, Trepanes, Briccols, Towers, etc,
Or Ciuill, as Mills, for Siewing of surrounded grounds, sawing of Timber and Board, beating of Hempe, Iron-Mils, Blomaries or Finaries and Hammer Forges, Grist-milles, Gun-powder mils, Papermils, Fulling-mils, Shere-mils, Turne-broach-milles, Oyle-mills, Barke-mills, Madder-mills, whether they goe with winde, water, hand, or horse.
Likewise Cranes, Pumpes, Aquaducts, Conduits, Goates, Sluces, Tonnells.
And thus haue I passed thorrow the Matter, being the first Essentiall part of Possessions: It followes to speake of the Forme.





THE SYNOPSIS OR EPITOME OF SVRVEY METHODIZED.
SECTION .II.

Discoursing of the Residence and laying of Grounds, their increase, Boundage, and Neighbourage; and of the admeasuring, calculating and proiecting of lines, surfaces, bodies, Edifices, composing and tricking of Plottes.


CHAP. I.
THe Forme Consists in Situation and Proportion of the Subiect,Forme. and Adiunct; and in the practise thereof, the Mathematicall, and Mechanicall parts are most perspicuous.
Situation,Situation. may be said to be Resident, and Respicient.
Resident Site depends vpon the setling,Primarie. laying and lying of the grounds, and is either Primarie viz. the

Maine Forme and proiecture of the Base and Body of the Soile, wherin it is remarkeable to obserue, how it is proiected in Plaines, eleuated and lifted-vp into Hills and Mountaines, debased into Dales and Vallies, or wauing in moderate swellings and fallings, ascents and descents, etc.
Secundarie.Or Secundary bearing reference to a further residence of the Soyle, especially if it bee arable; And then we are to consider whether it be laid in due and appropriate position suitable to the qualitie and exigence of the Habitude.
Selio est terra elata inter duos sulcos.Ridges. Flats.Arable grounds are eared in Selions and that either Flats or Ridges.
The first is necessarily required in light and leane land, to the end it may the better retaine any inforced vertue, against the washing away by showers.
The second are either laide in landes or Ridges large and high or round; or in Stitches.
The lands or Ridges are fittest in fat strong and fertile grounds that be tough, stiffe, binding cold and wet, least the fatnes should suffocate the seede, or the soaking cold obtunde and dull the natiue heate and confound the vigour thereof: and in such soyles it were frugall prouidence to spare from the plow a grasse-balke of some competent breadth.
Stitches.But small Ridges or Stitches are accomodated to cold and stiffe ground inclining to barrennesse, to preuent constipation and binding together of the soile, wherby the seed wold sooner burst with swelling, than get free passage for sprowting. And these Stitches are common in Norfolke and Suffolke, euen in their light grounds, and in Hartfordshire where the Tilthes are rich: and though the Irish soile be neither immoderately colde, stiffe nor barren, yet their tillage is generally eared in small Stitches, peraduenture for that the soile is so apte to fast-matting and swoording.
Plinie approoues the best Situation for a rich Plot to be a plaine declining into the South from the foote of a Hill: so the Poet.--Quique editus Austro.The best Site


CAP. II.
REspicient Situation hath dependance vpon Boundage and Neighbourage.Boundage.
Boundage is the compassing and describing of Plots with their buttalls, metes, bounds and Coastage.
Boundage is either contiguall or Remote.
Contiguall Boundage prescribes and limits-forth the extention of lands, by immediate and selfe-continuance of the confining Boundaries; and is either simple or compound, both which may be either Actiue, intimating that the sensing or inclosing of the Plot appertaines to the Possident; Or Passiue inferring that it is inclosed or laid in seueraltie by the adiacent.
Simple Boundage is Confrontage and Collaterage, both which with all other Boundages are capable of diuers peculiar variations deriuable from the diuersity of the causes and occurrents obserued in perambulation.
Confrontage Actiue may enter the Plot with these or the like Epithetons, Abutting, Heading, facing, fronting,Confrontage steighing, etc. Or Passiue headed, faced, etc.
Collaterage Actiue, as siding, surrowing, balking,Collaterage dyling, haying, hedging or shawing, immounding, impayling, immuring, skirting, Girding, verging, mazing, couruing, recouruing, bordering, confining; also lying, Bounding, extending betweene: Or Passiue.
Compound Contiguall Boundage is more significant, as side-haying, head-shawing, etc.Compound. likewise bounded, limitted, prescribed, compassed, included, terminated, determinated, collaterally, triangularly, quarterly,

circularly, irregularly, or as the Agent. Or more particularly, as with some angle, point, corner, or stripe pointing, shooting, running, extending vpon, etc.
And sometimes this Compound Boundage implies a mutuall propertie or duety participable to the Conterminants, as bancking, balking, dyking, drayning, sewing, sewaging, rilling, brooking, riuaging, foording, alwaies confining the conterminants with the particle Cum: And yet more specially, as head-diking, side-sewing, etc. and the like Passiuely: and any of these may be admitted into the rough-booke.
Remote.Remote Boundage is requisite for retriuing and manifesting the locall proiection of Plots in supply of the defect of memorie and metes and markes contingent; and is accomplished either by Obiects remarkeable (inuisible are improper, though our Hollanders, will needes bound their Coast-lands vpon Normandy mistaking it for Norman-deepe stumbled vpon in some obliterate deedes, where Germanie might better be admitted.) as Mountaines, Hills, Towers, Steeples, or other Edifices, Trees of super-eminence and Markes, and sometimes waies, balkes, hedges, Riuers, pits and such like, may effect as much being lined, rainged, rectified, opened, disclosed or cut by extention of common right-lines from fixed or noted stations.
There is another species of this Remote or Mediate Boundage, where the Plot extendes not fully to the Meets or Bounds described, but is intercepted by some smal Intermediall; as Balke, Meere, bancke, lane, path, Rill or such like; but this manner of Bounding, though it bee frequent, is improper and defectiue, wanting that perspicuity which should giue viue Validity to all Records.
Degrees.Or by Degrees of angular production obserued by some Dioptrall instrument, whether by taking the angle,

it makes with some permanent marke, or the swaruing of the Line or Needle from the Meridian.
For Coastage as East, Southeast, South, etc.Coastage. it is inseperably incident to all Boundage, as the most Materiall and Essentiall part thereof, and in the recording thereof a vigilant and circumspect care is required to preuent errors.
And thus much for Boundage.


CHAP. III.
IN Neighbourage it is not impertinent to particularize, how the Plot is accommodated for Tillage, Meddow,Neighbourage. Pasture, Wood, water, Fewel, Fish, Fowle, Ayre, etc. as also the Confinage with Champion, Wood-land, other Lords and Mannors, with the Commodities and conueniences deriuable from the propinquitie and competent distance of Cities, Townes, Markets, Faires, Ports, Hauens, Seas, Forrests, Woodes, Wasts, Commons, Meres, Moores Riuers, Quarries, Mines, etc. by opportunity for vent and intercourse of passage for Commerce, and inter-parlee for Conuerse, etc. with the Waies and Venues to the same and their conueniency of Conduct, as by land ouer smooth, facill and firme plaines, and by water, nauigable Riuers, loughes, Lakes, etc.
And this may suffize for Situation: It followes to speake of Proportion.



CHAP. IIII.
Proportion.PRoportion consists in the generall Modell and partiticular Modulets of the Plot, and procreats Mensuration and Content.
Mensuration is conuersant in extunding the lineall extentions of longitudes, amplitudes, crassitudes, altitudes, profundities, arches, circumferences, etc.
Lineal Fals.Lineall dimensions are diuersified according to the custome of the Country, as Inches, Palmes, Spannes, Feete, Cubits, etc. and their composures and graduations are from Barley Cornes; as three Beere-Cornes in length make an Inch, three Inches a Palme, three Palmes a Spanne, one Span and @ or twelue Inches make a Foote, one Foote @ makes a Cubit, two Cubits or three Foote makes a Yard, fiue Feete make a Pace Geometricall, sixteene Foote @ make a Pearch, Pole or Lug, forty Pearches make a furlong, whereof eight make a Mile, and these are by the Standard measure of England, tho some of them in name bee but confirmed by Custome.
But the Pearch in diuers places is of different extent,Perches. diuers. as eighteene foote in some Countries, in others twenty one, in the Country of Stafford twenty foure, and twenty fiue in the Forrest of Sherewood.
And these dimensions are found or performed either Cominus or Eminus.
The first with Palme, Foote, Pace, Rod, Raipe: but vsually the Rule is most in request for Board,Measures Stone Timber, etc, and the Chaine for land measure.
DecimatedAnd to accomodate these for exact and expedite operation disme or deuide each foote of the Rule and Perch of the Chaine into decimals or Tenths, and each Tenth or Prime of the Rule into Seconds, but it shall suffice

to diuide the Prime of the Chaine into two lincks, with three rings betweene euery lincke to keepe it from crossing.
The second is retriued with Plaine-Table,Cominus. Theodelite, Sector, Circumferentor, Geodeticall-Staffe, etc. Or without instrument by the same Geometrical grounds.
The first being accomplished by approach or contingence needes no amplification, but for precise keeping in the Wadd or right line.
The Wadd is delineated either to a marke in sight or out of sight.Wadding.
If the First; let the Chaine-leaders Wadd vpon the marke by some intermediall eminence and at the setting down of euery pricke, let each man waue his mate into the right Wadd.
If out of sight and in Champion not much swelling,To a Place not in view. it is expedient to place two Assistants, the one at the marke, and the other at the eminentest Medium, and then your selfe standing at (or directly beyond or short) the station giuen, and the first Assistant erecting some visible obiect, waft the Wadders into the Wadd. The like by Night with lanthorne or Torch-light. Or from some eminent Mount or transcendence (beyond the marke and in the same extension) surmounting or Surueying the whole tract, pursue the Wadd.
But if the place cannot bee brought within view, instrumentalize the tract at Randon, the difference of intersection, found by protracting the trauerse or by angular comparison, shewes the point or degree to be pursued.
Now for remote lines the operation is produced by the doctrine of Triangles, one side and two angles,Eminus. or one angle and two sides being giuen; As to instrumentalize a distance, first point-forth two competent stations, and from the first quantulate the angle betwixt the marke and second station, and at the second station take

the angle betwixt the first Station and marke: Now the solution may be wrought either by Calculation or Proiection.Calculation.
The first depends vpon the knowledge of Sines and Tangents, and is founded vpon this Theoreme.

In all right-lined Triangles the mutuall proportion of one Latus to another, is such, as the Sines respecting their Angles are proportionall.

But for as much as this conclusion is more familiarly found out by protraction, I will deferre, the Proposition vntill another time.
By Proiection: Protract or proiect first a line representig the stationall distance,Proiection. and from each extreame extend a line including an angle equall to the peculiar angle found: the intersection of these two lines demonstrates the marke, and the distances are manifested by the Scale.
The same reason serues for heights and depthes.
And by the continued progresse of such operations the Plots and Mapps of landes, tenements, Cities Townes and Countries are produced, etc.


CHAP. V.
Plotting.THe Plotting of lands and possessions comprehends their Topographicall and Mathematicall Description, and Consists in Delineation and Tricking.
Delineation is conuersant in pourtraying the Types, Surfaces, and Scheames of the Subiect and Adiunct.Delineation
And for exact working of both these, the Plaine-Table is most accomodate: for the vse whereof and of other instrumm^ts there are peculiar Treatises extant, and therefore I will onely touch some fewe Rules in briefe.

Plaine-Table
To Plot with Plaine-Table.

At each alternate angle produce diagonalls for plant-lines to the antegrade station, and so compasse the Plot.


To Plot a field at 2. or moe stations.

Extende lines from each station to euery marke (chayning the stationall line onely)

To Rectifie the

Plot: diagone alternate angles.
Table: retro grade the Ruler.



To Rectifie the stationall line

From some competent plaine, instrumentalize the leuell distance.

To retriue leuell or horizontall lines and angles in vnleuell and hypothenusall Plots.

From 2. or more competent stations vpon a plaine (either naturall by position or rectified from remote) in the Plot or adiacent delineate the whole Plot.Horizontalls And by this Plot to giue the true content, note each line with the superficiall dimensions found by the Chaine.

To Plot irregular Arch-lines.

From the mids of the Chorde-extend a perpendicular to ye Arch, or proiect a Triangle by producing 2.Irregulars. Crures from the Chords extreames: a iudicious eye (rectified with these mensurations may (ad vnguem) pricke downe the Delineations.

The best way to expedite the exact Plotting of mixte irregulars, and consequently of any Fielde.

Plant not the Table at euery Angle,Generall. but to preuent pussing and to assure a iust closing, extend from some fewe Maine Angles (or competent stations in the Plot) Base lines (secants, contingents, parallels, etc.) for Boundaries or deleble Plant-lines, and from conuenient distances in the same, distantiate euery By, dispersed in the Plot, and so pricke forth the Angles, Curues and Deuiations.
For Delineating of Adiuncts, as Edifices and other erections, the Prospectiue glasse is facil and compendious, but for want thereof take this generall Rule.
Proiect all Plumbe-lines in Parallelizme perpendicular to a Parallel or supposed Common Base of conspicuous eminence.Plotting (...) Archi^^ture
So the Base of the Building proiected in due Site, the modulets right angles by peculiar erection retaine like qualitie in Plano ex opposito, but ex obliquo they doe alternately appeare acute and obtuse. Other Delineations dependant succeed by consequence, and the eye by serious obseruation of stationall aspect may with facilitie giue the Vmbrage: but the Transposition and fore-shortening of some lines require more particular Rules, which with diuers other matters I am heere constrained to cut-off, least this worke intended for a Breuiat, should grow vnto too great a Volume.
And therefore for this time this shall suffize for Delineation.


CHAP. V.
Tricking.THe Tricking of Plots consists in Complements, and Compartiments.
Complements comprehende the Flie or Flies, Scale and Compasse, Kalender, Characters, Colours, etc.
The Flie.The Flie is a Card diuided into eight, sixteene, thirty two equall parts in the Limbe with competent extention to shew the Meridian and Coastages of the Plot.
Meridian.Meridians are diuers wayes found-out, but most speedily and exactly by helpe of a Dyall, or by striking a line vpon your Table, or erecting poles vpon your Plot in a right line, directing to the Cynosure or Polestarre, when it is perpendicular to Alliot the Thilhorse of Charles-Waine.
Otherwise at the Sunnes first cutting of the Horizon, strike a line towards the same vpon your Table and erect a marke in the field-line: At the Sunnes going

downe (the same day) plant your Table as before by helpe of the marke erected, and strike another line to the Sunne from the first point: Now describe a Circle vpon this stationall point to cut the two extended lines at equall lengthes: The Diameter that mediates the Arch of each Sector is the Meridian, etc.
The Scale and Compasse are no lesse requisite,Scale. and may be florished with Fruitage or Imagery.
The Kalender or Index serues for a Directory to expedite the intimation of particulars with signance of due Characters.Kalender.
The Colours would bee appropriated and suited to the seuerall Modulets of the Plot to distinguish their Natures, Tenures, Owners,Colours. or such like:Arable. -- As
Arable for Corne may be dashed with a pale Strawcolour compounded of Yellow Oker, and White leade, or of Pincke and Verdigreece.
Meddowes may be washed with a light Greene by taking more Verdigreece and lesse Pincke.Meddowes.
Pasture would be put into a deeper Greene made of the mixture of Azure and Smalts with Pincke;Pasture.
Heathes and Fennes may be distinguisht with deader Greene deriued from Yellow and Indico.Heathes.
Trees may haue a sadder Greene composed of white Leade and Verdigreece.Trees.
Barke, Blocks, Timber, Stone, etc.Barke. may bee fitted with Vmber and White.
Waies and Mud-wals, may haue white-leade with rust of Iron, or with Oker and Browne of Spaine.Waies.
Water, Siluer, Glasse, Crystal,Water. etc. may be represented with Indico and Azure or blacke Leade.
Seas may haue their greenish Skie-colour expressed with Indico (Smalts or Azure) White leade and Verdigreece.Sea.
And thus, both these and diuers other colours with their due proportion, may with small practise be easily

produced and multiplyed; And it will suffice to tract the Verges onely of Land-Modulets whatsoeuer you please to signifie thereby.
But howsoeuer you bestow these Colours of distemper, they must be ground and bound with Gum-water very thinne and bodilesse.
And it shal not be amisse to pounce the ground with a Stainsh Graine of burnt Allome and a double quantity of pounded Rossin both finely fearced and lightly pummiced, thereby to preserue the Paper or Parchment from thorowe-piercing with the Colours.
Compartiments are Blankes or Figures bordered with Anticke Boscage or Crotesko-woorke,Compartiments. wherein Euidences or other Memorables may be abreuiated.
And these may bee contriued in Parallelograms, Squares, Circles, Oualls, Lunaries, or other mixt or voluntary proportions compassed and tricked ad libitu^.
Vnder this Title may also be rainged the Lordes-Coate with Crest and Mantells.
And these Compartiments with the Scale, Carde and Kalender must bee bestowed in couuenient spare and voide places.


CHAP. VII.
Content.HItherto of Mensuration: Content in generall is Couchant and Crescent.
The Couchant is either Superficiall or Solid.
The first is of Land, Water, Board, Glasse and all Surfaces and Figures.
But before wee come to entreat of the Areas of Figure, it is not immateriall to enumerate how this Superficiall Content is diuersly distinguished for Land; as into Pearches, Daies-woorkes, Roodes, Acres, Oxegangs, Yard-lands, Plow-lands, Hydes.
There be also other quantities of Land taking their denominations from our vsual Coine; as Fardingdeales, Obolates, Denariates, Solidates, Librates.
Foure square Pearches make a Daies worke, 10. Daie-workes a Roode or Stong, 4. Roodes an Acre.
The Fardingdeale or Farundell (Quadrantata terrae) signifies a Roode or @ of an Acre,Quadrantata Terrae. so that if Obolata D^nariata, Solidata, and Librata, doe arise in proportionable graduation from Quadrantata as the moneyes do increase in valuable Estimate, then must the Obalat be @ Acre, the Denariat an Acre, the Solidat 12. acres and the Librat 240. vide Crompton lurisd: and Regist: Origin .1. But we read Viginti libratas terrae vel reditus in Fitzh .87. and Regist. Orig. 49. and 248. importing (it seemes) so much land as yeeldes 20. s. per annum.
So you shall read further 249. Regist. Centum Solidatas terrarum tenementorum and redituum.
But for Roodes and Acres,Acrarum diuersitas. they differ in Content according to the power of the extent or lineall Fall of the Pearch. Potentia rectae est quadratum. Et dupla, ratione quadrupla proportione.
Yet the Surueyor, whether he be imployed in Woodland, or Champion, in the Forrest of Sheere-Wood, where the Acre containes aboue 2 @ of Statute Acres, in Corne-wal where it amounts almost to 140. acres, or elsewhere, howsoeuer Customes haue accrewed, must make his Computation by the standard: Notwithstanding that the Lords Demaines (as appeares by auncient Surueys) haue beene measured by the 20.Mensura Maior and Minor. foote Pole called Maior Mensura, and the Customary lands by a Pole called Mensura Minor viz. 16. @ though some claime 18. foote^ So the French Arpent or Acre containing 100.Arpent. square Poles is laid-out in th'admeasurement of woodes by the 22 foot Pole, and this is called the Kings Arpent, their other lands are computated by the Pole of 20. 19 @ or 18. foot Poles.
The Oxe-gang,Bouata. Terrae. or Oxengate (according to Skene) called Bouata terrae containes after the originall repute 13. acres but we find it more or lesse as the custom of the place inures, and Bouata is properly vsed of Lands in

Gainour viz. vsually plowed.
Librata Terrae. Virgata Terrae.Foure Oxe-gangs of land extend to a Pound-land (Librata terrae,) of old extent.
The Yard-land (Virgata terrae siue quatrona terrae) varies from 20, 24, 30 acres. M. Lamberd: and it is not reputed in Demesne, but in Gainor, as are also fodi^a, minera, mercatus.
Carucata. Terrae.A Plow-land or Carue of land (Carucata terrae, that is, quantu^ aratrum arare potest in nouali tempore:) is said to containe 4 Yard-land at 30 acres to the Yard-land.
Hida.A Hide of Land (Hida or Hilda terrae) is saide to be such a portion of land, as may be tilled with one teame (according to the seuerall tilthes and seasons) in a yeere and a day, and so Crompton and the Author of the new Tearmes affirme it to be 100 acres by statute, and therby confound Hida with Carucata, or make them little different. Others say, that euery Hide of land containes 4 Plow-land at 120 acres, and 4 Hides a Knights Fee.
Feudum Militare.A Knights Fee (Feudum Militare) is so much Inheritance as is sufficient yearely for the maintenance of a Knight, and his competent retinewe with conuenient reuenewe, which in the time of H. the 3. was 15 pound; but Sir Thomas Smith (Repub. Anglorum,) rateth it at 40 pounds per annum. But for the quantity of land, M. Camden recordes it to be 680 acres or 800 acres. After some computations it containes 5 Hydes of land, each Hyde 4 Yard-land at 24 acres.
In the Dutchie of Lancaster a Knights Fee contains 4 Hydes of land, each Hyde 4 Plow-land, each Plow-land 4 yard-land at 30 acres amounting to 1920 acres.
Cantred Baronie. Earledome.Two Knights Fees make a Cantred, 2 Cantreds @ and @ make a Barony, one Barony and @ makes an Earledome: viz. 38400 acres.
But though these proportions of land doe not alwaies hold with their titles of honour, yet their denominations continue the originall institution, and howsoeuer

they be dismembred quoad quantitatem,Dignities indiuisible. yet the right and dignitie is indiuisible, insomuch as if a Capitall Messuage be Caput Comitatus vel Baroniae, it may not be parcelled.
And the Reliefe depends vpon the dignity (rather then the quantity) after the first allotment,Reliefes of Dignities. viz. 100 s for a Knights Fee, 100 Marks for a Barony, and an 100 pounds for an Earledome. Mag. Chart. But to returne to the finding out of the Areaes of Figures.


CAP. VIII.
FIgures with their Calculations for superficiall contents may be thus rainged.Superficiall.

To areate Figures.

1. Multiply the perpendicular in the demibase:1. Triangles. vel Contra.
2. From the mediatie of the sides vnited, subduct each side seuerally; eradicate the ductat of the said mediatie and remainders. Ramus.
Multiply the length by the breadth.2. Parallelograms. 3. Squares. Idem. lib. 11.6.
Square the latus. Idem. l. 12.23.
4. Polygonons. 5. Circles. Multiply the semiperipherie by the perpendicular, from the Center to the midst of one side. Idem. 19.1.
1. Multiply the Radius in the semiperipherie. Idem. 19.2.1.

2. Multiply the quadrated

Diameter by 11 diuide the product by 14 19.22.
Radius by 22 diuide the product by 7 19.22.
semiperiphery by 7 diuide the product by 22 19.22.


Multiply the Radius in the demi-Arch line. 19.4.Sectors. Sections.
Turne it to a Sector (by proiecting a Radius from each extreame of the Chorde to the Center) then woorke vt supra deducting the Triangle. Ibidem.
Adde the Base to the other Areaes,
Cones.Multiply the side in the semiperipherie of the Base. 22.10.
Cylinders.Multiply the altitude in the periphery of the Base. 21.12. In these 2. add Basall Areaes.
Multiply the diameter in the Circumference. Or the Plaines Area by 4. R. 21.5.Globes.

1, Multiply the Basall Area by 6.
2. Duplicate the squared diameter of the contayning Spheare.
Cubes or Hexaedrons.3. Triple the square of the diagonall line.
4. Multiply the sides double by the Triple of the side. So much for Figure or superficiall Content.

For Addition, Subtraction, Multiplication, Diuision, Reduction, Rule of three, etc. in lines or Figures, I wil referre them til the next impression, which I intend shortly to publish with much inlargement to the more compleat investing of the Arte, with due and appropriate Ornaments.


CHAP. IX.
Solid.THe Content Solid is of Timber, Stone, and other Bodies or Figurates, whereof a touch in briefe.
Pyramides and Cones.Multiply the perpendicular in @ of the Basall Area. R. 27.71.
Prismaes Cylinders.Multiply the perpendicular in the Basall Area. 27.6

1 Cube the crassitude; Or multiply it in the Basal Area.
Cubes.3. Or the Axis in the squared diagonall line, Or the superficies in @ of the altitude.
1 Multiply the diameters Cube by 11. diuide the product by 21. Ramus. 26.5.
Gloabes.2. Multiply the superficies in @ of the diameter.

Lesse then @: Subtract the altitude from the semidiameter, multiply the Remainder by the Area of the circular base, deduct the product from the semidiameter and conuexe sphericall superficies multiplyed together, and diuide the remainder by 3.Globie Sections.
More then @; subtract the semidiameter fro^ th'altitude, multiply the remainder by the Area of the circular base, add the product to the semidiameter and convexe Sphericall superficies multiplyed together, and diuide the totall by 3.

To retriue the mutuall proportion of Cubes or Gloabs

Cube the seuerall Cubes sides (or Gloabes diameters) Multiply the Contents giuen by the Cube of the Figurate sought, diuide the product by the Cube of the knowne Figurate. And so much for Content Couchant.

Of Content Crescent in a woord.



CHAP. X.
THe Crescent Content is of Increases renewing at seuerall seasons,Content Crescent. and thence the denominations of Aestiuall and Brumall are deriued.
The first is of Corne, Hay, Line, Hempe, Rapes, Woade, Fruite, Sommer-Herbage, etc.
The second is of Mastage, Edge-grouth, Winter-Herbage, etc.
In these Contents and Increases it is remarkeable to Recorde their Productions both in kind and proportion; as what and how much Grasse, Graine and other Growthes are vsually reaped vpon an Acre; how many Cattell such a Plot will Winter and Sommer, feed or keepe, etc.

And this shall suffice for Proportion.






THE SYNOPSIS OR EPITOME OF SVRVEY METHODIZED.

SECTION .III. Capitulating the Natures and Incidents to Possessions, Tenures, Landes, Titles, Fees, Discents, Tenants, etc.


CHAP. I.
HItherto of the Essentiall Parts:Accidentall. Partes. the Accidentall Parts incident to Possessions are comprehended vnder Propriety and Valuation.
The Propriety of Possessions intimates their particular state and condition,Proprietie. and may be deuided into Vocall and Euidential.
Vocall Propriety denotates the Properties of particulars by due Appellation,Vocall which is either Nominate or Cognominate.
The first is deriued from the Kinde and Species of the Particulars, and that either Generall;Nominate. as Vp-land

and Maritime, Woodland and Champion, Molland and Fen-land: Or Speciall; as Wealdes, Woulds, Plaines, Downes, Vales, Vallies, Mountaines, Fels, Hilles, Bogs, Bathes, Spawes, Mosses, Loughs, Moores, Fennes, Woodes, Copses, Heathes, Marshes, Meddowes, Pasture, Arable.
Cognominate.The Second deduces deriuation from Forme, Site, Climate, Obiect, Season, Person, Action or other circumstance; as Harpe-Close, Mountacute, Gilden-Vale Diffrin Cluyd, Salisbury Plaine, West-woodes, Vale of Belvoir, Lammas Pasture, Bel-Acre, Beaumeade, Nightingale Lane, Lough Erno.
So much for the Vocall Proprietie of Possessions.


CAHP. II.
Evidentiall. Proprietie.EVidentiall Proprietie decyphers the qualities and attributes coincident to the Possident and Possession: and in the processe hereof the Legall part of Suruey is most eminent.
Possident.In the Possident or Feudatarie his Title and Discent must be intimated.
His Title respects either Dignitie of Birth or Calling; Or Right of Possession.
Dignitie.Title of Dignitie; as King, Prince, Duke, Arch-Bishop, Bishop, Abbot, Prior, Marquesse, Earle, Vicount, Baron, Knight, Esquire, Gentleman, Yeoman, Artificer, Labourer.
Right.Right of Possession may be deuided into perpetuall and Terminall.
Perpetuall is either Allodium or Feudum.
AllodiumAllodium is an entire propertie and perpetuall Right in Possessions without dependance; and this is proper solely to the King in Right of his Crowne.
And all the Crowne land within this Realme in the

daies of the Saxon King Edward the Confessor are called Auncient Demesne. Kitch. 98. Booke Tit. Demesne.
And these Landes in the generall Suruey called Doomes-day Booke (made according to Geruasius Tilburensis and Ingulfus, in the time of William the Conquerour) remaining in the Exchequer,Terra Regis are amongst others) recorded vnder the Title of Terra Regis.
Fitzh. inferres (13. and 14. Na. Br.) that no landes are to be accounted Auncient Demaine,Auncient. Demaine. but such as are held in Socage.
All other Landes within the Realme are called Frank-Fee,Frank. Free. (Feudum Francum seu liberum) which is defined to be a Tenure in Fee-simple, of landes pleadable at the Common-law, in opposition to the other, whose tenents cannot be impleaded out of the L. Court.
Feudum is that which is held of a superiour by Seruice, Rent or both:Feudum. Or Feudum or Fee is a Right consisting in the person of the true heire, or of some other that by iust Title hath purchased or acquired the same: vide Bracton.
And this is alwaies diriued either Immediately or Mediately from the Crowne.
The first is where ye Fee resides stil in the first Feoffee.
The other is where the Kings Feudataries doe againe enfeoffee others.Feifz and Arrierfiefz. The French terme the first of these Feifz and the other Arrierfiefz.
Feudum is either Fee-simple or Fee-taile.
Fee-simple is an absolute seisure to the Feudatarie and his heires for euer.Feodum simplex.
And though many Feudists doe holde that Feudatarius hath not an entire property in his Fee, I may not conclude vpon Iacobutius his insinuated probabilities, that these Fees (or some of them) were at their first creation temporary and not perpetuall and hereditary.

Tantum aevi longinqua valet solidare vetustas.

Feodum. Taliatum.Fee-taile or Fee Expectant is a conditionall seizure to the Feudatary and his heires with limitation, and is either Generall or Speciall.
General, is where a man is seized of land to himselfe and the heires of his body for euer.
Speciall, where the man and his wife are seized of lands to themselues and the heires of their two bodies.
The nature of this Fee is implyed by the signification of the word Talliatum which the Normans make Tailler, and in Latine it is as much as Scindere: so this Feodum or Ius Talliatum doth abscinde and cut-off the before-General successions restraining them to the particular Heires of Families, yet the locall possessions are vsuall trans-ferred from one family to another, but Dignities whether Datiue or Natiue are therewith neither conferred nor auferred.
Terminable Right.Terminall Right is either an Estate for life, as the Dowagers, Grauntees for life; etc. Or for Yeares, as by Lease, Mortgage, etc.
Tenant.And in respect of these and other seueral Rights, the Tenant is diuersly taken and vnderstood, and implies aswell the Feudatary or Owner, as the Farmor or Termer.
Dutie.Tenant in the first signification sometimes imports duety of Tenurage: as Tenant by Knight-seruice, Socage, Tenant in Villenage, Burgage, Frank-Fee, Tenens per Catapultam, tenens Nativus.
Euidence.Sometimes it intimates his Euidence: as Tenant by Charter, Copie of Court-Roll, Verge.
Limitation.Somtimes it implies the extent of his estate of right; as Tenant in Fee-simple, Fee-taile, at will of the Lord according to the custome of the Manour or by common Lawe.
Sometimes it beares relation to the L. of the Fee; as Tenant in chiefe, very Tenant, viz. holding immediatly of his L. Mesn. Tenant Parauaile, viz. the lowest

Tenants, and most remote from the L. Paramount.
There is also ioint-tenant, sole-tenant, tenant in Common.
Tenant signifying the Termer is diuersified according to the exigence of the efficient causes of Possessions;Termer. as Tenant in Dowre, by Courtesie, by Will, Lease, Copie, Extent, Elegit, Execution, Statute Merchant, or of the Staple, etc. And thus much for the Title.


CHAP. III.
DIscent is the deuolution of Possessions deriued to the Heire apparant from his Auncestrie,Discent. by vnauoidable Right and Succession.
And this Discent is either of Bloud or of Inheritance.
Discent of Bloud is either Lineal or Collaterall.
Lyneal Discent is conueyed downe in a right line from Grand-father, Father, Sonne, Nephew,Lineall. etc. And here is produced an Heire Generall.
Collateral Discent springs foorth of the side of the whole Blood or Kinne; as Grand-fathers brother,Collaterall Fathers brother, etc. And in this case the Heire is saide to be Speciall.
This Discent of Blood is retriued by deriuage of Pedegrees from Auncestrie,Pedigrees. by inherent Birth-right and lawfull succession.
Discent of Inheritance is deduced by deriuing Sequences of Deedes from the Crowne,Sequences or from him that had Nouell Fee. And both these are very requisite to be intimated for the manifestation of the Validities of Estates, whether the right dimaine from Heritage or forraigne acquisition.
And hitherto of the Possident: It followes to entreat of the Possessions.



CHAP. IIII.
Possession.IN the Possession the Nature and Tenure require to be iudiciously discussed and recorded.
Eminence.For the Nature 'tis expedient to notifie the Eminence thereof, whether Grande, as Honours, Courts, Castels, Manours, Seignories, Forrests, Chases, Parks, Demesnes: Or Petty, as Graunges, Farmes, Tenements, Messuages, Cotages, Curtilages, Lofts, Crofts, Commons.
Incidents.In both these kinds diligent and particular enquirie must be had of their Incidents, by Royalties, Prerogatiues, Iurisdictions, Franchises, Priuiledges, Liberties, Rights, etc. conferred vpon them by Act of Parliament, Statute, Charter, letters Patents, Graunts, or acquired and confirmed by custome or prescription.
Lordships.Hence comes the Lordship Marcher or Royall vsing iura Regalia. Vide Stowe 176.
Courts.And Forrests haue their Courts of Attachment, Swanimote, Eyre or Iustice Seate. So Markets, Faires, and Court of Pie-Powders for Faires. Court-Leete (Law-day, or View of Franck Pledge) Court Baron. Also Wrecks, Swannage, Warrenage, Commonage, Piseage, etc.
Immunities.Immunities and Exemptions from Theolonie, Pontage, Picage, Murage, Pannage, Passage, Tranage, Lastage, Chiminage, Stallage, Caiage, etc. of all which Tenentes Honoris and Dominij de Richemonde per consu etudinem Angliae sunt quieti per totum Regnum: so other Honours haue their Priuiledges, as Ampthil, Tickhil, Follingham, etc.
Auncient Demeisme.The Tenants of Manours holding freely by Charter in ancient Demeisne cannot be impleaded, nor empanelled

vpon Enquests out of the same Manour, and they are Toll-free for all things concerning their sustenance and husbandrie, and exempt from contribution towards the expenses of Knights of the Parliament or Shiere. Vid. Fitzh. Na. br. 14. and 128.
Infeoffing with Toll,Toll. implies Freedome from Custome, etc.
With Caruage, from taxation by Carues.
With Bruckboote, from repairing and reedifying of Bridges, with Burghboote, from the like for Castels.
Foote-geld implies a Priuiledge to keepe Dogges within the Forrest not expeditated or lawed sans controule.Foote-geld.
Horne-geld freedome from taxe for Horne-beasts there.
Waiues, Weifes, or waiued goods,Waiues. import all goods and chattels, which being stolne, are left or forsaken by the thiefe in his fugacie.
Infangthef enables the L. of the Manour to iudge of Felons enhabiting within the Fee. And Vtfangthef,Infangthef. to iudge, or (at least) to execute iudgement of Felons apprehended within the Fee.
For Accrewments to the L. of the Manour by Felons,Felonies. not onely their goods both Reall and Personal are forfaited, but also their lands not entailed escheat to the Lord (Post annum diem and vastum) except in Gloucestershiere where the lands reuert to the right heire after the Kings yeere and day. Also in the Tenure of Gauelkinde in Kent, where the father to the Bough, the sonne to the Plough.
Baronies infeoffed with Theame alias Them,Theame. haue power to dispose of Villaines their Children, goods, and Chattels.
Abishersing, alias Mishersing,Abishersing, implies both forfaitures and Amerciaments of all transgressions within the Fee, and also the immunity from like penalties.
Blood-wit.Blood-wit confers all Amerciaments of Courts for effusion of blood.
Estouers.Estouers granted out of Woods or Forrests, include House-boote, Hay-boote, and Plow-boote.


CAP. V.
Tenure.OF the Nature of Possessions I haue spoken somewhat: The Tenure of Lands and Tenements, is the manner whereby they are helde of their Lords. Grande Cust. Cap. 28.
In euery Tenure the Confinage and Condition therof are remarkable.
Confinage.The Confinage shewes to what Lord, Honour, Castell, Manour, etc. the Seruice and Suitage (whereunto the Lands and Tenements are lyable) is due.
Condition.The condition intimates the Nature of the seruice or duty which the Tenant, by reason of his Fee, oweth vnto the Lord.
Seruice.This Seruice is by Hotoman defined to be Munus obsequij clientelaris; and this must be of ancient Commencement and continuance, sith it is not now erigible or to be created (but by the Kings prerogatiue) as parcel of a Manour, though it may by contract be established in a kinde of Seignorie in Grosse.
Manour.For a Manour is a Seignorie or Dominium consisting of Demesnes and Seruices of long continuance; and these may be comprehended vnder parts Essentiall and Accidentall.
Court Extinct.Here note, if the Lord so dismember his Manour, as that hee leaues not Free-holders, or if all the Free-holders saue one doe escheate, then is hee disabled to keepe a Court Baron for want of Suitors.
Non-Parcels vnited.Land may holde of a Manour by certaine Seruices

which may be Parcel of the Manour, and the land Non-Parcel; but by Escheat the Seruice is extinguisht, and the land comes in place and becomes Parcell in due consolidation.
But forraigne land cannot be vnited to a Manour,Manour diuisible. yet may a Manour be deuided into diuers by Partition of Coparceners.
Nor can two distinct Manours by practise be made one in perfect Vnion,Not vniable. howsoeuer such an innouation continued without contradiction, may in processe of time become to be reputed one in name and vse, there being no Record extant to the contrarie: Yet one Manour holding of an other, may by Escheat be annexed to the same, and so be consolidated and become one in vse.
But to returne: Demesnes are all such lands,Demesnes. as haue beene time out of minde helde in occupation and manurance, together with the Site of the Mansion or Manour House (called in some places Berries, Halls, Manour places, Courts and Court-houses) for maintenance of the Lords house.
These Demesnes were called of the Saxons (who had the substance, though not the name of Manours) Inlandt (and by Bracton (lib. 4.) Bord-lands) and the Seruices Vtlandt in opposition,Out-landt how restraind. though it may in some sort be restrained to comprehend onely Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments yeelding Rents of Assize (viz. originall and set in certainty) as for Free-hold, Copie-hold,Rents of Assize. or Customarie land; all which are Parcel in Seruice.
For the Diuision of Seruices,Seruices deuided. they may be all comprehended vnder Chiualrie and Soccage.
Chiualrie, or Seruitium Militare,Chiualry. is a Tenure or Seruice, obliging the Feudatarie personally to performe vnto his Lord some honorable or Martiall office; And this confers to the Lord (the Heire being in Non-age at the Fathers death) the Reall Seruices of Wardship,

Marriage and Reliefe, in lieu of the Personal Seruice, which the Heire in regard of minority is not able to execute.
Chiualry or Knight-seruice is deuided into Regall and Common.
Regall. Chiualry. Capite.Regall Chiualrie is solely confineable to the King, and is properly called Sergeantie. And this holdes either meerely and immediately of the King as of his Crowne (which is a Corporation and Seignorie in Grosse) and is then further called Tenure in Capite or Chiefe: Or mediately of the King by reason of some Honour, Manour, Castel. Fitzh. Kitch.
Sergeantie.Sergeantie (Sergeantia or Seriantia) is either Grande or Petit.
Grande.Grande Sergeantie is where Lands are helde of the King by some noble Seruice, performeable by the Tenant personally.
Petit.Petit Sergeantie is where Lands are held of the King, to yeeld him annually some small military furniture towards his warres.
Common Chiualry.Common Chiualrie is that Seruice which may indifferently be confined to the Prince, or to a common person; and is called Escuage (viz. Shield-seruice) which is either Vncertaine or Certaine.Escuage.
Vncertaine.Escuage vncertaine is of two sorts: First, where the Tennant is Tenure-bound at his owne cost and charges, to follow his Lord in the Kings warres, or to send a sufficient man in his steade, there to continue according to the proportion of his Fee: viz. after the rate of 40. daies for a Knights Fee.
Castel-ward.Secondly, where he is bound by himselfe or his Deputy to defend a Castell, so oft as it shall come to his course or turne, and is called in this case Castel-warde. Ma. Cha. 20.
Certaine.Escuage Certaine is where the Tenant is set at a certain pecuniarie charge (viz. 20 shillings for a Knights

Fee) in lieu of such vncertaine Seruices, as aforesaide. And this leeseth the nature of Knight-seruice, and is in effect Socage (though not meerely. because it smels not of the Plowe) though it still retaine the name of Escuage. Na. Br. 84. Litl.


CHAP. VI.
SOccage (Soccagium) is a Tenure of Lands obliging the Feudatary to the performance of certaine inferiour and husbandly seruices vnto the Lord of the Fee,Soccage. sans Wardship, mariage, Reliefe.
Soccage is also capable of the distinction of Chiefe and Common.
Soccage in Chiefe or Capite,Chiefe. is that which holdes immediatly of the King as of his Crowne. Praerog. 41.
Common Soccage is that which holdes of the King or some other Capitall Lord, by meanes of some Manour. Ibidem.
Soccage is either Franck (liberum) or Base (Villanum.)
Franke Soccage is where in lieu of seruice in kinde asumme of money is paid to the Lord.Franke.
Base Soccage is a Seruile kinde of Tenure,Base. and is deuided into Villanum Soccagium, and Purum Villenagium.
The first is, where a determinat Seruice is performable by reason of the Tenement, and not of the person of the Tenant.
The other is where the Feudatarie is lyable to vncertaine and indeterminat Seruice at the absolute and instant will and demaund of the Lord.Villenage. Bracton. and Na. Br. 94.
Yet may a man sans impeach of freedome (in regard of his person) hold in Pure Villenage;The person, nor the Freehold impeached. Nor is liberum tenementum impeached to him that holdes it in Villano

Soccagio, if it be to him and to his heires. Bracton.
There be other branches of Soccage, as Burgage; Frank-Almoine.
Copy-hold.And Copy-hold (saith Kitchin 80) is a base Tenure, and was originally called Villenage, Fitz. 12.
Meere Copy-hold.But (to retaine the moderne appellation) some of this is Meere Copy-hold, and escheats forthwith to the Lord by Felony. Kitch. 81.
And some is of more eminence, and held by Verge in auncient Demeisne, according to the Custome of the Manor, being in effect a kinde of Free-hold (though reputed Copy) and yeelds to the King Annum, diem and Vastum vpon Felony.
Some Copy-holds are fineable at the Lords will; and some only are lyable to a certain rate,Fines. and this is a kind of inheritance called Customary, not simply at the will of the Lord.
But there is a kinde of Customary Land of the Ancient Dutchy of Cornewall and other places,Customary. where the Tenants haue no Transcripts of the entries of their admittances;Folk-land. And this was called Folke-land, and the Tenants may be termed Tenants by Court-Roll, according to the Custome of the Manour.
But where the Tenants are, by reason of the Transcripts of admittances, called Tenants by Copy of Court-Roll, there the Land is Charter-land or Bockland.Bock-land. Kitch. 86.89.
For the Definition of a Copy-holder, reade West in his Symbol. 1. parte. 646.
And for the various Customes of Copy-holders in seueral Manours, 'tis as needlesse as endlesse to capitulate or enumerate them in this Tractate.
But both meere Copy-holde may be conuerted into Fee,Conuersion of Fees. and likewise Fees changed from their first institution by feofment; as out of Chiualry for certaine yeerely Rent into Fee-Farme, sans further duty than is specially

comprised in the Graunt, except Fealty alone, which by probability is still on foote, because it is inseperably incident to all Tenures.Fealty. For whosoeuer is invested in Fee, though in the freest maner, holdeth perfidem and fiduciam, that is, by Fealty at least. Smith Rep. Anglorum. 3.
And Dwarenus saith, that Fidelitas est substantia Feudi.
Fee-Farme is a Fee,Fee-Farme. and importeth a perpetuity to the Inuestee and his heires, for an annuall Rent of the third or fourth part of the Value. Fitzh. 210. But if the Rent reserued be behinde and vnpaide for the space of two yeeres, then may the Feoffour or his heires by Action recouer the Lands as their Demesnes. Britton. 66. And land thus held comes neere to the Nature of Ager vectigalis amongst the Ciuillians.

And hitherto of the Propriety of Possessions:
It remaines to intreate of their Valuations.






THE SYNOPSIS OR EPITOME OF SVRVEY METHODIZED.
SECTION .IIII.

How Possessions are to be valued by reason of their seuerall issues, Rents, Perquisites, Priuiledges and other profits, with particular respect to their Reuenewes and Reprises.


CHAP. I.
THE Valuation of Possessions consists in the due Estimate and Prizall of all Parts and Particulars Essentially and Accidentally thereunto belonging:Valuation. And to the exact performance hereof both the Materiall and Legall Parts are very requisite.
This Valuation is either Reiterant or Determinant.
Reiterant Valuation depends vpon the exact knowledge both of the Reuenewes and Reprises.
Reuenewes.Vnder Reuenewes (or Esplees after Ingham) I comprehend all and singular Rents, Seruices, Issues, and profits accrewing and renewing to the Feudist or Possident by, through or by reason of Fees and Possessions.
And these Reuenewes may be said to be Conuentuall and Incident.
Conuentuall Reuenewes comprize al Rents both in Esse and in Posse.
Rents.Rents in Esse are Receipts certaine or couenanted, and payable at daies and termes limited: and they are either Proper or Improper.
Proper.Rents Proper (whether Rent-seruice, Rent-charge, or Rent-Secke) may be for Landes, tenements, Pasture, Engines, Mils, Mines, Quarries, Warrens, Fishing, Fowling, Wood-sayles, Heath, Furse, Turbarie Mastage, (of Beech, Oake, Holme, etc.) Herbage, Broovage, etc. And Rent-Prouision, as Beifes, Muttons, Venison, Fish, Fowle, Graine and other voluntarie reseruations vpon graunts or estates for liues or yeres.
Improper.Rents Improper are where, of an vncertaine and casual commodity, a certaine Rent or Receipt is by contract created and raised: as for Licences, Swan-markes, Profits of Faires, Markets, Courts, Customes, Tollage, Pontage, Caiage, Cranage, Ferriage, Boonage, etc.
Posse.Conuentuall Reuenewes in Posse are all issues and aduantages arising of Possessions not demised (though Rentable) and therefore necessarily valueable by Estimate: as Demaine-Landes, Timber, Manuells, Wasts, etc.


CHAP. II.
Incident.INcident Reuenewes are either profitable as Perquisites, or Parallels to profits.
Perquisites may be diuided into Renouant and Dormant.Perquisites.
Renouant Perquisites are Accrewments acquired by Increase and Casualty.
Increase comprehends all profits deriued from the Pregnance and Production of the Earth.Pregnance.
Of the first sort are Stones, Metalline Oares and Mineralles vt supra.
Of the second sort are Wines, Pirry, Cider, Hony,Production. Waxe, Bombace, Raw-silkes, Hops, Sumach, Pitch, Tarre, Campheire, Opponax, Taccamahacca, Caranna, Masticke, and other Gums: Likewise Drugs, as Mechoacan, Kermez, Methium, Alkanet, Agaricke, Amber-Greece, Acacia, Lignum Aloes, Sassafras, Spikenard, Rubarbe: Also Muske, Ciuet, Ben, Beniamin, Castoreum, Cantarides, Cocheneil, with other Simples Fruite, Rootes. And Furres as Armins, Sables, Minivers, Lewzernes, Martins, Beauers, etc.
By Casualty are intended all duties and seruices that be Appurtenant and Appendant to a Manour,Casualtie. whether it be Capitall or Non-Capitall.
Vnder Appurtenants, may be rainged all Royalties Prerogatiues, Iurisdictions, Franchises, Priuiledges,Appurtenants. Liberties, Seruices, Customes, etc.
And all emoluments and aduantages deriueable from them: Perquisites of Courts; as Pleas, Fines, Amerceaments, Heriots, (Seruice, Custome, Couenant) Releifes, Aydes, Farewels, Waiues, Estraies, Deodands, goods of Felons and Fugitiues (by speciall graunt) co^morant in the Manour, Forfeitures, Escheates, Wards (in Non-age, Idiocy Lunacy) Marriages, Villaines, Treasure-Troue: Warrens of Birds, Conies, Hares, Commons of Pasture, Turbary, Piscarie, etc.
Appendant are Hospitalls,Appendant. Patronages of Churches and Benefices (Valuable not in contriuing commodities by Church-Chaffering, but equiualent in validitie

by reason of the priuiledge of electing or presenting a worthy Clarke, (who must be Idoneus) to succeede and supply the vacancie of the Church) Also Common of Fishing, of Estouers, of Vicinage.
Dormant.Dormant Perquisites are such things as are euer prest and ready at the instant commaund and pleasure of the Lord; as Villaines and Neifes, which are alwayes saide to be Regardant to a Manour.Regardant. And to this place may also be indifferently referred Salt Naturall, Sande, Grauell, Marle, Earth and such other thinges as are alwaies disposeable by the Possident for deriuing an immediate profit or Reuenewe.

So much for Perquisites: Parallels ensue.



CAP. III.
Parallels.BY Parallels I intend all pursuites of wilde Game, which for moderate exercise of the body and delight full refection of the minde, are held in priuate esteeme of Pursuite, or in valueable validity of the Purchase of the Pray, equiualent to profitable Accrewments. And they are either Generous, as Hunting and Hawlking: Or Plebeious, as Fishing and Fowling.
It is therefore not impertiment to the purpose to intimate what seuerall Games are vsually found within the Precincts and Priuiledges of the Plot or Fee, and how the Countrie is accommodated for Chace, View, Flight, etc.
Hunting.For Hunting, Record what Beasts of the Forrest there be, and how frequent: as the Hart, the Hinde, the Hare, the Boare, the Woolfe: Of the Chace, Buckes, Does, Foxes, Martrones, Roes: In like manner what Beauers, Badgers, Otters, Wilde-Cats.
Hawlking.First for Hawlking: Fowles of Warren, as Fesant

and Partridge: then the Elke, bustard, Heron, Mallard, Ducke, Teale, Heath-Cocke, Rayle, Rock-doue, Pie, Black-bird, Thrush.
Fishing is either in Fresh-waters; as for Samon,Fishing. Trout, Carpe, Pike, Manat, Breame, Barbell, Tench, Perch, Cheuin, Dace, Roach, Ruffin, Eeles, Lampreys Gudgeon, Minnowes, Crea-fish.
Or in Seas and other Salt-waters, for the Sturgion, Turbot, Porpuis, Seale, Bret, Tunie, Holibut, Mullet, Rochet, Gurnets, Gilt-heade, Base, Dorce, Macheril, Whiteing, Hering, Haddock, Thornbacke, Codfish, Keeling, Hake, Dog-fish, Horne-fish, Conger, Lampson, Bowman, Soles, Playce, Buts: the Lobstar, Crabbe, Pearle-fish, Prawne, Sea and Wood Torteise Oysters, Conchyles, Winkles, Purples, Cutle, Callough, Cockles, Muskles, Shrimps. Also for the Sea-Pike, Carpe, Troute, Breame, Tench.
Fowling may be for the Bittour, Curlewe, Mallard,Fowling. Pyntayl, Stockard, Duck, Teal, Snipe, Shouelar, Stork Cormorant, Gaunt, Sheldrake, Cob, Oliue, Puffin, Pewet, Yarwhelpe, Redshank, Ruffe or Reue: the Godwit, Gnat-snap, Knot: Gray, Greene and Bastard Plouer, Quaile, Dottrill, May-Chit, Spawe, Churre, Peeper, Grindle, Skirwingle, Sea and Land Larkes: The Crane, Storke, Cocke of the Wood, Wood-Cocke, Heath-Cocke, Heath-Poote, Grouse, Turtill; with which the Cuckow, and Owle, may for their delicatie bee rancked: then the Estridge, Birdes of Paradise, Canary Birdes, Parrots, etc.
Likewise for Hawlkes: as the Falcon, Ierfalcon, Tercel-gentle, Lanar, Lanaret, Leto, Ierkin, Saker, Sakret, Marline, Hobby. And short winged Hawlkes: as the Gosse-Hawlke, and Spare-Hawlke.

And this may suffize for Reuenewes: It Rests now to intreat of Reprises.




CHAP. IIII.
Reprises.REprises are impositions and duties whereunto the Plot or Fee is in peculiar lyable; and they are Reall and Personall.
Reall.Reall Reprises are al Charges and payments imposed, whether by Custome or by Couenant, for maintenance or repaire of Bridges, Sea-banckes, Hauens, Sluces, Ietties, Wharfes, Goates, Causeyes, Waies, etc.
And in this Rancke may be Marshalled al Resolutes Dechashes, Decrements.
Personall.Personall Reprises are Seruices, Duties, and Payments by Tenure to the Lord or Lordes Mesn or Paramount: as Fealty, Homage, Escuage, etc. Court-suite, Out-Rents, Boonage, Fines, Heriots, Reliefes, Respight of Homage, etc. Or by Graunt or Deed to Couenantees; as Rent-Charge, Extents, Pentions, Portions, Fees, Corrodies, Salaries, Stipends, Dowres, Annuities, etc. to Diuines, Artists, Linguists, Lawyers, Patentees, Feoffees, Seruitors, Officers, etc.

Valuation Reiterant is thus decyphered:


The Determinant remaines.



CHAP. V.
Determinant Valuation.DEterminant Valuation concludes and determines the Right and Interest of the Possident by Alienation of the Fee or Possession.
And in this Action, sith it is not Reiterable, it is expedient to retriue the vtmost Value and worth; to

which purpose that due prizalls may be produced, estimate all particulars both in Reuenew vt supra: And also Respectiue; as Edifices, Heire-Loomes, Engines, Timber, Tinsel, Ward-ships, Aduowsions, Villaines, Commons, Wasts, and other things in Grosse, with all Perquisites of like Nature.
Now by opposing the Estimation of Reprises to the Totall Valuation, the Remanet is rectified, and the true Value retriued.
And thus much for the first part of a Compleate Suruey.

FINIS.


Briefe directions for orderly marshalling of Surueyes, for accommodating of Field-entries in Rough-Bookes, for Engrossements and their Exemplifications with framing of Terrars, Rentals, Custome and Court-Rolls, Particulars, etc.
FOr other Instructions and Presidents requisite for methodical operations in Surueying of Lands and Euidences, with formal Exemplifications incident therevnto, I must deferre them till the impression of the Second part.
In the meane time, not altogether to defraud the expectation of the diligent, I haue intimated these fewe Inductions ensuing, which though they may seeme too cursorie and incompetent, to giue full satis-faction and information for the due disposures of the copious remarkables, occurrent in a compleat Suruey, in fit Symboliographie; yet I doubt not but the ingenious Practizer may pick-forth more ample Presidents, than may seeme (at first viewe) to be comprizable in the decurted Passages, as well of the former Tractate, as of this Supplement.
To Suruey a Manour: Out of the Series and Protasis

formerly dilated, contriue the Articles (suiting the exigence of the Seignorie) to be giuen in charge to the Iurie, and that in writing for more substantiall and direct proceeding.
The Tenants, both Feudataries and Termors, entred, the Charge ended, and their Estates summarily recorded, your Assistants ready, and all things prepared, proceede to the Suruey, describing Plots and noting in a Rough-booke (in Folio) all occurrents as they fall remarkable.
And in this practise you are not co^fined to imitate or insist vpon the precedent Protasis or other President, nor abridged of a voluntary proposition of any other iudicious Method.
The alternate Pages may bee delineated into certaine generall and Collaterall Heads for expedition, as well of the entries instant, as of engrossements to be selected, noting all Extrauagants orderly in the appropriate parallel of the opposite Page; so shall you auoide diffused accumulations, which would confound and puzzle the speciall Head in marshalling forth particular and due contriuances.
Nor shall it be impertinent to Kalander or Characterize each Modulet of the Ploat with the rough Entrance, thereby to facilize and expedite the ingrossements incident, in contriuing whereof an indigested Chaos of obseruations, would much intricate you, in regard the order pursued in perambulation, must necessarily be inuerted in the Exemplification.

Page. 1.



Tenant and Character.
Appellation. Place.
Boundage.
Mensuration.
Content
Improuement.


 
 
 

P.


a. r. P.

l.



Hugo


Belham


E. Hayed. M. Tremaine

24/5.
15.2.20
10.



Elwood.


Greene.


VV Siewing. Th. Dewhurst.

25/5.
--
--


 
--

N. Shawing I. Franckish.

 
Rent.
Estimate.


A.

East-field.


S. Shawing C. Gifford.

100

l. s. d.


l.



 
 
 
 
7.10.0
150.






Page 2. opposite.
This Pasture is proiected in large Ridges extended and declining South; the Soile is a sandy Clay of 18 inches Crust close sworded and well repleate with Trefoiles, Cinquefoile, Ribwort, Morsus, Yarrow, and other grasing Herbes of good growth, with a Dayrie House in the N. W. corner of two good Bayes, and a faire Pond 7 pole direct East from the House, springing from the West forth of a male grauell the Base of the Soile: the Hedge-Rowes are well growne and stored with Peare-trees and Appletrees of good Fruite, etc.
1. In these entries the Tenant is both expressed and assigned his Modulet with the Character.
2. There are opponed Residence, Species, Habitude, Crassitude, Inuesture, Ground-Plots, Edifices (Engines) tho last 3 must also be plotted.
Now to Engrosse a compleate Suruey:Engrossement. Modulize Alternate Pages, and particulate the Opposite with due obseruations, and characterize the Euidences.
To exemplifie the Engrossement without delineation of the Models, there is a method to be pursued in the particular Entries (according to their Eminences and kindes) of Estates and Euidences.
In Free-holds Record the Possident, Title, Possessions,Free-hold. Tenure, Descent and Reseruation.
In Copy-holds; the Possident, Title, Possessions,Copie-hold. Habendum, Fine, Reseruation.
In Leases; Commencement, Parties, Demise,Demise. Habendum, Reddendo, Couenants.
In spirituall liuings; Site, Edifices, Glebe, Decimals,Rectorie. vicarage. Reprises, Valuation, Estimate, Patronage, Incumbent.
Medowe, Pasture, Arable, require seueral Contents.
In the Entries of all saue the first, the Boundage and Extent of Cartelages must-be-recorded.
In Edifices and Engines their dimensions, matter, forme, and Repaire are remarkable.
Out of the Exemplification of the whole Composition and Body of the Suruey, these subsequents may be selected (viz. Terrars, Rentals, Customaries, Suit-Rolls, and Particulars) and thus framed.
Terrars.Digest in orderly composure, Edifices, Homesteads, Curtelages, lands, ground-plots, etc. with their qualities, sites, and proportions.
Rentalls.Compose in computable digestment all the Tenants with their Tenements and Rents in particular.
Customaries. Suit-Rolls.Recorde in fit contriuance all and singular the Customes and Priuiledges of the Manour.
Inroll all the Feudataries and Suiters to the Court with their Fees, Tenurage, Rents, and Seruices.
Particulars.Particularize Qualities, Contents, Rents (instant and improueable) Perquisites, Parallels and other Reuenewables and Respectiues, with vendible and distinct Estimates; Reduce all Reprises to a due Method and Record the Remanet.
Sequences.And for retriuing validities of estates, it is not impertinent to deriue the Sequences in Deeds from Auncestrie, and thereby to contriue Offices for the Tenure.Offices.
Non-parcel.For other the Lords Possessions comprised in the Suruey, and reputed no part or member of the Manour, they require to be recorded apart in the Infra, vnder the Title of Non-Parcels: Vizt, Churches, Chappels, Almes-houses, etc. Also Patronages, Villaines, Commons, Annuities, and other particulars helde in Grosse.
Memorandum.Register all Omissions vnder the title of Memorandums.

FINIS.

