




THE FIRST BOOKE OF THE FIRST DECAD OF THE GENERALL HISTORIE OF Venice: From the foundation of the CITIE.

The Contents of the first Booke of the first DECAD.
IN this first Booke is contained the originall of the ancient Venetians, with the sundrie opinions of the Cities foundation* In what place, and by whome it was first of all built in the Marishes. The terrible fire whereby it was consumed at her first rising. Her first Officers vnder the Consularie dignitie. Her ancient reuenew* and new increase thereof. The Tribunes Gouernement who succeeded the Consuls. From whence the Lombards are issued, with their progression in Italie. The confines which this Nation had limited to the Venetians. The Venetians first iournie against the Dalmatians. The ancient opinion concerning their Marriages. The Islanders offer succours to NARSES against the Gothes. The forme of the ancient buildings. The Church of Grada declared Metropolitane. A great inundation ouer all the Venetian Territorie. The daylie increase of the Citie. Dissension betwixt the Prelates of Grada and Aquileia. The Creation of the first Duke. The Venetians surprise Rauenna from the Barbarians. The dangerous Warre betwixt the Heraclians and the Iesulans. Prince VRSVS murthered. The Gouernement of the Master or Colonell of the men at Armes newly erected. And lastly, the retreite of the Heraclians and Iesulans to Medoac.

FOR as much as no man doubts, but that the first Venetians were the founders of this Cittie and State, whose Historie wee vndertake. I haue thought it not vnfit (seeing I perceiue the Historians to disagree about their true originall) before wee treat of the beginning of the Cittie, briefly to speake some-what ofWhereof the Authors meaning is to treate. their Antiquitie. Now these first Venetians had not their beginning from Italie: but were issued, as some thinke, from the Venetians of Gaule, who dwelt on the Coastes of the Ocean Sea. And this opinion was not grounded vpon the name only: but because

those which possessed the Adriaticke Gulphe, were like their neighbours very much adicted to Sea businesse, and they differed from the Gaules in speech only, (as POLIBIVS saith) and not in manners nor apparrell.
Others, as Titus LIVIVS, doe affirme that they are descended from Paphlagania. Hee sets downe, how that their Captaine PILEMON beeing dead at Troy, they came with ANTENOR into Italie. CATO following him, did thinke that the Venetians were descended from the Troian race. Cornelius NEPOS imagines that the Venetians were so named in Italie of the Henetians, which inhabited the towne of Cromna neere to Paphlagonia. There be some that haue written, how that this nation was a neighbour to the Cappadocians, and did make warre vpon the  Cimmerians, and came afterwards into the Adriaticke Sea.
Others thinke that they possest a little towne neere to Amastra, and that they went ouer all the Countrey to meete with the Henetians, as if they had beene no where to bee found. But all of them doe in a manner affirme, that this nation of whom wee speake, did come from Paphlagonia. The which XENODOTVS did notThe true original of the first Uenetians. only maintaine, but thought that the Cittie of Amisa was the same, which was afterward called Henisa. Howsoeuer, those which thinke so, bring in for their proofes, the industrious care which both these nations had to breede Horses and Mules: according to the testimony of HOMER, who saith,

And from the Henetians come strong Mules.


And albeit this great Poet spake then of those of Asia; STRABO a very diligent obseruer of Antiquitie, maintaines that euen almost in his time the choicest and best Mares came from the Venetians, inhabiting a parcell of the Adriaticke Sea, which were highly esteemed for their singular pace and swiftnesse. These things indeed, and diuers others doe cause me to follow the opinion of those, which say that the Henetians came into Italie with ANTENOR, and were afterward by the altering of a letter called Venetians. ANTENORS comming into the Adriaticke Gulphe is not only proued by the Venetians who were his fellowes; but because the place where they first arriued, was called Troy, which name the Burrough hath euer since carried. These men hauing first of all driuen away the Euganeans, which inhabited thisThe foundation of the Citie of Padua. Countrie, which lies betwixt the Sea and the Alpes, did build the Cittie of Padua. After that, they did in processe of time so encrease, as they did not only make themselues masters of that which did belong to the Euganeans (whose power in times past was so great, as it contained, according to the opinion of CATO in his booke of originals, foure and thirtie Citties:) but of diuers places of Bressia and Furli: which they named Venetian. For what places soeuer they conquered, were afterward called Venice. Some haue confined this Countrey, with the Riuers of Po, and Adda; with the lake of La Garda, in old time called Benac; with the Alpes, and the Adriaticke Sea.The extent of the Countrie of Venice. PLINIE comprehended on the East side thereof Aquileia, and STRABO on the contrary  cuts it off.
After this sort did the ancient Venetians extend their Dominion in length and breadth in the pleasantest Countrey of Italie. But the scituation of the places, ratherThe trouble which the first Venetians had to keepe that which they had conquered. then this peoples manner of life, did alwaies procure enuie to the ancient State of the Prouince. For on the one side the ordinary thefts of the Liburnians, and the fearefull and continuall roades of cruell nations on the other, did hinder them from enioying any long rest: so as it oftentimes happened, that by how much their publicke and priuate affaires did seeme to be increased by some relaxation from forraine warres, by so much the more were they miserably ouerthrowne by these sodaine stormes and alarmes. This nation, without this, had beene most happy, in regard  it wonne by right of warre the goodliest Countrie of Italie for their dwelling: For beside, that it is enuironed on the south side with a most calme circuite of the Sea,The fruitfulnesse of the Venetian Countrie. which makes it capable to receiue all maner of forraine marchandize: it is moreouer watered with most pleasant Riuers, by which, all that comes from the Sea, is easily

transported into the middest of the Prouince: It aboundes in Lakes, Pooles and Forrests: the territoric being meruailous fertile in Corne, Wine, Oyle, and in all maner of Fruites. It is stored besides, with goodly Houses in the Countrie, with Townes, Castles, and Citties very much recommended for their situation, and circuit of their walls, whereof we will heereafter make mention in his place.
But let vs now returne to these new inhabitants, who from the time that their affaires grew prosperous, were seldome freed from forraine warres. It would bee too long and tedious a labour, orderly to set downe in so ancient a matter, their paines and trauaile, as also it not being my meaning to insist farther on the deedes of the first Venetians.
Now after diuers and sundry roads of the Barbarians, and that by continuall wars the one against the other, from their beginning euen to the time of ATTILA, their substance had beene continually wasted, and were besides daunted by the fearefull assaults of the Gothes: A greater danger than all the rest, did on a sodaine assaile them. The Huns, conducted by ATTILA sonne to Mandluc, with a horrible spoile did castThe originall of the Huns, and their comming into Italic. themselues into the Prouince. This Nation, as saith PRISCVS, came from Scithia, and dwelt neere to the Riphean mountaines: After a long siege they tooke Aquileia, spoiled and wholly burnt it. They destroyed after the same manner Concorda, Altina, and almost the whole Venetian Territorie.
At the fearefull report of these warres; the Venetians, and the rest of Italy were  in alarme long time before: But in this trouble the Venetians were more amazed than any others, as beeing accustomed euer to endure the first assaults of the Barbarians. It is reported that at the same time great numbers of men left the firme Land, and retired into the Islands where Venice now stands: but at the enemies approach, greater numbers ran thither.
Certaine vnknowen Historians who haue written this Historie, haue in such sortDiuers opinion of the Historians. ordered the warres of the Huns, as it seemeth that Attila did twice enter Italy, the which none of the most trustie haue noted: but all of them say that neither at the same time, nor yet all together went to dwell in one selfe same place. The same authors doe affirme that diuers of the choisest men of Padua began the retreate, and  that vnder their conduct this runaway multitude arriuing at the mouth of the Riuer, which was then very deepe (whereby the name of Riuo alto remained to thatThe foundation of the Rialto. place) the fitst foundations of the Cittie were there laid: And that those of the Countrie of Padua who fled, being possessed with the like feare, began to people Chioggia, Malamoc, and Albiola. They affirme besides, that diuers of Aquileia withdrew themselues at the same time into the marishes of Grada: But so soone as Attila was gone, they ranne in troopes from the fieldes along the Sea coasts to the neighbour Islands: That the Aquileians put themselues into Grada, a place neere to the firme land enuironed with water. The runawayes of Concorda possessed Caorli,How the Islands were inhabited. and the Altinoes, sixe small Islands neere togeather, which they called by the  names of the gates of their lost Cittie: Tourcella, Maiorba, Buriana, Muriana, Amiana, and Constantiaca. This is in a manner all that which those Authors haue left vs in many words of the originall of the Cittie, whom I finde almost to agree in euery point with the rest who haue written the same Historie, except in this, where they are of opinion that the Huns entred twice into Italy. I suppose that this error proceeded from that they did reade, that in the time of the Huns they did twice retire themselues from the firme Land to those Islands, and that they would not else haue done so, had not the enemies come vpon them. But wee will heereafter set downe what wee thinke thereof: For from thence in a manner proceeded all the diuersitie in opinions about the originall of the Cittie, so as some affirme it to  bee built at one time, some at an other.
Diuers doe truely affirme, that the yeare of our Saluation 421, it receiued her421. Macrin Gouernor of Hungarie ouercome by the Hunnes. first foundations, at the same time when as at the report of the Huns arriuall, all Italy began to be afraid: For then, or certainly a little before, Attila hauing passed

the riuer of Danubie, ouerthrew in battaile Macrin the Gouernor of Hungarie and Macedonia; wherewith beeing puft vp with pride, he promised to himselfe the entire conquest of the Westerne Empire. Others reiect this opinion as erronious, and dare affirme that this Cittie was first of all built, about the time that Aquileia, and all the Venetian territorie was destroied, which hapned (as it is very credible) certaine yeares after: But nothing hinders vs from beleeuing, that at the first motions of this warre, all the noblest and richest persons accompanied with troopes of houshold seruants began the flight, that by their meanes they began to build in those places first possessed, and that afterward in tract of time, so soone as the enemie was entred Italy, they ranne from all parts in great numbers to those Islands, whereby of necessity these places were heere and there inhabited, that from thence the diuers opinions of the originall of Venice did proceed. But to auoid all confusion,The Authors opinion concerning the Cities foundation. wee will willingly follow their opinion, which beleeue that the Cittie of Venice was builded before the destruction of Aquileia, the which wee will declare in order how it hapned.
The originall of the Cittie of Venice, (as wee haue learned by reading those authors,How the original of Venice hapned. who haue most faithfully written thereof) hapned almost in this manner: As the feare of the Hunnes war had already possessed the people of Italy, and that the Venetians as the foremost in the danger, were also by meanes thereof greatly mooued (for all men beleeued that the Hunnes would come into Italy) their more  than barbarous cruelty towards the Christians, was the cause, why the ancient Venetians which dwelt in those pleasant places neere to the Adriaticke Sea, some of them in their flight seized on the Islands of the Sea next at hand, and others consequentlyWho they were that began to flie. on the rest: And those who began the flight were honorable persons, full of pietie and Religion. I cannot warrant ought of other places: But it is certaine, that from two most excellent Citties of the Venetians Countrey, Padua, and Aquileia, there ran thither from the beginning great multitudes: so as in this tumult, diuers of Aquileia with their children and richest moueables retired themselues to Grada: diuers of the cheefe of Padua did likewise resorte to Rialto.
Those places whereon at this day the Cittie of Venice is seated, were in times What those places were, whereon Venice is at this day built. past very strait and narrow Islands, and neere to one another, seperated by the pleasant current of riuers, which run turning into the Sea, according to the change of her ebbing and flowing: There was nothing to be seene in these strait places, but Seafowle, which came thither from the Sea to seeke shelter; sometime likewise fishermen, (but very seldome) came thither to rest themselues.
Now those of Padua which came to the Rialto (this place is now almost in theWhere the first foundations of the Citie were laid. middest of the Citty) were the first which began to build, and in that place were the first foundations of the new City laid. How religiously the same was done, may bee coniectured, because by how much any one did affect true godlinesse and religion, by so much more for feare of the Hunnes, whom he knew to hate the Christians, and to pursue them with more then a barbarous cruelty, he made himselfe head of those who by flight sought a place of safety, fortifying it, the better to preserue themselues. After then they had giuen thankes to Almighty God, and performed the vowes worthy their piety, and such as was conuenient for such businesse, they began in an happie place to raise the happie wals. Diuers dare affirme, that they began to build in the same place, where at this day the golden Church of Saint Marke doth stand.
All authors doe agree together, that the Citie receiued her first foundation on theOn what day the Citie of Venice was builded. (...) and twentieth of March. If we will curiously obserue certaine exquisite workes of nature, which are reported to haue beene done on such a day, it will not bee impertinent  to say, that nothing could on that day be vndertaken, which was not admirable, great, perpetuall, and surmounting all humane heigth and excellency. The holy Scriptures doe witnesse vnto vs, that on such a day the Almighty created our first Father, and that the Sonne of God a long time after, was conceiued in the womb

of the most sacred Virgin. The greatnesse of this mysterie is thought to surpasse mans vnderstanding, whereby it is hard, not only to declare it by speech (which can not be done) but to conceiue it in minde. But as we doe religiously beleeue it, wee doe likewise wisely and constantly confesse the diuinity to bee ioyned to the humanity, and the Eternall, incomprehensible, and holy, to be mingled with the corruptible and measurable. And we must not meruaile wherefore this great God did do it, because it behooued it so to be, nor if it were possible to be done, in regard it was his pleasure, for he can do whatsoeuer pleaseth him. But it may be, that some will scoffe heereat, as at a vaine and ridiculous obseruation, and will count it folly to make a differenee of daies. Let them thinke what they please: I thinke it auaileth very much, when we begin any thing, to choose such a day, wherein nature hath once or twice wrought excellently.
Now albeit that for the peopling of this new Citie, all the most experienced marrinersA very (...) obseruation. were called thither from all parts, with promise of great reward, to such as could build all manner of Ships: it is neuerthelesse reported, that they neuer receiued any man of seruile condition, nor a murtherer, or of wicked life: whereby it appeares that those good founders of this Cittie would not haue hir birth defiled by the accesse of such commers. The which some founders of other very renownedWhat manner of people were receiued into this new City. Citties tooke no care of, but haue freely called the most lewd persons, and haue receiued them into their Cittie with all freedome and immunity. But those men  sought nothing but how to people them, whereas these had regard to the sincerity of their manners, aud to their ancient Nobility.
This new Citie did daily encrease both in people and buildings: When as fire,Foure and twentie houses burns at once. kindled on a suddaine in a Carpenters house, did in a moment consume with continuall burning foure and twenty houses, and because the matter which maintained this fire, was without order scattered heere and there, and that there was no likelihood to quench it by humane strength, all the Cittie betooke themselues to praiers; and so soone as they had made a vow to build a Church to the honor of Saint Iames,A wonderfull miracle smelling some-what of Poperie. the Towne was preserued from that danger. This Church is at this day to be seene standing in the middest of the Rialto with signes of great antiquity. It is to be supposed  that these first buildings, whereof we speake, were very weake and slender, as those which the multitude of the people had rather erected in forme of houses, then for any shew at all: Seeing that diuers had builded houses of moorish substance to serue onely their present neede, beeing resolued to returne into the firme Land, if the Hunnes had not entred into Italie. As also because that Attila made no hast to come for certaine yeares, diuers did returne to their ancient dwellings. For after the first report of this great warre, Subthor brother to Mandluch, who was chiefe of the enterprise, marched into Germany: where he afterward dying, Attila, who withAttila defeated neere Tholouse. his brother did succeede him, after he had a long time runne ouer France, fought a bloudy battaile in the plaines of Tholouse, with Aetius the Roman, and Theodoric king of the Gothes, and going thence halfe vanquished, hee went into Hungary; where after he had stayed fiue yeares to renew his Army, he determined to enter Italy by force. And in the meane time that iourney was not short, nor without great trauaile, for in the same hee subdued a part of Illiria, Dalmatia, and Histria, so as it is supposed that foure and twentie yeares were expired, from the first alarmes of the Hunnes, and their passage ouer Danubie, vntill the totall ruine of Aquileia. This new Citie in the meane time began to encrease neere to the Rialto, but not very much; yet neuerthelesse such as it then was, it is certaine that it was gouerned by Consuls, as shall be declared in his place. But so soone as Attila began with his Armes to molest Italie, then did men of all sortes and conditions, runne in heapes  from all places to the Islands which were neerest them, with their wiues, children and houshold. Euery one beeing enforced by necessity, began to build new houses, and by continuall labour to ioyne one streete to another; so as a man would say, that they builded as many new Citties, as there were Islands and Streets. For they

seemed in a small circuit to build sundrie Cities, although both in name and effect it was but one. And this is the most common and frequent opinion of the originall of Venice, approued by diuers moderne writers, who affirme this to haue beene after the totall destruction of Aquileia. But diuers other doe thinke the first foundationWhat the true Foundations of Uenice was. of the Rialto to be the true originall and beginning of the Citie, seeing that the buildings since then, ought rather to be called encreasements, as made not only during the troubles with the Hunnes, but by little and little during the tumults of the Gothes and Lombards. And although they came at sundry times into those Islands, (as hath beene said:) Yet notwithstanding, because it hapned in the time that the Hunnes were there, that they ranne thither in greater number then before, by reason that their Countrey beeing taken and burnt, all hope of returne was lost, the common opinion was, that the originall of Venice was after the destruction of Aquileia: albeit that it ought rather to be called an increase than an originall.
But we haue sufficiently spoken of the foundation of the Citie. Let vs now come to discourse to take away all doubts, from whence these new Venetians are descended. I will briefly shew vnto whom their true originall is to be referred. I doe certainly know, that if the question be demanded, diuers, yea almost all men will say that they are issued from the Paphlagonian Henetians, which came with Antenor, by reason of the name: but if we search out the matter from farre, we shall vndoubtedly finde, that they least of all came from thence. Antenor was a Troian, so were the Paduans, and all those which followed him, who werein greater number then the Henetians, who beeing arriued in Italy, did suffer themselues neuerthelesse to be called Henetians, not that they were either in number ordignity inferior to them, but only because they thought it more honorable to haue the kingly authority to remaine to Antenor, and afterwards vnto his, than the title only, esteeming much more the thing it selfe, then the simple shadow of the name. Those which with Aeneas came into Latium, did the like, who being victors did easily endure to be called by the names of those whom they had conquered. Those of Aquileia were afterwards a Colonie of the Latins, and Concordia of the Romans: These beeing mingled with the ancient Venetians, did possesse Grada and Caorli, at what  time as the Huns arriued, they changed their dwellings. It is certaine that in processe of time, the inhabitants of these two places went to dwel in the Citie that now is.
This beeing so, wee may much more truely say, that the Venetians are descendedFrom whence the Uenetians that now are, be descended. from the Troians, from the Latins, and from the Romans, rather then from Paphlagonia, or from the Galles. This is it which we haue gathered together the most succinctly that we could, both of their antiquity, and true extraction. I will now set downe what the state of this new Citie was in the beginning, what were hir conditions, hir frugality and Religion, after that I haue called to remembrance, that there are some Historians, who referre the originall of the Citie to the yeare of our Saluation foure hundred fifty sixe, among whom is Blondus the Historian, who hath  also followed the opinion of those who did thinke the City to be builded after the taking of Aquileia. But we may easily perceiue how much they deceiue themselues, because that in the yeare of our Saluation foure hundred fifty sixe, Aquileia (as some456. The sundry opinions of the Historians concerning the building of the City. thinke) was besieged by Attila, and they say that the siege lasted no more then three yeares. But grant that it lasted longer, there is no man so ignorant in humane matters, but may perceiue that they began to flie out of Aquileia vpon the report of the Barbarians arriuall, and not after that all was lost, seeing that the same flight would haue smally profited them, and would haue beene to no purpose at all. It is then most certaine that some yeares before the losse of Aquilea, they began the second time to build in the Islands. I will not deny but that the Citie did receiue some  beginning in the first troubles of the Goths, who were a little before the Hunnes, at such time as the Venetian State (as hath been said) was shaken. But we will euer hold that Originall of it to be most true, which hapned the yeare of our SaluationThe true time when the city of Uenice was built. foure hundred twenty one.
Now what the ancient State and condition of this City was, may be knowne by many euident proofes, but principally by that, that the first founders thereof were very honest people, noble, and rich. For those ancient Venetians in that change, afterWhat the Venetians ex (...) was in the beginning. they had carried away with them their wiues and children, and the richest goods they had, did retire themselues at leasure into the places of most safety: But being hindred by the incursions of the Hunnes all along the Sea-Coasts from tilling the Earth; the poorest amongst them gaue themselues to fishing, and to make salt, or else to transport their neighbours Merchandize, esteeming that gaine more honest than to till other mens ground, some of the richer fort gaue themselues to the ^raffick of forraine Merchandize, others, keeping their houses applied their wits to beautifie  their Citie with new lawes and customes: and yet neuerthelesse such was their care of Iustice, and right was so maintained amongst them, as in so great a multitude of people, no strife could be perceiued.
The first and cheefest thing they gaue themselues to was the care of Religion, and by so much the more, as they perceiued any great danger towards from the enemy. The presence of certaine Prelates, did augment in them this common affection toThe Venetians zeale to Religion. godlinesse, who for feare of the enemie to Christians, had with their Countriemen retired themselues thither. Their helpe came in good time, not only concerning the Ministery of sacred things, but to retaine this City as yet ignorant, in ancient pietie and Religion, from being infected with the poison of the Arrian heresie, seeing The Arrian sect ouer all Italy. that contagion did no lesse ouer-runne the whole Prouince, than the Armes of the Hunnes. After that, they did contend and debate among themselues, not on voluptuous matters, but on pietie and continence. Riches and other things whereof men at this day make so much account, made no distinction amongst the Citizens for honor, but wisedome only. They did not regard mens sumptuous clothing, but their goodnesse, and to such (without seeking for it) did they freely offer their places of honor. In a word, a man would haue imagined that multitude not to haueThe Venetians great modestie. beene fugitiue Citizens, but Philosophers at their quiet studie. And because wee would not haue any man thinke, that wee feigne this matter to embellish our Storie: any one that hath the leisure, may reade that which Cassiodorus of Rauenna  hath written concerning the ancient state of the Citie: The poore (saith hee) and the rich liue there peaceably together, vnder one selfe same equality of lawes, without any difference of dwelling, not knowing what enuie meaneth; and ordering their liues in this manner, they eschew the most common vice in the World. I passe ouer the rest of his long letter, which Bonitendius hath inserted in his Commentaries. Such was the beginning of the Citie of Venice, and after such a kind of life, and in such exercises did she spend hir childhood: afterward by hir virtue, it grew, and waxed strong. And because wee haue (as I thinke) amply and sufficiently declared what hath beene the beginning of this great State, we will speake some-what of hir first gouernment. For I perceiue that those who haue written  the Venetian Historie, doe likewise varie in this. Some of them say that the Common-wealth was first gouerned vnder the Consulary dignity, by those whoThe first gouernment of Venice vnder Consults. dwelt at Rialto. They doe more-ouer affirme that Galieno Fontano, Simion Glauco, and Antonio Caluo (who were then Consuls at Padua at such time as the first foundations of the Citie were laid at Rialto) were the first that in qualitie of Consuls did gouerne the Citie at hir birth: Some thinke that these men were the Authors of the Paduans flight, and that their first arriuall was in that place, and likewise the first buildings. According to others I finde in these mens stceds, Alberto Phalerio, Thomaso Candiano, and Paulo el Conte. The third yeare of the Cities foundation, they created new Consuls for two yeares, Marino Linio, Hugo Fusco, and Luciano Graulo. They  say that these men were likewise created at Padua, and sent to Rialto: from whence may be easily gathered, that the Cities foundation was altogether before the comming of Attila. Marco Aurelio, Andrea Clodio, and Albino Moro, were Consuls at the third election for the two yeares following. I doe not finde who succeeded them.

But it is credible that this forme of Gouernement lasted till Attilas comming: at which time, all Ilands thereabouts being peopled, in stead of Consuls they created Tribunes. All of them in a maner say, that the same hapned a little after Attilas comming, and that about the sixtie yeare of the Cities foundation, the Tribunarie dignitie began in the Ilands, which were already inhabited.
For the Creation of the Tribunes, the businesse was first of all debated (as theThe Creation of Tribunes. maner is) by a fewe; after that, it was concluded in a generall assembly of the Ilanders, that euery Iland should haue a Tribune, the Magistrate to be yearely, hee shoul^ doe Iustice to his fellow Citizens, and punish offences with seueritie. But that which concerned the generall State of the Commonwealth, was referred to  the generall assembly of the Ilanders to be determined of.
That which we haue hitherunto said, if it be narrowly obserued, belongs to the Cities originall. We will hereafter begin to speake of her infancie. For diuers HistoriansThe partes of mans life compared with Cities greatly delighted in this kind of writing, (in number of whom is (...)) who haue distinguished the increasing of Cities, according to the seuerall parts of mans life, Infancie, Childhood, and Youth. Now the Tribunarie Gouernment which neerely followed the originall thereof, shall be rightly termed Infancie. Wee will then set downe in order what passed within and without the Citie, during the same, after that we haue acquainted the Reader, how that in the time of the Lombards (which was during this Infancie) the Citie receiued a meruailous increase. For it  hapned, that the Venetians hauing scarce time to breathe after the Warres of theThe comming of the Lombards into Italy. Hunnes, did perceiue on a sodaine, the Lombards (so called by reason of their long Beards) to be entred into Italy, vnder Albinus their eleuenth King, who at their arriuall, did possesse and subdue all that which had beene shaken; they did forthwith sease vpon all that which the Venetians held in the firme Land: not daring to assaile them at Sea, because they knew their strength to be great, or else it may bee, they deferred to doe it, till a more conuenient time.
This Nation (as it is reported) came from Scandinauia, an Iland of the GermaneFrom whence the Lombards are descended. Sea, who hauing often a long time before, enterprised on the Prouince of the Romanes which lies about the Riuer of Danubie, vnder Geodich their King, he being  dead, they passed into Hungarie vnder Andouinus his successour: then vnder Albinus, thirtie eight yeares after their arriuall in Hungarie, they came furiously into Italy, where their power did so encrease, as they haue commanded there more then two hundred yeares.
At the arriuall then of this people, the whole firme Land belonging to the Venetians lost her libertie, with the name of Venice: and the Venetians State which was in the Ilands, was limited from the Cape of Rising (so named at this day) euen to theThe Lombards giue limits to the Venetians. Marshes of Grada, as witnesseth Paul Deacon, in his Historie of the Lombards. Now seeing we haue begun to speake of the deedes and maners of the Venetians, we will of set purpose omit the residue of this Nations exploites, except so much as may  seeme to belong to our Historie.
I will then declare in order all that which these new Ilanders did in common, during this Infancy, before the comming of the Lombards. The most ancient is (as they say) a happie Voyage which they made at Sea, which gaue beginning to their future Marine Dominion. The Histrians and Dalmatians did disquiet the State of this new Citie, by incursions and robberies, so as the Ilanders could keepe nothing safe from them. I know not whether hatred moued them thereunto, enuying to see so great a power as that was likely to be in time, to encrease so neere them, or else whether it were the ancient disposition of that people, to robbe and spoyle at Sea.The Venetians first voyage to Sea. Some doe belieue that the same was then done at the intreatie of the Triestines, who more then any other grew very iealous of the prosperitie of this new Citie. Against these, the Venetians with a common consent Armed themselues, and hauing met them in the maine Sea, they brauely defeated them, and by that losse constrained them wholly to abandon the same.
It is reported that at this Battell, certaine games were vowed to the honour of the glorious Virgine Marie; but others set downe other occasions of those games, much differing, and more likely to bee true. For they hold that the Countries customeThe ancient custome of marrying their daughters. was to be troth then daughters in the Church, carying their dowries thither to bee publikely seene. It hapned by chance, that whilest they celebrated such a ceremonie in S. Peters Church (which stands now in that part of the Citie called the Castle) the Triestines who had already profest themselues their enemies, came in a night from Sea with two Galloyes, and ambush^ themselues in certaine places neere vnto the Citie. I^ the morning about such time as they celebrated the ceremonie, they came into the Church, and caried away the Priest of the place, with a great  number of people and much wealth. Pietr^ Candiano who then was Duke, thinking it needfull to vse diligence in so desperate a matter, did forthwith man the Gallyes with numbers of (...) all sortes, and followed the enemies, whom they o^The Triestines defeated. Marshes of ^aorli, as they were parting the spoyle. They easily defeated (...) hauing reskewed the Prelate, Citizens, and their goods, hee entred the second day of Februarie, two dayes after his departure, into the Citie as it were in triumph. But because the feast of the Purification of the blessed VirgineThe occasion of the games dedicated to the glorious Virgin. hapned vpon that day, it is reported that those games were first ordeined for the happie successe of that voyage. But being brought in for deuotion sake, they haue beene since depraued and corrupted by the dissolutenesse of those who succeeded: who enuying one another, haue brought in for the adorning of them, an exceeding aboundance of Gold and precious stones.
Now these Pirates being driuen from the Sea-coasts next vnto the Citie, and the Venetian name becomming famous and esteemed of all their neighbours, soone after, the Eunuch Narses, Lieuetenant to the Emperor Iustinian, but a man valiant andNarses comes into Italie. carefull arriued; who being come into Italy in the time of the Gothes, to free it from their bondage, was with the consent of all men succoured by the Venetians. But we are not certaine whether it were with Armour, Victuals, or Ships, which he greatly needed for the passage of the great Armie which hee had brought. For so soone as he had sent twelue thousand Lombards (whom he chiefely trusted) before  Aquileia, against the forces of Totila, who was by the commandement of the Barbarian,Wherein the Venetians aided Narses. camped vpon the bankes of the Riuer Adice, he resolued to passe along the coast to Rauenna by the Adriaticke Sea, which hee could not doe without a great number of hired Ships, in regard all those places were either filled from the Marishes which ranne into the Sea, or else from the mouthes of great Riuers which held the same course. It is most likely, that this iourney which otherwise would haue beene most hard and painefull for him, was by the Venetians helpe made easie; who were men that very wel knew the places, and skilful in Sea-matters. It is to be noted how that Narses, for the great seruices which the Venetians did him in that Warre, did build in that new Citie with the spoyles of the enemies, two Churches; one to  S. Theodore the Martyr; (which at this day ioynes to S. Markes Churche) and theChurches builded by Narses. other to the Saints, Menez and Germinian, which is right ouer against it in the Market place.
This is that Narses, who after he had driuen the Gothes foorth of Italy, valiantly ouercome so many barbarous Nations, and setled peace and quietnesse in the Prouince: being iustly moued with the Letters of the Empresse Sophia (who at the same time commanded the Easterne Empire, by meanes of her husbands basenesse) reproaching him with his former condition, and calling him home in derision, toThe Empresse Sophia reprocheth Narses. spinne and weaue like an effeminate Eunuch, did solicite by great promises Albinus King of the Lombards, to march from Hungary, to trouble the affaires of Italy. The  which he had secretly before then, giuen her to vnderstand who had wronged him, saying, That it would come to passe, that he, whome to please his detractors, sheeNarses auswere to the Empresse. thought fit to be sent home as a woman to carde and spinne, would shortly spinne her such a threed, as neither her proud selfe, nor those who had so freely slaundered

him should be euer able to vntwist. And wee must not wonder (as hath beene already said) that Narses at his comming into Italie, was aided by the Lombards, who at that time had no power in the Prouince: for hee sent for that aide (such as it was) foorth of Hungarie. Wee haue briefly heretofore declared, from whence this Nation is descended, because our purpose was from the beginning, not to strai^ farre from the affaires of Venice.
Now in the time of the Lombards: Paul, Bishop of Aquileia transported all theThe Church of Grada made Metropolitane by the Pope. treasure, reliques, and seruice of his Church to Grada, where in times past the Church of S. Euphemia had beene builded. Pope Pelagius at the request of Helie who succeeded Paul, (or according to Probin following the opinion of some) did decree, that in the generall assemblie of all the Prelats, the Church of Grada should be Metropolitan of all the Churches in the Venetian countrie, and of the Citie called Aquileia the new: which some affirme to haue learned, by the most ancient letters pattents of the Cittie.
About the same time did diuers prodigies appeare: Armies of fire coloured with bloud were seene in the aire; The Earth brought forth a meruailous and incredible aboundance of all manner of fruits. There happened besides ouer all the Venetian countries, and almost ouer all Trans-alpine Gaule, so great a deluge of waters on a sodaine, as the Riuer Adice which runnes through the Citie of Verona, beingStrange prodigies. miraculously swelled, did almost couer the highest toppe of S. Zenos Church which  stands neere to the Riuer in the Citie. Where it was obserued for a miracle, thatA great miracle at Verona. albeit the windowes thereof were open, yet this violent floud did not enter into the Churche, respecting (as it were) that sacred place. Helie caused a Church to bee built in the honour of the glorious Virgin, called at this day, Barbana.
Then certaine yeares after: Padua being taken and spoiled by the Lombards, the Citie, which daily encreased, was verie much augmented. They gaue the fugitiuesThe Paduan fugitiues dwell at Embragola. that parte of the Citie to dwell in, which is called Embragola, betwixt the common Ouens and the Arcenall. It is reported that they built two Churches, which at this day are to be seene at that place; the one neere to the other; to S. Iohn Baptist, the one: and the other to S. Martin. And because the Venetians should haue  no time to rest, Fortunatus of Aquileia, strengthned with the Lombards forces,The Church of Grada robbed. came and stole away all the treasure and ornaments of the Church of Grada, which at that time was the Metropolitane: To the which, being by this losse destitute of a Pastor, Pope Honorius at the request of the Emperour Heraclius appointed first fruits: and gaue it afterwards great store of golde and siluer, to buy vessels and ornaments for diuine seruice, with the Shrine of St. Marie brought from Alexandria. This Pope being tolde in a dreame, that the bodies of St. Hermagoras andVision in a dreame. Fortunatus wete buried in a little field belonging to Alexandra of Aquileia a verie deuout woman: hee transported them to Grada, and did shut them vp there verie religiously in a secret place.
Almost the same time, the Citie of Vderzza was destroyed by Lotharius KingUderza ruined by the Lombards of the Lombards. Those who fled from thence, came with their Bishop called Magnus, a man of an holie life, and rested in the territorie of the Iesulans, where they built a Citie which they called Heraclea, in honour of Prince Heraclius; butThe foundation of Heracles. the Moderns haue called it Villanoua. It is at this day almost ruined to the ground. There are to be seene certaine signes of a verie ancient Church, which those first founders of Heraclea doe say was dedicated to Saint Peter. At the same time also, Paul Bishop of Altina, fearing the Armies of the Lombards, and amazed by the spoile of his neighbours, came with his Reliques and Iewels, being accompanied with a great multitude of people, to Tourcelles.
The Episcopall See of Padua likewise, was by the authoritie of Pope SeuerineThe Episcopall See of Padua, translated to Malamoc. translated to Malamoc. Diuers Churches were built neere to Tourcelles by the inhabitants thereof, who were very deuout people: the which Burrough, some write, was called by the inhabitants Constantiaca, by the name of Constantius, sonne to Heraclius; who going to Rome landed there.
But the Citie of Heraclea in the meane time being greatly encreased by the concourse of so many people, as the place was not sufficient to contain them; the Shepheards flying from the incursions of the Barbarians, did driue away a great heard ofThe foundation of Equiline. oxen and mares euen to those shoares, who not being able to dwell in Heraclea, they did neere thereunto fortifie a place for themselues, which they named Equiline of the thinge it selfe, as Bonitendius saith. I know that some thinke Equiline to be the same, which is now called Iesulune, but the Authors whom wee follow, make diuers mention of them both, as of two sundrie Cities.
This is that we can learne concerning the ancient Venetians their originall, and encrease of the Citie; which we haue collected with great labour and trauaile. I will  now set downe how they created the first Duke. For although this manner of gouernment haue beene at times interupted, yet notwithstanding it is maintained euen till now, as good and holesome for the Common-wealth.
The Tribunes of the Islands abusing their office, had so troubled the State by ciuill dissension, as there was some likelyhood, that the bodie of this new Citie would be soone dissolued, vnlesse a remedie were applied. Luitprand who with titleLuitprand Duke of Forleini. of Duke commaunded the Prouince of the Carnons, (called now those of Forli) perceiuing this discorde, and supposing (as it came to passe) that this Venetian State, might through ciuill diuision be easily ouerthrowne, (the encrease whereof he thought would bee ouer-dangerous for him and his neighbours) did resolue to  assaile them; I knowe not vpon what ground. It is certaine that at the same time the Lombards did verie much trouble their Countrie: where at the Ilanders grew angrie, hauing found out the cause; which was their owne dissension, for which their neighbours contemned them, and wherby it would vndoubtedly soon come to passe, without speedy remedy, that the Common-wealth would receaue a notable losseWhat moued the Venetians to change the gouernment. The generall assemblie held at Heraclea. by this enemie, who did daily seeke occasion to disquiet the peace of this new Citie. All men thus complaining: the generall assemblie of all the Islands was published at Heraclea.
Christopher Bishop of Grada held the cheife place there, being accompanied with great numbers of the Clergie: and there after the celebration of diuine seruice, at  the first proposition which was made concerning the Common-wealth, euery man beganne to murmure: and some said, That there was no more hope to be hadComplaint in the assemblie against the Tribunes. of the Venetian Common-wealth, nor yet of their libertie, which had beene purchased and maintained by their Ancestors with such generositie, vnlesse the furie of the Tribunes might haue an end. That their selfe-same Ancestors had in times past for the sweetnesse of libertie, abandoned their most pleasant Countrie, their houses, and all other matters, which men commonly hold most deare, and were come into barraine Islands, where they found nothing that might inuite them to dwell there. That if they could haue dispensed with their libertie, they might haue remained in all safety in the Cities where they were first borne and brought vp, and  with this losse alone, haue liued peaceably vnder the dominion of the Barbarians: But being full of courage, they supposed that they ought not to loose their libertie, but with their liues. Wherefore did diuers of those that were there present, following the example of their Predecessors come into those places the precedent yeares but onely to liue at libertie? To what purpose then was their designes? what profit by their sodaine dislodging? why had they so many buildings, Churches, and so many publicke and priuate houses? why did they leaue the firme land to eschewe bondage, and yet meete it in the middest of the waters by the insolencie of a fevve? Whether it was likely, that this barbarous enemie would take any rest, till he had found some meanes to ruinate this new dvvelling place of Libertie? Seeing that Tyrants  hate nothing so much, as that name; That vndoubtedly it vvas his wishe; that all his desire vvas to see the Venetian State ouerthrovvne by ciuill discorde ^hich he could not by any other meanes shake. Whereupon, those vvhich desired the good and profit of the Common-wealth did resolue sodainely to elect a nevve

Duke who should represent the whole honour and maiestie of the State, and haue power to assemble the generall Councell, at such time as the important affaires of the Common-wealth should be in question; to choose yearely Tribunes in euery Island, from whence the appeales should come before him: and moreouer if any man had obtained any dignitie, Prelatship, or benefice, by the suffrages of the Clergie, or of the people, hee should not enioy the same without the pleasure of the Duke.



 PAVLVTIO of Heraclea, the first DVKE of VENICE.





THis thus concluded: Paulutio of Heraclea, a man of singular iustice, was by the consent of all men declared Duke; the yeare (according  to some) of the Cities foundation 282. or as others write, 297* and yet as some others affirme 276. They all agree, that the Tribunarie power did gouerne more, than two hundred and thirtie yeares: But in this first Dukes election, they did not keepe this manner of choosing, as weeWhat forme they obs^ued at the first Dukes election. see to bee at this day obserued in the creation of Princes, but they then proceeded therein more simply. For, ambition being not as yet crept into so religious a Citie; no bribing for honors; they had not in those elections respect to wealth, nobilitie, and other such like matters, but onely to the vertue of the person: by which meanes they obtained it, and not by cunning. But although vertue and wisedome  was respected aboue any thing, yet neuerthelesse, because men beleeue that wee can be neuer sure enough of that which is deerest vnto vs, it is reported, that the new Duke was constrained to sweare, well and faithfully to prouide for whatsoeuer should be fit for the honour of the Common-wealth and the Venetian name.
After he had taken his oath, this new Magistrate was honoured with diuers nobleThe Duke takes his oath. ensignes, whereby that soueraigne dignitie was made more illustrious: and yet for all that I will not affirme, that all the magnificence which at this day the Prince enioyeth was giuen him at the same time: for it is certaine that part of them was giuen him a long time after, and taken from else-where.
Now so soone as this new Duke was fully installed, hee determined to free the Common-wealth from this warre. And the better to effect it, hee entred league A league made with Luitprand. with Luitprand. (some say he ouercame him in fight) He extended the limits of Heraclea from the Riuer of Piauo, vnto the little streame called Piauicolle. By his authoritie rather then by force, he brought the Equilines vnder his dominion, (some name the Iesulans for the Equilines, which makes me to beleeue their opinion in

some sort to bee true who thinke Equiline and Iesulan to be one selfe-same place, though different in name) who at the same time had forsaken the Venetians. Those of Tourcelles in the meane space builded a sumptuous Temple to the glorious Virgin, where they placed the bodie of Saint Heliodore of Altina with diuers other Reliques.




 MARCELLO of Heraclea, the second Duke of Uenice.





THese things effected, Paulutio dyed, after hee had reigned twenty yeares and six moneths. Marcello of Heraclea was by the common voyce chosen in his sted. Wee doe not finde in all the time of his gouernment, which lasted nine yeares, any memorable matter to haue  hapned. Which in my opinion caused diuers Historians to leaue him out in the Catalogue of the Dukes, naming Horteo Hipates, surnamed Vrsus, next after Paulutio. Howsoeuer, they say that he was a vertuous man, wise, and reasonably well inclined to Armes, though his hap was to dye, after he had gotten more reputation by peace, than by warre.




 HORTEO called VRSVS, the third Duke of Uenice.





HOrteo, whom we say was surnamed Vrsus, succeeded Marcello. The Lombards at the same time tooke Rauenna a verie ancient Citie. The Exarch who commanded therein fled for succour to the Venetians. Pope Gregorie did likewise by letters entreate them to aide the Exarch against those insolent Barbarians. The Venetians, muchThe taking of Rauenna by the Uenetians. The creation of Exarch. affecting the Pope, willingly graunted thereunto, and comming before Rauenna with a mightie Armie, did forthwith take it, and being taken gaue it to the Exarch. It is reported that the name of this newe Magistrate was instituted at the same time by one named Longinus, whom the Emperour Iustinian sent into Italie in Narses sted, to commaund with soueraine authoritie. Prodeus of Vincenza, a valiant  man and of great reputation among the Garrison of the Citie, died in that warre. Paulus Diaconus in his Historie of the Lombards sets downe this exploit, and so doth Bonitendius the Secretarie, who hath inserted in his Commentaries the Copie of the Popes letters written to the Venetians to the same purpose.
The Venetians in the meane time were in tumult round about Grada, because Calixtus Bishop of Aquileia, disdaining (as it is thought) that the new Church of Grada should preceed his which was verie ancient, ouer-ranne the bounds of Grada.The troubles round about Grada. But the Pope commanding to desist, the matter was forthwith ended.
There arose after that, great dissension, which in a manner produced a ciuill warre, greatly disquieting the State neere to Heraclea. It is said, that the Dukes insolency  was the certaine cause of this commotion. For the Iesulans not being able anie longer to endure his presumptuous pride, armed themselues and ioyned battaile. This proude Duke marched against them, meaning to bring them to reasonable tearmes, and they fought on either side with more fiercenesse and hatred, than force. At the last after diuers losses on either parte, the Heracleans being wearie of the warres, did on a sodaine turne all their hatred towards the enemies vpon the Duke, as one whom they knew to be the author of all those miseries: who was vilanously murthered by his owne Cittizens, about the latter end of the eleuenthThe Duke murthered by his owne Citizens. yeare of his Magistracie.
The Heracleans being amazed at the newes of the Dukes death, remooued their  dwelling soone after (as it is thought) to Malamoc; no man knowes whether it were because they hated those places for the murther committed on the Duks person, or else for that the same place was too neere the firme Land, and by that meanes more subiect to the ordinarie incursions of the enemies. Some affirme it hapned by reason of the warre which arose betwixt the Heracleans and the Equilins. Those which are more curious alleadge cause wholly different from these, and denie that these places were thus abandoned by and by after the murther. And to speake truly, this first cause seemes too friuolous to make so populous a Citie at an instant to change her dwelling. The troth is, that long after the Dukes murther, during the principalitie of Mauritio and Giouanni his sonne, Heraclea and Equiline were abandoned, as shall be hereafter declared in his place.Difference arising about the creation of a new Duke.
I will now returne to that wherein the Authors agree among themselues. For Vrsus being slaine, in regard the Islanders could not agree about the creation of a new Duke, and that the Electors voyces did greatly varie, which was neuer seene before then, they concluded to choose no Duke in sixe yvares following, but to establish some new Magistrate, that should haue the whole power and authoritie, whose place should be but for a yeare. Thus it came to passe that the fortieth yeareThe master or Colonell of the men at Armes Dominico Leon the first. Felix cornicula the second. Theodato the third. Iuliano Cepari the fourth. or thereabouts, from the creation of the first Duke of the Common-wealth, they inuented a new manner of gouernment.
This new Magistrate set vp in the Dukes place, was called the Master or Colonell  of the men at Armes. The first that was appointed to this office by the common consent, was Dominico Leon. Foelix Cornicula succeeded him, who (as some say) was chosen at Malamoc. Next followed Theodato sonne to Duke Vrsus, lately called from exile, who by the consent of euery one, continued the yeare following, but he died

before his time was expired to the great griefe of all men. Iuliano Cepari (or according to others) Hippati succeeded him. Some Authors say, that the Venetians in this mans time tooke Rauenna from the Barbarians. Fabritio Ciani, (some set downe Giouanni for Ciani) enioyed the fifth yeares gouernment, who before the yeares end, was deposed from his office, and had his eyes thrust out by the people. Some haue written, that this yeare the Heraclians and Iesulans fought one against the other with great furie, and that the place of battaile was for a perpetuall memorie called Parco de Canale. Both of them at the last being defeated, the Heracleans, Iesulans, and Equilins sought out new dwellings. But wee will set downe in the booke following, vpon what occasion the inhabitants departed thence.

The end of the first Booke of the first Decade.








THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE FIRST DECAD. OF THE HISTORIE Of Venice.

 The Contents of the second Booke of the first Decad.
THe gouernment of Duke restored to the Citie. Duke THEODATO being blinde was banished. The Principalitie of Galla his successor had the like end. Duke MAVRITIO by a new example tooke GIOVANNI his sonne for companion, in the gouernment. From whence the strife proceeded betwixt MAVRITIO and FORTVNATO Bishop of Grada. Diuers opinions  of the warre of the French against the Venetians, vnder the conduct of PEPIN. A briefe description of the Cities scituation. PEPIN takes all from the Venetians except Rialto. PEPIN, defeated at Sea by the Venetians betwixt the Citie and Malamoc. The Romans compared with the Venetians, in both their exploits against the French: The end of the Venetians warre against PEPIN their full libertie. Heraclea repaired by Duke PARTITIATIO. Description of the Duks Pallace, and of the place where the Senate is assembled. The building of diuers Churches in the Citie. For what cause the Plaies were ordained, which are made at Shrouetide in the great Court of the Pallace. From whence the Sarracens are descended. How St. MARKS bodie, being stollen out of Egypt, was brought to Venice*




 THEODATO, the fourth Duke of Uenice.





THE fifth yeare of the creation of the Master or Colonell of the men at  Armes was not yet fully expired, when the whole Citie, possessed with a meruailous desire to haue a Duke (as though the Commonwealth could not stand without such a Magistrate,) Theodato,The gouernment of Duke restored. sonne to Vrsus, was on the sodaine, by the mutuall consent

of the assemblie held at Malamoc, declared Duke of the Common-wealth. This man obtained of Astolpho King of Lombardie, that the bounds of Heraclea should stand for the Venetians in the same termes as they did of old, euen to the Riuer of Piauo. Besides, there was an Hauen distant three miles from Chioggia; neere vnto the entrie whereof stood a Castle, stronger by arte then by nature, which the inhabitants thereof called Brundulla. Nothing is now to be seene there, but the ruines of a Tower; all the rest is razed to the ground. Theodato going thither to fortifie it, was surprised by Galla his enemie, the thirteenth yeare of his gouernment,A cruell and vnworthie acte. and hauing his eyes put out by his disloyall aduersarie, was miserably deposed by him from his dignitie; the which he hauing purchased by so wicked a deed  did enioy at his returne to Malamoc.




 GALLA, the fifth Duke of Uenice.





DIuers doe affirme that Theodato was suspected to haue affected tyrannie by the new fortification of this Castle: and that by Gallas meanes  the people made him blind. But Galla being verie dissolute, possessed with all manner of vices, abusing his ill-gotten Principalitie, did iustly receiue his deserued rewarde. For after that his eyes were likewise put out, hee was banished almost in the beginning of the second yeare of hisA punishment of God. gouernment.








 MONEGARIO, the sixth Duke of Uenice.








DOminico Monegario was forthwith appointed in his place* vnto whom in regard of his violent and furious nature, were yearely Tribunes assigned; to assist him in the gouernment: For they feared that the Common-wealth might receiue some great hurt by his rashenesse, if there were not some in the Councell to counterpoise the violence of his Spirit. But this was to small purpose. For in steed of a bridle and stay, it proued aspurre to his depraued humour; causing him to thunder forth all manner of mischiefes.Monegario his miserable end* The people then being impatient at his new tyrannie, after they had depriued him of his sight, turned him out of all authoritie, the fifth yeare after his  election. Mauritio of Heraclea, a wise man, and of vertuous life, succeeded Monegario.




 MAVRITIO of Heraclea, the seuenth Duke of Uenice.








THis man hauing well and happily gouerned the Common-wealth for ^ certaine time, and thereby purchased the loue and good will of the people, did obtaine in another assemblie (that which no man euer tillThe first association into the Principalitie. then had done) libertie to associate his sonne Giouanni, as Colleague with him in the Principalitie. Some affirme that in these mens dayes those of Heraclea and Equiline retired themselues to Malamoc: and that the cause* of their retreit proceeded from the secret hatred of the Dukes against Fortunato Bishop of Grada, about the gouernment of the Common-wealth. This FortunatoConspiracie against the Duke. had with diuers others conspired against them; but their desseignes being discouered, he with his complices, for feare of being apprehended, fled for safetie to the Emperour Charles: where hauing accused the Venetians, for that contrarie to the  agreement sworne betwixt him and Nicephorus, who commaunded the Easterne Empire, despising the Estate of the Roman Empire, they had shewed themselues affectionate to that of Constantinople: seeing that agreement did expresly import that the Venetians should be free, acknowledging neither of the Empires; This did in such sort moue Charles, as in the end he did by letters commaund his sonne Pepin, who gouerned the affaires of Italie, to make furious warres vpon the Venetians. Vpon this commaund Pepin forthwith came and assailed the Venetian coast next to the firme land, where Heraclea and Equiline stood. The inhabitants of those places frighted at the first alarme of this warre, and distrusting the sufficiencie of their walles, nothing strong either by arte or nature, fled away in great troopes  and retired themselues to Malamoc, and to Rialto.
But it seemeth that the Authors doe greatly differ concerning the destruction ofWhat Bonitendius saith concerning the association. Heraclea, and the troubles of those times. Bonitendius disposeth the affaires of those dayes in such sort, as hee saith, that Prince Mauritio (in whose time Charles King of France had wholly abolished in Italie the power and ancient Kingdome of the Lombards, enemies to the Pope, by reason whereof he was made Emperour) the affaires of the Venetians not being verie safe, neither at home nor abroad, amiddest those tumultes of Italie, had drawne in to the gouernment of the Common-wealth, by hauing wisely appeased the* quarrels of the Citizens, and brauely defended their frontiers, (rather by sufferance then approbation of the people,) a new and pernicious example, in taking Giouanni his sonne for Colleague in the Principalitie, which fell out vnhappily; not for himselfe who was old, and dyed soone after; but for his sonne which furuiued him, and his sonnes sonne, associated by his father, after the Grand-sires example.




 GIOVANNI, the eighth Duke of Uenice.





BEcause, in the gouernment, Giouanni did not follow his fathers steps: and that besides his other mischiefes committed in his place, hee sent Mauritio his sonne with a mightie Sea-armie to assail^ Giouanni Bishop of Grada, a vertuous man in those dayes: He, (...) yet the rest, doe not set downe the occasion of this warre. And it is to bee supposed that they did expresly conceale it, because there was none at all. For itThe cruell death of the Bishop of Grada. comes often to passe, that when a wicked man will hurt any one, hee neuer regardes the occasion why. This naughtie sonne hauing obeyed the commaundment of his bad father, and taken this Bishop, threwe him head-long downe from an high Tower.
Fortunato the Triestine, who soone after succeeded him, resoluing to reuenge  the vnworthie death of Giouanni, did secretly practise with certaine chiefe men of the Citie, to depose yong Mauritio, and his father likewise, from the Principalitie, who without occasion at all, had committed so cruell a murther. But the enterpriseConspiracie against the Duke discouered. beeing discouered, hee with certaine of his adherents withdrew himselfe to Treuiso, among whom were Demetrio Marmani, Foscaro de Georges, and Obellerio of Malamoc: who at that time were Tribunes.
Fortunato departed from Treuiso, and went into France to the Emperour Charles: at whose suite (saith Bonitendius) the Emperour commaunded his sonne Pepin, (who by Pope Adrian was named King of Italie) to make warre vpon the Venetians: and that in the meane time, in hatred of the murtherer Ma^ritio, and  his father, it hapned that Obellerio of Malamoc, who (as hath beene said) did follow the Bishop Fortunato to Treuiso, being declared Duke, both the father and sonne, were driuen forth of the Citie; the one being oppressed with olde age,The Duke and his sonne expeld the Citie. went to Mantua, and the other into France: by meanes whereof, Heraclea, as the place of their birth, was wholly with the places adiacent destroyed. Some say that Iohn was sent by the first Mauritio to assaile Grada, to reuenge the death of Bishop Giouanni slaine in that place; in which charge not bearing himselfe faithfully, It is supposed that Fortunato was displeased with him: Neither is it certainly knowne how long these three commanded one after another. Yet Bonitendius sets it briefly downe thus; That the first Mauritio gouerned three and twenty yeares, accounting  nine, wherein his sonne was his Colleague, who after that, commaunded as long alone and after hee had associated the young Mauritio, they were both expulsed the seuenth yeare of their association. Some hold that in the time of the first Mauritio, the Church of Oliuolla (called afterwards the quarter of the Castle) was by Pope Adrian erected into an Episcopall See^ the Islands of Rialto, Lupria, and Dorsse-dura, which were called twinnes, being vnder the iuridiction thereof. Some doe besides set downe, that at the same time, the Scopares an ancient Family as then in Venice builded the Church of Saint Moses of an excellent structure, according to the Cities abilitie in those dayes, and enriched it with goodly presents: And moreouer, that Saint Michaels Church, which at this day hath many markes  of antiquitie, neere to Brundula, was repaired and enriched by a stranger named Sergius, who hauing a long time beene sicke of an incurable disease, was in the night time diuinely warned in a dreame, that if he did visit a Church which was neere to Brundula, he should be healed of his sicknesse. And because it came to passe according to the prediction, he did sumptuously repaire the same Church, and bestowed on it many rich presents.








 OBELLERIO, the ninth Duke of Uenice.








LEt vs returne to Obellerio, who in his absence being created Duke (as hath beene said) comming to Malamoc, hauing for a time commanded with the peoples great good liking, did associate his brother Beato for Colleague. This man went to Constantinople to the Emperour Nicephorus, where he was nobly entertained, and honored with certaine markes of the Empire. In the meane time, Valentin his younger brother was by the people giuen to Obellerio for his Colleague. But we finde the Historians so much to varie concerning the occurrents of these times, as wee can hardly iudge which of them best deserues to be followed.
There be others which say, that Obellerio beeing expulsed by his brother Beato, had recourse to the Emperour Charles, whose daughter he married, promising to the King to betray his countrie, and that the French being fedde with this hope, did sodainely marche against the Venetians; that hauing in a moment seised on all the Sea-frontiers he came to Malamoc, which he found not inhabited, from whence he sought to passe ouer to Rialto by boate, whither hee had heard the Prince and people were retired, but being there beaten by a furious tempest he lost the greatest part of his Armie, and was enforced to retire without doing any thing worthie of note. Touching this and the rest which may easily be refuted, all of them almostWho led the French Army against the Uenetians. doe affirme that Charles was not the chiefe leader of this enterprise, but his sonne Pepin. And the easier to vnderstand how it hapned, we must search the matter from  farre, to the end we doe not too much straie from the Venetians. From thence we will continue our historie, where it behoues vs lightly to passe ouer that which diuers haue left in writing in a long and prolix stile more than needed.
The Lombards Kingdome being extinct (as wee haue said) and the affaires of Italie setled by Charles, or Pepin his sonne, who was afterward, installed King: and the Venetians being in the meane time freed by the agreement betwixt Charles and Nicephorus;Pepin King of Italie. there hapned strife betwixt the two Empires about Dalmatia. It is reported that by the same agreement (whereof we now spake) it was expresly mentioned, that Dalmatia should be a Prouince of the Grecian Empire. The Romans not well digesting that such a maritime Prouince so neere Italie, should be cut off The cause of the warre betwixt the two Empires. from their Empire, after they had a long time debated thereon, both sides prepared for warre. But soone after, truce being agreed on betwixt Nicetes, who commaunded in that Prouince for the Greeke Emperour; and Pepin: this Gouernour

returned w^th his Sea-armieto Costantinople, and comming backe in time with the same Armie into Dalmatia refreshing himselfe in the same Prouince, hee resolued to assaile the townes on the Sea coast (for the truce was already expired) which did obey Pepin. So soone as Pepin had notice of these preparations, he assembled all his French and Italian forces and tooke Comada, rounded on euery sideThe French tak^ Commada. The Greeke defeated before Commada. with the Sea and Lakes in forme of an Island: for this place was very commodious to bridle the enemies attempts. Nicetes comming thither soone after, was with great losse of his people brauely repulsed. In this encounter diuers Venetians were slaine and hurt. But it is not knowne whether this Venetian succour which accompanied the Grecian, were sent by the generall consent, or whether the Grecian did hire  them. Nicetes being disapointed of his purpose came to Venice. They say that after his arriuall, Obellerio and his brother who then gouerned the Common-wealth sought to make an agreement betwixt Pepin and Nicephorus.
The Venetians power was alreadie so encreased, as the two mightiest Empires of the Earth, did looke vpon them as on a rocke exposed to the sundrie billowes ofObellerio practiseth treason against Pepin. the Sea. Some in those dayes did thinke that Obellerio during the treaty of peace, did practise some treason against Pepin, (as witnesseth Paulus Diaconus in his Historie of the Lombards) by meanes whereof Nicetes and Pepin departed malecontent from Venice, so as the French soon after assailed the Venetians. Al those in a manner who haue written the Venetian Historie, doe impute the cause of this warre to Obellerio* who being driuen thence by his brother, that was allyed to France by marriage, and had married the daughter of Charles (as some say) did sollicite the Emperour, or (according to the opinion the crediblest Authors) Pepin, to take away the libertie of the Venetians. Blondus who hath written more of the Historie then any of the Modernes, saith that he is of opinion according to Godfrey of Viterbo, that Pepin made warre twice vpon the Venetians, (the first, when Heraclea was ruinated, of whichThe opinion of Blondus concerning the warre French against the Venetians. exploit wee haue heretofore spoken) and how that at this first time the Venetians were ouercome, and then restored to libertie, vpon condition that they should neuer more haue intelligence with the Greeke Emperour. The which, they not obseruing, but vnder-hand practising the friend-ship of Nicephorus, by the meanes of  certaine Marchants trafficking toward the Propontide on the coaste of the Ponticke Sea: Pepin was aduertised hereof, which caused him forthwith to come and assaile them once againe with the greatest forces hee could gather together, as shall bee hereafter declared, with the issue thereof. But we must first of all refute Blondus, who seemeth in some sort to contradict himselfe when he saith, that they yeelded themselues at such time time as Heraclea was destroyed. If it were so, this had not hapned in the time of Obellerio and his brother, but in that time of Giouanni and Mauritio the younger, seeing that himselfe affirmes in another place, that Heraclea was razed in their time.
Now because all those which haue written the Venetian Historie doe stedfastly  denie that the Citie was euer in subiection; the matter could not thus haue comeWhy the French did assaile the Venetians. to passe, that through the Patriarch Fortunato his report made to Charles, That the Venetians, contrarie to the agreement sworne betwixt him and Nicephorus, whereby they were declared neuters, should haue practised by their Agents the friendship of Nicephorus: Pepin was commaunded by his father to assaile them with all his forces: and because he had destroyed Heraclea and Equiline, and thereby greatlyThe Venetians (...) allwaies kept their ancient libertie. weakened their whole power, the common report was that the Venetians with their Duke were subiected. But it is certaine that the Venetians did euer retaine their ancient libertie, and that they were freed from that warre, on condition wholly to forsake the friendship of Nicephorus.
Some strife arising soone after betwixt the two Empires concerning Dalmatia, the Venetians hauing openly taken Nicephorus part (for it is reported that they succoured his Lieutenant Nicetes by Sea and Land) Pepin being then incensed against the Venetians, came and assailed them with greater forces than before.
All Authors moreouer doe agree, that at such time as the French made warre vpon them, Obellerio and his brother Beato were by a ciuill or domesticke broile driuen forth of the Citie, and had retired themselues to the enemie, whilst Valentin their yonger brother commanded within the towne. And the better to vnderstand the state of this fearefull warre, we will in breife speake somewhat of the scituation of the Citie, beside that which hath beene said in the precedent booke.
The Citie of Venice is (as hath beene said elsewhere,) scituate vpon Islands verieDiscription of the scituation of the Citie of Venice. neere to one another, which the continuall ebbing of the Sea, doth seuer in a manner by equall spaces, and yet in such manner, as her shoares on the South-side betwixt the Sea and the Lakes, are diuided by the space of fortie thousand paces into ten  waterie channels: and all those shoares cut out after the manner of Islands, were at that time wholly inhabited. The first of them all on the South-side, were the Brondolians: after them, came the Chioggians, Pelestrians, Albiolans, those of Malamoc, and of the Castle, where at this day is the Patriarkes seat. Those within beeing farther off from the Sea, dwelt in the middest of the lakes; the cheife of whom were those of Rialto, who haue in our time by the great concourse of people, and by their owne fame, obscured all the rest. Pepin hauing opposed his Sea-armie against that side to stoppe the incursions of the enemie, and thereby to take from him all hope of hauing victuals, did with his forces that he had on land, assaile the neerest Islands to the firme land; and hauing in part driuen awaie, and partly subiected  the Brondolians, Chioggians, and Pelestrians, he marched against the Albiolans.
This siege hauing contrarie to all mens hopes staied him there sometime, gaueThe retreate of Valentin, and all the Venetians to Rialto. Duke Valentin and those of Malamoc leisure to retire themselues to Rialto with their wiues and children, and whatsoeuer such a like feare would suffer them to carrie awaie: not only transporting their particular wealth, but soueraine Magistrate, and the whole maiestie of their common wealth, where it hath euer since then, made hir aboade, with greater felicitie and encrease of all things. But this place inuites vs to speake some-what of the antiquitie of Malamoc. All those (in a manner) who haue written the Venetian Historie, do affirme that this Malamoc which is seene at  this daie, (on the left hand) going to the Citie from Chioggia, neere to the Port bearing the same name, is not that ancient one which the first Venetians did build, and from whence wee haue said that the inhabitants retired themselues to Rialto for feare of the French; but that the ruines of this ancient one are to be seene in theThe auncient Malamoc ruinated. middest of the Sea. Whereby may be coniectured, how much ground the Sea hath deuoured since that time. I dare moreouer affirme, that that place was in the beginning called Medoac, and since by the Modernes named Malamoc, by corruption of the language like vnto diuers others.
The Albiolans amazed at the Dukes flight, and those of Malamoc, fell forthwithThe Albiolans yeeld. to composition; the like did those few people which remained in Malamoc. These  being receiued by composition; so soone as the victorious French man came to the Port of Albiola, which at this day is right ouer against new Malamoc, and had perceiued (for he did see nothing but Sea on the one side, and lakes on the other) that he must either change his purpose, or his manner of warre: it is said that he sate a certaine time verie melancholie vpon the shoare, with his face turned towards the enemie, as though hee were deuising some meanes to giue end to that warre; and that at last, through the counsell of an old woman (which is not credible) he made a bridge ouer the water, for his soldiers passage ouer to Rialto. But concerning the counsell of a simple olde woman, it is wholly ridiculous; as, if an old doting Crone had knowne better what did belong to a deed of so great importance, than so manie thousands of men which followed the French: seeing that diuers Italians most expert  in marine matters, and capable of greater things, were then with him. But admit that all those which were with him were ignorant of that meanes: those of Malamoc which were taken prisoners could easily haue executed such an enterprise.

For it is not credible (though some say it) that there were none in that place, which was in time past so populous, but one poore old woman.
There be that haue likewise affirmed, that they laboured first to ouercome themThe Venetians pollicie. by famine, but that the besieged hauing with certaine warre-like engins throwne loaues of bread into the enemies camp, the hautie French impatient of more delay, did fo^thwith ioine and make fast together diuers hogsheads or tuns, head to head, and couering them with boards, made a verie long bridge. Whereupon the Venetians perceiuing it did behooue them to fight, for their libertie, their Churches, and for their owne liues, and their childrens, and for want of so doing to vndergoe the yoke of the proud enemie, resolued to fight couragiously, intending either to die The Venetians resolution. fighting, or to preserue their libertie, and to hazard their last fortune by that maner of fight, wherein they were most exercised. Hauing then imbarked themselues in small light boats apt for fight and saile, the winde and tide seruing them; after they had tarried for the ebbe, they came furiously vpon the enemie, who alreadie approched. There began on a sodaine a bloudie battaile betwixt them, sustained neuerthelesse by verie different courages: For the French fought, incited with a desire to spoile*Different intents of the combatants. and to maintaine their former honour; But the Venetians, for their wiues, and children, for their publike and particular wealth, and for their libertie, which they held deerer then all the rest. And because the bridge was weakely built, and continually shaken by the waues of the sea, the enemie being accustomed to firme footing, began  forthwith to stagger. The Venetians on the contrarie, trusting to the lightnesse of their vessels, couragiously assailed them behinde, and in flanke. The bridge at the last being broken by force, (which some thinke hapned by the violence of a tempest, which arose at the beginning of the fight) there was in a moment a great slaughterThe French vanquished by the Uenetians. of the french: the sword on the one side, and the Sea on the other, presenting death vnto them. The multitude of such as were then slaine and drowned, gaue the first ground, why that place, by the which men turne from Malamoc to the Rialto, was, for that notable victorie, called afterward Orphano.
We haue heard, how the Venetians fought with good successe against Pepin the sonne of Charles. We may then, vpon a iust ground in some things compare the Venetians The Venetians compared wit^ the Romans. Common-wealth with that of the Romans, as we will often hereafter doe. For diuers things are to be found, as well in the prosperitie as aduersitie of both the Common-wealths, much like the one to the other. It is certaine that the prosperous beginnings and encrease of both these people, were wholly almost extinct by the Barbarians: albeit the Venetians Common-welth was in some sort more new in the time of her first troubles, than was that of the Romans in the time of the Senonians warre. Yet notwithstanding each of them had the French for their enemies. The Romans were assailed by the Senonians, a Nation altogether vnknown before the taking of the Citie; These by the Belgians, no lesse couragious, but more mightie then the Senonians: because they were, besides the forces of the Empire, aided  by the succors of Italie. The Roman state had incensed the enemie, because one of her Ambassadours had contrarie to the law of Nations iniured a Frenchman; The Venetian, because, in contempt of the agreement made betwixt Charles and Nicephorus, it had fauoured one of the parties. The Senonians were masters of all, sauing the Capitol. The Belgians left the Venetians nothing but Rialto. And both the one and other deceiued the enemie by casting loaues of bread. These men defended the Sea bankes; and the other a little hill. Each of them haue valiantly repulsed the French, puffed vp with the pride of his victories and happie successe. But the first did it voluntarily; and this by constraint. But the Roman therein deserued high glorie: in that all her enemies were slaine, And the Venetians, in that they defeated so mightie a king, assisted aswell with his owne forces, as with those of his Father  and the Empire. The preseruing of the Capitoll was cause of the encrease of the Citie, and of the perpetuall establishment of the Empire. That of Rialto gaue not only occasion of the Cities encrease, but of establishing the Princes residence

in a more eminent and magnificent place, than either Heraclea or Malamoc.
Thus farre extended the Cities infancie. Now followes her youth: during which the Venetians, after they had confirmed their forces, did mightily enlarge the limits of their estate.
But we will returne to Pepin, who amazed (as they say) at such a losse, did forthwithPepin retires to the firme land. raise the siege. And after the French had spoyled all the places they went through, he brought backe his Armie. Some say, that Obellerio, and his brother, being authors of so many mischiefes, did willingly banish themselues, and followed the enemie. Others, who make the Emperour Charles the authour of this warre, and not Pepin, doe affirme, that the French after this losse made peace with the Venetian, and came to Rialto; where being honourably entertained, he intreated the people to receiue Obellerio into the Countrie: which the Venetians hauing vnwillingly graunted (as the euent witnessed) so soone as Charles was gone, Obellerio was cut in peeces by the people: and his bowels being rent forth of his body, were torne in peeces by some of the multitudes teeth; his wife likewise, who was reported to bee of the royall bloud of France, was slaine with him. But neither was Charles the leader of this Armie, nor did this happen which they report. And the common consent of the crediblest Historians, makes me to beleeue, that it was Pepin which made warre on the Venetians. But whether it were the one or the other, it is certaine that the Venetians did wholly preserue their libertie, and became open  friends to either Empire.




 ANGELO PARTITIATIO, the 10. Duke of Venice, and the first at RIALTO.








SOme report, that Obellerio being slaine, his brother Beato held the Principalitie; and others say, that Obellerio and Beato being expelled, Valentin their yonger brother commanded in the Citie. But howsoeuer it was (for it is hard to iudge the right in such diuersitie of opinions) it is certaine that the Gouernement of these three, lasted not aboue fiue yeares. Angelo Partitiatio succeeded these three, who was the first that  held his seate at Rialto. They gaue him two yearely Tribunes to assist him in all thinges. Some say he had the surname of Badoairio, from whom the Badoairians are descended. The most curious Historians haue numbred the Partitiatij, among the noblest families which came from Heraclea to Rialto. And that which makes me

easily to beleeue it is; because among the most memorable matters acted in his Gouernment,Heraclea after it was repaired, (...) (...) (...). we find the reparation of Heraclea* which by reason thereof was afterward called Villa-noua. And because that in the time of the warre with the French, a great number of people ranne to Rialto, so as the place was filled with an incredible multitude of inhabitants; it came to passe, that threescore small Ilands next to them were ioyned together by Bridges. But all men did thinke this place, for the great multitude of people, and for the commodiousnesse thereof, worthie, that the Soueraigne Magistrate, and the whole State of the Commonwealth should reside there. And with a good and happie presage for the Duke and the whole Venetian State, it was decreed, That Rialto should euer after bee the Princes seate. According Rialto chosen for the Princes ordinarie residence. to this conclusion; to the end that the Soueraigne Magistrate should not want a house; the Duke himselfe did forth with appoint a place, whereon to build the Dukes Pallace, which stands (as we see at this daie) neere to the goodly Church of St. Marke. But we may truly say, that it is only the olde Pallace, which PartitiatioThe Dukes Palace in Rialto. did edifie. For the other neighbour-buildings confronting the Senate-house doe represent a newer architecture. For it is nor likelie, that in those daies they could tell from whence to haue gotten so manie costlie pillars, and excellent stones: their meanes being then verie small. But whether it were in Partitiatios time, or since (as it is most credible by the report almost of all Annalists) that this worke was built: the excellencie and greatnesse thereof doth deserue, that such a thing should not be  buried in silence. But because it would be too tedious a matter to particularize all the singularities of that place, wee will speake onely of the admirable structure thereof.
This place then, as it is appointed to manie and sundrie purposes, hath likewiseDescription of the Dukes Palace. manie and diuers fronts: whereof that which lookes vpon the West and South, is vnder-propt by two rankes of columns; and that which supporteth the whole burthen of the worke, hath pillars of a strange kinde of stone, rather bigge then long. The Arches are verie sumptuous, made of the same matter and workemanship, embracing vnder the bending of a costlie vault, diuers columns set verie neere together. That ranke which is aboue, is made almost of the same stone and fashion; and because  it hath a greater number of Pillars, they are the more slender, and vnderneath enuironed with a verie thicke rew of other pillars, but farre lesse, so as they doe not onely serue for a staie, but for a meruailous adornment. But as well the vppermost ranke (whereof we now spake) as the lowest, doth make a great gallerie: the most spacious part whereof is almost wholly possessed by the market-place. The remainder of the front, euen to the toppe of the whole Masse, which is of a verie rare stone, red and white, is so high, that it troubleth, as much as it delighteth the eies of the beholders, being verie richly couered with lead. Aboue the gallerie, there is a part of a verie great Librarie stored with manie Greeke and Latine bookes: theA verie excellent Librarie within the Prelace. greatest part whereof was giuen by the last Will and Testament of Cardinall Bessarion. The residue, which lookes towards the South, is the Comitia (For I know not how otherwise to terme this place) where euerie eight daies, and sometimes oftner, all the Nobilitie are assembled about the creation of Magistrates. As also I will more freely call that part of the Palace, which lookes towards the East, The Court, whereas the Senate vsually doe resort. I vnderstand by the Senate, that which they call the Councell of the Preguays; by whom are handled the most importantWherefore they are called Pirguays. affaires of the Common-wealth. For the ancient Fathers, the Authors of this State, haue, among other things, borrowed of the Romans, to name those Preguays which debate in the Senate, because they were intreated to deliuer their opinion, concerning that which was spoken by him that held the cheifest place in the Senate. But we will speake more amply in an other place. We will now returne to  the gouernment of Partitiatio, who hauing two sonnes, he sent the one named IustinianoIustiniano the Dukes sonne sent to Constantinople. to Leo Emperour of Greece, by whom he was liberally entertained, and greatly honoured and praised; and in the mean time, he tooke the other, named Giouanni,

for his Colleague, whereat Iustiniano at his returne was in such sort moued, as he obstinately refused to come and see his Father: But the olde man being extreamely desirous to see his sonne, after he had deposed Giouanni, who refused to obaie his FatherGiouanni deposed by the people. (had not the people constrained him thereunto) did associate Iustiniano, and his nephew Angelo sonne to Iustiniano: the people did confine Giouanni that was deposed, to Constantinople. Some saie that hee went of his owne accord, to Pergamus to the Emperour Leon, from whence, returning, he did, by his Fathers commandement, take his wife and children and went to Constantinople.The Emperour Leo giues many goodly relikes to the Prince.
About the same time, the Emperour Leon gaue Partitiatio the bodie of Saint Zacharie, and part of the garments of our Sauiour Iesus Christ, and of the glorious Virgin: with a peece of the holie Crosse, which he religiously lockt vp in Saint Zacharies Church which he had built. He did moreouer translate the Monkes of the Couent of Saint Seruulo at the entreatie of the Abbot, into Saint Hilaries Church, which stood then in the farthest part of the Rialto. And they which now knowe those places, doe at this day shewe the ruines thereof in the firme Land. Hee built likewise at the same time two Churches in the Islands, in those daies called the Twinnes, one to Saint Seuerus, and the other to Saint Laurence. Not long after, his sonne Vrsus made a Monasterie of Nunnes of Saint Laurence his Church. I finde in some Authors, that he did likewise builde, to the honour of the Prince of the Apostles, the Church of Oliuollo, which stands in that part of the towne which at this  day is called the Castle; and that at the dedication thereof, the relicks of Saint Sergius and Bacchus were brought thither.
About the same time likewise, diuers of the chiefest of the Citie conspired againstA conspiracie against the Prince discouered. these Princes. Giouanni Talonico, and Bono Bragadino chiefe of the conspiracie were put death. Monetario, one of the complices of this bad designe, saued himselfe by flight; but all his goods were confiscate. Some Authors doe likewise affirme, that, vnder this Princes gouernment, Vlric Bishop of Aquileia, accompained with certaine of the chiefe of Friuli were vanquished by the Venetians in a fight at Sea. This Vlric was a little before condemned for an Hereticke by Pope Alexander. This manVlric Bishop of Aquileia vanquished by the Venetians. for despight that the Church of Grada was preferred before his of Aquileia, being  assisted by troopes of the Forlani, came on a sodaine, and assailed the Bishop of the Island. The Venetians Fleete came as sodainely to his reskew; who hauing drawne the enemie to fight, did easily breake and defeate him, and tooke Vlric, with diuers other Gentlemen, prisoners. Then the victorious Venetian pursuing this scattered troope euen to the firme Land, did put all the Sea-coast of the Forlani (called at this day the Friuli) to fire and sword, and destroyed likewise certaine towns by their sodaine incursions. Diuers that escaped from the battaile, not knowing the waies, after they had strayed a long time through the marishes of Caorli, fell at last into the hands of the victors* The Venetians to purchase the name of meeke and gentle, did set Vlric and all the rest of the prisoners at libertie: on condition The publike games at ^tide. that they should send yearely to Venice, on the same day that the victorie was obtained, twelue wild Boares, (with as many loaues of one size) which, with a Bull, should be killed before the generall assemblie: And they should beside, ouerthrow with their Pikes Castles of wood. All this is yet at this day obserued with great preparation, as yearly sports, in the market place, on the sameday as the battell was fought.
This is that which hapned as well at home, as abroad, during the gouernment of Angelo Partitiatio; who after that he had transported the Ducall state to Rialto, did there beginne his gouernment with better augurie, than did in times past Paulutio at Heraclea, or Theodato since that at Malamoc. For since the limits of the State  were mightily enlarged, the whole honour and maiestie of the Common-wealth hath there remained, as in a settled and sure place.





 IVSTINIANO, the 11. Duke of Uenice.








IVstiniano after his fathers death gouerned the Commonwealth alone. Soone after, he persuaded the State to send to Michael the EasterneSuccour sent to the Greeke Emperour against the Sarazens. Emperour (for the perpetuall conseruation of their friendship with the Grecian Empire) certaine armed shippes to aide him against the Saracens, who at that time did ouer-runne most of the Islands of Europe, and chiefly Sicilie: but not meeting the enemie, they soone returned to the Citie.
And because we haue spoken of the Saracens, it shall not be impertinent to saieFrom whence came the name of Sarazens. somewhat of the originall of the name. For it was then verie new; and brought in according to the opinion of some, in the daies of Mahomet: who in his detestable  Sermons, whereby he hath almost diuerted the whole East from the true light, folding them vp in such darkenesse as they could neuer since free themselues off, was wont to call all those Sarracens, (by the name of Sara, Abrahams lawfull wife) who had embraced his sect; as if those, which followed his Doctrine, had beene by a Diuine oracle the onely lawfull successors, and heires of the Diuine promise. I will not likewise denie, but that this name may be deriued from Sarraca, a Citie in Arabia Foelix: But all Historians doe in a manner hold the first opinion for true. This Nation hath made manie and diuers Roades into Affricke and Europe, and manie likewise into Asia, but they haue beene ouerthrowne and defeated, as well by the French Armies, as by those of the Venetians. Let vs now returne to the Venetians  affaires, which of themselues succeeding happily in those daies, did afterwards receiue a great encrease, by the bodie of St. Marke, brought to them from Alexandria after this manner.
The king of that Countrie caused a magnificent Palace to be built, and for the erecting thereof, had commaunded to take all the faire and rarest stones from the ancient Churches and other buildings, as wel publike as priuate; and S. Markes Church in Alexandria being built of the same matter, it was thought that it would not bee spared: the which Stauracius the Monke, and Theodore the Preist, both Grecians, fearing, who did not only celebrate Diuine Seruice there but as Sextens did heedfully keepe that sacred place, were in great care. But it luckily came to passe that Bono of Malamoc and Rustico of Tourcelles arriued there, being driuen by tempest into that  place, contrarie to the publike appointment, with ten ships. These men comming for deuotion sake into the said Church, and perceiuing the sorrowfulnesse of those two, enquired the occasion of their sadnesse; and vnderstanding that it proceeded from feare, least the Church should bee destroied, they assaied to winne them by

many goodly promises, assuring them that if they wold deliuer vnto them the body of S. Marke, that both of them should be greatly honoured of the Venetians. At the first they reiected this demaund, as holding it a sacrilegious matter to remoue theWhy S. Marks bodie was brought from Alexandria. holy bodie out of his place. But it came to passe by the diuine prouide^ce, that whilst they were talking about the matter, some of those who had co^mission from the king to seeke such stones, came into the Church, and caused diuers stones which were fit for the building of the new-begun Pallace to be taken thence, greatly therby disfiguring the Church. These two Sextens being incensed hereat, and vehemently vrged by the Venetians to co^discend to their request, seeing some likelihood of the Churches ruine, did consent to their demand. But to the end that the Towns-men (who were  much addicted to the name of the Saint, and to the holy place, in regard of the many miracles there wrought) should not on a sodaine perceiue any thing, they did vnrip the cloth behind, wherein the holy body was wrapped, not medling with the seales which were on the forepart therof, and did put the bodie of S. Claudina into the sheet, in stead of that which they had taken awaie. It is reported that at the same time there came such a pleasant sweete smell forth of the Church, as euerie one ranne to taste it. And the matter had easily beene discouered, if they had not perceiued the fore-part of the cloth and the seales to be whole. And because they certainely knew that they could not, without great danger, beare the stoln body to their ships, they bethought themselues of a new subtile inuention to deceiue the people: The  which I would scarse credit, were it not, that the continuall course of the storie isThe Alexandrines insolent to strangers. painted with admirable arte in the sumptuous Church of Saint Marke.
Now to eschew the brauadoes which that Nation did daily vse to strangers, to discouer matters, they did put that holie burthen into a basket, and couered it with hearbes; then they threw swines flesh vpon it, which that Nation according to their ancient custome did extreamely abhorre: from whence came this prouerb spoken by Augustus, That hee had rather bee Herods swine than his sonne. ThoseAugustus his prouerb. then which were appointed to carrie it awaie, being formerly instructed what to do, cried aloud when they met any in the streetes, Ganzer, which signifieth in the BarbarianPollicie of those which carried S. Markes bodie to the ships. language, swine, and in this manner they brought it to their shippes; and the  bodie being wrapped vp in the sailes, and tied to the shroudes, they hung it on the mast, as determining precisely to depart, fearing least that pretious theft should be perceiued by those who had charge to visit the shippes before the Marchants departure. At the last hoising Ankers, they departed with great ioy: But it is reported that as they were in the maine Sea, they were tossed by an horrible tempest; and that then Saint Marke appeared to Bono of Mamaluc, and willed him presently toMiraculous apparition of S. Marke. strike saile, least the shippes, driuen by force of the windes vpon the rockes neere at hand, should happen to perish: which being sodainely done, they were by this Diuine oracle preserued from danger.
The matter beeing diuulged at Venice before their arriuall, caused a meruailous  ioie ouer all the whole Citie; euerie man declaring that the presence of that holie bodie, would make the name and State of Venice to be perpetuall; That the prophecie, which was deliuered from the Father to the Sonne, was accomplished: That in times past before the Foundation of the Citie, Saint Marke in his life-timeThe prophecie accomplished going towards Aquileia, his shippe arriuing in those Islands, it was reuealed vnto him in his sleepe, that his bones should one day rest in those places which he saw so desert and vninhabited. Amiddest this ioie there was nothing heard but songs and daunces, with vowes, and praiers, that in all time of neede it would please him to come and visit his Citizens, and to suffer his bodie to rest for euer in that place, which the Common-wealth would afterward dedicate vnto him. And in this manner  the whole people of all sortes, sex, and age, came to meete it at the Port of the Oliuollo: the Clergie going before, singing Hymnes and praises to God; where the Citie receiued with all reuerence, in the midst of an infinite number of sweete odors, an assured pledge of her future greatnesse: Which beeing receiued was carried into the Chappell of the Pallace.

The end of the second Booke of the first Decade.



THE THIRD BOOKE  OF THE FIRST DECAD OF THE HISTORIE Of Venice.

 The Contents of the third Booke of the first Decad.
ADeane and Priests were ordained in St. MARKS Church. OBELLERIO taken in the Isle of Veggio is beheaded. Malamoc being besieged and taken, in hatred to him, was wholly burnt. The Duke being exil'd the Citie by the conspiracie of CARROSIO, goes into France: Soone after he being restored by the practise of the Chiefe Citizens, is finally confined in the Island of Grada and there dyeth. Saint PAVLS Church built in the middest of the Citie. The Venetians vnluckily fight with the Narentines. Those of Verona are succoured by the Venetians against the inhabitants of the Lake of Benac. A mightie Sea-armie against the Sarracen Moores. What the Moores did in a short space, about Rome and the rest of Italie. The Venetians and the Greekes defeated by the Moores on the Sea of Crotona. The bodies of Saint PANCRATIVS, and Saint SABINA, giuen by the Pope, were put into Saint ZACHARIES Church. Ciuil dissension doth for a time much hinder the Common-wealth. Prince TRADONICO is villanously murthered by conspiratours. When Poueggia beganne to be inhabited. The Isle of Grada was by the Venetians comming deliuered from the Sarracens siege. Why Dorce-duro was inhabited. Commachia taken by the Venetians for a reuenge. The Duke CANDIANO slaine fighting against the Narentines. The Duke, and Senate, giue limits to those of Chioggia. What the Hunnes did in Hungarie The Hunnes defeate BERENGARIVS at his entrie into Italie, and after they had spoiled the Venetian Territorie, they come and besiege the Citie of Venice. The Venetians ouercome the Hunnes at Sea. The Histrians made tributaries to the Venetians; and they fight with good successe (as some say) at the same time against the Narentines. Duke CANDIANO was murthered by the people for his ouer-much pride, and for being suspected to haue affected Tyrannie.

IN this sort did the Citie daily encrease, and it was not onely augmented in strength, but in Religion, and by this happy successe did the gouernment of Iustiniano flourish. But by how much it was happier, by so much shorter was it. Such is the ordinarie custome of humane affaires, as they cannot long continue in happinesse. For soone after that he had laid St. Marks bodie in the Chapell of the Castle, and made himselefe Iustinians last will and Testament concerning S. Marks Church the Hoste of so great a Sanctitie, he dyed. Hee ordained by his will, that his heires should build a greater Church to Saint Marke. Hee did moreouer enrich by the same will the Churches of S. Zacharie and Hilarie with manie great reuenues.




 GIOVANNI PARTITIATIO the twelfth Duke of Uenice.








GIouanni Partitiatio brother to Iustiniano (who being called home from Greece was made his Colleague) being declared Prince, began his publike gouernment by Diuine actions; and appointed for the same purpose the neerest Church to the Palace: into the which (being dedicated according to the ancient manner) the bodie of the holie Euangelist was brought; and from among the Clergie certaine Priests were chosen to celebrate Diuine Seruice there, vnto whom was giuen a chiefe Officer, at this day called the Deane. This building was at that time of a meane stature, nothing like to that richesThe Creation of the Deane of S. Markes Church. and greatnesse wherewith it is at this daie adorned. But we will speake of the  excellencie of this Church in a more conuenient place. The Common-wealth made a league with the Narentines, a Nation which vsed to scoure and robbe the neighbour Seas. But the same being soone after broken, the Barbarians surprised certaine Venetian Merchants at the Sea, and slue them, comming homewards from Apulia. It is said that about the same time, Prince Obellerio, who, according to the opinion of some Annalists, did (as hath beene said in the precedent Booke) voluntarily absent and bannish himselfe, came into the Isle of Curtia, vulgarly called at this day Veggia, resoluing to stirre vp new troubles for his reentrie into the gouernment. Partitiatio did forthwith arme a mightie Fleet, and went to meete him, before he had time to attempt any thing, and at his first arriuall surprised him. In the meane time diuers of Malamoc, incited by their ancient loue towards Obellerio (who  being of their Citie had beene their Prince) did flie forth of the Towne. Giouanni being heereat moued did sodainely breake vp his campe; and being with his armie returned to Venice, came in hatred of those which were fled, tooke Malamoc, andMalamoc ruined. The death of Obellerio. burnt it. Then hauing taken new forces, he returned with all speed to Veggia* which being taken, he caused Obellerio his head to be stricken of.
Not long after, diuers of the Nobilitie conspired against him, by the meanes of Carrosio, son to Bonico, and being driuen thence by reason of this sodaine conspiracie, he fled into France. Carrosio in the meane time, without the consent of the people,Duke Giouanni flieth. seized on the Dukes Palace. Against him (thus brought in by himselfe into the gouernment) arose a companie of the chiefe Citizens, whose names were, Basilio Trasimondo, Giouanni Marturio, and Dominico Orcianico. These men were followed by thirtie other gentlemen, who from the beginning did mislike of Duke Giouanni hisThe vsurper punished Giouanni repealed. bannishment. They assailed Carrosio, tooke him, put out his eies, and afterward bannished him: They slue moreouer Theodato Cy^ri, Marini Patritio, Dominico Monetario,

with diuers others of Carrosio's faction. The gouernment of the Commonwealth was in the meane time committed to Vrsus Bishop of Oliuollo, Basilio Trasimondo, and Giouanni* Maturio, vntill Giouanni were returned out of France: who being come home, they willingly restored it vnto him. This man hauing in proces of time much to doe to appease many secret hatreds against those of the familie of Mastalici, being at that time one of the chiefest of Venice, was on a day surprised by the contrarie faction neere to S. Peters Church, whither he went to heare Diuine Seruice: and being despoiled of the ornaments of soueraigne dignitie, so sooneDuke Giouanni deposed from his charge and becomes a Priest. as they had cut the haire of his beard and head* they confined him to Grada in the 8. yeare of his gouernment; where entring into holie orders, he died soone after.




 PIERO TRADONICO, the 13. Duke of Uenice.








PIero Tradonico was chosen in his place. He was borne at Pola, and being driuen out of Equiline in the time of the French-mens warres, came to Rialto. Pola is an ancient Citie in the confines of Italie, andPola an ancient Citie. built (as Callimachus saith) in a gulph of the Sea, in forme of an Hauen, by the Colchians sent to pursue Medaea. Tradonico tooke his sonne Giouanni for Colleague. He caused a Church to be built in the honor of Saint Paul, the Apostle of the Gentils, as costlie as the Cities meanes in those daies would permit, and in that place, where it is at this daie to be seene, with signes of great antiquitie. It is said that he made some attempts on their enemies the Narentines, but  not with great successe. Others saie that he sent his sonne against them at times, who fought with the Sea-Pyrats with better fortune than his Father.
The Ambassadors of those of Verona, came at the same time to Venice, to craueThe (...) request against those of Ben^c. helpe against the inhabitants of the Lake of Benac: whom it was to bee thought they could not ouercome without forraine aide. Some write that those of the Lake craued this aide. The most curious Authors neuerthelesse doe affirme, that it was those of Verona: who hauing by the aduice of the Venetians furnished the Lake with shippes of warre, did the more easily ouercome their enemies: For which they did not only thank the Venetians, but sent them rich and costly presents to Venice. Others saie (for there is nothing wherein the Authors doe not almost disagree) that after that losse receiued on the Sea of Crotona (whereof we will heereafter make mention) the Venetians did succour the Veronois: the which is scarce credible. For there is no Nation, how warlike soeuer, but would haue beene daunted after so great an ouerthrow.
In this state stood the affaires of the Venetians, beeing more prosperous within the Citie, and the places neere to the firme Land, than abroad, when TheodosiusThe comming of Theodosius to Venice. of Constantinople, Generall of the Sea-armie of Michael the Greeke Emperour* against the Moores, arriued at Venice, where he laboured with Tradonico, to haue the Venetians to send forth a mightie armie against the Barbarians, which spoiled the coasts of Apulia.
They freely graunted his request in honour of the Emperour, and they armedA Sea-armiegraunted to the Grecian against the Sarracens threescore Gallies against the Moores* In regard whereof Theodosius intituled Trad^nico, Protos-pater of the Grecian Empire; which dignitie was next to the Emperours.
Saba the Captaine of the Moores, (for it will not bee impertinent briefely toFrom whence the Sarracen Moores are descended. speake somewhat of the incursions of this Nation, who are reported to be descended from Mauritania) at his arriuall in Italie tooke the Sea-port in Tuscanie, now called Ciuita Vecchia, others terme it Centochiese by the name of a Towne neere thereunto, which the Emperour Adrian did very sumptuously build (as witnesseth Plinie in his Epistles.) I dare affirme these men to be the ancient Pirgues, theThe Pirgueys. which the name of their Citie doth seeme to shew which is called Vecchia; and I would call it the Hauen of Pirgues, were it not, that hard by as yee goe to Ostia, there is a place, which the Inhabitants call Pyrgues at this day. Now Saba hauing landed his men in that place, and left a sufficient Garrison for the Guarde of his  Ships, marched with his Armie to Rome: who, after hee had first of all taken the Vatican, and spoyled the most renowned Church of the world, dedicated to the Prince of the Apostles, did besiege the Citie. But hauing intelligence of Guido'sSaint Peters Church at Rome taken by the Moores. comming, whom Pope Gregorie the fourth had called out of France for the Cities safetie, he did on a sodaine dislodge thence, and tooke his iourney betwixt Via Appia, and Via Latina, putting all the Suburbes to fire and sword, not sparing the noble Church of S. Paul two miles distant from the Citie.The spoiles made by the Moores.
The Barbarian turned towards Via Latina, and being come to the Forrest of Cassina, he tooke by force the Citie which stood therein, spoyling and ruinating it. The new Citie which was since then builded there, is at this day called Saint Germans. There is also hard by the same place a very famous Monasterie, renowned for the ancient Religion and wealth thereof. This did the Barbarians likewise take, and burnt the greatest part of it. Marching from thence along the Riuer Liris (called Garillano at this day) they ranne to Sea*ward, like a storme falling from the Mountaines, and driuen by the force of the winds, into the neighbour plaines; they put all places by which they passed to fire and sword; and after they had stuft their Ships (which they had sent for forth of Tuscanie) with rich spoyles, they departed into Mauritania. It was not long ere they returned againe: For being puffed vp with the fortunate successe of their former voyage, and promising better fortune to themselues,The Moores returne into Italie. they left their countrie and returned into Italie: where they tumultuously  assailed, at one selfe-same time in a manner, the Citie of Tarentum, and Sicilie.
Now seeing it was to be feared; that the Moores would spoile all the Sea coasts, Theodosius distrusting the forces which he brought from Greece, had recourse (as hath alreadie beene said) to the Venetians succors; the which being easily obtained, he marched against the Barbarians. In the meane time, so soone as Saba vnderstoodSaba the Moore before Tarentum. the enemies comming he raised his siege from before Tarentum, and sodainly retired with his armie into the streights of the Sea neer to Crotona. It is not known whether he did it for feare, or whether it were most auailable for his purpose to deceiue the enemie vnder colour of flight, to constraine him thereby to make someThe Citie of Crotona. rash attempt. Crotona is scituated on the Sea of Tarentum, a verie ancient Citie, builded in times past by the Greekes, following Apollos Oracle vnder Nicellus their Captaine; and in times past so mighty, as the Crotonians had an Armie of an hundred and thirtie thousand fighting men, at such time as they were vanquished by the Locrians neere to the Riuer Sagra. They were great warriours, and very

expert in a wrastling. But Pythagoras of Samos, and Milo his disciple, were the chiefePythagoras and Milo the two ornaments of the Crotonians. ornaments of that Citie; the one for being a Citizen of the same, and the best wrastler of his time; and the other for his skill in Philosophie.
In this place (for the Greeke and Venetian Fleet was there arriued) after certaine vsuall light skirmshes, at last they came to strokes with the whole forces ofThe battaile of Crotona. The Greekes stir. either side. The Greekes being broken and defeated, the whole strength of the Moors lighted on the Venetians: But they being extreamely busied in the fight neuer perceiued the flight of their fellowes, vntill they found themselues enuironed on euery side by the Barbarians: and by this mennes did the Venetian Gallies sustaine the force of the furious enemie. But the great multitude of the Moors preuailing The Venetian Armie defeated before Crotona. The Moores came into Dalmatia. they were either sunke or taken. Those Venetians which were left aliue, were taken by the enemie; the rest, were either slaine in the fight, or drowned. Some write that the battaile of Crotona was before the Moores besieged Rome, (among whome is Bonitendius) The Barbarians proude of this successe, sailed into Dalmatia, where they spoiled certaine Townes, surprised by their sodaine incursions. They tooke likewise certaine Shippes laden with rich marchandize, returning from Syria, who hauing from farre espied the Moores fleete, had retired themselues into the Gulph of Trieste: But after they had taken them, in hatred of the Venetians, they slue all the prisoners.
The report of the losse of the battaile at Crotona, brought a meruailous griefe  and terror to the Citie. But this latter, as least of all look't for, did in such sort grieue them, as the feare was no lesse in Venice than as the enemie had beene before it; and this feare would haue beene greater, had they not vnderstood by their spies, that the enemies were gone to Ancona; which being taken, and spoiled byThe Narentine^ ro^des euen to Caorli. their sodaine and vnlook't for comming, they did forthwith put themselues to Sea. The Narentines ioyfull for the Venetians losse, came sodainely from Dalmatia, to steale and spoile, euen as farre as Caorli. This Towne stands at the mouth of the Riuer Limenes, whither the ancient Venetians, which fled from Concorda in the troublous time of the Hunnes, had retired themselues. About the same timePope Bennet comes to Venic^ The bodies of S. Pancracius, and S. Sabina brought to Venice. or soone after (as saith Bonitendius) Pope Benedict came to Venice, where at the  importunate entreatie of Agnes de Morosin Abbesse of the place, hee promised to send from Rome the bodies of Saint Pancratius, and Saint Sabina, by the deuotion done to which bodies, the Church might be furthered in the building. They were afterwards sent thither, and placed with great reuerence in a little Chappell of the Church.The Emperour Lotharius confirmes the franchizes of Venice
Vnder this Princes gouernment the Emperour Lotharius (and manie Emperours likewise after him) did confirme by writing all the ancient priuiledges, and immunities of the Venetians, to the end they might be inuiolably obserued. Moreouer as the Common-wealth was then not very forunate abroad, it was much lesse at home: For the ciuill dissension of six of the noblest families in the Citie diuided  into two factions, did greatly trouble it. On the one side were the Iustiniani, the PolaniGreat strife among the Citivens. and the Bassei; on the other the Barbolani, the Seliani, and the Seuoli, who beeing ioyned together, did by their quarrells, often-times present the people with verie fearefull and horrible spectacles. And after they had fought in the middest of the Citie with different successe, euen almost to the totall ruine of one another, the Barbolani with all their adherents were driuen forth of the Citie. But soone after, at the entreatie of the Emperour Ladowicke, to whom they had retired themselues, the strife betweene the two factions beeing appeased, they were restored to their houses. These things hapned during the gouernment of Piero Tradonico: who after he had gouerned certaine yeares alone after his sonnes death, whome hee had associated  for the gouernment of the Common-wealth, comming one daie from diuineDuke Tradonico murthered. seruice at Saint Zacharies Church, it came to passe as he returned home-ward, hee was on a sodaine and vnlook't for assailed by certaine conspiratours, and by them murthered, the ninth yeare of his gouernment. At this so horrible and fearefull a

deed, his Ministers and seruants, which waited vpon him, mooued with a charitable affection towards the old man, endeuoured to defend him, and to repell the wrong, but being driuen away by a greater number, and stronger then themselues, they sodainly with a great noise seized on the Dukes Palace, where being besieged by the conspiratours, they did thirtie daies together sustaine their furie. At the last, after they had receiued assurance of the people, that the defending of so good a Prince against the trecherous attempts of wicked conspiratours, should not be imputed vnto them for a capitall crime; nor yet the seizing on the publike place for their safetie, which they had so couragiously defended: they came foorth of the Palace; hauing first of all capitulated, That the Citie should not leaue such an example The Princes household-seruants retired into the Palace, do^ Capitulate. vnpunished, to haue wickedly and miserably slaine so vertuous a Prince, without desert at all; saying, That it was an hainous matter, to behold Citizens to walke in a Citie, where they had committed so execrable a parricide, and besprinkled the peoples face with the bloud of the soueraigne Magistrate.
The people appointed three men to enquire concerning the murther, to punishThree men appointed by the people to enquire of the Princes murther. The murtherers punished. the guiltie, and to take order for those who had seized on the Dukes Palace. The three which were deputed, were Piero Bishop of Equiline, Giouanni Arch-deacon of Grada, and Dominico Massoni. These men bannished the guiltie for euer; some into France, and the rest into Greece. Diuers, who as yet were not condemned, were murthered. Vrso Grugnario one of the conspirators died miserably, being possessed by  wicked spirits; to shew that the death of Tradonico did not only displease men, but God. And those who had seized on the Dukes Palace, because it was not done without great commotion in the Citie; some of them were bannished out of the limits of the Venetians, and the most part of the rest were confined into the Isle of Pouegia.Pouegia newly inhabited. This place is fiue mile distant from the Citie: whither after they had carried their wiues and children, they did in time so encrease, as the Town which they built there was afterward greatly inhabited; but such as it was, the warres of the Genouezes did wholly ruinate it.







 VRSO PARTITIATIO, the 14. Duke of Venice.





THe Commonwealth being quieted by iudgment of these three men: Vrso Partitiatio was declared Duke. Vnder this man the Citie was, abroad and at home, prosperously gouerned. At the beginning of his gouernment, to the end that the Venetians might haue a firme peace, they were of opinion to send hostages to the Barbarians. Their Annalls

affirme this: but diuers Historians make no mention of hostages. The Saracens soone after, who came from Alexandria about eight and twentie yeares after Saba the Moores comming into Italie, had possessed the Isle of Candie: and being come on a sodaine into Dalmatia, after they had spoiled the Sea-coasts of Histria,The Saracens before Grada. they came and besieged Grada. Vrso did in such sort terrifie them by his sodaine arriuall, as with great feare they withdrew their vessells, and in an instant hoised saile and put to Sea. Some Historians saie that Giouanni the Princes sonne, a couragious yong man, did beare himselfe verie valiantly in this action. If it be so, it willThe S^racens fought with before Grada. not be amisse to beleeue, that the Barbarians were so farre from flying away vpon report of the comming of the Venetians fleet, as that on the contrarie they were so  hardie as to tarrie for them, and to ioine battaile, whereby it hapned that this yong man, behauing himselfe brauely the same daie against the enemie, was therefore by the people giuen for Colleague to his Father. Bonitendius reports that Vrso did not only fight there fortunately against the Saracens, but likewise at Tarentum: That he did moreouer brauely assaile the Na^entines with 30. ships of war, for that they had, contrarie to the agreement, robbed and spoiled certaine townes of Histria. But the Historians make no mention why he tooke Armes for the Histrians, seeing they were not as yet vnder the Venetians Dominion. It is likely, that after they had ouerrunne the Histrians, they entred vpon the Venetians frontiers. Vrso in the meane space bare a secret grudge to Pietro Bishop of Grada, till such time as he had confirmed  Dominico Calloprini, who had beene elected Bishop of Tourcelles; the which he refused to do in regard they were enemies. Now the state of the Commonwealth being peaceably gouerned abroade, the Duke enacted, That those who were called the Princes Squiers, should inhabit that part of the Citie, which at the beginningDorsse dura newly inhabited. was called Dorsse-dura, and should build houses there. And in this sort that place began to bee habitable, which before then was desert for feare of Sea-incursions. This Princes good fortune was likewise the cause, that the ancient strife betwixt the Venetians and the Forlani, occasioned by a particular affection which each of them did beare to the churches of Aquileia and Grada, was wholly extinct, vpon the promise which Vulp^rtio of Aquileia made, neuer more to molest the Church of Grada. All  these felicities were followed by an other nothing lesse. For hauing fortunatly preuailed against the Saracens, he was declared by the Ambassadors of the Emperor Basilius,Vrso declared Prothospater of the Grecian Empire. Prothos-pater of the Grecian Empire. But because Basilius shold not ouercome him in bountie, he sent twelue great Bells to Constantinople to him for a present; and the Greekes by this meanes of the Venetians liberalitie began at that time to vse Bells.




 GIOVANNI PARTITIATIO, the 15. Duke of Uenice.





NOw Vrso, after he had thus obtained whatsoeuer belonged to the adornment of mans life, deceased in the seuenth yeare of his gouernment: and by his death Giouanni his brother began to gouerne the Common-wealth. Hee determined to send his brother Badoario to Pope Iohn: that by his authoritie Commachia might be added to their State. This is likely to haue beene plotted by the Venetians, because this place stood on the ancient confines of Venice* Marini, Earle of Commachia, being aduertised of their determination, laide waite for the Venetian on the confines of Rauenna, as he went towards Rome. He hurt and tooke him, and after hee hadThe Dukes brother taken by the Count of Commachia. made him to promise to deale no more in that businesse, hee sent him home. But  soone after his returne to Venice he died of his hurts. The angrie Duke, resoluing to reuenge his brothers death, came with a mightie Armie to Commachia, tooke it by force, and vsed all hostile proceedings against those who had consented to his brothers death; and after he had left a Garrison there, he did spoyle and ouer runne the Territorie neere to Rauenna, because they likewise had their hand in that enterprise. Hee builded the Church of Saint Cyprian and Cornelius on the bankes of Malamoc, which a while after, in the dayes of Prince Vitalis Michaeli, and by his meanes, was conuerted into a Monasterie of Nunnes. Then falling sicke, hee left his brother Pietro (by the peoples command) for his successour but recouering his health contrarie to all mens expectation, he tooke him for Colleague in the Gouernment;  who dying afterwards, he associated Vrso his other brother, who was elder then Pietro deceased. Soone after, being troubled with a dangerous disease, which hindred him from intending the affaires of the Common-wealth, (Vrso hauing in the meane space voluntarily deposed himselfe) after hee had permitted the peopleDuke Giouanni doth voluntarily depose himselfe. to elect a new Duke, hee retired to his owne house as a priuate Citizen; the sixth yeare of his Gouernement being not fully expired. Some say, that both the brethren deposed themselues, because they perceiued the people to bee discontented with their Gouernement.







 PIETRO CANDIANO, the first, the 16. Duke of Uenice.





GIouanni being deposed, Pietro Candiano succeeded him; vnto whom, Giouanni being called into the Senate, did freely surrender the titles of the Soueraigne Magistrate, and withdrew himselfe to his own priuate house. At the same time certaine galleis were sent against the Narentines, ancient enemies to the Venetians (who robbed all the neighbour

Seas) to preuent their incursions; but they returned without doing any thing, by reason they could no where meete with the enemie. Not long after, Prince Candiano went against the same enemies, with twelue Galleis (some saie but seuen) and met them neere to the Promontorie of Dalmatia, which the inhabitants cal Micolal. The (...) animated by their Duke, did furiously assaile them. The Liburnians did brauely rece^ie them. They fought on both sides with more furie and courage than with forces. The Venetians at the first had the better, hauing sunke certaine of the enemies shippes: but the great multitude of the Barbarians beginning to pre^aile, and the Dukes Gallie being boarded, Prince Candiano fighting valliantlyThe Duke dies fighting with the Narentin^s. was slaine, after he had commanded the Common-wealth but sixe moneths. His  bodie being secretly conueied by the Histrians to Grada, was there buried.
At the first report of this losse, the whole Citie was in an vproare: which hadGiouanni Parti tiatio takes again the gouernment vpon him. beene much greater, if Giouanni Partitiatio, who had renounced the soueraigne dignitie, had not sodainely at the peoples entreatie taken vpon him againe the gouernment of the Common-wealth, with the Ducall titles. But the tumult being appeased, the people with a common consent, named Pietro, surnamed Tribuno, for their Prince.







 PIETRO TRIBVNO, the 17. Duke of Uenice.





THis man was likewise made Prothospater by the Grecian Emperour: Their common enemies (the Pirats) did very much vexe the places neere to the Citie: in regard whereof, Tribuno caused a wall to be madeThe Citie (...) fortified. to defend the Citie, from the little Canall neere to the Castle vnto the Church of Saint Maria Zubanica, with a chaine from that wall vnto S. Georges Church, for feare least the enemie should enter the Citie on a sodaine. But at this day there is no signe of that ancient wall to be seene: He gaue bounds to the Chioggians, from their Hauen along the shoare, euen to the mouth of the Riuer Acide: which are called Fosson, Besba, and Conchia; and so back againe to the same Hauen.
At the same time, the Venetian State, with that of all Italie on the Sea-coast  was verie much troubled: For they were assailed on the one side by Pirates, and on the other by the ordinarie inuasions of the Saracens, who as a new amazement seis^d on the Venetians.The Huns (...) into Italie the s^cond time.
The Hunnes, who (as we haue else-where said) were come forth of Scithia, entred

Italie with great furie. A verie great multitude of them leauing Scithia at that time, would staie in no place, til they had first seene how their friends and kindsfolke in Hungarie fared. These men by continuall frequentation with the Italians, being accustomed to the iournies of Italie, had for the most part changed their naturall crueltie and manner of life: by meanes whereof waxing m^re ciuill, they were driuen from the places which they had gotten by right of warre, by those that cameCiuill warre betwixt the Huns. after them. The crueltie of this Nation is reported to be such, as after that they had been in Hungarie, they abstained not from eating humane flesh after their countrie manner; who forthwith tooke vpon them the names of those whom they had driuen thence, and were called Hungarians. Those which were expulsed, were likewise  in times past called Huns, aswell as the latter; And being come into Hungarie in the daies of Attila, they were afterward named Bauarians, then Huns; and certaine letters being taken awaie from both names, it was made but one.
These then after diuers warlike actions done as well in France as Germanie, after they had vanquished Lewis king of Germanie, and made him tributarie, carryingLewis King of Germanie, Tributarie to the Huns. great store of bootie home with them, being proude of so good successe, resolued to make attempts on Italie; hauing perhaps vnderstood that they were at strife among themselues. By meanes whereof comming first into Misia, they defeated the Princes of the same in a bloudie battaile, and made them tributarie. Departing thence* vpon report that they determined to inuade Italie: Berengarius, who at the  same time held the Roman Empire, marched against them with fifteene thousand men, and they fought verie furiously vpon the confines of Italie, where BerengariusBerengarius defeated by the Huns. being ouercome, fledde from the battaile with the losse of the greatest patt of his forces.
The Hunnes became more hauty after this victorie, and they entred Italie the neerest waie, putting all they met with to fire and sword; and comming to TreuisoTreuiso taken by the Huns. they tooke and spoiled it. From thence determining to goe to Milan, the report of the great wealth of the Venetians which began at the same time to be verie famous ouer all Italie was the cause, that on a sodaine they turned all their forces vpon the Venetians. They speedily made a great number of small light boates; which  they couered (as it is reported) with leather, by reason that they were grossely made, and of a thicke substance. In these the Barbarians embarqued themselues, and assailed Villa-noua (so was the ancient Heraclia called, after it was reedified) which, beeing taken at the first assault, they burnt downe to the ground. From thence marching to Equiline and Iesulune they destroied them in the same manner. Then pursuing the course of their victories all along the Sea-coast, they spoiled Chioggia and Capodarger, and afterward burnt them. At the last they resolued toThe Huns assaile the Citie of Venice. assaile Rialto. The feare, which then fell vpon the Venetians, was not like to that which possessed them in the time of the French-mens warres. For this terror was much greater then the other. They fought with the French for their libertie. They must fight with these men for the safetie of their liues. Those, albeit they were enemies, had in them some sparkes of pietie and Religion. The Huns did not onlyThe great crueltie of the Huns. contemne godlinesse but all humanitie; for they did not spare the dead carkases, but like brute beasts they tare them in pieces and deuoured them. The euill disposition of this Nation had at the first report so terrified all people of each sex and age, as they did not alone bewaile the losse of their libertie; but their liues likewise. But (as it oftentimes hapneth) this despaire of theirs was conuerted into furie, and this furie into a desire of reuenge; or if that could not be effected, to die valiantly. This desire gaue them hope to vanquish the Barbarians, if they should attempt to hazard the fight.
It is to be supposed (for we cannot certainely affirme it) That the Venetians wereExhortation to the Venetians. sodainely encouraged by some, by this manner of speech. That it was now time for them by their actions to shew themselues valiant men; That a mightie danger did not onely threaten their Countrie, but their liues; That they had to doe with a kinde of people* who as little vsed

to spare the bodies of the dead, as their liues in battaile. But yet neuerthelesse they were not made of Iron, but their bodies might easily be pierced. That they should call to memorie how the ancient Venetians with a few inhabitants of the Latines, made no difficultie in their Countries behalfe to expose their liues before the walles of Aquileia, against three hundred thousand men; (for Attila had so many in his Armie) That the euent of that battaile did manifest, how much vertue and courage is better in warre than great multitudes: But it may be that some will tearme them rash and inconsiderate for their attempt, in daring to assaile the enemie with that sort of fight, wherein he was most expert: whereas on the contrarie, they should rather haue fought with them at Sea, or in the Lakes, knowne better to them than to the Barbarians: (then which, he said, nothing could bee more acceptable to the Venetians, who from their youth are accustomed to the Sea) than in such a place where their valour might be most apparent. Moreouer, that the enemies had neither the skill, nor shippes, fit for that purpose. That their Ancestors had in the same places, where they were now to fight* vanquished in times past King Pepin, followed with his owne forces, and with those of the Emperour his father: And that they onely fought for their libertie: whereas now* the danger of their liues did constraine them to defend themselues brauely. Now, in regard that if they were ouercome, they were sure to die, he could not thinke that there was anie Cittizen so base or recreant but would rather choose to dye valliantly with his sword in his hand, then by yeelding, to loose all he had, and to haue his throte cut, like a Sheepe, by a barbarous and cruell enemie. He said, That the strength and magnanimitie of the Cittizens were such, as they were not onely sufficient to rebate the edges of the Hunnes swords who threatned them; but to free their Countrie likewise from so wearisome a siege.
Being animated by these, or such like exhortations, they became couragious.The Venetians constant resol^tion. For it were follie to imagine that a multitude of people, being amazed with the feare of their enemies, could be encouraged without some vehement Oration, full of perswasiue speeches. All men, after that, ran to arme themselues, not onely to defend their libertie, but likewise, or rather, to preserue the safetie of their liues. The enemies in the meane space hasted towards Rialto. The Venetians imbarqued in their wel-armed vessels, and fit for the fight, met with them neere to Albiola. The fight at the beginning was verie cruell.
The attempts of the Hunnes were diuers; who relying on their great numbers,Battaile betwix^ the Venetians and the Hunnes. assailed them in sundrie places at once. The Venetians euerie where opposing themselues against them, did brauely resist their assaults: They fought sundrie daies without any likely-hood of victorie to either side. But at the last, both partes ioyning their whole forces, the Barbarians were broken and defeated, and dispersing their troopes, fledde farre from thence, leauing to the Venetians a most famous victorie. The enemies (as some report) beeing soone after wonne by the rewards of Berengarius, departed out of Italie.
The Venetians grew famous, by gaining this victorie neere to Albiola. All men said that the Venetians had abated the furie of the Hunnes; vnto whom Berengarius (a valliant and mightie Prince, by reason of the Empire of Italie) had giuenThe Venetians ouercome the Hunnes. Great praise giuen to the Duke. place. Hee did likewise greatly praise the absent Duke, by whose meanes and vnder whom all was done. It is to bee supposed, that the Duke Tribuno did at that time fortifie the Citie with a wall and chaine; and not for feare of the Pirates: the which certaine Historians doe likewise affirme.








 VRSO BADOAIRIO, the 18. Duke of Venice.








NOw the Common wealth being thus happily gouerned at home and abroad, the Duke Tribuno dyed; the nineteenth yeare of his gouernment, as some saie: and according to others, the three and twentieth. Vrso Badoiario was chosen in his stead. This man sent his sonne Pietr^ to Constantinople to the Greeke Emperour, of whom being made Protospater, he receaued diuers great and riche presents: But this young man returning home to Venice, was surprised by a meane Prince of the Dalmatians called The Dukes son taken at Sea. Michael, who spoiled him of his treasure, and confined him into Misia; from whence escaping he returned secretly to Venice. Vrso would haue examined the bounds of the Chioggians; but vnderstanding that Prince Pietro, his predecessor, had limited* them, he changed his purpose. He is reported to haue bin a verie good andThe Duke voluntarily deposeth himselfe, and becomes a Monke. religious Prince. For the eleuenth yeare of his gouernment, hee did willingly depose himselfe, and went to the monasterie of Saint Felix d'Amiana, where he spent the remainder of his dayes in the Monasticke life. The ruines of this place are to be seene yet at this day, (the Church almost fallen downe) as men goe from the Citie towards the Hauen of the Gruarij. This Towne belongs to the Forlani; and may be seene by those which saile on the left hand, neere to the Tower, called La Liamaiore.








 PIETRO CANDIANO the 19. Duke of Uenice.








THe gouernment of Pietro Candiano or Sanuto, (for they report this surname to remaine euer after to the familie of the Candiani) succeeded this voluntarie dismission. This man was sonne to the same Pietro who was slaine in the Dalmatian warre. Hee had a sonne of the same name, who being sent by his father to Greece, was by the Emperour created Prothospater. Some Authors refer the rauishment of the Maidens to these times; of whome albeit we haue sufficiently spoken in the first Booke, yet because the Historians doe likewise varie herein, it shall not be amisse here to saie somewhat of it. The Histrians, who were at the same time enemies to the Venetians, did on a  sodaine take away certaine Maides by force, with their dowrie, out of Saint Peters Church, which stands in that part of the Citie, called the Castell, at such time as they celebrated their marriage. Whereat the Citie being in an vp-roare: the Duke, after he had in hast gathered together certaine forces, marched sodainly after them, and ouertaking them in the marshes of Caorli, as they were deuiding the spoile, he did furiously assaile them, and (as some say) did easily breake them. Others affirme that they fought furiously on either side, and that the battaile was verie bloudie; but that at last the enemies were all slaine, and their bodies flung into the Sea. And that in remembrance of this victorie, the yearely Games, called (of theThe originall of the plaies dedicated to them that are married. married) were ordained. At a certaine day euerie yeare they carried twelue Virgins  with great pompe round about the Citie. But this order being brought in by deuotion, was afterward changed into a meruailous abuse. This custome continued till the warres with the Genowaies, That twelue Virgins, adorned with gold and pretious stones, were yearely on a certaine day carried round about the Citie, in memorie of what had beene done: But the Genoways imploying those of Chioggia and the Venetians in more important businesses; this custome was wholly abolished. Diuers of the most authentike Historians doe affirme, that this hapned not vnder Pietro Candiano, but vnder Badoario his gouernment.
I finde that about the same time they made warre on those of Commachia withThe Commachians vanqu^shed. prosperous successe: who being summoned to restore what they had iniuriously taken  from the wronged Venetians, refused so to doe, till at the last they were enforced; For they did not then only surrender the prisoners, but promised on their faith to doe whatsoeuer the Venetians would command them.
It is reported, that at the same time those of the Cape of Histria did yeeld themselues

to the Venetians. But it is likely, that they did it more by constraint, than of free will. For being assailed by the Venetians, for prophaning their ceremonies and rauishing the Virgins, they were constrained to make satisfaction, and to send yearely to Venice, for a tribute, an hundred peeces of wine. Pietro Bishop of Oliuollo sonne to Duke Pietro surnamed Tribuno, placed the bodies of Saint Saturnine, and Saint Nichodemus, in the Church of Saint Maria Formosa. And this is all we finde to haue beene done, during the gouernment of Candiano; who dyed in the second yeare of his regiment, or (as some others say) the latter end of the seuenth.




 PIETRO BODOARIO, the 20. Duke of Venice.





PIetro Bodoario succeeded him (who as hath beene said) was taken prisoner in Sclauonia as hee returned out of Greece: This man did  likewise gouerne the Common-wealth two yeares. Others say three; and affirme, that it was hee that ouercame the Histrians in the marshes of Caorli, and restored the Virgins of whome wee lately spake. More then this, I finde not anie memorable matter done by him.




 PIETRO CANDIANO, the third, the 21. Duke of Venice.





CAndiano sonne to Pietro succeeded him; who being by his father associated to the gouernment, was for his great pride banished. But waxing by yeares more wise and modest, hee was by the common (...) of the people restored to his lost dignitie.
The Narentines in the meane time did by their thefts vexe all theComplaints against the Narentines. neighbour-Seas, so as the Venetians condition was, in a manner, to bee compared to theirs, who are streighly besieged. The shame and anger stirred vp euery one to reuenge, saying; It was a dishonour to the Venetians, who had in times past obtained so many goodly victories on the bosome of the waters, patiently to endure that a fewe base theeues who had no hope but in flight, should so much presume, as to leaue the Venetians nothing in safetie. That diuers euen till then had beene by them vndone euen in the Cities sight, and that there remained nothing for them now to doe, but to come into the middest of the Citie, and knocke downe the wretched Citizens like heartlesse beasts. Being mooued with these complaints; they forthwith prepared a new Voyage against the Narentines.A fleet sent against the Narentines. And for the same purpose thirtie three Sips (called for the maner of their building Gombaries) were set forth. Vrso Bodoairio, and Pietro Rossolo commanded the Armie. The Narentines being amazed, at the reporte of this Nauie, had not the spirits to attend them, but by Ambassadours they sued for peace; which was graunted them vpon these conditions, That they should pay vnto the Venetians the iust value of  the hurt which they had till then done. Some say that the Fleete returned, as at other former times, without doing any thing at all.
The League at the same time was renewed, with the Bishop of Aquileia. Dominico Bishop of Oliuollo caused certaine relickes of Saint Iohn Baptist to be reuerently placed in the Church, builded in times past by his Ancestors, in that part of the Citie which is called Embragola. Duke Candiano in the meane time hauing three sonnes, did elect for his Colleague, neither the eldest, nor the youngest, but the second,The Dukes son which was his Colleague stirres vp sedition in the Citie. called Pietro: who soone after became so insolent, as hee durst, in contempt of his fathers wholesome Counsels, stirre vp certaine dissolute persons to raise a sodaine sedition in the Citie. The whole Senate, in manner, fauoured the old father. The animated seditious people followed the foolish young man; and the sundrie affections of either party preuailed so farre, as the Citizens were like to haue assailed one another in the middest of the Citie. Candianos authoritie appeased those tumultuous parties readie to fight, and on a sodaine by the peoples commandement (the greatest number of whom were actors in this conspiracie) the sonne was deposed and banished. And at the same instant the Clergie and the chiefe ofThe Dukes son banished the Citie. A solemme oath made by the Clergie and chiefe Citizens. The sonne warrs on the Venetians. the Citie sware iointly, neuer to suffer neither in the fathers life time, nor afterward, that seditious person Pietro Candiano to be restored againe to his place, from the which he had iustly bin deposed. Some say that he was by the people committed to prison, and condemned to dye, but at his fathers request they saued his  life, and banished him. In his exile he went to Rauenna to Guido sonne to Berengarius, (some say Albert for Guido) and obtained meanes at Berengarius pursute, to make warre on the Venetians, whose enemie hee had beene proclaimed. Some thincke that Guido furnished him with six Gallies to this purpose: For no one particular man had been able to enterprise so great a matter, in a deiected fortune like his. This rash young man did in short time take certaine Venetian shippes, notThe Duke dyes for griefe. farre from Rauenna, wherewith the old Duk^ was so grieued, as within fewe daies after he departed out of this life, after he had gouerned seauen yeares or (as some say) eleauen.








 PIETRO CANDIANO, the fourth, the 22. Duke of Uenice.








THe Citie being busied about the election of a new Duke: (the peoples affections being euer inconstant) the whole multitude possessed with a wonderfull desire to see this absent yong man, did on a sodaine by a publike decree repeale Candiano from bannishment; and contrarie to the oath, made aswell by the Clergie as the Principall Citizens, installed him in his dead Fathers place. But soon after, the Citie, and Pietro himselfe receiued the punishme^t of their rashnesse. The one, for contemning her oath, endured  a tirannicall gouernment, with a publike losse, by meanes of fier; And the other, for iniuring his Father and his Countrie. It is reported, that, the more to honor him, they sent three hundred barkes to Rauenna to accompanie him home. For it were a madnesse to thinke that they were so manie shippes, as some do write.
Now in this Princes daies, Pietro Marturio Bishop of Oliuollo did with a sumptuous preparation builde the Church of the Augustines. Ambassadours likewise atThe Church of the Augustines builded. The Generall Councell held at Rome, declares the Church of Grada for Metropolitan. The Duke puts awaie his wife. the same time were sent to Rome to Pope Leo, and to the emperour Otho, to entreat them, that the Church of Grada might be declared by the generall Councell, then held at Rome, Metropolitane of the Venetians dominions, and of Histria. The which they did not onely obtaine, but brought home other priuiledges graunted to  the Venetians.
The Duke in the meane time did repudiate Ioane his wife, because (as he said) she was old. He had a sonne by her named Vitalis: who taking holie orders vpon him, was by his Father disinherited, vnder colour of entring into Religion: But it occasioned his future good; for he became afterwards Bishop of Grada. Now his wife being put away, and sent to Saint Zacharies Nunnerie, he married Vualderta daughterThe Duke marrieth Vualde^ta daughter to Guido. to Guido, with whom he receiued for her dowrie, great inheritances, manie slaues, and other riches. By meanes whereof, being puft vp with his great wealth, and new alliance, he vomited out his bad (...), which till then hee had hidden, andThe Dukes tirannie. gaue himselfe to all manner of vices; beginning openly to practize tirannie in sted  of a iust gouernment. He became proude, and full of menaces. He had rather be feared than loued of the people. He did moreouer leuie a mightie Armie, and marchedUderza taken and ruinated by the Duke. against the inhabitants of Vderza; saying that they did wrongfully hold from him certaine lands belonging to his wife. Hee did first spoile the Countrie round about, then he assailed the Citie; which, beeing taken, hee burned downe to the ground.
Some Authors affirme, that vpon the same occasion he assailed likewise those of Ferrara: and that he tooke by force a Citie of their confines. These warlike actions made him more insolent. For he placed a companie of soldiors in the Dukes Palace for his guard: and all his speech and actions sauoured of tirannie. The people calling to minde their ancient libertie, fel on a sodaine vpon him, the seuenteenth yeare of his gouernment, as some saie, or the eighteenth, according to others. For the Historians doe much disagree concerning the times of euerie Princes gouernment. ButThe people assaile the Duke. with his Guarde defending himselfe valiantly from the top of his house, they set fier on the houses next to the Palace on this side the Canall, on the same side the winde did blow, which being kindled, the flame did not onely burne the Dukes Palace but  Saint Markes Church. Pietro seeing himselfe inuironed with so manie miseries, and that he must bee constrained either to giue place to the peoples furie, or else to die there, he tooke his yonge son which he had by this last wife in his armes, and went into that part of the Church which the fier had not yet touched, and commingThe Duke seekes to saue himselfe and his yong son. forth by a priuie way, he endeuoured to saue himself and his sonne by flight, whom he meant to carrie into Exile with him. But when he perceiued all the waies stopped with Armed men, he then fell to intreaties, That they would not fall vpon himThe Dukes request to the people. as on a cruell beast; that they would abstaine from hurting him, till he had excused himselfe to the people: and then it should be at their choice, either to put him to a cruell death, if they thought it fit, or else to saue his life, as by their bountie they had  done in times past, whilst his Father liued, at such time as they accounted him guiltie of Treason. He did moreouer confesse, that the people might be iustly mooued against him, but yet, the yonge childe in his armes was innocent; that they should doe a most vnworthie deede, If, for the hatred they did beare to the Father, they should murther the innocent creature, who neuer yet had offended anie one. All these entreaties were vaine; and those who assailed him cried out a loud, ThatThe death of the Duke and his son ^ it was lawfull for them (being an holie and iust matter) to take awaie a Tirant from the Common-wealth, whose excuses could not be but wicked: And so rushing vpon him, he did in a moment fall downe dead to the ground, wounded in diuers places, with his yong sonne likewise.
Some saie, that they did cut the childes throate in the trembling nurses armes,The bodies throwne vpon the common dunghill. and that the bodies were by the peoples command throwne vpon the dunghill, and there left to bee eaten with dogges, but that at the intreatie of Giouanni Gradonico, that lamentable spectacle was remoued from the sight of the multitude, and the bodies honorably buried in St. Hilaries Church. Some thinke that through the counsellBuried afterwards verie honourably. of Pietro Vrseolo, who was Duke after him, the people fired the houses next to the Palace, and that it was done onely to hurt the Duke: But it fell out otherwise. For the force of the winde, and the houses neere to the Palace did in such sort feede this fier, as, besides the Palace, the most magnificent Cathedrall Church of the Citie, and those of Saint Theodore the Martir, and Saint The great harm which the fier did the same day Marie Iubenica, with three hundred priuate houses were the same daie burnt.

The end of the third Booke of the first Decade.





THE FOVRTH BOOKE  OF THE FIRST DECAD OF THE HISTORIE Of Venice.

 The Contents of the fourth Booke of the first Decad.
THe Dukes Palace, burnt in the last popular sedition, is repaired at VRSEOLO'S cost, who succeeded CANDIANO. He giues a most rich Table to laie vpon Saint MARKES Altar. VITALIS Patriarch of Grada, sonne to the deceased Duke CANDIANO, flies to the Emperour OTHO. ADHELETA a most renowned Ladie, and her manie crosses. The league renued with those of the Cape of Histria. VRSEOLO, moued with a Religious desire, doth secretly leaue the Citie. The Common-wealth endangered by ciuile discorde. OTHO the second makes secretwarre on the Venetians, whom he first seekes to ouercome by famine. Saint GEORGES Churche built right opposite to the great market-place. The description of the Countrie of Illiria. All Histria, and Dalmatia, brought vnder the subiection of VRSEOLO. The Emperour OTHO the third comes to Venice in disguise, and remaines secretly for a time with the Duke. The Phaledrini build Saint BENETS Church. The Venetian ouercomes the Hadrians neere to the mouthes of the Riuers Po, and Adice. They fight likewise afterward with good successe in Dalmatia, with Heresimus, King of Croatia. Prince OTHO banished. DOMINICO VRSEOLO flies to Rauenna the morrow after he had seised on the Dukes Palace, being driuen thence by the people. Those of Zara reuolt, after they had first yeelded to the Venetians. PEPIN, Patriarch of Aquileia, troubleth the quiet of the Common-wealth. From whence the Normans are descended, who haue a long time reigned in Italie and Sicilie. GISCARD their Captaine. The Venetians vanquish the Normans at Sea, neere to Durazzo.




THE Common-wealth hauing by the Dukes death preserued her ancient libertie, it was an hard matter to declare whether of these two were the greatest; either their ioye for being freed from tyrannie, or their sorrow to see so many publique and priuate buildings consumed to ashes by the late fire, which did maruellously deface the Cities beautie. But fearing least such an astonishment might breed some greater mischeife in the Citie (as it is often seene, that one new sorrow followeth another at the heeles) they forthwith  created a new Duke. But yet they sought out one, differing in humour and qualitie from him that last deceased. But they needed not make any farre search, being so well furnished neere at hand.




 PIETRO VRSEOLA, the 23. Duke of Uenice.








THe vertuous wisedome of Pietro Vrseolo, being at the same time knowne to all men, was the cause, that at the generall assembly heldHe refuseth to take the charge vpon him. at Saint Peters Church for the same purpose (which is at this day the Patriarks seat) he was with a generall applause declared Prince: who refusing this charge, tooke it vpon him at the peoples entreatie, who told him that he ought not to forsake the Commonwealth in so dangerous a season. Yet it is most certaine that hee vnwillingly embraced it. For being from his youth brought vp and trained in the loue of Iustice, hee was afraid of popular gouernment, which seldome or neuer respects the innocent. But the affection which hee did beare to his Countrie, for the which we are chiefly borne (as saith diuine Plato) made him not to abandon his fellow-citizens in so great a danger. So soone therefore as hee was chosen Prince, because there was some likelihood, that the state of the Common-wealth could not bee on a sodaine established, but that greater troubles were to be expected in a Citie newly mutinied for her Princes massacre; to the end to make the people more obedient, he bound them vnto him by oath: and protested,The people ^weare to the Prince. that hee would in no sort endure any enterprise to bee vndertaken against himselfe, nor the State, whilest hee should manage the soueraigne dignitie. And because the Pallace had beene burnt, he transported the ensignes and Ducall dignitie into his owne priuate house: meaning neuerthelesse to returne to the Pallace so soone as it should be reedified,
His gouernment began by repairing these two places, which he did at his owneThe Palace and Saint Markes Church repaired costs, more magnificently than they were before. Now the Church being thus beautified, hee caused the bodie of the Euangelist, which few people thought had escaped the fire, to be brought againe into it. He gaue besides to the same Church a table of gold, richly wrought at Constantinople, which hee caused to be dedicated with greate solemnitie on the high Altar.
About the same time, or a little before, the Sarracens, being entred in two companiesVrseolo ouercomes the Sarazens before Barri. into Italie, after they had taken Capua, they beseiged Barri by land and Sea, a towne seated betwixt Brundusium, and the mouth of the Riuer Aufida: the poore inhabitants where of enduring all miseries through want of foode, were succored with victuals by the Venetians fleet vnder the conduct of Vrseolo. But because  the Barbarians did notwithstanding ouer-streightly presse those of the towne, Vrseolo accompanied with the aide of Greece, came and fought with the enemie on the Sea, and hauing defeated the greatest part of them, and put the residue

to flight, he purchased great glorie to the Venetians. He had but one sonne by his wife Faelicia, and as soone he was borne, they both vowed chastitie. He gouernedThe husband and wife ^ow chastitie. the State in the meane space with such wisedome and integritie, as men did easily perceiue by his carriage, that he had not accepted the charge thereof for any desire that he had to command, but for the good onely of the Common-wealth; in such sort as a peaceable gouernment had succeeded the tumults of the deceased Duke, if certaine Authors and Ministers of the late Duke Candianos furie had not resolued to trouble the publike peace.The complaint of Vitalis Bishop of Grada.
At these mens perswasions, Vitalis Bishop of Grada (who was as h^th beene said, reiected by his father vnder colour of entring into religion,) fled into Lombardie  to the Emperour Otho the second; where after hee had greatly complained of the miserable death of his father Pietro, hee besought him with great instance to reuenge it, in regard he had beene some time his frend and guest. Happily some would say, that hee was iustly slaine: but they could not say so of the young infant his brother, whom they had cruelly murthered in his fathers armes. He did moreouer manifest his owne banishment (which his very enemies lamented,) wherein he was likely to wax old and to die farre from his natiue Countrie, if he were not by some forraine aide reestablished in the Citie, from whence he had beene so vniustly driuen by his fellowe Citizens.The Emperours answere to Vitalis.
His complaint and teares did greatly mooue the Emperour Otho, who seemed  priuatly to be greatly displeased at his guests miserie, whereupon, after hee had giuen him some hope of returning into his Countrie, hee willed him to be of good courage, and to be merrie in his companie, till a fit occafion were presented to send him home, which he promised shortly to effect with all his power.
Vualderta in the meane season, Vitalis his mother in law, being come along with him, went to Adheleta, Othos mother, who then laie at Placentia, and by her meanes she was soone after, with the consent both of the Prince and people, admitted into the Citie. It is not vnnecessarie (in regarde it bolongs to our Historie) briefly to rehearse, by what meanes Adheleta returned to the Imperiall dignitie, from whence she fell by the decease of her first husband.A maruailous example of for tune.
She married first of all the Emperour Lotharius, a great friend to the Venetians. He being dead, Berengarius his successor confined her for euer into the Castle of La Garda, (whereof the goodliest Lake of Italie doth at this day beare the name) where she was brought to such pouertie, as begging her bread by letters and messages, she led a miserable life. Whereby wee may leame, that there is no man so great (did not the foolish admiration of wordly riches make men forget their weakenesse) but may confesse, that there is nothing in this world so firme and certaine, which a man may promise to himselfe long to enioy, Adhele^a escaping secretly from this place, came to Verona, to Alard, who (as I thinke) was Bishop of the Citie: for it is certaine that the familie of the Alardi, are at this day of great  account there. This man, because hee had no place where he might hide such a Ladie, sent her to Accioni his vnkle, who was in times past a good friend to Lotharius, who hid her a long time in a countrie-house, tenne miles distant from the Citie, vntill such time, as (knowne to himselfe alone) she married for her second husband Otho the first, who carried her into Germanie; by whom he had a sonne, which was the Emperour Otho the second, of whom wee euen now spake: Who after he hadBerengarius and his some Albert defeated. not onely defeated Berengaria, and Albert his sonne, but wholly ouerthrowne them, and by their ruines confirmed the Empire to himselfe: hee made peace with the Venetians at the request of his mother Adheleta, against whom he was incensed for the murther of Prince Candiano.
About the same time there arose a new strife with those of the Cape of Histria,The Histrions tributarie to the Venetians. which was soone appeased by the meanes of a new League; wherin it was expresly couenanted, That they should paie vnto the Venetians euerie yeare an hundred Hogsheades of wine. The Bishops of Grada haue for a certaine time gathered this tribute in the peoples name.
Thus stood the State of the Common-wealth, which was sodainly depriued of the presence of this good Prince, by an vnheard-of accident.
A certaine man, named Guerin, comming from Aquitaine in pilgrimage to Venice,Guerin comes in pilgrimage to Venice. to visit Saint Markes bodie, was brought before the Prince according to his appointment, which was, that all those who should come to the Citie for anie deuotion should be bountifully entertained in his Pallace. This man hauing a great while discoursed of religion and of Pennance (for this stranger was by professionThe Prince resolues to giue ouer his place. a Moncke) brought the Prince by little and little to this passe, (who of himselfe was sufficiently addicted thereunto,) as he forthwith thought vpon meanes how he might giue ouer the gouernment. And to put it in practise, hee craued but so  much time of the stranger, as was sufficient for the quiet setling of the Commonwealth; and hauing prayed him to returne within a yeare, he dismissed him. VrseoloHow the Prince spent the time, in the meane space, till he departed. in the meane time gaue himselfe to all exercises of pietie, and taking vpon himselfe the cause of the poore, he did comfort their pouertie with a meruailous affection. He built, besides, a deuout Hospitall which is yet to be seene at this day right ouer against the great market-place. He did moreouer take into his owne protection, and maintained with an incredible charitie, the Colledges, the Clergie, and all Religious sorts of people. He did patiently beare whatsoeuer Vitalis, (who was absent) and his adherents did daily practise against him, whose wicked deseignes were likewise (as some say) diuinely reuealed vnto him. At the last, after  hee had spent the yeare in these good exercises, vpon a night, (for Guerin failed not to returne at the prefixed time) he left the Citie in disguised habite, vnknown to his wife, his sonne, and all his kins-folkes, and went on his iourney. When heThe Dukes secret departure. for sooke his charge and Countrie, he was followed and accompanied by Giouanni Gradonico, Giouanni Morosini, Remoaldo, and Marini of Rauenna: they all being partakers of his enterprise. He led in processe of time so holie and religious a life, as after his death in Aquitaine, where he passed the remainder of his daies, hee was (as hath beene said) honoured for many miracles.




 VITALIS CANDIANO, the 24. Duke of Uenice.








THe Citie being depriued of such a Prince was possessed with a meruailous sorrow, but their desire to haue him againe was much greater. Yet neuerthelesse remembring the Common-wealth, they made hast the next day to elect another in his sted that was so much bewailed. Vitalis Candiano, sonne to Pietro Candiano the third, was by the generall co^sent declared Prince. At this mans entreatie, Vitalis, Patriarch of Grada, who till then for feare of the people had absented himselfe; was called home into his Countrie: And was soone after, by the Princes meanes; sent in companie of the Ambassadours into Germanie vnto Otho, who extreamely hated the VenetiansOtho the second hateth the Venetians. for the cruell death of Pietro Candiano. This Ambassade was to much purpose, for  it did appease the wrath of Otho; wherein, the presence of Vitalis, sonne to the murthered Duke, did greatly auaile them, of whom he had a verie great care, taking order for his safetie; which he could not haue done, if he had dismissed the Ambassadours vnsatisfied.
In the meane space Duke Candiano fell grieuously sicke, a yeare and certaine moneths after his election; and imagining hee could not liue long, deposing himselfe from his charge, and vowing all the remainder of his dayes to a mouasticke life, he caused himselfe to bee carried to Saint Hillaries Monasterie, where within few daies after he dyed, and lies buried.







 TRIBVNO MEMIO, the 25. Duke of Venice.





TRibuno Memio, a great wise man, but of few words, was elected in  his sted. This man although he was very wise (as we haue said) was not verie fortunate in his gouernment. For he was at times cruelly assailed by the conspiracies of his fellow-Citizens. And moreouer, in his time the Morosini and Caloprini two verie noble families, fightingCiuill discordes. one with the other, with greater hatred than force, caused the people manie times to behold verie vile and bloudie spectacles: of the which I know not whether I may reckon that for chiefe and most cruell, which in likelihood, though not in effect, was done by Stephano Calloprini; who came with his children, allies, and diuersThe cruel intent of the Caloprini. others of his faction, well armed, to assaile the house of Morosini, with an intent not onely to kill all the men, but wholly to extinguish (if it had beene possible) the name of the familie. This armed troupe marched through the Citie, readie to fight, with as great boldnesse and hatred, as if it had beene against the publike enemie; wherat the people, being amazed, silently attended to see the issue therof, when as the Morosini surprised perhaps, or else fearing their enemies, came not in sight.

I know not whether they defended themselues in their own houses, or whether dispersed through the Citie (which some doe affirme) they hid themselues in this tumult among their friends and kinds folkes, and did not shew themselues. But the Citie could not escape that daie from beeing coloured with the bloud of her Citizens. For the mischief was, that albeit they fought not, yet nener the lesse by chance there was a miserable murther committed. Dominico Morosino beeing met neere toDominico Morosino murthered. the Castle was vnluckily slaine by the Caloprini: They beeing afterwards called in question for this murther, (for they were sure that those of the contrarie faction, aided by Tribuno, did Arme themselues to reuenge this iniurie) fledde with theirThe slight of the Calloprini to the Emperour Otho, with their promise to him. Captaine Stephano, to Verona, to the Emperour Otho the second; vnto whom, for  hatred of the Prince, and the familie of the Morosini, they promised that state of Venice.
Otho did willingly lend an eare to this offer, because hee perceiued the practisers to be of the chiefe of the Citie: But before hee would assaile them by open warre, he would trie whether he could winne them by famine. He forth with forbad, ouerThe Emperours cruell Edict against the Uenetians. all Italie, anie traffike with the Venetians. He caused to be signified vnto them, that they should not enter into anie of the Cities of the Empire, neither vpon trafficke, nor any other pretence: If they did any thing rashly, hee would holde them afterwards for open enemies. By these menaces they soone knew whereunto Otho tended. For in shutting all manner of victuals from them, he meant to bring them to Otho the second his designe. the last and most intolerable point of all miserie, which is hunger. But howsoeuer the Citie might be affrighted thereby, yet would not the Venetians seeme to bee amazed, nor make shew to vnderstand whereunto Otho his desseignes tended; diss^mbling their griefe and feare; resoluing rather to endure all extreames, than to loseThe Venetians braue resolution. their libertie. The want of all necessaries grew already verie great in the Citie, when those of Capodarger, enioying the same priuiledges with them (as oftentimes oneThe reuolt of Capodarger. mischiefe followes an other) reuolted against them. The inhabitants obtained of the Emperour for their reuolt, certaine inheritances of the Lauretans; to the end it might serue for a baite for others to doe the like.
But these things beeing done abroade, and the Citie in the meane time pressed  with want of all necessaries, they began to laie all the fault on those of the faction of the Caloprini, which were neere to Otho, accusing them that by their meanes andThe peoples reuenge on the Caloprini. pursuite, the enemie laied all these trappes for them. Whereupon by a publick decree the houses of the Calloprini were wholly razed to the ground; their wiues and children committed to safe keeping; and the remainder of their goods confiscate. Otho in the meane space perseuering in his selfe-will, not to make open war vpon the Venetians, nor yet to haue peace with them, went to Rome; where being stricken with a sodaine disease he within few daies died. The Venetians were by his deathThe Death of Otho the second. (as at sundrie other times) deliuered from a great danger.
Adheleta, after Otho dis decease, not willing to abandon the Caloprini obtained  of the Venetians, that Stephano, and those who had followed him, should be repealed from bannishment: which the Prince and people granting at Adheleta's request, and the Calloprini being returned into their Countrie: it hapned that foure of the Morosini,The Caloprini return to Venice. remembring fore-passed wrongs, did assaile and kill three brethren of the Caloprini, sonnes to Stephano, as they returned to the Palace, entring into a boate to goeThree sonnes of Stephano Caloprini slaine. home to their houses. The Duke was suspected, and the people beleeued it, that this murther was committed by his consent; but hee cleared himselfe in open Assembly.
The same Prince gaue to Giouanni Morosino at his returne from Aquitain, whither he had accompanied Vrseolo, Saint Georges Church which stands right ouer against the Market-place, with the Marshes adioining, which were dependancies of  the Dukes Chappell, vpon condition to build thereupon a Monasterie for the Religious of the order of Saint Bennet. He sent his sonne Mauritio to Basilius Emperour of Greece; to the end, that being honoured by him with certaine titles, hee might

appeare more notable among his fellow-Citizens. All these things thus executed, he was surprized with a grieuous disease: by meanes whereof he voluntarily deposedThe Duke voluntarily deposeth himselfe. himselfe: or (as some say) he was constrained so to doe by the people, the foureteenth yeare of his gouernment, for that in the ciuill dissensions he had carried him selfe not like a iust Prince, but had euer fauoured one side more than another. He liued not long after: for so soone as he had made himselfe a Monke, he died forthwith.




 PIETRO VRSEOLO, the second, the 26. Duke of Uenice.





PIetro Vrseolo was by the people declared his successor. This dignitie  was foretold him a long time before, as by a Diuine presage, by his Father who was a man of an holie life. During his gouernment, the Venetians State did meruailously encrease both at home and abroade. First of all hee obteined of Basilius and Alexis (who at the same time did iointly command the Grecian Empire) that through all their Dominions, theThe Venetians free ouer all the Grecian Empire. Venetian Marchants should be free by Sea and land from al customes and tributes. He did moreouer by his Ambassadours, purchase the frendship of the Kings of Aegypt and Siria. Then did he win by bountie, and good offices, the greatest Lords of Italie. So soone as hee perceiued a conuenient time to reuenge all the wronges which the Venetians had receiued of the Narentines; hee for bad to paie them any Prohibitions to pay no more tribute to the Barbarians. more the accustomed yearely tribute, for the free commerce and Nauigation of the coast of Dalmatia. The Narentines being thereby incensed against the Venetians, did sodainely rob and spoile: And not satisfied with their thefts at Sea, they came on shoare and spoiled the Countrie neere to Zara: For that Citie alone, of all the rest of Dalmatia, was at the same time subiect to the Venetians. But the Venetians were not onely molested by these incursions, but all the neighbour-Nations Likewise: who after they had endured it with much discontentment for a while, perceiuing the furie of these robbers, who abused their patience, daily to encrease, and foreseeingThe Narentines great incursions. that those insolent people, would neuer giue ouer, vnlesse their attempts were assisted: Diuers Dalamatians, not finding themselues alone strong enough for such The Ambassadors of Dalmatia, Liburnia, and Histria come to Venice to compl^ine of the Narentines. an enterprise, had recourse to the Venetians. The Ambassadours of Liburnia, and Histria, came thither likewise, being all of them sent for this purpose, to treate with the Prince in the name of their Common-wealths; That if he would send a mightie fleet into Dalmatia against the Narentines, to defend the Sea-coastes, and the neere

nieghbours thereof, from the theftes of these Pirats; that it would come to passe (which they in the name of their fellow-citizens did promise) that all Dalmatia along the Sea-coast, Liburnia, and Histria, would submit themselues vnder the VenetiansThe Ambassadors offers to the Venetians. dominion. The offers which the Ambassadours made, did puffe vp the Princes minde, and filled the whole Citie with great hope one day to be Lords of Dalmatia. Whereupon, fearing to loose such an occasion, they resolued to send forth a mightie Fleet. But before wee speake of the setting out thereof, wee must briefly make mention of the situation of that Prouince; fetching it from farre.
The Grecians called those Illirians, which inhabited the vpper parts of MacedoniaDescription of Illiria. and Thrace, from the Cahonians and Thesprotti, vnto the Riuer of Histria, encreasing in bredth from the hilles of Macedon and Thrace, euen to the Peonians, and the (...) Sea, containing in all fiue daies iourney, and in length thrice asmuch. The which being measured by the Roman Authors, was found to containe 6000. stadij in length, and 1200. in bredth. Whereby it is apparent, that the Ancients haue called all that Illiria, which is contained within these limits euen to the Adriatick-Sea: comprehending therein Dalmatia and Liburnia.
They (...) besides, that the Prouince, and the Nation, were so named by Illirius, sonne to Poliphemus and Galathea, sometimes Lords of that Countrie; that Dardanus, Taulan^s, with others, were his children, from whom the Dardanians and Taulantians, people of Dalmatia, are descended. This Prouince, such as it is, did in times  past containe, according to the ancient diuision of the Cosmographers, Liburnia and Dalmatia. At this present all that Countrie whith lieth from Histria, verie neere to Liburnia, which stretcheth it selfe towards the Adriatick-Sea, and almost to the riuer Drillon, is called Dalmatia. Those who inhabited vpon this riuer, were the Dalmatians in times past. Since then, the Epirots being driuen forth of their Countrie,Albania is a part of Illiria. possessed this Prouince euen to Macedon: and all the Region is by the Moderns called Albania. In this sort Dalmatia extends it selfe more from the North to the South than from the East to the West.
Now the armie being in a readinesse, and the Soldiours ship't, after that Vrseolo had receiued the publicke ensignes in the Church of Oliuollo from the hands of The Venetians Armie against the Narentines. the Bishop, he sailed into Dalmatia. It was then the spring-time, and sailing pleasantly, he arriued first at Aquileia, after at Grada. Vitalis Bishop of the Citie accompanied with the whole Clergie and the people, went out to meete him, and after heThe Bishop of Grada his present to the Duke. had welcomed him: Take (saith he) Vrseolo this banner of Saint Hermagoras, which I wish may be fortunate to thy selfe and to the Commonwealth: cause thy Soldiours to follow it, among the ensignes of their Countrie, and let them fight valiantly vnder it: I hope that thou wilt one day confesse, that this banner which wee giue thee hath no lesse aided thee in the obtaining of the victorie, than the strength and courage of thy people. Wee are not ignorant how that by valour all Commonweales are well gouerned; but they are much better, when they haue God for their  guide. I doe accept (saith the Duke) this thy Presage, and I pray thee, when we are departed hence, to beseech that good God to graunt vs a prosperous voiage, and victorie ouer our enemies. Then bidding him farewell, hee came with a faire winde sodainly into Histria.
Histria is at this day the farthest Countrie of Italie, a neighbour in times past toThe Duke arriueth a^ Parenza Liburnia, and consisteth wholly almost of Islands: The Venetians first landing was at Parenza, but he was scarsely come to the Island next to the Citie, when as Andrea Bishop thereof, accompanied with all the inhabitants, came forth to meete him, and committed his owne person his Citizens, and all their meanes, as well publicke as priuate, into the Venetians hands. The Prince beeing enuironed with troopes of  Soldiours made his entrie into the Citie, where he did not faile to visit the bodie of Saint Maur^.
The fleete being gone from Parenza, came to the Island neere to Pola, which is aThe Duke com^ to Pola. verie ancient Citie of Histria, builded (as hath been said elsewhere) by the Colehians.

At his arriuall, the Polani following the example of the Parentines, came with one accord, with Bercaldo their Bishop, to receiue the Venetians. Sundrie other people, who had beene a long time desirous to yeeld vnto them, ran to meet Vrseolo in the same place, where by their Ambassadors they submitted themselues vnder their obedience.
Vrseolo, after hee had made some stay there, as well to giue audience to the Ambassadors,The occasion of his staie there. The Dukes comming to Zara. Coricta and Arba rendred to him. and to receiue their othes and homage, as to leuie new soldiours whom he embarqued; he held his course towards Zara. That Citie was not long before yeelded to the Venetians, in regard whereof all the people went out to meet and receiue them with great ioy, calling them their Lords, and deliuerers. The Bishops  of Coricta and Arba came thither soone after, with the Commissioners of their Cities, to sue for peace, and to receiue his command; swearing and protesting, inuiolably to perfourme what soeuer he should command them; adding thereunto, that they would in their praiers make mention of the Duke of Venice, as they did of the Emperour. All things falling out thus luckily for the Venetians on the coast of Dalmatia, Murcemirus, who, after hee had banished his elder brother, did possesseMure emirus king of Croati^ sends Ambassadors to the Duke. the kingdome of Croatia (namely that Croatia the red, which the Modernes haue termed to be a part of Illiria, which extends it selfe from the desert plaines, which lie almost in the middest of the Prouince, euen to Durazzo) fearing least the Venetian, spurred forward by the happie fortune which accompanied him, would  enter too farre into Dalmatia, made hast by his Ambassadours to insinuate himselfe into the Dukes fauour, promising the Venetians all aide and succour.
The Duke in the meane time sent ten Gallies from Zara to spoile the NarentinesFortie Narentine marchants taken. Countrie: These Gallies surprised neere to the Island next to Belgrade, called by the inhabitants Chama, fortie Narentine marchants, who were returned from Apulia. Some saie that their comming was discouered by spies, and that therefore the Gallies were sent to meete them. The Duke, after he had refreshed himselfe, did forth with follow them; but he found, that, before his arriuall, those whom he had first sent had taken the Island, nee^e to the which wee haue said the Narentines were surprised. Whereby it came passe that vpon Vrseolo his arriuall, the Ambassadors  of Belgrade and Trahu, came thither likewise to receiue the Venetians gouernment.The yeelding vp of Belgrade and Trahu. These men did promise aud sweare in the name of their Common-wealth, to remaine for euer obedient to the Venetians hauing of their own accord requested that it might be so. Trahu is an Island of Dalmatia ioining almost to the firme Land, with a Citie of the same name builded by the Issetes. Suringa of Croatia, brother to Murcemirus, was in this Island, who after the yeelding vp thereof gaue his sonne Stephen for hostage to the Duke, whom the Venetian did afterwards marrie to his daughter Hicela.The yeelding of Spalatra.
The fleet afterward departed to other places of Dalmatia. Spalatra, a verie rich Towne in those daies, following the example of her neighbours, receiued the Venetians The taking of Corcyra the blacke. into her wals. After that, he went to Corcira the black, now called Cursula, the which refusing to obey his commandements was taken by force: That being done, the Venetian Gallies came neere to the Isle of Pharos, (called likewise by the Modernes Lesnia in sted of Pharos, by corruption of the language) where they espied a fort builded on great Rockes in the middest of the Sea, which a farre off seemed impregnable to the beholders. The nature of the place had till then caused theTe situation of Pharos. Narentines to commit infinite robberies at Sea, who in case of necessitie had that place alwaies for an assured retreit.
There was likewise in the same Island a towne, stronge both by Art and Nature: not farre from whence the Venetian Marchants were wont to bee rob'd and taken.The Venetian Gallies surprise the Hauen of Pharos. The Gallies at their arriuall tooke the Hauen of the Island. Then they summoned the inhabitants to yeeld, willing them, by the examples of others, not to trie the furie of the Venetian armes: telling them that it was a follie for them to saie, that they had rather endure all shamefull extremities with the hazard of their liues, than toThose of (...) summoned.

preserue their children, and their goods, by receiuing the Venetian quietly into their Citie. This was sundrie times told them, that they should beware, least by their obstinacie they did incense the Venetians against them: that after the assault should beWhat moued those of Pharos to defend themselues. begun, there would be no hope of composition. There was some likelihood that they would willingly haue receiued a Garrison, and obeied forthwith, if they had beene certaine to haue beene receiued on the same conditions as others were; but fearing (that which was true) that if the Venetians were masters of the Towne they would raze it downe to the ground, the loue to their Countrie, (which is that we chiefly loue) made them resolute to defend themselues and to beate backe the enimie. The Duke on the contrarie, so soone as hee had vnderstood the meaning  of the towns-men, commanded to begin the assault. The Islanders did brauely defend themselues. There was a Castle (as hath beene said) inaccessible by reason of the steepnesse of the place: but the Venetians from the foote of the hill shot at once such a number of arrowes vpon the besieged, as being couered therewith like a cloud, they were constrained to abandon their places of defence. Then they which were in the shippes, with the hired Soldiours, did goe vp by the broken and pathlesse places of the mountaine euen to the toppe: Those within the Town being amazed to see them there, beganne to defend themselues, and the Venetians did furiously assaile them. and hauing set vp skaling ladders in diuers places, they beganne a cruell fight on either side. The hope to winne the Towne if they  would a little striue to doe valliantly, encreased the Venetians strength; and despaire possessed the other. A Tower in the meane time was taken by a few, who expulsed the enemie from that side, and made themselues masters of the wall: ThenThe taking of the castle and towne of ^haros called Lesina. those within being amazed flung downe their weapons, and vpon their knees cried for mercie. At this noise the gentle and mercifull Prince commanded to pardon those that were disarmed; and the Towne being razed downe to the earth by his commandement, he departed sodainly from thence, and came to Saint Maximins.The Citie of Pharos destroied. The Commissioners of Ragusa with their Bishop came and met him, and submitted themselues to him and to the Venetian people.
The Duke after that, entring their Countrie in hostile manner, did put all to  fire and sword. The enemies being amazed at this spoile sent their Ambassadours to sue for peace, which was graunted them on these conditions; To paye vnto the Venetians the iust value of all the losse they had sustained from the beginning of the warres; neuer after, to exact any more tribute; and not to suffer any Lord of their owne nation, or a stranger for them, and in their name, to spoile and robbeThe conditions of peace graunted to the Narentines. at Sea. The Narentines, who had made warre on the Venetians for the soueraigntie at Sea the space of one hundred three score and tenne yeares, with different successe many times, embracing peace, which was more necessarie, than honorable for them, did willingly accept these conditions. All the prisoners being set at libertie, the victorious Armie was embarqued.
The Duke, after hee had freed the Sea from Pirats, and brought all the SeacoastsThe Duke returnes to Venice of Dalmatia, Liburnia, and Histria, vnder the Venetians subiection, he returned with a prosperous winde to Venice: where hee entred, almost in a manner triumphantly (the true ancient triumphes being no more in vse) being enuironed by the people, who highly praised him for his great victories vnto; whom after hee had related what he had done, and how by the grace of Almightie God, and his owne conduct, he had subiected to the Venetians all the Sea-coasts from Histria, euen to the farthest parts of Dalmatia, with all the Islands neere adiacent, he was greatly extolled in an Oration: And it was decred, that euer after, both he and his successors, should carrie the title of the Duke of Venice, and Dalmatia, beseeching God  that the same might be prosperous to him, and to the Venetian Nation likewise. It was moreouer thought fit to send new Magistrates to all the Cities of this newNew ^fficers sent to the Cities newly conquered Prouince. It is thought, that Otho Vrso was sent to Ragusa; his sonne to Spalatra; Dominico Polano to Trahu; Giouanni Cornare to Sicore; (called Sibinica by the Modernes)

Vitalis Michaeli to Belgrade; and others to other townes, whose names the length of time hath worne out.
Vrseolo repaired the Citie of Grada; and with great cost caused diuers Palaces to be builded. He caused the holie bodies of Fortunatus, and Hermagoras, with those of Dionise, Largius, and Hermogenes, to be new in-shrined. He caused likewise a goodly Pallace to be built at Heraclea, with a Church, according to those times; the towne being then smally inhabited.
He did in such sort terrifie Giouanni Bishop of Belluna, who troubled the Venetians, by a sodaine prohibition to his subiects not to trafficke in any sort with them, as hee did forthwith surrender whatsoeuer had beene taken (vnto which  the commandement of the Emperor Otho could neuer induce him) withall and humblyThe Emperour (...) sundrie priuiledges to the Venetians. sued for peace: which because it should last the longer, he would haue confirmed by a new alliance. He sent his young sonne afterwards to Verona to the Emperour Otho, who had sent for him by letters, whom at the holie Sacrament of Confirmation he named Otho, who was called before then Peter. He did moreouer obtaine of the same Emperour diuers new immunities and priuiledges of Faires, and Ports. Concerning likewise the limits of Heraclea, which extended in time past to the Riuer of Piauo, Giouanni Diacono (whom the Prince had sent to Verona to acquaint the Emperour with the conquest of Dalmatia) had commandement to treat with him about it, who easily obtained, that they should stand at the same stay, as  they had done in ancient time.
Otho went to Rome, from whence resoluing to returne into Lombardie, hee commanded Giouanni (who went along with him) to write to Vrseolo, that hee would be shortly at Rauenna, and from thence would secretly come to Venice, to performe a vow that he had made, and that therefore he desired to haue his comming kept secret, because his determination was to come thither in disguise and with a small traine. The Duke, meruailous ioyfull at these newes, did with a wonderfull affection attend the comming of such a guest. The Emperour in the meane space came to Rauenna, and from thence to Pomposia, a place verie neere Ghoria at the mouth of the Riuer Po. Then in the night entring into a boat with fiue of his houshould The Emperour Otho comes to Venice in disguise. seruants, and Giouanni Diacono, he came with a faire wind to Venice. Hee went rather to the Monasterie of Saint Seruula, than to anie Inne or Citizens house, to the end that his comming might be the better concealed. The Prince came to him by night in the same place, where after a reciprocall gratulation, for the arriuall of the one in health and with a prosperous winde to Venice, and for the others happie exploits in Dalmatia, they came about mid-night into St. Markes Church, from whence, so soone as Otho had made his prayers and accomplished his vow, they went to the Pallace. And because each of them were verie desirous to haue the arriuall of this new guest kept secret; so long as the Emperour staied in Venice, the Duke euerie day dined in publike, but he supt in priuate with him. And to the end  they might be allied together not onely by the law of friendship and hospitalitie, butThe Dukes great wisdome. by another more strict and holie band, Otho held a daughter of the Dukes, then new borne, at the Font, the same day she was baptized: He did for euer remit to the Venetians the Cloake of cloth of gold, which the Common-wealth by accord solemnly sworne to, were yeerely bound to giue vnto the Emperours. Being honored likewise by the Duke with diuers great and rich presents hee went back againe to Rauenna.
Three dayes after Otho was departed, the Duke commanded a generall assemblie, where he publikely declared how that the Emperour Otho had beene in Venice; in what manner he had beene at home with him for certaine dayes; and what  he had obtained of him. It was verie pleasing to the people, and they greatly praisedThe Duke permitted to associate Giouanni his sonne into the gouernment. Vrseolos wisdome for concealing the presence of so great a Prince. And because he had so well deserued of the Common-wealth, they permitted him soone after by a decree to associate Giouanni his sonne into the Principalitie; whom hee sent thus

honoured with the soueraigne dignitie, with his wife, and Otho his brother, to Constantinople, to the Emperours Constantine and Basilius; from whence they returned soone after to Venice laden with diuers rich presents.
But because neuer anie humane prosperitie was seene to bee exempt from one trouble some accident or other of Fortune; it hapned thus, that before this oldPlague and famine in the Citie. man, (otherwise most fortunate,) dyed, he saw by two extreame miseries, Plague and Famine, and by the decease of his sonne and daughter in law, hapned almost on one day, the course of his happie fortune altered. He was after that constrained to enter into controuersie with those of Cap-darger, and with the Sacceans, with the one for refusing to pay the tribute called Ripetta, and with the other about  the Marshes of the Lauretans: But he ended them both as he wished, to the profit and honour of the Common-wealth.
At the same time the Phaledrini, a noble familie, caused the Church and MonasterieThe Church and Monasterie of Saint Benet builded by the Phaledrini. of St. Benedict to be builded, which they enriched with diuers great and goodlie inheritances neere adioyning. It is reported that the Duke was verie carefull to end the reparations of the Palace, and the Church neere adiacent. Then by his last will he diuided his wealth into three partes. The first and greatest, hee bequeathed to his children, the second he would haue to be imployed for the succouringThe Dukes last ^ill. of poore people and repairing of Churches: and the third to bee spent in his life time in publicke shewes, guifts, and liberalitie to the people. Those things  being accomplished at home and abroad, hee deceased the eighteenth yeare of his gouernment. His bodie, bewailed of all'men, was carried to Saint Z^charies Church and there honorably buried.




 OTHO VRSEOLO, the 27. Duke of Uenice.





OTho, his sonne, a young man of great hope, and worthie of such a father and grand-sire, men of great deuotion, did with the generall consent of all the Citizens succeede him. Hee beganne his gouernment with the same wisdome which all men expected, at what time Geica King of Hungarie being mooued by the reporte of his great reputation,The Hadrians defeated by the Duke. gaue him his daughter in marriage. Hee defeated the Hadrians neere to Lauretta, betwixt the mouthes of the Riuers Po and Adice: for that they had spoiled the Venetian frontires; and hauing vanquished them, he made peace with them, vpon condition they should surrender both to the Lauretans that which they had

lost, and should make no more incursions afterward. But it is reported that the Hadrians, who before that time had beene very mightie, did so sodainely decaie by the losse of Lauretta, as since then waxing daily worse and worse, they could neuer afterward recouer themselues.
About the same time Murcimirus (I finde in some Authours Heresimus for Murcimire) Lord of Croatia, did very much molest those of Zara contrarie to the agreement lately made, and did incessantly oner-runne the whole Countrie. And the neighbour Cities likewise had already felt the furie of the Croatian Armies, when Otho resoluing to reuenge it, marched against the Barbarian; who daring to tarrie for him and to offer battaile, was by him verie easily broken and defeated: But those Authours whom we follow, doe not set downe, whether it were by Sea or(...) vanquishet^ the King of (...). Land. Otho pursuing this happie victorie, after he had scoured with his Armie all the Sea, coasts of Dalmatia, Liburnia, and Histria, which his Father had subdued to the Venetians, he entred vnder colour of taking notice of the State of the Prouince into all their Cities, and assemblies; he caused the inhabitants to make new oaths of fidelitie, that they should euer after continue faithfull to the Venetians, in the same manner as they had voluntarily submitted themselues, and not to permit anyConspiracie against the Duke and his banishment. whatsoeuer to practise ought against their State. At his returne from Dalmatia, he was vnfortunately surprised by the conspiracie of Dominico Flabenico, who after he had shauen his beard, draue him into Greece, the fifth yeare after hee had taken  the gouernment alone vpon himselfe: where soone after he dyed.




 PIETRO CENTRANICO, the 28. Duke of Venice.








PIetro Ceutranico or Barbolano (for both these surnames are found in this family) succeeded Otho thus banished. This man entring into the Gouernement of his Countrie, which was full of troubles at home, and abroad, tooke great care which businesse to take in hand first; Y^t neuerthelesse he thought it best to reduce the Citie into her former peaceable estate, being yet in an vproare, by meanes of this cruell conspiracie, and the banishment of this good Prince. In the meane time Pepin Patriarch of Aquileia,Pepin Patriarch of Aquileia disquiets Grada. presuming on the assurance of these troubles, and on the flight of the Bishop  of Grada (for some write that Vrsus Bishop of that place after his brothers banishment fearing to be trecherously surprised by those of the co^trary faction, fled) seized

on Grada, as though he ment to keepe it for Vrsus in his absence. Others affirm^ that it was taken by force, in the behalfe of Vrsus from the Venetian Garrison which kept it, the which is altogether vntrue. For if they had beene then friends, they would not both of them at the same time haue pleaded the controuersie of their Churches at the Councell held at Rome, not without great suspition of enuie and hatred; where it is reported that the Pope and the whole assembly declared the Church of Grada to be the Metropolitan of the whole Venetian Territorie. But it is certaine, that the Emperour Conrade was at the same time in the behalfe of Pepin greatly incenfed against the Venetians, declaring himselfe in some matters their open enemie.
In this state stood the affaires of the Venetians, when as Centranico after hee hadContranico deposed from (...) dignitie (...) by the people shorne and made a Moncke. commanded foure yeares, was (as some say) at the pursuite of Vrsus Bishop of Grada, taken by the people, hauing his head and beard shauen, and in the habit of a Monke was banished. He thus exiled, the people commanded Vrsus to take vpon him the publike Gouernment, and to command as Duke, till such time as Otho his brother should be called home from banishment: Those which were sent for that purpose, brought backe word that at their comming into Greece they found OthoOtho dieth in Greece. dead, a little before their arriuall, as though it had so hapned by the diuine permission to the end that this ingratefull Citie might not bee so happie as once againe to enioy such a Noble man, Sonne to so good a Prince, and himselfe so well deseruing  of the Commonwealth, whom it had suffered to bee so ignominiously handled by the conspiracie of a fewe, against whom being able to haue opposed her selfe, yet would not. Vrsus hauing notice of his brothers death, did voluntarily depose himselfe, and went to his owne house, after he had commanded one yeare.
Vrsus hau^ng retired himselfe, Dominico Vrseolo moued rather by the reputation of his Ancestors (for he was neere kinsman to Otho) than by the fauour and consent of the people, seized indiscreetly on the Dukes Palace. But the people mindfull ofDominico Urseolo, vsurpes the Dukes Pallace. their libertie, foreseeing how vnlesse they did oppose themselues against the attempts o^ that insolent Citizen, that on a sodaine the euill disposed persons induced by that p^rnicious example, would without any respect vsurpe the Gouernment, came the morrow after his entrance and assailed him, and had vndoubtedly slaine him, had he not secretly fled away to Rauenna, where soone after he died.




 DOMINICO FLABENICO, the 29. Duke of Uenice.








DOminico Flabenico created by the generall consent of all men succeeded the short gouernment of Vrseolo. This man (as hath beene said) was the Authour of Otho his banishment; and therefore during the gouernment of Vrso Bishop of Grada, hee was banished the Citie as an enemie, but not long after, hee was repealed at the peoples request. So soone as he had receiued the gouernment, hee propounded to the people, that he thought it fit and most profitable for the Common-wealth, to driue the familie of the Vrseoli out of the Citie, as pernicious enemies to the publique quiet. He willed them then to assemble themselues, and to declare the Vrseoli vnworthy euer after to execute the soueraigne dignitie, or any other Office whatsoeuer: or to haue any authoritie to be present at the suffrages, and that they shouldGreat ingratitude of the Venetians. The family of the Vrseoli for euer banished from the Citie. The custome of taking a Colleague into the Principalitie abolished. adiudge them common enemies, and, as such, banish them. The people being ill aduised, hauing alreadie forgotten the sundrie deserts and benefits of this familie, making themselues the ministers of an other mans hatred, did sodainely consent thereto. After this sort, this familie, till then famous, and which had affoorded so many worthie men to the Common-wealth, was by this ignominie so deiected, as it could neuer after rise againe. He did likewise abolish the custome of associating a Colleague in the Principalitie, the which as most profitable is carefully obserued vnto this day. I find no memorable matter done by him abroad, but being oppressed with yeares he departed this life.




 DOMINICO CONTARENO, the 30. Duke of Uenice.








DOminico Contareno was by the generall consent of all men established in his place. Pepin in the meane time had molested all the places round about Grada, and for that time there was nothing decreed against him, in regard the City was then busied in affaires of more importance. Those of Zara had yeelded to the Lord of Croatia, or (as some write) to Salomon King of Hungarie. At the report hereof, (for it was to bee supposed, that vnlesse the Venetian Armie did speedily passe into Dalmatia, the other Countries which were now readie to rebell would soone after reuolt from the Venetians) the Duke with a great fleet sodainely hasted to Dalmatia; Zara taken againe which was reuo^ted. besieged Zara; and tooke it by force. The report of the reprisall of Zara auailed much to containe the other Cities in their dutie and fidelitie.
Pepin in the meane space tooke Grada the second time by assault, and did more harme at this entrie, than at the former. The Venetians iustly moued by this iniurie, determined before they would reuenge it, to aduertise Pope Benedict of the wrong which Pepin had done them, resoluing that if he did not obey the Pope, who they thought would redresse it, to reuenge the losse of Grada by Armes. Pepin sodainelyPepin obeyes the Popes commandement. obeyed the Popes commandement; but being of an obstinate and turbulent spirit, he dyed (as some say) soone after miserably.
Some write that Pope Leo came at the same time to Venice. But if they sent to Pope Benedict concerning the businesse of Grada (as hath beene said) following the opinion of diuers, I cannot imagine how the Popes name should bee so sodainely  changed; which makes me to thinke that it hapned by the negligence of some writers, who haue set downe Benedict for Leo, or on the contrarie, Leo for Benedict, or that (which is most likely) that these things were done at sundrie times. TheyPope Leo comes to Venice. say the occasion of his iournie was to visite the body of Saint Marke: and they affirme that hee gaue diuers great priuiledges to his Church, and to diuers others in the Citie.
VVee finde also that about the same time, those of Apulia fought diuers times with Robert surnamed Guiscard, a Norman by Nation, whose power at the same time was very great in Italie: The which neuerthelesse I dare not altogether affirme, because of all those Authours, whom wee follow, there is but one which  makes mention thereof.




 DOMINICO SILVIO, the 31. Duke of Uenice.








THis is all which hapned vnder the gouernment of Prince Contareno, who the six and twentieth yeare of his Principalitie dyed: he was buried in Saint Nicholas Church, his funerall being followed by great multitudes of people. Dominico Siluio was by sodaine acclamation of the people; as hee followed the bodie, saluted Duke.T^o great nic eues of a woman. He is reported to haue married a wife from Constantinople, so full of arrogancie and greekish pride, who (as saith Damian) was so nice and delicate in  her manner of life, as shee would neuer wash with ordinarie water, shee neuer touched her meate but with a forke of gold, her Chamber was perfumed with such rare odours, as the senses of those which came into it were ouercome with the sweetnesse thereof. But as nothing is of lesser continuance, than vnbridled dissolutenesse,

which is so much the more dangerous as it is most excessiue. This mostA Diuine pun^shment. proude and curious manner of life procured her a very loathsome and stinking disease, so as she, who by her insolent pride would not vse the most necessarie element of water, because it was common to euery one, could not bee holpen or comforted by the same, nor yet by any other meanes, to clense the filth and infection of her bodie.
About the same time Dominico Bishop of Oliuollo deceased. Henrie sonne to the last Duke succeeded him, who altered the ancient name of Oliuollo, and would be called Bishop of the Castle, as they are now at this day.
It is reported that vnder this Princes gouernment the Normans were driuen What the Normans were, and their Originall. out of the confines of Dalmatia. And because the Venetians haue had diuers warlike incounters with this Nation, we must speake something of them. They were then (as some Authors affirme) neere neighbours to the Sea-coasts of Guyenne, who after they had a certaine time scoured the Neighbour-Seas, entred in tract of time vnder their Captaine Raoul by the Riuer of Loire into France. They ouerranne Lorraine and a part of Germanie with fier and sword; afterwards returningRaoul the Normans Captaine becomes a Christian. into France, Raoul made a league with king Charles the third surnamed the Simple, and beeing by him perswaded to become a Christian, of an Enemie hee became his Guest; and being named Robert, he married the kings daughter. By meanes of which marriage Charles gaue vnto him that Prouince lying vpon the Riuer of Seine, which  hath beene since called Normandie, by the name of the inhabitants. This man, of whom I speake, was great Grandfather to that Robert, who came with an Armie into Italie, of whom we must say somewhat, to the end we may the more easily vnderstand, that which they haue done there.
Now at what time this yong Robert began to wex great on the confines of Lucania,By what mean^i the Nor^ans grew great. and Sicill, the affaires of Italie were then in meane estate, as well by the new receiued losses, as by the incursions of the Saracens, who ouer-ranne that whole Prouince, and Sicill in like manner. But it is vncertaine whether this man or some other of that Nation, did bring the Normans out of France into Italie. For it is certaine that the same great Robert, who from the shoares of the Ocean Sea did enter  by the riuer of Loire so farre into France, was great Grandfather to this man: So as perhaps some other of the Roiall bloud might conduct the Normans into TransAlpine Gaule, which at this day, is a part of Italie, before his time. From thence it comes that diuers doe affirme, that this yong Robert marched first against the Saracens. Neuerthelesse howsoeuer it is, herein all doe agree, that at the same time almost, the Normans did driue the Barbarians out of Italie, and Sicilie, with manieThe Normans driue the Sarracens and Greeks forth of Italie. thowsands of men slain on either side, and the Greekes likewise out of Calabria and Apulia. But after that the Norman forces, after manie and sundrie exploits, became suspitious to the Popes for that they were increased in Sicilie, and in a great part of Italie; more than was thought needfull for the safetie of the Lands of the Church  and others; the common rumor was, that the Normans, after they had possessed Lucania, would seize on Campania It is reported, that Pope Leo resolued at the samePope Leo vanqu^shed by the Normans. time, if he could not stay them by entreaties, and threats, to vse force And hauing leuied a mightie Armie for the same purpose, he fought with them with bad successe neere to Beneuentum: where after he had receiued a notable losse, he fledde forth of the battaile into the neerest Citie. Neuerthelesse hee was not. discouraged at this losse, but being a man stout and couragious, he found new meanes and forces to driue them forth of Italie; but all his attempts proued vaine. He being dead, PopePope Nicholas tributarie to the Normans. Nicholas his successour, not daring to contend with them, thought it much auaileable for the safetie of the Churches Lands; if paying them a yerely tribute, he might  oblige Robert to aide the holie Sea, when need should be; making him by that means to acknowledge, that he did depend on an other man. This is in a maner all that which some Authors haue set downe of the stirres of this Nation.
Others haue affirmed, that the same Robert (as we haue said) came from Transalpine

Gaule, not making any mention of France; and they say that Tancre^ LordSund^ie opinions of the Normans comming into Italie. of that Prouince had twelue children, among whom they highly esteeme two, that is to say, William surnamed Ferrabach, and Robert Guiscard. They doe moreouer denie that which we haue spoken of the Normans, to bee done vnder the conduct of Robert, but vnder his brother William. And besides, they do not set downe the matter like those whom we follow, but quite contrarie; That Campania and Lucania were neuer possessed by them, and that the Saracens were neuer driuen thence: but how that Willam iointly with the Princes of Campania and Salerne, marched against the Barbarians, who had alreadie possessed Sicilie, and tooke into their fellow-ship Molloc, Gouernour of Apulia and Calabria for the Greeke Emperour: by whose  meanes being ioined altogether, the Barbarians were easily driuen forth of Sicilie. And that Molloc after the Island was taken againe, did seize on it, placing strong Garrisons in the Emperours name, vnto whom he said the Island did belong, and not toMolloc Gouernour for the Greeke Emperour deceiueth his fellowes. his fellowes: whereat the Norman beeing incensed did sodainely leaue the Island, and came the neerest way into the firme Land, and laid seege to Melphi in Apulia. For the releeuing whereof, Molloc leauing the Island, the victorie remained to the Norman, and Molloc being defeated with the losse of all his Armie fled into Greece: so thatThe Normans defeate Molloc. in the end the Normans beeing conducted by William made themselues masters of the greatest part of Apulia. But after they had a long time debated the possession of this Prouince, with diuers euents, it came to passe that the Emperour Michael with The Emperour Michael driuen from Constantinople. three of his children were driuen from Constantinople by Nicephorus. The Emperour delt with Robert Guiscard, who at the same time beseeged Tarentum (for it is certain that vnder his conduct the Normans did in those daies flourish in Italie) to come to his aide into Greece, assuring him, that Nicephorus being vanquished (the which by his meanes he presumed easily to do) he should afterward haue the command of Greece. Whereunto Robert being likewise perswaded by Pope Gregorie did agree, and raising his seege on a sodaine, came to Ottranto, where assembling and imbarking such forces as he needed, he did put to Sea, and with a faire winde he landed first at Auellona, and from thence comming to Durazzo, hee beseeged it byDurazz^ beseeged by the Normans. Sea and Land. Nicephorus sent Alexis with an Armie by Land, against Robert and the  Emperour Michael, to enforce him to raise the seege of Durazzo. This man obtained of Prince Siluio in the name of Nicephorus, that the Venetians should send a mightie Armie against the Normans. Some saie that Nicephorus obtained it by hisThe Venetians Armie succoreth Nicephorus. Ambassadours before Alexis comming, by meanes whereof the Venetian Prince, came with a mightie Armie against the Normans: and being come before Durazzo in the view of the enemie, he put his people in battaile, and without any long stay, came furiously against them. The enemies in like manner being puft vp with their former victories, did couragiously and without feare receiue the Venetian Gallies. The Enemies fought with such furie, as they seemed not alone to fight for the imperiall dignitie of one of their confederates, but likewise for their Countrie. The The Venetians victorious ouer the Normans. victorie was for a long time doubtfull: At the last the Norman Armie being broken, part of their ships taken, or sunck, and the rest fled, the victorious Venetian opened to those of Durazzo, the passage to Sea, which was before shut from them.

The end of the fourth Booke of the first Decade.




THE FIFTH BOOKE  OF THE FIRST DECAD OF THE HISTORIE Of Venice.

 The Contents of the fifth Booke of the first Decad.
THe Venetians are defeated by the Normans vnder Prince SILVIO in  a set battaile neere to Durazzo. The Emperour HENRIE comes to Venice. The miraculous appearing of Saint MARKES bodie, after it had beene a long time hid from his Citizens. Vpon what occasion all Christendome tooke the Crosse vpon them, and armed themselues against the Turks and Saracens. Pope VRBAN his Oration in the Councell of Clermont, exhorting all Christian Princes to recouer the holie Land. The voiage of the VLTRA-MONTANI into Asia. How vnlikely the Christians fought at the beginning in Bythinia. The Christians beseege Nicea: with their notable victorie obtained against a great number of Turkes. The taking of Iconium, Heraclea, with diuers other Cities, from the Infidels by the Christians. Antioch is taken by them after a long and painefull siege and sundrie incounters. The Venetians take Smirna. The dissensions and secret hatred betwixt BEAMOND, and RAYMOND, Earle of Saint Giles. And whatsoeuer was done in Phoenicia, is generally comprehended in this Booke.

THe raising of the siege of Durazzo on that side where the battaile was fought, brought no great commoditie to the Venetians: For Nicephorus being wholy vndone by the sodaine rebellion of his people; the Norman after hee had repaired his fleete returning to besiege Durazzo by Sea and Land, Michael and  Alexis (iointly possessing the Empire by meanes of Nicephorus ouerthrow) determined in the Venetians absence to succour the Citie, so that it is reported there was a cruell fight neere to the walles, and that the Greekes beeing vanquished, and one ofThe Greekes ouer throwne by the Normans before Durazzo. the companions of the Empire beeing slaine, Alexis saued himselfe by flight, by meanes whereof the Durassians beeing constrained to yeeld, became subiect to the enemies power. And not long afterwards the Venetians in the behalf of Alexis came against the Normans, almost in the verie same place where the first battaile was fought but the euent did much differ from the former. For the Venetians being The Venetians defeated. vanquished, receiued so notable a losse, as of all that great fleete which Siluio had brought with him a small number was saued: part being drowned, and the residue taken. This purchased the Prince great hatred and enuie: For, at his return to Venice, the people deposed him in the thirteenth yeare of his gouernment. Diuers do

confesse, that the Venetians and the Greekes were vanquished before the Port of Durazzo, but that the losse was not so great as wee haue said it was; but only that the battaile was very bloudy on either-^ide and that so soone as the Norman began to haue the better, Alexis fled on the left hand towardes Peloponesus, and Siluio on the right hand towardes Venice. They doe besides denie that hee was deposed from his gouernment; but that the two and twentieth, or as others say the three and twentieth yeare of his Principalitie, hee fortunately deceased and was honourablie buried in Saint Marks Church.



 VITALIS PHALERIO, the 32. Duke of Venice.





SIluio being dead, Vitalis Phalerio was with the generall consent chosen  in his sted. His first proposition was no lesse honorable than profitable for the Common-wealth. For so soone as hee was declared Prince, he propounded to the People to send Ambassadours to Constantinople, to the Emperour Alexis, to obtaine of him, that Dalmatia and Croatia, which they had taken from the vsurpers and purchased by right of warre, might for euer remaine to the Venetians. It was likely that the Emperour would easily grant their request, in regard of the kindnesse which he had lately receiued from them. The Ambassadours were Dominico Dandulo, Andrea Michaeli, and Iacomo Auro. But in sted of these, I finde in some Authors, Ciani Vitalis and Antonio. Alexis did freely graunt their requests, whereby the Venetians haue euer since byNew titles giuen to the Duke of Venice. iust title possessed Dalmatia and Croatia. And Phalerio was the first (according to some Annalists) who in his titles did beare these Prouinces. I finde likewise that about the same time the Greekes and the Venetians fought vnder Phalerio before Durazzo with Guiscard, but the issue thereof was as successelesse as vnder Siluio.
The Emperour Henrie came from Treuiso to Venice to visit Saint Markes Church, whose miraculous apparition was a little before diuulged euerie where. It isThe Emperour Henrie comes to Uenice. reported that for a time it was not known in what part of the Church his bones did rest, so as the co^mon people cryed out, that he had retired himselfe into some secret place, as though he meant to conceale himselfe from the peoples sight: whereupon the whole Citie being desirous to know his resting place, prayers and fasts were appointed  euery where; then diuers Bishops, being followed by the Clergie and people, came in procession to his Church, where it is reported, that after diuers prayers,Saint (...) (...) ap^. he did miraculously shew himselfe to his Citizens, by putting out of his armes

forth of the earth: and that then to the peoples great contentment, his body was taken vp, and carried to a more honorable place: and it was decreed that none but the Prince and the Procurators of the Church, should know his resting place; and it is thought that at the same time they dedicated a new Church vnto him, more rich and sumptuous than the former.
Phalerio did afterward repaire the Burrough of Lauretta decayed by antiquitie: and reducing it into the forme of a little Citie, he did enrich it with diuers liberties and priuiledges, to make it thereby the more to be inhabited. After he had made this reparation (we finde no other matter done by him abroad nor at home) hee departed this life, the twelfth, or (according to some) the thirteenth yeare of his  Principalitie.




 VITALIS MICHAELI, the 33. Duke of Venice.








VItalis Michaeli was chosen in his place. In his time and vnder his gouernment, a mighty Armie was sent into Siria for to recouer the Cities and places of the Holie land. But because wee know that the Venetians haue had share in diuers great exploits executed by the Christians in Asia: I haue thought it not impertinent to touch briefly in order what was done there, to the end that by that which shall be set downe, it may be easily knowne what the Venetians did in that iourney.Who was the Author of the warre against the Turkes.
The Author then of this warre (as some write) was a French Hermit, named Peter, who going on pilgrimage to the Sepulcher of our Lord Iesus Christ, did vnderstand of Simeon Bishop of Ierusalem, and of other Christians who were there in small number, in what distres and miserable seruitude this holie Land, where the Sauiour of the world did redeeme vs, was held by the cruell Mahometists: That there was no place in the same, how holie or religious soeuer it were, which that abhominable Nation had not till then, defiled and contaminated, by thefts, murthers, and adulteries, adding therewithall the scourges, torments, and wrongs, which those who professed Christianitie did endure, who were of necessitie either to goe from thence, or resolue to dye there miserably. To this was ioyned a great miracle:A wonderfull vision hapned to Peter the Hermit. How that vpon Easter euen about mid-night, it seemed vnto Peter in his sleep, that Iesus Christ did call vnto him, inioyning him so soone as he should arriue in Italie, he should tell the Pope, and afterwards, all the other Princes of France and Germanie, that it would be pleasing vnto him, and that he did commaund them

tred Italie with great furie. A verie great multitude of them leauing Scithia at that time, would staie in no place, til they had first seene how their friends and kindsfolke in Hungarie fared. These men by continuall frequentation with the Italians, being accustomed to the iournies of Italie, had for the most part changed their naturall crueltie and manner of life: by meanes whereof waxing more ciuill, they were driuen from the places which they had gotten by right of warre, by those that cameCiuill warre betwixt the Huns. after them. The crueltie of this Nation is reported to be such, as after that they had been in Hungarie, they abstained not from eating humane flesh after their countrie manner; who forthwith tooke vpon them the names of those whom they had driuen thence, and were called Hungarians. Those which were expulsed, were likewise  in times past called Huns, aswell as the latter; And being come into Hungarie in the daies of Attila, they were afterward named Bauarians, then Huns; and certaine letters being taken awaie from both names, it was made but one.
These then after diuers warlike actions done as well in France as Germanie, after they had vanquished Lewis king of Germanie, and made him tributarie, carryingLewis King of Germanie, Tributarie to the Huns. great store of bootie home with them, being proude of so good successe, resolued to make attempts on Italie; hauing perhaps vnderstood that they were at strife among themselues. By meanes whereof comming first into Misia, they defeated the Princes of the same in a bloudie battaile, and made them tributarie. Departing thence, vpon report that they determined to inuade Italie: Berengarius, who at the  same time held the Roman Empire, marched against them with fifteene thousand men, and they fought verie furiously vpon the confines of Italie, where BerengariusBerengarius defeated by the Huns. being ouercome, fledde from the battaile with the losse of the greatest patt of his forces.
The Hunnes became more hauty after this victorie, and they entred Italie the neerest waie, putting all they met with to fire and sword; and comming to TreuisoTreuiso taken by the Huns. they tooke and spoiled it. From thence determining to goe to Milan, the report of the great wealth of the Venetians which began at the same time to be verie famous ouer all Italie was the cause, that on a sodaine they turned all their forces vpon the Venetians. They speedily made a great number of small light boates; which  they couered (as it is reported) with leather, by reason that they were grossely made, and of a thicke substance. In these the Barbarians embarqued themselues, and assailed Villa-noua (so was the ancient Heraclia called, after it was reedified) which, beeing taken at the first assault, they burnt downe to the ground. From thence marching to Equiline and Iesulune* they destroied them in the same manner. Then pursuing the course of their victories all along the Sea-coast, they spoiled Chioggia and Capodarger, and afterward burnt them. At the last they resolued toThe Huns assaile the Citie of Venice. assaile Rialto. The feare, which then fell vpon the Venetians, was not like to that which possessed them in the time of the French-mens warres. For this terror was much greater then the other. They fought with the French for their libertie. They must fight with these men for the safetie of their liues. Those, albeit they were enemies, had in them some sparkes of pietie and Religion. The Huns did not only contemne godlinesse but all humanitie; for they did not spare the dead carkases, butThe great crueltie of the Huns. like brute beasts they tare them in pieces and deuoured them. The euill disposition of this Nation had at the first report so terrified all people of each sex and age, as they did not alone bewaile the losse of their libertie; but their liues likewise. But (as it oftentimes hapneth) this despaire of theirs was conuerted into furie, and this furie into a desire of reuenge; or if that could not be effected, to die valiantly. This desire gaue them hope to vanquish the Barbarians, if they should attempt to hazard the fight.
It is to be supposed (for we cannot certainely affirme it) That the Venetians wereExhortation to the Venetians. sodainely encouraged by some, by this manner of speech. That it was now time for them by their actions to shew themselues valiant men; That a mightie danger did not onely threaten their Countrie, but their liues; That they had to doe with a kinde of people, who as little vsed

to spare the bodies of the dead, as their liues in battaile. But yet neuerthelesse they were not made of ^ron, but their bodies might easily be pierced. That they should call to memorie how the ancient Venetians with a few inhabitants of the Latines, made no difficultie in their Countries behalfe to expose their liues before the walles of Aquileia, against three hundred thousand men; (for Attila had so many in his Armie) That the euent of that battailc did manifest, how much vertue and courage is better in warre than great multitudes: But it may be that some will tearme them rash and inconsiderate for their attempt, in daring to assaile the enemie with that sort of fight, wherein he was most expert: whereas on the contrarie, they should rather haue fought with them at Sea, or in the Lakes, knowne better to them than to the Barbarians: (then which, he said, nothing could bee more acceptable to the Venetians, who from their youth are accustomed to the Sea) than in such a place where their valour might be most apparent. Moreouer, that the enemies had neither the skill, (...) shippes, fit for that purpose. That their Ancestors had in the same places, where they were now to fight, vanquished in times past King Pepin, followed with his owne forces, and with those of the Emperour his father: And that they onely fought for their libertie: whereas now, the danger of their liues did constraine them to defend themselues brauely. Now, in regard that if they were ouercome, they were sure to die, he could not thinke that there was anie Cittizen so base or recreant but would rather choose to dye valliantly with his sword in his hand, then by yeelding, to loose all he had, and to haue his throte cut, like a Sheepe, by a barbarous and cruell enemie. He said, That the strength and magnanimitie of the Cittizens were such, as they were not onely sufficient to rebate the edges of the Hunnes swords who threatned them; but to free their Countrie likewise from so wearisome a siege.The (...) constant resolution.
Being animated by these, or such like exhortations, they became couragious. For it were follie to imagine that a multitude of people, being amazed with the feare of their enemies, could be encouraged without some vehement Oration, full of perswasiue speeches. All men, after that, ran to arme themselues, not onely to defend their libertie, but likewise, or rather, to preserue the safetie of their liues. The enemies in the meane space hasted towards Rialto. The Venetians imbarqued in their wel-armed vessels, and fit for the fight, met with them neere to Albiola. The fight at the beginning was verie cruell.
The attempts of the Hunnes were diuers; who relying on their great numbers,Battaile betwix^ the Venetians and the Hunnes. assailed them in sundrie places at once. The Venetians euerie where opposing themselues against them, did brauely resist their assaults: They fought sundrie daies without any likely-hood of victorie to either side. But at the last, both partes ioyning their whole forces, the Barbarians were broken and defeated, and dispersing their troopes, fledde farre from thence, leauing to the Venetians a most famous victorie. The enemies (as some report) beeing soone after wonne by the rewards of Berengarius, departed out of Italie.
The Venetians grew famous, by gaining this victorie neere to Albiola. All men said that the Venetians had abated the furie of the Hunnes; vnto whom Berengarius (a valliant and mightie Prince, by reason of the Empire of Italie) had giuenThe Venetians ouercome the Hunnes. Great praise g^uen to the Duke. place. Hee did likewise greatly praise the absent Duke, by whose meanes and vnder whom all was done. It is to bee supposed, that the Duke Tribuno did at that time fortifie the Citie with a wall and chaine; and not for feare of the Pirates: the which certaine Historians doe likewise affirme.

to take by force that Countrie out of the Infidels hands, wherein for the Saluation of mankinde it was his pleasure to be borne, and to die, where diuers and great tokens of his humanitie were yet to be seen: witnesse the little house wherein he was borne; the Temple, where being a childe he wept, and growne bigger had disputed, and at last being become a man had taught; The mounts of Thabor and Oliuet; this a place of praier; and that of his transfiguration; Pilats Pretorium; mount Caluarie, where his crosse was set vp; and his Sepulcher not farre from thence.
Peter being returned into Italie, had no other thought but to goe to Pope Vrban,Peter tells his message to the Pope. vnto whom hauing deliuered his message, hee passed the mounts, and went to the other Christian Princes. In the meane space that hee in a manner ranne ouer all Europe, he forgat not by the way to exhort all men in his sermons to vndertake this holie voiage. But Pope Vrban comming soon after to the Councell of Clermontin AuuergneThe Pope comes to the Councell of Clermont in Auuergne. treated of this matter with a verie vehement Oration: the substance whereof was thus.




Pope Vrban his Oration.
THat he was not departed from Rome, and come to that holy assemblie for the affaires of the Church of Rome only, albeit it greatly needed to bee reformed, but was stirred vp by another occasion, the which, as more holie, was likewisemore notable: That he did not doubt, but that those there assembled had heard tell of what had be fallen long since in Siria, and chiefely in the confines of that Region which is commonly called the Holy Land: The vniust vsurpation of the Sepulcher of our Soueraigne Lord Iesus Christ (the which he could not vtter without teares) by those cruell barbarous Saracens; that there was no Church, Altar, or any other sacred place, but wasThe crueltie of the Mahometans. either razed downe to the groundby those cursed Mahometans, or conuerted to their prophane vses: that the Religious people dwelling there at such time as those enemies made themselues masters thereof, were constrained, some for feare of horrible punishment, to renounce the faith of Iesus Christ, and others that would perseuer therein, were by sword and fier, and other sorts of torments miserably consumed: That deuout Matrons going thither on pilgrimage from all parts almost of Europe, had not beene onely forced by them to satiate their brutishlust, but likewise in contempt and derision of vs, tormented by monstrous embracements: That if that which he had related was not in their opinions sufficient to cause them to take Armes, and to prosecute reuenge, He besought them at least to consider, and call to remembrance, how thatin a short time through the negligence of their Ancestors, the forces of Asia were encreased; and besides, how farre the Mahometans had in length and breadth extended their Dominions: How manie Countries they possessed, which did in times past belong to the Roman Empire. But would to God (said he) that the affaires of Christendome were brought to that passe, that we were but to complaine and bewaile other mens miseries. We haue (alas) seene in our daies Italie, wholly destroied by their spoiles and incursions; Castles, Cities and Churches beaten downe, and burnt by those Sacrilegious persons. But wherefore doe I relate the murthers, imprisonments, rapes, and so manie other matters neuer almost heard of, which this Land hath endured along time: seeing that Spaine likewise, and her neighbour Aquitaine, and all the Occidentall Prouinces, haue not only felt the like losse, but hauing at this daie scarce dried vp their teares, doe stand in feare of the like. And ye (...) Frenchmen (said he) albeit that this wound is not yet entred into your bowels; no doubt, but in regard of your neighbour-hood, you haue heard and seene likewise some-what of that, whereof I haue now spoken. And the Germans, and other Westerne Nations, who haue not as yet felt these losses, ought often to forethinke what dangers menace them from the East, nay rather, how neere they are to them already. I know not (said he) if the Venetians were not, (who with strong Garrisons defend the Sea-coasts, and who haue often repulsed this cruell enemie from Histria and Dalmatia) whether this storme would (ere this) haue beene blowne euen into Hungarie and Germanie. The power of the Grecian Empire, which whilst her strength and vigour lasted, was wont to be the Bu^varke of Europe on the East and West side, is in such sort ruined,

as the Emperour dreames on nothing but on meanes and forces whereby he may conserue his Citie of Constantinople; which place if we had lost (as God forbid) we may easily coniecture how great such a losse would be, as well to Europe as to him. I tremble with horror, when I doe but thinke what will happen, if this fier be not quickly quenched, which (...) doth more and more kindle. All the miseries, which those haue felt whom we bewaile, hang ouer our heads. Men and women shall be reserued to satisfie the luxurie of those barbarous people: and ye will hereafter lament, when it will be too late, that hauing had meanes, you haue not opposed your selues against these miseries. It may be you thinke, that this cannot come to passe. No more did they who haue since felt it. And would to God wee did not so often feede our selues with vaine hope. But it were better (o couragious spirits) whilst we haue strength, counsell, aide, power, and monie readie, and generally whatsoeur may giue hope of a victorie, to diuert this euident perill from vs. Nor is our enterprise aboue humane strength. That Charles, surnamed the Great, in a manner your Countriman, (o ye Germans) in regardWhat Charlemaine did against the Infidels. of the descent of his Ancestors, and your king (o Frenchmen) and the glorie of your name, did driue the Saracens forth of Spaine and Aquitaine: The same Charles constrained them to leaue Italie. The (...) Charles (of whom yee so much vaunt) did recouer Ierusalem which ye terme Holie, and draue thence the enemies: And by how much his glorie and reputation is great: by so much the more ought it to incite you which are descended from him, to attempt some new exploit which may augment this your ancient renowne. If ye do not thus* but giue your selues to rest and idlenesse, yee shall not only hazard what your Ancestors haue left you, but you shall suffer the natiue Countrie of our soueraigne king, to your great shame and contempt, with that of all Christendome likewise, to bee trodden downe by these cruell enemies; and his Sepulcher, Temple, and other holie places to be polluted by murthers, rapes, and sacri^edges. Arme your selues then in time rather, and deface this common infamie: Purchase to your selues and to all Europe assured safetie. I thinke you may easily doe it. For by how much your forces surpasse those of Charles (If ye all iointly vndertake this voiage) by so much more shall the victorie be certaine and easie for you. The victors profit shall be great and inestimable, by the spoiles of so opulent a Nation, and such rich kingdomes: But the Celestiall reward shall be much greater, the which in the name of Almightie God, we promise to as many as shall fight valiantly.




It is reported that when the Pope had ended his speech, the whole assembly criedThe Assemblies answer^ to the Pope. out, that it was Gods will to haue it so: Then the Pope hauing commaunded silence, replied. Goe then (quoth hee) yee generous spirits, and let that which ye haue all, with one accord, now spoken, bee your watch-word in this warre, and let as many as meane to vndertake this iourney, sew a Crosse of red cloath on the right side of their garments. They report a very admirable matter, the which I should hardly set downe, were it not for the assurance that we haue, that God dothAn admirable matter. euer assist holy enterprises; Which is, that the same day that the warre was resolued vpon at Clermont, it was knowne and diuulged to the farthest Regions of the earth.
But whilest Pope Vrban and the rest did labour about the choice of a Captaine in the assembly, the which besides other matters had giuen great hope to all men, and that this businesse had kept them there certaine dayes: it is reported, that diuers thousands of men affecting this new warre came thither: And that soone after,The number of those who at the same time tooke the Croisado. three hundered thousand armed men were in a readinesse to march.
The leaders to these great numbers of Christians, were Godfry of Bouillon, Eustace, and Baldwin his brethren, Raymond Earle of Saint Giles, and Robert Earle of Flaunders,The chiefe commanders. Hugh, sirnamed the great, brother to Phillip the French King, Stephen Earle of Chartres, the Bishop of Puy, and Peter the Hermit the Author of this enterprise.
This man, because hee would bee seene to haue some cheife commaund in this  warre, came with Baldwin and his brethren, through Germanie, Hungarie, and Thrace, to Constantinople, accompanied with troops of souldiers. The Bishop of Puy, Raymond, Hugh the great, passed into Italie with greater forces; and came to Rome to visit the Pope. From whence they departed in three troopes. The one

marched directly to Brundusium, the other to Barri, and the third to Ottranto. But Beamond sonne to Guiscard a valliant Prince, being incited before by the reportTheir sundrie p^ssadges. of this gallant enterprise, did ioyne his forces with those which passed through Apulia.
Whilest the troopes which were in Italie made themselues ready to march, Peter the Hermit, who was arriued at Constantinople with the three brethren of Bouillon, so soone as he had crossed the Bosphorus of Thrace, the next and shortest way, he passed ouer his troopes into Asia; which the Emperor Alexis (as it is reported) did soone enforce him to doe, in regard his souldiers obserued no martiall discipline, but gaue themselues licentiously to all manner of euill. The which,Peter the Hermite, ignorant of Martiall discipline. Alexis with others did impute wholly to the Hermit, being altogether ignorant of martiall discipline and vnworthie to haue any command; by meanes whereof diuers did report that the Emperour caused Peter, whether he would or no, to depart formost into Asia, where his Army soone after marched towards Nicomedia and Nicea.
But because it did manifestly appeare, that vnlesse some other besides the Hermit, (who was more religious than martiall) did take charge of the Armie, it was likely at the verie first encounter to fall into great danger: they chose RaymondRaymond a German chosen in the Hermits sted a German by nation, and a verie warlike person, for their Generall. By the which election we may easily coniecture, that the brethren of Bouillon came not with Peter to Constantinople: or if they did come, after the Hermit was gone into Asia, they remained with the the Emperour Alexis, till the rest of the forces were arriued.
The Sarracens, who had beene aduertised of the resolution of the CouncellThe Infidels aduertised of the Christians enterprise. held in France, and of whatsoeuer the Christian Princes had since then enterprised in this warre; did determine by Ambush to surprise those who should first come into Asia; to kill them; and then to resist the passage of the rest ouer the Bosphorus of Thrace. Raymond hauing marched on the Territorie of Nicea, without sending forth his discouerers, fell into Ambuscado, and retired with great losse of his people to the Citie of Exorga. This place had beene of set purpose abandoned by the enemie: who so soone as they perceiued the Germaine to be within the Towne, came sodainly and besieged it on euery side. Raymond being wearied with that long siege,Raymond flies to the enemie. of a Captaine became a fugitiue, and with certaine others went to the enemies side. The Citie after that was valiantly defended for a time, but at the last the enemie tooke it; and the most of those who were within it hauing beene tormented with hunger, thirst, and infinite other miseries, were put to death, either by the sword, or by some other accident of warre; all those which yeelded, were likewise put to the edge of the sword. The Hermit in the meane time seized on the Citie of Cynita, which was forsaken by the inhabitants; and hauing fortified it with those few forces which hee had, hee ioyned himselfe with the troopes, at such time as his Countrimen arriued.
Whilest these things were done in Bythinia, Hugo the Norman, the Earles ofThe French arriue at Constantinople. Flaunders and of Chartres, departed from Barri, and with a faire wind arriued at Durazzo. Then at the intreatie of the Gouernour of Dalmatia in the name of the Emperour Alexis, they marched in bands, and at sundrie times, to Constantinople, for feare least so great an Armie marching all together should spoile the Countrie: whither being come, as into a place of safetie, it is reported that AlexisAlexis practiseth ^reacherie. did lay snares for them; as one who from the beginning had greatly suspected their enterprise. But being reconciled to Baldwin, Godfrey and the rest, The Bishop of P^y and Raymond did arriue, who had conducted their troopes through Dalmatia, Albania, Macedon and Thrace.
Beamond, who for his fathers and his owne particular enmitie with Alexis, thought not himselfe safe if he should come into Greece, sailed with a direct course from Brundusium into Morea; and from thence marching in battaile (as if he had

beene to fights, through the higher Misia and Thrace, to auoide the trappes of Alexis, and came into Asia sooner than hee was expected; where after he had taken a Citie of the Hereticks; spoiled and ouerthrowne it; and being come to the banks of the riuer Barbara, he caused part of his forces to passe ouer at a foord, and kept the residue with himselfe. But the morrow after by breake of day, Alexis forcesBeamond ass^yled by Alexis Subiects. being come to assaile those troopes that were gone ouer the riuer, they did greatly amaze them at the first, and had vndoubtedly much endangered them, if Beamond had not speedily come to their reskue with two thousand horse, which he had ready fot the same purpose; at whose comming, the Greekes retired themselues. And by this meanes Beamond perceiuing that there was no place free from the ambushes  of Alexis, he resolued still to march in order of battaile. But the Emperour, after he had in vaine made all these attempts, thought it his best course to make anAlexis and Beamond reconciled attonement with him, and to that end sent his Ambassadours to him, laying all that was past vpon the malice of certaine people desirous of spoile.
It is reported that Alexis did afterward more esteeme of Beamond than of all the rest of the Princes and Captaines of the Armie, whereunto the meekenesse and courtesie of the Norman did incite him, so as after his comming to Constantinople, he did so farre insinuate himselfe into the Emperous fauour, as he freely promised him to furnish the Armie with new succours, horses, garments, weapons and all other necessaries. But yet neuerthelesse, because he would seeme to haue  care of his owne affaires, he said, that his meaning was to performe his promise; prouided, that the Captaines would promise and sweare, not to attempt any thingA new agreement betwixt Alexis and the Christia^ Princes. against himselfe, his State, and subiects; and that all the Cities which they should take in Asia (Hierusalem excepted) should be reduced vnder the gouernment of the Grecian Empire. This thus conluded: the whole troopes were forthwith transported into Asia; Beamond only with certaine others remained with Alexis, to further the dispatch of victualls and other necessaries. The Captaines in the meane time being come to Nicomedia, so soone as they had vnited their forces, resolued first of all to assaile Nicea. Wherefore dislodging thence, they came through forrests, and by-wayes before the Citie; and the siege was planted before  Beamonds arriuall at the Campe, by reason of his long staie about the sending away of victualls and other necessaries.
At his arriuall, Nicea, the cheife Citie of Bithynia, (called at first Antigona, byNicea besieged. Antigonus her founder, and since then, Nicea by Lysimachus, in fauour of his wife) was assailed in three seuerall places. This Citie was reasonably strong by situation, and much more by arte, being compassed about with verie high and thicke walles, the towers builded foure-square: the fourth part whereof towards the South is watred with the lake Ascania. They forthwith erected enginnes of batterie, and woodden Castles of the iust height of the Citie walles. Then they brought thither the ramme, and other warlicke engines. They did likewise vse the mine. The Citie, besides a great number of inhabitants, had likewise store of armed souldiers in garison, and euery day new supplies came to them by the lake in theirThe strength of Nicea. steades that had beene slaine or hurt: So as they were sure that whilest the passage of the lake should remaine open, Nicea could neuer bee taken. Wherefore it was concluded, for the hindering of the enemies passage, to send to the Emperour Alexis, and to entreate him, that with a certaine number of shippes hee would shut vp the lake from the enemies. Alexis fulfilled their request, but not sodainely.Sixtie thousand Turkes come to succour the Towne. For whilest he made readie his shippes, threescore thousand Turkes, with certaine troopes of Sarracens, came and incamped on the hilles next to the Citie, whereof they sodainely aduertised the besieged by the lake, which was not yet shut from  them, to the end that on a day prefixed they should make a sallie on the Christians, on the same side as they should on a sodaine assaile their Campe. The alarum began in the Bishop of Puy his quarter, who was encamped on the East-side, where the French did not onely with great valour receiue the enemies forces, but running

all the rest, they seized on the towne of Soccor, by meanes of certaine Christians that were within it, where they remained till such a time as the souldiers had made prouision of victualls for fiue dayes. But being departed from thence, so soone as they had surprised the Citie of Sura, and the Forte of the Imposts, with certaine otherSura. small townes in the Territorie of Sura, they laboured by a very streight pathThe Forte of the Imposts. to ascend the top of Mount Taurus.
This way, which was but a dayes iournie, was no lesse dangerous than painfull.A very dangerous way. It was verie narrow by reason of the flint-stones, and sharpe rockes which hem'd it in on the one side, and with a very deepe vally on the other, which was of so fearefull a depth, as it did amaze the beholders: the troopes were a whole day passing  this way not without the great care and heede of the Captaines, and the greatest part thereof they went on foote. There was none so hardie in the whole Armie as durst ascend those steepe places on horsebacke, but they threw their cloakes and baggage on their horsebacks for to make themselues more apt and disposed, to ouercome the danger of the way. It is reported that the same day diuers sumpterhorses, which were loden, fell head-long downe into the valley; some of them by chance; and some likewise were throwne downe of purpose, by those, who saw no possibilitie to bring them vp to the top of the hill.
Hauing passed these mountainous streights, they came to the Citie of Murasis which forthwith yeelded vnto them. From thence they discouered such huge and Murasis. spatious plaines, as their sight was dazeled with beholding them. In the middest of that plaine they espied Antioch, whither all the Captaines ment to march, and to besiege it. Being come downe into the valley they descried the enemies a farre off vpon a Riuers side, which runnes ouerthwart the plaine. These men were sent byA luckie euent for the Christia^s. the King of Antioch, to conuey the victualls, which was to come to the Citie from the mountaines. Against these were certaine light horse sent, who at the first charge brake and defeated them, part of whome being slaine, the rest fled to the Citie. There were taken the same day, a great number of sumpter-horses, and great quantitie of victuals, which as most necessarie were brought to the Armie to the great content of the victorious. They came afterwards to the riuer neare to Antioch, the which by the inhabitants is (as they say) named Farfar. But we know for a certaine that the Riuer Orontes watereth the Citie of Antioch. Whereby wee may not only doubt of the riuers name, but likewise which Antioch these modernes did meane; were it not that the fame of the Citie is so great, as it will easily bring vs forth of the Historians darknesse. For there is an Antioch in Pamphilia, neighbourWhat Antioch the Christians did besiege. to Seleucia; and an other more excellent than that in Phenicia, builded* by Seleucus Nicanor, sonne to Antiochus surnamed Ephiphanes, through the which runs the riuer Orontes. Towards this then marched Beamond, Hugo, and the rest, and vnderstood by certaine prisoners that Cassianus was King of this Citie, and Tributarie to the King of Babilon: who vpon this occasion had sent diuers thousands of men to  guard the Citie, who were esteemed so strong and valiant, as none in a manner durst fight with them; much lesse attend them.
The commaunders were not amazed at these speeches. Chiefly Beamond whoBeamond giues the first assault to the Citie of Antioch. conducted fiue legions, did the next morrow by breake of day march directly towards the Citie, where he did fiercely assaile the enemies, who were vnder the walles in order of battaile. But the neerenesse of the walles and their other munitions, which constrained the assailants to retire, was the cause that both sides did not fight with all their forces; by reason whereof this fight was made rather in hast, than otherwise. But how light soeuer it was, it lasted euen till night, at which time Beamond retired to his fellowes. After that, they made a bridge vpon the riuer, which  was directly betweene the Citie and their Campe: and they incamped in such sort, as it was besieged on all sides, sauing on the part next to the mountaines, from whence they perceiued no possibilitie to free themselues from the enemies incursions.
The Citie of Antioch is circled with a double wall, The inmost is of bricke, and

the other of great square stone, with foure hundred and threescore towers, with a Citadell on the East side thereof so strongly fortified, as it did not feare the assaults of the enemies. There was besides not farre off a lake abounding in fish, and meruailous fruitfull plaines, watred with riuers and fountaines, twelue miles distant from the Sea of Cilicia. It is reported that Saint Peter in the Churchs infancie didAntioch Saint Peters first Seate there establish his See, which did afterward greatly illustrate the Citie.
The Campe at the first wanted no victualls: for ripe grapes hung on the vines: and the whole Armie was a long time fed with great store of corne, found in wellsA boundance of (...) at the beginning of the siege. where the Countrimen did vse to hide their graine, and besides they brought at times great store of cattell to the Campe, taken stragling in the neighbour vallies by  meanes of certaine Armenians, Christians by profession, inhabiting the tops of the neighbour-mountaines, who for that they had constantly perseuered in Christian religion, after Hierusalem was taken by the Sarracens in the time of the Emperour Heracleus, could neuer since obtaine of the cursed enemie a dwelling place, vntill at the last Carpharat the Egyptian, permitted the Bishop and a few with him to inhabit the fourth part of the Citie, neare to the holy sepulcher; paying a certaine yearely tribute. But being driuen forth of Hierusalem, vpon the report of the Christians comming into Asia, they retired themselues into the mountaines neare to Antioch.
Now whilest the French-men and Germans performed these warlike exploits in The Venetians fle^t. Asia, the Venetians (I know not whether of their owne proper motion, or incited at the intreatie of the Pope and the Emperour Alexis,) sent a greater Armie than euer yet they had done, into Ionia: the which I finde to be of two hundred vessels of all sorts, and vnder the conduct of Henrico Contareni Bishop of the Castle, and Michaeli Vitalis the Dukes sonne.
Some neuerthelesse doe affirme, that the Venetians came not into Asia, till Hierusalem was taken. But I cannot beleeue, that a Nation so mightie at Sea as were the Venetians, would be idle during these great stirres in Asia and Europe; especially at such a time when as they might perceiue all the Sea-coasts from Hellespont euen to Pelusium, at the mouth of Nilus, to be exposed for a prey: the which in  a short time, with neuer so little labour, they might easily take from the Mahometans. The Venetians being come to Rhodes: it is reported that they fell at words with the Pisans, who were likewise arriued in the Hauen with a great Fleet;The Venetians defeate the Pisans at Rhodes. and falling from words to blowes, they fought on either side like enemies. But the Venetians getting the vpper hand tooke eighteene Gallies from the Pisans wherein were foure thousand men. It is not knowne wherefore, nor vpon what occasion the Pisans durst buckle with the Venetians, seeing they were mightier than they: but hauing taken them, because they perceiued them to weare redde Crosses, they sent them and their vesselles away, detaining thirtie of the chiefest Gentlemen among them for hostages. From thence they sailed with a faire wind into Ionia, where at their first arriuall they tooke Smyrna vnprouided of a Garrison. FromThe Venetians take Smyrna. whence it is said, that the bodie of Saint Nicholas was brought to Venice, and laid in the Church, dedicated vnto him, on the shoare.
This is all which some report the Venetians did in their first iourney. But others doe set downe, after the taking of Smyrna, all that which they did in Syria, which is not impertinent. For whilest their Fleete was preparing at Venice, they tooke in fresh supplies in Dalmatia, and came first to Rhodes; then to Ionia where they tooke Smyrna; and afterwards they scoured the Seas of Pamphilia, Cilicia, and Syria. The Citie of Antioch being taken, the French Captaines did not onely besiege Hierusalem, but tooke it with ease. For it is certaine, that the Venetians, departing  from the Hauen of Ioppa, from whence they had driuen the enemies Armie, at the Princes first arriuall in Syria, came to Hierusalem, and then besieged the places round about. But wee will hereafter make mention of that which they did in Syria.
The siege of Antioch in the meane time was no lesse long than painefull, hauingThe length of the siege of Antioch with the want in the Armie. for the space of nine moneths greatly weakened all the forces of Europe. For they were at times tormented with famine euen with all extremitie; so as besides the common Soldiours, diuerse likewise of the chiefe, not being able to endure so great scarcitie, sought manie times to flie thence, among whom were Peter the Hermit, William Carpenter issued of Royall bloud, and Tancred cousin to Beamond; who being shamefully reprehended in the middest of their flight for abandoning theThe complaints of the Christians before Antioch. Armie, were constrained to take new oathes. There was likewise great complaints made against the Captains for bringing out of the west al the flower of Christendom to die in the East by famine before the walles of Antioch; That there was no kind of  meate how vile and filthie soeuer, wherewith the miserable Soldiours had not till then fed themselues. They said moreouer that it hehooued them to leaue the Armie and those wilfull Captaines: For if they had had any care of them or their safetie, they would ere then haue ledde them from thence into some other farre place, or* if they were so pleased, to engage them in some dangerous fight* saying that in regard of the miseries they sustained, they had rather marche to some battaile where they were sure to dye honorably with their weapons in hand, than idly to perish through famine like wretched Slaues.
Beamond his authoritie (whose vertue and experience in warre according to theHow great Beamond his authoritie was. saying of as many as haue written of him, had purchased to him selfe aboue all the  other Captaines of the Armie a marueilous reputation) did with a gentle exhortatation proffit verie much for the appeasing of this tumult, who gaue the Soldiours hope of better fortune. But the famine neuerthelesse continuing, diuers thought on fit meanes how to escape it. And, without doubt, they would all of them at last haue disbanded, had it not beene for the sodaine newes that was brought, how that the enemies Armie was neere at hand, with whom they were not onely to fight for the maintenance of the siege, but for the safetie of their liues: That now the time was come when the flower and choise of all Europe should in the view of Antioch either dye fighting valliantly, if the enemies obtained the victorie, or else open the way to free themselues from famine and other miseries, which they had  till then endured. At these fearefull newes the French were so farre from being amazed, as the whole Campe on the contrarie cryed out, that they would presentlyHow glad the Armie was to fight to free themselues from famine. to the battaile; saying that it were better to dye at once if they could not winne the (...), than hourely to endure those miseries which were farre worse than death.
They were then at the same instant conducted against the enemie, and the fight being begunne in the view of the Citie, they cruelly fought on either side: the victorie for certaine houres space remaining doubtfull. But at last the enemies beeingThe enemies that came to the succour of Antioch are defeated. broken and put to flight, with the losse of halfe their forces, they left a glorious victorie to the Christians. And this was not the first time onely that they fought  with the enemies during the siege, but at diuers other times also as occasion serued; And some times both sides fought in set battaile, whereby their famine was often times by the enemies victuailes releeued.
In the end by the treacherie of Pyrrhus, one of the chiefest men of Antioch, (whoTreacherie of a Citizen of Antioch. being drawne by the great fame of Beamond, would be knowne in fauour of him to haue done such a deede) the Citie was taken by night, the ninth moneth after it was besieged: The King, vnderstanding by that nightly tumult that the enemie was entred,The taking of Antioch. going forth of the Citie at a Posterne gate, saued himselfe in the neighbour mountaines: But being fearefull and amazed, not keeping the beaten wayes, butThe death of KIng Cassianus. wandring through woods and groues neere to the Citie, the Armenians, who inhabited  those places (as hath beene said) met him and slew him.
Not long after the taking of Antioch, there was neere vnto the Citie a fiereer fight than at any time before, fought betwixt the Christians and Corbanes, Lieuetenant to the King of Persia, and Sensadolus, sonne to Cassian; where it is reported that

an hundred thousand fighting men of the enemies were slaine vpon the place, and that, besides the horse and other beasts of carriage, fifteene thousand Camels were taken.
The Captaine of the Castle of Antioch, who till then had brauely defended theWhy Alexis refused Antioch place, being moued with this happie victorie of ours, yeelded it to Beamond. It is reported that the Citie being by the generall consent offered to Alexis by Hugo, surnamed the great, sent for the same purpose to Constantinople, was vpon his refusall thereof, by the aduise of all men (except of Raymond Earle of Saint Gylles who alone opposed himselfe against it) giuen to Beamond. They say likewise, that (...), the day before he committed the treason, had agreed with the Captaines  of the Armie that it should be so. The common rumor was, that Alexis knowing in his owne conscience, that he had delt perfidiously with the French and Germans, refused to accept their bountie, fearing some deceit to bee couched in their offer: perceiuing very well, that they did iustly suspect him for not obseruing the agreement made betwixt them. For he had neuer succoured them with victuals or ought else, notwithstanding that they had oftentimes sent vnto him in their greatest miseries. Antioch being adiudged to the Norman, the Armie dislodged the fourth monethRugia. Albaria. after the yeelding thereof, and march ed first to Rugia, and from thence to Albaria. This place did somewhat hold backe the happie successe of their affaires by reason of a long siege. At the last, the Walles being beaten downe with the Ram, Albaria was taken by assault, and all that were within it were cut in pieces, except a few whom Beamond saued.A great quarrell betwixt Beamond and the Earle of Saint Gyles.
There grew in the same place a quarrell betwixt the Earle of Saint Gylles and the Norman, who returned with all his troupes to Antioch: The other Captaines wintered; some at Albaria, and some at Rugia. Beamond being requested to come where they wintered, meanes was made to reconcile him to the Earle of S. Gylles; but the one would in no sort leaue his stubburnnesse, nor the other diminish his authoritie: and each of them hauing vsed words, sauouring not onely of emulation, but of hatred and wrath, they were ready to haue come to strokes, had not Beamond, fearing that by his meanes the (...), (which he sought by all meanes to (...)) (...) to (...) (...) (...) backe to Antioch: He (...) followed in maner of a faction, by (...) (...) (...) and by the Earle of Flanders.
The Winter was spent in certaine light ^ttempts, (...) (...), and hisTripoli besicged by the Christia^s. followers: But at the beginning of the Spring ((...) (...) place towards the East are exceeding hot) the Armie began to march. (They (...) (...) and in the valley neere to the C^tie of Camella, in regard it was (...) day; resoluing at their departure thence to make Warre on the King of (...) in) (...) behalfe of Raymond.Tortosa. For he determined to haue that Kingdome either by (...) policie: Therefore they laide siege to Tripoly; but striuing in valne by (...) of the strength thereof, they diuided the Armie into two parts: the E^rle of (...) continuing the siege with the one, whilst Raymond ma^ched with the other to Tortosa. Beamond likewise, Godfrey and the Earle of Flaunders departed at the same time from Antioch. But vnderstanding that Raymond was become more au^acious, by reason of his exploits done in winter: and foreseeing the (...) (...) which Christendome would receiue if they should fight one with another* Beamond with his troopes returned to Antioch. Godfrey in the meane time and the Earle of Flaunders came and besiegedGibella. Gibella a most rich Citie, and soone after tooke it. From thence they marched to Tortosa, vnderstanding that their fellowes were in great danger by reason of their small number. The Earle of Chartres being sent for likewise by Raymond, came thither. And so these three Armies ioyning togehter, Tortosa was more streigthly besieged. But after they had beene three moneths before it to no purposeAgrement made with the King of Tripoly. at all, leauing the enterprise vnfinished, they dislodged, and making peace with the King of Tripoli vpon more easie conditions than the former which they

propounded to him, being furnished by him with weapons, cloathes, money and victualls, and they marched directy towards Ierusalem.
The first day that the Armie dislodged, it came to Bethlem; from thence to Zabarim,Bethlehem. Zabarim. The riuer Braim Berithon. where they were in some want of water; the third day they camped on the Riuer of Braim; departing thence they came diuided in fiue troopes ouer steepie mountaines, and rocks, not without feare of ambushes, to Berithon a Sea-town; and from thence to Sagitta: At the last they came on the tenth day to Cesarea:Cesarea. Ramolles. where after they had rested two daies, they marched in battaile to Ramolles, which the enemies had forsaken for feare. The 3. day after, about sun-rising; those whichIerusalem. were in the Vantgard, descried not farre from thence the Walls of Ierusalem: At  this first discouerie they made a great shout in signe of ioy; some honouring the name of Christ our soueraigne king with great reuerence; others vpon their knees weeping for ioy, did salute the holie Citie and the holie Sepulcher. But because this place requireth that we should say some-what of the antiquitie and magnificence thereof: to the end that this booke grow not too big, we will begin the sixt, which followeth by the description of the Citie.

The end of the fift Booke of the first Decade.






THE SIXTH BOOKE OF THE FIRST DECAD  OF THE HISTORIE Of Venice.

 The Contents of the sixth Booke of the first Decad.
THe sixth Booke containeth the description of the Citie of Ierusalem with the taking thereof. GODFREY of BOVILLON made King of Ierusalem. The Christians most happie victorie against the Turkes. The taking of Ascalon with other Cities of Syria. The Venetian Fleet returneth into Italie. The priuiledges graunted to the Venetians in the Citie of Ferrara. The Venetian Sea-armie called backe into Syria. The taking of the Cities of Ptolomais and Sydon, with the priuiledges which the Venetians for their part obtained therein. The lucky issue of the warre against the Paduans, and their confederats. Two strange and wonderfull accidents hapned by fire in the Citie of Venice one after another. Those of Zara, and other people of Dalmatia, doe rebell. Prince ORDELAPHO his successe at the reprisall of the Cities in Dalmatia; with his death, fighting against the Barbarians. The Venetian Armie at the pursute of Pope CALIXTVS returneth into Syria. The Citie of Tyre besieged by Sea and Land. The Tyrians yeeld. The Venetian Armie returneth from Syria into Itali^. The building of the Hospitall of the publicke Cbaritie.

THe Citie of Ierusalem which we may properly termeThe description of Ierusalem. holy, is (as wee haue learned,) seated on a high place enuironed almost on euery side with very high mountaines, hauing neither fountaines nor Riuers neare to it, but only Siloe, which Iosephus calleth a fountaine, and others a riuer. This which we cannot call a riuer for the small quantitie of water which is in it, running from mount Sion, passeth through the  vale of Iosaphat. The Territorie neare to the Citie is very drie and barren, and is full of Cisternes to receiue raine water. The Solymi which were sometime called Lycians according to Herodotus, were the founders of this Citie, as the verie name it selfe doth witnesse; and Cornelius Tacitus doth affirme it, in that place where he speakes of the antiquitie of the Iewes. Homer neuerthelesse singing the praises of the Lycians, doth seeme to make a difference betwixt them and the Solymi. His verse is thus;This man againe warr'd on the Solymi, Meaning Bellerophon, who was descended from Lycia. Concerning the Religion, and ancient manner of life, which this Nation vsed, it shal not be amisse to set down what Strabo a man verie much addicted to Paganisme hath written therof. For there is no man almost, but hath either read or heard what the Authours of the holie

Scripture haue set downe concerning the antiquitie of this place. It is good then, and (I say) lawfull, to know how neere some, who were stuffed with Paganish superstitions, haue approched to the knowledge of the truth.
The common report (saith he) of matters beleeued concerning the temple of the Ierosolimitans doth affirme, That those, who are now called Iewes, are descendedStrabo his opinion concerning Moses. from the Aegyptians: For Moses, a Priest of Aegypt, being possessed with a certain Idea of Religion, detesting the vaine institutions of his owne Countrie, came from thence into Palestine, followed by great numbers of people highly deuoted to Diuine matters. He taught them how greatly the Aegyptians did erre, to attribute the name of God to brute beasts; and the Grecians likewise, to represent their Gods  vnder humane pictures and figures: And that the same thing was God which had created vs and the whole world beside, which we call Nature; the figure of whom, no man how wise soeuer, durst vndertake to present; That it behoued them then to reiect all those Images and Idolls, and to build a Temple to the only God, wherein to worship him without any superstition: And that those who should liue chastly in all integritie and righteousnesse, might hope for happinesse; otherwise not. Strabo did not know all. But it is altogether necessarie to vnderstand, how an Ethnick, brought vp in superstition, doth approue that which is directly contrarie to his law. For he doth sufficiently approue that which he doth not reproue, and chiefly that, which hee knoweth to bee openly repugnant to the dreames of his Religion. But  (as I said) he knew not all. For, concerning the portraits of the Diuinitie, hee seemeth as much to reiect our custome as theirs. And to speake truth, as much as they did it foolishly, we do it wisely, with an other kinde of consideration. Now Moses, after he had thus perswaded a great multitude of people, brought them in to the same place where the Citie of Ierusalem now stands, the which hee possessed, with so much the more ease, as for the barrennesse thereof it was desired of none; being no such place as was worth the contending for by Armes. For the place, whereon the Citie is seated, is verie stonie, and ill-prouided of water. Strabo would heereby inferre, ^hat Moses, and those which followed him out of Aegypt, were the founders of this Citie, and not the Solymi. He sets downe besides, That there  was a Quarrie of stone found in the Citie, two hundred and fiftie foote in length, and threescore in breadth, wherewith that most magnificent Temple was builded in the Citie, from the foundation, euen to the toppe thereof: whereof diuers haue so largely written; and principally Iosephus in his Historie of the Iewes.
But so soone as straying forth of the right way, they gaue themselues ouer; first to tyrannie; then to couetousnesse; and vnto all other vices: it came to passe, thatSinne the cause of the d^struction of Ierusalem. by a iust iudgement of God, the Citie hath not beene only once, but many and sundrie times, and in diuers manner, taken and afflicted. For omitting that which went before the time of Alexander the great, it is written, That the first Ptolomie, king The first taking of Ierusalem by Ptolomie. The second by Titus. of Aegypt, did wholly destroy it: Then in succession of time, vnder the happie gouernment of Titus sonne to Vespasian, it receiued so much the greater losse, by how much before then it had offended: Soone after that, in the daies of the Emperour Adrian, and then after him, these losses following one an other, it had no leasureThe third by Adrian. almost to breath in the middest of so manie miseries, which haue continued euen to the time of this iournie. In this manner the Holie Land, otherwise happie, hath been a long time tormented vnder the cursed Empire of Mahomet, who cruelly possessed it, at such time as the Christian troopes did arriue.
Now after the Princes had viewed the situation of the Citie, they resolued to assaileThe Christians besiege Ierusalem. it in three seuerall places. The Earles of Flanders and Chartres encamped on  the North-side, neere to Saint Stephens gate; (for neere thereunto is a Chappell of his name, because it is thought, that he being throwne out of the Citie, was stoned in the same place) Godfrey and Tancred on the West-side; and Raymond neere to mount Sion, toward the South. So soone as the campe arriued, certaine skirmishes

were made on both sides, as occasion serued. And the Armie in the meane time wanted no victualls, as it did before Antioch, by reason of the Sea which was not far of; as also for that they possessed diuers strong townes in Palestine. They attempted at times, during the seege, to take the Citie by Scalado, but it was in vaine. At the last, bringing woodden Castles, and other warlike engins, before the walls, the batterie was somewhat more furious than before; and a breach being made they marched to the assault, which lasted from the day-breake till noone, with a great slaughter of our men, the which did howerly encrease, without anie likelihood of waxing better, had not Baldwin, followed by a troope of Soldiers, mounted the wall on boards, which the enemies had there placed to catch our engins, which were brought before  the walls. For a while it was doubtfull what would become of them. But theThe Christians take Ierusalem. Citie-gate in the meane time being broken open, and the wall neere thereunto beaten downe by the Ramme, the victors entring on euerie side, the enemie retired, where at their first entrance they made in all places a meruailous slaughter, without exception of sex or age. Dauids tower, fortified in manner of a Cittadell, was forthwith yeelded vp. All the furie of the fight was neere to the Temple, whither great multitudes of people were retired. They fought there with great losse on either side. Despaire encouraged the one, and shame the other; because the Citie beeing taken, the Temple was possessed, and kept from them by a few. Yet neuerthelesse they entred it by force, and ranne so couragiously vpon the enemie, as beeing thrust  forward in front by those which followed them, they which first entred were constrained to fight hand to hand, with the whole squadron of the Armed enemie, and were besides thrust forward, by those which were behinde them, vpon the points of their swords. The enemies in the meane time did valliantly defend themselues, whom the imminent danger did constrain to fight with hazard of all things. ThereforeGreat effusion of bloud in the Temple. the fight was verie bloudie, not onely at the entrie of the Temple, but in the middest thereof. And so great was the slaughter aswell of the victors, as the vanquished, as the bloud, which was spilt on the pauement of the Temple, was a foot deep. In the end, the vppermost part of the Temple being not yet taken, the retreate was sounded a little before night. The next morrow, after commandement was giuen  not to hurt those that were disarmed, they which defended the higher part of the Temple did sodainly yeeld.
In this manner was the Citie of Ierusalem taken in the yeare of our Saluation 1099. and foure hundred fourescore and ten yeares after it was taken by the Infidels,1099. and the thirtie ninth day after the Christians had besieged it. Godfrey of BouillonGodfrey of Bouillon king of Ierusalem. was by the consent of all men saluted king: who after he had receiued all the Roiall ornaments, (except the Crowne) would by no meanes be crowned; saying, That it did not become a Christian to weare a Crowne of gold in the same place, where Christ, the soueraigne king, had worne a Crowne of thornes.
Whilst these things were done in Ierusalem, fearefull newes was brought, that  great multitudes of enemies did approach. To meete whom, Godfrey, after he had left a good Garrison in the Citie, marched almost as farre as Asdona. There they fought a bloudie battaile, which for diuers howers space inclined to neither part. In the end the enemies were broken, and put to flight, with great losse. Some saie thatThe defeate of the enemie, with the number of the dead. there died the same daie an hundred thousand men. The prisoners that were taken did report, That the number of their Armie was fiue hundred thousand fighting men.
During this happie successe in Syria; the Venetians, departing from Smyrna, after they had coasted the Seas of Lycia, Pamphilia, and Cilicia, they arriued in Syria, and kept the Hauen of Ioppa, taken before by the Christians. But I dare not affirme, that the Venetians beeing departed from Smyrna, did arriue in Syria, before that the holie Citie was taken. Neuerthelesse it is certaine, that the French, beeing encampedThe Venetians comming into Syria. before Ierusalem, were releiued with victualls comming from the Sea. The which I can not see how it should be done by any other, but by them, at that time;

seeing that all the coast of Syria was as yet in the enemies power. After the Venetians had left a sufficient garrison for the defence of their vessells, they departed from Ioppa, and marched in order of battaile towards Ierusalem: from whence returning they tooke by force the Citie of Ascalon vpon the Sea, which the French hadThe Venetians take Ascalon. a little before attempted in vaine; and leauing French-men there in garrison, they laid siege to Caypha, which is likewise called Porphiria, neere to Ptolomais: the which siege lasted longer than it was suspected. From whence, because they would not liue idely, they went to besiege Tiberias: the which being yeelded by the inhabitants, those of Caypha did soone after the like.
Some Authours attribute these exploits to Godfrey, and not to the Venetians. But I thinke them to haue beene done by a mutuall consent; namely by Godfrey, with his Armie by Land, after the taking of Ierusalem; and by the Venetians, by Sea, keeping way with him still all-along the coast. And from thence it commeth that the Venetian Chroniclers attribute the whole to the Venetians; and the FrenchThe Frenchmen and Venetians ioyned together. The death of Godfrey. to Godfrey. It is certaine, that so soone as the Venetians arriued in Syria, they ioyned with the French, and that the affaires of the Christians were, for the space of a whole yeare, gouerned in the Prouince vnder the happie fortune of either of them. These things being done, the Venetian Armie returned to Venice. And Godfrey of Bouillon soone after died*
It is reported, that, about the same time, the bodies of Saint Nicholas and Saint The bodies of Saint Theodore and Saint Nicholas brought to Venice. Theodore, were brought to Venice; the one being laid in Saint Sauiours Church, and the other in that which of a long time had beene dedicated vnto him on the banks of the Sea. The Normans vnder the conduct of Roger, brother to Beamond, made incursions on Grecia and Dalmatia. The Venetians, after they had made a league with Caloman, sonne to Geica King of Hungarie, marched against the Normans.The Venetians agreement with Caloman King of Hungarie. But I know not vpon what ground the Normans at the same time made warre on the Venetians, and Alexis. The Venetian fleet being strengthned by the succours of the Barbarian passed into Apulia. For Caloman had not only made a league with the Venetians, but ioyned his forces to theirs. I know not vpon what occasion this was done, vnlesse it were that the Hungarians did at the same time  hold some places in Dalmatia; and that it grieued them to bee molested by the Normans. It may be likewise that they had couenanted so to doe in the articles of their agreement.
Now the Venetians hauing, in a manner, at their first arriuall taken Brundusium,The Venetians take Brundusium left a garrison there, and scattering their forces on euery side ouer the firme land, filled all the Sea-coasts with spoile and terrour. And afterwards the fleet being stuft with booties returned to Venice. It is said, that it was expressely mentioned inThe Hungariaus giue ouer their pretended right to Dalmatia. the treatie of peace with Caloman, that neither he, nor any of his successours should pretend any right to Dalmatia.
About the same time Matilda, a noble Ladie of the illustrious family of the Sigefretti, being by meanes of the Venetians repossessed of the Citie of Ferrara, granted vnto them, as to her friends by whose meanes she had obtained the victorie, fredome and exemption for euer from all matters within the same Citie. Prince Vitalis about the end of the fourth yeare of his gouernment died.







 ORDELAPHO PHALERIO, the 34. Duke of Uenice.








ORdelapho Phalerio was chosen in his place. In the first, or certainely in the second yeare of his gouernment, a very great fleete was sentA new fleete of Venetians in Syria. againe into Syria. The Venetian Chronicles say, That they were one hundred Gallies; Blondus mentioneth but fourescore. The Genoueses likewise about the same time, a litle before the Venetians, had sent their fleete thither. Baldwin, called King of Ierusalem after his brothers death,Baldwin King of Ierusalem. was at the same time incamped before Ptolomais a Sea-towne. This man being discouraged with the losse of a great battaile in Syria, soone after the death ofBeamond is set at libertie and returnes to Antioch. Godfrey, durst neuer after attempt any thing, vntill that he vnderstood that Beamond was deliuered and returned to Antioch, by the industrie and liberalitie of his nephew Tancred, his brothers sonne, who to free him, paid a great waight of gold for his ransome: For being then confirmed by the presence of so notable a man, he came (as hath beene said) and besieged Ptolomais, called Acon by the modernes, and at last Acre by corrupted speech.
Baldwin, being incamped in this place, receiued two mightie fleetes called out ofThe taking of Acon by Baldwin. Europe vpon faire promises, and being strengthned by these succours he shut in the Citie more strictly by Sea and Land, by meanes whereof it was taken the twentieth day after. Blondus saith that after Ptolomais was taken, there was no warlike exploite done vntill that Beamond (who was then gone into Italie) was returned  into Asia. Whereby it is apparent that Baldwin made more account of BeamondWhat account Baldwin made of Beamond. alone, than of all the other Christian Captaines in the Armie. But that which Blondus writes of Beamonds comming into Italie, seemeth to be verie true: Because diuers Annalls make mention, That whilest Beamond tarried in Italie, the Venetians, in fauour of Alexis, armed themselues against the Normans, who were incamped before Durazzo: and that, remembring perhaps the losse which they had in times past receiued, they durst not assaile the enemie who was in the Hauen, but held their course towards Apulia, where after they had greatly molested and indangered the enemie, they returned to Venice, leauing their enterprise imperfect. If it bee so, we must thinke that the Venetian fleete, after the taking of Ptolomais, returned into Italie, as well because it was Ordelapho (as they affirme) which marched  against the Normans, as also in regard, so many vessels being busied in Syria, they must of necessitie prouide newe to goe against so mightie a King; the which could hardly haue beene done.
It is reported, that the occasion which moued Beamond to make warre on Alexis,The occasion of the Warre betwixt Alexis and Beamond. was because that after Tancred had seized on Laodicia, the Greekes inuaded and molested the Sea-townes of the Principalitie of Antioch. Others say, that Beamond was so terrified at the only sight of the Armies of Alexis and the Venetians, as he sodainely fell to composition, and that by that meanes the siege of Durazzo was raised.
The Venetian Annalls affirme, that after the taking of Ptolomais, their fleete sailed to Sydon, whither Baldwins forces marched by Land, which in few dayes they tooke. Sydon stood in times past betweene Berithon and Tyre, the threeThe taking of Sydon. most famous Cities of Phaenicia, the most renowned for antiquitie and riches. Some set downe the taking of Berithon before that of Sydon, because it was the first that was besieged, before which they were incamped two whole moneths: and being taken with great losse, it caused the Christians at their entrance, not only to kill those which were armed, but such likewise who for age were not able to defend themselues. A Christian Colonie was sent thither by reason of the fruitfulnesse of the Countrie. And this is all we finde to be done by the Venetians in Syria in the dayes of Ordelapho. Some Authours say, that the Venetians, after the takingThe Venetians take Faronia by assault. of Sydon, tooke Faronia by assault, which is a Sea-towne neare to the mouth of Nilus, and how likewise in that iourney they sunke diuers ships of the enemies, which did vse to scoure the Seas. In recompence whereof Baldwin gaue the Venetians  in the Citie of Acre, a Church, and a part of the towne, with a place where they might doe iustice one to another, with like power and authoritie as the French had, with diuers goodly priuiledges; and that not only in the same place, but ouer all the Kingdome of Ierusalem. They say besides, that Baldwin being puffed vp with the happie successe of his affaires desired farther to extend the bounds of hisThe Castle of Soball builded by Baldwin. Kingdome; and to the same purpose he caused to bee built on the other side of the Riuer Iordan (famous for the baptisme of Christ our Lord) the Castle of Soball in a very high place: but that, soone after the Venetians were returned into Italy, hauing lost certaine battailes against the enemie, and fortified some places neare to Ptolomais, plotting higher matters in his minde, he died, euen as these warlike preparations  were in readinesse. Baldwin surnamed Burgensis, who was his neare kinsman,Baldwin surnamed Burgensis King of Ierusalem. was declared King of Ierusalem in his stead; and for the stronger assurance thereof he was confirmed by Pope Gelasius. Others write, that vpon the returne of the Venetian Armie from Syria, Ordelapho soone after led it against the Norman; but they set not downe vpon what occasion, nor to what place. And I thinke they did vnderstand it to be the iournie against Beamond (alreadie mentioned) notwithstanding that they affirme, how the same enterprise was not against Beamond, but against Liemond his sonne.
The Venetians at the same time did obtaine sundrie great priuiledges of the EmperourGreat priuiledges granted to the Venetians by the Emperour Henry the fourth Henrie the fourth; and they say, that for the same purpose Vitalis Phalerio, Stephano Morosini, and Vrso Iustiniano were sent to Rome, who in acknowledgment of that grant, promised him in the name of the people, a yearely cloake of cloath of gold, and a pension of monie, which was not verie great. Some say they obtained these priuiledges at Verona, and that the Emperor willed them to send commissioners to him to treat of the controuersie betwixt them and the Paduans. For it fell out at the same time, that the Paduans, ioyned with those of the Marches of Treuiso, and of Rauenna, were in Armes against the Venetians. And, notwithstanding that the occasion of this warre is vnknowne, yet may we perceiue by the Emperour Henries declaration, which followed soone after, that these two people then, as at other times, were at variance concerning their bounds. The Venetians  marched against the enemies who were come as farre as the Tower of Bebia, betwixt the Riuers Brenta and Adice* where at the first they made certaine light skirmishes,The Warre against the Paduans: with their (...). and afterward fought with their whole forces, where the Paduans being ouercome, six hundred of their people were taken prisoners. The Paduans being

terrified with this losse, had recourse to the Emperour Henrie, demaunding aide of him against the Venetians. Henrie, for that he would not seeme to contemne their request, concluded with the Ambassadours sent for that end (as hath beene said) to Verona, That, all strife and contention laid a side, The Venetians and theThe Emperours mediation betweene the Venetians and the Paduans. Paduans should louingly treate together concerning their greefes, Declaring to the Venetians, that they ought to remember how they were sprung from the Paduans; That they should greatly erre vnlesse they did honour the Citie from whence they were descended; and respect the inhabitants thereof in the same manner, as well-bred children doe their ancient parents: That the Paduans on the other side, in sted of enuying the Venetians glorie, ought rather to reioyce to see  those, that were descended from them, to haue purchased, euen till then, so great fame and reputation both by land and Sea; That his opinion was, in regard of their kinred, that their bounds should be common to either of them, and that they should neuer afterwards contend about any matter whatsoeuer. The Emperours authoritie preuailed much for the appeasing of this strife, but most of all by his gentle exhortation, whereby the Ambassadours there present were mooued at the same instant to forget all former hatred, according to his desire. And it is thought that theThe Venetians and Paduans reconciled. Venetians at the same time obtained of the Emperour Henrie that which hath been alreadie mentioned. Other Historians haue thought, that those priuiledges were graunted to the Venetians at his first arriuall, not making mention of the golden  cloake, nor of any other tribute.
At the same time a great part of the Citie was consumed by fire; which beginning in the house of Henrico Zeno, tooke holde on Saint Peters Church; and in an instant, after it had consumed a whole street by reason of the wind and of the matter apt to burne, it flew on the farther side of the canall, where in a moment it consumed the Isle of Cassian to ashes; and so scattering it selfe here and there, burnt our Ladyes Church, and the streets of Saint Agatha, Saint Austen, and Saint Stephen all on a rew. Two moneths after or there about: (for Authors doe not setTwo great accidents of fire hapned in the Citie. downe the certaine time) the Citie being yet terrified with the first fire, was presently frighted with another more terrible than the former, which beginning at Malamoc burnt and drowned. the houses of the Zancares flew into Saint Laurence his Island, and being sodainely scattered abroad did in a moment burne sixteene Islands of the Citie, and that part of the Dukes Palace, which looketh vpon Saint Bassus Church. Some say likewise that Malamoc was at the same time, in a manner, wholly burnt, and not long after drowned. Whereupon by the aduice of Ordelapho, those of Chioggia were suffered to take stones, columnes, and what other things they would carrie with them to Chioggia, to build Churches, and other publicke buildings, withChioggia builded with the ruines of Malamoc. S. Ciprians Monasterie builded. the ruines of Malamoc. And by that meane this citie, which till then was but of a meane structure, was in an instant greatly bewtified with costly buildings. The religious brethren of Saint Hilaries order of Malamoc remooued themselues to the  Monasterie of Saint Seruulo. The Gradonici likewise builded at Muriana a goodly Church to Saint Ciprian, for the religious sisters of the order of St. Ciprian of Malamoc. The Badoarij mooued with that selfe-same zeale to Religion, did, at their owne costs, build the Church of Holie Crosse, with the Monasterie thereunto adioyning.
The Common-wealth had scarce time to breath after those two terrible accidents of fire, when as on a sodaine newes was brought, that those of Zara, hauing driuen away their Gouernour, were reuolted from the Venetians, and had yeelded themselues to Caloman King of Hungarie. For the Barbarian, after the warre with the Normans wherein he was accompanied by the Venetians, being pufte vp with The (...) of Zara. pride for his good successe, (in contempt of the alliance which the Venetians till then had strictly obserued) seized vpon Dalmatia, and tooke Zara first of all, and the residew of the Prouince in a manner by a voluntarie submission. And wholly to alienate that Nation from the Venetians obedience, hee proclaimed forthwith,

That he came to set the Dalmatians at libertie. And after he had giuen great guifts to the Churches of the Cities, hee went backe into Hungarie, where he dyed sodainely.Caloman King of Hungarie dyed sodainely. It was thought that it fell iustly vpon him for breaking the league which he so religiously had sworne vnto.
Ordelapho, taking occasion by the death of Caloman to recouer that Prouince, did in the thirteenth yeere of his gouernment passe ouer into Dalmatia. He besieged Zara and in short time tooke it. The Barbarians in the meane time who were left in garrison in the citie, or (as I thinke rather) were sent out of Hungarie to raise the siege, comming to fight with the Venetians, were by them broken and put to rout, and by that meanes did wholly abandon Dalmatia; Thus by the happie successe Zara recouered ^e ^hy Venetians of this victorie, Zara was recouered. Then the troupes marched to Sicqua, which was likewise reuolted, constraining the inhabitants to yeeld. The towne was soone after dismantelled. Other places consequently submitted themselues to the Venetians obedience, who not satisfied with this victorie, trauersing the mountainesCroatia brought vnder the Uenetians obedience. of Croatia, subdued in a short space whatsoeuer lay in the middest of the countrie. By meanes whereof some say, that the Venetians beganne then to vse the title of Croatia.
Now ofter Ordelapho had quieted the Prouince, and enlarged the boundes of the State, he returned to Venice, whither he brought diuers great Lords of Illiria, with other men of note, prisoners; the which made his returne home more  magnificent, setting it forth to the people almost after the manner of an ancient triumph. But this Prouince did not long remaine quiet. For so soone as the newes of that which the Venetians had done in Dalmatia and Croatia was reported in Hungarie: a fresh Armie of Hungarians marched into Dalmatia. Which being vnderstoodA new Armie of Hungarians in Dalmatia. at Venice did greatly busie them, by plotting meanes how they might keepe that Prouince vnder their obedience. For there was likely-hood, that vnlesse the Sea-townes were strongly kept with good Garrisons, the Dalmatians (being naturally inclined to change and nouelty) would deliuer their countrie to the enemie. Ordelapho, knowing that in such dangerous businesses speed was to be vsed,Ordelapho comes againe into Dalmatia. passed into Dalmatia with a greater Armie than before, and ouertaking the enemie  before the walles of Zara, drew him forthwith to battaile. At the beginning they fought furiously on either side, fortune enclining to neither part, vntill thatOrdelapho dyes and the Venetians are defeated Ordelapho, encouraging his Soldiours, and thrusting himselfe into the formost rankes, fighting hand to hand with the enemie, was stricken with a dart, of which wound he sodainely dyed.
The Venetians being amazed at their Princes death did for a time sustaine the enemies forces; but beeing disordered, they fell to flight; diuers were slaine in the fight, and many taken prisoners. The report of this losse brought great heauinesse to the Citie. The common people thought, that their Prince being dead, and their Armie defeated, there was no more hope for them to be able to keepe the Prouince. Therefore they resolued to send Ambassadours to the king of Hungarie, to obtaine a peace if it might be, or else truce for a certaine time. Vitalis Phaledrio, Vrso Iustiniano, and Marini Morosino the Secretarie, were sent thither, who obtainedTruce with the King of Hungarie for fiue years. truce of the king for fiue yeares. Ordelapho's bodie, beeing brought to Venice, was honorably buried in Saint Markes Church, who fighting valiantly for his Countrie was slaine in the nineteenth yeare of his Principalitie. Dominico Michaeli was chosen in his sted.








 DOMINICO MICHAELI, the 35. Duke of Venice.








BAldwin, the second of that name, sent to this Prince for aide. For the affaires of the Christians in Syria, were brought to such a passe, that they spake no more of making themselues greater, but only how to keepe that which they had gotten. For albeit in the two first yeares of his raigne he had obtained certaine victories of the enemie, yet there was some likelihood, that they daily waxing stronger (as indeede they did) they should hardly be able to keepe those places which they held in Syria, without fresh supplies. He requested the Venetians by his Ambassadours, to passe with a mightie fleete into Asia; and the more easily to obtaine it, his Ambassadours in his  name promised a verie great recompence. But Baldwin, expecting supplies from Italie,Baldwin taken prisoner by Dalochus king of the Parthians. being taken prisoner by Dalochus king of the Parthians, with whom hee had fought, was carried away captiue to Cayro. Then those that remained in Ierusalem, did speedily certifie Pope Calixus of the state of the affaires of Syria, assuring him, that if they were not forth with succoured with supplies from Italie, and Europe, that their dominion in Asia would not only be soone brought to nothing, but the name of Christians would be extinct, and all reduced vnder the power of the Turkes.
The Pope being moued by this great danger, began forthwith to examine which were the chiefest forces of Italie, and found that there were none but the Venetians, which were able in those miserable times to preserue the affaires and state of the Christians in Syria. Therefore he sent his Nuncio to entreate Prince Dominico speedilyThe Popes resolution for the succour of the holie Land. to passe into Asia with a mightie fleete, to aid the Christians. The people then being called before the Assemblie, after due Praiers made vnto God, the Patriarch of the Citie by the Princes commaundement spake to them after this manner.




The Oration of the Patriarch of Grada to the people of Venice.
I Thinke (o people of Venice) that you are not ignorant, what our owne forces in part, and partly those of the rest of Europe haue done these precedent yeares, for the recouerie of Palestine, which ye call the holie Land. For this is the six and twentith yeare (if I mistake not) since that great voiage, which so manie Christian Princes, taking the badge of the crosse vpon them, vndertooke for

the same purpose into Asia, where by the Diuine bountie and their valour, all that which stretcheth from Bythinia euen to Syria, was in a short space taken by force out of the hands of the cruell enemie. And our people likewise after they had taken Smyrna in Ionia, and executed manie martiall exploits all along the Sea-coasts of Syria, did not only purchase great commendation, but had their share in the Cities that were taken. The which if we well obserue, ye shall finde, that they laid a sure foundation at that instant whereon to enlarge in time to come your Dominion in Syria. But it hath hapned in a short time, that by the decease of Godfrey, Baldwin, and Beamond, with other excellent Captaines, who died according to the necessitie of nature, our affaires in Syria haue been so altred, as in sted of their woonted prosperous successe, they are on a sodaine fallen to the ground, and doe daily wex weake, so as being more and more exposed to the violent assaults of the enemies, wee haue left vs small hope of abilitie to defend that Prouince. The which Baldwin, the second, fearing, did not long since send his Ambassadours vnto vs, to entreate vs, with great promises, to prepare forthwith a mightie Armie, and therewith to passe speedily into Asia. The intreaties of so great a person did mooue vs. But beeing at the point to open the matter vnto you, and deuising meanes how to prouide such an Armie, we haue with great terrour receiued newes, how Baldwin is taken by Dalochus king of the Parthians, and carried prisoner to Cayro. Whereupon Varimond Bishop of Ierusalem (o yee Christian people) being amazed, with all those which lie in garrison in the Citie, haue speedily sent for aide and succour to Pope Calixtus, saying, that vnlesse they be speedily releiued, themselues, with whatsoeuer they possesse in that Prouince, are in danger to be lost. The Pope being troubled with these newes, hath thought the Venetians alone to be worthie of such an enterprise. He hath written to your Prince, and to you, (yee people of Venice) whom hee intreateth, exhorteth and adiureth, not to abandon Christian Religion in so great a daunger. Wherewith your Princes pleasure is you should be acquainted, to the end ye might will and command a great Armie to be prouided for that purpose: whereunto, pittie alone, and the affection which we beare to the Apostolike Se^, and to all Christians in generall, should not onely prouoke vs, (which hauing receiued from our Ancestors as here ditarie, we ought to preserue and increase with all our power) but likewise the desire which wee haue to enlarge the bounds of our Dominions. Who is it but seeth that it will cheefely be an holy and iust warre, the which wee ought principally to consider in all things; and secondarily, highly worthie of the charitie and Religion for which ye are are euerywhere famous, to defend by Armes, and to preserue from the enemies wrong, this land where Christ, our king, was borne, did hide himselfe, wept, was betraied, taken and crucified, and his most holie bodie laid in the graue, and who (according as holie Writ doth witnesse to vs) shall come the soueraigne Iudge, one daie, to enquire of the deedes of all mankind. What Churches? what monasteries? what Altars doe yee thinke can be so agreeable unto him, as this holy voiage? Whereby yee shall free from base and cruell seruitude, the place of his birth, his Sepulcher, and generally all the signes and tokens of his humanitie. But because humane affaires are of such nature, as there is almost no publike charitie exempted from ambition: And your selues likewise, perhaps since I began to speake of this subiect, haue closely demaunded of your selues, what honour, what glorie, what recompence may be expected thereby? Certainly it is, and euer shall bee well be seeming, and greatly profitable for our reputation, that the Venetians only, of all Europe, haue beene thought fit at this time to oppose themselues with all boldnesse against all Asia in a manner. The farthest parts of the East shall feele the worth of the Venetians power. Affrick shall talke of it; but Europe shall greatly admire it: All men shall speake of you: The whole honour of the warre shall be attributed to you. That which we haue done heeretofore in Asia, seemeth to be effected rather by strangers than by vs. But that which we shall henceforth do there, shall be ascribed to vs alone. The glorie of strangers hath greatly hurt vs, who by their luster haue (in a manner) darkened all our great actions: the which in time to come they shall not doe. Their trauaile and danger in breaking the enemies forces shall bee our praise and glorie, to haue thus brauely broken and beaten them back. Moreouer I doubt not, but that all of ye are willing and desirous to enlarge your estate as far as may be. But how? by what meanes will you effect it? In liuing idely? or rowing vp and downe these Lakes in your little boates? Hee that thinketh so, doth greatly deceiue himselfe.

The ancient Romans of whom ye vaunt yee are descended, and whom ye desire to imitate, did not purchase the Empire of the World by liuing idely, and at their ease, but by making one warre to grow from off an other: By warre they did subdue all Nations: And finally, by warre their power and greatnesse did increase beyond all thought. Heereunto wee may yet adde that which is most to bee desired, That wee are to take Armes against enemies, whom to kill it is not onely lawfull, but likewise iust and holie. Besides, those whom wee relieue, haue alreadie, and will still giue vs a share in those Townes and Cities conquered from the enemie: But happily, some will thinke this a small matter, and wholly vnworthie (for the recompence) of so great an enterpri^e. I confesse that it is small in shew. But whosoeuer will thinke vpon the time to come, will finde it to be an assured foundation whereon to builde and encrease our Dominion in the Leuant. For great and admirable matters are often-times seene to spring from meane beginnings. But if neither the honour, recompence, nor the mutuall loue we all beare to the Christians name can not moue you: This, vndoubtedly, ought to prouoke you thereunto, That by freeing this holie Land from the bondage of the enemies, appearing one day before the Throne of this incomprehensible Iudge we shall stand vpright, acknowledged by this great King and by all the rest, for Soldiours of his guard, receiuing an holie guer don, for so holy a war. Depart then in Gods name, and prepare a mightie Armie, which may be for the profit and honor of the Common-wealth. It behoueth you to vse speed, least (as it often times hapneth) some vnlook't for accident do foreslow so great an enterprize:




This speech being ended, a sodaine noise was heard ouer all the Church, entermingled The Venetians resolue to succor the holy land. with sighs and teares, all the people crauing that the Armie might quickly be in readinesse; saying, That there was no man in the whole citie, but had rather enroll his name for so holie a warre, than to liue idly at home. Hereupon they armed fortie Gallies; (as they say which speak sparingly of the matter) but (according to their opinions who speak more indifferently thereof one hundred; also (accordingThe number of the Fleet. to others who amplifie the matter) two hundred: which opinion neuerthelesse I hold to be the truest. For if it were so as they say, I know (...) vpon what occasion Prince Michaeli (as shall bee heere-after mentioned) should dare (...) (...) the enemies Fleete before Ioppa, which consisted of seauen hundred Shippes of warre. But some say that the enemie, insted of seauen hundred, had but three score and ten. If it were so, all the Historians should haue small cause so highly to praise this victorie obtained by Prince Michaeli; and chiefly Blondus, who hath more curiously, than anie other, set downe that which was done at the same time in Syria. Besides, Giacomo of Genoa, who came to Hierusalem by and by after the battaile, doth write that the Venetians had two hundred vesselles, whereof three score and tenne were Shippes of burthen.
The Prince, being come to Dalmatia, tooke in fresh supplies. Then he sailed with a faire wind to Ciprus, where hauing certaine notice of the great multitude of enemies incamped before Ioppa, he marched furiously against them. The BarbariansIoppa besieged by the Barbarians. at the same time held those of Ioppa, which were become Christians, streightly  besieged; and hauing shut vp their Hauen, and taken from them all hope of succour on that side, from whence they most expected it, they attempted to make them yeeld. The Bishop, so soone as he vnderstood that the Venetian Fleet did approach, came to Ioppa with victuailes, and with the greatest forces th^ hee could, to the end to relieue the citie vntill the arriuall of the Venetian succours. But whilest he made these preparations, Prince Michaeli, who (as hath beene said) was come somewhat neere to the enemie, did on a (...) assaile him, not giuingThe Barbarians defeated by the venetians before Ioppa. him time to order his Ships in battell; vanquished him, and enforced him to discampe, after he had slaine some, and taken the rest. Some Authors affirme, That they fought in the maine Sea, and that the enemies Fleete was but an hundred vessels, where the battell being very bloudie on both sides lasted for certaine houres space, and that in the end, the enemies being ouercome, and their Admirall Galley taken, with diuers others, the Venetians opened the passage of the Sea to those of Ioppa; That our men, certaine dayes after, tooke in the (...) Sea ten of the enemies

Ships of burden, laden with rich Merchandise: so as there was neither Captaine, Marriner, nor Souldiour, but were a long time after the better for that rich bootie.
Some Authours doe affirme, That Prince Mihaeli, after this victorie came to Ierusalem,The Duke of Venice commeth to Ierusalem. where being kindly welcomed by Bishop Varimond and the rest, hee was by them gratified, for his opportune arriuall, and for his happie defeating of the enemie. It was debated there among the Captaines, after what maner they should prosecute the Warres. Wherein hauing spent certaine dayes, without any resolution what Citie they should first attempt: It is reported, that by the aduice of Prince Michaeli they fell to cast lots, and that the same falling on the Citie of Tyre, it was The lot fell vpon Tyre. the first that was besieged. The maner of casting these Lots was thus. The names of all the Cities, which they would besiege, were written in little scrowles of Paper; and being laide together confusedly on a heape vpon the next Altar, they were mingled by a yong boy: then after the celebration of Diuince Seruice, the same boy drew forth all those scrowles one after an other, in the presence of the Princes; and in this sort they concluded to begin the warre by the siege of Tyre.
This Citie was in time past an Island in the maine Sea, seuen hundred paces distantDescription of the Citie of Tyre. from the firme land. Alexander, sonne to Philip, being incamped before it, caused that space or distance from the Sea to bee filled vp to ioyne it to the land. It is very famous in respect of such excellent Cities as haue descended from thence;  namely, Lepta, Vtica, and Carthage enuious of the Romane greatnesse, with Gades scituate in the farthest parts of the earth. This Island is in circuite nineteene thousand paces. When Alexander besieged it, it was taken by warlike engines the seuenth Moneth of the siege. The excellencie and riches thereof consisteth in Purples and Scarlets; in regard whereof, forraine Kings, and the Romanes likewise, haue euer enfranchized the Inhabitants of that place. The Citie it selfe is in circuit two and twentie Stadij. It is thought, that Agenor, sonne to that ancient Belus, was the founder thereof, and that it was in times past called Sarra. From whence it came (as I thinke) that we find in the Venetian Annals, Surra for Tyre. The Phoenicians (among whom, next to the Citie of Sydon, Tyre hath euer held the chiefe The Phoenicians, the inuentors of Arithmeticke, the Alphabet, and Astronomie. place, as well for greatnesse as antiquitie) haue beene highly praised and esteemed by all ancient Authours, for inuenting Arithmeticke and the Letters of the Alphabet, and for being the first that gazed vpon the Starres in the night.
It was then concluded to besiege this Citie by Sea and Land; where at the beginning of the siege it was agreed vpon betwixt Varimond and the Venetians, That whatsoeuer Baldwin the first had in the last warres giuen to the Venetians in Syria, should remaine firme to them. Blondus saith, that hee had seene the Coppie of the Priuiledge, which did expresly containe, That the Venetians should in all places of the Kingdome of Ierusalem, and Principalitie of Antioch, haue a particular place and streete apart, and a place for them to pleade in before their Magistrate. They  obtained, besides, many other matters necessarie for the publike vse, That the Venetian Merchants should be free in Syria, from tolles and impositions; And that if any Venetian should suffer shipwrack, or dye in those places without making a will or heire, all his wealth should be put into the hands of the Venetian Magistrate, vnto whom the Treasurer generall of the kingdome should paye euerie yeare three hundred Crownes, out of the Kings reuenues. This is it which Bishop Varimond,The conditions graunted by Varimond to the Venetians. and those who did then manage the affaires of Syria, did graunt to the Venetians, and much more than this, which Baldwin at his returne from prison did willingly ratifie.
In this treatie with Varimond, it was expresly said, That if the Cities of Tyre Tyre besieged. and Ascalon were taken, the Venetians should partake the thirdes thereof. This Citie had in times past beene besieged by Baldwin by the space of foure moneths, who could not take it, by reason it was so enuironed with the Sea. This new siege likewise was much longer than was suspected: But whilest it was besieged by

Land and Sea, those of the Land-Campe began to murmur against the Venetians; saying, That they alone were out of danger in their ships, and that if the enemie (whom they continnually expected) should arriue, who would assaile them by Land, the Venetians in the meane time would put forth to Sea, and get to some place of safetie, and therefore they would either discampe, or share equallyThe distrust conc^ed against the Venetians. the labour and danger betwixt them. This slaunder being reported to Michaeli, he was greatly troubled therewith: and after he had continued a certaiue time pensiue, ruminating to himselfe by what meanes he might roote out this suspition which his fellowes had vniustly conceiued: he commaunded on a soddaine to plucke vp all theA couragious act of Prince Michaeli. bords from the bottome of the vessells, or (as others say) all the nailes and oares, with other matters belonging to nauigation. And causing them to be brought into the presence of Varimond and the rest of the Captaines, hee vsed this speech vnto them.




The Princes Oration to Varimond and the rest.
I vnderstand, (quoth he) companions in Armes, that ye doe in some sort doubt of the faith and loyaltie of the Venetians, and that instead of holding vs for faithfull companions, Ye repute vs cowards and traitours. But our fidelitie is not of so small continuance, that we will suffer yee long to suspect it, for which we are resolued to hazard all dangers. Take (saith hee) this certaine pledge of our fidelitie. (and in so saying, he caused all the furniture of his vessels to be throwne downe before them) Then he added, Yee haue now (as I take it) O Varimond, and the rest, matter enough to repose trust in vs, albeit that it is a common saying, that, before all things, we should consider the nature and inclinations of people. But to the end to take away from euerie one occasion of euill speaking, it hath pleased vs to doe thus; to let ye vnderstand, that the Venetians haue the same ^age like you. It remaineth now, that with a like affection wee goe forward with the Cities siege; whi^h being taken, I hope that in short time, we shall become masters of all Syria.




The fidelitie of the Prince and the Venetians, was highly esteemed; all men withProof of the Venetians loyaltie. a loud voice, did greatly praise them, and accounted them for faithfull companions and good Souldiers. Thus being confirmed, and continuing the siege with greater care than before, they report an accident newly hapned in the Campe, which the ignorant multitude may hold for a miracle. Those which kept the guard (experienced belike in such matters) reported that they had descried a Doue, executing the office of a Post, comming from the Campe of Dachines King of Damascus,A strange case of a Pigeon. who made great preparations to relieue the Tryians; and at such time, as it should flie ouer the Campe, they tooke speciall care at the very instant to make a great noyse, so as the Doue loosing her strength, fell downe all amazed. Being taken vp, they knew by the letters which were tied to her feete: That King Dachines did intreate the Tyrians to be of good cheare; That within few dayes he would be neare them with great forces, and by the death of their enemies free them from the siege. The Princes were greatly moued at these newes: For there was some likelihood that the Tyrians vpon this hope would haue more obstinately held out the siege, and that which was most dangerous, they feared to come to stroakes with so mightie an euemie. Whereupon they bethought themselues of a subtile stratagem; to tieThe Christians. stratagem before Tyre. counterfeit letters to the Doues fee^e, instead of those which Dachines had sent to the Tyrians: which imported, Not to expect any succour from the King, And therefore they should doe wisely, seeing their affaires stood so as they must needs yeeld, to giue place to the time, which they were chiefely to thinke on, and by a  timely yeelding to prouide for themselues and their meanes.
These Letters being publiquely read, (for the Pigeon being let loose flew directlyThe yeelding vp of Tyre. into the Citie) the Tyrians being wholly discouraged did yeeld themselues

the fifth moneth of the siege. I know of a certaine, that many will hold this, which wee haue reported of the Pigeon, for a fable, thinking it to be against nature, and so consequently vnworthie of beliefe, that a bird transported into a farre Region, should at a flight returne to her former nest. But it is vndoubtedly true that it was so: The which hath beene of ten times knowne by experience. For diuers doe witnesse, that the ancient Romans made vse sometimes of birds for the same purpose. Plinie makes mention of a Pigeon, which brought letters to the Campe before Modena. I finde that Fabius the Roman Historian, and Cecynna Volateran, haueThe like done by a Pigeon before Modena. sometimes vsed swallowes in such like businesse. But let it be granted that it may be so; it is no lesse strange, that these birds, flying in the ayre, should fall to the ground  by a suddaine noyse. For some doe affirme the same to haue hapned in the assembly of the Ismenians (as oftentimes in other places) at such time as by the meanes of Titus Flaminius, all Grecia did recouer her ancient libertie. Plutarch, a man of singular learning, hath taught the same to come to passe by the clearing of the aire, because that by a suddaine crie ascending vpwards, the aire is forcibly cleft, leauing no support for the birds; for waxing more soft and slipperie, the birds fall, as though they were come into an emptie place, without any stay at all, whereby they fall downe, being stricken with the noyse, as if it were with an arrow; It may bee likewise according to the same Authour, that this noyse engendreth in the aire a violent by-turning like to the tempest of the Sea, wherewith birds, being touched, fall downe amazed.
Now the Tyrians hauing yeelded; there were set vp on the Towers and highestThe third part of the Citie giue^ to the Venetians places of the Citie, the ensignes of Varimond, and of the Venetians, vnto whom were giuen the third part of the Citie, according to the agreement, the prowesse and valour of whom (according to the saying of Chronicles) was greatly admired in that siege: The like was giuen to them in the Citie of Ascalon. Baldwin,Baldwin ratifies it. returning from his imprisonment at the same time, did not only approue all these things, but did likewise at the ratifying thereof highly honour the Venetian Prince.
It is to be seene in some Authours, that he vsed this preface. Dominico Michaeli, Duke of Venice and Dalmatia, Prince of the Kingdome of Ierusalem, who after he had defeated a great Armie of the enemies on the inaccessible shoare of Ascalon; slaine and taken many thousands of those Barbarians: and deliuered those of Ioppa from the siege, where with they were shut in, did enter victorious into Ierusalem. Some others, adding greater matters than these, say, That, besides these things graunted at the same time to the Venetians in Syria, it was confirmed vnto them ouer and aboue all the rest, that whilest the Duke of Venice should make his aboad in Ierusalem, hee should enioy the same honours and prerogatiues as the King did. Whereas there is mention made, that the enemies were defeated before Ascalon, and not before Ioppa; the same proceedeth from the varietie of  Historians.
During the Venetians prosperous successe in Syria, Caloianes sonne to Alexis (some set downe Emanuel for Caloianes) enuying that the Christians had obtained so notable a victorie; and chiefely the Venetians, vnto whom was ascribed all the glorie of whatsoeuer had beene then done in Syria; resolued to make open warreNew warre against the Greeks against them. In regard whereof, there was some likelihood, that the Venetians, if they respected their owne priuate affaires, would wholly leaue Syria, as indeed it happened. For the Prince being speedily called home, vpon the first commotion of the Greekes, did depart out of the Prouince: who being come to Rhodes; and the Townesmen refusing to furnish him with victualls: he tooke and spoiled the  Citie. I beleeue hee had some other cause so to doe, For that had beene to haue drawne a kindnesse from them perforce. But it is most likely, that it was done in hatred to Caloianes, who had alreadie declared himselfe their open enemie; (which some Authours affirme) or else certainely, because the Venetians had in times

past receiued some notable iniurie of the podians, they would then at the instant call it in question, hauing so fit an occasio^
Prince Michaeli, from thence comm^g to the Isle of Chyos, wasted it likewise, and carried from thence the bodie of ^int Isidore to Venice, which was laid in Saint Marks Church, in the Chappell, ^ich we haue elsewhere said was builded by Narses with the spoiles of the enem^s. The fleet made some staie there, in regard of the great sharpnesse of the wi^er. From whence (finding that place fit forAll the Islands of the Grec^an Empire taken. the affaires of warre) they would no^slodge, vntill they had taken all the neighbour-Islands from the Greekes. W^eupon departing thence on a sodaine, they first tooke Samos, then Lesbos, A^dros, and all the other Islands of the Greeke  Empire. Hauing performed these ^oloits neare to the Islands Ciclades, they sayled into Peloponessus, where he s^ed on Methon, at this day called Modona, andZara and all the other Cities of Dalmatia recouered. left a garrison there. Then comm^g into Dalmatia, he recouered Zara (as some write) which had, before, driuen t^nce the Venetian Magistrate; and being thus recouered (to the end that her dest^ction might serue for example to the neighbour Cities how in time to come to f^ifie their faith so religiously sworne vnto) they did for the most part ruine it. Ten they recouered Spalatra and Trahu by force.
But other Authours haue p^sed ouer in silence that which we haue now mentioned to haue beene done by h^ in Dalmatia. All these great atchieuements luckily finished, after that he had ^amed one part by Armes, and protected the other  from al wrong, from the Seacoast of Syria euen to Dalmatia, he brought backe hisThe Prince returneth to Venice. Armie entire to Venice, w^ere hee was receiued with generall ioy. And so soone as he had related what he h^d done in that voyage, the whole Citie did highly praise him. The affaires of the Christians in Syria still declining by little and little, did eueryIn whose time the Turkes recouered the Holy-land. day wax worse, vn^ill the time of Baldwin the fifth. From whom Saladine, King of Egypt, reco^ered Ierusalem, the fourescore and eighth yeare after the Christians had taken ^t. There were diuers and sundrie warlike preparations made aswell in Italie as i^ other parts of Europe, for the conseruation of Syria. But all those attempts p^oued vaine and fruitlesse; of which wee determine briefly to speake as occasion shall serue, not interrupting the course of our Historie.
During the aboade of Prince Michaeli in Asia, or soone after his returne, theThe building of the Hospitall of the publike charitie. Hospitall of the publike charitie was builded, with all that which stands neere to it. The bodie of Saint Donato, brought from Pera to Venice, was laid in a Church newly built, by the diligence and cost (as some Authours say) of one called Marco Iuliano* Michaeli, after hee had gouerned the Common-wealth eleuen yeares, did fortunately decease. His funeralls were followed by great multitudes of people. His tombe is to be seene at this day in the porch of Saint Georges Church, right ouer against the Comcell-Hall on the left hand as ye enter into the Church.

The end of the sixt Booke of the first De^ad.




THE SEVENTH BOOKE  OF THE FIRS^ DECAD OF THE HISTORIE Of Venice.

The Contents of the seuenth Booke of the first Decad.
THe voluntarie submission of the Faneses. The institution of a new Religious Order in the Church of Saint SALVATORI. The erecting of the  Church of Saint CLEMENT. The Paduans are defeated on the turning of the Riuer Brente. The Venetians warre against the Normans, in fauour of the Emperour EMANVEL. The building of the great Tower before the Market-place. Diuers people of Histria made Tributaries. The building of the Church of the Crossed Friers. How greatly the conspiracies of the Neighbour-people did trouble the Venetians. The originall of the plaies made at Shrouetide. What the Emperour EMANVEL did to the Venetian Merchants ouer all his Empire in one day. The Venetians mightie Sea-armie against EMANVEL. The familie of the IVSTINIANI are almost extinct through the malice of their enemies. The miserable death of Prince VITALIS, slaine by his owne people at his returne from Greece. Two huge Pillars of a wonderfull workemanship, erected in  the Market-place, by an Artificer of Lombardie. An Ambassadour of Venice is abused by the Emperour EMANVEL. The cause why the Emperour EMANVEL hated the Venetians. At what time they beganne to shut vp in the publike Treasurie the money of particular persons vnder colour of loane. Pope ALEXANDER flies to Venice in disguise. The Venetians make warre against the Emperour FREDERICK BARBAROSSA, in fauour of the Pope. The Emperours Sonne defeated at Sea by the Venetians; with his imprisonment; and the Emperour FREDERICK his comming to Venice. The Honours and Titles giuen by Pope ALEXANDER to the Dukes of Venice. The agreement betwixt FREDERICK, the Pope, and the Venetians, made at Venice. The Venetian Prince hauing accompanied the Pope to Rome, returneth to Venice, honoured with rich presents. And lastly the description  of the magnificent Church of St. MARKE.





 PIETRO POLLANI, the 36. Duke of Venice.








PIetro Pollani succeeded his deceased Father-in-law Michaeli. At his entrance into the gouernement, the Faneses submitted themselues to the Venetians authoritie, promising to aide them when neede should be; to giue yearlie the quantitie of a thousand poundThe Fanese^ made Tributarie to the Venetia^s. weight of oile, for the vse of S. Markes Church, and to pay them, besides, a yearly pension of money, in manner of Tribute. It seemeth vnto mee that this tribute proceeded from some aide which they had  receiued from the Venetians in their warres, the which some Historians haue noted, albeit they set not downe against whom it was. Bonfi^io Michaeli, Administrator at that time of the Church of S. Saluatori, and all those which accompanied him, tooke a Religious habitA new Religious order. vpon them, instituting a new order, which was afterward authorised by Pope Innocent; and after him, Pope Alexander the fourth consecrated their Church. Pietro Gathilaso caused the Church of S. Clement to be builded on the Canal Orphano. It is reported besides, that at the same time a great strife arose betwixt the Venetians and the Pisans, occasioned by a brauado, rashly made vpon them in the Hauen of Rhodes by Michaeli Vitalis, the Princes sonne, Generall of the Venetian Armie: where the Pisans being ouer-come, and loosing the greatest part of their Armie, didAgreement with the Pisans. receiue a great disgrace: which afterward caused diuers and sundrie murthers on either side. And these two States would haue beene more sharply bent one against the other, had not the Pope by his wise mediation, sodainely pacified their strife.
Diuers cities of Dalmatia, insinuating themselues into the Venetians fauour, promised each of them in her owne name to waite on the Prince with one armed Gallie, as often as he should put to Sea with fifteene Gallies. The Polani likewise, a people of Histria, offered them all aide, with all necessaries for the furniture of the Gallies, at any time when the Prince, marching against the enemies, should arriue in their Countrey.
I finde about the same time the Venetians fought a cruell fight with the Paduans The Paduans defeated. who would haue cut off the Riuer Brente neere to Saint Hilaries Church. Guido Monticulano, Generall of the Venetians Armie by Land in that warre, hauing incountered them neere to Tumba, the bickering was verie bloudie on either side;

but the enemies being ouercome and put to flight, three hundred and fiftie of them were brought prisoners to Venice: who neuerthelesse at the entreatie of the chiefe of their Citie, laying all the blame on some audacious persons among the Common people, and not on the Nobilitie, were all freely sent home againe. Vrso Badoario left to Giouanni Throno of Mayorba diuers goodly Lands seated neere to Muriana and Maiorba, to build an Hospitall in the name of Saint Iames; which being since much augmented and enriched, was giuen to the Religious sisters of the order of the Cistercians. But whilest the Citie was thus at quiet: the Venetians, because they would not liue idely did set set forth an Armie, at the request of the Emperour Emanuel against Rogero, sonne to Guiscard King of Sicilie. This Prince, departingRogero sonne to Guiscard King of Sicilie.  from Ottranto with a great Fleete, came to the Isle of Corfu, bordring vpon the Adriaticke and Ionian Seas: And hauing seized thereon, hee sailed into Morea, where betwixt the Promontorie of Mailla, and the Gulphe of Argiers, and Laconia, he executed diuers hostile actions. Returning thence towards the Sea of Sarrona, neere to the Hauens of Cenchrea and Corinth, hee put all the Countrie adioyning to fire and sword: Then passing forward without any resistance at all, and being come to Istmos (vulgarly called at this day Heximilia) he filled all Achaia with feare and terror. He tooke likewise the Citie of Thebes; where it is reported he shewed himselfe ouer-couetous* in his curious seeking for gold, In the end, he neither spared the Countrie of Nigrepont, nor Beotia called Phocides. And being  pu^t vp by this happie successe, he sent one of his Lieutenants with threescore Gallies to crosse the Hellespont, called at this day the streight of Gallipolis, euen to the Bosphorus of Thrace, at this present called Saint Georges Arme, who with great boldnesse vsed such speed, as being arriued on the sodaine before Constantinople, he set fire on diuers houses neere to the Cittie with firie arrowes, which hee shotte from his Gallies.
The affaires of the Empire being thus troubled; Ema^uel by his AmbassadoursEmanuell his request against the Normans. had recourse vnto the Venetians, of whom, in respect of their ancient friendship, he freely craued helpe in his great need: or if he asked it too late, that they would yet reuenge the wrongs done vnto him. Therefore they prepared a mightie Fleete,A new Armie against the Normans.  which being in readinesse in the Hauen, after that certaine Gallies which were abroad were by a decree called home, the Prince set forward against the enemies. But Historians make no mention at what time these Gallies, which were called home, departed from Venice. We must beleeue they were those which the Venetians did entertaine for the defence of the coaste of Syria, according to their promise made to Baldwin: as some Authors doe affirme. The Fleet being departed from the Citie, sayling on the maine, and grieuously tossed with a mightie tempest, did put it selfe into the Hauen of Caorli, a territorie of the Forlani; where the Prince falling sicke, and perceiuing his disease growing worse and worse and that there was no hope of his sodaine recouerie, after he had committed the charge  of the Armie to Giouanni his brother, and Reyniero his sonne, he returned to Venice. Emanuel likewise had armed a great number of vesselles, which hee committed to the charge of one of his Lieutenants, with all authoritie at Sea. He came by Land with his forces into Albania where he besieged the Citie of Butritot.
But during these atchieuements: the Venetians after they had slaine diuers ofCorfu taken by the Venetians. the enemies, and taken many prisoners, tooke the Isle of Corfu by force. Some neuerthelesse affirme, That the Island was rather recouered; that they did not fight on the maine Sea; and That the Kings Fleete being dispersed and defeated, the Venetians tooke foureteene of his Gallies: who after they had left strong Garrison for the guard of this Island, sailed forthwith into Sicilia: where so soone as they  arriued there is no sort of crueltie which they committed not. They did put allThe Venetians Armie in Sicilie the Prouince to fire and sword; burnt diuers Cities; cut downe the Trees; plucked vp plants by the rootes; and carried great numbers of prisoners with them to Venice. By meanes whereof the Empire was not onely protected (as at other

times) by the Venetians forces, but restored to her ancient splendor and maiestie, which would hardly haue beene done without their aide. The Princes death, which hapned before the Armies returne, hindred the publike ioye for such a victorie* who deceased the nineteenth yeare of his gouernment. Dominico Morosini was by a generall consent chosen in his place.




 DOMINICO MOROSINI, the 37. Duke of Uenice.





ABout the same time (as some write) Rogero King of Sicilie deceased,The death of Rogero king of Sicily. who was an enemie to the Venetians. This Prince, after diuers great atchieuements, hauing subiected vnder his power the Citie of Thunis  in Africke, caused in his life-time these Latine verses to be engrauen on his kinglie sword.

Appulus, and Calaber, Siculus mihi seruit and Apher.

Which may be thus englished,

The prowd Calabrian beares my yoake
Black Affrica I tam'd,
Sicilia's Island felt my stroake
with'Pulia, (Naples nam'd.)

Sixe galleies were sent the same yeare to defend the Sea-coasts, on which the Pirats made ordinary incursions, who sailing on the maine, tooke fiue Galleies of Ancona, which Guiscard, one of the Pirats of his time, did commaund; who being taken was presently hanged. About the same time likewise, diuers buildings aswellA sodaine fier: publike as priuate, were consumed with fier in our Ladies Island, no man knowing from whence it came. Besides, at the same time the foundations of the great Tower was laid, which is right ouer against the market-place, and is a verie admirable peece of worke. For it is reported, that the foundations of the same great Masse are laid so deepe vnderground, as there was more time spent therein, than on the whole worke besides. The top thereof, glistering with gold, is of such heighth, as  a man may not only from thence see round about the Citie, but likewise discouer a great way off at Sea towards the South and East, in such sort as the brightnesse therof doth appeare like a luckie starre, two hundred stadij in length, to those which saile from Histria and Dalmatia.
The Polani, with diuers other of Histria, did by their thefts trouble the Gulfe. The Dukes Sonne with Marino Gradonico were sent against them with fiftie Armed Gallies. Pola being besieged by them, the inhabitants at their first arriuall sued for peace, which was granted them on condition, That they should no more robbe at Sea; and pay yearlie two thousand weight of oile for S. Markes Church. The Parenzans likewise, being moued with the like feare, promised to giue them aide, as oftentimes as the Duke should goe to the wars. The Emonians promised as much, with a yearelie tribute of oile. Some did, besides, acknowledge them for their Soueraigne Lords, promising to free all the Venetian Merchants from subsidies and impositions: Those of A^cona likewise at the same time made a league with theA league with Willam King of Sicil.  Venetians. The like did William King of Sicilie who succeeded Rogero; in regard whereof he graunted diuers priuileges, and immunities, to the Venetian Marchants which frequented the Faires of Sicilie.
Pope Anastasius, at the Venetians entreatie, erected the Church of Zara into an Arch-bishops See, whereunto he subiected all the Cities of the neighbour-Islands.Zara made an Archbishopricke Yet I am not of opinion, that the same was done so much in fauour of those of Zara, who were not at the same time greatly affectionate to the Venetians, as in hatred to the other Cities of Dalmatia; which, for the most part being reuolted from the Venetians, did at the same time obaie the King of Hungarie. If this be so (as diuers likewise affirme it) we must thinke, That Dominico Michaeli, at his returne  from Syria, did not recouer Spalatra, Trahu, nor any other Citie in Dalmatia, but only Zara; or else of a certaine, That this Archi-episcopall erection was in the daies of Vitalis Michaeli the second, in whose time, we finde, Trahu, Spalatra, Ragusa, and diuers other Cities of Dalmatia, to bee possessed by the Emperour Emanuel.
The Church of the Virgin, which the crossed Friers possesse, was built at the charges of the Gussoni, an honourable familie, as that likewise of St. Mathew: toward the which Bernardo Cornari did freely giue the ground. This is all which is obserued to haue hapned at home, or abroade, vnder this Princes gouernment; who died the eighth yeare of his Principalitie, and was buried in the Church of HolieCrosse.




 VITALIS MICHAELI, the second the 38. Duke of Venice.








VItalis Michaeli, the second, succeeded him: who after he had wholly rooted out all ancient emulation betwixt the Venetians and the Pisans, made a league with them.
The Venetians vnder this Princes gouernment took part with Pope Alexander the third, vpheld by the kings of France and England, against Octauian the Anti-Pope, who was alone fauoured by the Emperour Frederick Barbarossa; who, for this cause, commaunded the subiects of the Empire which were neere neighbours to the Venetians, to ouer-runne them. At the Emperours commandement,The Venetians neighbours take armes against them. those of Verona, Padua, and Ferrara, so soone as they had ioined their forces together, did assaile and take by force the Cape of la Mothe. But vnderstanding  that the Venetian Armie approached, (which vpon the first report of the enemies rising was prepared) they soone dislodged, after they had spoiled the Towne, and carried awaie the inhabitants as prisoners. The Venetians not meeting with the enemie, fell on the Territorie of the Hadrians, to reuenge the iniurie done to their subiects. Vlrich, Bishop of Aquileia, presuming on these troubles (for he likewiseUlrich Bishop o^ Aquileia brought to Venice as a prisoner. fauoured Octauian) came with a great troope of Forlani and tooke the Citie of Grada, not so much in hope to keepe the place (for hee had none at all) as to take thence the rarest and richest things, and to carrie them to Aquileia. But being taken with the manner by the Prince his vnlookt-for comming, himselfe, with twelue of his Channons, and manie others of note, were brought prisoners to Venice. From  whence soon after he was discharged, on condition, To send euerie yeare, at shrouetide,The originall of the Games at shrouetide. a fat Bull with twelue wilde Boares, which should be slaine in the Market-place, in the presence of all the people, for a perpetuall testimonie to posteritie of their victorie. But some Authours referre this to the gouernment of Angelo Partitiatio, which wee haue heeretofore mentioned. But I thinke the errour proceeded hence-from, that they deliuer the same to haue hapned in the time of Pope Alexander; not making mention of which Alexander.
Whilest these things were done neere the circuites of the Citie, the EmperourA secret league betwixt the Greeke Emperour and the king of Sicilie. Emanuel attempted by new sleights to gripe from the Venetians. Who hauing made a new League with William king of Sicilie, had giuen his daughter secretly to  him in marriage, or else of a certaine, some hope of new affinitie. For if the same had bene done vnder-hand, I know not with what face he could haue entreated the Venetians to make warre on him; because that euerie one would haue perceiued his dissimulation, by solliciting forraine Armes against him, with whom hee had contracted new friendship and alliance. Now therefore that he might with-drawThe Emperour Emanuels Ambassadours at Venice. this King from the Venetians, whose faithfull friend hee knew him to be, and who (as then) were ignorant of what had passed, he requested them by his Ambassadors to aide him against him. Some write that after the agreement was sworne to, there arose some dissension betwixt the Emperour and the King. If it were so, the matter is answered, for otherwise it would be a hard matter to beleiue, that such affinitie  and alliance betwixt so great personages, could bee contracted vnknowne to the Venetians, or at least could be long concealed from them. Therefore the Grecian Ambassadours receiued this answere, that the Venetians could not by the Law ofThe answere made to the Greeke Ambassadours. Nations, nor by their ancient custome, take Armes without a cause against him who was their good friend and confederate: But that the Emperour Emanuel might wholly make vse of their meanes, as of a Nation which did greatly affect him, so farre forth as their honour and conscience would giue them leaue: though they could not at that time send him aide, without great breach to their reputation and publike loialtie. The Ambassadours were with this answere dismissed, who were no sooner departed from Venice (because there was some likelihood of discontent  about this answere) but they sodainely decreed to send to all Venetian Marchants trafficking at the same time in Greece, to returne home speedily to Venice.
The Emperour, who before then bare them no great good will, thinking by

this refusall to haue a iust occasion to make warre vpon them, seized on the CitiesEmanuel seizeth on the Cities of Dalmatia. of Spalatra, Trahu, and Ragusa, but it is not knowne whether it were by force or by a voluntarie yeelding of the inhabitants. Then adding treacherie to treacherie, he did feigne that hee seazed on them, only to constraine the Venetians to renew the league with him, and with no intent to detaine them. Therefore he intreated them by his Ambassadours to suffer their merchants to vse their trafficke in the accustomed faires of Greece, and that hee would shortly let them vnderstand, how much hee did loue them, and was mindfull of the benefits which hee had receiued from them, as from his good friends, and companions in Armes. The promise of so great a Prince did indeed moue the whole Citie, but much more the remembrance  which he said he carried of the benefits which the Greeke Empire had in times past receiued from their Ancestors. Vpon which assurance hauing reuoked their former decree, they permitted euerie one to saile into Greece. Whereupon a great number of Merchants did sodainely depart, who stirred vp by profit went thither, being followed by two Ambassadours sent to renew the league, namely, SebastianoTreacherie of Emanuel. Cyani, and Auria Maripietro; who were scarce come to Constantinople, when Emanuel, at a day appointed for the same purpose, caused ouer all his Empire all the Venetians to be taken, with their ships and merchandize, commanding them to bee streightly kept till his farther pleasure were knowne, and their money and goods to be shut vp in the publicke warehouses.
The Ambassadours amazed at the newnesse of this deed (for they durst not by the law of Nations hurt them) leauing Constantinople returned into Italie. Some, who in this rumult and feare had put to Sea, arriued sooner at Venice than the Ambassadours, and did report, that by the treacherie and disloyaltie of Emanuel, all their Countrimen (a few excepted) were imprisoned, and their shippes and goods seized on in the hauens and faires of Greece.
The vnworthinesse of the matter did greatly trouble the whole Citie. But calling to minde that there is nothing sooner punished among men than trecherie, being resolued to reuenge this wronge, they sodainely prepared a mightie Armie. AA great Fleete against the Greeke Emperour. hundred gallies were (as they say) in as many dayes, with a meruailous cou^age, readie to set saile, with twentie shippes of burthen. And hauing, besides, sent to all that were abroade in trafficke of merchandize to returne to Venice by the first of September, after they had receiued the supplies of Histria and Dalmatia, the fleete set saile vnder the commaund of Michaeli. He first tooke Trahu by force, and wholy ruined it: whereby wee may perceiue that they had voluntarily yeelded to the Greekes. Ragusa likewise being recouered, the walles next to the Sea-side, with a tower, were beaten downe to the ground, whereon the Emperours Armes were ingrauen. This being done in Dalmatia, they came with a faire winde into the Isle of Nigrepont, where Prince Michaeli preparing to besiege the Cities notwithstanding that they were furnished with good garrisons, was disswaded from it by the  Gouernour of the Island: who being amazed to see so great an Armie, or (perhaps)A new deceit of the Greekes. not ignorant of his masters meaning, to abuse so mightie an enemie by some delay counsailed Vitalis to send his Ambassadours to Constantinople, assuring him that he knew of a certaine, that Emanuel would rathet choose a shamefull and discommodious peace, than warre.
The Bishop of Equiline, who spake good Greeke, and Manasses Badoario, were sent thither. Vitalis in the meane time went to the Isle of Chios, where hee soone reduced the Citie with the whole Island vnder his obedience. And because the cold grew alreadie verie sharpe, hee resolued to spend the winter there, and to expect the returne of his Ambassadours. And for that after the taking of Chyos, there was some hope of peace, hee absteined from making any more incursions on the lands of the Empire. Emanuel in the meane time being cunning and polliticke, so soone as the Ambassadours arriued made shew in publicke to desire peace, sometimes crauing such things, then refusing others, now approuing the Ambassadours

demaunds, and on a sodaine saying that he would communicate them to his Councell, and so of set purpose by these delaies, hee mocked the Venetians. At the last, the Bishop of Equiline and Manasses returned to Vitalis, hauing effected nothing at all, accompanied with the Ambassadours of Emanuel, who arriuing at Chios, and alleadging now one matter, and then another, caused a meruailous delaie.
Whilest these things were doing, the contagious sicknesse, seizing on the VenetianThe contagious sicknesse in the Venetian Armie Armie, did in a short space carrie great numbers of them into another world. The rumour was that the wells and fountaines, from whence the Venetians drew their water, were poisoned by the Emperours commandement, and that the contagion  in the Armie proceeded from the drinking of those waters. Some thinke that Emanuel came with a great Armie to the rescue of the Islands; but not daring to assault the enemie, he returned, after hee had caused all the waters to bee poisoned. It is reported that the whole family of the Iustiniani, was wholly extinct by this sicknesse.The family of the Iustinians, wo^ne out by the sicknesse. For all the males of this familie, that were able to beare Armes, did follow the Prince to these warres. The Citie did meruailously bewaile the losse of this family. But calling to minde that there was one of the same house yet liuing called Nicholas, who hauing taken holy orders on him, did serue in Saint Georges Church, right ouer against the market-place, or (as others say) in Saint Nicholas Church on the shoare; messengers were by the Common-wealth sent to the Pope, to intreate him to permit the young man to leaue his profession, and to marrieThe family of the Iustinians restored. that hee might haue children. Which being granted, the race of the Iustiniani, which hath produced since then so many learned men and great oratours, was preserued in the Citie.
Although Vitalis was greatly vexed with this losse, and perceiued the matter to be delaied by the malice of Emanuel, yet would not he seeme to keepe his Souldiers idle. Therefore, at the beginning of the spring he departed from Chios, and came to Lesbos, and from thence to Lemnos, then to Scyros. But because the sicknesse which was begun in the winter time, did still increase, and that the Souldiers and Marriners did sodainely fall downe dead in the streetes; being frighted with the  cries and slaunders of his owne people hee refolued to bring backe the remainder of his Armie to Venice, after he had lost the greatest part thereof.
Some Authours write, that Trahu, Spalatra, and Ragusa, did reuolt and yeeld to the Greeke Emperour, (which neuerthelesse diuers doe denie) whilest the Venetian Armie was on the Coastes of the Islands Ciclades; and that Michaeli at his returne recouered them.
The Armie being returned to the Citie, the sicknesse followed soone after; whichThe Plague very great in Venice. waxing more contagious at home than abroad, diuers thousands of persons died in few dayes. Whereupon the people being called into the assemblie, all men laid the blame of that losse on Michaeli, calling him traitour to the Commonwealth  and to his owne Souldiers, who seeking to please Emanuel enemie to the Venetian people, had suffered the opportunitie of so godly a victorie to be snatched forth of his hands, hauing abandoned his Armie to the treacheries and deceits of the Greekes: whereunto as hee was readie to answere, and to alleadge his excuses, there arose a sodaine noise among the people which was intermingled with reproaches. Hee perceiuiug it dangerous to make any stay there, stept aside out of the thronge, hauing no man in his companie, and went along the shoare the nearest way to Saint Zacharies Church. Thus escaping he met with a certaine man who fell vpon him and gaue him many dangerous wounds, whereof he shortly died, hauing beene deuoutly confessed; the seuententh yeare of his gouernmeut. OthersPrince Vituli^ murthered.  alleadge diuers other causes of his death. But it is sufficient to knowe that enuie alone procured the same. And nothing did him so much harme, as the ouer-great desire hee had to peace, the which sincerely pursuing, he hid greatly endanger the Common-wealth. As concerning other matters, he was a vertuous man, and at

the beginning greatly beloued of euery one for his wisedome. His funerals did manifest the good will and affection which the people bare vnto him, who in great multitudes were present at the same.
So soone as he was buried, the whole companie came into the Cathedrall Church, where, to cut off those troubles and seditions which seemed to threaten the Citie, being yet in an vproare for the Princes murther, they chose ten from among them,The creation of the ten. who did sweare at that instant to elect no Prince, but such an one as should bee for the profit of the common-wealth. Diuers are of opinion that these ten were not appointed to elect a Duke, but only for to punish the murther, and not then only, but likewise euer after, when any one should offer outrage to the soueraigne Magistrate, whose authoritie they would haue to be sacred and inuiolate: Others affirme, that fortie were appointed to proceede to a new election in the place of him that was deceased. Now, so soone as they entred into discourse concerning a new Duke, it is reported, that they all with one accord named Auria Maripietro, a man of singularAn example of great affection to a mans Countrey. wisedome and ripenesse of counsaile, and who at that time was one of the ten: But he bearing an incredible affection towards his Countrie, perswaded them at the same time to make choise of some other, who would be more for the profit of the common-wealth than himselfe; and in so saying, hee named Sebastiano Cyani, a man of threescore and ten yeares old, and exceeding rich; protesting, that he was fitter for the common-wealth, being one who was not able alone to helpe it in those dangerous  times with counsaile, but with meanes, which it did chiefly want. By this mans modestie, wee may easily see how free those ancient Fathers were from ambition, and how zealous they were for their Countries well-fare, neglecting their owne priuate profit, for the good of the publike. According to his aduice, his fellowes declared Cyani for their Prince, who was forth-with receiued by the people with great applause. And because diuers matters worthy of memorie, as well abroade, as at home, haue beene done vnder this Princes gouernement, we will beginne with those done in the Citie.




 SEBASTIANO CYANI, the 39. Duke of Uenice.





NOt long after hee was created Duke, there were brought out of  Greece (some say from Constantinople, but I cannot conceiue how that should be, so long as Emanuel liued) in ships of burthen commonly called Carraques, three Columnes, or Pillars, of a wonderfullThree great Pillars brought to Venice. greatnes* these ships being come into the hauen, as they began to vnship

one of these pillars with cables and other engines, the huge weight thereof, surmounting the industrie of the labourers, brake all the ropes, so as it ^ell into the bottome of the Sea, where it yet remaines: the other two were landed with more care. The which, after they had laien for a certaine time on the shore* no man durst vndertake for any hire whatsoeuer to set them vp. The desire which all men had to see them erected, was the cause, that by a publike decree it was euery where published, That whosoeuer would by his industrie vndertake to bring the same to effect, it should bee lawfull for him to craue of the Prince and People whatsoeuer hee would, promising on the publike faith, that it should be giuen him: Prouided, that it were a matter which might honestly be demanded. At the report hereof, diuers  (as the manner is) came running from all parts, some for hope of reward, and others being pricked forward with the desire of fame. But of them al there was none which vnder-tooke the matter, but only one that came forth of Lombardie, who by continuallHow the Columnes were erected and by whom wetting with water the great cables which supported the whole weight, being by that meanes brought into the Market place, did set them vp in the same place where they now stand, leauing a certaine space betwixt each of them. And on the top of the one was set a gilded Lyon with open wings, which is the badge of S. Marke, and on the other the figure of S. Theodore the Martyr, holding his lance and shield, with the Dragon vnder his feete.
It is reported, that he demanded for his recompence, That it might bee lawfullThe recompence which the Ing^ner demanded.  for all dice and carde-plaiers, to play and cheate betwixt those pillars without any feare of punishment. I should praise thine industrie (O Enginer) whosoeuer thou wert, haddest thou not so greatly recommended so base and vile an exercise, the which if thou haddest not extremely loued, thou wouldest neuer haue so much importuned. But God bestoweth not all on one man. This man likewise was the first beginner of the bridge a^ Rialto, and of many other very profitable deuises for the common-wealth, in regard whereof it was decreed, (he himselfe hauing so requested it) that he should be maintained during his life at the publike charge.
But whilest these things were done in the Citie, Emanuel being desirous to make his profit of the Venetians misfortune, (for hee had heard how greatly the Citie  had beene afflicted with the plague after the returne of the Armie, and likewise of the Princes murther) omitted no kinde of treacherie against the Venetians. He didCrueltie against the law of Nations. outrage to their Ambassadours that were with him; contrarie to the law of Nations. Prince Vitalis, at his departure from Greece, had sent them to Constantinople, vpon likelihood that the enemie would hearken to a peace: Hee called then Henrico Dandulo, one of the Ambassadours, into his cabinet, as if he had meant to haue imparted some secret matter to him, where hee made him blinde by holding red hot copper before his eies. This monstrous treacherie, which noteth such a Prince to be of a base and abiect minde, makes me to beleeue, that which diuers Venetian Historians haue reported of him: That being descended of base Parentage, after hee had  (to satisfie the inordinate appetite of a voluptuous widdow) put to death for that occasion all the Nobilitie of Greece, he obtained the Imperiall dignitie.
This widdow (as I thinke) had beene wife to Alexis; for Emanuel succeeded him, her husband being dead. After his death there being some likelihood that such an Empire could not be well gouerned by a Womans authoritie, the Princes and other great Lords of the Empire, did solicite her to marrie againe, and to take for husband whomsoeuer shee should like among the Nobilitie. Shee being enamoured on one of her houshold seruants of meane condition, named Gryphon (whoCruell determination of a Woman. after he had vsurped the Empire tooke the name of Emanuel) called him secretly into her cabinet, and bewraied to him her wicked intent. I haue determined (said  shee) for feare least by a new marriage I should be depriued of our familiar conuersation, to make thee Emperour, if thou wilt but shew thy selfe stout and valiant. But giue eare how this may be done. I know that thou hast many Kinsfolkes in the Countrie; I will haue thee cause them all to come secretly Armed into the Citie, by

sundrie waies, and at sundrie times: These thus Armed, thou must, when neede shall bee, bring into some place in this Palace, making them readie to strike, when thou shalt command. Then, all the chiefe of the Empire beeing called together, I will aske them if their meaning be to haue me marrie with such an one as I loue, and whether they will acknowledge him for Emperour of Greece? If they say (as I doubt not but they will) that they are so content; I will then name the for my husband and Emperour, and enforce them at the instant to sweare fealtie and alleageance vnto thee; But if they shall refuse so to doe, I will deliuer them all into thy hands, and into the power of thy friends, to doe with them what shall seeme good vnto thee. This yong man, being valiant and amorous, did greatly praise the inuention  of this woman; and after that hee had made readie that which was concluded betwixt them, vpon the refusall which the Princes made to consent to soAll the Princes of the Greeke Empire murthered. base and vnequall nuptials, they were altogether at an instant murthered: and by that meanes, in one daie, ended the race of Constantine in Grecia.
Emanuel hauing in this sort vsurped the Empire; It is reported, that hee found a Booke of Prophecies, wherein reading by chaunce he was greatly frighted at one of the verses, which said, that those of Adria should one daie command in Constantinople. I omit the rest, which he, being not able to vnderstand, did impart to soothsaiers and Astrologians; who were of opinion, that it was to bee meant of the Venetians,The cause why Emanuell hated the Uenetians. who inhabited the Adriatick Sea: which hee himselfe likewise imagining, had alreadie thought likelie to come to passe. And from thence (as it is said) proceeded the originall of his hatred towards the Venetians. For he, thinking it would shortly happen, that the Citie of Constantinople should be besieged by them, (the which of a certaine fell so out within a while after) he sought by treacherie and stratagems (not being able to do it by open force) to ouerthrow and ruinate the Venetian State. And not satisfied with that which he had till then done against them; he drew them of Ancona from their alliance, who in fauor of him, did for a time bar them from their free Nauigation. But the Venetians, making alliance with those of Ariminium, neere neighours to the Anconezans, did in such sort shut vp the passages from them, as their condition was like vnto theirs who are straightly besieged.
The Cities treasure being wholly exhausted by means of the great affaires whichWhen the loane began at Venice had hapned, it was decreed, That the monies of particular men laid in Deposito, should be brought to the treasurie of Saint Marke, to be imploied and kept in the name of the Common-wealth as neede should be, vntill such time as the Citie had recouered her former wealth. The which at this day is commonly called a Loane, which was (as some say) deuised by Prince Michaeli. From whence (as is supposed) grew the chiefe reason of the peoples hatred against him, and the principall occasion of his death. Diuers Ambassadours were sent likewise about the same time from sundrie places to treate af an agreement with the Emperour-
Thus stood the affaires of the Venetians, when as (to the end that the Citie mightThe True cause of Vitalis his death. be alwaies busied about weightie matters) The Cause of Alexander the third gaue them the subiect of a goodly victorie. Some moderne Historians doe in no sort approue this matter. But all the Venetian Annalists, and some strangers likewise, doe make particular mention of it; and saie, That after diuers secret enmities betwixt Alexander and the Emperour Frederick, occasioned, because (...) the new SchismeWherefore the Emperour Frederick hated Pope Alexander the third. betwixt Alexander and Octauian the Anti-Pope, the matte^ ^eeing referred to the decision of Frederick, Alexander would not stand to his iudgement: Fredrick being moued heerewith, called Octauian before him, and declared himselfe openly against Alexander. In hatred of whom, he published a Generall Councell at Dijon a Citie A generall councell published to be holden at Dijon. in France; the which beeing dissolued by reason there was nothing done, because Pope Alexander refused to come thither, Frederick in rage resolued to returne into Italie. Whereupon hauing sent his Anti-Pope before him, he marched soone after with great forces beyond the Mounts; but before his arriuall Octauian died. In

whose sted Guido of Cremona being elected, Frederick promised to assist him with all his power against Alexander. And after diuers exploits executed in the Prouince, comming neere to Ancona, hee turned towards Rome, whither he sodainely marched with an intent wholly to ouerthrow Alexander. Who being frighted with his comming, making vse of two Gallies belonging to William King of Sicilie, hee came first to Cayetta, and from thence to Beneuentum. Frederick, after hee had installed Guido in the holie Chaire, returned into Lombardie. But Guido likewise died soone after.
Now Alexander, committing the temporall gouernment to the Romans, crauedThe flight of^ Pope Alexander. no more but to intend Diuine matters; Prouided, that they of the contrarie faction  would permit him to liue in Rome. But not being able to purchase his peace on these conditions, and despairing of all reconciliation, he departed from the Citie. But it is hard to determine whither this refusall were the cause of his departure (a thing scarse credible, that the diuision of the inhabitants could haue constrained him to leaue the Citie, the Romans not being interessed therein, in regard they had theThe Emperour Fredericks rigorous (...) against the Pope. temporall iurisdiction in their own power) or whither it were rather the vniust command of the Emperour whereby he was bannished forth of all Italie, and those attainted of capitall Treason which should giue him meate or drinke, or receiue him into their houses; threatning to ruine those Cities which should giue him entertainement, and to make warre on those Lords and Potentates, which should  fauour him, which might be the cause, that hauing no place of safetie in all Italie, nor any good affiance in William King of Sicilie, hee came through Apulia to mount Gargari; and from thence taking ship (as Obba of Rauenna saith) in a vessell of Liburnia, he came to Zara; And afterwards passing through Dalmatia, hee came in disguise to Venice, as to the only refuge of all libertie. Yet there scarce thinking himselfe in safetie (as being vnacquainted with the Venetians loue and affection towardsPope Alexander comes to Venice in disguise. him) concealing his estate, which he thought best so to doe, hee remained so long in the Hospitall of the Charitie in poore raiment, called by the name of Commodo, as at last he was knowne by a naturall marke vpon his body. Some write, that the better to liue there in secret, he serued for Scullion of the kitchin. But it is more  credible that he concealed his Dignitie vnder the habit of a poore Priest; which by diuers likewise is affirmed.
Forraine Historians doe affirme, That he came to Venice with thirteene Gallies belonging to King William, and not like a fugitiue, to recouer the Emperours fauour in a free Citie, the place hauing beene appointed for the meeting. But if it were so as they say; What needed so many Gallies? which were sufficient, not only to haue transported the Popes small houshold, which is likely, at that time, to be but meane, but all Rome likewise: which in those daies was smally inhabited. Besides, what needed he to haue made so long and dangerous a iourney? As though he had rather to haue trauersed the Sea-coasts with danger, than to passe in safetie through the  Duchie of Spoleta, and marches of Ancona. Vndoubtedly hee needed not to haue beene at so great expenses, nor yet to haue so greatly hazarded himselfe, had it not beene to haue auoided a greater danger. For the Emperours decree made all things difficult to him.
Therefore, in disguised habit, or in these Gallies (for some of our Historians couertly seeme to consent thereunto) he must of necessitie come to Venice. But how soeuer he arriued there, all those, whom we follow, doe agree, That being at the pursuit of Fredericke driuen from the Pontificiall dignitie, hee had recourse to theHow the Venetians entertained the Pope when they knew him. Venetians; and that, being knowne, he was honourably entertained by Prince Cyani, and lodged in the Castle of Oliuollo: with promise, either to reconcile him to the  Emperour, or else that they themselues would reestablish him in his See.
First of all, they concluded to send Ambassadours to Fredericke, to entreate him,A resolued Ambassade to Fredericke in the Popes behalfe. in the name of the common-wealth, to be reconciled with Pope Alexander, and that in so doing he should not only performe a matter most profitable for all Christendome,

but most acceptable to the Venetians, who wholly sought the profit and aduancement of Alexander. It is reported that the Pope being present when the lettersAt what time the Venetian Prince began to seale with lead. were writing to Fredericke, and perceiuing that they sealed them with wax, he commaunded, in fauour of Ciani and his successors, That euer after the Duks letters should be sealed with lead: the which is obserued euen to this daie. Obba of Rauenna who liued in those times, as well in regard of the antiquitie of his booke, from whence we haue taken this, as also because he hath curiously set downe al which passed in this warre saith, That the Venetian Princes had till then vsed two sorts of seales; namely lead in all their publicke acts of perpetuall remembrance; and wax in all their missiues, and other priuate writings. And how at that time by Pope Alexanders authoritie, they decreed euer after to vse lead.
The Ambassadours being come into the presence of Fredericke, were at the firstFredericke his answere to the Uenetian Ambassadours. curteously entertained. But so soon as they made mention of peace with Alexander he fell into a rage, and said: Get yee hence, and tell your Prince and people, That Fredericke, the Roman Emperour, demaundeth his enemie which is come to them for succour; whom if they send not presently vnto him bound hand and foote, with a sure guard, he will proclaime them enemies to him and the whole Empire: AndFrederickes menaces. that there is neither alliance, nor law of Nations, which shall be able to free them from his reuenge for such an iniurie, To prosecute which hee is resolued to ouerturne all diuine and humane lawes: That he will sodainey bring his forces by Sea  and Land before their Citie, and will, contrarie to their hope, plant his victorious Eagles in the market-place of Saint Marke.
The Ambassadours, being sent sent backe in this manner, did report at VenicePreparations for warre against Fredericke. the fierce menaces which the Emperour had vttered: wherewith the Citie was in some sort troubled; For there was likelyhood of more sharpe warres, than euer in anie time before. They decreed forthwith to arme a great number of Shippes, and to make themselues euer masters of the Sea. For, that being well defended, they did not greatly feare the enemies forces.
Whilest the Fleet was preparing, and the whole Citie in expectation of this warre, speedie newes was brought, that Otho sonne to Fredericke, did approach  with threescore and fifteene Gallies. Whereupon Ciani determining to meet him, caused the Fleete then presently made readie, to set saile. Before they went aboard the Pope celebrated diuine seruice, with prayers to God, That it might please himThe Prince im^ himselfe in the Popes presence. to graunt the victorie to the Prince and his followers. Afterwards turning towards Ciani, he honored him with the golden sword, and with other signes of Knighthood; who sayling from the Port with thirtie Gallies, made way with speed towards the enemies. It is reported that they met on the frontiers of Histria, neere toFredericke his Fleet put to flight, and his sonne brought prisoner to Venice. the Promontori^ of Salberico, in the Countrie of the Piranni. And that they fought there a long time; where at last, the enemie beeing broken and put to rout, eight and fortie of his Gallies were taken; and among others, the Royall Gallie, and two  suncke in the fight. The Venetians, after they had gotten the masterie at Sea, brought Otho prisoner to Venice.
At the report of this victorie, the whole Citie was filled with meruailous ioie and amazement: They did hardly beleeue that the battaile was so luckily obteined, andAt what time the Venetian Prince did beginne to m^rrie the Sea. that so small a number had fought so valiantly. But vnderstanding that the Fleet was at hand, and that Otho, sonne to Fredericke, with diuers other great personages were brought prisoners, a great multitude of people ranne to see them. The taking of so great a Prince made Ciani his return the more triumphant. Vnto whom, being come on shoare, the Pope, after he had congratulated his victorie, presented a ring of gold.  Take (quoth he) Ciani this ring, and by my aduice, giue it to the Sea, obliging it thereby vnto thee, the which both thou and thy successors likewise shall for euer hereafter yearely doe on this same day, to the end posteritie may know, that ye haue in times passed by right of warre purchased the intire dominion ouer the Sea, making it subiect vnto you as a woman is to her husband.
The Venetians suffered Otho vpon his word, to goe vnto his father Frederick. promising to returne if hee could not mediate a peace for Alexander and for them. Departing vpon these promises, and being come into his fathers presence, he was entertained with so much the more ioy, as the feare and doubt of his being aliue had beene great: where after many reciprocall embracements entermingled withOtho ^is discourse to his father Fredericke. reares hee did briefly discourse of the battaile, and referre it to haue beene done by the diuine prouidence, saying hee had omitted nothing in that fight which did belong to a good Captaine, and that there wanted nothing for the obtaining of victorie, but a iust quarrell. It behooued him then to beleeue, that God was powerfull therein, and not men, seeing so mightie an Armie as theirs was, not being slowe  to fight, had beene defea^ed by a few, who were not halfe their number. And howsoeuer they might well ouerthrowe and destroy humane forces, yet it was impossible to surmount diuine. Therefore hee did most humbly beseech his Maiestie, no more to trouble Alezander for his place, whose quarrell hee might perceiue, by the successe to bee maintained not only by men, but by God himselfe: further alleadging. That he had alreadie dis^uieted him with the forces of the Empire, and sought to put him from his seate, yet all in vaine: That therfore he should do a deede pleasing to all men, and worthie of a Christian, if (all hatred being forgotten) it would please him to change his minde, and after assurance taken from the Venetians for his safe comming, he would be pleased to visit the Pope, and openly to giue  him satisfaction* Which being once done they might euer after remaine good friends, and consult together about the welfare of all Christendome; the which hee did againe most earnestly intreat.
The discourse of Otho did mightily preuaile with his father; who on a sodaineHow farre Otho his entreatie preuailed with his Father. being changed from warre to peace, began to incline toward a reconcilement with Alexander and the Venetians. Whereupon so soone as hee had receiued safe-conduct from the Venetians, he came to Venice. Pietro Cyani, the Princes sonne, was sent with six Gallies to Rauenna to meet him. Diuers small boates went as farre as Chioggia to doe the like. But being arriued at Venice, without staying in any place, hee went to see the Pope, who tarried for him at the gate of Saint MarksThe Emperour ariues at Venice Church, reuested in his Pontificalibus, sitting in a chaire richly decked: neare vnto whom when he approached, he threw off his purple roabe, and crept on his knees euen to his Holinesse feet, the which hee humbly kissed. The Pope raised him vp, and embraced him. Then both of them entering into the Church went vnto theThe Emperours obedience to the Pope. high Altar, whereon that most excellent table of gold (whereof wee haue heretofore spoken) enriched with most pretious gems was laid, and the which is at this day to bee seene in the treasurie of Saint Marke. The same was then seene and gazed vpon by the people, who receiued a wonderfull contentment to see the two greatest Potentates of Christendome talking there louingly together.
Some say that the Pope (for satisfaction of his wrongs susteined) whilest the Diuers opinions of the Historians concerning this reconciliation. Emperour kneeled on the ground did set his foote vpon his necke, speaking this verse of Dauid, super aspidem and Basiliscum ambulabis; and that the Emperour with a great and inuincible courage made answere at the same time, Non tibi sed Petro. Vnto whom hee replied in choller treading more hard vpon him, Et mihi and Petro. This was done vpon Ascension day. Others say that it was vpon the day that the battaile was wonne, and that in memorie thereof, the Pope granted great pardons to all, who repenting, and being confessed, should visit euery yeare on the same day Saint Marks Church. Not long after, the Emperour and the Pope departed from Venice. But the Venetian Historians say that both of them tarried there certaine moneths.
Obba of Rauenna reportes that Frederick came by Land to Ancona, and Pope  Alexander with Prince Cyani arriued there at the same time: the whole Citie runningHow long the Venetian Princes haue vsed the Canopie. out to meet them: And to giue them honorable entertainment, the City sent out two Canopies; the one for Alexander, and the other for Frederick; and that

then the Pope commaunded a third to bee brought for the Venetian Prince, and permitted him in the presence of all the people, that he and his successours should for euer vse one, as they at this day doe, when they walke abroad in solemnitie, with the other Ducall Ensignes.
VVhen they arriued at Rome, the Pope was receiued with all gladnesse: who obseruing amongest these triumphes siluer trumpets which made a verie excellent sound caused eight of them to be giuen to the Venetian Prince, in memorie of his victorie: which the soueraigne Magistrate of Venice should euer afterwards vse. All the Venetian Chroniclers doe affirme this to be true.
Cyant taking leaue of the Pope; returned with his holy blessing to Venice. The  Marriners appointed for that purpose went to receiue him in the Bucentauro. The Bishop of the Castle with the most part of the Citie went forth to meete him and to doe him reuerence; who landing at the Hauen, hauing a burning taper of white wax borne before him (as the first gift which he receiued of Pope Alexander being at Venice) the Canopie, the siluer trumpets, and the banner, (being the ensignesWhy they vse siluer Trumpets. which he and his successours had receiued, on condition to haue them carried before them euer after) he entered the Citie with great ioy. This is it which we findeThe ornaments and ensignes of the Venetian Princes. aswell in the Venetian Historians as in strangers, touching this so famous victorie, obtained by the Venetians against Otho, sonne to the Emperour Frederick: All which the Venetians, who liued long time after, would haue to be publikely represented. For the whole order of this warre is painted in the hall of the Palace, where euerie eight dayes they assemble for the creation of new Officers.
Cyani being oppressed with old age, and ill disposed of his person, after that heeThe death of Prince Cyani and his last Will. had prosperously gouerned the Common-wealth for the space of eight yeares, caused himselfe to be carried into Saint Georges Monasterie, where in short space he died. Hee gaue to the Common-wealth by his testament diuers lands, neere to Saint Marks Chuch; and some others in the Mercers street, neere to Saint Iulians, to the Pristes of the Church where he should be buried.
It is reported, That it was hee which did enrich Saint Marks Church with that sumptuousnesse and magnificent cost, whereof wee will make so much the shorter  mention, as we drawe neare to the end of this booke.
Now this Church is not, as diuers other, so much recommended for the greatnesse and vnmeasurable extent, as it is for the richnesse thereof. It is builded inThe description of Saint Markes Church. forme like a Crosse, whose corners are highly vaulted, and couered with lead, as all the rest is, which is discerned of Sea-men higher than all the buildings of the Citie aboue six-score stadij from thence. The whole masse is besides supported by most curious Arches, ioyned together by a meruailous skill: The inner part, from the middle euen to the highest part thereof, glistereth with gold; and the concauitie of the vaults is enriched with diuers goodly and ancient pictures, made after the Greeke manner, which, with the labour to behold them in respect of their heigth, doe present to the spectatators, by their sad and venerable aspect, a kinde of feare entermingled with pietie, and religion. That which is from the guilding downe to the pauement, is so well compassed and ioyned together with goodly tables of marble, as by their pleasant raies in forme of vaines, the eyes of the beholders are rather wearied than satisfied. The seats below are of a strange red stone, like to Porphirie. The pauement all of marble, engrauen with diuers figures wholly different, and of sundrie colours. Besides, sundrie Columnes, and diuers tables of marble Tap^ic, Parian, Spar^an, and Numidian, (at least, resembling them) enuiron the high seates on both sides the Quire. The comming into the Church on both sides is in a manner of the same trimming. Whose guilded Arches, are susteined without, by more then three hundred admirable Columnes, not so much for their greatnesse, as for their diuersitie of colours: the space betweene those pillers being couered with goodly tables of marble. On the heigth of this entrance, foure great brazen horses guilded are to bee seene, as if they neighed for ioy: which is indeede a most

excellent peece of worke, but not of our time. All this beares vp the highest top of the Church, diuided into sixe steeples: euery of which, built like a Piramides, hath on the sharpest point thereof standing a white marble statue of a naked man. Diuers other representations delightfull to behold, and wrought with exceeding skill, do greatly beautifie the spaces betwixt these steeples. The whole worke aswell on the right hand, as on the left, is of the same substance and workemanship, and all that which is vaulted vnderneath, is couered with gold. In a word there is no place in the whole Church, either within or without, but is either trimmed with gold, or marble, or with some other rich stone; so that two Columnes of Alablaster, which stand neere to the high Altar, and the Calcidonie-stones, which are to bee seene in  the middest of the pauement, of the breadth of a foote and halfe, are among so great riches counted as nothing. Such is the structure of Saint Marks Church, the adorning whereof (as I haue said) is for the most part attributed to Prince Cyani. And because it wholly (in a manner) glistereth with gold, I will not sticke (as I haue alreadie done) to call it the golden Church, as often as I shall haue cause to speake thereof.




The end of the seuenth Booke of the first Decad.






THE EIGHTH BOOKE  OF THE FIRST DECAD OF THE HISTORIE Of Venice.

 The Contents of the eighth Booke of the first Decad.
THe institution of the publike Almes, by whom, and at what time. The fourth rebellion of those of Zara. A new iourney of the Christians against the Turkes, with the defeate of SALADINE, and the recouerie of the Citie of Acre by the Christians. The coyning of the money (called Aurelia) in the Citie. Pola surprised by the Pisans. The recouerie of the same by the Venetians, and the defeate of the Pisans neare to Modona. ISAAC is imprisoned by his brother ALEXIS, after hee had depriued him of the Empire. The Christian Princes that march against the Turkes arriue at Venice. The Venetians agreement with these Princes. The recouerie of Zara. The resolution of the Venetians, and the stranger-Princes to goe into Greece, at the entreatie of yong ALEXIS. Constantinople is taken by the Christian  Princes, and by the Venetians. The death of yong ALEXIS, after the deceasse of his Father ISAAC, through the treacherie of his people. The recouerie of Constantinople by the Christian Princes, and by the Venetians ioyned together. BALDWIN, Earle of Flanders, made Emperour of Greece. The Isle of Candie, with all the Islands (in a (...)) of the Aegean Sea, allotted to the Venetians for their claime which they (...) (...) to Constantinople. The beginning of the warre against the Genoueses, for the Isle of Candie. The victorie also against the Paduans, for a wrong offered to the Venetians at a publike shew at Treuiso. The Venetians send a Colonie to Corfu. The Emperour HENRIE, who succeedeth BALDWIN, is treacherously taken by THEODORE the Albanois. The taking of Damiet in Aegypt by the Christians, where they became rich with the spoile: and  what prisoners they brought away with them.

THe common opinion is, That by a Testamentarie legacieWho was the Author of the publike Almes. of Prince Cyani, this holy distribution of money was likewise ordained, whereby the Procurators of S. Marke doe at this day releeue with the publike money, the necessitie of Orphans, and other poore distressed People. But the ancient manner of distributing itThe ancient ma^ner of distributing Almes. was altogether different from that at this day; the which being more seemely, was also more to bee praised. For it is said, That those distributers did themselues enquire of euery ones necessitie, and then putting the money into little coffins of paper, wherein were written the seuerall names of such only as they meant to releeue that day, they

would in the euening go to the poore mens houses, and giue them the Almes in very great secrecie. A man should not haue seene in those dayes (because there was no such neede) so many poore people at their Gates as now there are. The recommendation of friends and kinsfolkes did then smally preuaile; those onely which were knowne to be poore were alone releeued. The ancient maner is now wholly changed: and this change proceedeth from the great multitude of businesses. For they which at this day haue those offices, are almost of the chiefe of the Senate, for Councell, Age, and Authoritie, whereby they haue not onely the managing of this businesse of the Commonwealth, but diuers others likewise, and of greater importance: So, as being imploied in diuers businesses, they themselues  cannot in such manner intend this, as did those of old time. But they doe at this day liberally releeue all those who are recommended vnto them (prouided that the partie who recommendeth be of good reputation, and the pouertie of the person recommended apparant) therein omitting no worke of charitie.



 AVRIA MARIPIETRO, the 40. Duke of Uenice.





IN the place of deceased Cyani, the people did subrogate Auria Maripietro, (called by some, Andrea) hauing for the same purpose appointed foure men amongst them, who should euer after haue authoritie to choose fortie. Being by these men chosen Prince, he had no sooner A new manner of electing the Prince. receiued the ensignes of Soueraigne dignitie, but forthwith he disioyned the Pisans from those of Ancona: who being backt by the Pisans, and by conueniencie of the places, had for a time by their ordinarie incursions greatly molested the Venetians at Sea. But at the last, after a reciprocall restitution of whatsoeuer had beene taken, truce was granted for ten yeares.
At the same time those of Zara reuolted from the Venetians the fourth time,The fourth rebellion of those of Zara. and soone after this reuolt, Bella King of Hungarie, filled their Citie with Garrisons. It is said that they did thus vpon discontentment, that their Church should be subiect to that of Grada; if it were vpon any other occasion, yet this at the least was all their pretext. It is certaine that this Citie, which in respect of her often rebellions  had beene a cause of extraordinarie expence to the Venetians, was very glad, vnder this pretence to vent her former determinations. This reuolt being knowne, all men were of opinion forth-with to leuie an Armie, to reduce the Zaratins to their obedience, and to punish them according to their deserts, for their often breach of faith,

that they might serue for an example to others. But mens hope to see this Armie in readinesse, in regard of the pouertie of the common Treasurie, was small; wherevpon diuers of the wealthiest Citizens bearing a singular affection to the commonwealth,Example of great loue towards a ^ans Countrie. louing their Countries profit more than their owne, did giue great summes of money. There were likewise diuers impositions exacted at Rialto towards this warre. By meanes whereof the Armie being readie, sailed into Dalmatia. At the Venetians arriuall Zara was besieged, and all the Islands neare to the Citie were in a short space recouered. The Citie it selfe, in regard of the Kings Garrison within it, could not be taken.
But whilest the Venetians were busied in the Dalmatian warres, the Christian A New Armie of Christians for the recouerie of the bolly Land. Princes tooke armes for the recouerie of Ierusalem, from whence the Sarracens vnder the conduct of Saladine had expulsed the French, the foure-score and eighth yeare after it was taken by Godfrey. Wherefore the Venetians taking truce for two yeares with King Bella, at Pope Clement his entreatie, who did earnestly solicit them to vndertake this voiage, they soone resolued to leuie a mightie armie. Diuers great Princes likewise did for the same purpose arme themselues (as wee haue said)Who were the chiefe of this enterprise against the Turkes. at the Popes request. Among whom were the Emperour Fredericke, the Kings of France, and England, and Otho Duke of Burgundie, accompanied by diuers great Prelats: The Pisans likewise ioining themselues with the Venetians on the Adriatike Sea, passed into Syria with diuers vessels. But both their fleetes arriued there, a long time before those of Frederick and the other kings. For the Citie of Acre, (which the Christians had likewise lost) was besieged, before Frederick had crossed Saint Georges Arme to come into Asia, or before that Philip (departing from Messina, whither he was come with Richard, after they had crossed the Riuer of Genowaie and the Tuscan Sea) did arriue in the Prouince. Richard being tossed with a furious tempest cast Anker in Cyprus, which he wholly spoiled, because the inhabitants at his arriuall had refused to receiue him into their Hauen. From whence soon after he passed into Syria.
Frederick, after he had taken certaine Townes in Asia, entred Armenia the lesse,The Emperour Frederick dieth in Armenia. where vnaduisedly going into a deepe Riuer, to wash and refresh himselfe, beeing  carried awaie by the force of the streame he was drowned. But before this happened, our people had a long time laboured before Acre: for they had sometime fought with great hazard with Saladine. And besides that, want of all necessariesGreat famine in the Camp before P^olomais. was so great in the Christians campe, as the Soldiours did not refuse to eate whatsoeuer they found, how vnholesome or bad so euer it were, and being almost starued, did expose themselues out of their Trenches to bee slaine by the enemies shot. In the end, at the arriuall of these two Kings, the two Armies beeing ioined together, the French became so strong, as they no more feared to bee enforced by the enemie to discampe from that side. Saladine resolued by force to open a waie for his Soldiours, and vsing fraud with force, hee caused a ship full of Snakes and Serpents, to  saile directly towards the front of the Christians battaile. But being come in view, before the Barbarians who were within it could haue leisure to vse their cunning, their fleete being broken and defeated before the Hauen, this shippe was of set purposeSaladines Armie defeated. sunke. Whereupon, the Townes-men and those of the Garrison hauing lost all hope of being relieued, did yeeld, after they had maintained the siege a whole yere.Ptolomais yeeldeth. They were cruelly dealt with, by reason that in their capitulation they promised to giue the Christians a part of the holie Crosse, the which could no where be found.
Acre beeing taken, the Venetians possessed the selfe-same right, which they had in times past purchased by Armes in the same Citie. This is all which hapned abroade during the Principallitie of Auria. But within the Citie they stamped a  new coine, called (Aurelia) by the name of the Authour; who retiring himselfe into the Monasterie of Holie Crosse, the ninth yeare (as some say) of his gouernment, or the fourteenth (according to some) or the eight and twentieth yeare, which is much more (as others say) tooke the Monastick habit, and there died.





 HENRICO DANDVLO, the 41. Duke of Uenice.








HEnrico Dandulo, beeing declared Prince by the fortie according to the manner aboue mentioned, succeeded him.
The Common-wealth vnder this man did not only purchase fame and renowne, but did mightily enlarge the bounds of her Dominions. He first of all forbad those of Verona from trafficking with the Venetians, because they had wronged certaine Venetian Marchants on the Riuer Adice. This prohibition caused them to restore that which they had taken from the Venetians in their Priuileges and immunities, and neuer more to molest them sailing on those streames.
The Armie returned from Syria, for the great want it had of fresh supplies, hauing beene abroade three yeares: The Pisans likewise left the Prouince: But they, continually during the three yeares they were abroad, did so enuie and hate the Venetians, that the same (as it often hapneth) did beget open dissension, which turned at last to the Pisans ouerthrow. For they, sailing on the Adriatick Sea, surprizedThe Pisans take Pola. the Citie of Pola tributarie to the Venetians, with intent to winter there, if it were possible. But the Venetians, not being able to suffer such indignitie, did Arme ten Gallies, and six ships of burthen: and adding certaine fresh supplies of Souldiours, they came speedily to Pola, the which being as speedily recouered, they burnt al the Tuscan ships which they found in the Hauen. The greatest part of their Fleet was  gone to conuoie six ships of burthen of their owne, who returned at that time from Greece laden with Marchandize, and were going home. The Venetians, after they had dismantelled the Citie of Pola (not so much for hatred to the Townesmen, as to make it lesse fit for the Pisans retreite, at any other time) sailed towards Modona, determining to meete with those six ships of Pisa* and to fight with the other which were gone from Pola to conuoie them. It was not long ere they were descried; andThe Pisans defeated by the Venetians. making towards them, they fought almost in the view of the Citie, where the Tuscan conuoie being broken and put to flight, two of the Marchant-ships were taken. Soone after, they made peace with the Pisans.
Some Venetian Historians, not mentioning this peace, do affirme, How the same  yeare that they fought before Modona, the Pisans, back't by the Brundusians, did hinder the Venetians free Nauigation on the Adriatick Sea. Whereupon Giouanni B^silio and Thomaso Phaledrio beeing sent against them with great forces, did in such sort terrifie them, as they enforced them speedily to forsake the Seas: and going afterwards

against the Brundusians who had assisted them with men and victuailes, they did constraine them to sue for peace, the which was granted by the Venetians.Peace granted to the Brundusians.
Pellegrino Bishop of Aquileia did at the same time make a new league with the Venetians, thereby the better to enable himselfe against Treuiso, whose open enemie he was And by that meanes being made a Citizen of Venice, he did purchase diuers lands in the Citie, and did by this agreement promise the Common-wealth all aide and assistance when need should be. For his sake the Treuisans were forbidden an^e more trafficke with the Citie.
About the same time the Venetians had a new occasion presented them to enlardge their dominions. Isaac at the same time commaunded the Grecian Empire, who was a great friend to the westerne Christians, and had, not long before, liberally receaued and wel-comed (which his ancestors before him had neuer done but against their willes, for the naturall hatred which that Nation euer bare to all Christians of Europe) all the French and Almaigne Captaines which were going into Asia. This man had a younger brother named Alexis, whom he had euer so deerely loued, as (the name of Emperour excepted, which he reserued to himselfe) he liued in equall command with him. Isaac had moreouer not long before paid to the barbarous enemie (who had by his owne rashnesse taken him prisoner) a great weight of gold for his ransome. But this most vnthankefull brother, forgettingGreat ingratitude and crueltie of a brother. all these benefits, tooke his brother Isaac by treason, pluckt forth his eies, and  being blinded shut him vp in prison: And not therewith satisfied hee would haue done as much to his nephew, his brothers sonne, a childe of twelue yeares old. But the young boy by the aduice of his friends, and by discretion farre aboue one of his age, (as it is reported) saued himselfe by flight. The Venetians forces were at the same time verie great. For at the beginning of the spring-time the same yeare, BonifaceThe Christian Princes arriued at Venice. of Montferrat, Baldwin Earle of Flanders, and Henrie Earle of S. Paul, were arriued at Venice, and with them the Duke of Sauoy, intending to march against the Turkes and Sarracens. Some Authors saie that they sent their Ambassadours. But the most part affirme, that the Princes came themselues in person and compounded with the Venetians for the passage of eight thousand foot, and foure thousand  fiue hundred horse with their baggage, and victuailes, vnto Saint Georges arme, by which way all the Christian Princes had still passed ouer their forces; because there was no likelihood of anie other safer way into Asia, as also, for that Germanie and Hungarie were not quiet, and likewise in regard of these newes stirres at Constantinople, the which daily encreased, by reason of that which had hapned.
The Venetian Chronicles make mention of nine and twentie thousand foot, ofThe number of the Christian Armi^ whom nine thousand were Targuetiers, the which is more credible. For it is not probable, that foure so great Princes, vndertaking so long and dangerous a voyage, would leuie but twelue thousand fiue hundred men, seeing that anie one of them could easily haue furnished as many. It is reported that they promised a verie great  summe of money for the transportation of so great an Armie.
Now the Shippes of warre being readie, because the Souldiours arriued later than it was expected, the iourney was put off till Haruest. By meanes whereof the Princes and Captaines hauing spent all they had brought with them for that voyage were constrained to borrow of the Venetians. It is reported that the VenetiansThe Venetians bo^ntie to the christian Princes. in sted of lending did freely giue them the money which they demaunded, to the end to tye them vnto them, hauing determined to make vse of them, promising to vse greater liberalitie towards them, if they would lend them their forces till such time as they had reduced the Prouince of Histria vnder their obedience, and recouered the Citie of Zara which had so often rebelled, the which for a few years had binAgreement betwixt the Venetians and forraine Princes. possessed by the King of Hungarie. This being freely granted, they made an accord  betwixt them for a yeare, That the Venetians should only set forth threscore Gallies at their owne costs to ship their Souldiours, and that all the towns and booties, which should be taken, should be equally diuided betwixt them and the Venetians,

(Dalmatia and the adiacent Ilands excepted, which they acknowledge to be a part of the Venetians Dominion.) Duke Henrico, albeit he were euill disposed of his person, and his sight much impaired by the malice of the Emperor Emanuell, would neuerthelesse for the loue he did beare his Countrie, make one in the number. Therefore he departed from Venice before any of the rest, the 15. day of October. The morrowThe number of the Ships for the Voyage. after, they all followed him. The Nauie consisted of two hundred and fortie Ships of warre. For, besides the threescore Gallies promised first to the French; they made ready threescore and ten Ships of burthen, to embarke the forraine Soldiours, and sixescore other Vessels, vulgarly called Vrserions, for the cariage of the victuals, horse and furniture of the Armie.
The Triestines, and other the Inhabitants of Histria, accustomed to robbe at Sea, amazed to see so mightie a Fleete, did speedily send to the Prince for peace, which was granted them on these conditions; That those of Humaga, and the Triestines,Histria reduced to the Venetians obedience. should pay to the Venetian Prince a yearely tribute for each of them, of fiftie hogsheads of Wine. And to this purpose they sent Commissioners to Venice, to sweare to this conuention before the Senate, and to remaine euer after loyall to the Venetians, as their Ancestors had done. From Histria the Armie came to the siege of Zara. This siege, (by reason that the Citie was well victualled and furnished with Souldiers) lasted longer than was expected. The Citie being often assaulted,The recouerie of Zara. with great effusion of bloud on either side, was in the end after sundrie  losses recouered, and foorthwith dismanteled on that part next to the Sea. The chiefe Citizens despairing of pardon in regard of their continuall rebellion, saued themselues by flight.
The Winter in the meane time was very much spent, by reason whereof andYong Alexis commeth to the Armie. through the sharpnesse of the weather, they were constrained to tarie there. At what time, yong Alexis, who had escaped from the bloudy hands of his Vnkle, arriued at the Campe, and came into the presence of Duke Dandulo, and the FrenchThe complaint and request of yong Alexis. Princes, that Wintered there. This yong boy, after hee had with teares greatly complained on his Vncles crueltie, of his Fathers blindnesse, darke Imprisonment, bonds, and ill vsage, and of his owne banishment, able to draw pitie from his enemies, he did earnestly intreate them, in regard of the ancient friendship which his Father had euer borne to the Venetians, for the fidelitie, alliance, hospitalitie, and other benefits which all Christendome had receiued from him, as well at Constantinople, as in other parts of the Empire, to relieue him in his affliction, and not to suffer his Father any longer to languish in darknesse, more obscure than his blindnesse: And declared how that himselfe being yet very yong, depriued of his Fathers helpe and counsell, and of all his friends, being banished, poore, needie, and ignominiously driuen out of his Fathers Empire, was constrained miserably to beg his bread: After all which hee promised to giue them a great weight of Gold, withYong Alexis (...) promise^. other great rewards so soone as by their meanes he should recouer the Empire.
The teares of this yong child did greatly moue all the assistants; his age likewise, and his cause, were found to be iust and reasonable, the which all men did willingly fauour. Then the great promises which he made in this great danger, did shew that he had beene taught what to say, by those who attended him in his flight. For hardly could a man of riper yeares (much lesse one like himselfe, who was not yet out of child-hood) haue of himselfe inuented those things which he promised them. It is reported that he promised, so soone as he should be alone, or with his Father, restored to the Empire, he would make the Church of Constantinople subiect to that of Rome, and giue the Venetians and French-men, a certaine weight of gold in recompence of the losses which they had sustained in times past, and at sundrie times by the Emperour Emanuel: And moreouer, to giue vnto the Venetians a great  summe of money, which the forraine Princes had promised them at the first, for the transportation of their souldiers. Vpon these conditions and promises, the Venetians and French departed from Dalmatia at the beginning of the spring, determining

to saile with a direct course to Constantinople, if a contrarie winde did not hinderThe Venetians and the Princes resolue to goe to Constantinople. them. The Bandetti of Zara in the meane time, so soone as they had notice of the Venetians departure, made rodes and incursions all along the Sea-coasts of Histria and Dalmatia; against whom a new Armie was intended. Rayniero Dandulo, Sonne to Duke Henrico, a braue and couragious yong man, did command in the CitieIncursions of the Bandetti of Zara as Lieutenant to his Father: He, hauing armed certaine ships of warre, passed ouer into Dalmatia against those banished Zaratins. He caused a Fort to be built in the nearest Island to Zara, which was called Euill Councell, to resist the incursions and desseignes of the enemies: The Bandetti being backt by the aide of the King of Hungarie, came on a sodaine and surprised the Garrison within it, and razed the  Fort: whereupon a greater fleete was set forth, sufficient to represse the incursions, and rash attempts of those Pirates. The which being knowne to them, they humblyAgreement with the Bandetti of Zara. sued for peace and obtained it on these conditions; That (the chiefe of them hauing giuen their children in hostage to the Venetians) all the Bandetti should returne home into their Countrie; and should obey the Venetian Magistrate, and the Church, (that of Grada) and should besides send euery yeare to the Duke of Venice a thousand Connie-skins.
Whilest these things were done in Dalmatia, the Venetians and French-men after they had first crossed the Ionian Seas, and afterwards the Aegean and the Hellespont, arriued at the Bosphorus of Thrace, called St. Georges arme. But wee must  speake somewhat briefly here, of the place and situation of the Citie, for the more easie vnderstanding of what shall be hereafter set downe.
Bizantium (named, as all men know, Constantinople by Constantine, who muchDescription of the Citie of Constantinople. augmented it, and did there establish his Empire) yea builded (as saith Trogus) by Pausanias King of Sparta, is seated in so pleasant and commodious a place, as the Megarians, who along time before were the founders of Calcydonia, which is right ouer against it, were esteemed by Apollo's Oracle of small iudgement; because they refused so goodly and fertile a Countrie, as is that where Bizantium was afterward builded, and chose a barren and desert soile.
The streight of the Sea is fiue hundred paces in breadth, and waxeth still more  narrow, as it draweth nearer to the Bosphorus of Thrace (so called for the vsuall and easie passage of Oxen) called at this day S. Georges arme. This Citie on the North side hath the Sea of fiftie stadij in length, and the maine drawing towards the West. At the mouth of this streight in a small distance stands Constantinople on one side, and Pera on the other, so called in Greeke (as I thinke) for the small space that is betwixt them, being opposite one to another. Alexis had shut vp this space with a great yron chaine, and placed a strong Garrison at either end thereof, to hinder the enemies entrance.
Now whilest this great fleet staied there; the Ambassadours of the Isle of Candie came with two Gallies in the name of the whole Island, to acknowledge him for  their Lord. This yong youth, after he had louingly receiued them, gaue the wholeYong Alexis giue^h the Isle of Candie to Boniface of Montferrat. Island to Boniface of Montferrat, a valiant man, and his neare Kinsman. The chaine in the meane time could not be broken, vntill that a very great ship, called the Eagle, furnished with great yron tongs, and driuen forward by a North-winde, strake vpon it, and brake it in peeces. Presently hereupon the Venetians entred the streightConstantinople besieged by Sea and Land. and landed all the forraine troupes, which done, the Citie in an instant was besieged both by Sea and Land. But so soone as the Campe arriued, Theodore Lascaris, sonne in law to the Emperour, made a sodaine sallie with his forces on the Pilgrims, (forTheodore Lascaris sallies foorth on the Christian Pilgrims. the French-men and they on this-side the mountains departing to the warres of Asia, would at the first be so called) to trouble their incamping. The fight at the first was very bloudie, and doubtfull, but at the last, the Greekish furie being abated, Theodore with his forces was constrained with great losse to retire into the citie. The Venetian fleet on the other side attempted to winne the Hauen, but they spent two whole daies in breaking the chaine which lockt it. And this fight was so much the

more difficult to the Venetians, by how much the Garrison of the Hauen was stronger than that of the streight, whereof we haue spoken. Twentie Gallies on a front being tied together by great yron chaines, lay at the entrie thereof, to keepe out the enemies* and it was dangerous to come neare them, in regard of the great number of arrowes which flew from them against those which came formost. Yet neuerthelesseA great ^ght a^ the Hauen. the Venetians valour ouer-came this: For after they had likewise broken it, and furiously assailed the enemie, the hauen was wonne in an instant. The Gallies being forsaken at the very first brunt by Alexis Souldiers, fell into the possession of the Venetians.
After this victorie, they resolued to assault the Citie with engins on all sides, and Constantinople streightly besieged. An assault giuen to the Citie. after they had diuided the portions betwixt them, the Venetians did forth-with erect diuers warlike engins against the Citie on the Hauens side. Then they tooke two great masts of ships, and tying them together they made a bridge vpon them, from whence they shot into the Citie at their pleasures, by reason the bridge was much higher than the walls. They did moreouer cast fierie lances vpon the nearest houses, which lighting vpon drie matter kindled such a flame, as those who defended the wall being therewith terrified, in great confusion forsooke their places; which the Venetians mounting on ladders, did forthwith possesse. Alexis at this sodaine rumour came running thither with three thousand Souldiers which were of his guard, and made shew at the first, as if he would haue assailed the Venetians, vsing  thereby a Greekish pollicie, to make shew of nothing lesse than flight. But because all was lost, not only in that place, but likewise on the land-side, where Lascaris had beene beaten into the Citie with great losse, Alexis made a stay, as though he would haue deferred the fight till the morrow. But the Venetians pursuing the victorie, did alreadie in a manner fight in the very Citie. Whereupon Alexis at the entrie ofThe flight of Alexis. the night holding all for lost, left his wife and children, and committing great treasures which hee had drawne forth of the ground to the keeping of his Daughter Irene* who was a Nunne, about midnight he left the Citie and fled.
His flight being openly knowne, Isaack was forthwith taken out of prison, andIsaac deliuered out of prison. the Citie-gates being set open, the yong Alexis was with great ioy receiued by all  the people: Both of them were saluted Emperors: Great was the ioy on either side, but not without teares, to behold the wretched blind old man, who did greatly praise the pietie, and good nature of his sonne, and reioyced with him for this happie successe, exhorting him couragiously to maintaine the Empire which hee hadThe mutuall co^fort of the father and the Sonne. by his vertue recouered. The child on the other side was no lesse ioyfull, to see his Father freed from the prison of his wicked brother; and that so perfidious a person, hated of God and Men, being driuen iustly both from Empire and Countrie, was compelled to vndergoe so ignominious a banishment: saying, that his owne happinesse did not so much content him, as to see his Father reuenged on his enemie; That hee did not doubt, but that this wretched Alexis was greatly troubled in his minde, knowing his enemie to command in the same place, from whence himselfe had beene shamefully expulsed. After all these reciprocall complements, Isaac did in openIsaac ratifies what his Sonne had promised. assembly confirme and ratifie all that which his sonne had granted to the Venetians and French-men, the Protectors of his state. And all the good old mans thoughts were, how, and by what meanes hee might pay the Venetians, and French, that which had bee^e promised them: when falling sodainely sicke, hauing (as it wasIsaac dieth sodainly. thought) taken the aire too soone, he died in few daies after. The Sonne, no lesse mindfull than the Father, to acknowledge the benefits which he had receiued, did meane, not only to effect what he promised, but to releeue those that passed into Asia, with victualls, men, and all other necessaries. But this vngratefull Citie, accustomed  euer to seditious noueltie, did crosse his deseignes. For a sodaine commotionSedition against the yong Emperour. being raised in the Citie the people with great noise ranne to the Palace, where after diuers reprochfull speeches vsed to the yong Alexis, they told him that he was a foolish boy, smally experienced in affaires of consequence, who desirous to pay a great

summe of money foolishly promised to aeouetous Nation, enemie to the Greekes, made no matter of ruining and despoiling his Citie of her wealth. But the yong manA discreet answere of the yong Emperour. fearing in that tumult to be slaine, and being more discreet than one of such yeares, he told them aloud, that he would therein be ruled by his subiects. By this popular answere he appeased the tumult for that night. The next day, so soone as hee had debated the matter with diuers of his friends, by their aduise he sent to his Cosen Boniface, entreating him to come to his aide about the third watch of the night following, with all the forces hee could bring, acquainting him in what danger hee was among his owne subiects; the Empire not being alone in hazard, but his owne life likewise. Therefore he did earnestly entreate him, not to forsake him in those  tender yeares, being his neare kinsman, and wholly destitute of all helpe and counsell, furthe^ certifying him that he would giue order, that one of the Citie-gates should be open against his arriuall.
Among those who knew this secret, was one called Alexis, surnamed Myrtillus,Myrtillus issued from meane Parents. or (as other say*) Murciphon, whom the Emperour Isaac had preferred from a meane estate to diuers places of honour. This man being ambitious, and sodaine in his attempts, discouered the whole matter to certaine of the contrarie faction, whom heeThe treacherie of Myrtillus. knew to be of great authoritie in the Citie, and procured them to raise a new stirre at the houre appointed of the night following. This was accordingly effected. Now therefore in the middest of the vproare, hee counselled the yong Alexis, trembling  with feare, to hide himselfe in the most secret place of the Palace; and making the danger to be much greater than it was, he in a manner enforced him so to doe; and hauing hid him in a sure place, hee committed him to the keeping of some of his owne trustie friends. Hereupon he came forth, as though hee would haue quieted the tumult, the which he had promised to doe. The beginning of his speech was,Myrtillus speech to the people. in declaring vnto them in what termes the affaires of the Empire stood, and the imminent danger which threatned them from those couerous Nations, (for so he termed them) and enemies to the Greekes, and therefore hee said it was most necessarie to haue a man of iudgement, valour, and discretion; and not a child, if they desired to redresse these mischiefs. He obtained at that time what hee so much desired. For  the whole multitude, crying out confusedly; some said he should be gouernour of the Citie, others Generall of the men at Armes, and the third sort called him Emperour. And thus in this tumult being followed by a troupe of Souldiers, and by some of his kinsmen who assisted him, he made himselfe Master of the Imperiall Palace, where with his owne hand he cut yong Alexis throate. Then after he had appeasedYong Alexis murthere^. the tumult, and raised great forces, his first resolution was to driue the French and Venetians forth of the Empire; and afterwards for his better safetie, to put all Alexis Friends and Allies to death.
In this resolution hee forthwith marched out of the Citie, and embattailed his Armie, whom he conducted against the enemie, after this maner. In the Front hee A new Greekish inuention to deceiue the Ch^istians. placed Priestes bearing Images in their hands, who at the beginning of the fight should sing certaine spirituall Hymnes. I know not whether hee did this to draw his enemies to some deuotion, or whether hee thought by beginning with diuine Action, the sooner to obtaine the victorie. The first charge lighted by chance on the Earle of Flanders quarter, who like a valiant and carefull Captaine, did with a few sustaine the furious assaults of the Greekes, vntill that an armed Legion came to his rescue, and soone after all the rest. Whereupon, the fight in an instant being equall,The Greekes put to fl^ght neare the Citie. and his enemies very much shaken, Myrtillus altogether dismaied fled a pace towards the Citie, and was so narrowly pursued by our men, as himselfe and his troupes had like to haue beene taken vnder the Wals. The Italians and French  held as a token of good lucke, the taking of an Image of the Virgin Marie from the Greekes: imagining that it did foretell their victorie, in regard such a diuine power had forsaken the Greekes and was come vnto them. They did afterwards consult whether it were best to besiege Myrtillus in the Citie. All men were of opinion that

it was lawfull and iust to kill a wicked man, who had not onely defiled himselfe by an execrable murther, but had likewise seized on the Empire which was engaged to them by couenant for great summes of money.A new agreement betwixt the Venetians and the Princes.
The Venetians and French contracted new alliance, wherein it was expresly mentioned, That the halfe part of the Citie, Townes, and other matters which should be taken perforce from the Grecian Empire, should belong to the French, and the other halfe to the Venetians. Some Authors make mention of another kinde of diuision, wherein the Venetians had but the third part onely of whatsoeuer was taken. But the most part are of the former opinion: Hereupon, all of them prepared for the besieging of the Citie, and they proceeded therein both by sea and land with  such earnestnes, as they neuer ceassed, vntill they had brought it in subiection to theConstantinople besieged the second time. French men, and the Venetians. Neuerthelesse the victorie was not verie easie. For the siege, through the wilfull obstinacie of the Greekes, lasted threescore and eight daies. The Venetians valour did greatly appeare in this siege; who, hauing assaulted the Citie after the same manner as they had done at the first, after they had driuen the enemie from the wals, entred the towne somewhat before those, whoMyrtillus flight. in great numbers fought on the land-side. Myrtillus in the darknesse of the night departing with his wife and concubines, carrying with him a great weight of gold, auoided his deserued punishment. The Citizens being reduced into euident danger, (for the victors who possessed the walles, amazed them on the one side, and  Myrtillus flight dismaied them on the other) did (necessitie enforcing them thereunto) sue for pardon; and to this purpose, they caused the Cleargie to go formostConstantinople yeelds. with their relicks and Images* and themselues after being vnarmed, who comming in view of the Venetians, which possessed the walles, began to crie for mercie: the which was easily granted them vpon the opening of their gates. The Venetians entring first, the French followed with all their troups which had fought by land. NowFifteene men appointed to elect a new Emperour. the Citie being taken, the chiefe of the Armie consulted together to name fifteene men which should haue authoritie to elect a new Emperour. And it was expresly mentioned, That if the Emperor whom they chose were not a Venetian, it should be lawfull for the Venetians to appoint one of their own nation, whom they pleased to Baldwin of Flan ders chosen Emperour of the East. Thomaso Morosino Patriarch of Constantinople. be Patriarch of the Citie. This thus concluded, the Venetians deputed fiue Electors, the Earles of Flaunders and Saint Paul as many, and the Dukes of Sauoy and Montserrat made vp the number. By these mens voices Baldwin Earle of Flaunders was declared Emperour; and Thomaso Morosino Patriarch of Constantinople by the Venetians: who soone after went to Rome, and was confirmed in his dignitie by Pope Innocent.
The Princes in the mean time desirous to prosecute their voyage to the holy Land, vsing great liberalitie to the new Emperour, gaue him the moitie of the Citie, Prouinces,The Princes liberalitie to the new Emperour: Tributes, and other matters, (fallen to them by agreement) of the Greeke Empire. And not satisfied with this good office, they added to this great liberalitie, That all the Cities, Castles, Forts, and Townes which they should take depending on the Greeke Empire, should be recouered as in his name, and reduced vnder his obedience. Some thinke that the fourth part of the Empire was giuen to him, and the residue being diuided into two parts, the one part thereof fell to the Venetians.
All things at last being quieted in the Citie, the Armie speedily departed. BonifaceThrace reduced to the Emperors obedience. of Montferrat, and Henrie the Emperours brother dislodged first of all, who with great good successe possessed Thrace which lies on either side betwixt Constantinople, and Adrianople, three daies iourney in length. And all that conquest, such as it was, they reduced vnder the Emperour Baldwins obedience, according to  their promise: Prince Henrico remaining at Constantinople, dealt with the Emperour to bound that part of the Empire which was fallen to the Venetians, because it wholly almost consisted of Islands seated in the Aegean and Ionian Seas. And because the Isle of Candie belonged to Boniface by the gift of young Alexis: Baldwin

to take away all cause of strife, and that their fellowes should truly receiueThe Isle of Candy giuen to the Venetians. whatsoeuer had beene promised them, he made Boniface King of Thessalie, and gaue the Isle of Candie, which he tooke from him, to the Venetians: And the better to confirme the matter, the Venetian Prince sent M. Sanuto, and Rabani Carcerio his Ambassadors to Boniface, who was encamped before Adrianople; and till they returned he sent an Armie to receiue all the rest. The Ambassadors sent to Boniface, arriuing at Adrianople, shewed him the Emperours decree; and offering him besides a good summe of money, he easily condiscended to their request, and made ouer to the Venetians all the right which he pretended to the Isle of Candie by vertue of Alexis gift.
In this meane time Thomaso, Patriarch of Constantinople, at his returne fromThomas^ confirmed Patriarch by the Pope. Rome, where he had obtained whatsoeuer he demaunded, came to Venice, and after he had staied a while there, being readie to returne into Greece; hee tooke with him foure gallies which were sent for supplie to the Prince at Constantinople, with which he recouered Ragusa which was reuolted from the Venetians; and hauing repaired Durazzo, which the Greeke Emperours had abandoned, he left a good Garrison in it. Thence he came directly to Constantinople, where he was receiued of all men with great ioy: But nothing did so much hasten his returne, as the commaundement which the Pope had giuen him to crowne Baldwin Emperour ofThe coronation of the Emperour Baldwin. Greece. And that Coronation-day was beautified with a great assembly as well of  Greekes, as of French-men and Italians.
Scarse was the yeare expired wherein Constantinople was taken, but that all the Cities and strong Townes of the Greeke Empire, as well on the Sea-coasts as on the firme Land, were reduced vnder the Emperours obedience: Adrianopolis excepted. But this fortunate fuccesse was interrupted by his too sodaine death. Some affirme that hee died at Constantinople. And others say, that being inc^mped before Adrianopolis, he fell into an Ambush, and being taken by the enemies he diedThe death of the Emperour Baldwin. in Prison; and that, by his death, there was no Emperour in Greece for seuen yeares after. This is that which the Annalists maintaine. Those which alleadge the contrarie, say, That Henrie, his brother, was at the same instant saluted Emperour in Henrie brother to (...), Emperour of the East. his stead, who, being discamped from before Adrianopolis, which his brother had besieged, to effect his more speedie Coronation at Constantinople, receiued newes on the way of the death of Henrico the Venetian Prince; so as there was a small time betwixt the death of the Emperour Baldwin, and that of Henrico, who deceasedPrince Dandul^ dec^aseth. the thirtenth yeare of his Principalitie, and was honourably buried in Saint Sophias Church.
It shall not bee amisse to set downe in this place certaine propheticke verses, which I find in some Historians to bee attributed to S^bylla, the which are reported to haue been common almost in euerie mans mouth, long time before the Frenchmen and Venetians tooke Constantinople: if it be so, I doe assuredly beleeue, that  this Oracle was the only cause of that mortall hatred, which the Emperour EmanuelThe (...) why the Emperour Emanuel hat^d the Venetians. bare to the Venetians. And forasmuch as all that in a manner which hapned at Constantinople, since the time of the Emperour Constantine vntill Henrico the Venetian Prince, is comprized in these verses: I haue thought it fit to set them downe word for word, to the end that by them it may be knowne how well this woman possessed with a diuine furie, did prophecie of things to come; and that which Plutarch speaketh of the Egyptians is not altogether absurd, who thought that the spirit of diuination was easily communicated to women, They begin thus.




A Prophecie found in Constantinople.
AENeadum gloria Bizantium deducetur, Eruntque Danai in robore delicato vsque ad Leonem sexaginta

pedum. Donec catulos eius Vrsus deuoret. Hunc Aquila dispecta Vrsum dissipet, Aquilam Hircus obumbret, Pullum voret Aquilae, Fietque Potentum in Hadriaticis aquis congregatio. Caeco Duce Hir cum abigent, Bizantium prophanabunt, Hircus non balabit amplius, Nec Gallus cantabit, vsque dum sexaginta tres  pedes, and pollices nouem discurrant.
Which may be thus Englished.

Bizance shall rise, the Romans glorie hight,
Graecia shall flow with fulnesse of delight,
Vntill the sixtie-footed Lion come;
Whose princely whelps with death the Beare shall dome.
The Beare shall by the roiall Eagle fall; 
The Goat orethrowes the Eagle, Chick and all.
And in the mid'st of th' Adriatick strond
Shall meete great States combin'd by mutuall bond
Against the Goat. They, led by Chieftaine blind,
Shall quell his pride and tame his Tyger mind,
And Bizance selfe they likewise shall subdue.
So droops the Goat; And the shrill Cock that crew
So lowd of late, hence forth shall chant no more,
Till of a greater number kept in store
Sixtie three feete, with thumbs thrice 3. times told,
By fading hence this mysterie vnfold.





The Roman Empire (saith shee) shall bee translated to Constantinople: whichThe meaning of the prophecie. came to passe in the time of the Emperour Constantine; and Grecia shal liue peaceablie  in all delights, vntill the Emperour Emanuel his time who liued three score yeares; Andronicus, whom Sybilla calleth a Beare, after hee hath slaine his children, shall vsurpe the Empire; Isack sonne to Emanuel, of whom none account was made shall put Andronicus to death; Alexis shall take his brother Isack by treason; who wore a long beard after the Greekish manner: and hauing put out both his eyes, shall thrust him into a darke Prison, into which likewise, some say that young Alexis sonne to Isack was put, from whence escaping afterwards, hee came for succour to the Venetians. That the Venetians at that time ioyned with the French shall passe into Greece vnder the conduct of Prince Dandulo, who by the enuie of Emanuel had almost lost his sight, as hath beene said; and that Constantinople being taken by  them, the honour of the Empire shallbee taken from the Greekes: For in the space of sixtie three yeares and nine moneths, there shall bee in Constantinople neither Emperour nor Patriarch of the Greeke Nation; whereupon Sybilla (if this Oracle be hers) calleth the one a Cocke, and the other a Goate. This is that which shee hath said.





 PIETRO CYANI, the 42. Duke of Venice.








PIetro Cyani, sonne to Duke Sebastiano, succeeded Dandulo; and was Earle of Arba when he was created. The Venetians in the mean time, who were at Constantinople, because they would not bee without a Magistrate, did create a Pretor to gouerne them; which creation neuerthelesse was not to bee in force till it were confirmed and allowed by the Prince and Senate at Venice. The first who executed this new Magistracie in Constantinople was (as it is reported) Marini Zeno. Ambassadours were sent to Constantinople to the Emperour Henrie to renew the league. Boniface of Montferrat onBoniface King of Thessaly. the other side, hauing conquered Thessalie was called King thereof, according to  the Emperour Baldwin his decree.
But whilst these things were done in Greece, the Venetians after the creation of Cyani, to the end they might with more ease ioine all the places of the Greeke Empire to their State, which were fallen vnto them by the agreement made with theA Deeree of the Venetians about the possession of the Islands. French and the other confederates, they published an Edict; That all the Citizens of Venice, or their allies, who could at their owne charges seize on the Islandes of the Aegean and Ionian Seas, and of other places neere thereunto, depending in time past on the Greeke Empire, (reseruing certaine Islandes mentioned in the decree, which they were expresly forbidden to attempt) should claime them for their own, as lawfully purchased by right of Armes. Although at the first this may seeme not  verie commodious for the Common-wealth, Yet considering it more neerely, itThe cause of this decree. was necessarie to be so, as well for that the Citie was at the same time busied about the affaires of Greece, as in respect of the great numbers of Pirats; who were so increased, whilst the Venetians were imploied in the Thracian wars, as there needed a mightie fleete to represse their incursions: And therefore there was no possibilitie with any safetie to seuer the forces of the Common-wealth in so many places at once. It was then thought most conuenient, that the wealthiest of them should set forth one or more Gallies a peece, or other ships of warre for the same purpose: The which they presumed diuers would doe for the hope of the proposed gaine; and that thereby it might come to passe, that the Common-wealth hauing afterwards  neede of those ships of war, set forth at the charges of particular men, might make vse of them, by vertue of her owne authoritie in such cases.
Besides, euerie one was bound to keepe at his owne Costes, the places which should be possessed (which the Common-wealth could not doe without great expence)

and to carrie thither their wiues and children, with all their wealth: AndThe Venetians flecte against the Pirats. by this meanes, as by Colonies sent from the Citie, the whole should bee subiect to the Venetians obedience. But howsoeuer they had respect either to the one or other of the fore-nam'd occasions, it is certain that diuers particular persons did take Armes for this purpose. And to the same purpose before any of the rest, the publike fleete of one and thirtie Gallies sailed into the maine, conducted (as some say) by Rayniero Dandulo, and Rugiero Permarin: and others changing both the names make mention of none but Raynier^ Permarin. All Annalists almost, and other authors likewise doe set downe the atchieuements of particular persons before those of the publik State: as though it were likelie that priuate persons durst haue attempted  any thing on the Islandes, before that the Seas were freed from Pirats, with whom the commonwealths Gallies were enforced to fight, at the verie entrie almost of the Adriaticke Gulph.
And because the continuall course of this businesse doth so require it, wee will first of all set downe that which was performed by the generall Armie. They were scarce out of the Gulph, when they met with Leo Vetrano the Genouese, one of the most famous Pirats of those daies, with nine Gallies; who being assailed by the Venetians, was easily broken, taken, and brought to Corfu, whither the fleet sailed, where he was hanged. After the recouerie of which Island, the Venetians sailed towardsMod^na end Corona recep^acles of theeue^ and Pira^s, ^ned. Modona first, and then to Corona, the two receptacles of theeues and Pirats, which  they ruined. They are two Cities of Pelloponessus at this day called Morea. The one lies betweene Coriphasium, and the mount Acrita, and the other on the Sea of Messina. Neere those places the Ambassadors of Achaya and Athens came to the Generalls of the Armie promising to yeeld themselues to the Venetians; but it is reported that their rash resolution was interrupted by a Captaine named Mega, who the same time possessed those places. I thinke that these places were held by him, and by others, at such time as the Venetians were busied in the wars of Constantinople* At which time all the Islands and Sea-townes of the Aegean and Ionian Seas were exposed for a prey to as manie as could winne them: the Empire beeing then verie much declined. Albeit I wil not denie but that he might be before then  appointed Gouernour there by those who did command Greece.
The passage of the Sea being in this sort opened, all men hasted to these IslandsThe names of the Islands passesse^ by particular persons. as to an assured bootie. Marco Dandulo and Giacomo Viadre being ioined together seized on Callipolis. Marco Sanuto, accompanied with diuers Citizens who were at the Islands Cyclades, made himselfe master of Naxos, Paros, Molos, Herma and Andros. Raban Carcerio with his nephewes tooke Euboea, called at this day Nigrepont, and Euripa neere adioining. Andrea and Henrico de Glass^s, seized on Tenos, Micon (which the Modernes haue called Micolla) S^hyros, Philocolion, (called in times past Philocandea) with Staliminium which is named Lemnos.
In this meane time Henrie, surnamed the Fisher, Earleof that part of Morea Henrie the Fisher maketh a^tempts on (...) Isle of Candie. which is called Mailla, aided by certaine Gallies of Genoa, attempted to take the Isle of Candie from the Venetians. But Rayniero, Generall of the Armie, arriuing there vnlook't for, did not only prese^ue the Island, but sanke foure Genoa-Gallies that were found neere the shoare, in which some will needes affirme, that VetranoThe Venetian^ send a Colonie to Candace. was taken, and forth-with put to death. The Venetians soon after, to curbe the practises of the Greekes, sent to Candace* called Candida by the vulgar, the head Cittie of the Island, a Colonie, namely horsemen of the order of Senators, and footmen of the common sort of people.
The Genoueses in like manner did robbe and scoure the Seas, against whom Gi^nan Treuisano was sent with nine Gallies well prouided; He, hauing met with the  Fleete of Genoa, assailed it with more courage than force, and tooke twelue of theThe Gen^ueses defeated by the Uenetians. enemies vessels: By which losse the Genoueses being daunted sued for peace. Some Authours affirme, that, the Genoueses hauing taken a ship from the Venetians, Treuisano was commanded to pursue them with two Gallies and two ships of burthen;

who, hauing ouer taken them in the Libian Sea, neere to the ruines of old Carthage fought with them, and tooke from them foure ships, and soone after, twentie eight more on the Sicilian Sea.
About the same time there arose great dissension between the Venetians and the Paduans about a small matter. The Treuisans were at the same time by reason of a long peace, full of riches and delicacies, so as giuing them-selues ouer to all sportes and pastimes (as men commonly do in a prosperous estate) they inuented pleasantPleasant games inuented at Treuiso. recreations. They erected in the Market-place of their Citie a Castle, made of verie costly silke, compassed about with scarlet in sted of Walls, within the which were placed the noblest maidens of the Citie, wearing Coronets on their heads in  sted of He^mets, and for Curasses verie rich Chaines and Iewels, who defended the Castle against yong Gentlemen of the like yeares. And the weapons on either side were small artificiall apples, made of nutmegs, roses and lillies, fashioned round like a ball, with a sodaine small raine of rose water, and diuers other sweete odors. This great preparation being published abroad, caused diuers who were desirous to see, (as the manner is) to come to Treuiso. Diuers Venetians and Paduans being entreated to be of the number came to these shewes. But whilst all men were bu^ied in assailing the fort, and in looking on what side they would begin, it hapned that a troope of yong Venetians seized on one of the Castle gates, and would forthwith haue set vp their ensigne there: which certaine Paduans perceiuing, who The Paduans and the Venetians. quarrell at the games of Treui^. not farre off from thence did assaile the Damsells, fearing that the Venetians would carrie awaie the glorie of the fight, laid hands on the ensigne wherein was painted the picture of Saint Marke, and hauing pluck't it downe, did shamefully teare it in peeces: By reason of this braue there arose on a sodaine a great quariell; and they had fought in the verie place with great slaughter, If the Marshalls of the field had not instantly broke vp the games. But the Paduans, not acknowledging their faults (for there was some likelihood that the Venetians would reuenge this iniurie) afterThe Paduans make roads on the Venetians. they had made a league with the Treuisans, making shew as if they had receiued the wrong (being vsuall with those that will couer their fault) began first; and without any warlike summons, entring into the Venetians Territorie, carried thence  much bootie. The Venetians sending to demand that which they had taken awaie, the Paduans insted of hearkening thereunto, came and besieged the Tower of Bebia, seated at the mouth of the riuer, which Prince Cyani had fortified with a strong Garrison, vnder the command of Marco Concano a valiant person.
The Venetians being moued as well at this second as first affront, went to armes, and comming sodainely to the Tower, they assailed, brake, and defeated them, andThe Paduans defeated. tooke more than foure hundred prisoners, with foure ensignes, which did highly content the displeased Citie of Venice. The Treuisans, who were comming to aid their fellowes and allies, vnderstanding that they were defeated, returned back all amazed. The yerely tribute which those of Chioggia were wont to paie, was forgiuen  them by a publike decree, because they had valiantly behaued themselues in that incounter.
Soone after this battaile of Bebia, by the mediation of the Patriarch of Aquileia,Peace be^xt the Paduans and the Venetians. A great cu^tesie. a peace followed, on condition neuerthelesse, That the Paduans should send to the Prince at Venice, fiue and twentie of those which began the ^tir at the games of Treuiso; who being deliuered, the Venetian sent them home againe without anyA new strife betw^xt the Uenetians and Paduans. harme at all. This peace lasted not long, for both sides fell on a sodaine to Armes. The occasion of this new warre grew about the confederates of both these people.
The Forlani were at strife with the Treuisans about their boundes, who presuming  on the Venetians aide, entred the Territorie of their new enemies. Bertoldo, their Bishop by whose authoritie the whole matter was managed, went for succour to the Paduans. But others saie that it was to the Venetians, who made him a Citizen of Venice, And that which makes me most to beleeue it, is the ancient alliance

betwixt the Paduans and those of Treuiso. But they affirme that at the first beginning of the warre, Bertoldo and the Count Gorician came to Venice, where after they had agreed vpon truce for fiue yeares, the warre was finished.
About the same time the Episcopall See of Malamoc, (as some say) was translatedThe B^shops See at Malamoc, translated to Chiogg^a. to Chioggia. After that a great Earthquake did wonder-fully shake the Citie, whereby a part of Saint Georges Church fell downe to the ground, and diuers other priuate buildings. This hapned in the places neere to the ^irme Land. But the Venetians power did daly encrease in the Islands. Raban^ Carc^io, who had seized on the Isle of Nigrepont, fearing that he should not be able at his own charges to keep such an Island, did freely with his Nephews put himselfe vnder the Venetians obedience, promising to paie a yearely tribute. Certaine Gentlemen in manner of a new Colonie were sent to guard Corfu, among whom, were Pietro Michaeli, StephanoA Colonie sent to Corfu. Foscar^, Sigiberto Quirino, and Giacomo Seiano. Guifred, Prince of Achaia, who did succeede his Father Mega, with Gallus the wrongfull possessor of Cephalenia, came, and shrowded themselues vnder the Venetians protection.
Whilst these things were done in the Islands, and on the Sea-coasts of Ionia, the Emperour Henrie made a league with the Valachians; and after hee had married the King of Valachias daughter, he did in short space by meanes of that new affinitie, recouer all the Townes of Greece, which by Baldwins death were reuolted; And all matters being peaceable abroade, he attempted a verie holy and pious matter A ^dition of the ^stantinopolitans, affirming their Church not to be subiect to that of Rome. in the Citie, by fauouring the Popes Nuntio sent expresly to Constantinople, to the end he might draw the Greekes to the obedience of the See of Rome. It was likelie to haue raised a great tumult in the Citie, all the Citizens crying out against Henrie that it was the part of a good Emperour to meddle with temporall, and not with diuine matters* that they had beene too much obedient to him, to haue endured that their Church should bee termed subiect to that of Rome. Therefore Henrie, after he had left the Greekes to their wilfullnesse, returned to the gouernment of the Empire and declared the sonne of Boniface to be King of Thessalie, and gaue euerie daie hope of greater matters. But hee was on a sodaine preuented by death.
Whilest these things were done in Greece, Prince Cyani sent Ambassadours to theThe Emperour Otho confi^mes the Uenetians priuileges. Emperour Otho, to congratulate his victorie obtained against his enemie P^ilip Duke of Sueuia, and his corriuall in the Empire, who freely granted them the confirmation of all their priuiledges and immunities. Angelo Ph^ledrio Procurator of Saint Marke, did greatly enrich with diuers sorts of pretious stones, the golden Table which (as we haue said) lieth vpon the great Altar in the sumptuous Church of St. Marke. Prince Cyani (his first wife being dead) married Constantia Daughter to Tancred King of Sicilie. It is reported likewise, that he builded the Church of Saint Marie of Ierusalem; which is at this day an house of Nunnes.
Peter, Earle of Auxerre, after the death of Henrie, whose sister hee had married,Peter Count of Auxerre chosen Emperour of the East. was, by a generall consent, chosen Emperour of the East, who with his wife comming to Rome, was crowned by Pope Honorius in S. Lawrence his Church without the Citie. Afterwards he departed from Rome with Iohn Cardinall Colonna, (sent by the Pope for Legate into Hungarie, to leuie forces against the Turke) and being come to Brundusium, he there shipped his wife and children. But himselfe entring into the Venetians Gallies, sailed directly towards Dalmatia, determining to goe from thence by land to Constantinople.
It is reported, that in the Venetians behalfe he would needs assaile Durazzo. Theodore Duke of Albania, commanded there, who tooke it from the Venetians, after they had rampierd it with strong walls, where he placed a strong garrison of Albanians; so as the Emperours assaults were in vaine. This Theodore called himselfe  Emperour of Greece, and reckoned Emanuel, who had beene Emperour, in the list of his Ancesters. But feigning afterwards to be reconciled with Peter, he inuited himThe Emperour Peter murt^ered. to a dinner in the Citie, where in the middest of the banquet he was murthered. Others

say, that this perfidious wretch slew his guest neare to the groues of Thessalie called Tempe. Giacomo Tepulo was at the same time the Venetians Magistrate in Constantinople; who perceiuing the French forces halfe wasted and consumed in Greece, made a league with Theodore the Albanois for fiue yeare, and with the King of Turks for two yeare.
In the meane time Robert, sonne to Peter, came through Hungarie, and Misia, toRobert (...) to Peter Emperour of the East. Constantinople, where hee was sodainly saluted Emperour. The Prince at the beginning did communicate diuers great affaires of the Empire to Marino Michaeli the Venetians Magistrate in Constantinople. In which faithfull league of friendshipGreat friendship betwixt the Emperour and the Venetian Magistrate. and confederacie, hee perpetually continued, so as in all the titles of his letters of  state he called the Venetian Prince (as his Ancestors likewise before time had done) his most deere Colleague in the Empire: nor did he this, without a cause. For the ancient French forces beginning daily to decline in Greece, and no new succours nor supplies comming to them from any place, the matter was brought to that passe, as the whole burthen of the Empire lay only on the Venetians.
This Robert married the daughter of a rich Matrone, though of meane birth, formerlyThe Emperour Robert his vnforunate marriage. A cruell reuenge of a subiect on his Emperour. betrothed to a Senator: whose great heart not brooking so apparent iniurie, resolued presently how to reuenge it. Whereupon, accompanied with diuers of his faction, who were mightie, in a great rage they came to the Emperours Palace: which breaking open, and finding the Maiden, they cut off her nose with great crueltie: And e^t soones taking her Mother who had made the marriage, they threw her head-long into the Sea. Robert here-with vexed w^nt presently to Rome, where after he had complained to the Pope of the wrong done to his wife, returning towards Constantinople he died ^n Achaia. Baldwin, his sonne, being left very yong, married the Daughter of Iohn King of Ierusalem, who by a generall consent was entreated to take vpon him the gouernement of his sonne-in-lawes Empire, who was yet in his Non-age. The Cardinall in the meane time who was sent by the Pope into Syria with great forces, arriued at Ptolomais. The chiefe in this enterprize was AndrewAndrew King of Hungarie chiefe of the voyage in^o Syria. King of Hungarie, who (as it is reported) was aided by the Venetians in the transportation of his troupes and carriage, the which was easily granted him, by  reason that he did renou^ce and giue ouer to them, all the claime which the Kings of Hungarie might pretend to Dalmatia. Some Annalists report, That D^mietDamiet in Egypt taken. in Egypt, neare to the Riuer Nilus, was taken in this iourney, and that they brought away thirtie thousand prisoners. Wee finde no other memorable matter to haue beene done in this action.

The end of the eighth Booke of the first Decad.





THE NINTH BOOKE  OF THE FIRST DECAD OF THE HISTORIE Of Venice.

 The Contents of the ninth Booke of the first Decad.
THe ninth Booke containeth the full description of the Isle of Candie; The reuolt thereof from the Venetians; and the recouerie of it by them after they had chaced away Count Mailloc. The Nobilitie of the Island goe from thence rather than they will obey the Venetians. The rebellion of the Citie of Candace. How after diuers warlike exploits, all the Candiots almost were reduced vnder the Venetians obedience. New stirres of the Islanders; appeased by force. The preparation of VATTASVS to seize on the Island, the Inhabitants hauing offered it vnto him. The punishment of the rebells after the enemies were driuen out. The Venetians victorie against the King of the Exagoni before Constantinople. VATTASVS defeated in  the same place by the Venetians within few daies after. Truce with the Genoueses for nine yeares. The warre of the Venetians by Sea and Land against the Emperour FREDERICK and ECCELIN. The Genoueses victorie against FREDERICK, and the Pisans, neare to the Isle of Cirna. The fifth rebellion of Zara, and the speedie recouerie thereof. The declaration of the Assemblies which are made for the Creation of a Duke. The Paduans are set at libertie by the Venetians, by the helpe of Pope ALEXANDER, so soone as ECCELIN was driuen forth of the Citie. Twelue thousand Paduans murthered at Verona by the command of ECCELIN.

THe continuall reuolts in the Isle of Candie, happening Description of the Isle of Candie. almost one after another, which for a time greatly troubled the Venetians affaires, doe enforce vs a little to digresse from Italie: whereunto the subiect alone doth not inuite vs being filled with va^ious matter, but the fame of this Island so much renowned for the greatnesse and antiquitie thereof. That therefore such as are ignorant of antiquitie may not erre in the knowledge of her name, it is the same Creta, which the vulgar at this day call Candie, by the name of a Citie (as I thinke) which is of late so called therein. Dosiades thinks that it was called Creta by the Daughter of Hesperides: And Anaximander saith, by King Curetus: Philistides and Crates say, that it was first called Acria, and after Cureta; from whence we may easily gather that her name was in the future deriued.
Eudoxus (to speake somewhat of her situation) thought it to be s^ated in the Aegean Sea. But the most curious Authors saie, that it is enuironed with diuers; namely the Aegean, Cretan, Libian, Aegyptian, and Carpathian Seas. Apollodorus saith that it is in length, two thousand, and three hundred stadij. Artemi^orus setteth downe foure thousand and one hundred, extending from the East to the West, where her out-stretched proportion is longest. Some account but two thousand, and her breadh to be much lesse. Plinie thinckes that no part thereof doth exceed fiftie thousand paces in breadth, two hundred threescore and tenne thousand in length, and fiue hundred fourescore and ten thousand in compasse. Her territorie, besides, is verie closely compacted, full of mountaines, and verie fertile vallies. The hilles towards the West are of a meruailous heigth, not giuing place any iotte to mount Taygetus in Laconia. In the middest thereof where the hills seeme highest, mount Ida is to be seene, so much celebrated in the fabulous Poets.Mount Ida.
Ephorus writes That the most ancient inhabitants of the Island were first instructed by Radamanthus to build Cities, and to lead a more ciuill life; and afterwardsRadamanth and Minos Lords of Candie. by Minos his successor, strictly to obserue Iustice: hauing established lawes and ordinances for the same purpose. The same Author, and Plato likewise, did thinke, That this people, and the best-mannerd of Greece, especially the Lacedemonians, haue beene followers and obseruers of these lawes. But (as Strabo saith) all things being altered from bad to worse, this holie kind of life vanished, and mens manners  being wholy depraued, it was first troubled by Pyrates; and soone after being inuaded by the Romanes and subiected to their dominion, it was for a time vnder their protection in peace and quietnesse. At length that Empire beginning to decline, after Constantine had translated the Imperiall seate to Constantinople; and afterwards vpon the diuision of that one entire Empire into twaine, hauing two Emperours; one for the affaires of Greece, and the other of Italie; this Island was euer reputed as a part of the Greeke Empire.
In this passage of time it was not onely molested by the Barbarians, but at sundrie times greatly afflicted; And notwithstanding all oppositions, after the Empire of Myrtillus, which lasted not long, it was taken from the Greekes, and ioyned to  the Venetians dominion. But such is the disposition of this Nation and their desire of noueltie so great, as the Venetians a long time had much trouble to containe them vnder their obedience. Whereupon I will here beginne to speake of their turbulent commotions.
Enuie which euer waites on prosperitie, so soone as the Venetians possessed Candie,What mooued the Genoue^es* to attempt on Candie. did incite the Genoueses repining at their greatnesse, to imploie all their forces (which at that time were great and mightie) and by some meanes or other to snatch it from them. For the Island was as yet scarcely fortified with Garrisons, when they attempted by some of their Nation, with armed Gallies for the purpose, to conquere it: but afterwards with greater force, when they vnderstood  what was befallen to Vetrano their countrie-man, whom the Venetians had put to a shamefull death: wherewith being througly vexed, this aemulation was conuerted into open hatred, and they assayed by all meanes to winne the Candiots to rebellion. Which they being readie to put in practise: Count Mailloc tooke armes to trouble the affaires of the Island. This man beeing couragious and sodaine in his attempts,Co^nt Maillo^ his enterprise vpon Candie. presuming on his assurance of the Genoueses forces, did in a short space reduce the whole Island in a manner vnder his obedience.
The Venetians, who from the beginning were resolued to keepe that Island by all meanes whatsoeuer, did set forth a great Fleete. And in the meane time diuers were of opinion, after it should be recouered, to dismantle all the Cities, Castles, and townes that were strong either by nature or arte; alleadging diuers reasons for the confirmation of their saying. But Rayniero Dandulo who was a man sodaine and verie rich, did presently offer to keepe whatsoeuer should be recouered, at his owne costs. At which offer of his all the assistants blushed, so as no man afterward

durst speake of razing of Cities, fearing thereby they should seeme vnable to keepe the Island vnder their subiection. The Armie being readie, departed vnder the command of the same Rainiero, according to some Annalists, who had more mercenarie Souldiours out of Lombardie, than of their owne allies and confederates.The Venetians Armie ^n Candie. At his arriuall in the Island, the Metropolitane Citie of Candace which at this day is the best (for Marchants traficke) of the whole Island; was forth with recouered, and after all the other townes and Castles. Count Mailloc being brought to verie meane tearmes in a Fort, and being enforced to yeeld vpon composition, departed out of the Island.
The Candiots were alreadie brought to a reasonable good passe when as certain Rayniero Da^dulo his death. seditious Greekes did by their commotions interrupt the peace of the Island. Rayniero speedily opposing himselfe against these combustions was slaine with an arrow, shotte through his body, who being carried to Candace, was buried in Saint Georges Church. His death being reported at Venice, Giacomo Longo and LeonardoTepulo Gouerno^r of Cand^. Nauigaioso were sent with speed to guard the Island; and with them Giacomo Tepulo for the Islands Gouernour. And in another place, Raphaeli Zeno sailed towards Morea to the reliefe of Coron and Modon. Giacomo Longo meeting by the way not farre from Candie, three Shippes of Genoa, suncke them and gaue chase to diuers others. Moreouer seeing in regard of the leuitie and inconstancie of the Greekes, there was no likelihood of abilitie to quiet the state of the Island, without a great  standing Garrison, they resolued to send a Colonie thither: namely horse-men ofA Colonie sent to Candie. the order of Senators, and foot-men of the common sort of people. Vnto whom, being scattered here and there in Candace and other places of the Island, were great inheritances giuen; to some for terme of life, and to others in perpetuitie. Howbeit some Authors affirme That the Colonie was sent thither presently vpon the Islands recouerie as hath beene alreadie spoken in the precedent booke.Sedition in Candie.
Soone after the arriuall of the Colonie, the Hagiostephani (who for Nobilitie and riches were the chiefe of the Island) being desirous of noueltie, did reuolt from the Venetians, and seized on Mirabeau and Sethia. Giouanni Tep^lo to appease these Sa^to comes to ^ide the Venetians in Candie. stirres called Marco Sanuto to his aide from the neighbour-Islands; promising well to reward those whom he should bring to his succour* For I know no better meanes that he had to deale with a Venetian than vpon reward. The Historians make no other mention wherefore this reward was promised him at his arriuall. The Authors of the rebellion were in an instant chaced thence and the townes recouered: But in the meane space, there arose some strife betwixt the commanders which gaue fit occasion to a mischieuous fellow called Seuastus who was desirous of innouation, and watched for nothing more than how hee might disturbe the peace of the Prouince; the which reuolted on a sodaine.
It is reported, that because sufficient order was not taken for the prouision of victuailesA new commotion in Candace. in the Citie, there was no bread to be sold on a market-day (as was wont  to be) in the market-place. This Seuastus, who with others desired to disturbe the State, would not let slippe such an occasion. But hauing drawne together a great multitude of people, they all ranne first to Sanutos lodging, as to him who delt not with the Cities businesse (but diuers thinke that Sanuto had concluded with them so to doe, who because he would not seeme to partake in so wicked an enterprise, nor to take armes to trouble the State, but vpon necessitie, was contented (as hath beene said) that they should first come to him) and then afterward they came with great rumour to the Palace, and the Citie was sodainely taken by a few Souldiours fore-appointed for the same purpose.
Tepulo perceiuing all this to tend to a rebellion, retired himselfe in disguise to The Gouerno^ of Candie flies, being (...) like a woman. the house of Marco Tonisco his friend; and imagining that, the Towne being taken, it might endanger his life if he should be found there, he was secretly in the night let downe by a corde from the Citie walles in womans attire. This sodaine flight caused him to take his iourney towards Themenum, a verie strong Citie; where

thinking himselfe in safetie, hee resolued to remaine, after he had a little fortified the place a new, because he would not seeme by too much despaire to abandon the Prouince. Some saie, Tepulo being driuen forth of the Citie, Sanuto became CaptaineSanuto chiese of the rebels. of the Rebelles, who forgetting his Countrey and the benefits that hee had receiued of the same, did in hast with those of his faction runne vp and downe the Island, causing it to reuolt from the Venetians: And that after he had left Stephano Sanuto his kinsman to guard it, and ioyned all the Greeke and Italian troupes together, he did in short space reduce all the Cities and strong places (in a manner) of the Island vnder his commaund. Some likewise saie That he came and besieged Temenum whither Tepulo had retired himselfe, who with those that were come to his  aide did brauely defend the Citie: For diuers who remained loyall to the Venetians, so ^oone as they vnderstood that the Gouernour was at Temenum, ranne thither to succour him. The siege before Temenum being raised, the Gouernour in few daies recouered Montfort and Lasitha.
Thus stood the affaires of Candie, when as Dominico Quirino, and Sebastiano BethanioVenetian supplies in Candie. being sent as Prouidatori, with great forces of horse and foote arriued in the Island. The Gouernour who till then durst not rashly attempt ought against the enemie, who was much stronger than himselfe, after he vnderstood of the Prouidatoris arriuall, (who, besides the forces they had brought into the Island, were well furnished with weapons, money, and victuals) being thrust forward with hope to  effect some great matter, departed from Temenum, and came and lodged with his troopes at Panosobrita, a verie fit place to execute an enterprise, where hauing fortified his campe, he did in hast build a fort. Sanuto being aduertized of Tepulos departure,Sanuto narrowly followeth his enemie. and of the place where he was incamped, did with his Armie forthwith march thither. The Gouernour being somewhat daunted at the sodaine comming of his enemie, had certaine notice by his spies what forces he had in his campe. And being strengthened with new supplies, which (as I thinke) were mingled among the Islanders, he was not slacke to embattaile his troopes readie for the fight, if the enemieSanuto his dessigne. were so pleased. Sanuto on the contrarie, imagining that which was true, That by temporizing he was able to ouercome him, made none account hereof. For besides, that his souldiers in regard of the commoditie of the places did greatly annoy the Tepulans, he saw new forces daily to arriue at his owne campe from the Citie of Candace, and from all other parts almost of the Island; and on the contrarie, that time would bring so many discommodities to the enemie, as he would be at last enforced to die by famine, or by some other violent death, or else wholly to forsake the Island.
Tepulo soone discouered the purpose of his enemie; and not being able to draw him to battaile, he left a strong garrison in the fort newly builded, raised ^is campe, and returned to Themenum: From whence soone after departing in grea^ silence,Candace taken by Tepulo. he came to Candace, and about midnight setting vp ladders against the Citie wals, he gaue entrance to all his troopes, without noise or slaughter. The Citie being thus recouered, Stephano Sanuto who commaunded there, with diuers others were taken prisoners. The enemie being troubled with these newes, resolued to giue eare to a peace, the which he obtained of Tepulo on these conditions, That after he had retired all his Garrisons which he held in the Island (for all the countrey in a manner from Milopotamus vnto the Promontorie of Spatha, was possessed by his souldiers) he should leaue Candie, and get him home into his Islands with one Galley,Accord betwixt Tepulo and Sanuto. and a little ship for the passage of his troopes, or with more if neede were, not of his owne, but of ^ired ones for that purpose. This agreement being made with the Gouernour, and assurance giuen on either side, Sanuto embarked his troopes, and  by his so daine departure gaue peace to the Candiots.
This is in a manner all which some Authors set downe of the second rebellion ofGreat reasons in San^to his behalf^. the Island, which may yet rather be termed a ciuill warre. For it is not credible that Marco Sanuto did euer beare Armes with an intent to take the Island from the

Venetians; but onely to driue thence the gouernour, who was his mort^llenemie. For vpon what ground or what assurance should he beare Armes against his countrymen and countrey? And what should moue him to rise against a people, till then inuincible? seeing he knew for a certaine, that if the Venetians were once his professed enemies, they would not onely haue taken Candie from him, but all the other Islands which he had forme^ly wonne by right of warre.
Besides, what simplicitie had it beene in him to intend the ruine of those, withGreat reasons in Sanuto ^halfe. whom he resolued afterward to ioyne himselfe. For he would neuer haue gone about to haue drawne Count Mailloc forth of the Island, if he had in any sort desired to haue taken it from the Venetians. But it is farre more p^obable, that it was  for some iealousie or secre^ grudge happened betwixt the Gouernour and himselfe after the battaile, because that either of them enuying one another, would seeme more affectionate to his countrey, and to deserue better of the Common-wealth, than his fellow, and that at last he would haue driuen him out of the Island by force, de^ermining after he had chaced him thence, to giue the Venetia^s a sufficient proofe of his loyalty, in deliuering the Island vnto them peaceable, and at quiet, being defended by his aide. Other reasons likewise may perswade vs to beleeue, that it was vpon such occasions as I haue set downe. For perceiuing by the new supplies, that they pursued him as an enemie, he would not (of set purpose) fight, and though he possessed diuers places in the Island, he neuerthelesse freely abandoned them, and depa^ ted forth of the Prouince. I^ he had marched as an enemy against the Venetia^s, there wanted not those, who would haue repossessed him in the Island. The Genoueses would willingly haue accepted it, who were iealous and enuious of the honour and fame of the Venetians. But he did rather giue place to the publike peace, than helpe his enemie Tepulo. Some Historians referre to the same time that notable victorie ob tained by Giouami Treuisano ouer the Genoueses, wherof we haue made mention inA n^w commotion in Candie. the precedent booke. Candie remained not long quiet* For a new commotio^, much more terrible than that whereof we now spake, did trouble the whole Island, the which growing from a small cause, kindled such a flame, as the whole Prouince felt it. The common report is, that by the counsell of one named Pietro Philameno Gouernour  of the Castle of Boreparitano, the horses of a certaine Candiot Gentleman were stollen: Which being told to Paulo Quirino, who at that time was Gouernour of the Island, he commaunded restitution to the Islanders of that which had beene taken from them. Now because it was not done with that speed as they would haue it, the Greeks who were set on by others, tooke occasion to ouerrunne, vnder the conduct of Petro Scordillo, (who did owe the stollen horses) all the countrie of Reparitana, from whence they carried away great spoiles. The Candiots vpon this stir being desirous of nouelty, complotted forthwith a reuolt, whereupon in short space all that lieth from Milopotamus vnto the farthest part of the Island towards the West, rebelled against the Venetians.
The Gouernour, to stay these new insurrections of the Greekes, speedily sent PietroThe Venetians defeated in Candie. Thonisto, and Giouanni Gritti, with great forces beyond the streights of Milopo^amus: who passing through the forrest of Psieuronessus, not sending out their discouerers, were assailed and defeated by Constantine Seuasti, and Theodore Milesin, who lay in ambush for them, being accompanied with great multitudes of Greekes. Many Venetians were there slaine by them, who knowing the waies of the forrest did meete them scattered heere and therein amaz^d troupes. Giouanni Gritti one of the Captaines, died there, who was an industrious and couragious person, with Nicola^ Balastro, Marco Bono, Andrea Thealdo, and Vendramino of Aquileia, with a greate numbe^ of souldiers. A few of those which escaped the slaughter,Agreement betwixt the Venetians and the Greekes. hauing throwne away their Armes, came by verie strait and narrow waies to  the Gouernour: In whose place soone afterward succeeded Domin^co Delfino, vnder whom peace ensued betwixt the Venetians and the Greekes. To some of whom, to winne them by bountie, (as to Seuasto, and his companions Authors of the

reuolt) were giuen in perpetuitie certaine Lands on the hither side the Riuer Musella, towards the West.
There be likewise in the Island certaine Lands possessed in olde time by the ancient men at armes called by the common people Knight-ships. Some of these were giuen at the same time to the chiefest of the Greeks, as some other of them likewise to Theodore and Michaeli Melissini, so soone as they were receiued into fauour. This is all which we finde to haue hapned as well abroad as at home during the gouernment of Prince Ciani^ who after he had commaunded two and twentie yeares,(...) willingly ^posed himselfe being become vnprofitable to the Common-wealth by reason of his olde age, did willingly depose himselfe, and dyed fortunately soone after in Saint Georges Monasterie, whither he retired himselfe for deuotion sake. His bodie was buried in the Monument of his Ancestors.



 GIACOMO TEPVLO, the 43. Duke of Uenice.





GIacomo Tepulo was by the fortie elected in his place. Candie in this Princes time was not verie quiet; whereof I will briefly mention some passages, before I touch anie other matters, which hapned as well abroad as elsewhere during this Principalitie. The Venetians too much lenitie towards the Candiots, was the cause that the Greeks (who are by nature light-headed and inconstant) insted of yeelding loue  and obedience to the Venetians, did shew themselues altogether stubborne and peremptorie:Sedition in Candie by ^uer much liber^ie. For a base minde doth rather abuse another mans pati^nce than make any good vse of it; and is sooner brought to his dutie by seueritie and exemplarie punishment, than by meekenesse and fauour.
Thus the Scordilli and the Melissini through too much licentiousnesse hauing giuen themselues ouer to all manner of vices, and laying aside all shame, beganne first to disturbe the common quiet by secret thefts, and afterwards by open robberies to make hauocke in all places. The Gouernour being mooued with these vnseemely actions, did forthwith leauie Souldiours, and sent to entreat Marco Sanuto, with the greatest forces he could raise to come speedily into Candie, for the more  speedie expulsion of those theeues and enemies; saying That the Islanders did incline to an open rebellion; and that if their desseignes were not sodainely preuented and restained by force, hee stood greatly in feare of the whole Islands reuolt from the Venetians.
Sanuto esteeming de^ay in such a case dangerous to the Common-wealth, with all speed possible assemb^ed his forces and then wafted ouer into the Isle of Candie.Sanuto commeth to the aids of Candie. Where to bridle the Rebelles, ^ee caused a Castell to be built in a verie comodious place. At the sight whereof the enemies beeing daunted, though not giuing ouer their wilfull headinesse, sent to Iohn Vattasus (who held Lesbos an Island of the Aegean Sea, and who possessed at that time diuers places of the Greek Empire, entitling himselfe Emperour of Greece) promising him by their menssengers the entire dominion of the Island, after the Venetians should be driuen thence, so as hee would in time send them sufficient aide to expell the enemie.
The forces of Vattasus were at that time verie great. For he was in league with  the King of the Hexagons, who likewise in the places nee^e adioyning to the Ponticke Sea, called himselfe Emperour of Greece, determining at eithers charges to assaile the Empire of Constantinople. This King was angrie because young Robert, sonne to the Emperour Peter, had by the aduice of his counsell preferred the alliance of the King of Hierusalem (who had but the title of that Kingdome) before his. Vattasus, being drawne on by these promises, sent thirtie Gallies to aide the Candiots. At their arriuall Marco Sa^to being wonne by Vattasus (as it is reported) departed out of the Island with all his forces. Whereupon the Generall of Vattasus his Armie resolued to besiege the Cities; and entring Rethimna, he constrained Marco Quirino to yeeld himselfe: The like did Ma^gareto Foscari at Milopotamus,Uatt^sus ^is ^mie succoret^ the Rebels in Candie. and Conrad Millenius at Castel-nouo. Yet all these places did not yeeld at the first summons, but after they had fought and valliantly defended themselues for a time. Cat^ldo Auenali, who had seized on the Fort of Boniface with a good troope of Souldiours, did valliantly defend that place till the comming of the Gouernour, who was with an Armie secretly departed from Candace to relieue his owne Souldiours and to raise the siege; whereby the enemie being constrained hastily to dislodge left behind him diuers engins of warre: And because the victorie seemed not so easie as the Candiots had persuaded him it would be, perceiuing withall that the warre was more troublesome to him than the Venetians, he determined to returne to Lesbos. Wherefore after he had shipped all his forces, he left Candie to Vattasus Armi^ leaues Candie. And suffers ship^acke. the Venetians* and sailed thence. His fleet soone after, being verie great, was in such sort tossed and beaten by a tempest neere to the Island of Cithera, as they were all castaway, three small vessels excepted. Nicolao M^tatio and Marin surnamed Marini, being sent Ambassadours into Greece about a peace, suffered shipwracke in that tempest. The Gouernour Nicolao Tonisto, who succeeded Giouanni Storlato, and Bartholomeo Gradonico his successor, did recouer certaine townes.
Nicholas Seuastus and Michael Molesini, Authors of the rebellion and so manyAn agreement with the chie^e Rebels of the ^sland. mischiefes, being delt with by Gradonico, returned to the Venetians obedience; and he gaue them all the territorie which lies from Petraea to the mount Athis; on condition, That they should send euerie yeare fiue hundred pound weight of Wax for  the vse of Saint Markes Churche; and likewise pray vnto God for the Venetian Prince, and perpetually beare Armes against the Rebelles, till they were all reduced vnder the Venetians subiection. There remained no more Rebelles at that time but those that inhabited along the Riuer Petraea euen to the mount Summonium. GradonicoGradonico dyeth. dyed in the meane time, and by his death the Prouidatori tooke the gouernment into their owne hands. For to euerie Gouernour two Prouidato^i were giuen. Gio^anni Ardizino and Marco Molino, had this place in the Island when the GouernourTwo Prouidatorij giuen to ^rie Gouernour. dyed. Molino being at the siege of Sithie, a Sea-towne, perceiued on a sodaine twelue Gallies, who with full sailes came from the maine towards the Island:Vattasus sendeth new aide to Candie. Which Vattasus sent for supplies to the be^ieged. Whereupon, fearing if this Fleet  should enter the Hauen, that the inhabitants presuming on this new aide, would make some salley forth vpon him, whom he should not be able to repell by reason his forces were very few; or if they should saile to Candace, they might at the very first take it: he speedily raised his Campe, and in all hast returned to the Citie,

from whence he sent Ardizino with those shippes of warre which he had readie in the Hauen for the same purpose to hinder the enemies landing, if he found it to be necessarie for the Common-wealth. Vattasus forces in the meane time were entred into the Hauen of Suda, where the Venetian Gallies, arriuing as soone as they, did with great cries assaile the enemie, who already possessed the Port. The Greekes forthwith prepared for the fight, which they could not fitly doe by reason of the streightnesse of the place, so as they attempted to repulse the enemies fleet by their warlike engines and shott. The inhabitants bordering that place, who at the firstThe Venetians fight with the enemies. noise came running to the aid of their Countrimen, did greatly helpe the Greekes. For all the shoare was filled with townes-men and peasants, who without intermission  assailed the Venetians. The fight lasted from morning till noone, when as Ardizino the Prouidator beeing sore wounded commanded to sound the retreate: The Venetians determined the next day to renew the fight; which the Greekes fearing, about midnight they left the Hauen, and sailed thence into the maine.
Whilst the Prouidatori executed these warlike exploits, Angelo Gradonico arriuedAngelo Gradonico G^uernour of Candie. in the Island as Gouernour. By his wisedome the Subriti were reduced to the Venetians obedience, neuerthelesse vpon condition, to deliuer aliue into their hands Emanuel Dracontopulus and Constantine his brother; or if that could not be done, to kill them, as the chiefe authors of all the Rebellions, Because so long as they should liue, there was no likelihood that the Island would euer be at quiet:Agreement with the Candiots. Besides, that the Caleothetes, and the Anatoliks (who boasted to be issued from the Emperors of Greece) should be bannished; and that thirtie of the Noblest families of the Subriti, should come and dwell in the Towne of Boniface. The Candiots and their affaires being thus pacified* they which held the Citie of Nicella, (for there were diuers of Vattasus garrisons still in the Island) did forthwith yeeld.
But it is now time to leaue the Candiots, and to returne to other matters hapned at the same time in Greece, as well in the firme Land, as in the Islands neere adioining, which being of greater importance, haue more troubled and molested the Venetians. For so soone as the new agreement or new affinitie (as it was said) betwixt Vattasus and the King of the Hexagoni was knowne abroad, and that the rumor  was, that both of them ioining their forces together* would assaile the Greeke Empire, Iohn King of Ierusalem, Gouernour of Constantinople, beeing troubled withRequest made to the Venetians for the preseruation of the Greek Empire. these newes, began to consider by what cunning meanes he might preserue and defend the Empire committed to his charge; in which busines the Venetians were they alone from whom he expected aid: The which hauing imparted to Theophilo Zeno the Venetian Magistrate at the same time in Constantinople, they both sent to Prince Tepulo, to acquaint him with the League and affinitie of these two mightie Princes, who by the report of all men were in Armes for the inuasion of the Greeke Empire, and that therefore they had need of aide with all expedition, which is a chiefe point in Martiall businesse, saying, That they knew of a certaine, that both  of them were verie busie in leuying a mightie Armie: They entreated him therefore to hasten the succours, if they desired to haue Constantinople preserued; And not sparingly to send them this or that, but all things whatsoeuer they knew to bee necessarie for the maintenance of so great and dangerous a warre, Alleaging this further caution, That they were not to delaie the matter, for feare least the enemies (which God-forbid) should surprize some places fitt and commodious for the wars, which afterward when they would they should not be able to remedie, to the great preiudice of them and their confederats.
The Citie gaue a willing eare to this aduertisement, and being moued by the imminent danger, they commanded forthwith to leuie a great Armie. Whereupon 25. Gallies were in short space made readie to set saile, who departing from the Port vnderThe Venetian fleete commeth to the aide of Constantinople. the command of Leonardo Quirini, and Marco Gussoni, sailed directly towards Constantinople, when newes was brought them that the Citie was besieged and enuironed with a mightie Armie. The Generalls of the Armie, being troubled at this

report, made all the hast they could, for feare least some mishap might in the meane time befall the Citie.
Leo Gaualla, a man well experienced in marine matters, did command the enemies Nauie, who hauing notice of the Venetians approch, shifted his place, and brought his Gallies nearer to the shore, where the land-armic was encamped (for the CitieThe Armie of the Greekes before Con^tinople. The Greekes ^feated. was alreadie besieged by land.) But this deseigne of the enemie could not make the Venetians change their first resolutions, who at their first arriuall did so furiously assaile the Gre^kish Nauie, as in a moment they suncke foure and twentie of their Gallies, and put the rest to flight, in the view of the amazed enemies. The victorious Venetians entring the citie, which they freed from the siege, were ioifully enterteined  by all men, but chiefly by their Countrimen who dwelt there: And after they had perswaded them euer to hope well, and to feare no harme so long as the state of The Common-wealth should prosper, they remained there a few daies, and then returned into Italie.
The victorious fleete returned to the Citie sooner than was expected, to the exceedingThe Uenetians ioy at the returne of their Nauie. pleasure and contentment of the people. They tooke great delight to heare, that their Countrimen were deliuered from so great danger; and their ioy was not small for that so proude an enemie had been so sodainly defeated, who was as soone ouercome as lookt vpon.
But the vanquished could not long remaine quiet. For Vattasus who on the other Constantinople besieged again^ by Vattasus. side had armed fiue and twenty Gallies (because the former fleete as some say was sent from the frontiers of the Ponticke Sea by the King of the Hexagoni) came againe and besieged Constantinople, with greater numbers of small vessels. But how great soeuer the Armie was, it could not discourage Giouanni Michaeli Magistrate at that time for the Venetians in Constantinople, who with sixteene armed Gallies in the Hauen for guard of the Citie, gaue a furious assault to the enemies Campe. Vattasus Armie did not long endure the furie of the fight. For the affrightedVattasus Naui^ put to fl^ght. enemies did forthwith inuent meanes how to escape: and fortune soone after beeing aduerse to their partie, they openly began to flie. Tenne of the enemies Gallies being taken, and the residue put to flight, gaue the Venetians a goodly victorie, and those of Constantinople free passage of the Sea. The siege beeing raised Vattasus fell sick, and soone after died in the Citie of Nymphea. He left behind himVattasus dieth* a sonne named Theodore, begotten on a daughter of Theodore Lascaris, whom he married when they were both verie young. Other Authors affirme that beside one and twentie Gallies taken from the enemies before Constantinople, diuers others were taken from them at the streights of the Rhodian Sea, among which were diuers of Syria.
About the same time, at the intreatie of Pope Gregorie, truce was concluded for nine yeares with the Genoueses. His Holinesse knowing the little loue which the Emperour Fredericke did beare towards him, thought it much auaileable  for his partie, If, after hee had reconciled these two the mightiest people of Italie, hee could oblige them to him by some good offices. Whereupon (as it is reported) hee entreated the Venetians to send their Ambassadours to him to treate of a peace with the Genoueses: Some say that Stephano Iustiniano, and Marino Morosini, were sent thither; and others set downe Giouan Cornari, and Paulo Molino. Diuers Authours affirme, That the matter was debated at the Councell held at Lyons; and others say, That the truce was concluded at Rome.The Articles of the truce betwixt the Ven^tians and the Genoueses. Among sundrie Articles set*downe for the assurance of both parties, it was specially mentioned, That it should not be lawfull for either of them, to purchase new enemies, nor yet new alliance, nor to denounce warre against any, nor to aid any one, without the mutuall consent of either partie. The Pope thundered diuers great excommunications against those, who, in contempt of that agreement, should doe any thing contrarie to the same.
Blondus saith, That this treatie was ended before the Venetians succored Constantinople;

and by that means they were thought to haue infringed it, whereof afterwards grew such grieuous wars twixt these two people: But neither he nor those which belieued this, did consider, that the Venetians did as they ought in bearing Armes against th^ King of Hexagons and Iohn Vattasus, who inuaded that which belonged vnto them: For the Venetians had purchased right and title in part ofThe reason why the venetians succoured Constantinople. Constantinople, whither in the name of the Common-wealth they had beene sent from the beginning, vnto whom to denie aide and helpe in so great a danger, they humbly crauing the same, had beene as ill done, as for them to infringe an agreement, how holie soeuer: The Venetians raised the enemies Campe before Constantinople, 'Because it was iust and reasonable so to doe; seeing it is  lawfull for euerie man that hath power and meanes, euer to keepe and defendIt is lawfull for all men to defend their owne. his owne. For it is as cruell and inhumane a matter to hinder any one from repelling an iniurie done to him, as to wrong an other man. And the Genoueses themselues, if any man should haue inuaded ought that had belonged vnto them, would they haue forborne to take armes, till they had receiued aduise and consent from the Venetians? Besides, it is to be thought that the Genoueses by meanes of this treatie, did deale but craftily with the Venetians. For, imaginingThe craft and sub^iltie of the Genoueses. that it would come to passe by meanes of this agreement, whereby they held the Venetians bound as with a chaine, that they would delay the aide, either by determining, or making shew to prepare forces, vntill the enemie (whom perhaps they  had stirred vp) had taken Constantinople: because they could not draw the Venetians to this follie, they beganne to crie out, as though they had broken the accord so holily sworne to. But so farre off was Pope Gregorie (who was the meanes for the truce) from the least thought that the Venetians had in any thing at that time broken their faith, as on the contrarie he euer remained firme and constant in their friendship and alliance. Nay, moreouer, I find, that about the same time, or soone after, the selfe-same Genoueses did demand aide of the Venetians, as of their faithfull friends and companions, against the Emperour Frederick, and the Pisans, which was freely granted them: But of this wee will speake elsewhere.
It is reported that Pope Gregorie, at the beginning of the truce, did request the VenetiansThe Popes intretie to Arme against the Turks. and Genoueses, with all the other Potentates of Italie, to take Armes for the recouerie of the holy Land; and that the same had beene done (because they had all freely promised so to doe) had not the Popes sodaine death broke off that notable enterprise. The Venetians at the same time had friendly composed certaine differences betwixt themselues and the Genoueses: diuers Commissioners for the same purpose being sent from either side. But a cruell tyrannie, which had then crept into the Citie, did in a manner interrupt the whole treatie alreadie concluded, which would not haue proued very necessarie, in regard of that which afterward happened.
Eccelin, a man basely descended, and whose grand-father of the same name, commingWhat Eccelin was with his co^mi^g into Italie. like a poore Souldier out of Germanie, had followed the Emperour Otho the third into Italie, being made rich and raised to honour by the Emperour Fredericke the second, (whom he very much resembled) did by little and little commit great tyrannie in Italie, whilest Frederick being armed against the Pope, ouer-ranne the greatest part of Italie, and chiefly Lombardie; where diuers famous Cities were greatly vexed, vnder a colour only (as I finde) for that at the beginning of the controuersie betweene Pope Gregorie and Frederick, they had remained Neuters, not taking parts as others did. Eccelin by goodly promises solicited the Paduans, and inEccelin in Padu^ hope to preserue their liberties, constrained them to follow the Emperours part. These men vnder a gentle kind of bondage, were soone after held very short by him: who laying vpon them an vnusuall yoke, beganne openly to tyrannize. Then might you haue seene Gentlemen; some led to punishment, and others to prison; fromWonderfull crueltie of a Tyran^ whence being brought forth, they were either condemned to death, or perpetuall

banishment; their goods spoiled, Noble Maides, and Matrones rauished and defloured: In a word, all detestable actions which a proude conquerour is accustomed to vse towards poore captiues, was executed by this new Prince on the wretched Paduans: Diuers fled away for feare; Diuers likewise being destitute of all meanes, and banished the Citie, with their wiues and children, came to Venice, as to the only Sanctuarie of freedome.
All Lombardie on the other side did tremble at the Armies of Frederick. It is reportedPietro Tepulo defea^ed and ^aken prisoner. that Pietro Tepulo, sonne to the Venetian Prince commanding certaine troups of Milan against Frederick, was vanquished neare to the new Court, and taken prisoner with great losse, together with sundrie men of note. Frederick, in hatred to the  Father and to the Venetians, whose enemie he was alreadie professed, sent him first to Pisa, and afterwards into Apulia, where (as it is reported) he was miserably murthered. The Historians make no mention why hee put him to death in that Prouince. But I thinke, he did it to gratifie those of Apulia, who about the same time had beene greatly afflicted by Giouanni Tepulo, brother to Pietro. For the Venetians in the Popes behalfe had sent fiue and twentie Gallies into Apulia, vnder the command of this G^ouanni Tepulo, to inuade the Cities of that Prouince, which tooke part with Frederick. This Tepulo hauing at his arriuall chaced away the Garrison of the Prouince, seized on Thermida, then on Campo Marino, and soone after on Bestica. But whilest he was busied in razing and ruining the taken Towne, word was  brought him that the Barze, (the goodliest shippe, which at those daies sailed onThe Venetians take Fredericks great ship, called the Bar^e or Cethea. the Seas, carrying a thousand Souldiers, and which had fought at Sea for Fredericks partie) was entred into the Hauen of Siponto, called at this day Manfredonia; whervpon he sailed thither with his Gallies, where for his owne aduantage finding the ship in the Hauen, hee assailed it, tooke it with great ease, brake it in peeces, and burnt it in the enemies sight. For this cause it is likely that Frederick sent Pietro Tepulo to be executed in Apulia. Whilest these things were done abroade, or at least soone after, diuers good decrees were enacted in the Citie. They established first theThe Court of Requests establ^shed Court of Requests, with three Iudges, to decide euery mans controuersies. And next the ancient Lawes and Statutes of the Citie were examined, and being againe  confirmed, were set downe in better termes, and reduced into another quantitie. Some Authors referre to these times, this second battaile of Giouanni Michaeli, where he defeated with a few Gallies, the great Armie of Vattasus. Frederick after hee had obtained this victorie at the new Court, in the state of Milan (as wee haue said) where Tepulo was taken prisoner, came to Padua, alreadie subiect to the cruell tyrannie of Eccelin, where keeping the Feast of Easter, newes was brought him, how the Pope had a while before excommunicated him, and all those which followedThe Pope excommunicateth the Emperour Frederick. him, or in any sort did giue him assistance: wherewith being incensed, like a man beside himselfe, he forthwith fell on the Venetians Territories, and being come as far as S. Hilaries Church (where a little before Eccelin had builded a Fort in the view  of the Venetians) he cut short his iourney, and turning on the right hand, hee marched with speede towards the Tower of Bebia. This Tower for the hard accesseFrederic against the venetians* thereunto, by reason of the water which enuironeth it, did brauely sustaine the enemies assault, vntill that a great number of light vessels being come to the rel^efe thereof, enforced him to dislodge.
It is certaine that sundrie occasions moued Frederick to warre on the Venetians: For first, he would reuenge the iniurie that hee had receiued, by the burning of his Barze, and because the Venetians had made a league with the Pope. But that where with he was most moued, was, because he saw great numbers of Paduans were retired to Venice for refuge, thereby fearing, if they dwelt so neare, the Citie of Padua  would not long remaine in the same state it then did. And that which makes this seeme to be true, is, that at his departure from Padua, hee carried thence with him the chiefest and richest Citizens, vnder colour of sending them to the warres, confining them farre from home.
The Genoueses about the same time sent to the Venetians according to their agreement, entreating them speedily to aide them with a nauall Armie, saying; That they vnderstood how the Pisans, assisted by Frederick, had armed more than one hundred Gallies against them, and that their affaires could endure no delay, being well assured that the enemie would soone be with them, with whom they were not resolued to fight, without the aide of their Confederates. Hereupon the Venetians speedily set forth threescore Gallies; which being giuen in charge to AndreaAndrea Tepulo sent to aide the Genoueses. Tepulo (who was the Dukes sonne likewise) he was commanded to make hast to the succor of their friends. This man sayling directly to Pola, condemned the Polans in a pecuniarie fine, for not furnishing a Galley which they were bound to doe, and  did besides beate downe a part of their walls. From thence with a faire winde hee sailed to Durazzo, where he vnderstood that the Armie of Frederick, and the Pisans, was defeated by the Genoueses, neare to the Isle of Cyrna. At these newes AndreaThe Citie of Pola ^aken and ^uined. returned to Pola. For he had notice that the Polans soone after his departure were reuolted from the Venetians; whereupon, at his arriuall hee recouered it, spoiled, and razed it.
Zara likewise remained not long in quiet; for soone after that the Armie was returnedThe fifth rebellion of Zara. to Venice, it reuolted the fifth time, and chaced away Giouanni Michaeli their Gouernour: For the recouerie whereof a mightie Armie was appointed, and fiue and fortie Vessels were armed, whereof fiue and twentie were Gallies, and the  rest ships of burthen. Rayniero Zeno was made Generall of the Armie, who arriuing with his forces in Dalmatia, came and besieged this so often-rebellious Citie: where after he had staied two whole Moneths, and executed sundrie exploits, the stubbornnesse of the Inhabitants being qualified, at last they yeelded.
The Citie being recouered, they concluded to send Ambassadours to the KingZara recouered. of Hungarie. Whereupon soone after Stephano Iustiniano, and Pietro Dandulo, were sent thither. These men dealt in such sort with King Bella, as hee renounced andThe agreement with the King of Hungarie for Zara. made ouer to the Venetians all the right which himselfe or any other Kings of Hungarie might pretend to that Citie; and because this deede of his might be more firme and authenticall, they would haue it to be set downe in writing.
At this stay stood the affaires of the Venetians, when Prince Tepulo deceased, in the twentieth yeare of his gouernement. He was honourably buried in the Church of S. Iohn and S. Paul the Twinnes.




 MARINO MOROSINI, the 44. Duke of Uenice.





MAr^no Moros^ni succeeded him, by a new manner of election, according to some Authors. We haue set downe the forme of the PrincesThe forme of electing the Venetian Princes. election vsed till those daies; which was indeede without deceit, and such, as if they, who liued in those times, had beene ambitious, it would haue easily ministred occasion to them to haue done much euill. But that which hath followed since, is much more certaine than that ancient manner, and much more different. For first of all, when question is of electing a Prince: before the Electors come to any casting of lots, fiue men, appointed for this purpose, doe in the name of the Common-wealth acquaint the future Prince with that which he is to obserue, as well concerning his owne dignitie, as for the honour  and profit of the Common-wealth. For of necessitie the same must bee published in the great Councell, and be approued by them. After his approbation, all those who haue attained to the age of thirtie yeares; are commanded to come to the generall assembly: There, as many little round white Balls, as there bee Gentlemen in the Roome, are cast into a great vessell* among which are mingled thirtie that be gilded: I meane, that being so mingled together they make vp the iust number of the assistants, there being neither more nor lesse than they were in number at the beginning. Then being called in order, euery man draweth forth one, and those which haue lighted on the gilded ones, are led into another chamber neare to the same: And this is called the first lot of the thirtie Balls: Then againe they put  thirtie Balls into a Vessell, to answere the number of those who first drew, nine whereof are gilded, and those nine who draw the golden ones, doe name fortie men, whereupon these men be called the Electors of the first election. These fortie thus named, returne againe to the lot* after they haue put as many Balls into the Vessell, twelue whereof are gilded: the twelue of this number that draw those are called the second Electors. These men name fiue and twentie, who againe draw as many Balls, nine whereof are gilded, and the rest white: These nine which haue drawen the gilded ones choose fortie fiue, who returning againe to the lot, draw out of the whole number eleuen gilded ones, and they which light on them, doe last of all name one and fortie, which haue absolute power to elect the Duke and Soueraigne  Magistrate of the Common-wealth.
Sabellicus saith, That he learned this manner of election (for there is no mention heereof left in writing by any Authors) of Benedicto Treuisano, whom he accompaniedBenedicto Treuisano. from Venice, at such time as he was sent to be the Magistrate at Verona. Hee learned then of him, that these one and fortie Authors of the Princes election, doe shut themselues vp in that part of the Pallace, where the Senate doth commonly meete euerie day: and then at their entring in, they choose three among them, exceeding the rest in age and authoritie, as Princes of the whole assemblie, whom they name Priors, vnto whom after they haue giuen the chiefest place, the rest of the companie diuide themselues into foure parts, from whence they are called one  by one to giue their voices, and it is lawfull for euerie of them to choose in what place of the foure he will be.
Now those that be called from anie one of the foure parts (for that it is not materiall) come before these three, euerie one carrying in his hand a little folded scrole, wherein is written the name of him whom they choose for Duke. They lay them all downe in a certaine place, and returning to their seats, two Secretaries who stand before these Priors, doe in their presence read, how many voices euerie of them hath. The names of them that are appointed for voyces are put into a cap, and being well mingled together, they are drawne forth one by one at all aduentures, and according as they are drawne, they are likewise in the same order with their suffrages afterwards committed to lots. But this lot is not so much for the creation of the  Duke, as to know how euerie man stands affected. Now, those names being gathered vp in order, are againe put together; then they begin to cast lots for him, who by chance is first drawne, who if he be in the companie, is forthwith commanded

to depart*, and to withdraw himselfe into a place not farre from thence. But before they come to cast lots, those that be there present are demaunded, whether any of them can alleadge any matter against him for whom they are readie to cast lots, and it is lawful for euerie man freely to speake his mind. If there be then any one who will taxe him with some crime, he riseth vp, and declareth all that he knowes against him, which may make him vnworthie of such a dignitie: This man as faultie is called forth of that secret place before the Lords, who commaund him to purge himselfe if he can of that which is obiected against him, which hauing done, he is sent backe againe to that priuate place. Then they aske againe if any man will impugne that which he hath spoken, and in the same manner as often as he is taxed with  any thing, hee is called to iustifie himselfe. But we haue learned, that vpon one or two iustifications at the most, the whole matter is concluded.
Thus after he hath made his last excuse, they begin againe to cast lots for him, and they cast into vessels, one for the consent, and the other for the refusal, their smal bals marked with a certaine caracter to auoid deceit. Then they heedfully reckon the balles of the consent, which if they amount to the number of fiue and twentie,Since when the forme of electing the Prince hath beene in vse. he for whom they drew is declared Prince, if they are lesse, they fall to cast lots for him, who was drawne for the second place. Against him likewise, and so the rest, it is lawfull for euerie man to speake what he thinketh good, and the like for him to to refute their accusations: and this man shall be Prince, if the number appointed  for the voices be full, if not, they proceed to the third, then to the fourth, and so to all the rest. He saith, That it is a rare matter if the Duke be not created at this first Scratino, as they call it. And therfore if by chance there proue no creation at the first time, the first voices are crossed out and after proceede to new casting of lots for those which are shut vp in the same manner as we haue said. And the same is reiterated vntill such time as they haue a new Duke.
This is that which Sabellicus hath set downe, vnder the authoritie of so notable a man, concerning the Princes election, which I haue of purpose mentioned, to theT^e Popes Legate comme^h to Venice against Ec^elin. end that all men may know what was the ancient manner, and what the new forme now is of electing the Venetian Princes, whereof we haue hitherto spoken, and shal  hereafter speake as occasion is offered: As also because that Morosini was the first that was created in this sort. But howsoeuer this manner of election were then or since invse, it is certaine that the Venetians haue of a long time obserued it in the creation of their soueraigne Magistrate.
Now to returne to Morosini his gouernment: In his time Philippo Fontano Bishop of Rauenna, came (as some Authors say) to Venice, as Legate from Pope Gregory or (according to others) from Pope Alexander, who vsing spirituall Armour propounded euerlasting life as recompense for all those who should take Armes with him against the tirant Eccelin, who was proclaimed enemie to the Church of Rome. Eccelin at the same time laid straight siege to Mantua: Philippo to breake his forces, determined with such troups as he could leuie to trouble and disquiet those townes which he had possessed. Diuers men being called to so holy an enterprise by so great a recompence, came and met him at Venice: But the Venetians power did greatly further the businesse. For besides the great number of souldiers wherewith theyAn Armie at Venice against Eccelin. furnished Philippo, they relieued him with Armour, ships, and victuals, and they generally caused all necessaries to be carried speedily to the camp, which they thought to be expedient for the warres and besieging of townes.
The Armie departed from Be^ia, (which was the Rendez-vous for all the troups) to march against the enemie, and came on a sodaine to Corregiola. Ansedin nephew to Eccelin, and gouernour of Padua, was alreadie come thither with certaine  troupes, who being aduertised of what had passed at Venice, had caused the ordinarieThe riuer^ Brent and Bacchillion turned backwards. course of the riuers Brente and Bacchillion, to be turned backe, so as he did in a manner draw drie all the lakes which were neere thereabouts being wont to be filled by the flowing of those riuers, to the end the Venetian ships might not come

neere the firme Land to Land the Armie. This did in some sort make the Nauigation more difficult. For when they came to the mouth of Corregiola finding the ancient channell almost without water, and so shallow as it could not beare any great vessels, they were constrained to vse small boates and barks. In them they passed ouer first the Archers to beate back the enemies which stood vpon the bancks opposite against them; and afterwards they landed the residue of the Armie, which marched directly to the citie of Sacco, which being strengthned by Ansedin with a strong Garrison was valiantly defended.
The Bishop of Rauenna did on a sodaine raise his Campe, and seized on someS^cco taken by the Legate and the venetians. An Assault giuen to Pad^a. small townes not farre from thence, Ansedin beng aduertised thereof, after he had  committed the guard of Sacco to the Townes-men, came speedily to Padua. Philippo and the Venetians hauing receiued the Sacceans vpon their faithfull promise, pursued the enemie. Padua at their arriuall was so sodainely assailed, as they had (in a manner) taken all the suburbes of the crooked bridge, ere they in the Citie heard the assault. Philippo and the Venetians, waxing more hardie by this fortunate successe, did more furiously assaile the enemie at the Port Altina. The Paduans blushing to see so excellent a citie, so fully furnished with men and all necessaries, to bee lost by their fault, beganne couragiously to resist the enemie. The fight was eager on both sides: these men fought for their countrie, the other for renowne: the loue to their countrie did animate the one, and the hope of victorie the others. At  the last the obstinacie of the Townes-men being ouercome, the citie was entred by force at that gate. Whereupon Ansedin thinking all lost, fled with certaine of hisThe flight of Ansedin. Padua taken. friends on the other side of the citie. His flight being knowne, the towne was forthwith yeelded. The castle which at this day is to be seene in one part of the citie, within foure daies after did the like.
Eccelin all this while being ignorant of what was done at Padua, and seeing thatEccelin before Mantua. he lost his time before Mantua, resolued to bring backe his troupes to Verona. Hee forthwith therefore raised his siege, and camped on the Riuer Myncia, where hee had determined to tarrie three dayes. But he was constrained to alter his purpose  vpon the newes of the losse of Padua, which he little expected. And albeit it did greatly mooue him, yet kept he his griefe verie secret, dissembling it vntil he came to Verona, whither after these newes he marched by great iournies. But being entred into it with his troupes, he did commit (as it is reported) incredible crueltie.Eccelin his cruelti^ against the Paduans. For by sundrie exquisite torments he put tweluethousand Paduans to death which were in his Armie, who were not mercenarie men, or of the common sort, but all Gentlemen, and some of them of great account. We find not that euer any man did the like, (except Cornelius Scilla) in slaughtering at one time so many men subiected vnder his obedience. Of whom it is reported, That at one time andTwelue thousand Puenestines slaine by Sylla in cold bloud. place he put twelue thousand Prenestines to death, because they had fauoured Marisu partie, not pardoning any one of so great a number, but onely one that had  beene his Hoste: who perceiuing by that meanes the slower and choise of his countreyA Noble courage of a Prenistine. to bee extinct, did boldly refuse his mercie; and in saying that he would not thanke him for that curtesie, he cast himselfe into the throng of those who were put to execution.
It is not to be thought strange, or vntrue which we haue deliuered touching so many thousands of men at one time sent forth of Padua to the warres: For it is certaine by the testimonie of a verie credible Author, That there hath beene reckoned at times in Padua foure hundred families, all Gentlemen; and that which is more, sixscore thousand men sent thereout to the warres at one time.
Eccelin, after the massacre of the Paduans, hauing shut vp with great Rampiers a  little belowe Vincenza the Riuer Bacchillion, diuided it into diuers streames, and by that diuision he made the Citie more stronge, and made diuers vses of it, chiefely for Milles. The Bishop of Rauenna on the other side caused a great ditch to bee made round about the walles of Padua, and by that meanes in such sort fortified

the Citie as it needed no more to feare the attempts of Eccelin. Then he marched sodainely being well accompanied, to that place where the Riuer Bacchilion was shut vp: The Gouernour of Vincenza, equall to the Bishop both in strength and courage, sallied with the troupes which Eccelin had left there in Garrison. The fight beganne speedily aud held out long time without certaine knowledge which side had the better. But word being brought in the heat of the skirmishe, that the Ra^piers of the floud were broken downe, and that the Riuer with great force was returned into the ancient channell, the Bishop sodainely sounded the retraite. Diuers warlike attemps were afterwards performed on either side, but they are not fitting to be here set downe.
Some Authors affirme that the Pope, in acknowledgement of the aide and succour which the Venetians sent him in his action, graunted them that the Deane of Saint Markes golden Church should in high solemnities, vse a Mitre and pastorall staffe, which none of their predecessours could euer till then obtaine. The Prince being oppressed with age, after hee had fortunately gouerned the Common-wealth, deceased the fourth yeare of his gouernment. His bodie was buried at the entry into the golden Church. Raini^ro Zeni was named Prince in his sted.

The end of the ninth Booke of the first Decad.






THE TENTH BOOKE  OF THE FIRST DECAD OF THE HISTORIE Of Venice.

 The contents of the tenth Booke of the first Decad.
THe occasion of the first warre against the Genoueses is handled in this tenth Booke. Why the Venetians did seize on the Citie of Acre. The Venetians victorie against the Genoueses betweene Acre and Tyre. Aide sent by the Venetians to BALDVVIN Emperour of Co^stantinople. PALEOLOGVS seizeth on the Greeke Empire, and expells BALDVVIN. The Genoueses take three Venetian shipp^ at the Bosphorus of Thrace. The Venetians defeate the  Genoueses, and take foure shippes from them neere to the Hauen, called the seauen Swine. The Venetians besiege Tyre in vaine. MICHAEL DORIA taketh certaine Venetian shippes at the going out of the Adriaticke Sea. The notable victorie of the Venetians ouer the Genoueses in the view of the Sicilians neere to Trapani. PALEOLOGVS in league with the Venetians. Genoueses take Sydonia in the Isle of Candie. Apopular tumult in the Citie, wherein the Prince is wronged. Eight Gallies of Genoa taken neere to Cyprus, which are brought to Venice The Venetians victorie against the Genoueses in Syria at the same place almost where they wanne the first victorie. The Venetians are denied victuailes by their neighbours. Truce with the Genoueses: warre with those of Bologna almost for three yeares space at the mouth of the Riuer Po* Warre likewise against  those of Ancona for the impostes at Sea. The Common-wealth hath a new warre by reason of the troubles in Candie. The rebellion of those of Cape Histria. The Acoonitans, after the Venetians had driuen them from Sea, haue recourse to the Pope. A great Earthquake in the Citie: diuers incounters in Histria for a while against the Patriarche of Aquileia, and the Prince of Goritia. The Citie of Acre is ruinated and ouer throwne by the King of Babylon.








 RAINIERI ZENO, the 45. 'Duke of Uenice.








THERE was in Phaenicia (one of the Prouinces of the Kingdome of Siria) betweene mount Carmell and Sydon, a Citie in times past verie famous, calledThe Citie of Ptol^mais called Acre. at first Ptolomais, afterwards Acon, by a more vsuall name. Some Venetian Historians haue set downe Acre for Acon, following therein the vulgar, who so call it. The Venetians, at such time as the Christians tooke Hierusalem, with a part of Syria, had by an agreement  purchased a kinde of title in that Citie; and not the Venetians alone, but likewise the Genoueses and Pisans, who sent nauall Armies for the assistance of that warre. Now the Venetians and Genoueses had in the same Citie a Church common to them both, albeit they had otherwise a particular place and street a-part. These being first prouoked with iealouzie and afterward with mortal hatred, beganne to striue about the possession of the same Church.
The Venetians alleaged, That by couenant made with Baldwin not onely aThe origina^ of the war^e betwixt the Venetians and Geno^eses* street, but the third part of the Citie belonged to them, and so consequently that Church was theirs which was dedicated to Saint Saba. The Genoueses insisted on  the contrarie, not yeelding either to the couenants or to their fellowe^; and there was likelihood that some great mischiefe might be fall the affaires of the Christia^s in Syria in regard of that contention. But to take away all occasion of future diuision, the whole matter was referred to Pope Alexander the fourth, who louing equitieTheir d^fference referred to the Pope. The Popes sentence. as well as peace, did forth with conclude, That seeing the ^iuine seruice was common to them both, the Church likewise ought to be so. The Genoueses hauing notice of the Popes sentence sooner than the Venetians, presuming on the good will which Philip of Montfort a French-man by Nation, did beare vnto them, who was Gouernour of the Citie, they came not staying for the Popes answere, and seized on the place, and speedily fortified it in manner of a Castle. Philip also  vnto whome the Venetians complained, was so farre off from redressing theThe Venetians commaunded to lea^e Acre. same, as on the contrarie, vpon their speech, That the thlrd part of the Citie belonged vnto them, he commanded them (to giue the people contentment) to depart thence.
The Venetians, disdaining to digest such an iniurie, made a speedie league with M^nfred, King of Sicill, against the Genoueses; But whilest they were busied in preparing their Armie, the Prince of Antioch, and the Patriarke of Ierusalem, did sharply by their letters rebuke Philip, counsailing him to gouerne himselfe mor^ discreetly; and assured him, that if the Venetians were not reconciled to the Genoueses, from whom they were seuered by his pride and their owne, the affaires of Christendome were like to receiue a great affront in Syria, by reason of that quarrell. The Venetians vnderstanding the small account that Philip made of those aduertisements, and that it was certaine, that he would not change his determination, either for admonitions or threats, but that he would continue will full in the hatred  which he had already conceiued; They being wholly impatient by reason of the hainousnesse of the matter, set presently forth thirtie Gallies well prouided, which they had in readinesse at the same time in the Hauen of Tyre. The Venetian Historians say, That they were sent from Italie, vnder the command of Lorenzo Tepulo;Acr^ taken by the Venetians. and that comming to the Hauen of Ptolomais, after they had broken the chaine which shut it in, they furiously charged three and twentie Genoueses ships of burthen, and two Gallies, being there by chance in the harbour, which were as easily taken as vnawares assailed; and that afterwards hauing despoiled them of all their tackling, they burnt them all in a moment. With the same violence likewise they came to S. Saba's Church, which the Genoueses had fortified, the which being likewise  taken, was for the most part ruined.
Whereupon the Genoueses, rather incensed than daunted with this losse, hauing armed two and thirtie Gallies at Tyre, came to meete with the Venetian Nauie; but it was in vaine. For the Venetians leauing the Syrian warres, for the care which they had of the affaires of Greece, sailed into the Pontick Sea, to the aide of their Countrie-men, which dwelt in Constantinople, whom the warres of V^ttasus had entangled. In the meane time the newes of that which had beene done in Ptolomais, being come into Italie, did in such sort stirre vp the Genoueses, who alreadieThe Genoueses resolution. did not greatly affect the Venetians, as they resolued to leuie a mightie Armie, to reuenge this wrong: Therefore, after they had armed fortie Gallies, and ten Argozies, they sent them into Syria.
The Venetians likewise in Italie fore-seeing the dangerous warre, which they were to make with the Genoueses, did with a meruailous speede arme fifteene Gallies, and ten ships of burthen, of which Andrea Zeno was made Generall; And with like celeritie, those Venetians which were in Ptolomais made readie about fortie lesser ships, commonly called Vaccetes, and ten Argozies.
At this stay stood the affaires of the Venetians and Genoueses in Syria, when inThe Popes disigence to make peace betwixt the Venetians and the Genoueses. Italie Pope Alexander, vpon tidings what had passed at Ptolomais, and considering how great either of their forces were, and that by their mortal hatred, some horrible mischiefe was threatned those Christians which at that time were in Syria, had an  especiall care to giue audience to both their Ambassadours sent to him for that purpose, and for that cause would needes haue the Pisans to be present at that audience, whose Ambassadours he had sent for out of Tuscan, to be as it were Vmpiers, and Procurers of the peace, betwixt these two people. And (without doubt) by theThe treatie of peace broken. Popes mediation peace would soone haue ensued, if they had not in the meane time fought together in Syria. The newes of this encounter did greatly trouble the deseignes of the Pope. For so soone as both the Armies arriued in Syria, the Venetians albeit they kept a strong Garrison in Acre, had not forsaken Tyre, where the Genoueses and Philip Montfort remained, who vndoubtedly would haue offered violence to the Venetians which held a part thereof, had not the Gouernour of theWisedome of the Gouernour. Citie expresly forbidden any attempt whatsoeuer, within the circuit of the Citie, or  in the Hauen. But the condition of the Venetians seemed in some sort better: who alone held Acre, and yet neuerthelesse had not abandoned that which they possessed in Tyre.
The Genoueses hereat being more incensed, came on a sodaine forth of the hauen, and sailed directly towards Ptolomais. Andrea Zeno and Lorenzo Tepulo, Generals of the Venetian Armie, being aduertized of the enemies proceeding (for diuers Venetians were in Tyre, as hath beene said, mingled among the enemies) imagined the truth, to wit, That the Genoueses meaning was to come thither, thinking in the same manner to surprize them, as their owne men had beene of late surprised by the Venetians. For which cause on a sodaine they drew all their vessells forth of the hauen, so as these two mightie fleets met one with another. Vpon the first kenning of each other, they quickly put themselues in order of battaile, and then ranne furiously one vpon another, being armed indeed more with hatred than with force;  after which ensued a bloudie fight. But the Venetians from the beginning of theThe Genoueses defeated by the Venetians. fight had the most aduantage, as being the stronger, and greatly fortified by the aide of the Pisans, with whom they were then in league; In the end the enemies being broken and defeated, and diuers of their Gallies sunke and taken, to the number of fiue and twentie: the rest trembling with feare escaped to Tyre. The Venetian brought backe his victorious Armie to Ptolomais, dragging after him the taken Gallies, and some thousands of Genoueses.
This notable losse of the enemies did not yet appease the Venetians furie, but on the contrarie did the more inflame it: For that soone after this victorie they ouer-threw all the buildings, as well publicke as priuate, which the Genoueses possessed  in Acre: they spoiled their store-houses and moueables, and expelled at the last their Criers and Beadles, with their other Officers, and all other signes of their ancient fortunes, which they had till then enioyed in that Citie.
Moreouer, two thousand sixe hundred Genoueses who were taken in the fight, and brought thither (as hath beene said) were by them made Galley-slaues. It is reported that the Pope was greatly troubled with these newes; and that he would not dismisse the Ambassadours of Genoa, who were called home after the losse of the battaile, till the Venetians had granted, that all the Genoueses Souldiers which were taken prisoners, should be set at libertie.
Thus were the Venetians affaires entangled in Syria, whilest in Greece they were  little better, being now vexed by the Greekes, then by Vattasus, and another whileThe power of the French ^uch decaied in Greece. by Theodore his sonne. For the power of Baldwin was so decaied, as if the Venetians had not at times come into the Pontick Sea to bring him aide, the Greeke Empire would not so long haue remained in the hands of the French-men: which they hauing of^en done at other times, did not cease to continue, so soone as they were become Masters of Ptolomais, notwithstanding their cruell war with the Genoueses. For they sailed into Greece, as forgetting their affaires in Syria, to giue Baldwin timelyThe death of Theadore sonne to Vattasus. succours. But vpon newes of the death of Theodore, which was thought to haue happened opportunely for the quiet of Greece, the Venetians returned into Syria, whither they were called by sundrie messengers.
In the meane time, Michael surnamed Paleologus, who was left Protector ofMichael Paleologus. Theodore his children, with the absolute gouernement of the Empire, had at the beginning giuen hope to all men of a happie peace: For he made shew to bee contented, and highly to respect the children, and to preserue and defend that which Theodore had left them. But soone after, hee did not only defeat Baldwins forces, but wholly chased them thence: whereunto, how, and by what meanes he attained, I will briefly set downe. Yet I will make mention by the way of that which some Authors doe report, to wit, That Theodore did not leaue Paleologus as Protector toGreat treachery of a Greeke. his children, but one named Gregorie Imisole, whom Paleologus caused to be slaine, as hee was hearing diuine seruice, and that hauing by his death taken vpon him the  charge of the children (for besides his neare kindred, hee had euer shewed himselfe a faithfull friend to the late Theodore) so soone as he had assured his owne estate, hee caused them miserably to be put to death.William Prince of (...).
This man being installed Protector, beganne the warre against William, King of

Achaia; a French-man by nation; and he ceased not to pursue him till hee had constrained him to fight, wherein being ouercome, and taken, he confined him to prison. Being proud of this victorie, hee came and assailed Baldwin. The Emperour being aduertised that his enemie approached with his forces, resolued to guard the streights of the Ponticke sea, and to dri^e him if it were possible, far from the hauen. So soone therefore as he had prepared a nauall Armie, with the greatest forces that he could leuie, he gaue the command therof to Marco Gradonico the Venetian, who was then Magistrate in Constantinople, determining either to hazard all or else to diuert that haughtie enemie from his purpose. For being desperate of all aide, he knew not by what inuention else he could bee able to keep Constantinople, hauing beene till then so extremely impouerished, first by Iohn Vattasus, and after by Theodore his successour, as hee was enforced to Pawne Philip his sonne (who hadTo what extremitie Baldwin was brought. afterwards committed to ward in Venice) to the Merchants of Bruges, who was lent him a great summe of money, and to sell the gutters and couerings of leade of the publike buildings and the pretious relicks of Saints: so great was his want of money.
Thus being compassed with miseries, and almost distracted, he sent all his forces, to the guard of the straite and passages of the Sea, not leauing any garrison in the Citie. But whilest he sought meanes to keepe out a forraine enemie, he was ouerthrowne by domesticke treacherie. For certaine Greekes (who by nature were lightheaded and inconstant) being wearied with so many miseries, (or rather as I thinke  glutted with the French gouernment) thinking that for want of a garrison in the Citie, they might easily deliuer the same to the enemie, sent diuers whom they might trust to treate with Palcologus, and to will him to come at a certaine houre ofTreachery of th^ Greeks against the French. the night, with what forces he best pleased, promising that without doubt they would bring him in, and make him master of the Citie without the losse of any one man. Paleologus would not slip such an occasion, but came about midnight, with great troupes of souldiers through by-waies for feare of descrying. Hee was no ^ooner come to the walles, but the traitors receiued him into the Citie, without thePaleologus taketh Constantinople. slaughter of any one except of those which had the guard of the gate. Baldwin, and Pantaleon Iustinian the Patriarch, being awaked at the first noise of the surprise, in  great feare fled to Euripus, called at this day the strait of Nigrepont, with certaine of their friends, carrying with them the most rich, and precious things, that so fodaine a nightlie terrour would permit them, where taking ship, they sailed thence with a direct course to Nigrepont.
Some Authors say, that Baldwin and his troupes were absent when Paleologus tooke the Citie. But whether he were there or no, it is certaine that the Citie of Constantinople was lost in this manner the eight and fiftie yeare, (or as others say) the threescore and third yeare after it was taken by the Venetians and French-men. The Venetians dispatched messengers with speed to the Pope; and Baldwin sent to Lewis the French King: but no aide was either giuen or denied by any of them both. Yet  notwithstanding, in regard it was very likely that Paleologus would not stand still in so faire and euen a way, they concluded to send Marco Michaeli with eighteene galliesThe venetians send a fleete to guard the Ista^d^ to guard the Islands, and all the Sea-coasts, with expresse charge not to let slip fit occasion to disturbe Paleologus. The which was so valia^tly executed, and with such dexteritie, as all men did assuredly beleeue, that Paleologus was at the point to leaue ConstantinoplePaleologus ready to leaue Constantinople. The Genoueses leagu^ with Paleologus. William Prince of Achaia, set at libertie. The Citi^ of (...) called at this day (...)* in despair, had not the Genoueses in hatred to the Venetians readily offered him their aid. For hauing made a league together they sent their whole armie out of Syria into Greece, which of a certain was much more strong and mightie than that wherewith they fought betwixt Tyre and Acre.
Paleologus trusting to his owne forces, attempted to enlarge the bounds of his  Empire towards Morea: And the better to effect it, he set William at libertie, (who as we haue said was by him imprisoned after his defeate) on condition to deliuer the Citie of Epidauro in Morea into his hands (so was this Citie called in olde time which standeth almost in the middest of Greece, called at this day, by corruption

of the language Maluasia) being assured, that with this Citie he would greatly molest the Venetians by sea and land. But the Venetians hauing notice thereof, with little difficultie drew William to their partie, and sware perpetual friendship with him, who ser^ed them afterward verie faithfully in this warre. They sent moreouer eight and thirtie Gallies with supplies, to their Armie which was alreadie in Grecia.
But whilest this mightie Armie was preparing against Paleologus, diuers ships ofThe league of Achaia w^th the venetians. warre at sundrie times departed from Venice; as ships of burthen fit for the fight, and Gallies well appointed, not so much for the guard of their owne frontiers, as to spoile whatsoeuer they could find belo^ging to the enemy, and to frustrate his atempts. Which happened at the same time when that great ship called the Lion, which had two hundred marriners, and an hundred souldiers in her departing from Venice with two Gallies, met neere to Tenedos with twentie Gallies of Genoa, which in steed of flying from she gaue chase vnto* and pursued them almost to Constantinople. It was not long after when that great fleet of thirtie seuen Gallies sent with supplies (as aforesaid) arriued in Greece, where they met by chance on the Sea of Thessalonica with threescore saile of Greekes and Genouoses, who durst not meddle with them. Neither would the Venetians assaile them, in regard of their great multitudes; but passing quietly by them, they came into the Isle of Nigrepont, the which for theThe venetians in the ^sle of Negrepont. most part was possessed by* the Venetians, after they had driuen thence Anfosius, bastard (as some say) to Fredericke the third, King of Sicily, who hauing a part thereof by contract of marriage with Marulla, daughter to Boniface of Verona, held the partie of Paleologus.
The enemies fieete sailing forth of the Sea of Thessalonica met with three Venetian ships of warre neere to the Bosphorus of Thrace, returning from scouring the Seas, almost as farre as Constantinople. These ships being taken, all the prisoners which fell to the Genoueses were forthwith murthered, and they which happened on Paleologus, had their eyes plucked out. The Venetian nauie feeling winter draw on, and the enemie not stirre, returned to Venice. About the beginningCrueltie of the Greeks and Genoueses. of the next Spring, Gilberto Dandulo departed from Venice with two and thirty  Gallies, and being come into Greece, met vpon the way neere the hauen called the Seauen*swine, the same fleete of Genoueses which the Venetians the yeare past durst not deale withall, as they came forth of the Bosphorus to spoile whatsoeuer they could light on belonging to the Venetians. Being come in sight one of another, they presently put themselues in order of battaile readie to fight, running one vpon another with great furie. The fight was verie sharpe at the encounter, but it lasted not long, by reason of the smal number of the vessels, neither was it verie bloudie. For the Genoueses with losse of foure of their ships escaped away by strength of their oares, putting themselues into the hauen of Maluasia. But the Genoueses soone after made their losse good, by the sodaine surprisall of three Venetian ships, laden  with victuals and munition.
Now albeit the maine warre was neere to the Islands of the Aegean Sea, and along the coast which runneth from Morea to the straite of Gallipolis, ^et the affaires ofThe Genoueses put ^o flight. Syria were not altogether quiet. For all the Italians (in a manner) that were in Iernsalem did so much fauour the Venetians in Acre, as it was plainly seene, that they did more affect them than they did the Genoueses: whereas on the contrarie, those of Tyre held altogether for the Genoueses. By this meanes all the Christians which were then in Syria, were diuided in factions one against another for the partie ofThe Christians in Sy^ia diuided into factions in regard of the venetians and Genoueses. these two mightie people: and those Cities which in times past had beene with so much labour and bloud freed from the cruell Empire of Mahomet, were in an instant  by this vnnaturall warre filled with murther and sedition. Neuerthelesse the Venetians that they might not seeme carelesse of what more neerly concerned them the third or fourth yeare (according to some Authors) of this first Genoan warr, set forth fiftie Gallies, or (as some say) seuen and thirtie against their enemies the

Genoueses, who being come into the maine directed their course to Sicily where the Genoan fleet was reported to ride. And not finding the enemie there, they sailed into Syria, where neere to Tyre they tooke an Argozie of the enemies. AfterA new venetian fle^e in Syria. this they entred the hauen* determining to force the Citie: But Andrea Barofio, a discreet and valiant Captaine was gouernour of the towne, who although the Venetians had sent to Ptolomais for supplies to girt the Citie with a streighte siege,Tyre besieged by the venetians. both by sea and land, did neuerthelesse with the garrison thereof verie brauely defend it.
The Genoueses in the meane time were not idle: For vnderstanding by their spies, that a great ship called the Strong Castle, with ten other ships of burthen laden  with marchandize, were to come forth of the hauen of Venice, bound for Asia, they lay in ambush for them behinde a Rocke at the issue of the Adriaticke Gulph. But the marchants being thereof aduertized by a small boate which went before for discouerie, affrighted with the newes, made presently to land. And vnlading their ships on the shoare, where lay a garrison of Albanians, they left the emptie vessels to the enemie, who perceiuing themselues discouered, and knowing the Venetians meaning, forsooke their ambush, and shewed themselues. Some historiansThe Genoueses ambush discouered. affirme that Michael Doria commaunded that Genoan fleete, and how they fought at Sea, as also that the Venetians trusting to the strength and greatnes of an Argozey returned to Venice, after they had lost the other ships laden with  marchandize.
The Venetians in sted of being discouraged at this losse, were the more animated to reuenge; so as not long after they sent Giacomo Dandulo into Dalmatia with seuen Gallies, with full power (If it should be expedient for the Common-wealth) to ioine with those whom hee should finde there for the guard of the Islands. Whereupon after he had taken three from Zara, hee sailed into the Sea of Sicilie, where receiuing three other Gallies of Candie, and not long after foure from Nigrepont, strengthened with these supplies hee sailed to Ragusa, where hee met Marco Gradonico with tenne Gallies; These two fleetes beeing ioined together, sailed into Sicilie; where after they had coasted all that part of the Island, which looketh  towards the East, and almost all that which lieth from Mount Pachino toward the South, they tooke neere to Lilibeum three Genoa-Gallies conducted by Lanfranc of Bourbon. This losse beeing reported at Genoa, eight and twentie Gallies were sodainly set forth, to reuenge this iniurie; who sailing into Sicilie with a direct course to meete the enemie, found the Venetians at Ankor in the Hauen ofThree Genou^ses gallies taken by the venetians Trapani. Some write, that the two fleetes met by chance before Trapani: But whether it were so or no, it is certaine that the Gallies on either side sailed in order of battaile readie for fight.
It is reported that the Genoueses came too eagerly to charge, and so by consequence too vnaduisedly. For after their comming from Genoa they feared nothing  so much as to misse the Venetian: so that their hatred concurring with their power the fight began sodainly. Hatred on the one side and desire of glorie on the other, did greatly augment eithers forces: And as well the one as the other, would manifest to the Sicilians, (in whose sight they fought) which of them was best experienced in Martiall discipline, and who were best Sea-men. They fought a long time with vncertainetie of victorie. But the Genoueses fortune at last declining, theirThe Goneueses deseated by the venet^ns before Trapani. wilfulnesse was such, as rather than to escape with dishonour they chose there to die fighting. In this fight were taken foure and twentie of their Gallies: and the residue burnt or sunke. Aboue two thousand fiue hundred were taken prisoner^, and more than twelue hundred slaine: the rest were drowned.
The victorie was not vnbloudie to the Venetians; but their ioy to haue so brauely vanquished the enemie, would not suffer them to thinke on their great losse. AndThe inconstan^ and lightnesse of the Greekes. because that by this ouerthrow the Genoueses power was thought to be wholly abated, Paleologus, who till then had taken their partie, made truce with the Venetians

for fiue yeares. The Senate after the battaile of Trapani, sent one and twentieA new Venetian Armie sent to Mod^n. Gallies to Modona for the guard of the Sea-coast, because (as I thinke) they were aduertised that the Gallies of Genoa made incursions on those places.
It happened by chance that certaine of the enemies ships being come at the same time as farre as Modon to rob and spoile, so soon as they vnderstood of the Arriuall of the Venetian Armie, presuming on thei^ swiftnesse on a sodain like run-awaies they turned their backs. The Venetians holding themselues not deceiued in their enemies flight, forthwith followed them: But the Genoueses beeing still daunted with their former losse receiued in Sicilie, and determining from the beginning not to sight, did escape by strength of their oares into the Hauen of Rhodes: from  whence soon after departing, they tooke a Venetian ship laden with verie rich Marchandize in the Channell of Nigrepont: some say it was not in the Channell, but in the Hauen of Hiericon. The Genoueses after that, sailed sodainly into Candie,The Genoueses come into Candie. where after they had coasted the greatest part of the Island, they tooke Cydon a sea towne (called at this day Canea by corruption of speech) which for the mostCan^a in Candie ruined by the Genoueses. A popular commotion in Venice. part they spoiled and ruined.
During these exploits in Greece, there arose a great commotion in Venice which did threaten the Commonwealth with euident danger. The expences of this long warre had till then so exhausted the publike treasure* as the Senate was constrained to inuent new subsidies for the entertainment of the Armie: Whereupon they laid  a new impost on white meates. Which beeing commanded to bee published, the people at that time wearie of so great burthens, came running to the Palace with great noise and menaces: Wherewith the Senators being amazed, Prince Rayniero came forth, to the end by his soueraigne authoritie, either to dant the popular furie, or else to pacifie their tumultuous spirits by some gentle admonition: But thisThe people beare small respect to their Prince. manie-headed beast, without any respect at all to the ducall dignitie, did forth-with cast stones at the Prince: who being affrighted gaue place to their furie. No sooner was the Duke retired, but the Authors of the sedition hauing found a fit occasion for their theeuish intents, did by force enter into diuers gentlemens houses which they ransackt, and spoiled. At the last the tumult being appeased, sharpe informa^ion was  made against those who had done outrage to the Soueraigne dignitie, and were the Authors of this popular sedition; whereupon the delinquents being apprehendedThe seditio^s pu^ished. were seuerely punished.
It is reported that about the same time all the streets and places of the Citie were paued with bricke, and that the bridge of Rialto was with great cost new builded, with more cunning workmanship than before. All this notwithstanding the ruining of Cydon, and the taking of the ship so richly laden, did greatly discontent the Venetians; Therefore, three and twentie well-furnished Gallies were giuen toA new Venetian Armie against the Genoueses. Marco Gradonico, to saile to Acre, with expresse commandement to espie a fit time when with most aduantage he might fight, and when it should bee offered, to employ  all his forces by some warlike enterprise to represse the pride and rashnesse of the enemies, which was of late encreased by reason of some fortunate successe. Some Authors thinke that these Gallies were sent to serue for a conuoy to those, which at the same time went into Asia about traffick of merchandize, and that they met with eight shippes of Genoa, neare to Rhodes, laden with merchandize,Certaine Genoa ships taken. which they tooke and sent home to Venice; of which successe the people were very ioyfull. I greatly wonder at that which some doe write, touching fiue ships of Pisa, that were brought to Venice with those of Genoa, seeing that some few yeares before the Venetians, consorted with the Pisans, fought with the Genoueses in Syria, and that soone after they were comprehended, as friends and allies to the  Venetians, in the truce made with the Genoueses by the mediation of king Philip: OthersThe Venetians victorie against the Genoueses. which make mention how the gallies were sent to reuenge the ruine of Cydon and the taking of the rich marchant-ship, affirme that they did not fight neere vnto Rhodes with the Genoueses fleete of eight and twentie gallies, but betwixt Tyre

and Acre, and that they went more couragiously to the charge, in regard of the places of retreat which either of them had, though neuerthelesse at the last the Venetians there likewise got the vpper hand* hauing taken fiue of the enemies Gallies.
Whilst these exploits were done at Sea, Prince Zeno died in the seuenteenth yeare of his gouernment.




 LORENZO TEPVLO, the 46. Duke of Venice.





LOrenzo Tepulo sonne to Prince Giacomo, succeeded him. At this Princes entrie Pope Clement the fourth after he had discreetly considered how great miseries the French-men, with others who till then were in Syria had endured, and were likely still to endure by meanes of the wars  betwixt these two potent people, he did by his Ambassadours entreatThe Pope endeuoreth to accord the Venetians and the Genoueses. the Venetians and the Genoueses, to listen to a suspension of Armes, if they could not on a sodaine conclude a peace. And the more easily to effect it, he entreated either of them to send their Commissioners to him to Viterbo. The Kings of France and Sicilie, did request the like, offering freely to employ themselues to mediate a firme peace betwixt them Commissioners were sent to the Pope, but certaine monethsGreat scarciti^ of victualls in Venice. after, they returned to Venice without conclvding any thing. About the same time there hapned great scarcitie of victuals in the Citie, by reason that the passages into Sicilie and Apulia for corne were shut vp from the Venetian Marchants: For the Genoueses scouring all the Seas, there was no man that would vndertake to relieue  the Common-wealth. There needed a mightie fleete to serue for Conuoy to the Marchants sailing to and fro. But that could not easily be brought to passe in so troublesome a time. Wherefore they determined to haue recourse to their neighbours. They sent to Treuiso, Padua, Fe^rara, and to the neighbour Cities, who, besides the great abundance of monie offered vnto them, were entreated, That if euer the Venetians had done any pleasure to their neighbours, as well to others, as to the Paduans of fresh memorie, (as those who not long since by their means had shaken off the yoke of seruitude, when (to al mens knowledge) there were no forces greaterIagratitupe of the neighbours. or readier than those of the Venetians for the ouerthrowing of Eccelins tyrannie: They would in so great necessitie relieue that Citie which had so well deserued of  them. How be it if in their present necessitie they would not remember curtisies receiued, yet at least for humanitie-sake to grant their request. But neither intrea^ies nor monie being able to ouercome the ingratitude of their neighbours, prouision of corne was in all places denied th^m.
The Venetians disdaining to be thus vnworthily dealt with, to the end that all men might know, (and chiefly they who had so wilfully refused them) how gently they had dealt with them in time past, they made a decree which continueth till this day, That all marchandize passing between the Gulphe of Fana, and the mouth of the Riuer Po, should pay a certaine tribute to the Common-wealth; And to this purpose should come to Venice where their merchandize should be rated, if it so pleased the Officers thereunto appointed. And to preuent all deceit herein, they created a new Magistrate, who had certaine ships of warre appointed him, carefully to looke to the Sea-coasts: This caused (for it was likely that the Neighbours at the first report of this new Edict would oppose themselues against it) the league to  be renewed with the Pisans for fiue yeares.
About the same time the Genoueses and the Venetians, as well in their owneTruce graunted betwixt the Venetians and the Genoueses. name as the Pisans their associates, made a truce by meanes of Philip the French King, who succeeded Lewis, being then greatly desirous to releeue the distressed French-men in Syria. Wherewith (as it is reported) he was so greatly affected, as he kept with him at Cremona the Ambassadors of either of these people so long, sometimes entreating the one, and anone exhorting the other, appeasing and promising so much, as at last all sorted to his owne desire: And this was the eleuenth yeare (according to some Authors) since the beginning of the warre against the Genoueses. Now there are some other Venetian Historians, who seeme to augment this number, saying, That Rayniero Zeno ruled seuenteen yeares. Others set downe only sixteene, and affirme, That the warre beganne at Ptolomais in the beginning of his Principalitie, which was the yeare of our saluation 1260. and continued till the1260. time of Lorenzo Tepulo. But in my opinion this incertaintie of times hath chiefly hapned through the negligence of Writers, who for want of due obseruation haue (perhaps) attributed longer time to Zeno than he raigned. Or else it may bee that the warre was not commenced in the beginning of his Principalitie. For their confusion herein is so great, as a man can hardly discerne the truth of the matter: wherefore, following the opinion of Blondus, a most exact obseruer of times, I thinke that this first Genoan warre endured but eleuen yeares.
Now truce being concluded with the Genoueses, the Venetians had new warreNew war against the Bolognians. in Lombardie. Those of Bolognia, who at that time possessed the greatest part of the Countrie of Flaminia, being grieued that by the new decree of Impost lately, as aforesaid, made by the Venetians, their Merchants were excluded from their traffick, prepared with all secrecie a new warre, to open them a passage for their nauigation. Being therefore readie to set forward, they sent their Ambassadours before to Venice, who, concealing their warlike preparations, should treate with the Venetians about the abolishing of that Decree, and dismissing of their Garrisons on euery side, to the end that their Merchants might haue free passage. Whereunto if the Venetians should refuse to consent (as it was likely they would) they were  without other termes to denounce warre. Tepulo soone discouered the fraude of theThe Bolognians intent discouered. Bolognians: Whereupon he fell to his subtilties, which were no lesse pollitick than theirs, and speedily sent out nine Gallies to preuent the enemie. It was most certaine that he who could soonest discouer the others pollicie, and first seize vpon the place, would make all things after very difficult for his enemie. Wherefore the Venetians came with speede to the mouth of the Po, which is called Primario, neare to Rauenna: where at their arriuall perceiuing the Bolognians to build a Fort on the other shore, they likewise with speede seized on S. Alberts, which they instantly fortified by helpe of the Souldiers.
Within few daies after, Prince Tepulo came thither with Sea-forces, the better to  restraine the enemies attempts: There, and in other places they often fought with great effusion of bloud; and the Bolognians did still for the most part preuail^, inWhat was the number of the Bolognians Armie. regard of their great numbers. For their Armie was reported to be fortie thousand fighting men, and all of the same Prouince: which the Celtique Gaules had in part

possessed, (a most warlike race and almost not to be conquered) and in part the Senonians, (who for certaine Moneths held the Citie of Rome) which was afterward called Flaminia, and at last Romagniola. Whereby may bee coniectured that the same Prouince doth not at these daies bring forth men wholly different from those whom it nourished in former times, but very couragious, and of great spirits, and such (in a word) as it was not said without cause, That a red Italian, a blacke German,Avsuall preuer^ and one of Romagniola with his haire of two colours, are commonly froward fellowes.
Now, this dangerous warre was drawne out at length, till the third yeare after, when at last they fought with all their forces, vnder the conduct of Marco Gradonico,The Bolognians deseated. where the victorious Venetian brake and defeated the enemie with great losse. The Bolognians hereupon being discouraged, sued for peace, which they obtained on these conditions, That hauing ouerthrowne their Fort at Primario, being permittedPeace granted to the Bolognians. to carrie thence certaine things with them, they should leaue the entrance of the Po, free to the Venetians.
The Anconitans, by the example of those of Bolognia, durst attempt to takeThose of Ancona complained to the Pope of the Venetians. armes: and sent to Pope Gregorie the tenth to complaine on the Venetians. The Pope entreated the Venetians not to stop their nauigation: This entr^atie they did neither obay nor resist, But because they would not seeme (against their custome) to contemne the Popes commandement, they sent Ambassadours to him, who alleaging  now one thing, and then another, said, that the Anconitans had not doneThe Anconitans co^plaints ended. well, by false reports to traduce the Venetians before the Pope, and that their accusations were vntrue; These and such like allegations of the Venetians, by little and little ended the matter. And the Pope herein was so farre off from conceiuing any displeasure against them, as he^ rather procured the truce before then concluded at Cremona betweene them and the Genoueses, to bee renued for two yeares more.The truce betweene the Venetians and Geno^eses prolonged. These things thus succeeding in Italie, certaine Lords of Nigrepont, who as yet  possessed the third part of the Island, contrarie to the will of Andrea Dandulo, Gouernour of the Island, with sixteen Gallies inuaded that part of Asia the lesse, which then was vnder obedience of Paleologus: from whence hauing carried away great bootie, they prouoked this Prince to warre vpon them. So soone therefore, as his Armie was readie he came to Nigrepont and besieged Orea. The Lords of the Island, to free their people from the siege, came with twentie Gallies to draw the enemie to fight: wherein being broken and put to flight, Paleologus, in a manner, bereft(...) defeateth them of Nigropont. The league renewed betwixt* Palcologus and the Venetians. them of all their fleete, and brought away diuers of the chiefe as prisoners. But fiue hundred Venetians, found in the fleete of those Lords, hee committed to his Lieutenants, to bee sent home to Venice, with commandement to renew the league for fiue yeares following.
I cannot but exceedingly meruaile, in that it is said, that those Lords of Nigr^pont made warre on Paleologus, against the will of Dandulo. Those of the Island  might, perhaps, refuse to obay the Magistrate, but that the fiue hundred Vene^ians, who were found (as hath beene said) in the fleete, should so doe, it is very vnlikely. Let them, which so report, consider by what meanes the same could possibly come to passe.
On these termes stood the affaires of Venice at such time as Tepulo dec^ased, the sixth yeare of his gouernment: who was buried in the Church of the Twinnes, in the monument of his Ancestors. Giacomo Contareni was chosen in his place.








 GIACOMO CONTARENI, the 47. Duke of Uenice.








AT the beginning of his gouernement it was likely that the warreThe warre like to haue beene renewed with the Genoueses. would haue beene renewed with the Genoueses, because an Argozie of Venice laden with merchandize, was taken by two of Genoa. It was snpposed to haue beene done by the publike command, and therefore they beganne to prepare a new Armie: yet neuerthelesse they determined (following the custome of their Ancestors) to demand first of the Genoueses, in the name of the Common-wealth, that which had beene taken from them, which if they refused to doe, it was not questionable, but that the Venetians would vse all manner of hostilitie. The Ambassadours, who for this purpose were  sent to Genoa, after they had receiued what had beene taken from them, returned soone after to Venice well satisfied, where finding the whole Citie prepared for a new warre, they freed them from all care, in bringing them home peace from Genoa.
The popular sedition which happened in the Citie in the time of Tepulo, by reason of the Impost on the Mills, was wholly extinct vnder this Princes gouernment. But things being thus pacified at home, a new warre sprung vp abroade. The inhabitants of the Cape of Histria, of whose affection towards them the VenetiansNew (...) with those of Cap^d' His^ria. ^d better conceiued than of all the rest in that Prouince, were sodainly reuolted. (...) (...) was sent thither with great troupes to reduce them to their obedience. Whereupon perceiuing the Sea and Land to clatter with the sound of theThe Patriarke of Aquileia succoureth the rebells. Venetians Armes, they sent to Fo^li, to entreat the Patriarke of Aquileia, in regard of (...) mutuall amitie, to come to the succour of a Neighbour-Citie, and to take Armes to repell the Venetian who highly menaced them. He being moued with their entrea^ies, in hast leuied forces and sent them to their aide. The Histrians relying on these succours* attempted by diuers meanes to diuert the Venetian from the siege. But neither those, nor yet their owne forces, did greatly auaile them; forThe rebells subi^cted. being vanquished, they were constrained to returne to the Venetians obedience; Rayniero M^rosini was sent Gouernour into the Prouince to containe them in theirRayniero Morosin^. dutie.
The Venetians being freed from the warre of Histria, were sodainely troubled with that of* Ancona; and yet I know not whether this beganne before the other was ended. For the Annalists handle this matter so confusedly, as wee can hardlyNew warre with (...) Anconitans. tell what to beleeue of it. Besides, very few Historians make mention of this warre

of Ancona: And they which doe mention it, say, that the Venetians besieged Ancona in the time of Pope Iohn the one and twentieth, whose Papacie lasted no longer than the first yeare of Prince Contareni his gouernment. They affirme moreo^er, that the warre beganne vpon occasion of the decree for the new impost, made certaine yeares before, which to abolish they had made meanes to Pope GregorieThe Anconitans se^ke to defrand the Venetians of their Impo^s. but without effect. The better therefore to annihilate this decree, they caused certaine merchandize to be secretly transported into the Sea of Histria, and to other places neare to the entrance of the Riuer Po. The Venetians being therewith incensed, (for the Anconitans abusing their lenitie and patience, became daily more insolent) forthwith armed sixe and twentie Gallies, to the which they added certaine  ships of burthen for carriage of victualls and munition, with all other things necessarie for the siege of a Citie. But before they made this warlike preparation, it is to be supposed that they sent to demand their custome of the Anconitans, which was denied them. The Venetian at his first arriuall did furiously assaile the hauen,The Venetian fleet before ^cona. from whence being beaten backe, and the fleet hauing no place of safetie to ride in before the Citie, nor being yet come to an Ankor; there arose a terrible tempest, which did cast and beate part of their vessels in peeces vpon the Neighbour-shore.The Venetian fleet scattered by tempest. Sixe Gallies striking vpon the Rocks of Senegaillo, were wholly lost, and the residue of the fleet being driuen forward by violence of the tempest ranne vp into the maine. Afterwards new forces, with supplies of ships and Gallies, were sent from  Venice, for whom (sailing at Sea) the enemie laid a new kinde of Ambush* Hee setThe A^conitans pollicie to surprise the Venetians. vp the Venetian ensignes on his Gallies, which he had taken from them at the assault of the Hauen, framing in the best manner he could, the rest of the tackling after the Venetian fashion. Then from as farre as he might discerne them, he beganne with great ioy and clamour to haile them as their friends and companions. By this pollicie on a sodain they grapled with two of the formost which they tooke, and dragged to the Citie, to the great contentment of the Inhabitants: But we doe not finde who commanded the Armie at the same time. Howbeit, it is certaine that by hisThe G^nerall of the Venetian Armie punished. negligence and want of experience in martiall matters, the Venetians receiued two great ouerthrowes in short time, and that for his labour, hee was called home from  the Armie, and committed to prison.
They did better afterwards than at the first. For they resolued to tame the stubbornnesse of the enemie by a siege: whereupon within a few daies after, Ancona was againe besieged. At which time the inhabitants fore-seeing what might happen, and that by the perseuerance of their enemies they might fall into some manifest danger, they sent to Pope Nicholas the third, newly elected, to animate him againstThe (...) s^nd to ^ope Nicholas the third. the Venetians, and to acquaint him chiefly with that which their enemies had till then done to them, and did daily more and more; and besides, to declare vnto him, that they had alreadie by the Venetians means endured all the miseries, which those who were a long time streightly besieged, were wont to sustaine, and they  were likely to endure much more, if they were not speedily releeued by some forraine aide: In regard whereof they besought his Holinesse to compassionate the miserie of so ancient a Citie, and so affectionate to the Church of Rome, and that it would please him to deliuer them from so great a danger.
The Venetian Ambassadours were come at the same time to Rome, to congratulateThe Venetian Ambassadours at Rome. his assumption to the Papall dignitie: who, after they had a long time attended there, and not being called, as were others, to the publike congratulation, they doubting the matter, that the Pope by reason of those of the marches was offendedThe Venetians discontentea with the Pope. with them, sent word thereof to Venice. The Duke and Senate taking it in bad part, did by their letters call home their Ambassadours, who being on their way  from Rome, were by the Popes commandement brought backe, who, after he hadThe Venetian Ambassadours brought back^ (...) Rome. sharply rebuked the Venetians for so streightly besieging the Anconitans, being feodaries of the Church of Rome, forbad the Ambassadours (who would haue defended the cause) to speake. It is reported, that the same day they returned to Venice,

eight Gallies with supplies were sent to the Camp before Ancona: I know notThe venetians send ^w supplies before Ancona. whether it was done vpon necessitie, or else in hatred to the Pope, for vsing their Ambassadours with so small respect. The enemie thereby perceiuing, that in sted of raising the siege, the Venetian did more sharpely oppresse them, abating their courage, they became suiters for peace. The matter being debated without any resolution, the Commissioners returned home without any peace: So soone as they were gone, they resolued to strengthen the Armie with fourteene Gallies; two of which stragling by the way were by the enemie surprised, who lay in wait to catch what he could: Neuerthelesse, he bought his peace at no meane rate.
The Duke being alreadie old and decaied, not able for his age to attend the publike The Duke willingly deposeth himselfe. affaires, by consent of all men deposed himselfe, and soone after died: His funeralls were great, and were followed by multitudes of people, to the Church of the Friers Minors, where he was buried. Giouanni Dandulo, then absent, was chosen in his place.




 GIOVANNI DANDVLO, the 48. Duke of Uenice.





SOme Authors affirme that vnder this Prince the peace was concluded with those of the Marches, because (perhaps) this warre ended at the beginning of his gouernment. They say besides, that it was expresly mentioned in the Treatie, that the decree of the impost should  remaine firme without any contradiction.
About the same time the Sea did in such sort ouerflow the Citie as it was in aGreat ouerflowing of the Sea, with an earthquake. A new warre with the Patriarke of Aquileia. manner held for a prodigie: Whereupon, soone after ensued a great earthquake. They began likewise at the same time to stampe diuers sorts of golden coine in the Citie. A new warre was kindled against the Patriarch of Aquileia in regard of the Histrians, whom he especially maintained against the Venetians. Certaine people of that Prouince were reuolted, whom the Venetian would reduce vnder his subiection, and to that purpose had sent an Armie into the Prouince. The Patriarch speedily came to their aide: but considering with himselfe that his forces were not sufficient to hinder the Venetian, he yeelded without any further trouble, making  shew for a while, that he desired nothing so much as peace: and thus in the meane space the Histrians were by little and little reduced vnder the Venetian gouernment.The Patriarke allieth himselfe with Count Gorician. But this Patriarch so soone as he had ioyned his forces with those of Count Gorician, being strengthened with the new alliance of this Prince, he returned againe

to disquiet Histria. These new commotions were followed with rebellions of diuers Cities. The Venetians hauing notice hereof were constrained sodainely to arme themselues and to re-inforce their Armie. It was commonly reported that the enemies Armie consisted of six and thirtie thousand men, among whome were great troupes of horse. The rumour of so great numbers caused the whole CitieThe Venetians preparations for H^stria. to bee verie carefull for the preparation of this new warre. They prouided therefore a great number of ships of speciall choice which were manned with the third part of all such as were able to beare Armes.Thriests besieged by the (...).
The Armie being gone from Venice, and arriued in Histria, did sodainely encampe before Thrieste. For among others in this insurrection this Citie likewise  did reuolt. Now the Venetian resoluing to besiege it, in few dayes built sundrie Fortes about it, furnishing them with strong Garrisons to hinder the enemies in^ursions. Afterwards with other Engins they began to batter the Citie, but hauing a strong Garrison within it it could by no meanes bee taken. Whereupon, because it was not for the Common-wealths profit to entertaine so great forces without action before the walls of Thryeste; hauing small hope to take it; and supposing the For^es builded at their arriuall to bee sufficiently furnished with Souldiers and victuals to continew the siege; the residue of the Armie marched into other places. But whither they went, or how they were imploied, the Authours whom we follow make no mention.
Not many dayes after, the enemie came thither, and at his arriuall assailed theThe Patriarcks Armie comes to Thrieste. Fortes; which were not only well kept and defended, but those likewise which were within them hauing made a sallie vpon the enemie, skirmished fiercely neere to the Rampier where diuers on both sides were slaine, and among others, the Nephew of Count Gorician, a valliant and braue young man. The retreit being sounded, truce was taken for a day. In the meane time Gordiano, a man of authoritie, and who till then had held an honourable place in the Venetian Armie was suspected of treason. The speech was that he had secretly practised with the enemie to yeeld the Forte vp into their hands. Being apprehended and put to the torture he confessed his wicked intent; whereupon the next morning by breake of day, he was  tied hand and foot, and put into a warlike engin, wherwith he was throwne into theA Traitor punished. enemies Campe; who now perceiuing that hee could neither preuaile by force nor cunning, being out of all hope to surprise the Fort, hee returned without effecting any thing.
The enemie being gone, the Venetian troupes returned soone after. Now whether they had retired themselues of set purpose because they would not fight with the enemie, whom they knew to be much stronger than themselues, and that in the meane time the fleetrode at anchor in the maine, or else in some hauen hard by, vntill they had newes of the enemies retreate; or rather whether after they had left strong Garrisons in the fortes to maintaine the siege, the rest of the Armie not  willing to spend the time in one only place, went to besiege other townes not farre off, and that at the first reporte of the enemies comming, they returned to relieue their fellowes, I cannot certainely determine. But the Venetian being againe returnedThe Venetians Armie comes againe before Th^este. to assaile the Citie, was beaten from the walls with great losse. The Armie afterwards departing thence, the siege was continued by those who lay in the fortes vntill such time as they vnderstood of the enemies returne. Vpon the first tidings whereof they abandoned the same (whether through feare, or wearinesse to tarrieThose within the fortes retire to their sh^ppes so long in a place I know not) and retired themselues to their gallies. This is all (in a manner) that was done for two yeares space in Histria.
But in Syria the Venetians which were in Acre* made^ruce with the King of Babilon The Venetians take truoe with the King of Babilon. for two yeares, who had at the same time ruined Tripolie, a very famous Citie, and had caused Tyre, Sydon, and Berithon to vndergoe the same fortune. It is reported that hee made truce with the Venetians and the other Christians which were in Acre, to the end that his ouermuch prosperitie might not stirre vp al

Europe to take Armes against him. Howbeit the same did not keepe them backe:The Pope exhorteth the Christia^ Princes to ^ndertake the ^oiage into Syria, with his offer. For Pope Nicholas by Letters and Ambassadors excited all the most famous Princes of Europe, to succour the afflicted Christians in Syria. And for his owne part hee made offer of fifteene hundred armed Horse: And for their passage into Asia, the Venetians offered him twentie Gallies, together with victualls for the Marriners, who were to be paid by his Holinesse: for the expedition of which businesse, the Bishop of Tripoli came to Venice.
The Venetians being moued at the Popes instant pursute, added to these twentieThe Venetians offer, for this ^otage. Gallies, which were promised, fiue more, armed at their owne cost, because they would not seeme carelesse of the affaires of Christendome; of the which fleet Giacomo Tepulo was declared Generall, with the Popes Legate. But the other Princes of Christendome not appearing, all this great preparation of Gallies and Armes, was to no purpose. For the time of the truce being expired, the King of Babylon ^uing notice of what was done in Europe, sent his sonne with a great Armie to besiegeAcre taken by the Infidels. Acre, who sodainly enguirt it on euery side with furious assaults: The Venetians with the Popes Souldiers, for a time did brauely defend it. But no supplies comming out of Europe, those which could escape by Sea slipping away one byAt what time the Christians were driueu out of Syria, 1290. one; the Citie was at the last taken by a few, spoiled, and razed downe to the foundation. In this manner was the Christian name wholly extinct in Syria, the yeare of our saluation 1290. and after that great and notable voiage vnder-taken by the  meanes of Pope Vrban the second, at that time when Ierusalem with a part of Syria was taken, one hundred ninetie sixe yeares.
Prince Dandulo, after all these miseries happened in his time, deceased (the tenth yeare of his Gouernment being scarce expired) and was honourably buried in the Church of the Twinnes. It is reported that his funeralls being ended, there aroseA popular tumult about the creation of the Duke. on a sodaine a great tumult, and how the people flocking on euery side, vsed many threatnings and reprochfull termes to the Senators, and by name demanded Giacomo Tepulo for their Duke. This man being vertuous, and a louer of the publike peace, after he had sharply reprehended the peoples rashnesse, secretly departed the Citie* and came to Marroco; where he remained vnknowne, vntill (the tumult being appeased) Pietro Gradonico was by consent of the Senate declared Prince of the Commonwealth.

The end of the tenth Booke of the first Decad.







THE FIRST BOOKE  OF THE SECOND DECAD OF THE HISTORIE Of Venice.

The Contents of the first Booke of the second DECAD.
THe warres of the Venetians and Genoueses compared with those of the  Romans and Carthaginians. The second warre with the Genoueses, after the truce expired. The Venetians burne Pera. GIOVANNI SOVRANZA looseth diuers Sea-companies through extremitie of cold, after his atchieuements on the Pontick Sea. The Venetians are defeated at Corfu, where they loose a great Armie. They receiue the like losse soone after, at the streight of Gallipolis. A new peace betwixt the Venetians and Genoueses. The Commonwealth greatly endangered by the conspiracie of BVCONIO. The Venetian fleete brings a great bootie out of Greece. Trafficke euerie where prohibited to the Venetians, because they had taken Ferrara. The publike libertie in danger to be lost by meanes of a cruell conspiracie of her Citizens. Warre for a time in Dalmatia about the  rebellion of Zara. The Church and Couent of S. DOMINICK builded in the Citie. The Citie freed from the Popes interdiction by the meanes of FRANCISCO DANDVLO. The ancient Port beautified and enlarged. A new rebellion of the Candiots quickly appeased. The Venetians free the Paduans againe from the yoake of bondage. The warre begunne againe in Histria, causeth the Venetians to take Armes. The voyage against the Turke ^oncluded, and soone broken through the default of the French. The Venetians and Florentines make a league against those of Escalla.








 PIETRO GRADONICO, the 49. Duke of Venice.


IN writing the Venetian Historie, diuers matters offer The Venetia^s and Genoueles compared to the Romanes and Carthagenians. themselues vnto vs, so conformable to those of the Romanes, as it is not possible to see any thing more like, as well in counsell, trauaile, accidents of fortune, as other sundrie euents. But among all, which (as I haue said) are verie many, the Venetians warre with the Genoueses, seemes in my iudgement to haue great resemblance with those which the Romans had  in times past with the Carthaginians. For the neere neighbourhood (as it oftentimes happeneth,) did not beget that ^mulation which was betwixt them, nor was cause of the warre, because they were as farre distant one from the other, as is the spatious bredth of the Ti^rhene and Libicke Seas betwixt Italie and Affricke, by this meanes farre enough remoued the one from the other. These in like manner, are not neighbours. For if we consider the breadth of Italie, we shall find the one to be so farre off from the other, without going forth of Italie, as it may be wondered at. For Italie as (Strabo saith) is a promontorie stretching from the Alpes, whose height on the North side extending towards the South, serues The situation of Italy. for a Rampier. It is besides watered towards the West with the Ligusticke and Tirrhene Seas, and on the East with the Adriaticke and Ionian Seas. And from thence the waues begin to mingle themselues together; and to make it more strong, they would faine shut vp the Alpes more closely, but it cannot be. In this deepe Gulph stands the famous Citie of Venice* On the other side, the Ligusticke Sea laboureth to hold fast the feete of the Appenine hils which it almost doth, and within this turning likewise lieth the Citie of Genoa, enuious of the Venetian greatnesse* in such sort as they are almost one opposite to the other. Prudent nature did se^ betwixt the two former a great vastnesse of Sea, which might serue for a barre, if they should atThe distance betwixt the Venetians and Genoueses. any time happen to inuade one another, thereby to quench their mortall hatred, and coole their boyling furie: But to these she hath not alone opposed the bredth  of Italie, but the very tops of the Appenine hilles, stretching from Liguria to Ancona, from whence being beaten backe by the waues of the Sea, they soone turne towards the mount Gargan: then on a sodaine, as if they feared the Sea, they go on to the farthest parts of Italie, to subd^e in a manner the waues which they haue so

often shunned. But neither the distance of Sea could restraine the wrath of the former, nor the difficult accesse of the Appenin hilles that of these people.From whence the Venetians are descended and from whence the Genoueses.
The Romans held themselues descended from the Troians. The Venetians boast of the same originall. The Libians mingled themselues with the Phoenicians; and the Genoueses were likewise mingled with them. Emulation of great a^chieuements did first stirre vp those men, and afterwards the desire of rule: And on these two points onely hath the warre growne betwixt these people: Those for Sicilie, and these (as hath beene said) for the Citie of Acre. The Romans who were victors* were often times in greater danger than the Carthaginians whome they vanquished. The Venetians haue runne the selfe-same fortune, notwithstanding  that they haue wholly defeated the Genoueses. Those two Nations fought aboue one hundred yeeres together, with equall hatred, and oftentimes with equall forces: These likewise with great care and trauaile haue long time fought with one an other, so that like those men, these being wearied with the warre, haue at times giuen intermission to their Armes, but not to their enmitie. If the end were notThe Ligustick and Lybick wars had almost one selfe same end. like, yet neuerthelesse hath it not heene wholly different. That great Carthage was razed downe to the grounde, and this proude Genoa, wanting further abilitie, hath at length giuen place to the victorious Venetian.
But tbe better to continue the discourse of these warres, which the Venetians had afterward with these proud people, we must first of all set down certain matters  which some Historians haue formerly mentioned, to the end we may be the better enabled to quote the times which the co^fusion of Authors maketh otherwise doubtful, and withall to reduce those things to our memorie which haue formerly beene spoken vpon this subiect.
Gradonico at the same time commaunded Histria, when hee was chosen Prince of the Common-wealth. Being called home to Venice hee tooke possession of his charge, which hee beganne with diuine matters, commanding the day and feast of Saint Katerine to bee yearely solemnized, vnto whome when he was but a priuate person he was much deuoted. I beleeue that the Senat in fauour of the Duke did make a decree for this purpose; by meanes whereof this holie Virgin  was afterward highly reuerenced in Venice, her feast beeing before that time but a working day. But it may be that he did it not so much for particular deuotion, as because he was (as some thinke) chosen vpon the same day.
It is reported that about the same time, Andrew King of Hungarie sonne to a VenetianAndrew King of Hungary commeth to Venice. woman of the familie of Morosini, and to Stephen the Kings sonne, came to Venice, where he was so farre off from contemning his mothers house, because it was a priuate familie in a free Citie, as hee would needes appropriate to himselfe the ancient Armes of the familie, by adding thereunto onely a white Crosse with a circle; to the end that by that difference, those of the same familie might bee knowne from the other Morosini. Stephen his father was borne in Ferrara, whither  his mother, daughter to the Prince of Ferrara after the death of her husband had retired herselfe being left with childe, but being come to age hee could neuer recouer his fathers Kingdome, which was possessed by his neere kins-men. And being desirous (as I thinke) to put himselfe vnder the Venetians protection, he married Thomasina Morosini, by whom he had this Andrew, who in time got title of Gouernour of the Kingdome; and afterward that of King. Some Authours referre the ruine of Ptolomais to these times; but the greatest part of them affirme that which we haue reported thereof in the precedent booke.
The truce being expired, the warre against the Genoueses was more fiercelyA new warre with the Genoueses. than euer renued. But the Venetians good fortune was not so apparent in the next  Lygustick warre, as disastrous by the occurents of the yeeres ensuing. For by how much more the power of both these people were alreadie manifest to euery eie; by so much greater were the warlike preparations made by either partie. It was likewise euident that this their contention, was not about the simple possession of

Ptolomais, nor for a street or Church onely, but to acquire the absolute command or dominion at Sea. In this quarrell the Venetians were the first in field. But I thinke it was not in respect of the Genoueses assailing the Pisans at that time, who after they had taken the hauen of Legorne from them, and burnt it, suncke diuers shippes of burthen full of flint stones and grauell in the hauen thereby to take the vse of the Sea from them: For the Pisans forces had beene alreadie before that time greatly weakened, chiefly by that notable losse which they sustained in theThe Pisans vanquished by the Genoueses. Isle of Lamel, where twelue thousand of their people were slaine or taken by the Genoueses, with the losse of fiue and twentie Gallies. Now the Venetians, to draw the Pisans forth of this danger, who had in times past so faithfully releeued them  in the first Ligusticke warre, and to alter the course of the Genoueses victorie, made hast to get before them, with a great Fleet, (as some say) of threescore and six Gallies which sailed into the Ponticke Sea vnder the command of Rogero Morosini, toRogero Morosino Generall of the Venetians A^* mie. spoile and destroie whatsoeuer belonged to the Genoueses. Others make mention of fortie six onely: and others affirme that there were no Gallies in this Fleet, but diuers shippes of all sorts. Their first charge was against those of Pera. This place neere to Constantinople, which I thinke was at the same time but a village, had beene fortified by the Genoueses, and was much frequented by Genoa Merchants trafficking the Ponticke Seas, who for the neere neighbour-hood thereof to Constantinople and for transportation of their merchandize to and fro had the commodiousnesse  of the place in singular recommendation. Whether they had then determined to doe that which afterward they did, to wit, to enclose that place with ditches and walles, knowing how fit it was not onely for the vse they then made of it, but likewise for the warre, I confesse my selfe ignorant. This placePera taken and burned by the Venetians. therefore being not yet fortified, was soone taken by the Venetian and consumed to ashes. From thence the Armie sailed to the old Forts which the Genoueses held, which being take^ were for the most part burned. The Genoueses in the meane time laie quiet without action. Giouanni Souranza the next yeare following was commanded to holde the same course with fiue and twentie Gallies. At his arriuall hee tooke the Citie of Capha by assault in Chersonessus of Tauris: where being ouertaken  by winter he was constrained to tarrie. In this countrie being extreame cold (for it doth not onely incline to the northward, but lieth directly vnder it) he lost nine companies of Souldiours with the extremitie thereof, and the residue of hisA wonderfull mat^er in the fennes Meotides. Armie likewise was greatly afflicted. The fennes Meotides which are not far thence, together with the Cymerian Bosphorus, are so congealed with extreame cold, as it is most certaine that in those places where in Sommer men fight with Gallies, in Winter they combat on horse-backe on the Ice.
The Genoueses likewise thinking it time to be stirring, sailed into the maine withThe fleet of the Genoueses in the Adriaticke Sea. threescore and six Gallies, or threescore and ten (according to some Authors) vnder the conduct of Lampadio Doria: who desirous to reuenge the losses receiued on  the Pontick Sea, entring tumultuously into the Gulph of Venice, had directly come to the Citie, if vpon report of the comming of so great a Fleet, they had not bin encountred by the Venetians with greater forces than at any time before. The Venetians at the same time hauing fourescore and fifteene Gallies, and vnderstanding that the Genoueses were at Corfu, sailed thither with an intent to fight with them. For now being in number of vessells superiour to the Genoueses, they would not refuse the fight, being thereunto also encouraged by remembring what had passed in former expeditions: They knew well enough that they were to fight against the same enemie, whom they had vanquished in the battaile betwixt Tyre and Acre: And the remembrance of that notable victorie at Trapani, did more animate  them, where though they were much inferiour to the Genoueses, yet in a manner they had broken them: neither did they forget how often the Genoueses (who at that time did so greatly desire the fight) had shamefully fledd from them; whereupon they openly said, That the enemies did not shew themselues so

desirous of fight, for any assurance they had of their owne forces, or for that they were ignorant of the Venetians valour, but only through their owne naturall obstinacie, the which at last, by right or wrong, would ouerthrow them.
The Genoueses on the other side hardly digested, that in the former warres theyThe Venetians and Genoueses resolution. had seemed at times to strike saile, and to yeeld to the Venetians, Besides, a fresh griefe at wrongs receiued on the Pontick Sea, for the space of two yeares, did greatly moue them; but nothing did so much animate and encourage them, as for that about the same time they had so abated the power and forces of the Pisans, as they (who not long since had been verie mightie) had nothing left them besides the bare shadow of their ancient name. With these hopes and incouragements, both parties Carolo and Andrea Dandulo geoeralls of the Venetians ^mie. came brauely to the fight. Carolo and Andrea Dandulo (as discreet as valiant) commanded the Venetian Armie; who hauing omitted nothing which might helpe to the obtaining of the Victorie, did boldly and valiantly receiue the enemie comming towards them. In the beginning the fight was doubtfull, and the slaughter verie cruell, such indeed as could not but happen at the encounter of two so mightie armies: There was nothing heard but the frightfull clamours of marriners, and souldiours, incouraging one another: All the Sea rang with the noise of broken vessels clashingThe Venetians defeated at Corfu. together. Thus the battaile lasted a certaine space with great slaughter: but at last the Venetians were defeated. And the victorious Genoueses holding them streightly to it, filled euerie place with bloud and ruine. All the Venetian Historians (one  only excepted) confesse that the losse of this battaile was verie great, and that the Venetians Nauie was wholly defeated and lost. But all of them iointly conceale the number. Whereby wee may rightly presume, that of so great a Fleete scarce one vessell was saued (which is credible enough) or verie few, TheSunarie opinions touching the battaile at Corfu. fore-excepted Authour setteth downe the matter somewhat more at large. For hee (quite contrarie to the rest) saith, That the Genoueses, beeing besieged by the Venetians in Corfu, would haue deliuered all their shippes of w^rre to the Dandulo's so they might haue beene suffered to depart thence with liues and baggage; And that vpon deniall, their feare turning to despaire, they ioined battaile. At which time the Genoueses ioining pollicie with force, laid fifteene Gallies  in ambush, which comming forth vpon the Venetians in the heat of the fight, did (without all doubt) giue them the victorie: moreouer, that six Genoa Gallies, and two and thirtie of Venice did not fight, which either for feare, or (according to others) being driuen an other waie by force of the winde, could not come neere the fleete, but that the residue did fight brauely, where manie more Genoueses than Venetians were slaine; so as at the beginning the Genoueses had the worst, and were readie to flee, if the fifteene Genoa Gallies comming forth of their ambush with great noise, had not restored the battaile, and put the Venetians to rout. Foure thousandA strange death of one of the generalls of the Venetian Armie Venetians were taken with Andrea Dandulo one of the Generals of the Armie, who with sorrow and shame* during the time that they carried him prisoner towards  Genoa, did strike his head so often against the Gallies side, as hee died by the way. Ricoaldo of Ferrara writes, That the Genoueses fought there with fourescore and eight Gallies, and that thirtie Venetian Gallies escaped from the battaile, hauing kept aloofe from the beginning of the fight: likewise that fiue thousand prisoners were brought to Genoa: where by reason of the great flaughter of their owne people, they shewed small ioie for the victorie, so as it was reported euerie where, that the Genoueses had lost more at Corfu than the Venetians.
This was the successe of the battaile in Dalmatia. The report of this losse brought great feare and sorrow to the Citie. But the feare of imminent danger caused, That (all griefe beeing laid apart) they determined speedily to raise new  forces, thinking that the victorious enemie (no armie being in readinesse to beat him back if he should saile towards Venice) would be shortly roaring at their gates: But I thinke hee went forth with into Greece, or rather home, because wee finde not that the Genoueses after the battaile of Corfu, performed any warlike action at Sea, or in Dalmatia.
Now the Armie being furnished, fearing least the Islands and Sea-townes of theA new Army of the Venetians. Ionian and Aegean Seas should be vnfurnished of Garrisons, fiue and twentie Gallies were sent thither vnder the command of Marco Basseio. These likewise scuffling with the enemies on the Hellespont, called at this daie the streight of Gallipolis, the issue thereof proued as vnfortunate, as the other at Corfu: The fight is reported to haue beene cruell, and that after great effusion of bloud* the Venetians good fortune altered, and how they lost sixteene Gallies, with their boates and mariners, who were taken by the Genoueses, and how the rest scatteringly scaping from the midst of the throng, speedily fled out of the Genoueses sight. This new losse was muchThe Venetians defeated at the str^ight of Gallipolis. lesse than that at Corfu, by reason they did not fight with so great number of vessels. But, like as to an ill-disposed bodie, euerie accesse of an ague (how little soeuer) is verie dangerous: euen so this new sorrow which followed the other at the heeles, did meruailously afflict the Venetians: and because the publike good fortune should bee else-where as succeslesse, the victorious Genouese soone after the battaile of Hellespont sailed into Candie, where at his arriuall he tooke the Citie of Cydon. But in the middest of all these misfortunes, the Venetian was not discouraged.Cydon in Candy taken by the Genoueses. For after he had oftentimes renued his forces, he fought sundrie times with the enemie with different successe.
But neither the Historians whom we follow, nor the Annalists make any mention, in what place, or at what time, or with what successe it happened: so as we may  truely saie, that no remarkeable thing was done all the rest of this warre, other than that which hath beene heeretofore spoken of. All Authors with one voice affirme that after all these reciprocall losses, receiued on either side, hauing in this cruell war (almost) wasted their forces, the mindes of either parties inclined to peace, rather of necessitie, than any true affection. For though their Armes were sequestred, theirAn enforced peace betwixt the venetians and the Genoueses. hatred still continued. Albeit the Authors whom we follow make no mention how long this Ligusticke warre lasted, neuerthelesse I gather by diuers obseruations, that it lasted not halfe so long as the former. Yet sure it is, though it were much shorter, it was more cruell: whereupon (as hath beene said) both parties did willingly listen to a peace, not with an intent wholly to lay by their Armes but only because at that  present they could doe no more. Now the Common-wealth beeing wearied with so manie garboiles, and scarcely freed from this warre, was assailed by two dangerous conspiracies of her owne Citizens: But as the Authors thereof were different in qualitie; so was the danger nothing like. For as the one was acted by people of meaner condition than the other, it was likewise the more easily broken; Such was that of Buconio, which happened before the other of Tepulo, beeing much more cruell.
There dwelt in the Citie at the same time one named Marino Buconio, who wasBuconio his conspiracy. neither of the Senatours degree, nor yet of meane estate, but holding a middle ranke, and other-waies audacious and prompt to all mischiefe. This man being impatient  of the publike libertie, or rather of the quiet which the Citie then enioied, determined with himselfe to kill the Prince, and some other principall persons of the Senate. Being thus resolued (in regard he durst not vndertake it alone) he imparted his designe to diuers of his owne quallitie, whom he knew of a long time to haue participated the same discontent, who without any more delaie approoued the deed, and freely promised him their assistance. It is most certaine that they had determinedThe conspirators desseigne. to kill the Prince and diuers of the Senate. But it is not knowne whether they did it to vsurpe the Segniorie, or else for enuie to see Gradonico in such a dignitie, who some yeares before had been elected by the Senators against their wils* and therefore had determined to murther him with the Authors of his creation. This conspiracie being  discouered to the Prince, did greatly amaze him: but the danger neerly co^cerning him, he had no greater meanes speedily to quench it, than to seize on the body of Marino and his complices, who being taken and conuicted of the deed, were accordingThe punishment of the guilty. to their deserts hanged betwixt the two Pillars.
There happened againe certaine strife with the Paduans, who had fortified a placeNew ^ontention with the Paduan^. in the Lakes, which lie betwixt Chioggia and Albana, named Patabubula. For it is certaine that the Paduans intended so soone as they should haue builded the Fort, and left garrison therein, to make goodly salt-pits thereabouts in despite of the Venetians. But the Senate hauing sent certaine troupes of souldiers thither for the purpose, did forth with raz^ the Fort. The Paduans tooke this heinously, but daring not to stirre at that time, they did for a while shew themselues neither friends nor enemies to the Venetians.
Some Authors write, that at the same time they made warre on Paleologus Emperour(...) venetian Armie against the Emperour Paleologus. of Greece, because he refused to pay the Venetians a great summe of money  which he ought them, but they tell not how that money was due: The fleet being readie for this purpose, (the supplies of Candie and Nigrepont being comprized therein) was of seuen and twentie Gallies, whereof Iustiniano was made Generall, who speedily sailed into the Ponticke Sea, where he tooke diuers Greeke sh^ps (I know not whether it were by fight or surprize) and hanged vp all the Greekes that he found in them, because (as I thinke) by their malice the Venetians and Baldwin were certaine yeares before driuen from Constantinople. From thence spoyling all along the Sea-coast, which lieth from Pera to Argire, he put all to fire and sword,Peace with Paleologus. whereat the enemie was so amazed, as hauing paid the summe which was due, he in a manner with heaued-vp hands obtained peace of the Venetian. The victorious  Armie returned to Venice with fifteene thousand prisoners.
This victorie had in some sort restored the Commonwealth, which languished after the losses receiued in the second Ligusticke warre, and by her home-bred conspiracie, with hope of better fortune hereafter: at what time the troubles of Ferrara didHow great mischief^ the Emperours abs^nce out of italy hath caused. throw it head long into a greater danger. It came to passe by the Emperours ouerlong absence out of Italie, that diuers new Lords had seized on the most famous Cities of Cis-alpine Gaule, as those of Escalla on Verona, the Gonsagos on Mantua, and those of Este on Ferrara. VVhose ancestors threescore yeares before this happened, hauing driuen Salinguerra from them, did in the Popes name gouerne the Citie; then being become masters of Modena, and of the places neere adioyning, their power increased in such sort, as Charles the second, King of Naples, married his daughter Beatrice to Azzon of Este, who at that time was verie famous. This man had a bastard named Frisco, whom he had by another man s wife, who the same yeare that his father married Beatrice, surprized him by ambush, and shut him vp inA det^stable act of a bastard. prison where he died. Azzon being dead, this detestable young man being fauoured by the Bishop of the place, and by certaine Ferrarois, would haue assured to himselfe the principalitie of Ferrara, gotten by parricide, and seizing almost on all, could not make himselfe master of the Castle which was seated on the riuer of Po, on Bolognia side. To besiege the which (because that without ships he could not ouercomeThe venetians help the bastard. the garrison within it for the neere neighbourhood to the riuer) he had recourse  to the Venetians: and hauing receiued a fleete from them for his aide, he did straightly besiege the place, so as the Venetians being encamped on the water, there was some likelihood that it would soone yeeld. The Popes Legate who lay then at Bolognia, so soone as he vnderstood what had passed at Ferrara, sent speedily to the Venetian General and earnestly entreated him to desist from his enterprize. And by chance as the Legates messengers arriued, a furious assault was giuen the Castle, which was the cause, that by meanes of the noise of Armour and shot, they could haue no audience. The Ferrarois in the meane time being moued (as it is to be thought) by the presence of the messengers of the Popes Legate, and being diuided The Venetians masters of ^rrara. among themselues, cried out that they would relie vpon the Legates promise, wherupon followed a great tumult of such as fauoured the partie of the Church, and their owne libertie: This sodaine alteration of the inhabitants, did greatly trouble the rest, and principally Frisco: But the Venetians were so farre from being amazed with this new tumult, as on the contrarie hauing on a sodaine fired the Ferrarois

ships, which the tyrant had assembled to besiege the castle, and giuen a more sharpThe Fort taken by the venetians assault, they ceased not, till hauing broken the bridge they entred the Fort of Thealdo: Frisco being incensed against the Ferrarois, for that they had so sodainly forsaken him, sent from the strongest places horsemen into the Citie, who set fire thereon in diuers parts. The townesmen then seeing themselues inuironed with Armes and fire: so soone as the tumult was appeased, they submitied themselues to the Venetians, making no mention of Frisco, whom they hated to the death. So soone as they yeelded, they had no more outrage done to them.
The Venetians albeit they would willingly haue kept the Citie for themselues, which they had receiued vnder their protection, neuerthelesse because they would  not seeme to breake their promise with Frisco, they kept him in the Citie: Pope Clement who was then in France, after that he had vnderstood the misfortune of Ferrara, being vexed to see a feudatorie Citie of the Church of Rome to be so vnworthily handled by a tyrant, and at last made subiect to the Venetians, he forthwith imployed spirituall Armes against them, and excommunicated them* publishingThe venetians excommunicated by Pope Clement. ouer all Europe, that it was lawfull for any man to kill the Venetians wheresoeuer they could finde them, as being excluded from the Communion of Christians, and enemies to the Church of Rome. This doe the Annales make mention of. But that which strangers write thereof, as it is more gentle, so is it likely to be moreThe tenure of the excommunication. true; That the Venetians were interdicted from the vse of the Sacraments: his Holinesse  adding that any man should do wel, who hauing any Venetian prisoner, should sell him as a slaue. This was the cause that in all the faires almost of France, the VenetiansWhat miseries this excommunication brought to the venetians. marchandize of great value, wereby commaundement of the Princes and Lords miserably spoiled. As likewise in Calabria, and the marches neere to the Sea. In such sort as the Venetians hauing euerie where lost all that they had, were verie badly intreated, and some of them likewise slaine. Whereupon it happened during that time that they abstained from trafficke with strangers.
The Popes Legate in the meane time, after he had leuied great troops, and receiued certaine companies of horse from the Florentines, marched to Ferrara against the Venetians and Frisco. The townsmen at the first newes of the comming of the Papall  Armie, reuolted from the Venetians, and let the Legates troopes (who were at their gates) into the Citie: The slaughter was great on both sides, but much more on the Venetians, who being chaced by the great number of the enemies, did speedilyThe Citie of Ferrara reconered by the Popes Legat. enter the Fort of Thealdo. The towne being recouered, the Legate sodainly commaunded to besiege the Castle. The Venetians (notwithstanding that they had alreadie sent to the Pope to treate with him about the yealding vp of Ferrara, and that the businesse could not sodainly be effected in regard of the distance of the places) fearing to receiue some greater losse, did freely yeeld vp the Castle which held out with a strong garrison.
The Commonwealth being thus afflicted, was assailed by a cruell conspiracie,The conspiracie of Tepulo. the which was likely to haue ouerthrowne both the libertie and the state. Baiamonti Tepulo, issued from a noble and illustrious family, but bearing a diuelish minde towards his countrey, and such peraduenture as did Catiline in time past to his, making vse (as it is to be thought,) of the times calamitie, wherein he perceiued the commonwealth to be tossed vp and down with so many miseries, conspired against it, together with diuers of the same qualitie and meanes, whom he had dealt with, and made partakers of his dessigne. It is reported that they concluded at a certaine day appointed for the purpose to enter the Pallace by force with all their friends and confederates, and then, the Prince and Senators being in an instant murthered,The conspirators purpose. to make themselues masters of the Commonwealth, and after the diuision betwixt  themselues of the lands and offices of the state, to exercise open tirannie. This mischiefe was accompanied by another, for that diuers of the common people, wonne by faire promises, or set forward by a desire of noueltie, were in pay with the conspirators, vnto whom it is not likely that so great a designe was euer imparted, but that shew was made of some other matter.
It is reported that vpon the appointed day (as if heauen would be the foreteller ofStrange prodigies happened that day that the conspi^acie should haue bee^e executed. of so damnable an enterprize) there arose a horrible tempest, intermingled with haile and raine, the ayre being filled with lightning and thunder. But the conspirators making vse of this prodigious tempest, in steed of being amazed therat, ranne armed with great noise to the Pallace. The enterprize being a little before reported to the Prince and Senate in great feare, did much amaze them. The alarme was sodainly giuen ouer the whole Citie by men sent for that purpose, who cried out aloud, that it behoued all men to take Armes, and to runne speedily to the Pallace to the rescue of the Prince and Senate, if they desired to preserue the Commonwealth. They r^n thither from all parts, but the conspirators in the meane time had filled the great and large  market-place of Saint Marke with armed men, and without delay assailed the Pallace. Then the Senators (for diuers were with their weapons alreadie runne to their rescue)The conspira (...) (...) the Ducall pallace. did not onely sustaine the conspirators assault, but did valiantly repulse them. There was a sore fight. Libertie was the ma^ke they aymed it* On the oneside, these traytors had their weapons in hand against it: And on the other, the Prince and Senate would either die or preserue it. In troth it was a lamentable spectacle to behold a Citie founded in libertie, growne vp in libertie, to maintaine the which those ancient Venetian Fathers founders of the same, had so often sought with barbarous and cruel nations, and shed so much bloud by Sea and Land, to haue at last taken Armes against it selfe, and to desire by those Armes to ruine it selfe, and to call  that libertie in question among themselues, which all men esteemed so deare and pretious. It is to be thought that this pretence alone held them in awe. The Senators by exhortations to defend it, and the wicked Citizens with shame, and reproche. And the fight ceased not vntill such time as the Senate getting the vpper hand, the conspirators were beaten backe from the Pallace. It is reported that in this tumult BaiamontThe death of Baiamont. perceiuing it not good for him to tarrie there, as he was going home to his owne house through the Mercers streete, a woman forth of a window threw a morter on his head, with which blow he fell halfe dead to the ground, and being there stayed by his hurt, was slaine outright by those which pursued him, who soone after The pun^shment of the conspirators. returned to the Pallace. Some of the conspirators which were Patricians by birth being taken on the Dice bridge, and brought backe into the Princes presence were forthwith beheaded. Whereupon that place hath euer since borne the name of Maupas. And that the memorie of these wretches might be vtterly extinct, it was decreed in all places to deface the Armes of Baiamont and his complices: and that on paine of life no man to be so hardie as to keepe or set them vp in any place whatsoeuer.A p^ntion gi^en to the woman who slew Baiamont. Their houses were razed to the ground, and all their goods confiscate: Some say that Baiamont his Pallace stood in the same place, where at this day the Hall of the shambles of Rialto stands. There was likewise a pension appointed out of the publike treasurie for the woman and her heires, who with the blow of the morter stayed Baiamont. The Citie was deliuered from this conspiracie (as some say) on  the day of Saint Vitis the martyr, whereupon in memorie thereof euerie yeare on the same day, the Cleargie doe go in procession to Saint Vitis Church being accompanied by the Prince and Senate, to giue thanks to God for the preseruation of the Commonwealth, and at their returne, a solemne banquet is made in the Pallace.Another opinion concerning the ^ssue of the conspiracie. Some Authors say that the issue of this conspiracie was different from that which we haue spoken of, and that the Prince was aduertized of the whole matter before they went to Armes. VVhereupon Michaeli and Gu^do Canuto were sent from the Senate to Baiamont, to entreate him not to attempt any thing against his countrey, and that the conspirators did hardly suffer these men to returne with their liues. And after they had taken armes, and burnt and spoiled certaine places, they fought openly  (as hath beene said) but at last the conspirators being roughly repulsed with great slaughter, the Senates partie proued the stronger: and that after the arriuall of Hugolino Iustiniano (who at the same time was Podestate of Chioggia, who came with troups of souldiers to the rescue of the Prince) Baiamont and his adherents (who

fortified themselues on the otherside of Rialto) being daunted, did yeeld themselues vpon the Prince and Senates word, on condition, that all those who were guiltie should depart forth of the Venetian territorie, and by that meanes there was almost no Citie of Cisalpine Gaule, nor village on all the Sea-coast of Flaminia and Forli, wherein some of these banished conspirators were not. But the former opinion is most true.
Those of Zara presuming on these calamities did reuolt the sixt time, hauingThe sixt rebellion of Zara. chased away Michaeli Morosini the Gouernour. They forthwith sent forces to recouer it vnder the command of Belletto Iustiniano. In the meane time the Prince deceased in the twelfth yeare and ninth moneth of his gouernment. His bodie was honorably  buried in Saint Cyprians Church.




 MARINI GEORGIO, the 50. Duke of Uenice.








MArini Georgio surnamed the Holy, did for his wisdome succeed him. All the time of his Principalitie which lasted not a full yeare the Venetians were interdicted by the Pope by reason of the affaires of Ferrara, which caused the Common-wealth to receiue many discomodities as well at home as abroad. For we haue alreadie said in what danger the conspiracie of Tepulo had put it: And then soone after, the Armie had no good successe before Zara.
Bellet was gone into Dalmatia with the Venetian troupes, among which were a thousand horse, who by the Senats appointment were commanded by Dalmasio a Spaniard, a valiant man, who being at Ferrara in the Popes paie, had constrained the Venetians to leaue the Citie, and to retire into the Castle with great losse. The Venetian Armie being encamped in the next Island to the Citie, this Dalmasio landed all his Cauallerie on the firme land, and encamped verie neere to Zara, fortifying his campe with good Trenches and Rampiers. Bannus commanded in the Citie with a good Garrison. He comming forth of the Citie likewise with his troupes, did lodge within a mile of Dalmasio. The whole Summer was almost spent without any memorable action: And Haruest alreadie drewnere without any hope alat to tak the  citie, when Bannus propounded certaine triuiall conditions of peace: which taking none effect, he beganne to vse his cunning, and dealt secretly with Dalmasio, to make him leaue the Venetians partie and to enter into the Citie, saying, That so soone as he should come thither, he should receiue ten thousand crownes, and should command

therein with great entertainement so long as he would; and that the inhabitants should defray his charges for corne and all other necessaries for his expence. And that when he should please to returne into Italie or else where, they would furnish him with shippes, for himselfe, his followers and their baggage.
This thus concluded. Dalmasio made shew to be wearie of so long a siege, and determinedDalmation the Spaniard proue^ a traitor to the Venetians. the next day to giue a generall assault to the Citie: then hauing imparted his designe to diuers of his trustie friends, hee willed them that when they should come to the assault, they should secretly bring from the Camp whatsoeuer they made most account of, and should place it and themselues in the formost ranckes, to the end that without any impediment they might retire into the Citie. The next  morrow so soone as he had put his troupes in battaile, and was come to the Citie, to enter it at the first signall giuen he, beganne to ride towards the enemies Fort, whereat the Venetians were much amazed, when to the great contentment of the inhabitants, he entred the Citie.
All men did infinitly wonder (as hath beene said) of this sodaine change of Dalmasio, and were afraid least this perfidious Traitor had practized some worse matter against them, whereupon in haste, for that they would receiue no greater losse, (for it was to be feared that those of the Citie ioyned to the troupes which Bannus commanded not farre from thence would make some sallie vpon them) they retired all their Cauallerie to the shippes. Dalmasio being come into the Citie, and to shew  that he was no fugitiue, but had some iust occasion to doe what he had done, would needs take vpon him the part of an vmpire to treate of peace betwixt the Dalmatians and Venetians: wherein after he had a while laboured, and perceiuing he could doe no good by reason of the difficultie of the Articles propounded on either side, knowing besides how the Venetians did hate him, for that he had forsaken them,The treatie of peace broken. and vnderstanding likewise that the inhabitants did suspect him, leauing off his negotiation of peace, and not desiring to endanger himselfe any longer there, he embarqued himselfe in the vessells which were promised him by the agreement, and sailed towards Apulia. But being in the maine Sea, a terrible tempest arose on a sodaine,Dalmation diuinely punished for his treacherie. by the which being tossed here and there, and part of his shippes being dasht  against the rockes, he lost his followers and his goods: receauing by this meanes the deserued guerdon of his treacherie. Hauing escaped ship-wracke, perceiuing all things to be contrarie vnto him, fearing with the losse of his meanes, to incurre the danger of his life, without making any long stay there, hee shipt himselfe in a small boat, and went into Italie. The small time that the Principalitie of Marini lasted maketh me thinke, that the siege of Zara was not discontinued, but that it held out till they yeelded: which was (as I finde it) vnder Prince Souranza. Marini in the meane time builded at his owne coast a great Church and Couent to Saint Dominicke, where he founded a Colledge for students in diuinitie: He built hard byThe godle de^ds doone by Prince Marini. that place an Hospitall which he endued with rich rents, to the end that those who  should celebrate diuine seruice there, together with the sicke people, might be releeued and entertained by the Procurators of Saint Marke, vnto whom for these purposes he left the managing of all his wealth. After these godly workes accomplished, he deceased the tenth moneth of his gouernment, and was buried in the Church of the Twinnes.








 GIOVANNI SOVRANZA, the 51. Duke of Uenice.








GIouanni Souranza a man of a verie ancient family, gentle and courteous, was chosen in his place: soone after his election, hereceaued those of Zara vnder his obedience, but with such libertie and gentle conditions, as diuers thought, that thereby he ministred matter vnto them of aZara reduced vnder the Uenetians obedience. seauenth reuolt. Vitalis Michaeli was sent thither as Gouernor. About the same time the number of the Procurators of Saint Marke was encreased to six, being before then much lesse. It is said likwise that at the same time the foundations were laid at Capesalina as farre as the Church of the Trinitie: and that at the same time  those of Nona, Spalatra, Trahu, and Sacca, returned vnder the Venetians obedience.The Authors discourse on the doings of the Pope and Dandulo.
The Citie, which till then was interdicted by the Pope, was freed from it by the most charitable affection of Francisco Dandulo sent for that purpose to his Holinesse. This man (as it is reported) being with great difficultie admitted to the presence of Pope Clement (who did infinitly hate the Venetians about the Ferrara businesse) by a wonderfull example of pietie towards his countrie, and with zeale to Religion, continued a long time prostrate on the ground before the Popes table, with an Iron chaine about his n^ke like a dogge, vntill his wrath being appeased, he tooke away that note of infamie from his countrie, whereupon, ^uer since, heeThe great pietie of Francisco Dandulo. was surnamed the Dogge, which title was giuen him abroad and at home, because  he was tyed like a dogge with an Iron chaine to the Popes table. But if it be lawfull for Historians, to censure of matters iust and vniust, and freely to vtter what they thinke thereof, we say that the act of Dandulo was not so religious, as that of the Popes was bitter, (I will not say proud) to suffer (not being moued thereat) a noble man, sent from the most Christian people, the noblest of Italie, to entreate him to blotte out a publike infamie, to couch so long like a dogge at his feet. Sure I am, the example of our heauenly King (whose Vickar and Vice-gerent he named himselfe) might haue mooued him, who did not denie pardon to the miserable theefe, so soone as he demanded it. It may bee thought that the Venetians had endured miserie enough for seizing on the Castle of a neighbour citie (though peraduenture  incited thereunto rather by the law of Nations, Frisco being their Allie, than vpon any promise or desire of bootie) hauing beene lamentably robed and spoiled in all the faires of Europe, lost a great quantitie of gold, and (which is worse) diuers among them brought into bondage, and diuers likewise murthered. He satisfied his

haughtie wrath, with the infamous estate of this man. But whether he were satisfied or no by this act, posteritie neuerthelesse shall for euer much more extoll the patience of the one, than the ouer-great seueritie of the other: He dealt hardly with him (as I haue said) because it was in his power so to doe, and this man made a religious vse thereof, for that it so pleased him: Some peraduenture, but not verie many, will approue the Popes deed; but assuredly all men will not onely preferre this mans pietie, but highly admire it.
The Citie likewise was not vnthankefull to him, but gaue him publicke demonstration, that it held nothing at so high a rate in her Citizens as meekenesse and clemencie. They were not long ere they recompenced him. For they dealt so carefully, that soone afterward, he who not long since was seene for his countries sake to endure shame and reproach, was inuested with the markes and ensignes of the soueraigne magistrate. Clement, his wrath being appeased, shewed himselfe afterward truly meeke and clement. For, besides the abolishing of the interdiction, he decreedDandulo his pietie acknowledged likewise, That the Venetians should neuer afterward be excommunicated by the Popes for the like occasion, or for any other whatsoeuer. And his pleasure was that this his declaration should be enregistred.
About the same time Iustiniano surnamed Iustinian, went to Sea with foureteene Gallies* Hee had commission to scoure the Sea and to meete with eleuen Gallies of Genoa, (who as it was reported) had runne to diuers faires in Europe to reprise, and  spoile the Venetians good: But being come to the Ponticke Sea, he drew neere to the Citie of ^pha, where diligently enquiring whether the same were true which was reported of the Genoueses, he found it to be a false report giuen out byFalse reports against the Genoueses. such as desired noueltie, and to see these two people at oddes. The Genoueses who dwelt in that Citie, fearing vnder this pretence that the Venetian would hurt them, promised him by solemne oath all (...) and assistance. Iustiniano thinking itA deed worthie of a Generall of (...) Armie. most vniust to hurt those who had not offended them, without offering them any hurt brought backe his Armie safely to Venice.
This was done abroad. But in the mean^ time at home in the Citie, they beganne somewhat to enlarge the olde Arcenall, which being since then greatly augmented, hath beene in our daies so much enlarged, that the circuit thereof, being walled in,Description of the Arcenall. seemeth a farre off a little Citie, so that it may be more properly called a Repositorie of all things, than an Arcenall: For, besides an hundred Gallies, which are there alwaies readie, and haue neuer yet wet Ankor, but are onely supported by their bridges, there is to be seene almost as many halfe made vp, and some of them almost made vp, with an infinite number of other small boates, and so great quantitie of of all kind of Armor and munition, as a verie huge Armie may be casily furnished therewith.
It is thought that about the same time a nauall Armie was sent forth for the guard of the Islands and Sea-coast of the Ionian and Aegean Seas, which neuerthelesse  performed nothing worthie of memorie. Iustiniano who certaine yeares before had beene with a Fleet in the Chersonessus of Tauris, was commanded the twelfthA new Armie against the Genoueses. yeare of this Princes gouernment to goe forth with fortie Gallies against the Genoueses: who sailed into the Ponticke Sea, where he sunke diuers shippes of warre of Genoa to the number of foure and thirtie, who had inuaded the dominions belonging to the Venetians. Those of Pera being danted at the ruine of their fellowes, and desirous quickly to fortifie themselues, filled certaine shippes full of earth and other weightie matter which they suncke before the Citie. Iustiniano neuerthelesse came and besieged the towne, and caused woodden castles and other engins of warre to be set vp in the shippes, to batter it. Which the Genoueses perceiuing, and well Those of Pera censtrained to sue for peace. weighing the great danger which threatned them, turning their defence to entreaties, they besought the Venetians to cease the batterie; saying that they would recompence the losses which the Venetians had sustained by them, together with

the expence of that great Armie. On these conditions peace beeing graunted the Armie returned safe (...) Venice.
Much about the same time, or soone after, there arose a new rebellion in Candie.New stirres in Candie soone suppressed. Iustiniano, who in the last voiage to Greece made an approach to Pera with the Venetian Gallies, commanded the Island. So soone as hee had leuied all his forces against th^se new tumults, hee vsed such diligence, as in a moment he suppressed them, and reduced the fearefull Candiots to their former obedience. In the interim of these affaires in Grecia, they treated in Italie with the Paduans, about the turning back of the ordinarie course of the Brent into the Sea. The Paduans were at the same time molested by Mastin of Escalla. Wherefore  the Venetians sought by all meanes to free them, as their neighbours, from this warre, quite forgetting the iniuri^s receiued from the Paduans in their aduersitie. For during the interdiction of Pope Clement, the Venetians neuer had worse enemies than the Paduans: And because since then, there had beene no reconciliation betwixt them, the Paduans, being vanquished by those of Escalla, were brought into bondage: But the Venetians neuer ceased, till they had driuen the Tyrant forthThe Venetians restore the Paduans to their libertie. of the Cittie, and restored the Paduans to their ancient libertie, committing the gouernment of the Citie to Marsilio Carrario, who afterwards did carefully cherish the friendship and alliance of the Venetians. This is all which happened abroad or at home during the Principalitie of Souranza. Some neuerthelesse say, that in his time  there was a conspiracie against the Common-wealth. But we finde no such matter in the principall Authors. His gouernment lasted sixteene yeares ^nd six moneths; and hee lieth buried in that Chappell of Saint Markes Church where the Font standeth.




 FRANCISCO DANDVLO, the 52. Duke of Venice.





FRancisco Dandulo surnamed the Dogge (as hath beene said) was chosen in his sted.
At the beginning of his gouernment, victualls beeing verie deere in the Citie, hee dispatched certaine Gallies and shippes of burthen into  Sicilie to fetch Corne vnder the conduct of Nicholao Phalerio, who brought home such quantitie of wheat, as in few daies (to the peoples great contentment) the scarcitie c^assed. At the same time eight Gallies of Genoa tooke twoAbundance of Corne in the Citie.

of Venice, returning from France in trade of Marchandize. The goods within them were taken by the Genoueses: but the sailers, and marriners (for that they must either die or bee taken prisoners) leapt into the Sea, and by swimming saued themselues on the neighbour-shoares: The Polani and the Valesians, who had binThe Polans and Val^sia^s brought vnder the obedience of the Uenetians. a long time subiect to the Patriark of Aquileia, did voluntarily yeeld themselues to the Venetians: whereat the Patriarch beeing incensed, did speedily leuie troupes of Souldiers to surprise them: The Venetians on the other side (because they would not seeme to abandon those who of their owne motion had lately come to their obedience) sent great forces into Histria vnder the command of Iustiniano surnamed Iustinian. The Patriarke of Aquileia, knowing himselfe not of force sufficient Agreement with the Patriarke of Aquileia. to with-stand the Venetians, did without any memorable fight, resigne vnto them Pola, and Valles, vpon certaine conditions whereof the Authours make no mention.
Six Genoa Gallie^ fought with eight of Venice conducted by Thomaso Viari, deputed for the guard of the Islands and Sea-coastes; in which fight the Venetian was defeated with the losse of fiue Gallies, and the other three escaped, and came home to Venice. With this losse the Senate was much displeased: who being informed that it hapned by the negligence of Viari, committed him to prison, whereViari confined to perpetuall prison. The great incursions of the Turkes. (as it is reported) he ended his daies.
The Turkes in the meane time not satisfied with driuing the Christians forth  of Syria, by their ordinarie incursions became likewise Masters of the Sea, and had so spoiled the coastes of Candie, Ciprus, and Rhodes, as there was no safe sailing into the Leuant.
The Venetians at the pursute of Pope Iohn the two and twentieth, had dealt with the French King, vnto whom were sent Philippo Bellegno, Blazio Zeni, and Marino Morosini, to conclude a voiage against the Turkes. Some Annalles in sted of Pope Iohn set downe Pope Nicholas; but they erre greatly therein, seeing that from Pope Nicholas the fourth till that verie time, there was no Pope of that name.
In this Treatie made with the French King concerning the recouerie of Syria, and resisting the attempts of the Turkes, it was concluded, That he should send twentie thowsand horse, and fifteene thowsand foote; and that the Venetians should furnish an hundred vessells, among which should bee diuers Armed Gallies, with foure thousand Souldiours, and besides, diuers Marchant-shippes to carrie the victualls, munition and other necessaries for the Campe. But the French-men failing (for those Tramontani are held to bee slow and negligent in vndertaking such remote iournies, albeit they are valiant and couragious to execute haughtie enterprizes, and (which is most commendable in this Nation) are verieThe enterprise against the Turkes broken. affectionate to Christian Religion) the preparation of this goodly enterprise by little and little vanished into smoake. The Barbarians waxing more insolent  by this slacknesse, and negligence, did in a manner by their ordinarie incursions, keepe the Seas, as it were besieged. The danger neuerthelesse which daily increased, enforced the Pope and some Christian Princes to take Armes against them. The Venetians first of all set forth a great number of shippes, of which Pietro Zeni was made Generall. This man pursuing the Barbarians inThe Turkes p^ to flight by the Venetians. all places, did with meruailous good successe free the whole Sea-coastes and the Islands neere to Syria, from the incursions and spoiles of the Turkes: Diuers others likewise did with good successe fight for Christendome with that cruell Nation; but cheefly the Venetians, who tooke from them an infinite number of shippes, when by Zeni his command all the Prisoners were forthwith hanged. Hauing thus assured the nauigation, he brought back his victorious Armie to Venice.
It is reported, That at the same time the Sunne suffered a meruailous eclipseA wonderfull eclipse.

at noone-daie for the space of three houres. Prince Dandulo caused a new coine to bee stamped, called Mediani. The power of those of Escalla was at theThe power of those of Escalla. same time wonderfully encreased, in such sort as all men farre and neere ouer all Lombardie stood in awe of them: For besides Verona, Vincenza, and Bressia, which they before possessed, they had newly seized on Parma, after they had by treacherie driuen thence the Rossi: And they had alreadie surprized Feltre, Belluna, and Ceneda from Iohn King of Boheme. Treuiso likewise (according to some Authors, namely those which haue written the Venetian Historie) did obey them. Blondus neuerthelesse saith, That Treuiso belonged to the Venetians, at such time as they began the warre against Mastin of Escalla. But I can hardly approue his  opinion, because we do not finde that the Venetians did then possesse any Towne of the firme Land: seeing if it were so, it would appeare in some sort, at what time, and in what manner the Venetians had taken so famous a Citie. For my opinion, The contrarie (reported by others) is farre more probable: to witte, That the Venetians tooke it in this warre which they had against Mastin; whereof wee are to speake. They had likewise (to the end that nothing might bee wanting to their happinesse) subiected the Citie of Padua, a little before the warre began. For Marsilio, named by others Vbertino Carrario, beeing not able to preserue that Citie in her ancient libertie, by reason of their ciuill dissension, suffered it to fall into bondage; whereunto because hee had so easily consented, Escalla permitted the Carrarians to command the Citie in his name. Mastin waxing proud with this good successe (following humane couetousnesse, which knowes lesse how to behaue it selfe in prosperitie than in aduersitie) resoluing to disturbe the Venetians, speedily built a Fort in the lakes neere to Petabubula, which he manned with a strong Garrison. The Venetians, knowing whereunto his dessignes tended fortifiedThe course of the warre with those of Escalla. a place likewise which they held, not farre from thence. Afterwards they consulted by what force or meanes they might tame and daunt this infestuous Tyrant, who hauing ouerthrown the neighbouring forces panted (as it were) with desire to master theirs. And therfore there was some likely-hood, that after he had assured his owne estate, he would forth with make warre on the Venetians.
To preuent Mastin of his purpose, (for hee was the eldest of all the familie of Escalla) the Venetians hastened the warre. His forces, as they were the greatest of all his neighbours, so were they the most maligned: For worldly matters haue this propertie, That there is nothing which so much procureth enuie and hatred, as too great felicitie. Although the number of those who enuied him were verie great, The Venetians neuerthelesse, had least caus^ of all men to looke after him, in respect that holding nothing as yet in the firme Land, they had till then satisfied themselues with being strong at Sea, not caring for more, esteeming their fortune great enough, in regard of their Sea-traffike: This then being truth, the Venetians had no cause to feare the Tyrant, although his forces were terrible to others, as to  Obisso of Este, Philippo Gonzaga, Azzo Vis-conte, and the Florentines in Tuscanie: who because he had taken the Citie of Luca not far from them, stood in great feare of his power.
Pietro Rossis of Parma, with his brethren, all valiant and braue men, were capitall enemies to the house of Escalla, for that Mastin, vnder pretence of future alliance, had driuen them forth of Parma, and laid plots for their liues, which they hauing notice of, fled to Pontremolla, where Mastin did streightly besiege them, at such time as the Venetians with others, confedered them-selues against him.
After diuers Ambassages sent from partie to partie, the Florentines and all theLedgue and alliance against the familie of Escalla. Princes of Trans-alpine Gaule, who were iealous of the forces of those of Escalla, ioined themselues with the Venetians against Mastin and his whole familie* But some Authours affirme that the Florentines alone did allie themselues at the beginning, a^d that the rest came after the warre was begun. Iohn King of Bohem did

likewise ioine with them, for the recouerie of the Cities which were taken from him in Italie: Yet for all that the Venetians were the first motiues of the warre. It is reported that they neuer vndertooke warre with more courage; not forWhat moued the Venetians to make warre on those of Escalla. feare or enuie to them, beeing free from both these passions, (as hath beene said) but because they thought it well beseeming people, borne in libertie, mightie and rich, to defend as well the libertie of others, and chiefly of their neighbours, as their own.

The end of the first Booke of the second Decade.







THE SECOND BOOKE  OF THE SECOND DECAD OF THE HISTORIE Of Venice.

The Contents of the second Booke of the second Decad.
PIETRO ROSSIS, the Parmesan, being made Generall of the Armie of the League, defeateth the Cauallerie of those of Escalla, neare to Luca in Tuscanie. ESCALLA recouereth Vderza, which hee had a little before lost. ROSSIS, so soone as he had receiued the Enseignes of S. MARKE, comes and encampeth before La Mot. The Venetians mercenarie Souldiers slaine by trecherie at Mestra. ROSSIS, hauing with his Armie passed the Riuer Brente, seizeth on the enemies camp. The Venetian Armie scattered here and there about the Countrie neare to Padua; with the encounter which it had neare to Verona. Those of Cognilian yeeld to the Venetians. Sedition in Padua. Diuers Ambassadours arriue at Venice at one time to treate of peace. Padua restored to her ancient libertie; the faction of ESCALLA being driuen thence. The Gouernement of the Citie of Padua giuen to the Carrarians. PIETRO and MARSILIO DE ROSSIS, soone die one after another. Diuers battailes wonne from the enemies on the confines of Vincenza, and Cremona. GALEAS Visconte taketh Bergamo and Bressia, from those of Escalla. Peace with those of Escalla after the losse of the Citie of Treuiso, and diuers other places. The Citie afterward protected from a great inundation at the intercession of S. MARKE.

THe league against the Tyrants being concluded, theWarre concluded against those of Escalla. Senate commanded that all those who were able to beare Armes, should be enrolled. It is reported that  at the same time, aboue fortie thousand men, from the age of twentie yeares to threescore, were enrolled, with such willingnesse, as many of all sorts and ages, did voluntarily follow the Armie, without any publike or particular pay, but only pricked forward with a desire to extinguish this tyrannie which was so neare them. Notwithstanding, they were not of opinion to assaile the enemie with all their forces at the first, but following their ancient custome, to beginne sleightly, and then to continue it feruently. Now, whilest these two mightie people of Italie were preparing their Armies, it is said, That vpon the report of this warre diuers ranne thither, out of FrancePeople come from all parts to the Venetian Armie. and Italie, to serue them, who being desirous to take the Venetians pay, after they had trauersed Tuscanie and Flaminia (the passages through Lombardie being shut vp) arriued at Rauenna. For all places on this side and beyond the Po, with whatsoeuer

lieth vnder the Alpes, (Bolognia and Ferrara excepted) were against the Venetians. For neither Luchin Visconte who commanded in Milan, nor Philippo Gonzaga, had as yet shewed themselues to bee against Escalla. And albeit the Bolognians were at the same time diuided among themselues, and excommunicated by the Pope, because they had driuen the Legate Apostolicall forth of the Citie, they did neuerthelesse freely suffer the Venetians, to leuie Souldiers in their Territories, with whom soone after, they also ioyned their forces.
Ostasio Polentano, at that time Lord of Rauenna, affecting the Venetians, did willingly receiue the French-men, who arriued in the Citie, and sent them speedily in small boats to Venice. There was prouision made in the Citie, neare to the Church  of Mendigotis (which is one of the farthest parts of the Citie) of lodging for those which came thither, and of victualls, and other necessaries, vntill such time as the Armie were readie to march against the enemie.
There liued at the same time Pietro Rossis of Parma, accounted among the NoblestPietro Rossis declared Generall of the Uenetians Armie. families of Italie, a man most skilfull in martiall discipline. The Venetians (notwithstanding he was absent) elected him Generall of their Armie. This man albeit he was streightly besieged by Mastin, imagining neuerthelesse that the time was come, with other mens forces to reuenge the wrongs done to himselfe and his bretheren, determined because he would not loose such an occasion (for the Venetians had alreadie entreated him by letters to come thither) to passe in disguise through  the enemies Campe, (not being able to escape thence by a forcible sallie) and to goe to Florence, and from thence to Venice.
There liued with him his wife, a very vertuous and chast Ladie, who loued her husband dearely, and was not ignorant of his most secret affaires. Shee considering with her selfe, into what danger he exposed his life, and how great the attempt was which he vnder-tooke, casting her selfe weeping at his feete, entreated him after this manner.




The complaint of Pietro Rossi's Wife.
FOr Gods sake (deare husband) and by the loue and bond of Matrimonie, desist from this dangerous enterprise, and weigh with your selfe how your estate standeth, and in what place you leaue my wretched selfe with your Daughters. (It is reported that he had sixe Daughters, who comming all about him, drenched in teares, made the same request like their Mother.) Alas (said shee) what shall become of me, if, thou being taken by the enemies ambush (which God forbid) I should lose thee, and of these poore wretches likewise, who besides God, haue none other hope but in thee? Doe you thinke the arrogant enemie will omit such an opportunitie, or will not rather attempt by some sodaine assault, to winne both this place and vs, destitute of thine aide? who doubteth but he will soone winne all? But, alas, what shall then become of me, and these poore Wenches? Doest thou thinke they will spare the honour of thine, who haue not spared thy life. This vnruly enemie will leape for ioy, when he shall haue power to quench his hatred towards thee by the dishonour of thy Daughters, or else hee will command his Souldiers to torment them: He will spoile, robbe, and burne, those poore meanes which Fortune hath left vs. Who doubts but that then their condition will be better, which shall not liue to see any of these mischiefs. I poore wretched and vnhappie creature shall see it. But what did I say? see it? nay, rather shall feele whatsoeuer poore prisoners are wont to expect from a cruell and mercilesse enemie. If the feare of thine owne life moues thee not; this at the least which I haue spoken ought to moue thee: All this which I haue spoken, I doe as verily beleeue will come to passe, as I hold that to be true which I see before mine eies: Tarrie then here still, deare husband, and with those small meanes thou hast continue to defend thy selfe and vs, let me entreat thee to put off thy iourney till our affaires stand on surer termes. I hope so soone as the enemie shall haue notice that the Venetians haue entred his territories beyond the Po, that he will speedily depart hence, and then thou maiest safely go to thy charge. Thus did she speake.



Pietro Rossis answere to his wife.
THe husband being moued with her teares, albeit he was valiant and couragious, gaue her few words: he knew all that she had said was true, but to comfort her thus afflicted, and to put her in hope. He entreated her to be comforted, to hope the best, telling her that she should shortly see him returne with place of commaund to ouerthrow the power of those, who by treason had driuen him from his dignitie, and had attempted against his life, and those of his familie. That he did verily beleeue that the enemie would soone depart thence, but in the meane time he entreated her to remaine firme and constant, and to looke carefully to his children, and to the affaires of his house: As for the Guard of the Fort, he told her, that he did repose so much trust in the fidelitie and valour of his owne souldiers, as that they would sufficiently defend her, and maintaine the siege so long, as the enemie should at last whether he would or no be enforced to raise his campe: Besides, that he was of necessitie to make hast, least he should seeme to contemne so honourable a charge, That the passing through the enemies campe was not so dangerous a matter as she thought; For diuers great Captaines had in times past, not onely gone through their enemies campe in disguise, but had likewise stayed there for a time till they had carefully enquired of the state of the enemie: He willed her then to cease weeping and lamenting, and no more to entreate him to the contrarie, because he was of necessitie to depart. He said moreouer, that men being incited by vertue, did attempt diuers great enterprises, but that necessitie made them to execute greater: And thus after he had recommended her, himselfe,Sentence of a great Captaine. his children, and houshold, to his friends whom he left in Garrison, he gaue order for his departure.




Some Authors say, that he left one of his brethren to guard the place, and others thinke that he sent them before to Venice, where after that their brother was chosen Generall, they were made Gentlemen of Venice. Thus after that he had embracedRossis departeth in disguised habit. all his people, about midnight he departed in disguised habite, accompanied with one onely faithfull and valiant friend, and went through the enemies campe to Florence, where he was receiued with great ioy of all men. But being diligent, and  an enemie to sloth, he would needs go vpon some enterprize. Whereupon soone after he marched with the Florentines forces to the countrey of Luca, where putting all to fire and sword, he rode with a few troupes, euen to the gates of the Citie, From whence carrying great bootie, and being come forth of the enemies countrey, into a countrey of safetie, he fell into an Ambuscado.
Fiue hundred horse sent by Mastin to guard the Citie, sallied forth on the other side of the towne, and came galloping into a forrest, through which they knew the enemie must passe at his returne, where they ambusht themselues. As he returned,Rossis first exploit. those of the Ambuscado breaking forth with great cries amazed those in the Vantguard, who conducted the bootie, and did defeat and put them to rout: diuers  were slaine there, and the ensignes of the Vantguard taken. Newes of this encounter being brought to the Captaine, who led the Rereward, and diuers of those which fled being alreadie come to their fellowes, saying that all was lost, Rossis being very quick and sodaine, after he had sharpely rebuked them for their flight stayed them, and commaunded them to follow his ensignes, and take courage; then did he brauely receiue the enemie, who being ioyfull for his imaginarie victorie, came towards him. The fight began verie cruell, but the Captaines presence turned the feare of his souldiers vpon the enemies, who with great slaughter were defeated, and pursued to the Citie, where the bootie and ensignes were not onely rescued, but those of the enemiesPietro Rossis his first victorie. were taken, the which Pietro returning victorious to Florence, commaunded  to be dragged through the Citie. The victorie did greatly encrease his first reputation; there was nothing spoken but of his valour and prowesse; all men said that the vnbridled boldnesse of those of Escalla should by his conduct be in short time abared, iudging him worthie of the place which was giuen him.
In such reputation was Rossis: who being readie to march towards Venice, tarried for the troupes which the Florentines promised by their agreement to send, when as the Venetians in the meane time had begun the warre, but not with so good successe as was done in Tuscan. Gerard Caminensis, an allie of the Venetians, hauingGirard Caminensis taketh Uderza. taken armes against those of Escalla, departed about midnight from the Citie of Metta, (commonly called the Motte) and seised on Vderza. Mastin vpon report of the taking therof (some say that it was Albert, who made this iourney) marched speedily with his troupes towards the enemie: and being come into the territorie of the Vderzans, he sent his best armed horse before the Citie, and himselfe with the residue of his troupes followed a farre off, with an intent to enclose the enemie if he came  forth vnaduisedly to fight. These forerunners being come neere to the walles, were sodainly repulsed by those of the towne, who neuerthelesse returned againe to the skirmish of set purpose to draw the enemie farre from the Citie. The which hauing done, and being come to the place of ambush, those of Escalla sodainly issued forth, and enforced the Garrison to flie towards the Citie: Then the horsemen by the tyrants commundement alighted, and assailing the Citie on euerie side, they greatly amazed those that were within, who were few in number, in respect of the largenesse of the place: so soone then as those of Escalla came to the assault, the Garrison distrusting their owne small number, forsooke the walles and fled* Then the assailants, after they had broken vp the gates, entred and slue the enemie in all places. There were few prisoners taken, and among others, Gerard made one of the number.
Vderza being recoueted, the enemie marched towards Camino, which he likewiseAlbert of Escalla recouereth Vderza. tooke in few daies, after that he had corrupted the Garrison with money: It is thought that if he had gone to the Motte, he might with ease haue taken it. But by his negligence which commonly followeth a great conquest, the souldiers wantingWant of a Generall. victuals and a warlike Leader to conduct them, running heere and there without obseruing martial discipline, for sooke their ensignes. The Venetians in the meane time stirred not. For Marsilio, who at the beginning came to Venice, deputed by his brother, was leauying forces, and being not yet strong enough, he durst not march  against the enemie, for feare least at the first he should commit some error. Some Authors affirme, that Marsilio was left by his brother in Pontremolle to sustaine the siege. And the Venetian Annalists write, that he was at the same time in Venice.
Mastin of Escalla sent commissioners to Venice to demannd a peace, offering toMastin beggeth peace of the Venetians. withdraw his Garrison, and to raze the Fort which he had builded in the lake neere to Petabubula. But they obtaining nothing of the Venetians, returned without any peace. Rossis in the meane time with fifteene hundred horse, namely eight hundred which he had receiued of the Florentines, three hundred from the Bolognians, and the residue of Obisso of Este, passing through the countrey of Ferrara, came to Pietro de Rossis arriueth at Venice. Chioggia, where embarking himselfe with a few of his followers, he came to Venice. A troupe of Senators at his landing went to receiue and gratifie him, and brought him directly to the Prince, who spake thus vnto him.




The Princes speech to de Rossis.
GEnerous Pietro, thine excelllent vertue so much renowned euerie where, hath bene the cause, that being to make warre on the Lords of Escalla for diuers iniuries receiued from them, we haue esteemed thee alone among all the Captaines of Italie, worthie to assist vs, chiefly in so difficult a businesse. We haue thought it fit from the beginning to elect a Generall, to whose hands we might commit our forces to fight on the firme land. But according to the common report, we haue found no man, I will not say that surpasseth thee, (for that cannot bee) but that can in any sort equal thee, either in counsellor valour. We therefore haue chosen thee being

absent, and busied in a trouble some warre, to commaund all our forces: Being assured that it will come to passe if thou be such an one as all men report thee, and we hope that thou wilt proue, that so soone as thou shalt haue subiected vnto vs this proud enemie, thou wilt free both thy selfe and thine from this warre, and brauely reuenge all the wrongs which thou hast receiued from him. It is almost incredible to tell how great the hope is which we haue conceiued, that our affaires will prosper, hauing thee for our Generall in this warre, which hast as much reason to sight for vs as for thy selfe. It is no matter whether an enemie be ouerthrowne by reward or hatred. His ruine then being as profitable to thee as to vs, this our exhortation may seeme needlesse. We intreat thee neuerthelesse well and faithfully to gouerne what shall be committed to thy charge, as becommeth an associate and a good Generall. Opportunitie the mother of all things will shew thee time and place fitter for thy designes: And we on the other side will furnish thee with souldiers, victuals, munition, and abundantly with the principall sinue of warre, which is money. Take then these publike ensignes which to thy selfe and to the Commonwealth likewise we pray may proue most fortunate, the which shallRossis receiueth the ensignes of Saint Marke. follow thee wheresoeuer thou shalt commaund, and thy souldiers them. And we beseech God to fauour thy proceedings, to the end that thou mayest bring them backe vnto vs, not onely safe, but victorious.




So soone as Rossis had receiued the signes of his office, he answered in few words the Princes speech, leauing behind him a greater hope of himselfe, than if he had vsed many words in his owne praise: and presently he departed with all his troupes. Blondus writeth that he came first to Treuiso: thinking thereby that the same Citie was then subiect to the Venetians: Others thinke, that it was on the confines of Padua and Treuiso: and some who are most worthie of beliefe (for the enemie then held all those places which they name) affirme that the Rendeuous of the whole Armie was at the Motte. In that place he made the generall musters of his Armie,A generall reuiew of the Armie. and found that he had, besides the succours of the Allies, foure thousand fiue hundred horse, and sixe thousand foote, besides great numbers of victuallers, souldiers boyes, and such like people which follow a campe. The Earles of Colalta, who before had held the partie of Escalla, came to the campe well accompanied, as did diuers others from the confines of Forli, from beyond the mounts, and out of  Germanie, who being come thither vpon the report of this warre did greatly encrease the Venetian Armie.
Mastin, so soone as he vnderstood the departure of Pietro Rossis, and what he hadMastin raiseth his campe from before Pontremolle, done at the same time before Luca, whilest he remained at Florence, raised his camp from before Pontremolle, and resolued first of all to succour the Luquois, and to put a strong Garrison into the Citie, for he feared least his furious enemie should snatch that towne from him. But hauing notice that he was called to Venice, and learning by his spies what abundant warlike preparations the Venetians made, he speedily came to his Armie at Verona. Albert brother to Mastin, had in the meane time placed a strong Garrison in Padua, and did nothing without the aduice and  counsell of Vbertino Carrario, whereby we may perceiue that it was Albert, and not Mastin, who was farre from thence (as all authors affirme) which recouered Vderza. Thus Mastin being carefull to espie all meanes how to frustrate the Venetians first attempts, or if that could not be, at leastwise to foreslow them by some hindrance, not being able to doe it by open force, had recourse to deceit.
A certaine man called Thomasino commaunded at the same time in Mestra, an inwardTreachery practised by Mastin friend of Spineta Malespina, who was in Mastins campe, in whose name he held that place, situated on the Treuisan territorie neere to the lakes of Venice. This man by the counsell of Spineta, enterprised a villanous act against the Venetians. He agreed and promised to yeeld the Citie to the Venetians, prouided that they  would giue him fiue thousand crownes, and gaue for assurance thereof his wife and sonne for hostages: And the day of the execution being come, Albert and Spineta entred the towne at midnight with certaine troupes of horse and foote. The Venetians, albeit they held the traitor sufficiently bound vnto them in regard of the

hostages, thinking that they ought not to be ouer-credulous, would not suffer any naturall Venetian to be of that night-enterprise. Fiue hundred stranger-Souldiours were sent thither, vpon whome so soone as they entred the Citie a little before daie, the Souldiours of Escalla breaking forth of of their Ambushe made a furious assault. The number of the prisoners was few: as those whose liues, fortune and danger had rather saued, than the intent of the enemies; all the rest were slaine: Then causing his Cauallerie on a sodaine to sallie forth on those which were without, verie few escaped. Albert thinking he had giuen the Venetians a great blowe, leapt for ioy, and mockt the prisoners, as if they had beene naturall Venetians. But  when he vnderstood by the prisoners that there was not one Venetian in all the companies, but all mercenarie Souldiours and strangers of farre Countries, he was verie sorrie for that which he had done, and blaspheming God and men, being ashamed of the murther he had commited in the night, in a rage with his fellowes he made haste to Padua.
Rossis in the meane time being in the Treuisan territorie, readie to march againstPeitro Rossis his ^ration of his souldiors. the enemie, spake to his Souldiours in few words, exhorting them chiefly to shew themselues in all occurents, valiant and couragious, and diligently to obserue martiall discipline, saying that he desired no mutinous or carelesse Souldiour, but such as were valiant vpon the enemie, patient in trauell, and obedient to his command: And therefore if there were any amongst his troupes that would not bee such, hee  counselled them to depart and goe on no further, saying that hee had rather ouercome with few, worthie and valiant Souldiours, than to be vanquished in the companie of many cowards: willing those that were such to tarie behind and heare tell of their fellowes braue exploits, rather than by their presence to trouble the whole Campe.
Mastin being aduertized that the enemies were dislodged, fearing least theyThe suburbs of Mestra burnt by Mastin. would seize on the suburbes of Mestra, commanded them all to be burnt vpon a day, to the great griefe of the inhabitants. Rossis after he had passed the Riuer of Anaxus, marching through the Treuisan, and perceiuing a farre off the flames and  smoake of those suburbes, said aloud, That hee aspired to greter matters than to lodge in the suburbes of Mestra. At that time some counselled him to besiege Treuiso, but he made answere, That he made haste to fight with the enemie; whome hauing once ouercome he would afterwards obtaine diuers goodly victories.
The Venetian Armie was alreadie on the bankes of the Riuer Brente, whenBraue resolution of a greate Captain. newes came sodainely to Padua, that the enemie approched. The Paduans hereupon beganne to murmure, and scorning the Tyrants tolde them, that they should doe well to goe and take armes to hinder the Venetian from passing the Riuer, if they would be accounted so valiant as they made shew for; They on the other side being loath to giue any token of feare, commaunded the Souldiours forthwith to arme themselues. Albert hauing made choise of a selected troupe marched forth of Albert of Escall sleeth. the Citie, to oppose himselfe against the enemie. But Rossis after he had passed the Riuer by night, had raised his Campe before day from the further side thereof; and afterwards marched cheerefully in order of battaile against the enemie, who was said to approach, thinking that the houre was come wherein he should reuenge so many iniuries receiued from those of Escalla, or else in performing the part of a good Captaine die valiantly fighting. Albert hauing certaine notice of the enemies passage, and that he marched towards him with an intent to fight, being therewith daunted did sodainely turne backe: which being perceiued by those that were with him, dispersing themselues here and there, they forsooke their Campe which was newly victuailed in aboundance. The Venetian, after hee had made good cheere The Sacceans yeeld to the Uenetians. therewith, ranne furiously to the veriegates of the Citie, burning and spoiling all places neere about, the Generall hauing forbidden his Souldiours to murther or rauish. But whilest they thus so spoiled farre and neere, those of Pieue de Sacco came weeping to the Venetians, beseeching them to take compassion on them, offering

to doe whatsoeuer they should command, and freely to furnish the Armie with victuailes. The Sacceans being receiued vpon their oath were enioyned to bring victuailes to the Campe which laie neere their Citie: From thence Rossis sent an Herald of Armes to Mastin, (who vpon the report of the Venetians march was comeRossis challengeth Mastin. to Padua) to acquaint him with his desire to fight with him with displaied enseignes: And that if he were so valiant and experienced in Armes as he boasted of, he would wish him not to refuse the battaile, but rather to come foorth into the field, and to make proofe which of them were most valiant. Mastin made no reply to this challenge.
Rossis perceiuing he could not draw his enemie to fight: without any longer stay  raised his Campe, after he had set fire to the towne of Corania; but the Venetians afterwards repaired it speedily, and placed a strong Garrison in it: All this hapned in a Moneths space. But about the fifth of Nouember, the Campe approaching the village of Bouolenta, the Florentine troupes with the other associates, which hadAnthenor laid the first foundations of Chioggia taried at Chioggia, ioyned themselues by litle and litle to the Armie. This place is almost on euery side enuironed with water. It is thought that Antenor the Troyan laid the first foundation thereof.
Diuers report, that so soone as Rossis was knowne to be in the field, the cauallerie which staied at Chioggia was mightily encreased, and that the Rendezuous  of the Armie marching on the firme land was at Bouolenta. Rossis resolued not to stirre from thence till he had in some sort discouered the enemies intent, whom hee knew to be so politicke, as he would attempt nothing but vpon sound aduise. The Annals affirme that which wee first said, and further adde, that by the aduise ofThe Venetian build a Fort at Bubulente. Rossis they builded a Fort at Bubulente, wherein they left a strong Garrison, both by land and water. For hee had obserued that the situation of that place was very commodious for the Warres, as it fell out by experience. For the Venetians from thence did many times make roades on the Territorie of Padua.
Rossis departing thence gaue an alarum to Padua, and riding neere to the Gates and Wals of the Citie, hee called the enemies to the fight, and with reproachfull  speeches hee taxed their cowardise. But the enemie keeping himselfe within the closure of his Wals, and not daring to come forth, he passed on, and tooke the lower way towards Cap-darger, to goe from thence to besiege the Fort of the Salt-pits; where Marco Lauretano was arriued, with the nauall Armie: whereupon by mutuallThe Venetians besiege the Fort of the Salt pits. consent the siege was aduanced. The Garrison within it were first sounded, whether they would voluntarily yeeld without enforcement; which they refusing to doe, the Venetians did furiously assaile them. The engines were already planted against the Wals, and the Souldiers mounted on the enemies Rampire, at such time as Spirituello Gouernour of the place hauing receiued an hurt, sodainely died thereof. They of the Fort being amazed at this accident, craued truce for eight dayes, with determination that if Mastin came within that time to raise the fiege, they would still hold it for him, and withall faithfully promising, if they were not releeued before the Truce were expired, that they would yeeld it vp to the Venetians. This being graunted, they sent to Padua to intreate Mastin to come himselfe and to raise the siege, or if he could not come, at the least, to send forces sufficient to constraine the enemie to raise his Campe: But he promising them nothing, but willingThe Fort of the Salt-pits taken. them rather to seeke their owne safetie, the Castle was yeelded, which was foorthwith razed by the Venetians.
About the same time those of Cognilian, yeelded to the Venetians, and were the way-leaders to diuers other Cities, and associates of Mastin to reuolt from those of Escalla, as it afterwards happened. The tyrants at the beginning had made great  leuies of Souldiers, and among others, of three thousand Lansquenets. It is said these men did very roughly intreate the Paduans, as well by spoyles and robberies,Great insolencies of the Lancequenets. as by deflowring of maidens and rauishing of wiues: so as it is to bee thought that these vilanous actions were the first and principall motiues of the Paduans rebellion.

Mastin being thereby constrained to disperse them here and there, vnder shew of going to Garrisons, sent fifteene hundred of them to Aeste, who by a meruailous vnruly licence, did outrage the inhabitants thereof. There arose likewise in Padua (for those that remained there continued their old trade of life) a great sedition, and the Townesmen and the Strangers were ready to haue fought in the middest of the Citie, had not Mastin by his timely comming appeased the quarrell already begun.The cause why the Paduans reuolted from those of Escalla* It is certaine that the Paduans were by this iniurie meruailously withdrawne from the friendship of those of Escalla, and that by reason thereof, they alreadie tended to rebellion.
Mastin was determined to call backe the Garrison at Aeste to the Citie, had not  his brother Albert disswaded him from it, saying that hee ought not to charge the citie with any more strange Garrisons, and that he had no cause to feare the Paduans nor Marsilio, whose truth and fidelitie he held for assured. Rossis in the meane time fought with good successe against those of the Garrison of Aeste, and taking three hundred of them, after he had stripped them, he sent them away.
Those of Escalla perceiuing their affaires exceedingly to decline, sent their Ambassadours to demand aide of all their friends and allies, as well within Italy as abroad, and namely to the Duke of Bauiere. But the Paduans because they would not seeme altogether to betray the tyrants, sent at the same time their Commissioners to Venice, who (if it were possible) should mediate some good agreement betwixt  the Venetians and those of Escalla. This they spake in publike: But they had secret commandement if they could not conclude a peace, to make a league with the Venetians against Mastin, Threescore Ambassadours, from threescoreAmbassadours sent to Uenice to procure a Peace. Princes or Commonwealths, came at one time for this purpose to Venice. Marsilio Carrario was sent thither from their enemies, who at his arriuall (as it is reported) was pursued by the common people and beaten with stones: But it was not so much in hatred to Marsilio, as to the tyrants whom the people mortally hated: some thinke that it was done of purpose, to the end that those of Escalla should haue no cause to distrust him who came to speake secretly against them to the Venetians,The Venetians propositions concerning a peace. like the other Ambassadours. The Venetians demaunded that Padua, Treuiso, and Parma should be restored to their ancient libertie, and Luca in Tuscany yeelded to the Florentines; but those of Escalla thinking these conditions to be too base and ignominious, would not accept of them. Whereupon the Ambassadours were dismissed without any conclusion at all. In the meane time the Ambassadours of Accio Visconte, of Philippo Gonzaga, and others, made a league with the Venetians againstSecret practise of Marsilio Carrario with the Venetians. those of Escalla. Marsilio dealt secretly with the Prince about the yeelding vp of Padua, which soone after ensued. Some Authours write that in the presence of all the Ambassadours, hee spake softly to Dandulo^, and said, What wilt thou say Prince if we giue thee Padua? And that the Prince dissembling at the same time both in gesture and speech, that which was in question, answered, We will make thee Gouernour thereof. This I rather beleeue, than that which is commonly reported, That a long time afterward an Ambassador from Carrario spake this openly at a banquet on the Feast day of Saint Vitis, (as the maner was) albeit I graunt it might well enough be spoken in a banquet. But the person of the Traitor discouereth the errour committed therein. For it is certaine that the Gouernment promised at the first, was afterward giuen to Marsilio; but he whom they nominate, had no recompence.
Whilst these things were done at Venice, Rossis tooke certaine Townes in theRossis at the Gates of Padua. Territorie of Padua from the enemies, and then bringing his troupes neere to the Citie, he set fire on one of the Gates, called Al-Saints. Moreouer those of Mestra Mestra yeelded to the Venetians daunted a while after with a new siege, wherewith they were enuironed, yeelded. From thence comming to Treuiso, he burnt in a night two of the Citie gates. The Inhabitants were so amazed in this night-assault, as diuers running fort' of the Citie in the darke, on that side where the enemie was not, saued themselues by flight, but many of them hauing lost their way, fell into the enemies hands, among whom

the noble wife of Caminensis was slaine in the habit of a seruant. This being done,Cami^ensis wife, slaine in the habit of a (...). they made no farther attempt against the Citie, I know not whether it were because they despaired of taking it (being ignorant of the great feare and amazement of the Citizens) or rather because they would speedily goe to take Serrauall, whichSerrauall vnder the Uenetians obedience. (according to some) came at that time vnder the Venetians obedience.
Mastin and Albert his brother hauing vnderstood that besides the losse of so many Cities in short space, their associates likewise had forsaken them, and taken armes to offend them: (for it was reported that Luchin Visconte hauing attained to the principalitie of Milan (by the death of Accion his kins-man) and Phillip Gonzaga were alreadie in the field against them, or else in a readinesse so to doe) being enuironed  with so many michiefes, knew not what to resolue on, nor what they ought chiefly to follow, or in what place to oppose themselues against the enemies desseignes, or by what meanes to relieue their Citties. But in this great incertaintie of their affaires, not being able to conclude on that which was most expedient for them, Mastin on a sodaine with the greatest part of his forces left Padua, committing the guard of the Citie to his brother Albert, and came to Verona.
In the meane time Marsilio Rossis; after hee had passed the Riuer Adice, marched with those troupes which hee had receiued from his brother directly towards Mantua, where ioyning with Philip Gonzaga, and Luchin Visconte, they consulted together of the whole matter, and after marched into the field, resoluing first to assaile The Territorie of Verona spoiled Verona. Now hauing forraged the Countrie, they entred the Territorie of Verona, where they made great spoyle round about the Citie, which with great clamours they besieged; bringing thither all things necessarie for a siege. It is reported that Charles sonne to the King of Bohemia, lay at the same time before FeltreCharles sonne to the King of Boheme encamped before Feltre. with a great Armie of Germans, by meanes whereof those of Escalla were at one time affailed in three seuerall places. Mastin being thus vncertaine by what meanes to oppose himselfe against the enemie, after hee had a while ruminated with himselfe, determined like a mad man to doe it by Armes, and to fight with any that heeResolution of a desperate man. should meete with. But before he would giue battell, he Knighted his sonne Francis who was yet very yong, Spineta Marquis, Guiao Corregiario, and Paulo Aligerio the  Gouernour of the Citie; after which hee marched with great noyse and furie towards the enemies, and in their view put his Armie in order of battell, being resolued for his part to fight. Rossis made a retreat, so did the rest, not meaning to fight, thinking it more auaileable for them to draw the Warre out at length, the which by all likelihood Mastin could not long maintaine, than to hazard the whole by the euent of a battell. In this sort making a faire retreate, not giuing shew of any manifestA wise retreate flight, they held on their way towards Mantua.
Mastin as proude of this retreate as if hee had wonne the battaile, returned speedily with three thousand horse and certaine foote companies to Padua, and from thence to Bubulente, where the Venetians Fleete lay. At his arriuall hee surprised  twentie small Venetian vessels, left for the Guard of the munition, and made an attempt to take the Castle, the which being brauely defended, hee was constrained toMastin encam. peth to shut victuals from the Venetians. depart thence, and hee encamped two miles beneath the Riuer, with an intent to shut vp the passage of the victuals which came from the Citie by water. It is thought that he might with more ease haue executed his determination if hee had encamped betwixt Bubulente and Mestra. Rossis, to cause him dislodge, commanded a great quantitie of woad (an hearbe belonging to Fullers) to be pounded and to be throwne into the Riuer, to make it vnsauorie and bitter to be drunke by those of Escalla. But victuals waxing scant in the Venetians Campe, by reason that the enemie lay so neere, the arriuall of Marsilio called thither for the purpose (as I  thinke) was cause that the Venetians, strengthned by his comming, had free passage whither they pleased, being little inferiour to those of Escalla in strength.
Pietro Rossis likewise being often prouoked by the enemie to fight, did purposelyA discreet resolution of a Generall. refuse it: For he perceiued that Mastin could not long hold out, and that hee should

doe vndiscreetly, to hazard the fortune of a battel, knowing that the enemie was already halfe vanquished, and there was no doubt but that he would be ouerthrowne without bloudi^ied. Whilst he lay in Campe neere to Bubulente, thinking greatly to hinder the enemie by keeping of the passage of the Riuer from them, hee had noticeBressia besieged by Luchin Visconte. that Luchin Visconte had streightly besieged Bressia, which newes he very badly d^ested, and marched with speede through the Territorie of Padua and Vincenza to releeue Bressia, which whilest hee attempted, more fearefull tidings were brought, that Padua was lost and his brother taken prisoner with the whole garrison.
This losse did in such sort abate the tyrants pride, as hee neuer after hoped for  better successe. Marsilio Carrario, so soone as Mastin was departed from the reliefePadua reuolteth from those of Escalla. of Bressia, had forthwith giuen notice thereof to Pietro Rossis, and leauing open the Gate of the crooked Bridge, gaue entrance to him and his whole forces, which they of the Citie perceiuing (for there was no hostile act committed) all men with great ioy ranne to meete him, calling him their deliuerer, and infinitely praised him. But Rossis with the generall consent did in the Venetians name giue the gouernement of the Citie to Marsilio Carrario. Albert, and Risse Foranensis with diuers other friends and seruants of the Tyrants were taken prisoners, and their goods spoyled. Albert was soone after brought to Venice. Rossis gaue leaue to fiue hundred Almaine horse that were found in the Citie, freely to depart thence with their Armes and  Horses.
Mastin, being daunted with so many losses, receiued fresh newes that Charles hadThe Citie of Feltre taken by the king of Hungary taken Feltre with other Townes; and anon after that Luca was besieged by Orlando Rossis, Captaine generall of the Florentines, and that it was not yet certainely knowne whether those of Luca were reuolted or not. But that which did most ofBressia and Bergamo taken by Luchin Visconte all afflict him, was, when he vnderstood soone after that Bressia whither he had so speedily marched, was taken: and in this sort bad tidings comming daily vnto him, the end of all was, that Luchin had seized on Bergamo.
Those of Escalla being wholly chased from Padua, the Venetian Ambassadours came thither, namely, Marco Lauretano, Iustiniano surnamed Iustinian, and Andrea Morosino; who comming into the Market-place where the people were assembled, Lauretano in the name of the Common-wealth, vsed this congratulatorie Speech vnto them.




The Venetian Ambassadors Oration to the Paduans.
WE cannot but exceedingly reioyce, that yee being now freed from so cruell an enemie, haue recouered your ancient libertie lost by the malice of Mastin: And therefore by the Senates appointment we conferre the gouernment of the Citie on Marsilio: whose courage and valour, by how much more it is famous and knowne to all men, by so much more doe the Venetians highly esteeme it for the good and commoditie of the Paduans, adding thereunto his singular vetue and wisedome, which cannot but bring great and desired quiet to his fellow-Citizens. For the Venetians verie well know, and namely by experience, that a Commonwealth is most happie which is gouerned by a wise and discreet person. Attend therefore, and perpetually receiue your Citizen Marsilio, to obey his commaundements, and heartily to defend iustice, seeing ye are not ignorant how grieuous a thing tyrannie is: And thou likewise Marsilio, albeit we are all well perswaded of thy vertue, thou art neuerthelesse to thinke that we haue called thee to this place, not onely to commaund ouer thy countrey, but to bring it all helpe and succour. If peraduenture thou shalt doubt what course to take for the wellgouerning thereof, and by what meanes to make thy selfe regarded without enuie among thine owne people: take example by the Magistrates of our Citie, which will easily teach thee: who whilest they are in office, are respected for the honour of the Commonwealth, and their charge being expired, they liue equally with the meanest, knowing verie well that this equalitie

is the onely bond of a Commonwealth. It remaineth now, that this Citie followiag thine example, doe highly account, honour, and respect the friendship of the Venetians, as well in generall as particular. The which duly and religiously to obserue the nouelties hapned in your time may incite you, we hauing twice within few yeares freed you from the cruell yoak of bondage. For that man is no lesse foolish, than ingratefull, who cannot be moued by benefits receiued.A notable sentenc^.




The exhortation of Lauretano being most true, was likewise most pleasing ^o the people, and chiefly to Marsilio; who after he had giuen great thanks to the Venetians,Marsilio his answere to th^ Venetians. said. That he would in such sort rule, as no man^in time to come should haue occasion to complaine of his gouernment, much lesse to desire (and if he were a louer of the publike peace) any change. And that aboue all thinges he would take order, that the Paduans should alwaies be such towards the Venetians, as those ought to bee who haue receiued benefits and good turnes, namely, with such acknowledgement and good offices as all men should say that the Venetians had well imployed their labour and cost. As for the present benefit which he had receiued from them, he would at all times, and in all places confesse, that he held his honour, dignitie, and all the rest of his meanes, onely from them.
This did he speake, which was with a generall consent approued by all the people: Then followed mutuall embracements and congratulations, the whole Citie leapt for ioy, all things on a sodaine were changed. For in steed of feare and enuie, wherewith it was before filled, nothing was then seene, but ioy and contentment.
But the course of the fortunate successe of the Venetians affaires was interruptedThe death of Pietro Rossis. by an accident hapned to the two brethren of Rossis, who in few daies died one after another. For Pietro after the taking of Padua being come to the siege of Moncelesse was mortally wounded: whereupon being carried to Padua, he died so one after to the great griefe of all men. He was a man of a goodly stature, a great warrior,How highly Pietro Rossis was lamented. and an excellent Captaine, being an enemie to crueltie, and when hee went to the warres, he forbad his souldiers to murther in cold bloud, and to enforce women. He was so well beloued of his souldiers for his gentlenesse, as the Almaine horsemen, who were verie many in his campe, called him their father, and he was beside so liberall, as (his horses and Armour excepted) he gaue all his wealth among his souldiers. Diuers Italians and Almaines cloathed in mourning habite, did follow his funerall, and bewailed him a long time. He died in the prime of his age, being but six and thirtie yeares old. Marsilio his brother, who not long before was sicke of a seuerThe death of Marsilio of Rossis. being brought to Venice, died there within sixe daies after, being fiftie yeares of age.
Their brother Orlando Rossis, who at the same time held Luca straitly besieged, was in his absence chosen Generall of the Armie, and being sent for, came so one afterOrlando Rossis chosen Generall of the Armie. to th^ campe at Moncelesse. For the siege was not discontinued, although the Generall was dead: At his arriuall he tooke part of the Armie, and came by the confines of Este, and made roads on the territorie of Verona, where putting all to fire and sword vnto the gates of the Citie, he brought a verie great bootie to the campe: Not long after the Senate called him to Venice whither all the Agents of the associates were come to treate of peace. But because in this assembly the selfe-same conditionsA treatie of peace broken. were propounded to Mastin as were in the former, and that he stoutly refused them, all the commissioners departed from Venice without any conclusion. Mastin perceiuing that he was not yet freed from this war craued aid of the Duke of Bauier,Mastin imploreth the aide of the Duke of Bauiere. adding diuers great promises to his entreaties. This duke promised to send him great supplies, prouided that he might haue good caution for what he promised. Mastin deliuered into his hands the Citie of Pescata, wirh his sonne Francisco, and diuers other children of noble families. But the Duke failing of his promise, so so one as Mastin perceiued himselfe deluded, he came on a sodaine and recouered the Citie, with his sonne and hostages. Marsilio Carrario died in the meane time, leauing (by the consent of the Venetians) Vbertino his neere kinsman for his successor, hauing sent a hundred thousand crownes to Venice to build a Church in a part of the Iury, and to enrich it with diuers inheritances.
At the same time the Armie approched Montfort, and from thence diuers roadsMastin defcated before Montechia. were made on the territories of Vincenza and Verona. Mastin in the meane time battered Montechia, whither Orlando came vnlooked for, defeated him, and draue him thence: Not long after Mastin came into the field to execute a new enterprize, the which had as bad successe, as that of Montechia. The Paduan and Almaine horsemen were encamped in the Isle of Longare. Mastin thinking to surprize them, did speedily march thither with his forces. The Island being assailed by land and water, was not onely well defended, but with the losse of his ships hee was ignominiously driuen thence. Vbertino on the other side hauing with money corrupted theMoncellesa taken. Garrison of Moncellesa, entred the Citie on the side of the Castle, which was within few daies after yeelded to the Venctians by Florentio the Gouernour therof. Mastin in another place attempted by treacherie to recouer the towne of Montagnane, but this designe fell out vnluckily. Spineta Mariqus, and Guido For anensis were commaunded with great secrecie to goe with their forces to the appointed place: wherof the Venetians hauing notice, placed fiue hundred Almaine horse not farre from Este in ambuscado, so that the enemies marching forward, (hauing sent no discouerers before) were surprized and assailed by those of the ambush, and at the first brunt (throwing downe their Armes) betooke themselues to flight. The number of the slaine was great, but that of the prisoners greater, among whom were Guido and  Gilberto his brother, and with them two hundred men at Armes. Andrea Morosino, for that hee had valiantly behaued himselfe in that encounter was afterwards knighted.The siege of Vincenza.
Orlando was at the same time in Padua, from whence he speedily departed with his troups, and came to Vincenza, where approaching the citie neere to Saint Felix gate, he lodged in the suburbes. The poore inhabitants were then more terrified than before. For being on euerie side shut in by the enemie, they lost all hope of getting any victuals, especially from Verona, by reason the Venetians possessed Brendola and Montechia. Diuers with their wiues and children being driuen forth of their houses by the men at Armes of the Garrison were constrained to begge. At the last the Tyrantes pride being abated, peace ensued very opportunely.
It is reported, that being not able to raise the siege before Vincenza, he harkenedMastiu being ensorced, accepteth of peace on any conditions. to a peace, about which hauing sent his Commissioners to Venice, he obtained it on these conditions: That Feltre, Beluna, and Ceneda should remaine to Charles of Boheme; Bergamo, and Bressia to Visconte, who possessed them; Treuiso, with the villages and Castles of the Treuisan, to the Venetians, with the Castles of Balde and Bassan, with free libertie to trafficke on the riuer Adice; and foure Cities of the territorie of Luca to the Florenitnes.
It is reported that the Florentines being discontented with this agreement, becauseThe Florentine^ discontented. Luca which they demaunded was not yeelded to them, sent to Venice about  this businesse, where the matter was rather debated out of wilfulnesse than of any hope they had to obtaine it. But the Venetians inclining to peace, the Florentines consented thereunto. All the associate Lords which had taken part with the Venetians were likewise satisfied. Albert with the rest of the prisoners were set at libertie. The Venetians gaue the Castles of Balde and Bassan to Vbertino Carrario: whereby we may see that the Venetians did not seeke by this warre to enlarge their estate.vpon what cause the venetians did make warre vpon those of Escalla. For besides the breaking of the tyrants forces, whom they could wholly haue ouerthrowne, and by armes haue appropriated all that to themselues which they had taken from him, they gaue the renowned Citie of Padua (which they might haue held by right of warre) to Marsilio Carrario a priuate Citizen, and afterwards to Vbertino his successor, two great Castles vvith their demaines taken from the enemy during the treatie of peace. But Blondus affirmes it to be most true, that the Venetians had neuer any desire to increase their dominions, but onely to preuaile so farre (which hapned as they desired) as to be able to abate the tyrants pride, and to make him glad to sue for peace with heaued-vp hands, who a little before had disquieted all Italie,

and who was not satisfied with the command of all which lieth on this side and beyond the Po, within the continent of the Alpes, but would besides haue enthronized himselfe in Tuscanie, and haue attempted at the last, not to take away (for that he could not doe) but to molest the quiet possession of the Sea, which the Venetians of a long time had purchased with much labour and trauaile.
This then is the fruite, as pleasing as great, which they reaped by this victorie, thinking that they had done enough and very much, to haue troden the tyrants pride vnder foote, vnto whom in the end being daunted and basely suing for a dishonourable peace, his demand was not onely graunted, but they made him a Gentleman^astin is made a Gentleman of Venice. of Venice. Dandulo after he had fortunately abroad and at home gouerned  the Commonwealth, deceased, in the eleuenth yeare of his Gouernment.



 BARTILMEO GRADONICO, the 53. Duke of Uenice.








BArtilmeo Gradonico was his successour, and chosen by the fortie. I find in some Authours that about the same time the great Hall was builded, where euery eight dayes and sometimes oftner, all the Gentlemen are assembled about the creating of new Officers: And that they began at the same time to send Magistrates to Poueggia, Palestrino, and Malamoc.
Moreouer on the fiue and twentith of Februarie in the night, there arose a suddaineA prodigious storme at Venice in a night. tempest, which caused such an inundation in the Citie, as the waters stood  three foote deepe, which was neuer till then seene. This being reputed a prodigie, gaue beleefe to that which a poore Fisher-man reported to haue seene the sameBeleeue this who list. night: which was thus. So soone as he perceiued the storme, in a great feare he drew vp his little Boate neere to Saint Markes Church, and standing not farre from thence out of the raine and wind, three men came to him, who, as if they had some carnest businesse, entreated him in all haste to Ferrie them ouer to Saint Nicholas ChurchA wonderfull apparition to a poore Fisherman on the shoare; which he refusing to doe for feare of the storme, they on a sodainc went into his Boate, as though themselues would guide it: which the Fisherman perceiuing, entred into it, (though against his will) and guided the Boate. But being come to the Church, they turned towards the mouth of the Hauen: where  they saw a Ship full of Diuels, which these three men sudainely sunke by the helpe of God. Whereupon the Sea in an instant grew calme. And then, one of them entred into the next Church; the other was caried to Saint Georges; and the third returned to the place where they tooke Boate: of whom the poore old Fisherman (albeit

in regard of what he had seene, he thought him some Diuine Person) demaunded his hire, who answered him: Thou shalt goe (quoth he) to the Prince and Senate, vnto whom hauing declared in order what thou hast seene this night, they shall liberally reward thee. The Fisherman replied, they will not beleeue me, and I know certainly that they will iest of me, and so I shall become the laughing stocke of the people for my rash report: whereunto this diuine personage answered him, and said: Take this pledge (and gaue him a Ring which hee had on his finger) let the Duke and Senate vnderstand, that by our meanes the Citie hath beene this night preserued from a terrible floud: And because thou shalt not faile but doe this, know that he whom thouWho those were that appeared. diddest see enter into his Church, is blessed Saint Nicholas, which yee Marriners doe so highly reuerence; the other is Saint George, who is gone to visite his Church; and I am Marke the Euangelist the patrone of your Citie. This being said he vanished.
The poore Fisherman, emboldned by this pledge, so soone as it was day came to the Palace, where saying that hee would speake to the Prince concerning some important businesse, he was presently brought into his presence, who was accompanied by the Senate, where he declared in order all that hee had seene and heard; then for a witnesse to his speech, he drew foorth of his bosome the Ring which the holy Saint had giuen him ouer night: They were all greatly amazed at this miracle: then they caused diuers solemne Prayers to be made, as well in priuate as in publike  in the Churches of these holy personages, by whose helpe the Citie had beene defended from the present danger: Besides, they appointed the poore Fisherman a yearely pension out of the publike Treasurie.
About the same time the Ambassadours of Edward King of England arriued atThe King of Englanst crauet^ aide againg the French King. Venice, crauing aide by Sea against Philip the French King, whom the Genoueses fauoured with all their power, but notwithstanding all their promises on their Kings behalfe, they could obtaine nothing: Their excuse was, in what great danger their affaires stood at Sea, which they were constrained to defend from the ordinarie incursions of the Turkes, who by the carelessenesse of the Christians were growne so mightie, as they could in a moment Arme two or three hundred Gallies if neede  were.
At the same time certaine Lords of Candie reuolted, who being retired intoCertaine Lords of Candie rebell. some Fortes and Castles in the mountaines, did disquiet the greatest part of the Island. Nicholao Phalerio, Iustiniano surnamed Iustinian, and Andrea Morosino, with good forces were sent against these men; who were embarked in the Gallies which went to traffique in Ciprus. Being arriued in Candie they assailed the enemie in three places, and giuing them in a maner no time to breath, they tooke from them all meanes to robbe and spoile. They did moreouer propound great rewards to any whosoeuer should kill any one of those Rebels, or could bring him aliue toReward propounded against the Rebels. the Venetian Magistrate, hauing set downe a certaine rate for euery head; but the  Authours whom we follow mention not how much. They being by this meanes in few dayes reduced vnder the Venetians obedience, were punished according to their deserts, diuers of them were throwne into the Sea, but the most of them were hanged, which caused those of the Iland, being terrified by the punishment of thoseCaudie is appeased by the Rebels punishment. Lords, to returne on a sodaine to their due obedience. The Island being quiet, the Generals of the Armie (Nicholao Phalerio excepted who died there) returned to Venice. Victuals were very deare in the Citie, during the principalitieGreat dea^th in Venice. of Gradonico, which was very short; for it lasted but two yeares and nine Moneths, which time being expired he died. His body was buried at the entire of Saint Markes Church.

The end of the second Booke of the second Decade.



THE THIRD BOOKE  OF THE SECOND DECAD OF THE HISTORIE Of Venice.

The Contents of the third Booke of the second DECAD.
A Great Armie prepared against the Turkes. The foundation of Saint ANTHONIES Church. The Venetians victorie neere to Zara against LEWIS King of Hungarie. Thereddition of Zara. The Citie of Venice much shaken by an Earthquake. The same Citie terribly afflicted by the Pestilence. Truce for fiue yeares with LEWIS King of Hungarie. Cape-histria rebelleth, which causeth the Venetians to passe ouer thither. The cause of the third Ligusticke warre. The Venetians take ten Ships of Genoa in the Hauen of Cariste. The Genoueses take Nigrepont in the absence of the Venetian Armie. The Venetian and Arragonian Fleete greatly tossed by a tempest on the Ionian Sea. The prosperous battels which the Genoueses had at one time against three mightie Armies neere the Bosphorus. The Venetians and Arragonians ouercome the Genoueses on the lower Sea. The Genouses in anger  contemne their libertie, who after they haue repaired their Armie, take Parenza. The Genoueses take diuers Ships of burthen from the Venetians at sundrie places. The Genoueses defeate a great Armie of the Venetians in the Isle of Sapientia. Prince PHALERIO affecting tyrannie, is with his complices worthily punished.








 ANDREA DANDVLO, the 54. Duke of Uenice.








A Ndrea Dandulo succeeded Gradonico, a man certainly of rare and singular learning, and as eloquent as could be wished, in one of his yeares: For it is reported that he wrote the Venetian Historie in two stiles; the one more amply, and it may bee therefore lesse eloquent, and the other more succinctly, and thereby (as saith Carosini) more beautified and adorned. Hee was besides of a meeke and liberall disposition, whereby hee  purchased the surname of Comifino: And that was the reason (as I thinke) why before he was of competent age, they made him Procurator of S. Marke, and soone afterwards Prince. For the manner was, not to name any one to that dignitie, but such as were already of good yeares; and all Authors (almost) are of opinion, that he was not aboue sixe and thirtie yeares of age, when hee was named for the soueraigne Magistrate. We finde in some Authors, that at the beginning of his Principalitie, according to the league made with Pope Clement, and other Christian PrincesThe Pope, the Venetians, and other Christian Princes in league against the Turk. Smyrna taken. against the Turke, the Venetians armed sixteene Gallies, and gaue the command of them to Pietro Zeno, who after he had sunke diuers ships of the Barbarians, did by a sodaine assault take the Citie of Smyrna, and where hauing slaine the Inhabitants, he left a good Garrison, and that soone afterward, not farre from those confines, the Venetians accompanied with those of Rhodes, and Cyprus, did oftentimes fightThe Venetians, Rhodians, and Cypriots defeated by the Turke. with the Turkes, where diuers of both sides were slaine. But at the last the Venetians with their Allies being defeated and put to flight, part of them being afrighted escaped into the Citie, the rest being enclosed by the Barbarians, were all slaine.
At the same time Nicholao surnamed Giouanni, was sent by the Senate to the King of Babylon, to treate with him concerning the Venetian Merchants free traffick into Aegypt. The Barbarian granted their request, bnt on certaine conditions, the which seeming not to bee allowed of, without the Popes permission, it was not thought lawfull to trafficke with the enemies of the Christian faith, Marini Phalerio Knight, and Andrea Cornario, were sent to his Holinesse, who granted that the VenetiansThe Pope permitteth traffick with Infidells. should for fiue yeares following traffick to Alexandria with sixe Gallies: Souranza, by vertue of this permission, was the first that vnder-tooke that voiage with two Gallies, wherein Pietro Iustiniano went Consull.

Two yeares after, Iustiniano surnamed Iustinian, obtained of the Pope in the name of the Common-wealth to traffick into Syria, and the time of these two trafficks was prolonged for ten yeares. At the same time they beganne in the Citie to build St. Anthonies Church, (the beginning whereof is attributed to one Iannotto a Florentine, of the familie of Abbi) vpon a little Rocke, where was first builded a little Chappell of wood. In the same place at this day is to be seene a great voide place, or ratherThe building of Saint Anthonies Hospitall. an Island, made by a continuall heaping together of earth, which the water in processe of time hath brought thither; It hath a delightfull prospect towards the Lakes, and besides the Church which is faire and large, there stands neare to it a new sumptuous building, which serueth for an Hospitall.
About the same time those of Zara reuolted from the Venetians the seuenthThe seuenth rebellion of Zara. time. The report was, That they had sent to Lewis King of Hungarie, to certifie him, if he would come into Dalmatia, they would deliuer their Citie, Hauen, Lands, persons and meanes, as well publike as priuate into his hands.
The Senate presently vpon these newes, gaue fiue armed Gallies to Pietro Canalis, who sailed into Dalmatia. Being come neere to Zara, hee receiued Marco Cornari the gouernour with all his familie, and diuers other Venetians, into his vessells, who were in the Citie when it reuolted, from whence hee presently departed: For, to haue besieged the Citie with so few vessells, and by Sea only, would haue beene as  foolish as vnprofitable. He first retired to Pague; the inhabitants whereof hauing receiued him into their Citie, deliuered the Gouernour into his hands which those of Zara had sent thither not long before, together with all those which had aided or assisted him, whom Canalis sent to Venice. Soone after hauing fortified the place, he tooke with those few Gallies which he had, diuers vessells of the enemies which laie neere to the Islands: But whilst by these meanes hee went about to hinder theZara inuested by Sea and Land. Zaratines: Marco Iustiniano came by Land with his Armie, and encamped at the Fountaine next to the Citie, where he sodainly caused his Souldiors to build a Fort. Then, from thence, he did with his engins batter the Citie, beat downe the walls, ouerthrow the houses, and made all things verie incommodious to the enemies. If  the Zaratines were streightly besieged by Land, by Sea they were no lesse: For the Venetians hauing taken from them the Towne of Damiana, they did at times approch verie neere to the Citie, then they speedily returned, and after some stay, came back with more furie to assaile the Hauen.
Thus stood the affaires of the Zaratins, when Andrea Morosino and Simon D^dulo, the Princes brother, arriued at the Campe to prouide and take order for whatsoeuer should be expedient for the Common-wealth: and I thinke, this was the cause, why from the beginning they called these Magistrates Prouiders; but we willA general assault giuen to Zara. alwaies call them Prouidaetori. At their arriuall it was resolued to giue a generall assault to the Citie by Sea and Land. It may be they had notice that Lewis King of  Hungarie was not farre off with great forces. The Citie being assailed with great furie, the Sea-forces threw bridges from the Gallies vpon the walls, seeking by that meanes to enter the Citie. On the other side the Land-Armie drew neere the walls with their engins and other warlike instruments; But both sides had no great successe. Some were gotten vpon the walls, on the bridges from the shippes, who did greatly affright the inhabitants, and slew diuers of them. But soon after, the Townesmen waxing desperate, did furiously fall vpon them and beat them from the walls, breaking the bridges, whereupon the Souldiours on that side were constrained to make a base retreat. The fight on the Land-side was as vnfortunate. For the enginsThe Venetians are beaten from the assault. of batterie breaking at their first approach, made all the Venetians attempts bootlesse, which the Generall perceiuing, commanded to sound the retreat. After  this assault King Lewis ariued with six score thousand men, and encamped not farre from Zara; who, to free the Citie which was giuen vnto him from the siege, gaue a sodain assault to the Venetian Campe. The Hungarians with fearefull cries made an attempt on the Venetians Fort, not thinking to meet with trenches and rampiers

that were able to keepe them out. The Zaratines likewise made a sallie, and together with them assailed the Fort. The Venetians did not only valiantly defend it, but repulsed the enemies farre from thence with great effusion of bloud. In the meane time those in the Gallies hearing the noise, and fearing that their fellowes were assailed, leauing a sufficient number of Souldiors for the guard of their vessells, they came on shore, and marched in a close battalion to the reliefe of their countrimen: which they in the Fort perceiuing, presently issued forth vpon the enemie. There was on either side a cruell fight neere to the Fort and much bloud-shed: But the Hungarians who at the Venetians first comming had begun by little and little  to disorder their owne rankes, being ouercome by this sodain sallie, betooke themselues to flight, who were pursued and slaine heere and there by the Victorious Venetian. The Dalmatians perceiuing the bad successe of the Hungarians retiredKing Lewis defeated before Zara. with great amazement into the Citie. The King thus repulsed, with losse of a great part of his Armie, returned (in manner of a flight) into Hungarie. But because it was scarce credible (to speake truely) that so great an Armie should be defeated by so small a number: It is most likely that Lewis brought but twentie thousand men into Dalmatia, and that the Printersr and not the Historians haue greatly erred in the number: yet whatsoeuer their Armie was (for vndoubtedly it was great) the Venetians got that day a glorious victorie of the enemies: And besides, the slaughter of the enemies was so great, as the aire beeing corrupted with the infection of so  manie dead bodies, did in short space cause great mortalitie in the Campe. The siege neuerthelesse was not discontinued, but the Venetians on the contrarie did more sharpely vex those Rebells by Sea and Land. In the end, the Venetians hauing broken the chaine of the Hauen, the Zaratines despairing of all forrain aid, and distrusting their owne forces, craued leaue to send to Venice, the which was freelyThe reddition of Zara. graunted them: The messengers beeing come to the Citie, craued mercie, committing themselues and their Citie to the mercie of the Senate. Zara beeing recouered Iustiniano was made Gouernour: The chiefe of the Citie who had beene the Authours of this seuenth Rebellion, were by the Senate for euer banished the  Citie.
We may by this gentle punishment perceiue how great the Venetians clemency hath still beene, who were contented to punish a Citie that had so often Rebelled, and been thereby so troublesome to the Common-wealth, by the only banishment of a few of her inhabitants.
The ordinarie iudges of the Citie of Venice not being able in regard of the multitudeNew magistrates created. of causes which was dailie pleaded before them, to haue any fit leisure to intend the appeales sent vp by inferiour iudges to their audience: The Senate created three Auditors to looke to that businesse, who according to the large extent of their iurisdiction, were called the Ancients. Three others were likewise created to heare the causes of strangers.
Besides, Prince Dandulo caused all that which had beene abolished from the ancient customes to be reduced into one volume, together with all the decrees made by the Senate, since the principality of Giacomo Tepulo, vntill that present, and hauing diuided them into Chapters, with a large Table, he named it The sixth Booke of the Cities decrees. And hauing moreouer whilst he was Procurator of Saint Marke carefully gathered together all the iudiciall acts and decrees of the great Councell,The Prince causeth all the decrees of the Citie to be gathered into one form^. he set them downe in order, and noted, who had beene the Authour of euerie of them, and vnder whose Gouernment each of them had beene receiued and allowed.
There was at the same time great scarcitie of victualls in the Citie, which began  in Graedonico his time, by reason whereof Gallies and other vessells were sent into Apulia and Sicil to fetch corne vnder the command of Marco Iustiniano. We may heereby easily perceiue that this voiage for corne, was before the siege of Zara, the which likewise some Authors do not denie. For it is certaine that this Iustiniano in

that warre of Dalmatia was generall of the Land-Armie, and that after Zara was was recouered, he was made Gouernour of the Citie. Now (as all men know) it could not bee that one man alone could at one selfe same time execute two so different offices. It is reported that two shippes of those which went for Corne were lost by a sodaine tempest as they returned homeward, and that they were neuer after heard of. Others say that foure only escaped out of this storme. The residue of the ships laden with Corne, did fortunately arriue in the Hauen: by meanes whereof the dearth ceased.
But this mischiefe being taken away, an other presently ensued: For vpon theA wonderfull Earthquake. day of Saint Paul his conuersion, about one of the clocke after noone, there hapned  a great Earthquake, which did in such sort shake the Citie, as diuers publike and priuate buildings were thereby throwne to the ground. The Steeples of Saint Siluester, Vitalis, Saint Giacomo de Lorio fell downe, together with the top of Saint Angelo his Church, and the left side of that of Saint Basil. The Babylonians thought, (for I see diuers that demaund from whence this fearefull motion of the Earth doth proceede) that it happeneth by the force of some Planet, meeting with the Sunne in the Region of the Earth. Anaxagoras hath thought that it is engendred in the Earth by processe of time, and restraining of Aire. Possidonius affirmes that it is a winde shut closely vp in the bowells and concauities of the earth. Plinie saith, that the earth neuer quaketh, but when the Sea is very Sundry opinions on Earthquakes. calme, and the aire so still and cleare as birds can hardly beare themselues vp therein, and at such time as the winds are inclosed in the veines and entrails of the earth. By this speech of Plinie it seemeth that the windes are the cause of this shaking, the which diuers Philosophers doe likewise affirme. Hee addeth by and by after; An earthquake (saith he) is nothing else but as the thunder in the aire, or an ouerture or creuase in the earth, or as the lightning breaking forth violently from the middest of the cloudes, the wind enclosed therein striuing to burst forth by force. The StoicksDiuers sorts of Earthquakes. set downe diuers sorts of earthquakes, opening of the earth, swelling of the water, and the boiling vp of the same, the which is very true. For at some time the earth falleth downe very low, at other times it is much lifted vp, and putteth forth great  Mountaines; in this the Riuers doe ouer-flow on a sodaine, in the other sparkes of fire are seene to rebound, the waters to boile ouer, and sometimes Riuers to leaue their ordinarie course. A fearefull sound goeth before, and accompanieth this quaking,The signes which fore-runne an Earthquake. sometimes like to the roaring of a Bull, and then like to the lamentable cry of some humane creature, or like the clattering noise of Armour, according to the qualitie of the matter which is inclosed, or according to the fashion of the caue and hole through which this winde passeth, which resoundeth (as it is said) in vaulted and hollow places, waxeth hot in sharp and drie places, and causeth great defluxions in moist and humide places.
The Citie of Venice is not so much subiect to earthquakes, as some doe imagine,Of all Earthquakes the agitation of the waters is most dangerous. seeing among all the motions of the earth, that of the waues and flouds is the most dangerous: For lightning is not so hurtfull, nor the shaking of buildings, nor namely when the earth is puffed vp, or falleth downe by an interchangeable motion, because the one keepeth backe the other. The safest buildings are those vpon vaults, the corners of walls, and on bridges, leaning one against another. Besides, bricke buildings are lesse dangerous in such accidents than are others: Those which are atHow men may foretell an earth quake, either at Sea, or on the Land. Sea can foretell these earthquakes, at such time as they perceiue the waues to swell on a sodaine without any winde, and those which are on Land may likewise foretell them, when they see birds, as it were, in amaze to stay their flight, or when the water in Wells is more troubled than ordinarie, hauing a bad tast and stinking smell, for these are (as it is reported) the true signes and presages of future motions. Pherecydes the Syrian, drawing water out of a Well, foretold an earthquake which hapned there. Anaximander Milesius did by these signes declare to the Lacedemonians, that an earthquake was at hand, for otherwise, hee was no God to know things to

come: And the truest signes of all are, when the windes blow not, or when the Sea is meruailous calme. For an earthquake neuer happeneth, when the wind bloweth, or when the Sea swelleth with waues: for when it blowes, the motion ceaseth, otherwise it lasteth fortie daies, and some times longer, some haue lasted two yeares. But this earthquake whereof wee speake lasted fifteene daies more or lesse, wherevponHow long the Earthquake lasted at Venice. all Women that were with child, being touched therewith miscarried, and died soone after of the contagious sicknesse that forthwith ensued.
This dangerous sicknesse (as it is reported) came from Scythia, and from thenceFrom whence the contagion came to Venice. glided along the Pontick Sea, and the Hellespont; and at last at the same time that this great earthquake happened, it infected, in a manner, all the West. Some Authors  call this disease, the euill of the groine, and I thinke the reason was, because the first signes of that disease were small kernells in the groine, then there followed an extreame heate with griefe and heauinesse in the head, which caused losse of memorie, so as in three daies they died. And this infection was so sharpe, as of one hundred that had this disease, fourescore and ten died. At the beginning thereof there was nothing heard nor seene in Venice (which aboue all other Cities was greatly afflicted therewith) but teares and sighes, euery where burialls, Phisitions looking to their patients, Friends and Kinsfolks visiting those that were sicke, Priests comforting them and doing their dutie. But afterward, this cruell disease encreasing moreGreat desolation in the Citie of Venice. and more, those that were infected therewith, of what age and condition soeuer, fell  downe euery where one vpon another, and sodainly died, the Kinsman refused to succour his Kinsman, the Friend to helpe his Friend, the Brother to visit his Brother, the Sister to releeue the Sister, Parents forsooke their Children, and Children in the like manner their Parents, there was no more Phisitians nor Medicines, euery man fled one from another; and in what place soeuer a man was stricken therewith, he there died without any helpe at all: Funerall Pompe was no more knowne, it was enough to dragge a dead body out of his own house, by reason of the stench, and to lay it in some poore boate which carrie^ it without pompe or ceremonie, to be throwne hastily into some pit: and it is thought that diuers were burned, who were not fully dead. This corruption of the aire begunne at the beginning of the At what time the infection beganne and ended in Venice. Spring, and encreased daily till May-day, being then at the Prime, and so lasted to the great losse of all men till the Moneth of Iune, and then it beganne by little and little to decrease, namely when the number of the liuing was so few, as it found no more matter to worke on.
The Citie being thus bare of Inhabitants (for there were none to be seene in the streets) for the repeopling of the emptie and void places, which did greatly deforme the Citie, the Senate made a decree, That as many as would come and dwell at Venice,Strangers that would come and people the Citie, were made Citizens of Venice. after they had remained there two yeares, should bee held for Citizens of the same. The Senate moreouer fearing that Lewis King of Hungarie making vse of this miserie of theirs, would againe inuade Dalmatia (for he was come at the same time  into Italie with a great Armie, to reuenge the death of his brother, whom Queene Ioane his wife, had put to death) sent three Ambassadours to him, Marco Iustiniano, Andrea Morosini Knights, and Nicolao Gradonico: who either by intreaties, or faire promises, did so alter the Hungarian, as he not only promised, not to attempt anyTruce taken with Lewis King of Hungarie. thing against the Venetians, during their aduersitie, but made a truce with them for ten yeares (as some say) or for eight according to other Authors.
But because the Venetians should be neuer freed from some forraine war, thoseThose of CapHistria reuolt. of Cape-Histria reuolted soone after the recouerie of Zara. The Venetians, though it were in a very vnfit season, did neuerthelesse leuie forces, and vnder the command  of Pancratio Iustiniano, sent both by Sea and Land into Histria, to reduce them vntoThe Histrians reduced to the Venetians obedience. their obedience, the which, so soone as he arriued in the Prouince, hee easily did. The Authors of the rebellion were sent to Venice, and commanded on paine of life not to depart thence without the Senates leaue, because they should no more raise any new stirre in their Citie.
At the same time likewise, Albert Prince of Croatia, robbing, and spoiling the Prouince of Histria, constrained the Venetians to take Armes against him. New forces were raised for that purpose, and the warre being thus proclaimed against Albert, two Senators were sent thither for Generalls of the Armie. The Croatian being daunted at the first report of the marching of the Armie, demaunded safe conduct of the Generalls, and obtained it, that hee might goe to Venice to the Prince and Senate, where being arriued, he threw himselfe prostrate at his feete, who although they had iust cause to bee offended with him, yet neuerthelesse obseruing their ancient custome, they pardoned him, after they had first taken certaine places Albert Prince o^ Croatia pardoned. Those punished which did not follow the Senates commaundement. from him, which by the Senats commandement were razed, to the end they should be no more a retreat for theeues and robbers. Carosino (who onely makes mention of this Dalmatian warre) saith, that those two Generals at their returne to Venice, were condemned and depriued of their place of Senators, because they had not in the same warre followed those directions which were commaunded them.
Soone after ensued the third warre with the Genoueses, but it is thought that the cause of the warre proceeded (as oftentimes before) from them. They possessed certaine Cities on the Ponticke Sea, and therefore euer since Paleologus draue the Venetians from Constantinople, they attempted by all meanes to depriue the Venetian What was the occasion of the third ^igusticke warre. marchants of the trafficke of those Seas. Whereupon there and else where, they offered them sundrie wrongs, but especially neere to the Citie of Protospera, which they held on the same coast. Meeting in that place with certaine Venetian and Candiot ships, they fel vpon them, and hauing taken them, they constrained them to returne by Capha to the great hinderance, and more shame of the marchants. Carosin saith they were taken and spoiled in the ^auen of Capho. The Senate sent to the Genoueses to demand restitution of that which had beene taken from them: which being denied, they prouided a mightie Armie against the Genoueses: Some gallies were armed in Dalmatia, Ca^die, and Nigrepont, and diuers were likewise stayed at Venice, who were readie to go forth for trafficke; and Marco Morosino the  Admirall of the Adriaticke Sea being called home from Ragusa where he remainedThe Venet^ans Armie against the G^noueses. with certaine gallies, they made vp the number of fiue and thirtie, the which were giuen to Marco Rucino: but diuers Authors in steed of Rucino set downe Nicolao Pisano.
This man leauing Venice with an intent to assaile the enemies, who were reported to be abroad at Sea, was constrained by a sodaine tempest to enter into the Hauen of Cariste, which lieth towards Nigrepont. It fell out fortunately for the Venetians, that fourteene Gallies of Genoa rode there at the same time at an Ankor, laden with marchandize, and store of Armour, with diuers souldiers, who were bound for Pera, to fortifie it, to the end that their countrimen who dwelt there, might be no more surprized (as at other times) by the Venetians: Others say that those gallies returning homewards into Italie, entred that hauen. The Venetian Generall hauing descried them, commaunded his souldiers forthwith to prepare themselues to fight: All of them speedily obeying his commaundement, tooke their weapons, and turned the prowes of their gallies towards the enemie, and did shut in the issues and passages on all sides sauing towards the land, fearing to fall vpon the rocks. The Genoueses resolued to trie all meanes, rather than to yeeld. The Venetian then landed part of his forces, and speedily fortified a place neere to the enemies, from whence with his engines he began to batter them, whilest the gallies likewise shot continually vpon them. The Genoueses being assailed on euerie side (perceiuing all things to fall out vnluckily on their sides) watching the time, began  to make their saile-yards in readinesse. The Venetian perceiuing their intent, was at the first amazed at the strangenesse of the matter: But vnderstanding that the enemie went sodainly to flie, did with great attention marke which way he would escape. They on the other side making shew as if they intended some other matter, hauing

turned their prowes to that side which the Venetians had left without anyFoure Genoa Gallies escape. guard, being aided by their sailes and oares they betooke themselues to flight: And foure of the Gallies had in this sort escaped one after an other, when Marco Morosino Admirall of the Adriatike sea, being vexed therewith, commanded one of those Gallies which he had receiued the yeare before, for the guard of the Gulph, to run athwart the fift Genoa Gallie which was readie to escape, which was so speedily done, as the same being taken, the residue which were readie to follow being amazedTen Genoa Gallies taken. ranne vpon the next rocks, and were easily taken: And because they were laden with richmarchandize the soldiors and sailers bourded them, and being busied in pillage suffered the other foure to escape with ease (who were already in the maine Sea) not caring for the Generals commandement: who being angrie for loosing so goodlyA discreet act of the Generall. an opportunitie through the couetousnesse of his people, commanded to set fier on fiue of the Gallies which were taken, and had not been yet pillaged. He did it to the end to enforce his Souldiours, (who were thereby depriued of their hope of more spoile) to pursue the enemies. For so soone as they left off to spoile, they followed the chace.
The Genoueses in the meane time were farre enough off, yet neuerthelesse, tenne of their Gallies, with the Generall of their Armie, and threescore and tenne Gentlemen were taken, not accounting those of meaner qualitie, who were many in regard of the number of the Gallies, The victorious Venetian after this victorie at Chariste, sailed towards Nigrepont, where he left the Genoa Gentlemen with a thousand of the chiefest prisoners to be kept; the residue to the number of foure hundred or thereabout, were sent into Candie, and there put to the chaine and oare. The newes of this victorie brought great ioy to the Citie. The Senate in the midst of this mirth, being mindfull of Religious matters, decreed That the same day that the Genoueses were ouercome at Chariste, should for euer bee solemnized among theWhy the feast of the decollation of Saint Iohn is celebrated at Venice. holidaies at Venice. It is thought that vpon this occasion; the day of the decollation of S. Iohn is till this day celebrated, which before then was no holiday. Others say that it was vpon S. Victors day the Martyr.
The Venetians making no long aboade at Nigrepont, after they had scoured the  Aegean and Ionian Seas, came on a sodaine to haue besieged Pera: But the enemie hauing notice of his comming by their spies who had brought newes of their late losse at Chariste, and how the Venetian Gallies were at hand, had fortified all places round about the Citie, and chained the shippes together which lay in the Hauen with their Masts and saile yards in manner of a Fort and Rampier, and prouided so carefully for all other matters, as the Venetians (who came thither soon after with great shoutes) perceiuing what the enemie had done durst not assaile them: But tarryingThe Venetiandare not assaile Pera. certaine daies in the streight of Gallipolis, they surprized diuers vessels of Genoa.
In the meane time, those foure Genoa-Gallies which had escaped from Chariste, hauing ioined themselues to six others which were conducted by Philippo Doria, hauing notice of the departure of the Venetian Armie, came with all speed to assaile Nigrepont. Thomaso Viari who at the same time was Gouernour of the Citie being affrighted so soon as he descried the enemie a farre off, fled, with the Prouidatori out on the other side of the Citie which lieth towards the Channell. The GenoueseThe Genoueses take Nigrepont at his arriuall, hauing assailed the Citie, wondered at the sodaine flight of the officers, and did in a moment take and spoile it; then after he had set the prisoners at libertie, and brought thence great numbers of the inhabitants, he burnt the Citie. Doria being exceeding glad to haue in this sort reuenged their losse lately receiued, departed from Nigrepont, and from thence came soone after and seized on the Isle of  Chyos. The Generall of the Venetians after he had beene abroad fortie daies on this iournie, and being out of hope to take any greater prize, returned toward Venice: but on the coast of Dalmatia he met with tenne Venetian Gallies, which the Senate sent vnto him, whom he there staied, and caused them to returne with him

to Venice. The report of the great bootie which the Armie brought home, and answeredThe Armie returneth to Venice with great bootie. all mens expectation, made his returne most welcome. Some Authors affirme that the spoile which was brought to Venice, amounted to the valew of foure hundred thousand crownes, and others say three hundred thousand.
The same yeare that the warre began, the King of Arragon, vnto whom the VenetiansThe Venetians in league with the King of Arragon. had sent Mihaeli Steno, ioined his forces to their against the Genoueses. The Senate being strengthened by the alliance of such a Prince, hoping to execute some great designe, commanded a verie mightie Armie to be set forth, and appointed fiue and twentie of the chiefe among them to make prouision in the Citie of all things necessarie for the warre. Nicolao Pisani being chosen Generall of the Armie, departed Nicolas Pisani Generall of the Venetian Armie. from Venice with twelue Gallies, and with him Giouanni Delfino, who went to Constantinople to make a League with the Greeke Emperour against the Genoueses. Pisani being arriued in Dalmatia, receiued one Gallie from the Corictani, an other from those of Ragusa; then he commanded three others of Venice to follow him, who met him at Nigr^pont; Giouanni Delfino, who came from Venice with him wentThe greeke Emperour in league with the Venetians against the Genoueses. on his Ambassade to the greeke Emperour, who allied himselfe with the Venetians against the Genoueses.
But whilst the Greekes prepared their shippes of warre, thirtie Venetian Gallies departed from Venice vnder the command of Pancratio Iustiniano, Admirall of the Gulph, who sailed towards Sicilie to ioine with the Armie of the Arragonois  which was said to be at hand: These two Armies being there ioined together left Sicilie, and sailed directly towards Greece intending to passe beyond Morea: ButThe Uenetian^ ioyne with the Arragonois. being on the maine, such an horrible tempest arose, as in the memorie of man was neuer the like seene. The Fleet was meruailously beaten, and in great danger, one of the Gallies was drowned, and diuers others striking on the shoare were split in peeces, but without any great losse of men, by reason they were so neere Land. At the last the tempest ceasing, they sailed towards Modon, whither Nicolao Pisani came within a while after from Nigrepont. The Genoueses a few daies before had giuen him chace with fortie Gallies, from the maine euen almost to Nigrepont, whither he speedily retired himselfe, and sunke certaine shippes at the entrie of the Hauen, to barre the enemies entrance, beeing resolute to defend that place with all his forces. The Genoueses failed not, but came with great shoutes and assailed the Citie, which being manfully defended by the Venetian, all their attempts poued vaine: who beeing repulsed from Nigrepont, went and tooke the Citie of Philotea by force.
But whilst these exploites were done about Nigrepont, a Gallie of Genoa left theThe Genoueses before Nigrepont Fleet and went before to discouer, who meeting with a Venetian Gallie which was commanded by Giouanni Moro (or Memo as some say) assailed one another, but the Venetian was ouercome, by whom the Genoueses vnderstood, that the Venetian and Arragonois forces were not far from thence, whereupon returning with speed  toward Nigrepont, they aduertized their Countrimen; That two nauall Armies ioined together were at Morea; the one of Venetians, and the other of Arragonois; that they were already vnder saile to come and meet them, or else that they would be with them very shortly. Pagano the Generall of the Genoueses Armie beeingP^gano General of the Genoa Armie. troubled with these news, left Nigrepont, and speedily sailed with all his forces to Pera.
It is reported that before his departure thence hee reuewed his Armie, and found fifteene hundred men to be wanting, who for the most part had beene slaine before Nigrepont. Pisani being freed from the siege came (as hath beene said) to Modon, where after he had conferred with Pancratio Iustiniano, and with Ponce Generall to the  king of Arragon, concerning the state of the war, and giuen order that all things necessarie for their iournie should be in readinesse, they came to Nigrepont: And from thence after they had fortified the Citie with men and victuals they sailed towards Constantinople: But being yet on the Aegean sea, by reason of the viole^ce of the wind

(for it was in the middest of winter) they were constrained to remaine for a time in the same place, where the winde had staied them. But victuailes beginning to wax scarce, they returned toward Candie; from whence, fortie dayes after, about the beginning of the spring, being furnished with victuailes and other necessarie munitions, they sailed against the enemie.
The Venetian Historians say, That the two Armies passed on to Constantinople without any tempest; that being there ioyned with the Greekes forces, they went furiously against the enemie; that there was a bloudie fight neere to Pera; and that they departed one from another with equall vantage. But in this they haue verie What the Thracian Bosphorus is. negligently, (I say not licentiously) spoken against the Venetians reputation. For the most credible Authors affirme that the issue of this battaile was verie different, saying That they fought neere to the Bosphorus of Thrace, which is a streight three miles distant from Constantinople, hauing Europe on the one side, and Asia on the other, looking one vpon another by reason of their neighbour shoares, so as they may be perceiued to haue beene in times past but one Land, being diuided by an earth-quake, which made a verie streight passage to the Sea. So Plato thought That Atlas hauing cut through Calpe opened the passage of the Ocean to the Mediterranean Sea.
Now at the mouth of this streight, (which in regard of the narrow space therof that Oxen doe easily passe ouer, is called Bosphorus, surnamed of Thrace, by the name  of the Prouince which lieth on the one side thereof) the Genoueses so soone as they had intelligence of the enemies comming, who were newly departed from Gallipolis, did of purpose plant themselues: fearing if they should fight on the maine Sea, and at one time with three great Fleets, they should be enforced to fight in around forme, and therefore they thought it safest for them to receiue the Venetians and Spaniards in front at the entrie of a streight, where it was impossible for so many shippes to fight altogether in front, and the Greekes Armie on their sides whose forces they hoped to sustaine with more ease and abilitie, if on their first approach they could but put them to flight as it afterward hapned. For the Greek Armie The Greekes base flight. consisting of forty Gallies, so soone as the fight beganne, at the verie first shock of the enemie, basely gaue place, and in a maze returned home. The Genoueses being quit from them, turned all their forces vpon the Venetians and Arragonois, who fought in the front. They fought there (according to all mens sayings) verie fiercely, and for two hours space it was not discerned vnto which side fortune inclined. But at Sunne-set the winde arose, which greatly troubled the Genoueses, who notwithstanding would not giue ouer, but fought more couragiously; and for all it was night they would not leaue the battaile, choosing rather to dye than to giue place. The Venetians on the other side being mindefull of their reputation, were ashamed that they had not at the first ouercome them, being the stronger in shippes: For besides fortie Gallies of their owne, the Arragonois had thirtie. Other Authors neuerthelesse  speake not of so many, but say, That diuers Gallies being carried away by force of the winde, could not come to fight. Now this bloudie conflict lastedA cruell nightflight. all night euen till day. The night made the dangers of the fight more terrible. There was nothing to be heard but groanes and pittifull cries, clashing together of Gallies, and clattering of armour; and both the shoares ecchoed with the horrible noyse. All that darke night as, hath beene said, (and that which is most to bee admired) in winter, the fight continued. It is thought that in the darke, the Genoueses ranne vpon their owne fellowes, the Venetians on Venetians, and the Arragonois, on their owne countri-men. But when it was daie, the Sea being dyed red  with bloud of the dead bodies, made manifest how bloudie that night-encounter had beene on either side. The channell of Nigre-pont was couered with bloudie carcases with the furniture of suncke Gallies, and with a great quantitie of arrowesThe Arragonis Generall slaine in the battaile. and dartes, and with diuers abandoned Gallies which hulled vp and downe without Souldiours or conductors. At the last, Ponce Generall of the Arragonois being slaine

and they by reason thereof being retired, the Venetians likewise, (because they were able to doe no more) quitted the place to the Genoueses.
The enemie likewise being satisfied that they had giuen him place, reputing it for great honour, and imputing the victorie to himselfe, did in like manner with his people retire to his Campe. In this battaile were slaine Stephano Contareni Procurator of Saint Marke, Giouanni Steno, Benedicto Bembo; and Pancratio Admirall ofWho dyed on the Ventians side. the Gulphe, dyed within few daies after of his hurtes. The Venetian Annalists affirme, That the one halfe onely of the Venetian Fleet fought at this battaile: which makes mee think that the streightnesse of the place was the cause thereof; and that therefore the Genoueses would not stirre from thence. It seemes likewise the victorie  was as bloudie to him; for the Venetian afterward, challenging him to fight, he durst not accept it.
Giouanni Delfino who was present at this battaile (according to some Authors) reported at Venice, That the Venetians in this fight had the better; that they took eight and twenty of the enemies Galleis; that the Soldiours and Sailers in them were all slaine, with great numbers of others who diuersly perished: and that the Venetians had lost but foure Gallies. But forraine Historians report the matter to haue hapned in the same manner as wee haue alreadie mentioned at the Bosphorus of Thrace. But because no man should thinke that wee haue concealed or dissembledWhat Petrarch deliuereth concerning this battaile. ought, chiefly in that we said that they fought all the night: Francisco Petrarcha the  famous Poet, speaking of this cruell battaile, makes mention of it in these words. You haue ouercome (saith he, writing to the Genoueses) content your selues least it be thought that ye haue forgotten your ancient customes. Wee haue seene the Bosphorus to swell with the bloud of the Venetians your enemies, when at night a strong wind arising, yee were assailed by three mightie Nations, betweene Constantinople and Nigre-pont, fighting with the enemies against wind and tide, This is that which he writeth, with other matters to the same purpose. Blondus besides saith That the battaile continued all night euen till day without any intermission, and that which is most to be admired, in the middest of winter. Soone after this battaile, Pisani surprised two Genoa shippes laden with victuailes which were going  to Pera. Then perceiuing that he could not draw the enemie to fight, after hee had staied there a while (victuailes beginning to faile) he retired with the Armie of Arragon into Candie, where at leisure hee trimmed and repaired his Gallies. The Genouese in like manner brought backe his halfe-broken to Genoa. The newes of that which hapned at the Bosphorus being reported at Venice, did greatly afflictHow the Senate disdained the losse of this battaile. the Citie: But the Senators were more ashamed than sorrie, being highly displeased with the rashnesse of those who would fight in so discommodious a place, beeing accompanied with the forces of two mightie Princes, and yet could not vanquish the Genoueses whom they alone had so often ouercome, and which is worst of all, they had quitted the place as though they had been vanquished, with great  losse. Wherefore, because in time to come no more such rash faults might be committed, they decreed to send foure Prouidatori to euerie Armie, who should in all matters assist the Generall, and with him giue order for whatsoeuer should be expedientFoure new officers created in the Armie. for the Common-wealth. Giouanni Delfi^no, Marco Cornari, Marini Grimano, and Marini Phalerio were sent thither in the same nature. These men being come into Candie, certaine Gallies were sent to scoure the Ponticke Seas, who hauing surprized certaine of the enemies shippes laden with corne and other marchandize, returned into the Island. After whose returne Paulo Lauretano, surnamed the Great, was commanded to goe to Cyprus with nine Gallies, from whence he brought to Venice diuers Marchants with rich marchandize.
Whilest these things were done neere to the Islands, foure Genoa Gallies entringThe Genoueses make roades to Histria. the Gulphe, came on boote-haling euen to Histria: vpon these newes Marco Michaeli was commanded to hasten spedily thither with fiue Gallies to take them if it were possible: but whilest he made preparations for his iourney the enemie went backe

as speedily as he came. Much about the same time eight Gallies were sent to Sea vnder the command and of Giouanni Sanuto, and not long after, nine others; of both whichPisani (...) of the (...) Armie. Pisani was made Generall. Who after he had sailed the Aegean and Ionian Seas, and being come as farre as Pera, did with admirable speede surprise diuers ships of Genoa, among whom were two Barzes, laden with rich merchandize, which were iudged to bee worth two hundred thousand Crownes, wherein were nine Gentlemen of Genoa with diuers Merchants. This being fortunately atchieued, vpon report that the Genoa fleet was comming, Pisani thought it euer better to go and assaile the enemie, than to waite for him, and to make warre, rather in a forraine Countrie than at home. Wherefore hauing chosen out of the whole fleet twentie  Gallies he left Marco Michaeli with the residue for the guarde of the Gulphe, andPisani ioynet^ with the Arragonois. came with a prosperous winde into Sardinia, where he ioyned with the Armie of Arragon, which was of fortie Gallies and three Barzes, vnder the commaund of Bernardo Caprari. The Arragonois did at the same time besiege Algiers: the two fleets being there ioyned together, came to the Sea of Caralitana.
The Genoueses being puffed vp with pride for the battaile at the Bosphorus, departing from Genoa with three and fortie Gallies, commanded by Anthonio GrimaldiGrimaldi Generall of the Genoueses. went to seeke the enemie. Some say they fought neare to Cyrna; and others, at Callaris, which is a part of the Isle of Sardinia, from whence it is thought that the Gulphe tooke the name, and some say at Congeria. But wheresoeuer they fought,In what place the battaile was fought. it is certaine, that so soone as the two Armies got sight one of another, they forthwith fell into order of battaile, and set forward with great courage to the encounter. The Genoueses calling to minde how that not long before they had vanquished them, albeit they were stronger than they, thereby promised to themselues the victorie: The Venetians attributed it to the incommodiousnesse of the place, rather than to the enemies valour; all of them resoluing, that day to reuenge the disgrace and losse which they had sustained, or else to die in that place. Their Allies were of the like minde: wherupon they fought with as great courage as force. Some say that the Genoueses hauing descried the Venetian ensignes, were afraide: For hearing that the Venetian was comming to ioyne with the Arragonois, they were In what manne^ the Venetians fought. desirous to fight with the Spaniards, before the Venetians should arriue. Now the Venetians with their Allies being ready to fight, determined to tie and make fast all their Gallies together, (ten choise Venetian Gallies excepted) which were committed to Giouanni Sanuto, to execute some enterprise, if neede should be. By this wee may easily imagine with what courage the Venetians fought that day. For hauing in this sort chained their Gallies together, they had determined either to vanquish, or die there, hauing taken from themselues all hope of flight. Some say that Giouanni Sanuto did first receiue the enemie with his ten Gallies, and that the maine Armie with the Barzes followed after, But it is not credible that such a battaile was so sleightly begunne, or that ten Venetian Gallies would oppose themselues to three  and fortie of Genoa, which would in an instant haue been inuested by so great a number. It is more probable that these ten were set a-part to come to the rescue, and that their Generall was commanded to runne a-thwart the enemie, when he should perceiueThe battaile betwixt the Venetians and Genoueses. him most busied in the fight, and that by this meanes it fell out, that the Genoueses being assailed in front and in flanke, were the more easily vanquished. But how soeuer it was done either by pollicie or force, or rather by both of them together, it is not certainly knowne. Yet it is most certaine, that they fought the same day very fiercely, and that at last the Genoa forces being wholly broken, after they had valiantlyThe Genoueses defeated. rescued Grimaldi their Generall, out of the thickest of the presse, they fled as vanquished, and lost fiftie ships of warre; which being in possession of the Venetians  and their Allies, were all (according to some Authors) with all their tackling,Great crueltie falsly imputed to the Uenetians Mariners and Souldiers sunke: because they meant altogether, if it were possible, to extirpe the name of Genoa; which they affirme to haue read in the Genoueses Histories. But in regard the quarrell betwixt them was not about mens liues, but only

for enlardging of their Dominions, and that in all the time past it was neuer seene, that either of these people did inhumanely murther their prisoners, it is hard to beleeue, that they did put them to death, as is reported; but that rather they sought to couer their owne disgrace by other mens faults.
The Venetian Histories make mention of two and thirtie Gallies taken from the enemie, and of great numbers of men slaine in the fight: And as for the prisoners, among whom were diuers Gentlemen, That some of them were sent to Venice, and the rest of them into Spaine by the Arragonois.
Grimaldi with those vessells which he could gather together, retired with all speed to Genoa, where the report of that losse, being spred abrode through the Citie, caused The great lamentation made at Genoa. so great sorrow and desolation, as though the Citie it selfe had beene taken. The two victorious Armies after the battaile, came and assailed Sardinia, where by force they tooke two Cities from the Genoueses; and afterwards departed the one from the other, they returned to their owne homes.
The Genoueses being daunted by this only ouer-throw, which was exceeding great, not being able of themselues to vp-hold their estate, had recourse to forraine forces. They sent their Ambassadours to Giouanni Visconte, who at the same timeThe Genouesis commit themselues to Giouanni Uisconte, Duke, and Arch Bishop of Milan. gouerned both Spirituall and Temporall matters at Milan. The summe of the Oration with the chiefe of the Ambassade made, was in a manner such as followeth: That the Genoueses fortune by one only defeate, was in such sort altered, as being  in times past most great flourishing, was now weake and feeble, by being at last ouer-come by a mightier enemie, whom they had in time past often vanquished: by meanes whereof they were no longer able to make resistance. But, notwithstanding that all things failed them with their fortune, yet neuerthelesse their hatred to the Venetians, was no whit diminished, but rather on the contrarie encreased: That they had rather hazard their ancient libertie, than to yeeld to the force of their capitall enemie. And therefore they besought him (both for his profit and happie fortune) to accept of the Citie of Genoa her Inhabitants, Territorie, Sea, Hauen, Townes, and all other her Faculties, as well publike as priuate, and generally, all matters Diuine and Humane; All which they were commanded by the Genoueses  to commend to his power and trust: earnestly beseeching him, that hee would bee pleased to preserue by speedy aide his Genoa, her Citizens, with all that which belonged to them, and by his power to defend from the wrongs of the Venetians, those whom he had once accepted for his subiects; who would euer so continue, to the end that all men might see that they had not in vaine requested his aide and fauour.
We cannot sufficiently admire and grieue, to behold the mightiest people of ItalieThe Authors discourse. nexe after the Venetians, and those who had purchased so much honour and reputation at Sea, thus on a sodaine through despaire, not only foolishly, but shamefully to haue subiected themselues, loosing their ancient libertie, which from the  beginning they had so carefully kept and maintained. But, of a certaine, the Stoicks opinion is most true, who say, That all other passions disquiet humane vnderstanding, but that choller alone doth wholly ouer-throw it: in such manner as it happened at the same time to the Genoueses, who through hatred and wrath became mad distracted.
Visconte did willingly accept of their offer, and hauing curteously entertained theVisconte his answere to the Genoueses. Ambassadours, hee entreated them to bee of good cheare, and told them that hee with his Allies would take an order, that so long as the Viscontes should prosper, the Genoueses should neuer repent to haue implored their aide: with this hope then he dismissed them, saying, That the assistance and aide of that familie, which they had  so humbly craued, should neuer faile to beate back all forraine iniuries which should threaten them: And so the Ambassadours tooke their leaue.
These newes being brought to Venice, (there being some likelihood of greatThe Venetians make new alliance. warre with the Viscontes, by reason of the Genoueses) the Venetians beganne forthwith

to fortifie whatsoeuer they possessed in the firme Land; and allied themselues with the Carrarians, those of Escalla, of Aeste, the Gonzagues, and the Florentines in Tuscanie. Some Authors say, that Visconte, as well in his owne name, as on the behalfe of the Genoueses, did by his Ambassadours seeke to procure a peace, in whichPetrarke Ambassadour for the Milano^s. negotiation they nominated Francisco Petrarcha for the chiefe Ambassadour, and that he could not obtaine it, though vpon great conditions; and they thinke that it so happened by the will of God, in regard of the famous and memorable victorie,Victorie of the Uenetians ouer the Genoueses i^ Morea. The Genoueses make incursions into the Adriatick Gulph. which the Venetians soone after obtained of the Genoueses in Morea. The Genoueses, albeit that they had so vnfortunately fought, would neuerthelesse persist in their obstinacie; For foure of their Gallies did within a while after enter the Venetian  Gulphe, and on a sodaine spoiled Fara, and Corfu, with certaine Islands of Dalmatia; where they surprized the Cities, spoiled and burnt them; being forth-with seconded by foure others.
The Senate being moued at these newes, commanded fourteene Gallies to bee speedily armed, and Nicholao Pisani to hasten with them to meete the enemie: But the Genouese was gone forth of the Gulphe, before this Armie arriued.
Pisani, to the end his iourney should not bee altogether vnprofitable; sailed towardsPisani the Venetian Generall retires to Dalmatia. the Pontick Sea, where meeting with no memorable action, hee retired into Dalmatia. Ten Gallies which were armed at Arbi came to him thither, which being ioyned to the residue, made vp the number of foure and twentie. It was reported  euery where in the meane time, that the Genoueses hauing renewed their ArmieA new Genouesan Armie commanded by Pagano Doria. (for a whole yeare was past since their losse on the lower Sea) had set forth fiue and twentie Gallies vnder the conduct of Pagano Doria; and that they were already departed from Genoa. Pisani hauing ioyned ten other Gallies of Giouanni Sanuto to ^he foure and twentie of his owne, sailed speedily into Sardinia to preuent the enemie. Doria, (whether it were that fortune would not haue the two Armies meet, or whether he did it of set purpose, which I rather beleeue) hauing shunned the Venetian Armie, so soone as the Venetians were gone from home, entred furiouslyDoria spoileth the Adriatick Gulphe. into the Adriatick Gulphe, to warre rather on other mens streames, than on their owne, where in few daies hee surprized diuers vessells, who met him vnlookt for. From thence sailing into Histria, he tooke Parenza, which hee spoiled, and hauingThe Genoueses take Parenza. taken thence the bodies of S. Mauro, and S. Charles, he burnt it.
The enemies comming into the Gulphe, with the taking of Parenza, occasionedThe feare which was in Venice for the enemies comming. a great feare and amazement in the Citie, no lesse than if the Genoueses had beene at their gates. Therefore, they speedily chained vp their Hauen, and placed a strong Garrison there, because they thought that the enemie would come directly to the Citie, who knew that their maine Armie was abroad. They planted Sentinells and Corps-de-guard ouer all the Citie, and sent forth light boats to discouer the enemies deseigne: and this feare lasted till certaine newes was brought that the Genoa Armie was dislodged. Doria departing from Histria, met with a Venetian Barze on the  maine, he sent three Gallies to encounter it, who became Masters thereof; the Merchants were taken with their merchandize, which was a very great bootie; for it was esteemed worth an hundred and eight and fortie thousand crownes. Within a while after, three Venetian Gallies were likewise taken going to Candie, to bee armed there with men and munition.
The Senate were greatly vexed that the Genoueses after so notable a losse receiued the yeare before, had in so short time raised themselues againe, in such manner, as the Venetians could hardly assure any place abroade, nor yet their Gulphe at home. And because they knew that the Genoueses were thus strengthened by theThe Venetian Senate displ^ased with Visconte. They make alliance with the King of Boheme. aide of Visconte, they resolued to wrap him in a Domesticke warre, to cause him to  forsake them. They determined then to renue their alliance with Charles King of Boheme, with whom not long before they were allied against Mastin of Escalla. That being done, it was concluded that he should passe with a mightie Armie into Italie against Visconte. And in the meane time the Venetians exchanged prisoners with the Genoueses.
Andrea Dandulo hauing gouerned the Common-wealth almost twelue yeares, deceased. After his death the Common-wealth was greatly afflicted abroade, and at home, during the most dangerous gouernment of Phalerio who succeeded him. For besides the sundry losses which it sustained at Sea in his time, it was assailed by two insupportable mischiefs, famine, and pestilence, and with terrible Earthquakes: And it escaped narrowly from loosing her liberty likewise, by his Deuilish conspiracie. Dandulo died the sixt of September, and was honourably buried in S. Markes Church, neare to the Font.




 MARINI PHALERIO, the 55. Duke of Uenice.








MArini Phalerio Knight, and Earle of Val-Marine, being absent, was declared Prince. He was at the same time Ambassador for the Common-wealth, to the Pope: At the same time as the Senate were busied about the election of a new Prince, newes came that three Genoa Gallies were taken by the Venetians, neare to the Islands of Greece: The enemies Armie likewise entring the Adriatick Gulph tooke certaine Merchant ships, and hauing in a short space gotten a great bootie, departed as speedily as they came.
After the election of Phalerio, Pisani who commanded abroade for the Commonwealth, and did alone at that time conduct that mightie Venetian Sea-Armie of fiue and thirtie Gallies, and two and twentie lesser vessells, hauing notice that the enemies were abroade came and cast Ankor, and waited for them in the Isle of Sapientia, neare to Morea. Doria, Generall of the Genoueses came thither so soone as hee,The Venetian Armie in the Isle of Sapientia. with an intent to fight. Blondus saith, that they fought at Sea neare to the Island, and that after a long and dangerous combat, the Genoueses got the victorie: Pisani being taken prisoner with fiue thousand beside. If they did fight, and imploied their whole forces, the fortune of Pisani and the rest is to be excused, because the euents of warre are diuers and vncertaine, and in mine opinion he is to be praised, in that he rather chose to die, or to be taken, than basely to flie. But the Venetian Histories The Venetian Armie surprized say, that the whole Armie was lost that day without fight or slaughter, one Galley excepted, which escaped. If it be so, wee may assuredly thinke that the Venetians were surprised by the Genoueses in the same manner, as the Venetians did the Genoueses certaine yeares before at Chariste, vnder the command of the same

Pisani, (as some say) and that he was taken in his owne snare, and that the losse was much greater to the Commonwealth than the enemie knew of.
It is reported that the day before this vnfortunate losse, diuers prodigies appeared(...) (...) (...) the (...) of the (...). to them* and among the rest a great number of Crowes fought ouer the fleet, part of which were so beaten by their aduerse partie, as the fethers and bloud dropped downe abundantly into the Venetian gallies: Besides, a sayler leaping out of one gallie into another, was on a sodaine swallowed vp by a sea-monster. The Citie beingGreat discomfort in Venice. troubled at the report of this losse, the people said that they neuer receiued a greater: and they did beleeue that their state would haue beene wholly ouerthrowne, if the victorious Genoueses should at that instant haue come directly to the Citie. Where  was their Captaine? where their Gallies? where were their forces readie to haueThe Genoueses Generall his error. beaten him forth of the hauen, and to haue defended the Citizens? They would haue beene wholly ruinated, if the enemie (as it often happeneth, not knowing how to make vse of his victorie) had not sailed some where else, as of a certaine it fell so out. For victorious Doria satisfying himselfe with his fortunate exploite, returned with his whole Armie to Genoa: where being no lesse admired for this notable victorie, than for the bootie of which he brought home, he was welcomed with great ioy, and generall applause of all men.
But the Venetians (as their constancie in aduersities hath euer beene admirable)The Venetians diligence. did not spend this small time of relaxation from warre in idlenes, but did forthwith  leuie new forces, and in a short space did set forrh foure armed gallies to guard the Gulph. Yet neuerthelesse they were not so soone readie, but that three of the enemies gallies hauing before entred the Gulph, tooke certaine ships of burthen returningTr^ce taken with Visconte. from Candie to Venice, which would haue greatly molested the inhabitants of Histria and Dalmatia, if their attempts had not beene speedily resisted.
In this state stood their affaires, when as on the landside truce was taken for foureA great brauerie of a G^noueses g^lley. monethes with Visconte. But in the meane time a galley of Genoa called Grimaldi meeting on the coast of Morea with the same Venetian gallie, which as we said did escape from Sapientia, tooke it, then soone after another wherein was Guido Tre^sano the Gouernour of Candie, and soone after, another in the hauen of Frascane: And the boldnesse of the galley was such, as it sailed from thence to get bootie euen as farre as Grada. The Venetians not being able to endure so great a disgrace sent forth three gallies, not onely to hinder her from committing any further harme, but to be reuenged for what had beene alreadie done. The charge thereof was committed to Nicholao Iustiniano, who with those forces went to expulse the enemie.
Phalerio in the meane time hauing gouerned the Commonwealth nine wholeThe manner of Phalerio ^is conspiracie. moneths, was possessed with a desire to make himselfe king thereof, whereunto this wicked man had almost opened the way. This enemie to his owne countrey, and to the Senate who had elected him to the dignitie, did determine to seize vpon the seignorie, and to kill the chiefe of the Senate: And the more easily to effect it, hee had hired diuers of the common sort to exhort this wretched murther, and some likewise (which is to be admired) of the nobilitie, so as mischiefe doth euer find fauourers. The murther was committed to sixteene euill disposed persons, who were of the chiefe of the conspiracie, all which had a day appointed them to come to the Pallace with threescore more well armed. They concluded among themselues that on the fourteenth day of Aprill, they would cast false reports about the Citie, ThatA day appointed for the execution. the enemie was at hand, and that his gallies were alreadie before the hauen, at which rumour the Prince should forth with commaund all men to take Armes, and cause the great bell of the high Tower to be rung. At which signall, those of the conspiracie  comming forth of their houses well armed, should by sundrie waies come to the Pallace to receiue the Prince and Senates commaundement, where seizing on the gates, they should kill all the Senators, with as many as were come thither to debate on matters concerning the Commonwealth, and generally the whole Nobilitie,

and then Phalerio should no more be called Duke but Lord. Some say that they resolued so soone as they should haue disanulled the order of the Senators, to commit the gouernment of the Citie to the people.
But it is most certaine that a Commonwealth well gouerned hath still beene beloued of God, and much more when it is gouerned by iustice, so, as of all earthly gouernments,Aristocratia repu^ th^ be^ of (...). I thinke the same to be most pleasing vnto him which Plato calleth Aristocratia, which doth not obey the commaundement of one alone, and which being most good, (as well in opinion of that learned man, as in the iudgement of all wise men,) hath euer beeene esteemed most worthie of praise: Because it is a true agreement and vnion of the chiefer sort; and such is the gouernment of the state of Venice: which hauing beene oftentimes preserued before by the diuine prouidence, was of a certaine much more at this instant. For succour came to the Senators from thence where they least of all expected it. There was a man called Beltrand a popular person,By what meanes the plot was d^scouered. and one of the chiefe of the conspiracie. He the verie night before this massacre should haue beene committed, being prouoked (as it is to be thought) with repentance for so horrible a crime, came secretly the euening of the same night to the house of Nichalao Leon one of the Senators, and his gossip, and hauing taken him aside, discouered the whole matter: telling him, That being stirred vp with loue to his country, and with an exceeding great affection to the Senate, he could not conceale  such a mischief. And after he had named the chiefe of the conspiracie with Phalerio, he be sought him that he would haue him in remembrance, that it might not be imputed to him for a fault, that hee had at the beginning consented to the conspiracie against the Senate and his countrey. Leon was amazed, and with the heinousnesse of the matter, could not for a time make him an answere, but the feare of the publike and particular danger awaked him. Beltrand being gone home, he speedily sent for the chiefe of the Senat, those of the councell of the ten, and other officers of the Citie to come to speak with him. So soone then as the Senators were come to his house, and such of the co^mon sort as had not bene named by the accuser to haue beene acquainted with the plot: those sixteene which were chiefe of the conspiracie,The chiefe conspirators punished. An excellent Architect punished with the rest. were the same very night apprehended, and being conuicted of the crime, were murthered, and with ropes let downe from the top of the Pallace vpon the Columnes. It is reported that Philippo Calandriero was one of the number, who was one of the best architects and engrauers of his time, whose skill the Senate had vsed in their publike buildings. It is thought that the new buildings as well in the ducall Pallace as in the market-place, which doth much exceed the old, was of his workmanship. I would haue concealed his name, if I had not thought it a cruell deed to depriue so excellent a wit of his praise. For in this matter, whereof we now spake, I am soWhy the Author doth not name those that were guiltie of the conspiracie. farre from mentioning the names of the conspirators, as on the contrarie, I thinke those that haue named them, to haue done indiscreetly, who in thinking thereby to  shame them, haue for euer made them inrolled. For there is no man how wicked soeuer, but doth in some sort desire to leaue some remembrance of himselfe to posteritie: witnesse that vnknowne fellow, who of set purpose did burne the Temple of Diana in Ephesus, who being demaunded wherefore he did it; answered that he determined by some notable villanie seeing by vertue he could not) to leaue some memorie behinde him after his death. It is said, that for to raze out his remembrance, it was decreed that none should set downe his name in histories: The which was wisely done. For it was a greater punishment to quench his memorie, than to take away his life. Domesticke examples might haue remembred our Citizens of their dutie: For after Tepulo his conspiracie, the Senate expresly forbad, that none should dare to write, paint, or engraue, the name or armes of Baiamont, nor of any  of his complices. And besides, whereas our ancestors would haue the effigies of all the Princes from the beginning of the Citie vntill that present time, to be representedPhalerio his pict^re razed out in the great hall. in order in the hall of the great councell: to the end that the picture of wicked Phalerio should not be seene in the ranke of Princes, they decreede that his place

should remaine void, and be couered with a blacke vaile. Their opinion was that they could no sharplier punish those who had transgressed against the Commonwealth, than wholy to blot out their remembrance. And we in like manner, hauing named the authors of the conspiracy, because it should be knowne who had in times past conspired against the countrey, haue expresly concealed the name of the rest for to punish them thereby, as we haue done others.
Phalerio likewise was by the Senates commaundement the same day punishedPhalerio is put to death. with death, his bodie was carried into a little boate to the Church of the Twinnes, being accompanied by eight Sergeants, who carried torches. It is reported thatSundrie punishments of the conspirators. commissioners who were appointed to enquire of this matter, did discouer in eight  daies space aboue foure hundred: A great many of them were put to death, some were hanged, others beheaded, and some were flung into the Sea. Diuers were pardoned, who had promised to aide the conspirators, but they were not made acquainted with their practise: but they were so noted, as some for shame, and for feare, forsooke the Citie with their wiues and children, the number of whom was about fiue hundred: Phalerio his Pallace was giuen to the Church of the holy Apostle.
He which discouered the conspiracie was not onely pardoned, but they gaueThe discouerer of the conspiracie recompenced with his discontent. him a yearely pension of a thousand duckates, and besides, a Senators place: But he thinking it a meane recompence for such a peece of seruice, did publikely accuse  them of ingratitude, detracting from them in euerie place. The Senate being prouoked at his impudencie, had like to haue put him to death, but the remembrance of his late good seruice made them to abstaine: whereupon, hauing taken from him the publike recompence, he was banished for ten* yeares to Ragusa. FromMarco Cornari vice-Duke during the trouble^ whence departing before the prefixed time, hee died in his iourney towards Hungarie. During these troubles Marco Cornari gouerned the Commonwealth as Vice-Prince. Then at the next assembly Giouanni Gradonico surnamed Naso, was chosen Duke.




 GIOVANNI GRADONICO surnamed NASO, the 56. Duke of Venice.





ABout the same time Bernardo Iustiniano, departed from Venice with seuen  gallies: He hauing fortunately scoured the Seas for a time, did greatly molest the Genoueses, and would haue done much more, if peace had not opportunely ensued for the good of either people, this warre hauing lasted fiue yeares. Order was diligently taken for both

of them, and with their allies, and Armes were laid aside, as well by Sea as Land,Peace betwixt the Venetians and the Genoueses with their allies. A religious and godly act. against Bernabo and Galeas Viscount who succeeded Iohn. Then the prisoners taken in the warres were on each side set at libertie: whereupon the Genoueses to the number of two thousand being deliuered on the feast day of Marie Magdalen, went by couples, carrying each of them a burning taper in his hand to giue thanks vnto God at the Church of the same Saint. This spectacle moued the whole Citie to deuotion, so as euer since, that feast-day hath beene solemnized, which before then was not obserued.

The end of the third Booke of the second Deead.







THE FOVRTH BOOKE OF THE SECOND DECAD OF THE HISTORIE Of Venice.

The Contents of the fourth Booke of the second Decad.
THe truce being expired, LEWIS King of Hungarie allieth himselfe with the Carrarians and the Patriarch of Aquileia, and at one time assaileth the Venetiaris in Italie and Dalmatia. The same King returneth into Hungarie, hauing spent some time in vaine before Treuiso, and leaueth certaine troupes there to continue the siege. The Paduans forbidden to traficke at Venice. A troupe of mercenarie Almans defeated by the Hungarians neere to the Riuer Brente. The Generallreuolt of Dalmatia from the Venetians in fauour of King LEWIS: Peace with the same King. Two Venetian Ambassadours sent to the Emperour, are taken in Germanie by theeues. The Duke of Austria rescueth those Ambassadours, and bringeth  them backe to Venice. The Nobilitie of Candie reuolt from the Venetians. LVCHIN VERMIO goeth into the Island with great forces. The Venetians vanquish the Greekes neere to Mount Strombula, who retire to Candace. The Venetians recouer the Citie of Candace. The Island being quieted, Tilts and Turneyes were made in the Citie for ioy of the victorie. The King of Cyprus in the companie of the Venetian Armie taketh Alexandria in Egypt. A new sedition in Candie worse than the former, so soone as the troupes were gone forth of the Island. Those of the Island being a long time very much molested, and their forces at the last broken, submit themselues to the Venetians obedience. The rebellion of the Thriestines. The Venetians victorie ouer the Duke of Austria at Thrieste. Strife betwixt the Venetians and Paduans concerning their limits.

ARmes being laid a side by Sea and by Land, and the The Venetians restored to their vsuall trafficke* Citie restored to her ordinarie trafficke, diuers shippes sailed to Cyprus, and to other Faires and Martes of the Aegean Sea, who for their more safetie (for albeit they feared not the Genoueses, yet the incursions of the Barbarians kept them in much awe) had certaine armed Gallies for their conuoy commanded by Bernardo Iustinian, who hauing brought them to a safe Port, returnedThe Earledome of Val-marin fallen to the Uenetians by Phalerio his d^ath. speedily into Dalmatia: from whence hauing taken order for the affaires of the Prouince he brought  backe his Armie in safetie to Venice. Giouanni Baldo was the first that was sent to gouerne Val-marin: that Earledome being fallen to the Venetians by the death of Phalerio.
This yeare about the Spring-time (because the rumour was that Lewis King of

Hungarie made preparations against the Venetians) Marco Cornari, and Marin Grimani were sent into Hungarie, from whence they returned within a while after, hauing found the Hungarian disposed to Warres. Some Authors affirme that the cause of the Kings hatred to the Venetians, was, because they denied him shippingThe cause of the warre betwixt the venetians and the King of Hungarie. for the passage of his Armie into Italie, at such time as hee would haue made warre on Queene Ioane. But it is most certaine that this King was vanquished by the Venetians at Zara, before that he beganne any warre in Italie. But whether it were on this occasion, or for any other, as some say (for wee know not herein whom to follow) without all doubt the Ambassadours were sent into Apulia to the Hungarian who (as some Authors say) made truce with him for eight yeares, and as others say  for ten. But at the beginning of the Genoueses warre, (albeit the time of the truce was not yet fully expired) he beganne to quarrell with the Venetians about Dalmatia, and there were presumptions that hee would forth-with make warre vpon them, had not the mediation of the Emperour Charles the fourth caused him to giue ouer, who commanded him to stay till the truce was ended: whereupon he deferred the warre till this present: which the Senate plainly foreseeing, made them (as it is thought) to hasten the peace with the Genoueses, the which they had before denied them, when they stubbornely craued it: to the end that being freed from the Genoan warre, they might with more ease intend the other, as they had done.
Some Annales make mention how that Cornari and Grimani the Ambassadours,What tribute the King of Hungary demanded of the venetians. might at the same time haue easily shunned that warre, if they would in the Common-wealths name haue promised him, a white horse, as a yearely tribute for Dalmatia. The Venetians not intending thereby to wrong their right to Dalmatia refused it, whereupon so soone as the truce was expired, hee entred furiously into Dalmatia, without farther denouncing of warre. It is reported that at his first comming,The King of Hungarie his great Armie in Dalmatia. he brought so great an Armie, as at one time he besieged Zara, Scia, Spalatra, Trahu, and Nona. The Venetians (who doe nothing rashly) measuring the enemie by themselues, did not imagine that he would so soone haue beene in the field, by reason whereof they had not furnished the Prouince with necessaries. But when they heard how that all the Cities almost of Dalmatia were besieged by the Hungarians, they speedily prouided shipping, Souldiers, munition, and victualls, and therewith furnished all those Cities, and hauing taken this order, they thought that the Cities, Islands, and Castles, should be so sufficiently and faithfully defended by those whom they had sent thither, as in the end, the warre should be tedious to the Hungarians: when on a sodaine, because he would keepe the Venetians occupied in sundrie places, hauing secretly allied him selfe with Francisco Carrario, he passed intoThe King of Hungarie allieth himselfe with Carrario. Italie with a hundred thousand fighting men, without the great supplies of the Duke of Austria, and the Patriarch of Aquilea, and came and encamped on the Treuisani. The Earles of Colalta with diuers other Lordes, did on a sodaine take part with the Hungarian, who in a short space tooke Coniglian by composition, where  Zacharie Contareno was Gouernour, after that Sacilla, and from thence he came andThe King of Hungarie besiegeth Treuiso. besieged Treuiso. The Venetians albeit they were sufficiently busied in Dalmatia, yet neuerthelesse vpon the first newes of the Kings comming into Italie, they fortified Treuiso with victualls and munition, and sent thither Marco Iustiniano, Giouanni Delfino, and Paulo Loretano, that they might together prouide for the affaires of the warre. The King in the meane time hauing published the alliance with Prince Carrario, forbad on paine of life that none should forrage or spoile the Territorie of Padua vpon any occasion whatsoeuer.
The Common-wealth being thus wrapped in so great a warre, Prince Gradonico died, hauing gouerned one yeare and two Moneths, and was honourably buried in  the Church of the Friers Minors.




 GIOVANNI DELFINO, the 57. Duke of Uenice.


GIouanni Delfino being absent was subrogated in his sted. He being called  from Treuiso, where he executed his Office, could not obtaine any safe conduct from the King, who lay in Camp not far from thence, for his free passage. We may hereby easily perceiue, how much thisThe Duke of Venice is denied a passe-port. King was incensed against the Venetians: yet neuerthelesse hee came forth of the Citie at the same time, on the back-side thereof, being well accompanied. It is not certainly knowne whether the Citie were assailed before or after the Dukes departure: Those whom we follow doe greatly varie herein: All Authors agree in this, that the King hauing made an approch, with his engines of batterie did Treuiso brauely defended. furiously assaile the Citie; and that at this assault diuers of his Captaines died there, and among the rest, one of his owne neare Kinsmen, and that the Citie was brauely defended by the Venetians.
The King being wearied that his affaires went no better forward, and out of hope at that time to take the Citie, leauing certaine troupes to continue the siege, hee returned into Hungarie. The Venetians being incensed against Carrario, called homeThe Venetians incensed against Carrario. Marini Morosino their Magistrate from Padua, (for that Citie euer since it was freed from the Tyrannie of Mastin, had still a Venetian Magistrate,) they commanded moreouer that none should carrie them any salt, and the Citizens were forbidden to traffick any more with the Paduans. Then they leuied forces in Germanie, the  which being come through the territorie of Vincenza, were incamped on the banks of the Riuer Brente. This Riuer was swelled by reason of the raine, and growne so deepe, as it could by no meanes be Foorded, whereby the Almaine troupes were constrained to tarrie on the banks, till such time as the water being fallen, that they might passe ouer and ioyne with the Venetians, whereof those of the Camp being aduertized by their Spies, speedily sent certaine troupes of theirs to surprize the Almaines,The Almaines defeated through their owne default. who dreamed on no such matter. Their attempt was not vaine: For the whole companie by the vnexpected comming of the enemies, was broken and put to flight, and the greatest part of them slaine on the place.
In the meane time Marco Iustiniano, surnamed the Great, was sent to Treuiso to  command there in Giouanni Delfino's sted. Not long after, fiue and twentie Senators were appointed to ouer-see the affaires of the Warre: And shortly after truce being taken with the enemie for fiue Moneths, Ambassadours were sent into Hungarie toPeace refused on vniust conditions. the King, to treate of peace, namely, Andrea Contareni, Michaeli Phalerio, and Bonitendio

the Secretarie: But they returned without effecting what they went for. In this interim, the truce being expired, the enemie tooke Serrauall. But the Common-wealth receiued a great losse in Dalmatia. For the maine warre being in Italie, the Senate were constrained to draw the greatest part of their forces forth of the Prouince, and not being able by reason of their Domestick warre, to raise the siege of Spalatra, Sacco, Trahu, and of diuers other small Townes not far from thence, they were all yeelded to the King. Enona wherein Giouanni Iustiniano commandedA Citie brauely defended. was brauely defended, and famine it selfe could not daunt the courage of the generous Venetian, to cause him in any sort consent to yeeld. It is reported that the scarcitie of all necessaries was so great in Enona, as the Souldiers abstained not from  eating all manner of meates, how vile and vnholesome soeuer. The enemie likewise surprized Zara, and it was supposed to be done by the practize of Carrario; yet neuerthelesse the Castle held still out for the Venetian.
Now the Venetians holding the affaires of Dalmatia for lost, and those of Treuiso hauing beene a long time in great hazard, they resolued againe to send Ambassadours to the King to conclude a peace with him on such conditions as they could.The Venetians enforced to sue for peace. A peace more necessarie than honourable for the Uenetian. Pietro Treuisano, Giouanni Gradonico, and the Secretarie Bonitendio were sent thither, who obtained peace on these conditions, That whatsoeuer the Venetians had till then possessed from the Fanatick Gulph, euen to Durazzo, should remaine to King Lewis: and that the Venetians should wholly giue ouer their right to Dalmatia: As  concerning the other Lands which lay neare to the Gulphe, and on the hither side thereof, the Venetians should haue the one halfe thereof; and that the King should redeliuer to the Venetians whatsoeuer hee had taken from them in Histria, in the Treuisan, and in the Countie of Ceneda: promising, not to suffer any Dalmatian to vse the trade of a Pyrate, nor to come into their Ports, and Islands, and that he would take order that the nauigation should be as free and safe along the coast of Dalmatia for the Venetians, as it had beene in times past. By reason of this peace more necessarie than Honourable, the Venetian Princes left Dalmatia forth of their Titles. Their Officers, which they had there, being called home, were not permitted toThe King infringeth the peace. bring thence their goods, albeit it was expresly mentioned in the treatie of peace, that it should be lawfull for all Venetians who were then dwelling in Dalmatia, to ship away their goods and moueables, which they held in the Prouince. Herein the Hungarian infringed the Articles of peace, by not fulfilling the contents thereof: But the Venetians thought it best, in so dangerous a season, to dissemble thatThe Venetians wisedome. wrong, rather than to reuenge it by a new Warre.
Peace then being made with Lewis, three Ambassadors were sent into Germanie to the Emperour Charles; Marco Cornari, Giouanni Gradonico, and Lorenzo Celso. The Historians make no mention why they were sent. Two of them, hauing left Celso with the Emperour, returning home-wards without effecting what they went for, and passing through Germanie, were surprized by a Prince of the Countrie, and The Venetian Ambassadours taken prisoners in Germanie. basely carried away by force into a Castle, an absolute place of retreat for theeues. Celso vnderstanding what had hapned to his fellowes, came by an other way to Seigna, and from thence to the Sea-side, from whence hee safely sailed to Venice. Within a while after he was sent with an Armie for the guard of the Gulphe: About the spring-time of this yeare, the contagious sicknesse began againe: The Sommer following, Prince Delfino died, the fifth yeare of his Gouernment scarcely expired: and was buried in the Church of the Twinnes.





 LORENZO CELSO, the 58. Duke of Venice.


LOrenzo Celso being absent was chosen in his place. Twelue of the Senate  were speedily in the Common-wealths name sent to congratulate him, and to bring him in a Galley to Venice. When he drew neare to the Citie, the whole Senate went to meet him, and receiued him in the Bucentauro. Victor Pisani was sent in his sted to guard the Gulph It is reported that the Princes Father did for a time forbeare to come and see his Sonne, because he would not be enforced to salute him bare-headed, as though it had beene an vnseemely and vnheard-off matter, to see a Father inferiour to his  Sonne in dignitie. But hee behaued himselfe herein, I will not say vndiscreetly, though like an ignorant person: he was so vnskilfull in the affaires of the world, and customes of his owne Countrie, that hee did not vnderstand that the same Honour was not giuen to his Sonne, but to the Majestie of the Common-wealth represented in him. It may be that he had heard (and so he was the more to be excused) the discourses of morall Philosophers, which make a question, Whether a Father ought to giue place to his Sonne, being inuested with soueraigne dignitie. Those which are best learned in that discipline, say, That in publike he ought to doe so, but that at home and in priuate, the Sonne ought chiefly to honour and respect the Father.
About the same time, the Duke of Austria came to Venice with the Ambassadors,The Duke of Austria commeth to Ueni^^* which were (as hath beene said) surprized in Germanie. His comming thither was reported to be but only to see the Citie, which as hee had heard was builded on the marishes. The Prince with diuers of the Senate did honourably receiue him in the Bucentauro, and brought him to the Pallace of the Cornari, neare to Saint Lucies Church, prepared for him by the Common-wealth: who so soone as hee had seene the singularities of the Citie, and giuen them thanks both in generall and particular, for the curtesies which he had receiued, he returned into Germanie.
In the Winter-time of the same yeare, the King of Cyprus attended by a RoiallThe King of Cyprus commeth to Venice. traine, arriued with three Gallies at Venice; who being receiued likewise by the Common-wealth, and brought to the same lodging, where some few Moneths before the Duke of Austria had laine, did the morrow after in S. Marks Church Knight  Andreola, surnamed Giouanni, who was appointed Gouernour of Treuiso: Then departing for France, he was accompanied by Prince Celso, with the most part of the Senate as farre as Marghera.
In the Moneth of September the next yeare after that these two great Princes

had beene at Venice, a great rebellion hapned in Candie by the Venetians, whoGreat sedition in Candie. dwelled in the Island, whereby the Commonwealth had like to haue lost it. The Senate had decreed in regard of their excessiue charge for the wa^s to raise a certaine tribute on the Candiots. At the publishing of this decree, all the Gentlemen almostThe Gouernour of the Island imprisoned. (a few excepted) did on a sodaine reuolt, who laying hands on Leonardo Dandulo the Gouernour of the Island, and the Prouidatori, they surprized all the ships of burthen that were in the Hauen, which were come thither for the vintage, with all the merchants that were in it. In this ^umult they hastily chose Marco Gradonico surnamed Bayardo for their Captaine, who was (otherwise) a verie discreete person.
Dominico Michaeli, who at that time guarded the Gulph, hauing notice of this  tumult of the Candiots, did speedily send a Galley to aduertize the Prince and Senate thereof. These newes did greatly grieue the whole Citie, and that worthily, because the report was, that the Authors of the rebellion were of the chiefest families of Venice. What worse act could the Greekes and the Islanders haue committed, which were neither borne at Venice, nor issued from the Venetians? It was to be feared that they would haue kindled a greater flame, and would become executioners of other mens furie, being glad to behold the dominion and state of the Venetians to be dissolued by their quarrels and dissensions, seeing by other meanes they could not effect it. It was decreed to send three of the Senate to the chiefe of the Colonie, who should by exhortations and aduertisements put them  in mind of their dutie due to their countrey, and diuert them from their wicked designes, with ample authoritie to reduce them to their obedience, on such conditionsCommissioners sent into Candie to app^ase the troubles. as they should thinke most expedient. Pietro Souranza, Andrea Zeno, and Marco M^rofino were sent thither.
It is reported that fiue more did soone after follow them: but the first and last Ambassages were to no purpose, those of the Island not onely refusing to giue them audience, but to receiue them. The Ambassadors perceiuing that warre must needs end the businesse, determined to depart thence in the Venetian gallies, who returning from the Fai^es of Grecia, were by chance arriued there. The Captaine of the gallies being readie to hoist saile, did furiously seize vpon the inhabitants whom he  found in the Hauen, and at Sea, and brought away three hundred of them prisoners to Venice.
The Senate vpon the returne of the Commissioners, resolued by a generall consent, to make warre vpon those perfidious Colonies, and the residue of the Island, who had openly reuolted from their obedience, and did particularly banish diuers of the chiefe of the rebellion, whom they had proclaimed enemies to the Commonwealth:Ambassadors sent euery where against the Candiots. But first of all, they dispatched messengers to the Pope, the Emperour Charles, Lewis King of Hungarie, Ioane Queene of Sicily, and to all Christian Princes and people almost, to let them vnderstand of the treacherous and vnworthie rebellion of their Colonie in Candie; and to entreate them if they would not Aduertisement to Christian Princes against the Candiols. giue them aide and assistance to reuenge such an iniurie, at the leastwise not to hinder them from doing it, and that they would not aide their rebels, though they should request it; That they knew well enough that it was notorious to the whole world, that the Citie of Candace in Candie was a Colonie of the Venetians, and that the Venetians were scattered ouer the whole Island. That it was lawfull for Fathers when their children are stubborne and disobedient, and that they cannot by entreaties nor threatnings reduce them to their obedience, to vse the rod to chastice them. That the Venetians meaning was, seeing they could not by gentlenesse and faire meanes bring the Candiots to the remembrance of their dutie, to attempt to doe it by Armes: the which they did soone hope to doe, if they were not aided  by some forraine power. And that they should performe the parts of good Princes and true friends to the Venetians, if they would permit that perfidious Colonie, to receiue from their mother, vnto whom they owe theit being, the chasticement which it had deserued.
The Ambassadors were in all places friendly heard and entertained, and thereThe entertainement giuen by the christian Princes to the Venetian Ambassadors. Dominico Michaeli Generall of the venetians nauall ArmieLuchin Vermio of Verona, Generall of the land-Armie. The number of the land-Armie. was no man, but in detestation of the Candiots fact, did liberally offer them all assistance. In the meane time they leuied a mightie Armie, and made Dominico Michaeli Generall thereof, who was before, Prouidator of the Gulph; and the land-Armie was committed to Luchin Vermio of Verona who was expresly sent for to Venice for the same purpose: He hauing receiued his oath from the Prince well and faithfully to serue the Commonwealth, did forthwith receiue the publike ensignes: Great summes of money were leuied on the Citizens, as well to begin the warre as to continue it. Vermio, so soone as all the troupes were assembled, and the fleete readie, to the end he might not be ignorant with what forces he fought, made a general muster  of his Armie, and found that he had a thousand horse, and two thousand foote, not accounting the sailers, and those that ^owed in the gallies.
The fleete which consisted of three and thirtie gallies, and eight ships of burthen,The number of the fleete. leauing Venice on the ninth of Aprill, arriued about the seuenth of May at Fresca, a place verie neere to Candace. But during these preparations, certaine Gentlemen of Candace, hauing by chance vnderstood what had beene concluded at Venice after the returne of the Commissioners, and being certified that they were not of the number of the banished, hoping of pardon began secretly to fauor those which remained faithfull and obedient to the Venetians. For diuers at the beginning not allowing of such a wicked practize absented themselues from the Citie, and retired  to their Castles and Houses of pleasure in the Island. The chiefe Authors of theThe rebels feare reuolt, considering the great danger which threatned them, not onely from their enemies, but from their owne Citizens, were affraid least those whom they perceiued to wauer, would by some good offices practize somewhat against them by the aide of those which were absent. For there was likelihood that those who at the beginning had opposed themselues against their designes, would forthwith vpon the arriuall of the Venetian Armie fall vpon them: And notwithstanding that many of them were of sundrie opinions, yet no man durst propound that which one alone by the aduice of one particular person must presume to execute.
This man whosoeuer he was, dealt with one named Calergo, the Pneumaticke, and hauing set before him the entire dominion of the Island, perswaded him to kill all those, who did continue in the Venetians obedience; and for this purpose to draw great numbers of Greekes to his partie. This Calergo consented thereunto, and came first of all to Mopsilla, a pleasant countrey house, where he assailed Andrea Cornari,The miserable death of Andrea Cornari. and slew him. It is reported that Calergo had in times past beene his guest, and had beene euer succored and desended by him: And that so soone as Cornari saw him come armed, he did on a sodaine demaund wherefore he came: who made answere that he was sent to kill him. Whereupon he put him in minde of his ancient hospitalitie, and other good turnes which he had receiued from him, for which, he entreatedThe pretence of a murtherer to execute his enterprize. him not to kill the man vnto whom he was so infinitely bound. The murtherer  extolling libertie, said: That for it he would forget all hospitalitie and other bonds of friendship, and that he was come to deliuer his countrey (which men so decrely affect) from cruell bondage.
After Cornari his death, he did in sundrie places pursue diuers other faithfull seruantsDiuers slaine by the same murtherer. to the Venetians. Gabriel Veniero, Marini and Lorenzo Pascalis were slaine, one at his farme at Pulla, and the other at Melissa; Lorenzo Gritti, at Pestria, then Zannachio Iustiniano, and Leonardo Abraham with diuers others, who tasted the furious crueltie of the murtherer.
The Greekes waxing more bold by meanes of Calergo his executions, came withDemaund of the Greeke multitude. great arrogancie, and assailed the Nobilitie, saying, That they would haue ten naturall  Greeks to be of the Senate, and that in their absence nothing should be determined or concluded. But this base multitude, who at the beginning were foolish, hauing at the last lost all sence and reason, did by their continuall clamors affright the Senate, and threatned to breake open the prisons, if they did not deliuer them

all the Venetian prisoners that were there, that they might murther them.Threatnings of the Candiots.
In the meane time he that suborned Calergo, intending wholly to raze out the Latine name in the Island, sent for his murtherer to come to a certaine place two miles distant from the Citie to conferre with him about the betraying of the Citie: wishing rather that the gouernment of the Island should fall to Calergo and the Greeks than to the Venetians. Vpon the way he fell into the hands of those whom Marco Gradonico the Gouernour had sent for to take him. For the Gouernour with others, so soone as they heard tell that they had slaine the Venetian Geutlemen, whereunto not any but one man had consented, did presently send to seize vpon Calergo. For they feared that this Greeke hauing committed such a villainous deede,Calergo the mur therer taken. Exemplari^ punishment of Calergo. would still practize greater crueltie. This wicked man being taken, and brought to the Citie, in reuenge of the Venetian bloud which he had spilt, was thrown downe from the top of the Pallace vpon the point of swords, and his bodie being cut into diuers pieces, was cast vpon the Citie dunghill.
This spectacle was verie pleasing to the people. Whereby we may obserue, howThe lightnesse and inconstancie of the multitude great the inconstancie of a multitude is, which dependeth on the verie least motions: and that their loue or hatred respecteth not the deed, but onely the fortune of him whom they follow. A little before, those of Candace fauoured Calergo, but so soone as they saw him drawne to execution, they wholy forsooke him, and iudged him worthie of death. The nobilitie being daunted with those mischiefs and  with the great war like preparations which were made, the authors of the rebellion perceiuing that they could not of themselues long hold Candie at that stay, and though they could, yet were not their forces sufficient to resist the Venetians, they began to consult (for they resolued not to returne to the Venetians obedience) into whose hands they should commit the entire possession of the Island. The GenouesesThe Candiots resolue to yeeld to the Genouese. alone were held fittest for it, as well for their power by Sea, as for the ancient enuie which they did beare to the Venetian greatnesse. And therefore they concluded to send ten Ambassadors to Genoa, the one halfe Italians, and the other Greeks. Two of these being intreated to deliuer their opinion, did boldly answere that they thought it fittest to send to Venice to the Prince and Senate, offering (if A free speech of two Senators of Candie. they thought good) that they would not onely be of the Ambassade, but rather to take the whole charge vpon themselues if need were, assuring them in so doing, they should obtaine a generall pardon, to their great profit, and for the honour and dignitie of the Commonwealth.
On the contrarie, others being moued with enuie said, that it behooued them to^arco Gradonico murthered in the Pallace. send to Genoa. It is reported that Marco Gradonico, one of those who was of opinion to send to Venice, being called into the Senate, vnder pretence of some publike matter, was murthered by some of the contrarie part, who were hidden in the Chappell of the Pallace. And the residue who did in any sort seeme to leane to his opinion, were in danger likewise to haue beene murthered. They were diuers daies  consulting about this businesse, but at last the contrarie faction preuailing, the AmbassageThe Candiots send Ambassadors to Genoa. Georgio Molino Bishop of Ca^on. was resolued on for Genoa. VVherefore hauing made readie a galley for the Ambassadors, it hapned by chance that Georgio M^lino, Bishop of Coron, a man of singular affection towards his countrey, was at the same time in the Island, who hauing vnderstood of the Candiots reuolt, was come thither to procure (if he could) a peace, and as he was returning thence, (by reason he could not doe that he came for) one of those who at the beginning were of opinion to send to Venice, did secretly wish him to aduertize the Prince and Senate, that they had sent to Genoa to deliuer the Island into their hands.The venetian Prince and Senate send Ambassadors to Genoa. The Genoueses answere to the Candiots.
This being knowne at Venice by Molinos letters, Ambassadors were speedily dispatched  to Genoa, to entreate them not to meddle with the Isle of Candie, according as they had before time promised. The letters being read in open Senate, they answered the Candiots, That the Genoueses could not grant their request without breach of their publike faith; that they were verie sorie both in generall

and particular, that it was not lawfull for them to succour so noble an Island, and (as they vnderstood by that Ambass^de) which did greatly affect the Genoueses. They wished them therefore to depart, and to seeke aide elsewhere, and not to expect any from them: in regard they had sworne to the contrarie.
The Candiots being dismissed without any hope of aide, returned home to their houses. The Venetians in the meane time had made hast, and were come (as hathThe venetia^ Armie at Fresca. beene said) about the seuenth of May to Fresca. Betweene that place, and the Citie, there is a verie high hill, called Strombula, and neere to it two others, so neere the one to the other, as a farre off you would not thinke them to be three hils, but one. Towards the East there is in it a rough way, but so narrow as two armed souldiers can hardly march in front, and on each side are deepe downefals, and so vneasie to passe through, as the entrie of those places being stopped, a few men are able to keepe out many thousands. In one part of the mountaine which lieth beneath those narrow waies, great abundance of salt water issueth forth of a caue, which commeth (as it is thought) by secret conduits from the Sea, which is not farre f^om thence:Almiron. which place the Islanders call Almiron. Those warers are reported in VVinter to be somewhat fresh, in regard of the streames which fall downe into them from the neighbour mountaines, which make a small riuer (seruing for the vse of certain milles) which a mile thence on the North side entereth into the Sea. From the mouth of the riuer to the Citie by Sea, is but an open shallow Roade. The Armie  peraduenture landing at this place, an hundred souldiers comming rashly as farre as the milles were surprized by the enemie, and cut in peeces; from whom being dead, the Greekes pluckt out their tongues, and cut off their priuie members, tearing the one with their teeth, and wiping their hinder parts with the other. ThisThe Candioti crueltie to the venetians. reproach did more incense the Venetians against the Greeks, than the slaughter.
Michaeli so soone as hee had landed his troupes, went with the fleete, and besieged the Citie. Luchin before he passed any farther, spake to his souldiers in this manner.




Vermio his Oration to his Souldiers.
I Perswade my selfe that yee are not ignorant (hauing sailed so large a distance of Sea) of the cause why at this time yee are sent into this Island. We are come hither to punish the disloyaltie of the new inhabitants of Candace, who haue strayed from the naturall condition of Venetians, and also to chastice the audacious rashnesse of certaine Greekes. Now therefore by how much more the Venetians cause is most iust, by so much the more ought we to striue to get the victory for feare (which I would be sorie) least if we be ouer come through our owne negligence, the Venetians cause will be reported to be no better than their Armie. Yee are to fight with an enemie, who by nature is no souldier, nor experienced in Armes, who hath not throwne himselfe headlong into this warre for any trust he hath to his owne forces, but by his owne retchlesse temeritie. Besides, they haue neither cauallerie, Armour, nor forraine aide, nor indeed any thing wherein they may hope, sauing in their owne folly, by which they will be as easily ouerthrowne, as they haue inconsiderately cast themselues into this danger. One thing we may feare, which is, that being shut vp in their walles, they will thereby for a while depriue vs of our victorie. But being as they are proud and presumptuous, I hope they will sallie forth, which if they doe, and you being such as you ought to be, the victorie is ours. The place besides where we are, doth constraine vs to fight: for this Prouince is enuironed with the Sea, and in it we haue no place of retreate. Our fleete so soone as we were landed, hoysted their sailes, and is gone to besiege the Citie. We must then either die betwixt the shoare and these  moutaines, or with victorie march to the Citie, to meete againe with our fleete. And yet I doubt not, if any gallies were heere, and should see vs fight vpon the shoare, they would not receiue our fugitiue souldiers, but would rather put to Sea, and suffer vs to be slaine heere as base and cowardly people. I thought good to speake this vnto you, to the end ye may vnderstand,

that we must not onely fight valiantly, (for our cause is better, and we are valianter than they) but, whether we will or no, if we desire to liue, we must shew our selues couragious in regard of the difficultie of these places. Moreouer the wealth of this Island doth exhort vs to winne the victorie, whereof if we become masters, we may hope for a most rich bootie. Furthermore, the Venetians are, and haue alwaies beene rewarders os braue and valorous men, who being mindfull of your worth, will or daine perpetuall pensions for the best amongst you, and indeed for all, if you doe all shew your selues worthie men. To conclude, if no other thing inuite you to play the men, yet ought the example of your Captaine to prouoke you thereunto. I commaund you then to goe out with the selfe same courage as ye shall see me your Captaine to march with. He is not worthie to be termed a souldier, but a base Bisonian, who whilest his Captaine shall fight, doth shamefully retire from the battell. For my owne part, if I shall perceiue any one to ma^ch fearefully to the fight, I will be as great an enemie vnto him, as to the Greekes against whom wee fight.




Vermio hauing spoken thus to his Souldiers, commaunded euery one to bee in a readinesse to march against the enemie. The Greekes in the meane time who were sent to guard the streights of the mountaines, waxing more proud for their last victorieThe Candiots errour. (as I thinke) leauing the hilles with a desire to fight, came downe into the bottome to assaile the Venetians. Vermio would not loose so faire an aduantage, but sodainely set his forces in order of battaile. The Candiots were at the first brunt in a manner broken, and so narrowly pursued by the victorious Venetian, who would not giue them time to knit their forces together (which they attemptedThe Candiots defeated. to doe in those streights) as they sought to escape by manife^t flight. The Italians followed them at the heeles and slew them euerie where, so that more were slaine in the flight than in combat: diuers hauing throwne away their Armes escaped into the mountaines, but greater numbers did with an head-long race draw the enemie neere to the walles. It is reported that the Venetians followed them so courageously as they lost many of their people at the Citie gates. Those of Candace beingThe Citie of Candace yeelded daunted with this losse, and perceiuing themselues to be besieged by Sea and Land, despairing of forraine aide, began forthwith to treate of yeelding. Wherefore after they had taken the Venetians faithfull promise, that the poore inhabitants  should not be molested either in bodies or goods, they sent by night the keyes of the Citie to Michaeli and to the Prouidatori. Vermio being commaunded to enterThe Venetians Souldiers readie to mutinie. with a few troupes; the gates were shut after him, so as the Souldiers were deceiued of the bootie they hoped for. There had like to haue beene a mutinie in the Campe; and there wanted no setters on to cause them not only to mutinie but absolutely to reuolt, accusing Vermio, and Michaeli the Generall of the Sea-Armie, for depriuing the Soldiours of the bootie which they had wonne by their valour.Vermio app^aseth it. But Vermio hauing vnderstood their discontentment, came amongest them, and after he had sharpely rebuked the Authours of the mutinie, he so farre preuailed with the Prouidatori, as they presently gaue them double paie, and by this meanes the  matter was appeased. Diuers of the enemies finding themselues guiltie of this rebellion, and despairing of pardon, would in this tumult haue taken Armes, but they were in a moment apprehended: The new Gouernour lost his head, so did all the Authours of the rebellion and diuers others fled. The Ambassadours who at theThe rebells punished. same time were returned by chance from Genoa, falling into the Venetians hands, were punished according to their deserts.
The newes, first of the victorie and then of the taking of the Citie of Candace,Great ioy at Venice for the recouerie of Candy did greatly reioyce the Senate and the whole Citie. Thanks was giuen to Almightie God in the Churches. prisoners were set at libertie; and diuers poore maides were married with the publique purse. Tilts and Turnaments continued for certaine  dayes in the Market-place of Saint Marke by young Gentlemen, with sumptuous preparation, who were fiue and twentie in number, each of them furnishing fiue hundred crownes for the scaffoldes and other expences. The King of Cyprus being returned forth of France was present at it, and fought at Barriers with

the sonne of Vermio, a braue young man, and of great hope. Some say that Vermio himselfe was one of the Iudges at the Tilt. If it were so wee must not beleeue that this publique shewe was so soone made. It is reported that one named PascalisWho wonne the honour at the turn^y. M^not, who came with the sonne of Vermio, wanne the glorie of the turney, and that the victorie was adiudged to him: which was a Crowne of gold, of the valew of three hundred and threescore Crownes.
The Island being quiet and reduced vnder the Venetians obedience, the victorious Armie returned to Venice. But the alliance made with the King of Cyprus, was the occasion of setting forth a new Armie, wherewith the Cypriot soone after surprised and spoiled the famous Citie of Alexandria in Aegypt. But hee could  not tarrie long there, by reason of the great numbers of Barbarians which daily ranne thither, whereupon the third day after his entrie, hee was constrained to dislodge and brought backe his Armie to Cyprus, laden with spoile. Prince Celso afterA new commotion in Candie. he had gouerned three yeares and tenne moneths died. His bodie was buried in the Caelestines. Marco Cornari was chosen in his place.




 MARCO CORNARI, the 59. Duke of Uenice.





AT the beginning almost of his gouernment a new reuolt happened in Candie, fiercer than that whereof wee now spake. Diuers Greeke Gentlemen, who in the last stirres had in some sorte fauoured the rebells, were quiet till Vermio his troupes, and the nauall Armie were gone forth of the Island. For hauing then fortified the places which belonged to either partie, and then from day to day practising other nouelties, they did not cease to disturbe the peace of the Island, vntill they had caused all places to Arme against the Venetians.
It is reported that Iohn Calergo was the Authour of the troubles who was oneWho was the Authour of the new commotion. of the noblest families of the Island. He hauing set vp the ensignes of the Greeke Empire proclaimed euery where, That it was done for the protection of the Isle of Candie, exhorting all those who loued their libertie to follow him. Diuers being amazed, tooke Armes. Those which followed him, first of all sware to destroy the  nobilitie; after they came on the sodaine and furiously assailed Nicholao Dandulo, andThe death of Nicholao Dandulo and his brother. his brother; and hauing murthered them they seised on their Castels. Nicholao Iustiniano Prouidator, and Dominico Molino, leauing the Citie, to resist Calergo his attempts, tooke certaine places from the rebels which they burnt. Those of Calergo

his faction on the other side being sodainely come to the Suburbes of Castel-nouoThe spoiles made by the Candiots. which belonged to the Venetians, which were newly inhabited, burnt them to ashes. But the Towne being brauely defended by Pietro Treuisano the Prouidator, they were shamefully put to flight; and from thence they came and seized on Rethimna: Those which were within it for the guarde thereof, despairing of abilitieRethimna taken by the ^ehells. to defend it in regard of their small number, leauing their horses behinde them, went to Sea and came to Candie. The Greekes after they had driuen away the Venetians from diuers places who had newly inhabited the Island, pursued the course of their victorie, and ceased not till they had made all that which lieth towards the West from Thalis vnto the Promontorie of Spatha, to reuolt from the  Venetians: the Townes and certaine Castles excepted. This reuolt being reportedWhy the Venetians were troubled at this new s^irre. at Venice put the Senate in meruailous care to begin the warre againe; which was the more grieuous vnto them, by how much they had thought the affaires of Candie to be safer than at any time before. The Prince and Senate commaunded those who were in the Island to leuie forces from all partes, and to procure horsemen out of Licia, Caria, and Ionia, if they could get none elsewhere. They sentThe Popes indulgences against the Candiots. likewise to the Pope (the which they easily obtained) to intreate him to grant plenarie Indulgences of all sinnes commitred till that time, to all those, who would take Armes against those perfidious Candiots.
This was done in Italie, whilest the Islanders being vanquished by Nicholao Iustiniano at the foote of the hilles Lasithes, with the losse of diuers of their troupesThe Ca^diots defeated. they were diuerted from their attempts. For their meaning was to haue seized on the mountaines; but I know not whether it were to saue and defend themselues, or rather from thence to assaile their enemies by a sodaine and vnexpected comming vpon them. Moreouer, the Greekes all the winter made sundrie and different attempts, against which the Prouidatori did with great diligence opportunely opposeNew Prouidatori sent with supplies to the Isla^d. themselues. Giacomo Bragadino, Paulo Loretano, Pietro Mocenigo, Lorenzo Dandulo, and Andrea Zeno were sent into the Island as new Prouidatori: They had commaundement likewise to leuie Souldiers as well horse as foote from all places.
Hauing receiued the old bands, and added new supplies to them, they were readie  to march against the enemie, when newes was brought them, that after they had leuied great numbers of Souldiers, and attempted in vaine to take the Citie of Maluicina, they had scattered themselues ouer the Territorie of Cydon, and had put all to fire and sword which they knew to belong to the Venetians, and to bee newly inhabited. This was done on the Sea-coast, whilest in the middest of the Island, fiue and twentie hundred of the enemies, came and incamped themselues at one time neere to Agatia and Melissa. Giacomo Bragadino speedily marched againstThe Candiots defeated and put to ^light by Ciacomo Bragadino. them with foure hundred horse and fifteene hundred foote; they fought there verie fiercely: where those of the Island being broken and defeated, diuers were slaine in the battaile, but the number of the Prisoners exceeded who were all hanged;  some few which fled in great feare, got into the next mountaines. The Venetian departed and set fire on the Farme-houses and villages of the enemies spoiling euerie where round about.
Thus stood the state of the Island when on a sodaine the inhabitants of fifteeneFifteene villages reuolt. Villages reuolted, who fearing to be defeated in open field retired with their wiues and children intto the mountaines of Lasithes where they were forthwith assisted by the cheefest of the Rebellion. Diuers others did the like, who for their more safetie betooke themselues to those mountaines.
The forces of the Greekes being thus augmented, they were not satisfied with defendingGreat boldnesse of the reb^lls. themselues, but trusting to their great numbers, they came cheerefully  and spoiled the Countrie of those who had continued faithfull to the Venetians: and entring into the bonnds of the Citie of Candace, they filled al the places round about with feare and terrour. Pietro Mocenigo perceiuing the whole Island almost to be infected with this furie, and to tend to a generall reuolt, and that he could by

no meanes fight with the enemie who kept still in the mountaines, brought backe his troupes to Candece, intending to keep the Citie and to represse the enemies violent eruptions. Then he certified the Prince and Senate of the state of the Island,Mocenigo his resolution. and requested them to send more forces if they desired to see the enemies trecherie daunted; that his fellowes and himselfe had with much adoe gotten fiue hundered horse out of Asia; that they wanted greater numbers both of horse and foot, which of necessitie must be sent to them, if they intended to reduce the Island vnder their obedience. And therefore he besought them to take speedie order that supplies might be forth with sent from Italie.
Before Mocenigo his letters came to Venice. Pantaleon Barba, Giouanni Zeno, NicholaoNew Prouidatori and new supplies sent into Candi^. Treuisan^, Andrea Zeno, and Nicholao Iustiniano, departed from the Citie with certaine troupes of footmen, who came into the Island as new Prouidatori. They being ariued the old ones returned home (Pietro Mocenigo excepted) who remained still Gouernour. Those that came last hauing receiued the olde troupes and assembled all the forces which were in the Island, caused them to be imbarked in three Gallies and two shippes of burthen, and sailed to Milopotamus. From thence they forthwith marched towards the enemie; against whom, being shut vp in strong and inaccessible places, Andrea Zeno, one of the Prouidators, being couragiously prouoked with a desire to fight, and entring with his forces into a dangerous place,The death of Andrea Zeno. was slaine by those who defended the passage from aboue. Hee being dead, they  made a retreate and brought backe the troupes to Milopotamus.
In this manner the new Prouidatori began the warre with the enemie, when a great number of footmen being come from Italie, in three shippes of burthen, did maruelously strengthen the Venetian Armie. Whereupon, the Prouidatori made diuers attempts vpon the enemie, but of small moment, for the Venetian could by no meanes drawe the enemie to fight. But the spoiles and burning vp of houses heere and there in the Island, was the cause of a great dearth. Howbeit at last the scarcitie of victuals was much greater in the Candiots Campe than in that of the Venetian, because the Venetian Gallies did from all partes bring them plenty of corne and all other kind of victuals. Whereupon, those in the mountaines enforced  by famine, hauing deliuered the Authours of the reuolt to Iustiniano, who layThe rebells enforced by famine yeeld to the venetians. incamped not farre from thence, they submitted themselues vnto the Venetians obedience. Those that were guiltie were forthwith punished. The reduction of these men did in such sorte daunt the courage of the Greeks, as all that which lieth from mount Strombulo stretching Eastward euen to the middest of the Island, did in short space yeeld to the Venetians: whereupon the whole burthen of the warre fell on a sodaine on that part of the Island which lieth towards the West* Diuers Venetians who had beene Authours of those reuolts, to make themselues more acceptable to the Greekes, renounced the Latine name and promised to obserue the Greeke ceremonies.
Iustiniano hoping to doe some exploit, in regard of the enemies amazement, tooke on a sodaine foure hundred Horse and foote, of those who had continued faithfull to the Venetians; and departing with them from Candace, he marched against theThe Siuerites vanquished by Iustiniano. Siuerits, where hauing beaten downe the enemies Fortes and defences, which they had incompassed with a high Wall made without morter, the euent was fortunate. They fought with the like good successe at the same time at Milopotamus and in other places: The Lithernians being prouoked by these attempts, didThe Lithernians returne to the venetians obedience. The rebells executed. deliuer Alexis Calergo, with his brother and his children, to Cressio Molino, who after Zeno his death at Milopotamus, came into the Island: Hee caused them to bee safely conducted to Candace, with Zannachio Molino a kinsman of his owne, who  was thought to be one of the Authors of the rebellion, where they were all executed. The wife likewise of Georgio Calergo, and his children, falling at the same time into the Venetians hands, had the like end.
Iustiniano, and Nicholao Treuisano, desirous to pursue the enemie who was halfe broken, ioyned their forces together neere to Anopolis, where were diuers enemies both Greeks and Latines. The place was strong by nature, and the situation thereofThe situation of A^polis. inaccessible. There was but one way to come to it; and but one onely meanes to batter the enemie: Namely, for the Venetians to seize on the Hill which commandeth the Towne. The which being soone done by the Prouidatori, in few dayesAonpolis taken. they became masters of the place: Giouanni and Georgio Calergo with diuers Venetians of the number of the Rebels, were there taken and brought to Candace. It isRa^esse of a rebell. reported that Georgio being found with his brother Giouanni hid in a Caue, did attempt by the shot of an arrow to kill him, who came foremost to surprise him; but  that his bow brake. It is great folly to anger him in whose hands a man is sure to fal. It was likewise a merrie answere which a simple Souldier mou'd to one of the chiefe of the Rebellion who was taken prisoner; and being sore hurt, was caried to Candace to be put to death, who craued that hee might haue some Chyrurgion to lookeA merrie answere of a soldier to one of the rebells. to his wounds; the Souldier who was next him, told him that his wounds needed neither Chyrurgion nor plaister, iesting openly at the poore prisoner, who was shortly to loose his head.
The enemies being euery where put to flight, Candie became quiet, whither came Giouanni Dandulo, Paulo Loretano, Pietro Morosini, Giouanni Fuscareno, and Thadeo Iustiniano, being sent by the Senate to enquire of the state of the Island, and to  settle the affaires thereof: These men hauing disanulled certaine Lawes, established new, and hauing razed certaine Fortes, they builded others. They commaunded likewise the inhabitants of Anopolis, to leaue the Towne and to dwel some where else, leauing the Towne desolate and forsaken; forbidding on paine of life that none should dare to goe thither to inhabite. Like prohibitions were made, not to build or till the earth on the mountaines of Lasithes. And after they had put some of the Rebels to death, who were here and there scattered in the Island, and banished the residue for euer, they restored the Island to her ancient quiet. Such was the issue of the rash reuolts of the Candiots. Prince Cornari being oppressed with age, hauing gouerned two yeares and eight moneths, died, and was buried in the Church of the Twinnes.




 ANDREA CONTARENI, the 60. Duke of Uenice.








ANdrea Contareni succeeded him, who hy some apprehension of future matter did for a time refuse this dignitie, and had of purpose retired himselfe to a house of his owne in the territorie of Padua; resoluing not to returne to the Citie vntill they had chosen a new Duke. ButHow hardly Contareni accepted of his dignitie. by no meanes yeelding to come to the Citie neither by the Senates letters, nor yet by those of his familiar friends, certaine of his kinsmen were commaunded to goe and tell him, That if hee continued in his wilfulnesse, the Senate determined to confiscate his goods, and to banish him for euer from the Commonwealth. It is reported that then, the feare of his owne particular losse made him obey and returne to Venice. If he did this feeling himselfe not to be fit for such a  charge, it was (as all men may perceiue) a verie profitable example: to the end that no man should presumptuously thrust himselfe into the gouernment of aWhat those ought to doe that are called to publick offices. Common-wealth: the profit whereof he ought chiefely to respect whosoeuer he be that is called to such a dignitie. For it ought not to be accepted so much for a mans owne particular gaine as for the common good. They therefore which aucupate publique honours, ought to examine themselues what they are, and what their sufficiencie is; and if they feele themselues vnfit for such place, let them know, that it shalbe as profitable for themselues, as for the Common-wealth to make an honestContareni his fault inexcusable. excuse. But Contareni was not guiltie of such a fault who wanted neither wisedome, nor skill to gouerne. But if he did it (as I perceiue) to auoide the labour and  trauaile which accompanies such dignities, he did not well; and I know not whether hee erred more in so doing, than if hee had rashly thrust himselfe into the Throne. For that would haue beene accounted a follie, and this malice. It is certaine that in his time the Common-wealth was much afflicted by forraine warre, and that there was great dearth in the Citie.
So soone as he had accepted the charge, the Thryestines reuolted. The VenetiansThe Thryestines reuolt. kept an Armed Gallie in Histria for the guard of the Toll. The Thryestines, who along time before had hatched alterations, fell on a sodaine vpon the Venetians who were there by chance, and picking quarrells with them, slew the Committie of the Gallie, and hauing hurt some others they would haue  murthered the residue, if the Gallie had not presently put to Sea. But not satisfied with this brauado they came on an holiday into the Market-place, and threw downe the Venetian ensignes which were set vp there (as the custome was) tearing and treading them vnder feete, with reprochfull speeches.
The Senate perceiuing whereunto the Thryestines dealings tended, andA Venetian Armie against the Thryestines. knowing that they ought no longer to temporize, did speedily send an Armie thither; which besieged those mutinous people both by Sea and Land. The Land-Armie was committed to Dominico Michaeli; and that by Sea to Cressio Molino. It was then the middest of winter. And because it was to be feared that if the Venetians should procrastinate, the enemies might fortifie themselues with  some forraine aide, all that which was necessarie for the warre, was forth with in a readinesse. The Citie being at their first arriuall assailed, the Thryestines with the helpe of the Forlani did brauely defend it, and making a sodaine sallie, they did greatly trouble the Venetians neare to the walles with an vnexpected fight. Afterwardes likewise they fought diuers times with different successe: but the Venetians perceiuing that it behooued them to haue greater forces, supplies were sentNew supplies comes to the Armie. thither, and new Prouidatori; Paulo Loretano succeeded Dominico Michaeli; and Thaddaeo Iustiniano, Cressio Molino: who brought two thousand Treuisans to the Campe.
The Thryestines being daunted to see the Venetian forces daily to encrease beganne The Thriestines resolue to yeeld to the Duke of Austria. to bethinke themselues whence they might bee releeued. They resolued to haue recourse to the Duke of Austria, to implore his fauour and assistance, and to deliuer their Citie, meanes, and estate into his hands. To this purpose they sent Ambassadors to him, by whom they yeelded themselues to his protection, and on

a sodaine they set vpon the toppe of the highest tower the Dukes ensignes. The Duke soone afterward came thither with ten thousand horse, and great numbersThe Duke of Austria brings aide to the Thryestines. of foote. The Venetian in the meane time hauing spoiled round about, had brought all the townes neare to the Citie vnder their subiection. The Almaines at their first arriuall came and besieged the Venetians Campe with such vehemencie as in a moment they seized on the trenches. The Campe would hardly haue sustained this assault had not the Souldiers and Marriners who were a farre off hearing the noise ranne to the rescue of their fellowes. Those of the campe were so encouragedA base retreate of the Almaines. by their arriuall as they did not only driue the enemies forth of their trenches but with great losse constrained them to retire. Truce for a day was granted to the Almaines  to burie the dead. Being afterwards put to flight in a skirmish, and perceiuing their bad successe in releeuing Thryeste, and that it was an hard matter to diuert the Venetian from his purpose, with great griefe he brought backe his troupes into Germanie. The Thryestines when hee was gone, desparing of all other forraineThe Thryestines returne to the Venetians obedience. A new warre with Francisco Carrario. The cause of the warre. aide, did on certaine conditions returne to the Venetians obedience, which being done, the victorious Armie returned to Venice.
The Citie was not long at rest. For a new war was raised against Francisco Carrario: the cause thereof proceeded (as is said) from Carrario, who vsurped a certaine place neare to the lakes, the which belonged to the Venetian. The Venetians being moued with this iniurie did forbid the Paduans the trafficke and commerce of  their Citie, which is (as all men knowe) an euident signe of future warre. The neighbour Princes being highly displeased that by the Paduans meanes the trafficke was likewise forbidden to their subiects, did endeauour all they might to quench this strife and to make them friends. But all their attempts proued vaine. The KingCommissioners appointed on, both sides to enquire of their strife. of Hungaries Ambassadours came afterwards for the Carrarians: (for they said that they were vnder the protection of King Lewis) and those of Florence and Pisa for the Venetians; and by their meanes truce was taken for two moneths. The Venetians deputed fiue commissioners; and the Carrarians as many, who should debate the matter, and search out their bounds in frendly sort and afterwards marke their limits. But they could effect nothing.
At the same time the Venetians were informed that the Tyrant had practisedCarrario his purpose discouered. with certain bad persons to murther diuers of the Senate. Diligent search was made for them ouer all the Citie, and some of them were found and taken in the house of a poore woman named Gobba. The womans life was saued, because shee had freely confessed the truth; but she was confined to prison for ten yeares. All the rest were punished according to their deserts being drawn through the Citie with horses, and then cut in quarters at the Colummes. Their hostesse sonne who had promised to shew the murtherers those whom they should kill, was hanged in the same place. Not long after, others being conuicted of the same crime were punished in the same manner. The Senate fearing, that by these murtherers the Common-wealth might  receiue some great mischiefe, appointed that all those who were known to be hated by Carrario, should bee guarded by Armed men from their houses to the Pallace. They commanded besides to looke carefully to the welles, for the reporte was, that he intended to poison them, and by that meanes to vndoe the whole Citie.
The Senate were not yet freed from care, when as a new feare surprized them.Traitours in the Senate, knowne and punisted. For they suspected that some of their owne companie did by close intelligence aduertise Carrario, of whatsoeuer was secretly done in the Senate. Enquirie here of being made, they found certaine Senators to be guiltie of that fact. Whereupon those who were found least faultie were dismissed from the Senate, and were declared to be for euer vnworthie to execute any publicke charge, the others were condemned  to perpetuall prison. In the meane time the Ambassadours who had beene sent vp^arre prepared against the Carrarians. and downe from all sides, could not preuent a future warre, which the Venetians perceiuing, they made speedie preparations for the same.

The end of the fourth Booke of the second Decad.



THE FIFTH BOOKE  OF THE SECOND DECAD OF THE HISTORIE Of Venice.

The Contents of the fifth Booke of the second Decad.
RAYNIERO Generall to the Venetians, giues ouer his place soone after the beginning of the Warre with the Paduans. The Venetians receiue a great ouerthrow by the Hungarians, vpon the bankes of the Riuer Anaxus, called at this day the Piaua. The Venetians victorie against the Transiluanian, with the taking of him. Peace with the Paduans. The Duke of Austria beginneth a new warre with the Venetians. They fight with the Almanes neere to Longina: Feltre besieged, and the siege forthwith raised by the comming of LEOPOLDE. The Austrian Marchants are prisoned at Venice. Peace with LEOPOLDE. The cause of the fourth Ligusticke  Warre. The taking of the Isle of Tenedos. The Venetians driue the Greekes and Genoueses from Tenedos. The Venetians Warre (almost at one time) with King LEWIS, the Bishop of Aquileia, the Genoueses, and the Carrarians. The Genoueses being vanquished at Sea neere to Ancia, lost diuers of their Gallies. The Venetians bad successe in Cyprus at the siege of Famagosta. The taking of Catharra by VICTOR PISANI. The Genoueses refuse to fight on the Sea of Tarentum. The Paduans besiege Mestra. VICTOR PISANI taketh Sabenico. Trahu is twise besieged in vaine. How hardly they made prouision for victuals in the Winter, and the losse of a great part of the Venetian Armie by extremitie of cold. PISANI hauing lost his Armie at Pola, is imprisoned at Venice. The Genoueses being proude of this victorie, hauing greatly augmented their Armie, lay siege to Chioggia.

IT was very likely that in these great warlike preparations by land, there was neede of some one man who should be well experienced, diligent, and a trustie friend to the Venetians, vnto whome they might (as very often in former times they had done in the like troubles) safely commit the charge of their Armie. Whereupon they concluded for this purpose toRayniero Uasco Generall of the Uenetian Armie send for Rayniero Vasco foorth of Tuscanie, one of the best Captaines of his time; and in the meane time to  send Dominico Michaeli to the Armie to commaund there vntill his arriuall. They sent with him AndreaThe rendezuous of the Armie at Mestra. Zeno and Thaddeo Iustiniano for Prouidatori. The Rendez-uous of all the troupes was at an appointed day, assigned at Mestra. From thence the Armie first marched

against the Paduans. The Venetians entred the enemies Countrie, and hauing made diuers skirmishes with good successe, they filled all places where they came with feare and terror.
In this meane time Rayniero arriued at Venice, where hauing receiued the publike Ensignes, he hasted with greater forces to the Campe, which he forthwith caused to march; and hauing passed the riuer Brente, he forraged and spoiled the Paduans Territorie which was next him, vnto the riuer of Brentello. Carrosino saith, that he could not foord that riuer, because it was greatly swelled with the raine, and that therefore he led his Armie through the Territorie of Vincenza towards Padua, from whence the Souldiors brought back great bootie: And that from thence hee went and encamped neere to the Fountaines of Abana; but that victualls waxing scant, and strife arising betwixt him and the Prouidatori, hee retired in manner of a flight towards Mestra. Some Authours say, That beeing desirous to passeThe retreate and dismission of the Generall. the Brentello to bee the neerer to assaile the enemie, the Prouidatori would by no meanes suffer him to doe so: whereupon hee being moued with choller, that hee might not manage the warre as he pleased (saying that the ignorance of the Prouidatoridid snatch a goodly occasion forth of his hands) gaue ouer his charge, calling God and men to witnesse, That their wilfulnesse did hinder him from obtaining the victorie.
The Prouidatori were suspected to haue beene corrupted by the enemie, and by that meanes to haue endammaged the Common-wealth. Yet neuerthelesse the Venetians affaires prospering, and hauing taken certaine Townes from the enemie, that suspition ceased. The enemie perceiuing that without forraine aide he could not long resist the Venetians, called the King of Hungarie to his aide, with whom euer since the siege of Treuiso he had beene in league: Some Authours thinke that this league was sworne at the beginning of the warre. But the Venetians hauing notice that the Hungarian made preparations both by Land and Sea (which heeThe Hungarians come to aid the Paduans. might easily do hauing taken Dalmatia from them) the Senate decreed to set forth besides the Land-Armie, a fleete by Sea, whereof Michaeli Delfino was made Generall, and the Prouidatori were Pietro Iustiniano, Procurator of S. Marke, and  Pietro Cornari. This fleete being gone to Sea, kept all the Sea-coasts safe for the Venetians during this warre.
The Paduans affaires stood at the same stay as I haue said, at such time as great numbers of Hungarians came to their succour. Their first arriuall was on the Treuisan, where they put all to fier and sword, respecting neither age nor sex, and their murther still encreasing, they fought at times with bad successe. For Thaddeo Iustiniano at the first report of the enemies comming, to resist their attempts did speedily encampe on the riuer of Piaua: But the Venetians discouerers beeing surprized byThe Venetians vanquished by the Barbarians. the enemies, the Hungarians were sooner seene than heard of: whereupon they fell  vnlookt for to the fight neere to the riuer, and at the first, (because the bodie of the enemies Armie was not yet arriued) the Hungarian was put to flight and pursued by the victorious Venetian euen to the riuers side, whither all the Souldiours did not follow Iustinian, who hasted after the fugitiue enemie, who hauing put themselues in order on the riuer bankes, the fight began more cruell than before: wherevpon the Hungarians became victors, and the Venetians beeing vanquished, verie few of them escaped from the battaile: the number of the dead was great, and that of the prisoners small.
On the report of this losse, the residue of the Armie retired on a sodaine to the Treuisan: The enemie soone followed him thither, and in his view presented him the battaile. But the Venetians keeping themselues in their Fort, and the enemie  not being able to constraine them to come forth, returned towards the Forlani, first through the confines of the Bellunois, and then of those of Feltre, and encamped before Bassan, a Citie belonging to the Vincentines. Belluna and Feltre did at the same time belong to Albert Duke of Austria, an Associate of King Lewis in that war.
Some Authors say that Carrario gaue those Townes to Albert, to procure him to take Armes against the Venetians: wherein the German shewed himselfe verie vndiscreet, seeing that a while before, the Paduan in the treatie of peace had offered them to the Venetians, who refused them, because they would not doe any thing to displease the German.
Delfino Generall of the nauall Armie, hauing gone round about the Lakes in certaineThe Venetians build two Forts on the takes. light boates, commonly called Ganzarioles, came and builded a Fort at Lupa Podoana, and then an other neere to the same: by meanes of which, the Venetians might more commodiously breake the enemie, and offend him neere hand. The greatest part of the Venetians Armie laie on the Treuisan, where certain warlike exploits were executed, but vnworthy of mention. Diuers Soldiours were cassed, and enforced to leaue the Campe, who by their thefts did more molest their own people than the enemie. Some Authors say that Rayniero Vasco who (as wee haueDiuers opinions concerning Rayniero his dismission. said) did voluntarily giue ouer his place, was shamefully driuen from it. Giacomo Moro being sent to command the fleete, hauing staied a while at the Forts which Delfino had builded, fell sick, and was carried home to Venice.
Rayniero being gon, Alberto Carrario came to command the Land Armie: At thisAlberto Carrario in Rayniero his place. arriuall with Leonardo and Andrca Dandulo, and Pietro Fontano Prouidatori, they fought in the Lakes with no great successe. They fortified a place which was verie commodious for the Venetians verie neere to Delfino his Forts. Carrario came vnlookt-for, and draue them thence who wrought in those workes. Diuers Gentlemen were slaine at the first brunt, and with them diuers Archers, the rest fled speedily to the shippes: But the losse was not so great there, as the fight was afterwards fortunate to those of the Campe; For both Armies being come in view one of an other, the Venetians attempting to fortifie a place which lay betwixt the two Camps: Stephano the Transiluanian, Generall of the Hungarian horse-men, marched in battaile against the Venetians to hinder their worke: Leonardo Dandulo went forth to meete him, resoluing to fight with him if he had beene so contented: But the Transiluanian as if it had been of set purpose did the same day abstaine from the  fight. The morrow after, Pietro Fontano whose lot was that day to command (for he and Carrario commanded the Armie by turnes) did by the breake of day verie couragiously embattaile the Armie, the enemie for his part did the like. The battaile being concluded on, the Venetian commanded the men at Armes to alight from their horses and to fight among the footmen, and as he was putting them in order,The venetians victorie ouer the Hungarians. he exhorted and intreated all of them to resolue either to die or get the victorie, protesting to hold him for an enemie, and to kill him which should but only make shew of flight, and that himselfe would be in the foremost rankes, not so much to encourage them, as to note and obserue euery mans valour. The Souldiours being animatedFontano his exhortation to his Souldiours. by this speech, gaue a braue onset, and fought so valiantly, and with such feruencie, as hauing broken and defeated the enemie, they purchased that day a goodly  and memorable victorie. Diuers were slaine in the fight, but more in the flight. The Transiluanian was taken with all the chiefe men almost of his partie. There were taken of the Italian^ Bonifacio and Antonio de Lupes, with diuers other Paduan Gentlemen. King Lewis his ensignes with those of Carrario being throwne away in the fight, were taken by the Venetians.
It is thought of a certaine that if the Venetian had narrowly pursued the enemie,The venetians error. he might haue entred Padua with him, and haue made a verie great spoile euerie where and gotten great booty. The Paduans being daunted with this losse, did accuse the Carrarians as Authors of the warre, hating and detesting them. Francisco Carrario in the meane time, to hinder the Venetians, did by promise of great pay  draw from them to himselfe the greatest of their Caualleri^: But they caused greater numbers than they had lost to come from Milan and Pauia to their seruice. Giacomo M^ro went to meet them as farre as Verona. Marsilio Carrario brother to Francis was with him, who after the losse of the battaile hauing offered himselfe to the people

to mediate a peace, could by no meanes cause his brother to condiscend thereunto, whereupon he with diuers others did bend themselues against him: But consideringMarsitio Carrario forsak^th his brother. the great danger he incurred among his own people he fled to Venice: His flight encreased the peoples hatred to Francisco, and did so greatly animate the Citizens against him, as he had as manie enemies in the Citie as abroad.
King Lewis hauing notice of the losse of his people and of the TransiluaniansThe King of Hanga^ie (...) on peace. fortune, sent to command Carrario to harken to a peace vpon any conditions, and that he should not hope for any more aide from him. The enemies obstinacie being ouercome, hee sued for peace, which he obtained on these conditions. That the Prince and Senate should appoint fiue commissioners, to bound the limits, for which  they were at strife, as they should see cause: That the Paduans should presently pay fortie thousand crownes to the Venetians, and foureteene thousand crownes euerie yeare for the space of fifteene yeares: That Francisco Carrario or his sonne, should come into the presence of the Prince and Senate, and humbly craue for pardon: That Castelnouo should be razed with all the Forts thereabouts: That the tower of Corania with seauen miles compasse round about should remaine to the Venetians: That Marsilio should enioy the possession of his goods, and that his reuenue should be brought him to Venice: That all prisoners taken in the warres should be released: That Carrario should forthwith dismisse all the forrain troupes that were come to his aide: That he should yearely send to offer at Venice three hundred  crownes on the high Altar of Saint Marke: That they should restore to the Venetians all the inheritances with the profit receiued of them, which had beene taken from them on the Territorie of Padua during the war: That the Paduans should not build within three miles neere to the mouthes of any Riuers: That he should not fortifie any place nor maintaine any Garrison.
On these conditions peace was concluded with the Carrarians which they receiuedNouello sonne to Francisco comes to sweare to the peace at Venice. as more necessarie than profitable. Nouello sonne to Francisco came to Venice to confirme and sweare to it: who being brought into Saint Markes Church, swore vpon the high Altar, as well in his owne name as his Fathers, that hee did accept of whatsoeuer had beene of late agreed on by his Father and the Carrarians, that they  would obserue this peace inuiolably, and all the Articles therein contained. Such was the end the verie same yeare (as farre as we can learne) of the warre against the Paduans. About the same time the monasterie of the virgins was burnt with diuers buildings neere to the same which were all repaired at the Common-wealths cost.
After this Paduan warre, the Common-wealth was three yeares at rest. ThisThe Duke of Austria maketh new war on the Venetians. quiet was disturbed by a sodaine comming downe of the Germans. Leopold Duke of Austria hauing entred Italie with foure thousand horse without any warlike summons, did tumultuously seize on the Treuisan, where putting all to fier and sword, he encamped before the Citie to the great terror of the inhabitants. It was not  knowne vpon what cause he made this warre. The Venetians who at that time expected nothing lesse being prouoked by the daily aduertizemenrs they receiued, requested those of Aest their neighbours to assist them, from whom receiuing some small aid, they sodainely marched against the enemie. It is not likely that the Venetians would goe to field with this aid alone, which was verie small, but that at the report of this warre, diuers companies of footmen were leuied in the Citie, albeit the Authors whom we follow make no mention thereof. The German vnderstandingThe Almains retreate. that the enemie marched towards them, raised his campe and retired to the Territorie of Belluna.The Almain marchants imprisoned in venice. Giacomo Caballa Generall of the venetians Armie by Land.
The Senate in the meane time being prouoked by this losse, caused all the German  Marchants which were in Venice to be imprisoned and their goods to be seized on: They did besides send for one Giacomo Caballa one of the best experienced Captaines of his time in the art Militarie to be Generall of their Armie. But whilst these things were done at Venice, Pietro Hemo Gouernour of Treuiso, sent fiue hundred

horse and foot, to spoile the Territories of Feltre, and Belluna. These being conducted by Marini Souranza to fetch bootie forth of the enemies Countrie, after they had made great hauock and carried away with them a great prey, retired into a place of safetie for feare of the enemies, whom they vnderstood were marching towards them.
Giacomo hauing receiued the Generals place marched to Treuiso, where he staied a while till the troupes were leuied from all places, and till his Armie were compleat as he desired, with which entring suriously into the enemies Countrie, he came firstThe enemies put to flight before Longina. and encamped at Longina, where ioining fight with the Almaines hauing slaine diuers of them, hee went on his way as farre as the Piles of the victorie. There is  on the hither side of the Forrest of Feltre a verie narrow bottome, through the which the Riuer Piaua doth rather fall furiously than runne: vpon the right side where it runneth with greatest force, it doth in such sort shut in the Feltrian Mountaines, as it leaueth a small space of ground. On this side then of the Mountaine, cut out euen to the Riuer bankes, a very old wall encloseth all these streights, which is called at this day The inclosure of the vanquisher: The Venetian hauing likewise driuen the enemie from thence, came euen to this Inclosure of the vanquisher, the which hauing couragiously assailed, hee forced, and tooke. It is reported that the skill and valour of Gerardo Caminensis did greatly appeare in thisGerardo Caminensis. assault.
Leauing a Garrison in this place, the Armie came towards Feltre: where at theirFeltre besieged by the venetians first arriuall they tooke the Suburbes, and furiously assailed the Citie: Leopold hauing notice of the Feltrian danger, ranne speedily with great forces to their aide to raise that siege. Vpon report of the enemies approach, the Venetian retired to Treuiso hauing fired the houses next to the Citie, wherein the Souldiours did lodge at their first comming. Leopold being come as farre as Belluna, vnderstanding that the enemies were gone, was highly discontented, hauing lost the opportunitie of abattaile: whereupon returning to recouer the Gallies which he had lost, he attempted first to driue the Venetians from the Tower of Baldina, which Caballa had possessed during the siege of Feltre. Giacomo as soon as he had intelligence of the enemies  purpose, sent his sonne abraue yong man with a troupe of choice Souldiours to seize on it and to keepe it. The Almain being aduertised by his spies of the yong mans iournie, departed from Belluna, and by an Ambush did on a sodaine surprize this troupe which at the first he brake and put to flight: Their Captaine was takenThe venetian Generalls sonne taken with diuers others. The prisoners sent home vpon their word. Truce with Leopold. with more than an hundred braue men, besides the residue of the companie, but hee suffered them forth with to depart vpon their promise, that if peace did not ensue, they should returne and become his prisoners: Then hauing recouered the Tower, he brought back his troupes to Belluna.
At this stay stood the Venetians affaires, when by the mediation of King Lewis truce was taken for two yeares with Leopold: But in the meane time (as the mindes  of men are variable and inconstant) the King separated himselfe againe from the Venetians, and made a League with the Genoueses, the Bishop of Aquileia, and the Carrarians against them. The Senate hauing intelligence that a secret warre was practized against them, and that the truce with Leopold was almost expired, thought it verie necessarie to make an agreement with him, and to make a peace by all meanes, because they would not bee intangled in so manie warres at once: whereupon Leonardo Dandulo, and Pietro Cornari were sent toAn absolute peace with Leopold. Leopold, who hauing yeelded vp vnto him all those places which they had taken from him during the warres, and set the Almain Marchants at libertie, they concluded a peace with him. Soone afterward began the fourth warre with the Genoueses:The cause of the fourth war with the Genoueses. which being the cruelst and most dangerous that euer the Venetians had vntill then, I do likewise finde it to be most amply described by Historians. But before we enter into the discourse of the matter, we must set downe the cause why this warre was renued.
Caloianes was Emperour of Greece, and a great friend to the Venetians, who amongThe punishment of an vngratefull sonne to his father. other children had a sonne named Andronicus, who being conuicted for that he had maliciously conspired against his father, had his eyes put out by his commandement, and was for euer confined to Pera. The Genoueses who of a long time had badly digested, that Caloianes did more esteeme the Venetians than them, caused first of all this young man to bee lookt vnto by Phisitians, and then perceiuing that he had halfe recouered his sight, did vilely solicit him to seize vpon his fathers Empire. This rash and audacious young man, did willingly embrace this mischienous counsell, whereupon, with the helpe of those of Pera who were in a manner all Genoueses, hauing on a sodaine seized on the old man with his kins-folkes and  house-hold seruants hee did inuade the Empire, causing his father and his whole familyGreat ingratitude of a sonne to his father. to be imprisoned. Some say that Caloianes was depriued of the Empire by Cantacusin a Greeke by Nation, and was afterward restored to his former dignitie by Francisco Catalusia a Genouese, and that the Emperour in recompence there of gaue him the Isle of Lesbos. But those Authors whome we follow doe affirme Andronicus to be the Author and motiue of all these troubles, whome I rather follow, because it is most certaine that this young man was afterward besieged with the Genoueses in Pera.
Andronicus had then at the first promised the Isle of Tenedos to the Genoueses,The Isle of Tenedos promised to the Genoueses with whom being desirous to keep his word, he did write to those who kept the  Fort of the Island to deliuer it with the whole Islande to the Genoueses. Two Gallies were sent from Pera to Tenedos for the same purpose. The Captaine of the Fort and all the inhabitants not making great account of Andronicus letters,The Gouernour of the Island ref^seth to obey the commandement of the rebellious sonne. answered that the Island belonged to Caloianes and not to his sonne, and that they would yeeld it vp to no man whatsoeuer, vnlesse he that ought it would command them. It is reported that the Empire being yet at quiet, the Gouernour of the Island and the inhabitants were commanded that if the old man should happen to bee driuen from the Empire (which God forbid) by any sinister accident, they should deliuer the Island to none but to the Venetians. Those of Pera being frustrate of their hope to get Tenedos, went to Constantinople. Marco Iustiniano was at the  same time Admirall of the Venetian Gulphe, who vnderstanding what had befallen Caloianes, fearing least the Venetian Gallies who were gone on to trafficke towards the Ponticke Sea should in that changeable season receiue some displeasure by the Genoueses, hauing conuoied them to the verie entrance of that Sea, after hee had crossed the streight, arriued at Tenedos, resoluing to tarrie there till the spring time and to attend the returne of his Gallies. He staied there with the Fleet all winter. Then going at the spring to the Bosphorus of Thrace, to receiue the Venetian Gallies which returned, he went backe againe to Tenedos, where hauing acquainted the inhabitants with the dangers which threatned them, as well from the GenouesesBy what meanes the Isle of Tenedos came into the Venetians possession. as from others, the Island and the Fort were by a generall consent yeelded vp into  the Venetians hands. Iustiniano leauing Donato Troni and diuers others there with forces to guard it, he returned with his Fleet to Venice.
The yeelding vp of the Island to the Venetians, being knowne euerie where, the Genoueses as wel for their ancient hatred and emulation, as for that they perceiued whilest the Venetians should possesse that Island, the free nauigation for their Marchants sailing into the Ponticke Sea would neuer afterwards be safe, did neuer cease to stirr vp Andronicus a-new against the Venetians, who was alreadie no great friendThe Venetians in Constantinople wronged. of theirs, to iniurie those who remained at Constantinople. He being prompt to all mischiefe, imprisoned Pietro Grimani with the Venetian Marchants, and seized on a Barze, lying in the Hauen which was returned from Tanais. Iustiniano being  returned to Venice, it is said that discoursing of what he had done, and of theDiuers opinions in the Senate concerning the taking of Te^eaos. Island which he had of late brought vnder the Venetians subiection: the same was diuersly taken by the Senate; some not allowing thereof for feare of the warre; and others praising the deed for the commodiousnesse of the place, said that it was well

done, whereupon two Gallies were appointed for the guard of the Island, wherein Antonio Veniero went for Gouernour of the Isle, and with him two Prouidatori, Giouanni Gradonico and Pietro Cornari.
Whilest the Island was mand with this Garrison, the Genoueses came on a sodainThe Genouese^ surprise the Isle of Lemnos. with eleuen Gallies, and seized not in their owne name but in that of Andronicus on the Isle of Lemnos which the Venetians had taken from the Greekes, so soone as they vnderstood how the Emperour had wronged their countrie-men. Afterwards hauing made readie three and twentie Gallies neere to Pera, and with them two shippes of burthen, they departed from Constantinople and landed in the Isle of Tenedos. Andronicus was there in person, by whose commandement the Genoueses  would seeme to doe all. Carolo Zeni was at the same time Gouernour there, a diligent and couragious person (for Veniero was not yet come thither, and I thinkeThe Greekes and Genoueses defe^ ted by Zeni at Tenedos. Donato Troni was alreadie departed from thence) this man did not alone with great courage defend the walls, but made a sally with certaine choise troupes, and disordered the enemies whom hee did beate backe to their shippes with great slaughter: in such sort as Andronicus hauing lost all his peeces of batterie was enforced to dislodge to his great shame.
It was thought that the Genoueses beeing desirous to ruinate the VenetiansThe Genoueses allie themselur^ against the Uenetians wirh the King of Hungarit, the Bishop of Aquileia, and the Carrarians. Victor Pisani Generall of the Venetians. Warre denounced to the Genoueses. power, not being able of themselues to do it, did ally themselues with Lewis King of Hungarie, Francisco Carrario and the Bishop of Aquileia. The Senate perceiuing that  both in apparence and deed the warre was prepared against them, prouided an Armie of twentie Gallies, the which was committed to Victor Pisani, with all authoritie at Sea, and gaue him Panthaleon Barba and Lodouico Loretano for Prouidatori. Foureteene of these Gallies being armed at Venice and the rest in Candie, departed from Venice the foure and twentith of Aprill. But Victor was commanded not to atempt any hostile act against the Genoueses, vntill such time as warre should be denounced. It is said that Nicoleto a Citizen of Chioggia, one of the Secretaries of the Senate, was sent to Genoa for this purpose.
The nauall Armie leauing the Gulphe, and hauing coasted Sicilie sailed directly towards Genoa, in which voiage it tooke in few daies diuers of the enemies shipps, and hauing soone after scoured the lower Sea, Lodouico Fiesca of Genoa to reuenge this shame went to Sea with ten armed Gallies with an intent to fight with the Venetian. Victor was at the same time at Ancia, a Sea-towne of Italy, who hauing notice of the enemies comming did sodainely embattaile his Armie, commanding his Souldiours to bee in readinesse, and at the first sound of the Trompet to arme themselues, at the second all Souldiours and Marriners to keepe their ranckes, and at the third furiously to set forewardes towards the enemie. The GenouesesBattaile at Sea with the Genoueses. were alreadie insight, when the Venetian because hee would fight on the maine aduanced towards them. They had scarce begunne the fight, when as on a sodaine a terrible tempest arose with great showers of raine, which did in a moment  so trouble them, as nine Gallies of either Armie (the residue being constrained to retire) did fight, not with arrows shot, for they did not shoot any in this sodaine stirre, but with the sword and push of pike; The battaile (notwithstanding the foule weather wherein the Seas and Heauen seemed to fight together) lasted two long houres: At the last the Genoueses giuing backe (foure of their Gallies escapingThe Genoueses put to flight. forth of the throng) the residue were taken with Lodouico their Generall, one of which dashing vpon the neighbour shoares fell into the enemies power. Eighteene Gentlemen of Genoa were taken, and more than eight hundred Souldiours and Sailers, with six-hundred slaine.
The victorie was likewise verie bloudie to the Venetians, hauing lost diuers of  the troupes which fought, and more were hurt: of the prisoners, Zacharia Gisio, Fiesca and the other Gentlemen, with the moytie of the prisoners were sent to Venice, and the residue Victor carried with him to Candie. But beeing come vnto Morea neere to Modon, hee met with the six Gallies which (as wee said) were sent to

Candie to be armed, and ioyning them with his owne, he sailed to the Island: From whence departing soone after to in^rap ten Genoa Gallies which had remained all the precedent winter at Constantinople, and being come as farre as Nigrepont, hee had notice that the enemies Gallies were passed alreadie, and almost at Genoa, whereupon he returned, and did for a while make after them, who by their diligent speed were gotten into a place of safetie.
Whilest these things were done at Sea, Prince Carrario as well in his owne nameCarrario beginneth warre against the Venetians. as in that of King Lewis had begunne the warre with the Venetians, saying that he did nothing contrarie to his oath nor to the Law of Nations in taking armes against the Venetians, because he was whether he would or no to obey King Lewis, vnder  whose protection he was: The Bishop of Aquilea did likewise denounce war againstThe Bishop of Aquilea denounceth ware in like manner. them. Thus at one time did diuers arise thinking to ouerthrow the power and State of the Venetians, who had no succour nor allies, but Bernabo Visconte and Petrino King of Cyprus, to beare off so manie stormes and assaults of the enemies, and yet the King of Cyprus aide did neuer stand them in any steed, but that of Bernabo did auaile them which did spoile and scowre the Sea of Genoa. The Venetians neuerthelesse so long as the warre continued did alone defend themselues with their own forces, without the helpe of any other, the which was scarce credible at the beginning.
Now at one time the Paduans on the one side, and the Forlani on the other entring  the Treuisan filled all the Countrie with feare and spoile. Gerardo CaminensisGerard Caminensis taketh the enemies partie. who was thought to be a friend to the Venetians, by reason that he had married the daughter of Pantaleon Barba, at the first beginning of the warre, left them and went to the enemies, hauing first taken the Motte from his brother Richardo. This was done on the Venetians territories, whilest the Lords of Carretta assisted by the forces of Bernabo and the Venetians tooke certaine townes from the Genoueses.
The enemies in the meane time were not idle, for they surprised Famagosta,Famagosta taken by the Genoueses. the goodliest Citie of the Kingdome of Cyprus. Historians say that the occasion of the taking thereof was, that young Petrino sonne to King Petro, being slaine a litle before by the conspiracie of his owne subiects, hauing inuited to the feasts and solemnities  of his coronation all strangers with those of the Island, the Venetians and the Genoueses trafficking in the Island which were verie many, came thither likewise. It hapned that these two Nations in the middest of the banquet, did by their ancient hatred and iealouzie fall to words, which diuers thinke that the Genoueses did first minister, who did disdaine that the King should more esteeme the VenetiansThe cause of the taking of Famagosta. than them. They drew their weapons in the middest of the Royall Palace: and the Cipriots fauouring the Venetians, certaine Genoueses were slaine and diuers hurt, and the residue were driuen shamefully from the banquet. The Genoueses being moued with this iniurie did forthwith depart forth of the Island with all their wealth. Then returning within a while with a nauall Arrnie they did on a sodaine  assaile the Citie of Famagosta, and tooke it. The Authors whom we haue read, doe not plainely tell whether they took it by force or treacherie. They slew diuersThe Genoueses reuenge. in detestation of the death of the late King, and among others, the Kings brother, and spoiled all their goods. The King and his mother for feare of the Genoueses escaped in this tumult forth of the Citie. In this manner did the richest marchant Citie of the Kingdome of Cyprus fall into the Genoueses hands.
The young kings mother was suspected to haue deliuered the Citie vnto them to reuenge her husbands death: and that which maketh me to beleeue it, is the death of those who slue him, and the spoyling of their goods, as also, because the Genoueses attempted nothing against her nor her sonne. Now whilest the Genoueses  held Famagosta, Visconte had in the meane time betrothed his daughter to the yongVisconte of Milan giueth his daughter to the King of Cyprus. king, and being desirous to send her to Cyprus, he dealt with the Venetians to arme sixe gallies, with which his daughter might passe safely into the Island, and that he on the other side would leuie eight thousand horse, and a great number of footmen

at his owne cost, to ouerrunne and spoile whatsoeuer belonged to the Genoueses. The Ladie being brought to Venice, was lodged in the Pallace of the Cornari.Uisconte his daughter commeth to Uenice. Then departing from Venice with sixe Venetian gallies, and ^iue which the king of Cyprus had sent, she safely arriued in the Island.
The king lay at the same time at Ceraunia called at this day Cernia, where afterAn agreement betwixt the Venetians and the king of Cyprus. he had with great magnificence receiued his wife, he dealt with the Venetians for a great weight of gold which he promised them, that they would with the fiue gallies which he had in pay assaile the hauen of Famagosta: the which being taken, they gaue an assault to the Citie on the same side, whilest he with the greatest forces he could leuie, should scale the walles on the other side. The Captaines of the gallies  were, (...) Miani, Francisco Bocoli, Pietro Quirini, Francisco Foscolli, Grouanni Barba, Francisco Mocenigo, who had each of them a-part armed one seuerall galley at their owne charge. These being moued as well by the kings offer, as for their generall hatred which they did beare to the Genoueses, with the fiue gallies, which as we haue said were sent from the king to Venice, beginning to fight at the entrie of the haue^, were at the first repulsed by the Genoueses, wherupon they retired to Sea, til their souldiers and marriners were refreshed. The Genoueses had placed three ships of burthen at the mouth of the hauen to hinder the enemies approach: The VenetianThe venetians take the hauen of Famagosta. returning againe with his mercenaries to assaile the Genoueses, came not as at the former time to assaile the hauens mouth but the sides, and emptied so much  earth and grauell^s he made at last a passage for his gallies to enter, which comming into the hauen, the ships of burthen were forthwith taken by the Venetians with those which defended them. Diuers gallies with other vessels which lay there at an Anker were likewise taken. The Hauen being thus seised on, the Venetians gaue a so daine assault to the Citie, and hauing set vp skaling ladders in sundrie places, diuersThe venetians repulsed from the Citie and hauen of Famagosta. hoping to enter, did in the midst of the enemies cries, and arrowes, mount to the top of the wall. The Genoueses whose numbers were great in the Citie, making a furious sally on the assailants, did first with great slaughter beate them from the wall, and then from the Hauen. Diuers doe thinke that the same Citie had beene taken that day, if the Cyprio^s had assailed it as couragiously on the other side as did the  Venetians. The Venetians Histories affirme this for true.
Some of the authors say, that it was not Pietro, but Bugon of Lusignam, whichDiuers opinions concerning the taking of Famagosta. was father to Petrino, and that he was not slaine by his owne subiects, but that it was one called Pietro, brother to the young king: Besides that the Genoueses were not iniuried by the Venetians, but that by the kings commaundement, some of them were throwne forth of the chamber windowes, where the feast was kept, and other some slaine in the Citie, and ouer the whole Island, so that none were left aliue to carrie the newes to Genoa: That the Genoueses comming into the Island with a great nauall Armie conducted by Pietro Fregosa did take the Citie of Nicosia by assault with the King and Queene, and after they had put all the Island almost  to fire and sword, brought away the King and Queene to Genoa, who being afterward set at libertie, did in vaine with the Venetian forces come and besiege the Citie of Famagosta, which he had voluntarily giuen to the Genoueses, with the residue of the Island. But howsoeuer it happened, the matter falling out vnfortunately (as hath been said) the Venetian gallies departing thence, failed into Syria, who besides the other harmes which they did to the Genoueses, they tooke from them a Barze named Spinereggio laden with most rich merchandize: and returning on a sodaine towards the Adriaticke Gulph, did ioyne themselues neere to Zara with the nauall Armie, which was conducted by Pisani.
Whilest these things were done in Cyprus and Syria, Victor Pisani, with eighteene The venetians take the citie of Catharra. gallies tooke the Citie of Catharra by force which belonged to Lewis, king of Hungarie. At their arriuall they summoned the inhabitants, who made a verie proude answere, adding diuers reprochfull speeches which did greatly offend the Venetians. Pisani in regard thereof being enflamed with choller, landing his troupes did

come and assailed the Citie. The souldiers and marriners did at the first with such violence winne the defences, and afterwards the walles, as in a moment they made themselues masters of the Citie: which being taken and spoiled, those whichThe sort of Catharra yeelded. were in the fort, being daunted with the sodaine losse of their fellowes, did forthwith yeeld. The bootie did inrich the souldiers and marriners. The Generall did speedily aduertize the Senate of the victorie by a galley which he sent away of purpose.
Pisani his Armie being increased which was alreadie of twentie fiue gallies, vpon report that the Genoueses gallies were comming into Dalmatia, and that they were alreadie departed from Genoa for that purpose, and had commission after they  should haue shut in the hauen of Zara, to molest the Venetians, not onely at Sea, but along the neighbour shoares, resolued to meete the enemie at his comming farre from the Citie. The Venetian at last ouertooke the Genoueses neere to Tarentum: for hauing passed beyond Naples, he vnderstood that the enemies ArmieThe situation of Tarentum. a little before had sailed towards Calabria: whereupon hauing coasted all the shores, he did not misse of the enemies Armie at the place aboue said: and for to enforce him to fig^t, he encamped at the mouth of the Gulph neere to the mount Lacinia, which is iust opposite to that of Salentina. These two mountaines looking one vpon an other make this Gulph to be of a verie dangerous approach. In that is situated the Citie of Tarentum. I said the Venetian did rather encampe neere to Lacinia, than  elsewhere, because that the Genoueses lying in the hauen of Tarentum, and the Venetian being verie desirous, not onely to draw him to the fight, but to constarine him thereunto, had rather encampe there, to take away the meanes from them who lay a good way in the Gulph of flying backward.
At the last the enemie being come forth of Tarentum, so soone as he perceiuedThe Genoueses flie from the venetians. the Venetians to come towards them, did speedily put to sea-ward, and turned forth of the way. The Venetian neerely followed him, hoping speedily to ouertake him when as he saw himselfe to be deceiued with a new tricke of warre. The enemie made shew as though he would fight, and as if he were out of al hope to escape. And turning on a sodaine towards the Venetian, he feined to make all things readie in A s^ratagem of the Genoueses to (...) the fight. his gallies for a battaile: which Pisani perceiuing, made a stand and commaunded his souldiers and marriners to arme themselues. The Genouese so soone as he saw the Venetians in a readinesse, the souldiers loden with Armour, and the gallies all pestered with warlike engines, he gaue a signe to his people to set saile. Ye should haue seene then these two fleets sailing very differently the one from the other. For the Genoueses who had their marriners readie, and vnloden, seemed to flie vpon the Sea with wings, and the Venetians not able to stirre, by reason of their weight and pestering. By meanes whereof he escaped at his pleasure, and tooke the direct way into Dalmatia. Pisani hauing no place of retreate neere, turned on the left hand towards Apulia.
At the same time, fiue gallies being armed by the Senates commaund, after the taking of Catharra departing from the Citie with the same which brought the newes of the victorie, to goe vnto the Armie, met with three Genoueses gallies neere to Berisone. These three had scoured for a time vp and downe to the Venetians losse, and had taken as occasion serued, diuers ships laden with marchandize. The Venetian so soone as he had perceiued them a farre off, sailed directly towards them to take reuenge. But the Genoueses without any stay betooke themselues to flight,The flight of three Genoueses gallies. and the one ceased not to pursue, and the other to flie, vntill they were in view of Zara, for then the Venetian gallies giuing ouer their pursuite retired to Brandissa, where so soone as they vnderstood that the Genoueses fleet was arriued in Dalmatia,Description of the hauen of Brandissa. they stayed in that hauen, fearing if they should passe on their iourney, to bee surprized by the enemie. The hauen of Brandissa is by nature great: the mouth thereof containeth diuers and sundrie hauens which are not subiect to Sea tempests. There are within it diuers pleasant places of retreat where ships lie out of danger.

The structure thereof is like to the hornes of an Hart, whereof the Citie in times past tooke the name, because the hauen with the residue of the Citie is made in the forme of an harts head which in the Messapian tongue is called Brandissa.
The Venetian, hauing then receiued of the Gouernour and the inhabitants of the Citie, the towers which lie at the mouth of the hauen, did man them with good garrisons, then they sent by land to Pisani, who was said to be in Apulia with a great Armie, to certifie him that they staied in the Hauen of Brandissa, fearing to meete with the enemie who was not far from thence. Victor vnderstanding the danger of his Countrimen came with speed to Brandissa. And there adding the six  Gallies to his owne fleet he made vp the number of one and thirtie, wherewith heThe number of the Venetian Armie. speedily sailed into Dalmatia to surprize the Genoueses going to Zara, who hauing notice thereof did sodainely retire to Trahu.
But whilest these things were done at Sea, the Venetians on the firme land tookeThe Cities of Cesalta and Saligetta taken. the Citie of Saligetta from Gerardo Caminensis and soone after Cesalta which was burned, and the other wholy ruinated. The enemies in the meane time were not idle: for Prince Carrario hauing assembled, as well of his owne, as of the Hungarians, the Bishop of Aquileia, and of other Princes of the league to the number of sixteene thousand men, came and furiously besieged the Citie of Mestra: and to take fromMestre besieged by the Carraria^s. the inhabitants all hope of succour and victuals, he placed a strong Garrison on the riuer which leadeth from Mergera to Mestra: within a while after the enemie seized  on Morezane, which is neare to Mestra, without the losse of one man: diuers men of note were taken there who were sent to guarde that place. The Citie was afterwardMestra relieued by the Venetia^s. more sharpely assailed. The Venetian sent three hundred braue Souldiers to releeue Mestra vnder the commaund of Nicolao Galianico the Luquois, and Hircio Pisani, who passed through the enemies watch, ech of them carrying a bundle of arrowes on his horses crouper. Afterward they made diuers skirmishes all along the dike. At the last the enemie desplayed all his forces, and battered the Citie more furiously than before.
Francisco Delfino commaunded within it, who by his valour and good counsell did  not onely defend the walls, but did likewise constraine the enemie, after he had lost his peeces of batterie, and a great number of his Souldiers, to retire into his Campe,The siege of Mestra raised. and within a while after to raise the siege and depart. Diuers of the enemies being infected with the aire of the marishes, fell into a deadly sicknesse: whereof being returned home to their owne houses they soone died. These are the exploits which were done that sommer.
Six^ gallies returning from forrage brought newes to Victor Pisani who was encamped before Zara, that the Genoueses Armie rode at an Anchor in the hauen of Trahu. Victor departing thence to goe and fight with them, and passing by chance not farre from Sicco a Sea towne, he thought it fit before hee went farther to take it by assault. Yet neuerthelesse hee would first of all summon the inhabitants to  knowe whether they had rather to endure an assault than voluntarily to submit themselues to the Venetians. Three Gallies were sent before to this purpose, who hauing taken assurance of the citizens, did enter the same, where they acquainted the Magistrates with what they had in charge, who answered very arrogantly that the Venetian should neuer expect to haue the Sicceans to yeelde voluntarily, but if he ment to become master of the Citie, it behoued him to vse other weapons than words. Pisani being stung with this braue answere of the inhabitants, trustingA braue answer of those of Sicco. to the great number of his Gallies (which were seuen and thirtie) made hast to assaile the Citie. Whereupon entring the hauen on a sodaine, he commaunded his Souldiers to land, and to march furiously to the assault. The Souldiers went to  it so couragiously, as hauing set vp ladders in sundrie places of the wals, and vndermined them, the Citie was taken in a moment with great slaughter of the inhabitants:Sicco taken by the Venetians* the greatest number of whom were retired with their wiues and children to the Palace, where for a while was a bloudy fight. But that place being likewise forced,

great crueltie was vsed on all sexes and age whatsoeuer: diuers were slaine, and some were throwne headlong downe from the top of the Palace. There was a Castle in one of the corners of the Citie which was strong by nature and art, into the which diuers had retired themselues, who presuming on their great numbers, did dare to make a sallie on the enemies, and to fight in the middest of the Citie. The fight lasted for a time doubtfull, and more bloud was shed there than in any other place. But the Dalmatians being at last ouercome, were constrained to retire againe into the Castle, which Pisani would not of purpose besiege, fearing if hee should stay long in that place, the enemie would be gone into the hauen of Zara.
The Citie then being spoiled and burnt, and diuers prisoners carried thence, a  great bootie was brought to the Gallies. He sent away a Gallie to Venice to aduertise the Senate of the taking of Sicco and of their want of victualls: Then imbarking his troupes he sailed towards Trahu. The hauen of Trahu hath two entries, one towards the East and the other on the West side. The Genoueses had so artificially stopped both of them, as the Venetian returning from the assault, was constrained to lie at Anchor on the West side. One part of the Genoueses Armie wasThe Venetian Armie neere to the hauen of Trahu. at the same time gone into Apulia for victuals; from whence returning, they entred the Hauen on the other side not being perceiued, which Pisani hauing notice of, did diuide his Armie into two parts, to shut in the Genoueses on euery side: Then to molest them in sundrie places, he landed certaine troupes of Souldiers. It is thought  that the footmen made certaine light skirmishes, which are not worthie of memory. At the last, Victor being impatient of so long stay came and assailed the Citie, but allThe Venetians assaile Trahu in vaine. his attempts were in vaine. For hee was so farre from entring, as on the contrary he was beaten backe by the Genoueses (whose number in the Citie was very great) ^nd constrained to retire with great losse to his Gallies. Luca Valerosa a Venetian Gentleman died in this assault. Victor being frustrate of his expectation, and victualls beginning to faile, not hoping to recouer any force from Venice, the dearth of all things being very great there, he raised his siege and came and encamped beforeThe Venetian before Zara. The Albanois reduced vnder the Venetians obedience. Zara, where he did more feare than hurt the inhabitants. He sent besides tenne Gallies to the Albanois to know their minds, who being daunted with the mishap of  the Catharrians and with that of the Sicceans, did voluntarily yeeld. Francisco Contareni was sent thither to commaund the Citie.
The Senate being aduertized that the Armie was dislodged from before Trahu,The Uenetian Armie returneth before Trahu. did forthwith arme fiue Gallies, and laded them with victualls, which were sent to Pisani who lay before Zara, who was commanded to returne instantly before Trahu: and not to stir from thence till either by force or famine he had taken the Genoueses Gallies which lay there. But the Genoueses after the first siege, had with greater labor and trauaile than before, fortified the hauen: by meanes whereof this last attempt was as vaine as the former wherof we now spake. The Armie for certaine daies lay at ankor before the hauen. But Pisani being enforced by hunger and cold  (for it was winter alreadie) departed from thence, hauing effected nothing, and came into Histria. From thence he wrote to the Senate to know their pleasures whether he should with the whole Armie returne to winter at Venice, or else tarrie abroad. They decreed that the enemie being so neare, it was needfull that hee should tarrie abroade all winter: the which of a certaine did greatly hurt the common wealth For the Souldiers and Marriners being vndone by hunger and cold, were scatteredThe Souldiers (...) with hunger and cold. here and there without any leaue searching for victualls, and left their Ensignes badly attended. Diuers likewise died with hunger, and others with cold. And because victualls were scarce in the Citie, they concluded to send diuers ships that winter into Apulia to fetch corne, and that Pisani should conuay them for feare of being  surprized by the enemies. The dearth did in some sort cease in the Citie by meanes hereof. The Armie returned into Histria to their wonted place. But the extremity of the cold daily increasing, and many dying euery hower, the number of those which remained was so small, at it was not sufficient to arme twelue Gallies: so as

Pisani sent diuers of them emptie to Venice, to the end they might be furnished anew against the spring time, if the Senate so pleased.
Eleuen Gallies newly armed at Venice were sent to Pisani, with diuers otherThe Senate sends new supplies to Pisani. vessells, laden with victualls, and among the rest, a great ship of burthen, full of armour, and other equipage for ships: the which Pisani commanded to bee forthwith carried into Candie, to furnish those Gallies which the Senate had appointed to be made readie in the Island. The Armie departing from Pola where it had wintered, and being come into the maine, a terrible tempest arose on the sodaine, which scatteredThe Venetian Armie separated by tempest. them here and there. This ship of burthen which was full of Armour, was by the force of the winde carried safely into the Hauen of Ancona, where it met with  a Venetian Barze loden with Syrian merchandize: Being ioyned together they expected a fit time to depart thence, but on a sodaine they espied twelue Genouesan Gallies on the maine.
The Venetians suspecting the truth, and that they were Genoueses, would forthThe Venetians being deceiued by the Anconitans, were taken and spoiled by the Genoueses. with haue vnloden their ships, and determined to carrie their best and richest wares into some place of safetie, but the Townes men would not suffer them so to do, saying that their Hauen was a safe retreate for all men, and that they needed not there to feare the Genoueses, nor any whatsoeuer, protesting that they should doe no worse than themselues. The Venetians on this assurance did not vnlode. The Genoueses in the meane time entred the Hauen, and kept themselues quiet for a while, but after they had beene at meate, they armed themselues, and with great noise, seized on the Towers, and Walls of the Hauen, and from thence they ran to spoile the ships. The Venetians which were on the Citie walls, would haue shot at the Genoueses, but the Inhabitants would not suffer them, saying, that they would not incense the Genoueses against them by any new injurie. They then perceiuing themselues to be betraied did not stirre. The Venetians ships being drawne forth of the Hauen, the one of them being vnloden of the Armour that was in it, was burnt in the view of the Citie, and the other which was laden with merchandize, the enemies carried away. This injurie did greatly moue the Venetians, but being intangled in so many Warres, they thought it fit to deferre the reuenge till some other  time, and therefore they did as then attempt nothing against the Authors of that deede.
Pisani in the meane time was come into Apulia, and the Venetian Gallies tooke in their lading of corne, at Barletta and Siponto. Those who loded at Barletta quarrellingA quarrell against the venetians at Barletta soone appeased. with the Inhabitants about a small matter, were in great danger of their liues, but the tumult was appeased by the arriuall of those who commaunded the Gallies. The Venetian in the end hauing loden, departed from Apulia, and met at Sea with fifteene Gallies of Genoa. So soone as Pisani descried them, he bethought himselfe after what manner he might assaile them, whether it were best to doe it on the sodaine, or after the accustomed manner: He knew well enough that the Genoueses  whom he could not prouoke to fight at Tarentum, and were not since that time become stronger in Gallies, or in ought else, would neuer abide a battaile: yet neuerthelesseA battaile at Sea betwixt the venetians and Genoueses. he commanded his warlike engines to bee set in order in his Gallies, and being come within bow-shot one of an other, each of them began to prouoke his aduersarie by shooting of arrowes. The Generall of the Genoueses Armie died at this encounter. The Venetian Historians, nor those Authors whom we haue followed doe not name him; Victor Pisani was hurt likewise with the shot of an arrow.
The enemie perceiuing that to dissemble in this fight would no whit at all auaileThe Genoueses slie from the sight. him, trusting to the lightnesse of his vessells, he got forth of the throng, and sailing directly towards Dalmatia, the Venetian forthwith lost sight of him, whereupon he  ^ntred at his pleasure into the Hauen of Zara. Pisani arriuing in Histria, and bringing his fleet into the Hauen of Pola, he sent the ships which were laden with corne to Venice.
Whilest these things were done abroade, the Senate sent fiue Gallies well armed

from Venice, to scoure the lower Seas. It was reported that there was no armed Gallies at Genoa. It was the spring-time when they sailed into the maine Sea, where they remained all that Sommer, Haruest, and a part of the Winter, in which time they did greatly molest the enemie.
Pisani after he had sent (as hath beene said) the ships loden with corne to Venice,The Uenetian Armie (...) at Pola. he remained at Pola with one and twentie Gallies, fiue of which for that they were slower than the rest, hee caused to bee drawne a shoare to bee trimmed and made cleane, that they might thereby become more light and apt to fight. But in the meane time fourteene Genoa Gallies were on a sodaine descried within a mile of the Hauen: Those which were within them, did brandish their naked swords, and The Genoueses challenge the Venetians. challenged the Venetians to the fight: Ten other Gallies of supplies were come vnto them from Zara, of which the Venetians had no notice, the enemie had placed them in ambuscado behinde a little hill neare to the Hauen, and commanded them that after the battaile should be begunne, and when they should perceiue their fellowes by little and little to retire, and the Venetians to follow them, then on a sodaine with great noise and cries to come forth vpon the enemie. Pisani not dreaming on this Ambush (because hee plainely saw all the Gallies which the enemies were wont to haue) hauing commanded speedily to prepare those fiue which were on the strond, sailed directly with the residue of his Armie towards the enemie.
They ranne at one an other with great furie, and fought for a time without any The battaile at Sea. ods, but the Genoueses Admirall Galley striking on that of Pisani, (and Luciano Doria the Generall of their Armie being dead, whom Donato Zeno slew) shee was lost:The death of the Genoueses Generall. Those of the ambuscado come forth vpon the Venetians. whereupon the Genoueses in the heate of the fight began a little to giue backe, not so much for feare, as of set purpose, and being come to the place of the Ambuscado, the enemies rushing forth with great clamours did much amaze the Venetians. Pisani perceiuing his fiue Gallies, which at the beginning of the battaile were on shore and being now armed did issue forth of the Hauen towards the fight, did couragiously receiue the enemies running fiercely vpon them: (But those Gallies whoThe flight and defeate of the venetians. were appointed for rescues, perceiuing the number of the enemies Gallies, and their fellowes to be inclosed on all sides, refusing to come to the fight, did forthwith flie  towards Venice:) And then did the Venetians fortune beginne openly to decline. Pisani being to his great griefe drawne by force forth of the throng, did with all speede direct his course towards Venice, leauing a glorious victorie to the enemie: fifteene Venetian Gallies with all their furniture were taken: very few escaped to the Land. Two thousand men were taken in this defeate, among whom were diuers Gentlemen, the residue were slaine or hurt. This losse happened on the sixth of March, on which day the Venetians in a manner lost all their Sea-forces.
The newes of so vnfortunate a battaile brought extreme sorrow to the wholePisani, with the Captaines of the fiue Gallies are imprisoned at venice. Citie. Pisani, with the other Captaines of the fiue Gallies, which had refused to come to the fight, being condemned by the Senates decree in a very great fine, were  committed to prison, they for their refusing, being the cause of the losse of the battaile, and Pisani because he fought, before he had sent forth to make discouerie. TheThe people are displeased with Pisani his imprisonment. people tooke Pisani his condemnation very impatiently, but much more his shamefull imprisonment. The report was, that the enuie of some of the Senators, rather than his offence, was the cause of his imprisonment.
The Genoueses being puft vp with pride for this one victorie: and hoping to execute greater exploits, being come to Zara, did commit their captiues to close prison, some of the meaner sort excepted. Then causing their Gallies which were much broken at this battaile to be repaired, they filled the Venetian Gallies with Dalmatian Marriners, so as in a short space they armed eight and fortie Gallies with all The number of the Genoueses Armie. things necessarie. But before this losse at Pola, sixe Gallies were set forth from Venice vnder the command of Carolo Zeno, to molest the Genoueses on the coast of the lower Sea. These fiue hauing ouer-taken those sixe farre from Venice, did diuers great exploits as well in the higher as lower Sea, all the residue of that yeare vntill

the middest of Winter, at which time, after the losse of Chioggia, they were by the Senates decree called home.
The Genoueses in the meane time hauing a great number of Gallies, tooke sixteeneHumaga, Grada, Cao^li taken by the Genoueses. forth of the Hauen of Zara, and came at the same time and seized on Humaga, Grada, and Caorli: Then giuing chase to a ship laden with Marchandize, they came euen almost to Venice, and were in the view of the Citie, when Thomaso Mocenigo, who was Owner of the shippe, not beeing able to approach the Hauen by a mile for want of winde and water, did on a sodaine with those who were in his companie leape into a Galliot or small Gallie, (for the enemie was verie neere) and so escaped into a place of safetie. Whereupon three Genoa Gallies did enuiron and  spoile the ship in the view of the Citizens who stood gazing on the shoare, and whenThe Genoueses spoile and burne a ship in the view of Venice. they had so done, they burnt it. This was the greatest disgrace that the Venetians sustained during this war, to behold one of their ships which was returned from Syria richly loden, to be pillaged and burnt by the Genoueses, they not daring to stirre, or make any resistance.
The enemie departing thence, went and tooke Pelestrina by assault, the which hauingPelestrina taken by the Genoueses. found for the most part to be abandoned by reason of the wars, they forthwith spoiled and burnt it: Then they sailed towards Chioggia, where they landed, and without any difficultie seized on that part of the Citie which looketh towards the East, called by the inhabitants Little Chioggia, the which likewise being desolate The Genoueses before Chioggia. they forthwith burned. The Garrison which lay in the Citie being much offended thereat, made a sodaine sallie vpon the enemie. The Genoueses attended them beyond the bridge, where they fought couragiously on both sides, but the enemies number still increasing, the Venetian beeing ouer-come, was constrained to retire with great losse into the Citie, and the Genoueses to their ships, who after that directed their course towards Ancona, where they staied to refresh their Souldiours and Mariners, and from thence, hauing with great mirth dragged the Venetians militarieThe Genoueses error. ensignes gotten at Pola through the Sea, they returned triumphing to Zara. It is thought that the Genoueses might easily haue taken Chioggia at the same time when they burnt part of it, if they had knowen the situation of the Citie.
The Venetians being in a short space afflicted with so manie mischiefes, considering that the meanes of the Common-wealth were not sufficient to leuie an Armie strong enough to oppose against the Genoueses, and that the cause therof was partlyThe venetians resolution. by reason of the late losse of their Armie, and partly likewise because diuers armed Gallies were from home, they resolued for that time to defend their Citie: Therefore they appointed fifteene Gallies for the guard of the Hauen vnder the conduct of Thadeo Iustiniano. But they could hardly manne six of the number, by reason thatHow the Mariners loued Pisani. they wanted rowers, euerie man refusing to serue, in hatred to the Senate, who had imprisoned Victor Pisani, who was beloued of all men.
They did afterwards fortifie the Hauen in this manner. They did first of all build The Hauen of Venice fortified. two Castles of wood, of a verie hard, and strong substance, at each end one. These two Castles were filled with great quantities of arrowes and darts, and beneath were placed warlike engins to keepe the enemie far off. Then they crossed ouer an yron chaine three double, supported by verie strong Sandoni (for so they call certaine ill trimmed vessels) euerie of them being fastned to two Ankors, to the end they might not be shaken by the waues of the Sea: And they did couer the entrie thereof with yron bodkins, and made strong defences on each side. Three great ships strongly fastened together were set against those chaines, who, being furnished aboue with hurdles, did represent an inexpugnable Fort. They made a trench at Saint Nicholas on the shoare, from the waters which are within the Citie, and there they builded a Fort  to hinder the enemies approach, if he should come from Malomoc: then they builded a Fort neere to Malamoc with a strong Garrison, and two couered ships to keepCab^lla of Verona Generall of the venetians footmen. the enemie from comming into the Lakes, whereby they might greatly indanger the Citie. Caballa of Verona was made Generall of all these Garrisons. The Ports being

thus inclosed and fortified, Thadeo Iustiniano Generall of the nauall Armie, did keepe sometimes within the Forts, and sometimes abroad. Diuers other vessells well victualed for a good while, were readie, and expected when they should bee commanded to saile against the enemie, if neede should be.
The Genoueses likewise were not idle in so faire an aduantage: but departing from Zara the sixt day of August vnder the conduct of Pietro Doria with eight and fortie Gallies, and diuers other small vessells, they sailed beyond the Citie of Venice, and came furiously into the Hauen of Chioggia, which being taken the Armie approached the Citie. Prince Carrario, who was before aduertized (as being allied to this  war) of the Genoueses arriuall, had leuied forces and shippes, and hauing notice of what they had done at Chioggia, he came in smal vessels called Ganzarioles through the channell of the Riuer Brent, euen to the Venetians Fort, neere to Montauban. But perceiuing that the place could not be taken without great slaughter, and meaning to make no long stay there, he tooke in hand a memorable worke, and worthyA memorable enterprize of Carrario. a great Prince. For hauing assembled a great number of husband-men, from daybreake till noone, he caused a trench to be made of fiue hundred paces long, euen to the channell called Nasariola, so deepe, as the vessels with the troupes might easily passe through it, by meanes whereof he forth with constrained the Fort of NasariolasThe Fort of Nasariola taken. to yeeld.
Giouanni Chyurani being sent the same day with manie vessells to hinder the Paduans  designe, ioyning fight with the enemie, did greatly foreslow Carrario his attempt till night, and then either by feare, or negligence rather, forsaking theCarrario ioineth himself with the Genoueses. businesse, he went to Chioggia. The enemie in the meane time came at his pleasure and ioined al his troupes to the Genoueses Armie, with his munition and victualls, hauing left a Garrison at a Fort built of purpose at the mouth of the Riuer, to the end that the passage thereof might be assured to his people comming from theChyurani for not doing his dutie, is condemned to perpetuall imprisonment. firme Land. The Senate commanded Chyurani who was at Chioggia, to come home, who because he had not perfourmed his dutie in the Seruice of the Common-wealth, was condemned in a great fine, and to  perpetuall prison.
The end of the fifth Booke of the second Decad.





THE SIXTH BOOKE  OF THE SECOND DECAD OF THE HISTORIE Of Venice.

The Contents of the sixth Booke of the second Decad.
THe Genoueses take Chioggia: The Citie is greatly affrighted at the report  of this losse. PISANI is set at libertie by the Senates Decree. The Generall of the Armies place is diuided betwixt THADEO IVSTINIANO and VICTOR PISANI. The Citie fortified neere to the Hauen, and in diuers other places. King LEWIS sendeth CHARLES to besiege Treuiso. The treatie of peace begun by the Hungarian, is broken off by reason of his vniust demands. The Genoueses besiege Malamoc: They fight vpon occasions on either side, as well on the shoare as in the middest of the marshes. The Senate resolue to leuie a great Armie. Diuers particular persons doe diuersly aide the Commonwealth. The Genoueses raising their  Campe from before Malamoc, doe retire to Chioggia. CAROLO ZENO his exploits against the enemie, as well in the higher as lower Sea. The Venetians besiege Chioggia on euerie side. How valiantly they fought at Brondoli neere to the Hauen with the enemie. THADEO IVSTINIANO looseth part of the Armie at Siponto. The Genoueses being vanquished and almost daunted in a set battaile neere to Chioggia, yeeld themselues. The Prince hauing giuen the Souldiours the spoile, doth recouer the Citie with all the prisoners.

CHioggia is seated in the middest of the marishes, enuironed almost round about with channels, and hathThe description of the Citie of Chioggia. within it like to Venice, brookes that are nauigable, which ebbe and flow with the Sea-waues, and without the Towne diuers streames which run through their fieldes and salt-pits whereon the inhabitants do go in little boates, as in a beaten way: By meanes whereof during the siege, there were still men, so long as the enemie possessed the Hauen, who came those waies by night, bringing letters from the Senate to Chioggia, and from thence to Venice. But these streames can beare no great vessells. There is a waie which leadeth from the Hauen to the Citie, by which the enemies might haue passed, which was before then  inclosed by the Venetians. They had builded a Fort on the hither side of the Hauen with a good garrison, as at Malamoc, and had besides placed a ship in the middest of the marishes, right ouer against this Fort, well furnished with men and munition: These lets kept back the enemie, who so soone as they had forced the Hauen, which

is a mile distant from Chioggia, did not forthwith assaile the Citie, who being encamped neere to the Hauen, great forces in few daies came to them. For besides the Paduans, and the mercenaire Souldiours which Carrario brought, the troupes likewiseSupplies come to the Genoueses. of the Bishop of Aquileia, with those of the other confederates came thither to them. These perceiuing their bad successe in that place, resolued to assaile at one time the Fort and the ship: Hauing then put 12. Ganziarolles forth of the Hauen, after they had a while rowed vp and down heere and there, they came to the shoare of the little Chioggia, where great numbers of men drew them by maine strength ouer little hillocks which hang downwards on the shoare, into the inner channells. They placed moreouer warlike engins on the shoare, to batter the Fort at one time, before, behind, and on euerie side. Diuers Genoa vessells likewise being come somewhat neere, did greatly molest the Venetian with the shot of their arrowes, so that they which were within, being in this manner tormented by their shot, and distrusting their owne small number, hauing set fier on the Fort and the ship, because theThe Venetians enforced to retire into Chioggia. enemie should haue no vse of them, retired into the Citie. The Paduans with those which were on the opposite shoares, so soone as they perceiued the Venetians to leaue the place, cried out that the Venetians were vanquished and vndone, that their pride was daunted, and that they together with their name would be buried in the waues. But they not being any iot amazed, placed three shipps of burthen well armed and furnished neere to Saint Dominicks Church, to hinder the enemies  approach. And on the other side those which guarded the Citie sallying forth on a sodain on that side of the bridge, which leadeth from the citie to the little Chioggia, fell with great furie vpon the enemie. The fight was for a while equall, but the number of the enemies stil encreasing (for they were reported to be foure and twentie thousand) the Venetians did speedily retire into the Citie, hauing lost the other part of the bridge.
There were three thousand fiue hundred Souldiors in the Citie besides the inhabitants, who were commanded by Balba Gallucio the Bolognois, Nicholao Gallicano, Hircio Pisani, and Nicholao Darseria, all of the valiantest and famousest Captaines of those times: Pietro Hemo was Gouernour, and Nicholao Contareni with Giouanni Mocenigo were Prouidatori. The Citie was afterward twise assaulted. At the first time albeit the assault was verie cruell, hauing continued from day-breake till night, with great slaughter; yet the Citie had no great harme: But at the second, the Genoueses being mingled among the Souldiours entred into the middest of the Citie. It isThe enemies cunning. said that to their force they added cunning; for the enemie hauing brought neere to the bridge a small ship-full of vine-twigs and other drie matter, that being set on fier, the smoake did first choake those which fought aboue, and the flame and heat afterwards did enforce the Venetian to leaue the place. The enemie would not loose such an occasion, but hauing once seized on that place, they did presse the Venetian so neerely, as giuing backe by little and little, they entred pell mell with them  committing great slaughter in the Citie.
The inhabitants and the rest did then begin to flie on euerie side: Pietro Hemo being for saken by his people, did with fiftie Souldiours for a time brauely sustaine the enemies assault on the bridge neere to the Palace. But at the last all things falling out desperate by reason of the great multitude of the enemies, he with his Souldiours did shut themselues vp in the Palace, which soone after beeing yeelded fell into the enemies hands. The Armie afterwards entring, the Citie was vtterlyThe Genoueses take and spoile Chioggia. spoiled. The Genoueses ensignes, with those of King Lewis, and of Prince Carrario, were set vp in the highest place of the Citie, and those of the Venetians were throwne downe and trodden vnder, foot. All the noble women whose honours  the victorious enemie would haue to be preserued, were with their children retired into the Churches, and three daies after being called from thence were sent home to their houses in all safetie. Diuers escaped, others were taken prisoners: those which fell into the Genoueses hands, were imprisoned in Chioggia, but

those which fell to the Paduans, and the Forlani, were carried elsewhere.
Chioggia hath on the south side, a small Island of the bredth of fiue hundred paces stretching as farre as Brondoli. This space of ground is almost wholly tilled with great labour by the inhabitants. Therein there is a goodly vineyard to be seen, and verie large gardens. The inhabitants make great profit thereof, notwithstanding that they giue themselues to salt making, and to fishing. They make great ditches about their inheritances, their grounds being alwaies wet and moist. There are likewise diuers houses in it here and there, some of them builded with moorish matter, and the rest with morter and bricke. The Genoueses drew a great many prisoners forth of these places, which being on all sides enuironed with water could  not for want of shippes escape. Diuers were found dead on the shore who had carelesly entred into the water.
Six thousand men were slaine at the taking of the Tower; the most of whomeThe number of the dead on the Venetians side. Carrario his crueltie. A diuine punishment. were either Townes-men or Venetians. In this sort we finde that Chioggia was taken by the Genoueses. Nicolao Gallicano and Balba Gallucio being with money redeemed from the Genoueses by Francisco Carrario, were beheaded. But they which receiued the price of humane bloud falling into the hands of the enemies before the end of the warre, did dye more miserably in prison, than those whom they had sold.
The guard of Chioggia was giuen to the Genoueses. Prince Carrario with part of  his troupes went home to their owne houses. The like did the forces of the Bishop of Aquileia who were commanded by Giacomo Porliano. Pietro Hemi paid three thousand crownes for his ransome, and lost the worth of as much in mooueables when the towne was taken. The Genoueses after the taking of Chioggia, came with Ganziarolles and other lesser vessels, and a fewe Gallies to seize on the Castle of Loretta, and the tower of Bebia. Those which were in the new tower hauing noticeThe Genoueses take Loretta and the tower of Bebia. Cap. darger taken by Carrario. of the taking of those two neighbour Fortes, not tarrying till the enemie arriued burned their Fort, and retired with great feare to Cape-darger a Towne belonging to the Venetians: but it continued not long in their obedience. For Carrario approaching with his forces the inhabitants forthwith yeelded, which they of Montauban  vnderstanding, did quickly burne their munitions and fled to the tower of Salina. This Fort alone remained impregnable all the time of the warre.
The Venetians being thus shutte in by Sea and Land, beganne on a sodaine to want victuailes and other necessaries: For Chioggia beeing taken, with all the Townes and Fortes which they possessed on the Riuers and Lakes, they had no hope to get victuailes from any place but from the Treuisan, from whence they furnished the Citie with a litle corne and flesh by the Riuer Sylla.
The newes of the losse of Chioggia being brought at mid-night, the enemie entring into it at Sun-set* did in such sort trouble the Senate, that so soon as it was day the whole Citie was in alarme: At which noise all men ranne with their armes to  the Palace, where such great numbers of people arriued as all the great market-place before the Palace* and before Saint Markes Church, was filled with them. Then by the Senates commandment they gaue notice to the people of the losse of Chioggia with as many as were in it. It is reported that at these words there were suchGreat sorrow ouer all the Citie for the losse of Chioggia. cries and lamentations made among the people, as greater could not be if the Citie had beene taken: yee should then haue seene honorable women to walke vp and downe the Citie hanging down their heads full of sorrow, and then on a sodaine lifting vp their eyes and hands to heauen, knocking their breasts with their handes: The men on the other side bewailed their common fortune, saying that the State of their Common-wealth was ouerthrowne. Euerie man lamented his owne particular  losse: but much more their libertie which they held so deare.
They certainely beleeued that the victorious Genoueses would ere long bee at their gates, and after the ouerthrow of their State would wholy abolish their memorie. Euerie one thinking all to be lost, thought on nothing but their owne particular

Some sent away their gold, pretious stones, iewells, money, apparell, and other rich mooueables, to them which kept their farmes in the countrie, others hid them in Churches, and old monuments. In a word the whole Citie was filled withThe common complaint of the people. feare and weeping: diuers did beleeue that if the enemies Armie had in this amazement come into the Citie (which Carrario after the taking of Chioggia did oftentimes counsaile the Genoueses to doe) it would haue beene taken that verie day, or at the least-wise brought into great extreamitie. But God hath not giuen all to one man: Many men haue knowne how to vanquish, but few that could make vse of their victorie. The Garrison which lay at Malamoc being called home, came speedily to Venice, hauing razed their Fort and brought away the shippes.
Besides, almen complained, that there was no man who by speedy counsaile and exhortation could raise the courage of the Citizens daunted with sorrow, and who for his good seruice had such credit among the people, as all men would gladly entertaine him, and be desirous to haue him for their Captaine in such a danger: all men saying that their State was lost, and their liues in great hazard, vnlesse some one would shew himselfe to relieue their afflicted countrie: That there was none but Pisani in the whole Citie, who being beloued of all men could by his valour preserue the Common-wealth in so dangerous a season: but that he was in prison and kept in darkenesse, yet if he were set at libertie, his onely presence would encourage  the daunted Citizens, and that therefore they should doe well to goe altogether to the Palace, and intreat the Senators presently to enlarge him, and to bestowe him on his countrie.
These speeches were publickely pronounced, and some times in the Senates hearing. This being reported at the Palace, the Senators did sodainely assemble to determinePisani is set at libertie by the Senates decree. thereon. They decreed that Pisani and all they who were imprisoned for the same fact, should be set at libertie: which being diuulged in the Citie, a great multitude of people ranne on a sodaine to the Palace. But he like a discreet and modest person would needs lie the night following in prison, and in the meane time sent for a Priest to heare his confession. Then so soone as it was day, hee went vp to the PalacePisani his great modestie. and heard Masse at Saint Nicholas Altar, where he receiued the Sacrament giuing  all men thereby to vnderstand, that he did forget the wrong which he had receiued as well by the Common-wealth, as by particular persons. This being done he was brought into the presence of the Prince and Senate whom he saluted, not with a furious and angrie looke, but with a gentle aspect, and kneeling at Prince Contareni his feet, the Prince spake thus vnto him.The Princes speech to Pisani in open Senate.

Victor, we haue for a time obserued the rigour of the Law: it now behoued vs to vse mercie and fauour: by our commandement thou wert imprisoned for the losse which the Common-wealth receiued at Pola vnder thy conduct: we haue at this time thought good to set the at libertie: Let me intreat thee not to dispute which of  the two hath bin most iustly done, but rather forgetting what is past, to looke vpon the Common-wealth, and endeuour to restore and maintaine it: In a word deale in such sort, as thy fellow-citizens who loue and honour thee for thy notable vertues, may be bound vnto thee as well for the good of the Common-wealth, as for their owne particular profit.

To this speech Pisani answered. Most excellent Prince there hath nothing befallenPisani his answere to the Prince. me either from your selfe, or from those who with you doe gouerne the State of the Common-wealth, which I take not in good part, as becommeth a good Citizen. I know that all things are well and wisely done which are concluded for the seruice of the Common-wealth, whereunto I assure my selfe that all your Councels and decrees doe tende. Concerning the iniurie I haue receiued of some particular  persons, I am so farre off from taking any reuenge, as I protest and sweare by that most holy Sacrament which I hope I haue this day receiued to my soules health, and by that holy diuine seruice which I was present at, neuer hereafter to remember it. And I intreat those who haue in any sort enuied my fortune and prosperitie,

to beleeue, that I beare them no lesse good will than to my dearest friends, and that they shall neuer by me, nor for me receiue any displeasure whatsoeuer, but I will on the contrarie striue to performe all offices of loue and kindnesse towards them. As for your charitable affection, and inuiting me to the seruice of the Commonwealth, I doe most willingly vndertake the defence thereof, and I would to God I were a manable in these dangerous times, to relieue it in any sort either with counsell or industrie, but howsoeuer, my loue shall neuer be wanting. This being said, he was embraced by the Prince, and by all the Senators, whose eyes were full of teares, and then he went home to his owne house.
It is reported that as he walked in the streets among great numbers of people The ioy of the people when they beheld Pisani at libertie. who came to congratulate him, the whole Citie in a manner following him, they clapped their hands in signe of ioy, and there were some, who at randon said that he ought to be Prince, and not a priuate Citizen; but he mildly reprehended them, telling them plainly that those praises ought to be giuen to Saint Marke the Cities Patron, and to the Prince, and not to an humble Citizen. And because the Senate had giuen him charge of those troupes which were neere to the hauen, that he might together with Caballa the Veronois aduise what should be most expedient for the Commonwealth, the common people thought that he had beene restored to his office of Generall of the nauall Armie. Then did all the religious Orders, all the Colledges, the companies and fraternities of the Citie come to offer themselues  both in publike and particular to furnish an Armie freely at their owne costs: some likewise made offer at their owne charges to arme all the gallies. But he after hee had courteously entertained them, sent them backe to the Prince and Senate, telling them that it was they who had the managing of all matters, and that they would listen to their offers, which concerned the good and profit of the Commonwealth. In the meane space he spent the time in visiting the works and fortifications made at Saint Nicolas Church against the enemies incursions, the which as vnprofitable, he caused to be beaten downe, and made others of better forme. But when the people knew that he was not restored to his former office: yee should haue seene in an instant how they stood affected to him, and taxed the wilfulnesse of the Senators, who in so great a danger would still respect their priuate hatreds. What said they, shall not so notable a man, most skilfull in marine matters and famous for the reputation of his high attempts, be restored to the office of high Admirall? This is notThe peoples talk in fauour of Pisani. done for the good of the Commonwealth, but onely to satisfie the enuie of a few particular persons. These or such like detractions of the common sort being reported at the Pallace, the Senate did againe assemble, where they propounded the small danger which at any other time the peoples murmuring against the Senate could import; but that it was most necessarie at that present to bee at vnitie one with another, inregard the safetie of the Commonwealth was then in hazard. VVhereupon by a generall consent, Victor was admitted to his former office. It Pisani is restored to his former office. was presently blowne abroad the Citie, how that by a new decree of the Senate, Pisani was declared Generall of the nauall Armie, and that he was with his forces to lie betwixt the Citie and the Paduan confines: Great numbers of people did forth with runne vnto him, and in three daies sixe gallies were armed, and many more might haue beene made readie if need had beene, euerie man striuing who should first enroll his name for that seruice.
Many Ganzarioles and other small vessels were added to these gallies. All which being readie to depart: Pisani came with the nauall Armie to the Hauen, whereIn what manner Pisani fortified the Citie. he conferred with the Generall of the land troupes, to change the Fort which had been builded at the first into a bricke wall, and to build at both ends two small towers  with good garrisons. The Senate allowed this opinion of his, and euerie one falling forthwith to worke, in foure daies the two towers were builded; Pisani, Thadeo,The diligence which was vsed in the fortifications. Iustiniano, Caballa, and diuers other noble men, hauing laid the first foundations. Then they began the wall in the same place where the trench was, the which being

drawne from one tower to another, was ended in fifteene daies: great numbers of townsmen, souldiers, and marriners laying their hand to it. The ruines of this building are at this day to be seene on the left side of the Hauen. There was afterward a great yron chaine drawne neere to the Iewrie to hinder the enemies incursions, and foure great couered ships were there placed to serue for a defence. Then without they made a trench from the new wall vnto Saint Martins Church, where diuers light boates were placed, who all night long went the round, least the enemie entering secretly, should burne the buildings next to the Citie. They did besides in the night time place diuers corpes-de-guard, for feare least the Citie should receiue some harme by a surprize.
VVhilest these things were done in the Citie, diuers persons in light boats madeThe venetians daily incursions. incursions beyond Montauban and those places from which men go from the firme land to Chioggia, where they assailed diuers boates which went vp and downe, which being easily taken, with the profit that arose by them, did encourage diuers others to doe the like. There passed no day but some vessell or other was taken, so as in a while after none durst goe from Padua to Chioggia. The Genoueses soone perceiued that if the passages were shut from them, victuails would faile. VVherfore to stay these incursions, or rather hoping to execute some great exploit, they came with their gallies and diuers other armed vessels, furiously to possesse the Hauen of Malamoc, and to encampe there; and hauing builded a Fort in the same place where  that of the Venetians had stood, they landed part of their troupes on the opposite shoare to take Poueggia by force.
The Venetians being aduertized of the enemies approach did shut vp the channels which came from Chioggia to Venice with two ships which were sunke one neere to the other, a little beyond the Church of the holy Ghost, and on the side of them another greater than they lying at Anker, with store of archers in it. The enemies gallies being come thither. Thadeo Iustiniano who lay at the foresaid Church did with fiue gallies euerie day giue them alarme, where they fought more with arrowes and dartes, than with hardie stroakes. The Venetians light boates comming on the one side with their warlike engines and arrowes did infinitely torment  the Genoueses gallies, and diuers daily died on both sides. They fought likewise sometimes on the shoare as occasion serued. In all which encounters the VenetiansDiuers and sundrie encounters where the venetians had still the better. had still the better. For Caballa the Veronois was most skilfull in the art militarie, and had good troupes of horse, which the enemies at Poueggia, and Malamoc had not.
During these combatesand encounters at the Sea, Charles sonne to Lewis, (as some say) or according to others, sonne to that Charles who defeated Manfred kingCharles sonne to Lewis king of Hungarie commeth before Treuiso. of Apulia, came with ten thousand Almaines before Treuiso. Before his arriuall Nicolao Morosino, Giouanni, and Zacharia Contareni were sent thither to consult with the Hungarian concerning the Commonwealth. For it was reported that hee had expresse commission from his father, to giue audience to the Venetians Ambassadors, and to those of the league; and if he and his associates likewise thought it fit, to make a peace with the Venetians. At his arriuall the Paduan Prince came to the campe, so did the Ambassadors of the Genoueses, and the Bishop of Aquileia, as well to congratulate his welcome, as to determine with him either for peace or warre, of that which concerned the king and the confederates. The Venetians the next dayThe venetian Ambassadors come to the campe to treate of peace. came to the campe which lay neere to the Church of the fortie Saints. And though they were expresly commanded by all meanes to accept of peace, though it were on vniust conditions* yet neuerthelesse the demaundes were such and so hard on all sides, as if the Venetians wealth had beene foure times greater than it was,The enemies vniust demaunds. it would not haue beene sufficient to satisfie the insatiable couetousnesse of the enemie.
This treatie of peace lasted certain daies, but the enemies shamelesse demands caused the Venetians by no means to condiscend to such vnhonest conditions, chusing

rather to endure all extremitie than by such basenesse to dishonour the Venetian name: Prince Carrario in the middest of this parlie returned to Padua, hauing left Arcuan Buccecarino to command the troupes which hee had brought to Charles. After his departure the matter was a while debated on. But the enemies meaning to take all from the Venetians, and to leaue nothing to the vanquished but their liues, the which they would haue them to enioy of their speciall fauour, the despite of that disgrace being conuerted into choler, the Senate commaunded their Ambassadours to giue ouer the businesse, and without any conclusion at all to returne to Venice. They being gone, Charles, after hee had laine in Campe two moneths beforeThe treatie of peace broken. Treuiso, perceiuing that it was to no purpose, dislodged and returned into  Hungarie.
Whilest these things were done on the Treuisan, the Venetians armed fiftieCharles returneth to Hu^garie. small (...), and came about sixe or seuen of the clocke in the euening, to surprize the enemies Fort. There was in the dike which Carrario had hastily made neare to Montauban, one Gallie commanded by Bartilmeo Vsiere of Sauona, with two other small boates, which serued for conuoy to those which went vp and downe. The Venetians hauing sodainely assailed it, tooke it in a moment, the enemie making greater shewes than deedes. The Venetian Archers wanne it, who passing ouer the otherside of the dike, did shoote directly into it being very neare to the shoare: but being taken and spoiled, because by reason of the ebbe they could not bring it  away they burnt it.
This victorie did greatly reioyce the Citie, and so much the more, because this fortunate successe did put courage into the Citizens, who were daunted with soSecret speeches of the people. manie losses, and caused them to hope for better fortune. For after these exploits, diuers speeches full of discontent were euery where heard, How that the Citie was become carelesse and fearefull, that it durst not fight with the enemie in a set battaile, that the Venetians did greatly degenerate from the valour of their ancestours, who had so often ouer come the Genoueses, hauing more Gallies than they* That a while before, the Genoueses had no place of retreat in all the Sea, to retire themselues in safetie for feare of the Venetians, but that now the same Venetian vigour  was dead: that they did no more remember their Countrie, their libertie, nor yet their owne priuate meanes, saying that it was a folly, or rather a miserable thing to stay, (hauing consumed all their wealth) till they were basely enforced to yeeld, rather by famine then by Armes: That the Senate should doe well to leuie the greatest forces they could: That the Citizens were resolued, either to vanquish the enemie, or else to die for the preseruation of their libertie. These speeches being reported to the Senate, made them thinke on higher enterprizes: WherevponThe Citizens resolution. they concluded to Arme fortie Gallies of which Prince Contareni should bee Generall: And Captaines for those Gallies were speedily appointed. This decree being published, did greatly reioyce the people; and it was executed with such affection  of the inhabitants, as according to some Authours, foure and thirtie Gallies were made readie in two dayes, the friends kinsfolks and allies of the Captaines of the Gallies hauing imploied themselues in that busines to hire Rowers, the residue of the Gallies for want of men could not be made readie. For besides the losse which they receiued a few moneths before at Pola, eighteene Gallies were abroade vnder the command of Carolo Zeno, which they daily expected. Prince Contareni in the meane time, so soone as the Rowers were gone into the Gallies; for to practise them in rowing (for they were almost all artificers) hee did daily make them to row from the Iewrie to Saint Nicholas Church. Hee did it of purpose as well to accustome those new and vnskilfull people to the oare, as also to delaie the battaile if it were  possible till the arriuall of Zeno: Because it was against reason to oppose to the victorious Armie of the enemies, one lesser in number, and weaker in forces than they.
But because the scarcitie of all things did in such sort oppresse them, as it was impossible

to drawe the matter out at length for feare least that delaie might cast them headlong into some greater danger, they resolued to fight notwithstanding that Zeno was not returned. And because in so great a dearth they might bee able to feed such an Armie, before they did set forward against the enemie, it was published by a decree of the Senate, That whosoeuer among the people would relieue the nauall Armie or the troupes, with monie, victualls or Souldiers: so soone as the enemiesA new decree of the Senate in fauor of those who should rele^e the Citie. should be defeated, thirtie of those who should bee thought to haue best deserued, should be receiued into the number of the Senatours, which honour they and their posteritie should for euer enioy: And besides, that the Senate would yearely distribute fiue thousand crownes among those who could not attaine to that dignitie. Diuers on the hope of such a recompence did shew themselues, diuers likewise being moued with loue to their Countrie, some offered one thing and some another.
More than threescore families did relieue the Common-wealth at this need, so as by how much any man was esteemed rich, by so much more did he striue to deserue well of the Common-wealth: by meanes whereof great reliefe was gathered, wherupon diuers were made Senatours. But in reading all that aboue mentioned in some Authors who haue beene carefull to collect this historie, one thing hath greatly moued me, which though it be of no great importance, doth neuerthelesse shew a great affection and loue towards a mans Countrie.
It is reported that one whose name was Matheo Fasceolo a Citizen of ChioggiaA liberall offer made to the Senate by a Citizen of Chioggia. (this man after the taking of the Citie retired to Venice with his children) came to the Senate, and told them how that at the taking of his Countrie he had lost all his wealth, which amounted to manie thousands of Crownes: and that if they were againe in his possession hee would franckly employ them for the good and profit of the Common-wealth: But that he had nothing left but his life, and two children, the which he freely offered to the Senate and his Countrie: And if they would employ them either by Sea or Land, they were readie for the seruice of the Common-wealth to expose that onely iewell which fortune had left them of all the rest.
The Genoueses hauing notice of the great preparations of the new Armie, fearingThe Genoueses feare. least the Venetians, being driuen forward by the flowing of the Sea, should about midnight surprise the entrie of the Hauen which they held, and being once entred, that those of the Citie comming to assaile them in small boates before and on the sides would enuiron them, and by that meanes enforce them to fight in round and so cut them in peeces, they raised their siege and returned to Chioggia, thinking that the Venetians being shut from victualls by Land and Sea, wouldThe Genoueses do wholy ruinate Malamoc and Poueggia. yeeld. But before their departure, they razed the Fort and ruined Malamoc and Poueggia downe to the ground.
Soone after, foure and twentie Genoueses Gallies went into Friul to get victualls, meaning to exchange salt (whereof they had great store) for wheate and other kind of graine. In the meane time three of those Gallies which were left for the guard of the Hauen (the Genoueses hauing disarmed the rest because the Citie should not be without Garrison did daily make incursions as farre as the tower Salina (which was the only fort that the Venetians held of all the residue in the lakes) and gaue diuers alarums to them within it. Victor Pisani departing from the Citie with three hundred small boates and fifty Ganziaroles, came and ambusht himselfe among the reedes neare to the tower thinking to surprize them, but being descried a farre off by meanes of his slags which were not taken downe, the Genoueses on a sodaine returned amaine towards Chioggia. The Venetian not being able  to ouertake the enemie in his flight, came with speed by the lakes which did beare smaller boates, first to Chioggia, where at his arriuall he tooke the Fort of the Saltpits, which are neare to the Citie, and hauing assailed the Citie at the same instant, he did greatly terrifie the enemie: The furie of the fight was towardes the

gate Mariana, and the fight was alreadie begunne in the channels when on a sodaine these three Gallies arriued. The Venetians being assailed by the enemie,An enterprise attempted with bad successe. before, behinde, and on the sides, were enforced speedily to retire to their enseignes. Prince Contareni his sonne in Lawe died in this encounter a braue young man and of the familie of the Gradonici, and diuers others likewise with, eight vessels taken by the enemies: And by this meanes the matter falling out vnluckily the Armie returned to Venice. The Genoueses Gallies in the meane time who wereThe Genoueses fortifie Chioggia. returned from forrage, vnderstanding what had beene attempted in their absence, did resolue to fortifie Chioggia, and to beat downe all the buildings neere to the salt pits, and those likewise which were vpon the Walls: to rampier the market  place in the middest of the Citie, and all the houses neere round abouts, and to that purpose to stop vp all the streets which lead to the water with a bricke Wall, and to make a Fort in manner of a Wall with rampiers and Towers of wood, with bridges within it of double ranckes, for the ease of the combatants. And because they had intelligence by their spies, that Carolo Zeno who was abroad with the Armie, was not yet returned, and that there was no likely-hood that the Venetians would attempt any thing before his comming, fearing by that meanes nothing lesse than their arriuall, they wrought but lasily in those fortifications.What Charolo Zeno did after his departure from Venice.
Carolo Zeno (as hath beene said) departing from Venice with fiue Gallies at such time as Pisani was defeated at Pola* met neere to Sicilie with Sicilians ships, diuers  of which being loden with corne and other victuailes were going to Genoa, hee made himselfe maister thereof, and taking as much victuailes as hee thought sufficient for his owne fleet, he threw the rest into the Sea; then he did let goe the Marriners who were Sicilians without any harme at all; and gaue them somewhat to beare their charges: forbidding them hereafter to goe no more to Genoa. Besides he tooke diuers Genoueses ships, as well on the coast of Trinacria as, on the Tuscan, and after he had spoiled them he suncke them in the Sea,
In this happie iourney of his, foure Gallies departing from Candie came and ioyned with him: These likewise before they came to him, had taken three Genoueses Barzes, one betweene Candie and Morea, the other at Sapientia, by the aide of  the Modonois, and the third on the Sicilian Sea: The which being brought to Naples, the merchandize which was within them was sold for fiue and fortie thousand crownes. Then Carolo hauing of fiue Gallies made a fleet of nine (for he was stillZeno make^ spoile all along the Riuer of Genoa. Generall of them all) sailed speedily towards the Riuer of Genoa to spoile there, where after he had made furious incursions, torne vp Trees and plants by the roots, he made all things desolate from Porto-venere euen to Genoa. He would not tarrie to besiege any place for feare of six of the enemies Gallies, who still followed him.
This spoile being made, returning to the maine Sea, he seized on a Sicilian shippe laden with corne, and other vessells going to Genoa, he brought away the shippe, and suncke the rest. These exploits did Zeno on the lower Sea. But neere to Trinacria  Micheleto Iustiniano who with foure Gallies had laine in the streight, besides other shippes taken from the enemies on the Propontide Sea and the Bosphorus, he tooke a Neapolitan Barzeloden with Genoueses merchandize which was sold for eighteene thousand ducats.
The six Gallies likewise which departed from Venice at the same time in a manner, or a litle before Zeno, were not idle. For soone after their departure they surprized two shippes of Amona, vnto whom vpon their word, they restored what they had taken from them, and within a while after departing forth of the Gulphe they met with a Turkish Gallie which they suncke, and slew all that were in it. Then they came and made certaine light assaults on the Isle of Chios where they burnt the  Wind-mills and the Rampiers. From Chios they went to Tenedos, and from thence hauing crost the streight, they sailed toward the Ponticke Sea, where hauing surprized a shippe of Sicilie, and finding the morchandize to belong to the Genoueses, it was sent as good prise into Candie.
Afterwards, he drew neere to Constantinople. Caloianes had at the same time recouered his Empire, and driuen his sonne Andronicus into Pera. But he was not yet master of the Castle, which did greatly vexe him. Therefore he neuer ceasedCaloianes earnest intreatie to the Venetians for succour. to importune the Venetians, vntill he had drawne them as well by entreaties as promises to assaile three hundred Genoueses which kept it. It is reported, that melting into teares, he besought the Venetians not to forsake him in so euident a danger, protesting that if by their meanes he were restored to his Empire, that the Venetians, and not hee (as in time before) should beare the name of Emperour of Constantinople. The Castle being taken by the Venetians valor, Caloianes recouered allThe Venetians take the Castle. the places of the Empire (Tenedos excepted.)
But whilest the Venetians were neere to Constantinople, they surprised two Genoueses ships laden with Syrian merchandize, within the which were eight and twentie Genoueses; and diuers other small vessells, which for the trafficke did ordinarily frequent the streight, and the Ponticke Sea. Pera likewise in hatred to AndronicusThe Uenetians besiege Pera in hatred of Andronicus. was streightly besieged, and during the siege, the foure Venetian Gallies in fauour of Caloianes did neuer stirre thence.
About the same time Zeno came to Tenedos, where in few dayes nineteene Venetian Gallies arriued, trusting to whom he tooke a Barze of Naples wherein were diuers Genoueses. Whithin a while after he departed from Tenedos with fifteene Gallies, hauing left two for the guard of the Island, and sent the residew to the siege  of Pera, vnder the command of Bertucio Pisani, brother to Victor. As he passed along he would needs haue seized on Andria a Citie belonging to the Barbarians, where being stricken with an arrow he fell downe dead. Carolo came from Tenedos to Rhodes, and going from thence he tooke two Genoueses ships. Then he arriued in Cyprus, where neere the Island he tooke a Barze of the enemies laden with corne, after that, an other which was verie rich. From Cyprus he sailed into Syria,In what place Zeno receiued newes of the losse of Chioggia and the Cities siege. where refreshing himselfe in the Hauen of Beritha, a Candiot-Gallie arriued sent by the Prince and Senate, bringing newes of the losse of Chioggia, and of the Cities siege, who commanded him to returne speedily into Italie, to raise the enemies Campe: whereupon hee sodainely left Syria and sailed to Rhodes to take in victuailes. Nicholao Zeno, Micheletto Iustiniano. Giouanni Barba were sent before with three Gallies to make expedition for whatsoeuer should bee necessarie for their iournie. They found in the Hauen of Rhodes a Genoa Barze called Pichinione, the goodliest that in those daies sailed on the Seas. The Genoueses mistrusting that which followed, that the residue of the Armie would quickely come thither, (the Venetians in the meane time not daring to assaile it for the bignesse of the vessell) went forth of the Hauen, and tooke the direct course towards Ionia, hauing but a scant winde. But it was not verie long ere Carolo arriued. There was by chance at the same time in the Hauen, a strange Barze, with an other of Spaine strongly armed, butA great Barze of Genoa taken. somewhat lesser: Zeno with these and the residue of the Armie, came and ouertooke  the enemie who for want of winde (as hath beene said) was not verie farre from the Hauen. The Genoueses sustained the assault a day and a night, and would not yeld, vntill they perceiued their sailes to be burnt. A hundred and threescore Marchants were taken in it, and almost as many Marriners. The Florentine Marchants were let goe so soone as they came to Rhodes, and to each of them were giuen an hundred crownes to beare his charge home.
It is reported that the Genoueses neuer had a greater or richer ship. They found by the marchants bookes of accounts, that the goods within it were worth fiue hundred thousand crownes. They sould thereof to the value of foure-score thousandA Genoueses ship esteemed to bee worth fiue hundred thousand crownes. to such as bid most: the residue not being set to sale.
Carolo, after he had caused the great ship to be vnladen, and the goods to put in smaller vessels, suncke it in the maine sea, and then passed into Candie. In that place (as some Authors say) hee receiued the first newes of the Cities siege by Marco Morosino, who was sent thither with a Gallie of purpose by the Prince and Senate.
But during these exploits at Sea, the Citie being tormented daily more and more with the scarcitie of all necessaries, Prince Contareni departed by night from Venice in the middest of Winter, with foure and twentie Gallies, and diuers other Vessells which carried Victualls: the Horse-men, and Archers, came by day-breake, and seized on the Hauen of Chioggia: And then on a sodaine hee sanke two Barzes at theThe Prince with his Armie in the Hauen of Chioggia. mouth of the Hauen, which he had dragged thither for that purpose, thereby wholly to take from the enemies all meanes of making any incur^ions* hauing at his arriuall left forces at the place, where he meant to sinke them, to see that those who had the charge thereof should speedily execute it. Then the Mercenarie Souldiers being landed, and tickled with a desire to fight, marched toward the Citie: Those within  the Towne being in great numbers made a sallie forth vpon him (for there were at the same time ten thousand fighting men in Chioggia) where the battaile wasThe Genoueses beate backe the Venetians to their Gallies. bloudie and fierce on both sides: But the enemies multitude still increasing, the Venetian was beaten backe, and with great losse driuen to his Gallies. Diuers were slaine fighting, but more flying: For whilest the troupes arriued on the shore side, striuing to enter into the Gallies, diuers in that amazement were slaine, and many taken: who being brought to the Citie and disarmed, were all murthered. Hn cio Pisani who had an honourable place in the Venetian Armie, died in this assault. The enemie by this victorie being become more insolent, did forth with arme diuers small vessells, and came against the Venetian Barzes, the which being not defended,The Venetian Barzes t^ken and burnt by the enemies. the Gallies not being able to come neare them by reason of the strength of the floud, were presently taken and burnt: wherewith the Venetian was better contented than if the enemie had kept them and placed Garrisons in them; For if they had so done, they would haue wholly hindered the Venetian from shutting vp the hauen.
The Venetian did not greatly esteeme these two losses, hauing his nauall Armie still whole and sound, for of all his Rowers, Pilots, and Marriners, not one came on shore to fight. He speedily sent two Gallies to the Citie to bring away two other Barzes. But whilest all these preparations were making readie: Frederico CornariCornari seizeth on Brondolli. went with foure Gallies by the Princes commandement to Brondolli, to shut vp at one time all issues from the enemie. Being come thither he sodainly sanke two ships  neare to one another, not farre from Brondolli; the one towards Saint Blase his Church, in the way from Chioggia to Ladice, and the other in the very Hauen.
But whilest Cornari was occupied in this businesse, Prince Contareni, because hee would loose no time, caused the bottomes of those two Barzes* which the enemies had burned to be drawne forth of the water, and filling them with flint stones, hee put them in the selfe same place from whence they had beene drawne: Then the next day hee did without any impeachment sinke in the same place the two other Barzes which came from Venice, being filled with earth and flint-stone. And because the entrance and comming forth of the Hauen, should bee still free to the Venetians, they fortified that part thereof which looketh towards the Citie; the which  the enemies sometimes attempted to hinder: But being repulsed by the arrowes which were shot forth of the ships in the Hauen and then by those which lay at ankor without, they were constrained to retire to the Citie with great losse.
The enemie fearing that if the Hauen should be shut vp, he might be brought toThe Genoueses determination fearing to be shut vp. the last point of all miseries, which is famine, caused fourteene Gallies to bee prepared to carrie part of the troupes from thence by Sea to Brondolli, intending to returne at the spring, to free his Countrimen from the siege, after hee should haue reenforced his Armie at Genoa. The Venetian Gallies which Cornari had brought thither (as hath beene said) did come before them to S. Blase his Church. The Channell was so streight as two Gallies could hardly goe in Front; the which did  greatly profit the Venetians, because they could not bee enuironed by a greater number, (but the ships which were sunke auailed them specially) whereupon so soone as Cornari perceiued that the enemie sought to draw them vp from thence, and to make themselues a passage, he aduertized his fellowes thereof, who lay three

miles from thence, by a smoake. Contareni perceiuing this signall, instantly commanded Thadeo Iustiniano to goe with foure Gallies to relieue Cornari. At his arriuall the enemies left off a little. Victor Pisani being sent after Thadeo with sixe Gallies,The Passage of Brondolli shut vp to the Genoueses. caused two other ships to be sunke, almost in the same place, and shut vp the passage with a chaine made of Masts and Saile-yards, builded in the forme of a Rampier.
Victor was made Generall of the Gallies which were sent to Brondolli: whereatIelouzie betwixt Pisani and Thad^ Iustiniano. Thadeo being offended (for there was alreadie some suspition of jealousie betwixt them two) forthwith departed thence in his Galley, because he would not be enforced to obay him, and came to the Prince. The residue which were thirteene remained in the Garrison, where the Venetians had much to doe, the enemies hourely  seeking all meanes to open the passage. The Genoueses Gallies being brought back to Chioggia, hauing attempted the passage in vaine, the enemie seized on the Monasterie of Nunnes neare to Brondolli, and fortified it: and hauing caused his Gallies to glide along as farre as little Chioggia, he attempted likewise to possesse the other side of the Hauen of Brondolli. Victor which perceiued it (for the enemies Gallies were remoued from the other side) he commanded Giouanni Barbadico to passe speedily vpon the enemie with light Vessells (whereof great numbers were from the beginning sent vnto him) whilest himselfe with his Gallies drew as neare as he could to the same side which the Genoueses intended to take. For it is most certaine that the enemie possessing both the sides of the Hauen, the Venetian Gallies would haue  beene shut in. The Hauen is foure hundred foote broade. There is small store ofA sharp sight in the Hauen of Brondolli. Water in the middest thereof, but it is nauigable on both sides neare to the shore. Now the Genoueses possessed alreadie (as hath beene said) one of the sides, and had fortified it. If he had shut in the going forth on the left side, as he had determined, the Venetian Gallies had beene vndone. They rested not in any sort in so great a danger: they fought fiercely in the middest of the Hauen, whereby the Venetians endured much, in regard of the great numbers of arrowes which the enemies shot on them from the opposite shore. But the greatnesse of the danger made the Venetians resolued, or rather obstinate in their determination, so that at last they brake the enemies deseignes; and being become Masters of the place, they builded a Fort  there with all expedition* which that they might finish with more safetie, they called great numbers of Souldiers and Artificers from the Armie.
Georgio Caballa, Sonne to Giacomo, was sent with a good troupe to guard thatThe Venetians and the Geno ueses lodge at one time in one Hauen. place; and by this meanes the Genoueses and the Venetians possessed one Hauen at one time. Whereupon there were daily skirmishes, the engines of warre throwing from one side to an other. The nauall Armie was likewise much molested day and night, by the warlike engines which the enemie had in the Nunnes Monasterie. During these exploits, neare to Chioggia, the Stellani, in fauour of Bernabo Visconte, ouer-ranne the whole Countrie of Genoa, thereby to diuert them from the Warre of Chioggia. For besides other exploits of warre, foure thousand horse came at times The Stellani ^rre on the Genoueses The Genoueses defeate the Stellani. vnder the conduct of Asturo their Generall vnto S. Francis Church, neare to Genoa, filling the whole Countrie with feare and terrour. But the Genoueses making a sallie forth vpon them the latter time, wholly brake them, and tooke them all prisoners; their Captaine excepted, who escaped by meanes of a Peasant.
The forces likewise of the Emperour Caloianes did somewhat aide the Venetians, who did greatly molest those of Pera by ordinarie incursions, and sometimes by furious assaults: But so soone as his Sonne Andronicus had placed Misians and Turkes that were come to his aide, in a place neare to the Citie, for feare of danger he gaue ouer the Venetian partie.
This was done farre from the Citie. But on the Venetian Territorie, The Genoueses  who were desirous to put forth some Gallies to succour their troupes, did with great difficultie draw eighteene Gallies ouer the bridge of Port Mariana, intoThe Venetian attempts to binder the Genoueses escape. the streame which separateth little Chioggia from the great, and from thence conducted them with great danger to Brondolli, where being sufficiently furnished

with men and Armes, they remained before the Fort, expecting a fit time to sallie forth. The Venetians on the other side not to suffer the enemie to escape without punishment, kept good guard neare to the Hauen, to beate him in if hee should attempt to make any euasion. But whilest the enemie watch this time, and the Venetian continued to attend on him, the Venetian Gallies were greatly molested by the enemies Archers, in such sort as the Marriners like desperate persons cried out, that they were of necessitie to dislodge, vnlesse they would haue them which were in the Gallies, to die before Chioggia. Those likewise which were in guard on the shore, fearing that Carrarto would send his troupes to assaile them on their backs, intreated that they might raze the Fort and depart thence. Pisani exhorted and intreated Pisani exhor^eth his murmuring souldiers. them all to haue patience for a while, and that it could not be long ere Carolo Zeno would arriue; and that then being strengthened with Men and Gallies, they would easily daunt the enemies boldnesse.
The like despaire was in the Princes Armie* For cold and hunger, and the danger of arrowes which were continually shot into the gallies had so daunted them, as the souldiers with those which were in the Hauen, thought more on flight, than on resistance. The Princes presence onely, and intreatie did stay them, who laid beforeThe great respect which the souldiers did beare to the Princes presence them the great disgrace, and euident danger which their countrey was like to incurre if they departed thence without effecting some worthie enterprize: That without doubt the Genoueses would pursue the Venetians at the heeles, if they dislodged  from before Chioggia, and comming more furiously than before to assaile their Citie alreadie in a manner lost by famine, they would in short space take it.
But neither entreaties, no^ exhortations could perswade the souldiers, who were wholly daunted, to continue the siege, so as at last they resolued within two daies to raise their campe from both places: But Zeno on a sodaine, as if he had beene sent from Heauen, about noone entred the Hauen of Chioggia with foureteene gallies well armed.
The Senate on the first of Ianuarie, so soone as they descried him on the maine sailing directly towards the Citie, about three of the clock after noone, sent to commaund him to go and meete with the Prince, who lay before Chioggia. His comming  was no lesse acceptable than needfull. The ioy and welcomes were great in both Armies, but much more when they vnderstood by his speech that he had sunke threescore of the enemies vessels of all sorts, and that he had taken in the great Barze called Pichinione, and in the rest more than three hundred Genoa marchants, not accounting the rowers and marriners, and gotten a bootie more in value than three hundred thousand crownes. But because their businesse at that time required no long delay, Zeno was forthwith commaunded to goe to Brondolli with twelue gallies to meete Pisani.
His arriuall brought great contentment to the Venetians, who wept for ioy. The Garrison which was on the shoare perceiuing the arriuall of their gallies, tooke  courage also. At the same time three gallies of Candie, and one of Arbacame to the Prince: Whereupon the Venetians seeing their Armie to consist of two andTwo and fiftie gallies in the venetians Army by Sea. fiftie gallies, did no more feare the enemies attempts. Carolo resolued to lie at Anker without the Hauen, and not to enter before night: But a sodaine tempest a rising before sun-set, he returned with fiue gallies to the Prince, hauing winde and tide with him. Thadeo Iustiniano who had remained still with the seuen, hauing been grieuously tossed, lost two gallies* one neere to the Fort which was broken on the Sea-banks, and the other neere to the mouth of Po. Carolo being sent back again with nine galliesCarolo Zeno arriueth in the hauen of Chioggia. to Pisani, entred the Hauen as he was commanded and ioyned with him. Two gallies were placed as sentinels neere to the place, where the enemies would haue escaped.
The Genoueses faining to escape by night, came and assailed one of those two gallies, and by the helpe of the Garrison of Brondolli drew it on shore. Those within it feeling themselues to be drawne forwards by cables and yron chaines* did presently leape into the Sea, hoping to saue themselues by swimming, but being kept

downe by the waues, they were all drowned, and those who stroue against the waues were slaine by the enemie. Giouanni Miani Captaine of the galley was taken with a rich booty. For this galley Carolo had brought home from his voayge.
The enemie being proud of this exploit, would needs attempt to get forth: For he certainly knew that so great a multitude of people shut vp in a place, would soone be famished if speedie meanes were not found to separate them. Whereupon the Garrison which was at Lupa neere to the hauen, which the Venetian determined to assaile; and the other which ment to escape at Brondolli, came at one time to encounter the Venetian. They fought fiercely in both places, and the Genoueses were repulsed with great losse; but much more at Lupa than at Brondolli. The Venetian A new fight with the enemies. after all these attempts, to take all hope of escape from the Genoueses, caused two great ships of burthen to be brought from Venice, and sanke them with an yron chaine in that place, (though verie streight) which remained open to the Genoueses. Then they placed fiue gallies for the guard of the passage commaunded by Francisco Bocolli, in which place before there were but two. Carolo Zeno was commaunded to keepe neere to the Fort with seuen gallies; and fiue others were placed in the way to Bebia: Victor with the residue of the Armie encamped neere to SaintThe venetians attempt to hinder the enemies escape. Blase his Church.
In these places they remained all day: in the night they came neere to Brondolli, and set boats in sentinell, to the end they might be soone aduertized if the enemie  remoued. Such was the state of the Venetians affaires at Brondolli, when in the meane time three Venetian gallies, sent with forces from the right hand, assailed Loretta, which in few daies was recouered and manned with a strong Garrison: in likeLoretta recouered. manner the new Tower which had beene burnt at the Genoueses first arriuall, was repaired and manned with souldiers for the guard thereof.
About the same time that Loretto was recouered, the Tower of the Monasterie of the Nunnes which the enemies possessed neere to to the Hauen, being shaken with a sodaine stroke of a Peece of batterie, was for the most part ouerthrowne, where Pietro Doria Generall of the Genoueses Armie was crushed in peeces. Some say that he was slaine as he was putting his vessels in order of battaile, and that (he  being dead) the Fort was abandoned, and the vessels left to the mercie of the fire.The death of the Genoueses Generall. And that thereupon the victorious Venetian pursued the enemie in his flight as farre as Chioggia, and that there they fought againe before little Chioggia: wherevpon the Genoueses being againe vanquished with great slaughter, and hauing lost the one halfe of the bridge, they retired confusedly into the Citie: that the same day likewise more than sixe hundred Genoueses were taken, and almost as many slaine, of whom besides Doria of whom we now spake, Thomaso Goti a man of great repute, was buried in the ruines of the bridge. But Chinatio setteth downe the matter otherwise, whom herein we rather follow as we haue done in other matters. He saith that all that which we haue spoken of, did not happen in one day, but at sundrie  times: that both the enemies fleets did neuer lie so neere one to the other, nor did neuer so much hurt one another with arrow*shot. It is reported that no day passed wherein aboue fiue hundred great stones were not flung forth of brazen engines from one campe to the other, with great slaughter and hurt.
In the meane time they were not lesse infested neere to the Citie. For they skirmished daily neere to little Chioggia, as occasion serued. The Genoueses being shut vp in this manner, men began to come to Venice by the riuer of Po, from La Marca, Romagnia, and Ferrara. By meanes whereof the dearth of victuals soone ceased. The price whereof had beene so high, as the Citie was almost brought toGreat scarcitie of victuals in venice. the last extremitie. For corne was solde at the same time* at a fourefold rate, and so likewise all other necessaries.
The Paduans by stealth in small couered boates carried victuals to the besieged. The Senate to reenforce the troupes which were before Chioggia, leuied fiue thousandThe Genoueses designe to get forth. foot: The Genoueses for their last attempt, would trie if by any cunning they

could put their Armie forth which lay at Brondolli, seeing by force they could not doe it. VVherefore hauing drawne a great and broad trench from the Fort, euen to the shoare, they were in great hope to be able in the darknesse of the night vnknowne to the Venetians to put forth to Sea, whereupon twentie gallies made account to get forth in that place, whom they thought to be sufficient to molest the Venetians coast, and chiefely the Citie of Venice, so as they being at Sea, the Venetian should be enforced whether he would or no to raise his campe. But the Venetian hauing discouered the enemies designe, all the souldiers thereabouts were sent for to the Princes campe, where they resolued to assault Brondolli at one time by Sea and land.
All the forces in a manner being reduced into one bodie for this purpose, there arose a quarrell betwixt the Italians and the mercenarie strangers which were in the campe: who falling to blowes, diuers in a moment were slaine, and it would greatly haue endangered the Armie, had not the Princes comming sodainly appeasedTumult in the venetian Army: the matter. This tumult, with the feare likewise, least the enemie should draw his trench euen to Brondolli, caused the Venetians to make hast, and not to tarrie for Iohn d'Agons a wise and valorous Frenchman, whom in his absence they had namedIohn of Agons ^ French man. for their Generall by land. Carolo Zeno being sent with the residue of the forces which remained round about Brondolli, was commanded to bring those troups which had still laine encamped vnder the publike ensignes before the Citie neere  to the shoare, to assaile the Fort of the Genoueses, who was thought to be a Captaine better experienced on the land than sea.
Pisani was alreadie commaunded carefully to attend the signall: and that so soon as he should be aduertized that his fellows fought at Brondolli, he should likewise come on the other side, and that hauing brought his gallies as neere as possibly he could, he should land his troupes, and assaile the enemie on that side next to the Port. All things were readie for the assault of Brondolli, when as the exploit falling out fortunately at little Chioggia made them to alter their determination. For the Venetian fearing that the enemie would come on their backs, would first before they went to Brondolli assaile the Fort which the Genoueses held in that place: The troupes marching on to this end, were hardly come to the Tower, when as on an instant the Genoueses as though they had beene called by a certain signal, caused all those which were at Brondolli to come to Chioggia, sauing a few who were left for the guard of the place, who were commaunded to march in battell, and to assaile the Venetians on their backes, whilest they should be busied in the fight, and that they on the other side would sally forth of the Citie, and giue a furious onset on the enemie: herein being guided after the common saying, That it is better to fight with the enemie in a set battell, than by a long siege to bee brought to all extremitie.
It is said that fifteene hundred came forth of Brondolli, and about eight  thousand from the Citie. The Garrison of Brondolli came with great noise,The Genoueses come and assaile the venetians in set battaile. as issuing from an ambush, and fell vpon the Venetians. Zeno brauely receiued them, and the fight was verie cruell. At the first they shot such great store of arrowes from both sides, that the aire was darkned as with a great cloud. The noise which was heard from the shoare, and from the ruines of little Chioggia, together with the clashing of Armour filled euerie place with terror: in which fight the number of the dead was great, but that of the wounded much greater.
In the meane time that great squadron of eight thousand men came forth of the Citie, and came forward in a close battallion like a torrent vpon the Venetian, who was busied in fight with the first commers. Zeno likewise turning towards them, did  valiantly sustaine their first attempts, and was alreadie enforced to fight on both sides, when desiring to be ridde of the one, that he might intend the other, he came with greater furie against those of Brondolli, towards whom giuing backe by little and little, and almost halfe vanquished, the cauallerie speedily marched, who finding

them to be spent and tired in the fight with the footmen, did easily breake andThe Garrison of Brondolli broken and defeated in the fight. put them to flight with great slaughter. Diuers casting themselues into the water neere to S. Katherines Church were drowned, as well because they could not swim, as by the weight of their Armour.
The victorious Venetian being freed on that side turned all his forces against the squadron of the Citie, which being amazed at the mishap of their fellowes, had alreadie begun by little and little to giue backe. Against these being of themselues disordered, the Venetian furiously marched. The enemies being then affrighted, loosing their iudgement with their rankes, perceiuing fortune to be contrarie, beganne openly to flie: euerie man shifting for himselfe, endeuoured to get ouer the bridge  fearing if he should be shut forth to be murthered by the enemie: those that were last were worst dealt with. Diuers were slaine in the flight, but manie more neare to the bridge: which not being able to beare so manie armed men together, and sodainely breaking in the middest, drew diuers with it into the ruines. Those which fell with the bridge and their Armor into the water, did all perish, some on their owne ^auelings, and others by stones which fell vpon them, but the number of such was greatest who by the weight of their Armour sincking into the bottome of the water, were neuer after seene. More than a thousand who were shut forth of the bridge, were cut in peeces, and diuers likewise casting their weapons from them were taken prisoners. Those who were on the farther side of the bridge being  pursued with arrow-shot were enforced to yeeld. The Venetians committed the keeping of the fort that the enemies Souldiers had builded in that place, to Giacomo Rouccio a valiant Captaine. The Tower which before the battaile was begunne to be assailed, did likewise presently yeeld.
Foure hundred Genoueses were taken at the same time, among whom were diuersThe great losse which the Genoueses sustained that day. gentlemen: with a thousand ensignes of the Paduans and Genoueses:
The night after the battaile, the Genoueses that were at Brondolli hauing set fier on their Gallies retired in great amazement to Chioggia. So soon as Victor had notice of the enemies flight, he presently drew neere with his Gallies, where he saued two Gallies of Genoa from the fier, ten of them being burnt, and the residue drawne  to Chioggia a while before. Diuers Paduans and Genoueses fearing that if the Venetian should shut vp al the passages, they might not then depart when they would, did the same night retire with great silence to Padua. The next day Victor entredPisani entreth into Brondolli. into Brondolli, where hee had intelligence by certaine spies, that tenne Genoa Gallies strongly Armed, lay not far from thence for the guard of the Mills, whither he presently sent certaine small boates, to discouer whether it were so or no. But the Genoueses descrying them, and beeing terrified with the newes of the losse of their Armie, left their Gallies, and leaping into the water escaped by swimming to the next shoare, by meanes whereof these Gallies without any resistance at all were possessed by the Venetians, which to the great ioy of the people, were brought to  Venice. Some Authors say, that they were but fiue, and that fourescore of the enemiesTen Genoa Gallies taken. were taken in them.
Carolo Zeno, hauing by the Princes commandement drawne his troupes from the lesser Chioggia, came and encamped before the Hauen of the Citie, by the way which leadeth to Brondolli, neere to Saint Francis Church, where he caused his Souldiors to make a great Trench. The Genoueses then perceiuing that they wereThe Genoueses put all vnprofitable eaters forth of Chioggia (...) passages leading to Chioggia are shut vp. Pisani fortifieth Brondolli. more streightly shut in, did put all the women and children, with other vnprofitable eaters forth of the Citie. Prince Contareni sent that wretched companie to Venice. Besides, the Venetian inclosed all the passages from the firme Land to Chioggia, with stronge rampiers. Pisani likewise by building a Tower and a rampier at Brondolli, did within a month make the Hauen so strong, as leauing a few troupes for the guard thereof, he brought thence his Armie out of all feare and danger. The siege still continued till Chioggia was recouered.
In the meane time, vpon report that a new Armie was prouiding at Genoa, and

that of a certaine Prince Carrario made great preparations of Armor and shipping, and perceiuing besides, that they should not spedily recouer Chioggia, the Senate to preuent the like scarcitie of victuailes, as that wherewith the Citie was a while before afflicted, decreed that certaine ships of burthen should be sent into Apulia to fetch corne, and that Thadeo Iustiniano with twelue Gallies should be their conuoy.Iustiniano it sent to Apulia for forrage. He sailing towards Histria did without any great difficultie recouer Grada, where surprising diuers Forlani, he sent them all bound to Venice. Hee departed thence with a faire wind, and came to Manfredonia, where he had intelligence that the Genoueses Armie was not farre off, being commanded by Maruffo Doria; hee  presently sent backe those shippes which he had laden with corne: Soone after, the enemie approaching, he caused the other shippes to bee suncke in the Hauen to the end the Genoueses should make no vse of them, and himselfe with six Gallies (for the rest were gone a forraging) returned towards Venice. But a terrible tempest arising, caused him to returne to Manfredonia, where (because the enemie was at hand) he caused all his Gallies to be disarmed, and their tackling and furniture toThe Genoueses* assaile Iustinian^ at Manfredonia. be caried into the Towne, which done, he suncke them in the Hauen. Then barricadoing his troups on both sides the entrie of the hauen, to the end they might fight in couert, he resolued to hinder the enemies entrance. Some say that Guido Foranensis the Cities Gouernour, counselled Thadeo to leaue the Hauen and to retire with  his troupes into the Citie, but that he would by no meanes doe so.
At the enemies first arriuall, there was a cruell fight for two houres space: then both sides made a pause whilst they refreshed themselues, and soone after they returned to the combate with greater furie. The Hauen had been brauely defended, if the Venetian had not beene enforced to fight neere together, and in a round figure, by reason that some of the enemies were landed, they neuerthelesse for a while brauely sustained all their assaults: But being beaten thence by the enemies great multitudes, they fled. The Citie beeing not farre off was the cause that the slaughter was no where else but in that place where they skirmished. Thadeo with a hundred of hisIustiniano taken by the Genoueses Souldiors were taken by the enemie.
The Genoueses hauing broken as much of the sunke Gallies as appeared aboue water, sailed to Ficulan, where six other Venetian Gallies were reported to be, fiue of which by the enemies rash entrance escaped and came to Venice, and the other being not so swift as the rest, was taken. The slaues of those Gallies which were lost at Manfredonia, came to Chioggia by Land. Where, at the verie same time as all this happened farre from Venice, the Venetians fought with good successe on the Lakes, with fourescore of the enemies vessells, eight of which were taken, and the residue beeing put to flight retired with great feare to Chioggia. But the assaultA great fight on the lakes. which was within a while after giuen to the Genoueses Fort at the Mills was not so fortunate. For the Venetian was not only shamefully beaten thence, but the sonneThe venetians repulsed from the Fort of the Mills. of Lodouico Loretano a valorous yong man, with diuers other Venetians of note were there slaine. The Venetians comming againe the morrow after to enuiron the Fort, the Paduan Armie (which Chioggia being besieged had remained there, intending to passe ouer into the firme Land, so soone as the Venetian Gallies should not be able to stirre for want of water) was onward on their iournie in the Lakes, so as whilst the Venetians were busied in the fight, newes was brought them that the Paduans were escaped towards the firme Land. Whereupon they gaue ouer their enterprize,The Paduans desea^ed and put to flight. and crossing the Lakes they made hast to ouertake the enemie, whom on a sodaine neere to the shoare they defeated and put to flight.
The enemies esc^ping into the neighbour Marishes, all their vessells to the numper of fourescore were taken, and with them threescore prisoners, among whom were diuers Genoueses, They were not idle in Zenos Campe, for they still fought as occasion  was offered. The enemies beginning to want victualls, the Soldiours first, andDemands of the besieged. then the Genoueses, craued that they might depart from Chioggia with their goods; the which was flatly denied to either of them.
Not long after, the Venetians hauing intelligence that the Genoueses ArmieThe Venetians propositions to the besieged. was arriued in Dalmatia, and of the preparations which Carrario made on the frontiers to relieue his associates, and to raise the siege; sent word to the besieged, that whosoeuer would haue their liues saued should forthwith leaue Chioggia (for the Historians mention no set time) and come and yeeld their bodies at the Prison gates in Venice, otherwise they should not expect any mercie.
It is reported that the enemie did so contemne this proposition, as not one amongThe resolution of the besieged. all their great number would embrace it. They had beene aduertized of the comming of their Armie, and therefore hoping that the siege would soone bee raised, they resolued still to hold out, and to endure any extremitie rather than to  yeeld. The Senate did set forth fiftie light vessells to resist the Paduans attempts, for they were to fight on the lakes. They did afterwardes cause fiue and twentie Gallies to come to the Citie, which should be opposed against the enemie, if he had made any approch.
On the fourth of Iune about three of the clocke after dinner the Genoueses ArmieThe Genoueses Armie calleth the Uenetians to the fight. presented it selfe before the Hauen of Chioggia, being three and twentie Gallies in number. They came within a mile of the Citie, and with great cries called the enemies to fight. But the Venetians not stirring at all, made themselues readie to receiue the enemies assaults: And in another place great number of light boates kept watch on the lakes to discouer the Paduans proceedings. The Genoueses  perceiuing that they could not draw the Venetians to fight, retired to the Fossoni, from whence they daily came to challenge the Venetians with reprochfull speeches. Yet neuerthelesse Prince Contareni and the other Captaines continued still firme in their resolution, by no meanes to fight. And yet they sent forth certaine small boates which by their swiftnesse did greatly molest the enemies Gallies.
Pisani at the last contemning the enemies small number, did by the Princes permissionThe Genoueses dare not attend the Venetians. sallie forth of the Hauen with fiue and twentie Gallies, and being come somwhat forward at sea, he did on a sodaine turne the prowes of his Gallies vpon the enemie at Fossoni. The Genoueses durst not attend them, but hauing retired the  Armie, they did on a sodaine flie towards Ancona; but the Venetian without the Princes commaundement would not pursue them verie farre, fearing to leaue the siege,
The besieged at the same time would needs attempt one meanes more to escape, hauing for the purpose made a hundred small boates of the wood of houses, each of which had tenne oares. They had determined (for their fleet within few daies after was returned to their olde place of abode) that so soone as their Gallies should approach the Hauen, and with their great vsuall noise make all men attentiue to behold them (for they had receiued new supplies from Genoa and Dalmatia) three of their Gallies should come as neare as they could to the shoare right ouer against  the lesser Chioggia. And in the meane time those within the Towne should come forth by the inner channells which lead to the port Mariana and the lesser Chioggia, and being come to the Sea, should goe aboord the Gallies: Granello of Pera was the Conductor of this enterprize. Hee when all things were readie, gaue a signall to his people to come forth. Those of Zeno's Campe hauing discouered theThe Venetians sodaine arriuall hinders the enemies escape. matter, did speedily aduertize the Prince that the enemie was readie to depart. Diuers light boates were forthwith sent to hinder their comming forth, who hauing crossed the water, and being come to the place where the enemie was alreadie come forth, did on a sodaine so affright them, as in a moment they were defeated. Fiftie of their boates were taken, diuers of them were slaine, and fourescore prisoners  taken with Granello their leader, and the residue by flight escaped into the Citie
Blondus saith that the Genoueses made an attempt to cut a sunder the chaine which crost the sunke Argoseis at the entrance of the Hauen, at which time Maruffo the Generall of their Armie came at the floud, and gaue in vpon the Venetian

Gal^ies and that thes kirmish being begunne, hee busied the Venetian in fight, whilest his people tooke away that hinderance: but that both their attempts proued vaine. For those who would haue come forth, and those likewise who cameThe enemies are euery where ill intreated. and assailed them at their backes, were in such ^ort beaten by the Engines of warre aud by arrow-shot, as they were basely enforced to flie.
The Genoueses being daunted with the losse of their people returned to their vsuall aboade. Those in the Citie perceiuing that neither their owne attempts nor those of their fellowes did any whit auaile them, did set all the prisoners at libertie, and bringing them to the Citie gates, sent them to the Campe. It is thought that they did it for feare, least if they should haue died in prison, they themselues in like  manner falling afterwardes into the enemies power might receiue the selfe same punishment.
Then they tried another means to get forth. They sent messengers to the CaptainsThe Genoueses pollicie to get forth of the Citie in despite of the Venetians. in Zeno's Campe, who promised them all the gold, siluer, and Armour of the Genoueses with the Citie to boote, on condition that the Venetians would permit them to depart thence home to their houses without any harme at all. To this forme of yeelding they did all hearken; But Zeno opposing it, did aduertize the Prince thereof by an expresse messenger. Pietro Hemo his Counceller was forthwith sent thither, for besides diuers things which would haue beene taken from them by this kind of yeelding, the Venetians should haue receiued a great disgrace, if the Genoueses  their ancient and Capitall enemies being with great danger and trauaile brought to all extremitie should haue escaped from them without punishment. By Hemo hisAn in what conditions the Genuoueses designes were broken. aduice then it was concluded, that the spoile of the Citie should bee giuen to the Souldiers, and that as manie as tooke the enemies paie should become their prisoners; and the Genoueses, Paduans, Forlani, Dalmatians, and Greekes, being more apt to tug an oare than to beare Armes, should with the Citie fall to the Venetians share. The Captaines being by these Articles put in minde of their dutie, did promise and sweare to Zeno, that they would neuer againe accept of the Genoueses offers, nor in any sort harken to their messengers, entreaties, or promises whatsoeuer. The matter being thus appeased, Roberto de la Marca, who held a very honourable Roberto de la Marca is hanged at Uenice. place in the Armie, continuing still wilfull in his opinion that the Genoueses offers should bee accepted, did labour all hee might to haue it done, til being brought into Zeno's presence, hee was by a generall consent committed to prison, and two dayes after being conuicted of treacherie was hanged at Venice: and thus by the death of one only man the whole tumult was appeased.
The Genoueses first designe prouing vaine, they endeuoured still to raise some sedition in the Campe, as they had done at the beginning, by making greater offers to the Souldiers. But the Captaines sent their messengers to Zeno, assuring themA discreet answere of the mercenarie Captaines to the enemies. that the Genoueses liues and deaths were in his and the Venetians hands, and that they were to entreate and beg their liues of them, and to vse no more meanes to  the Souldiers, for both they and their Captaines, were at the commaund of Carolo, into whose presence they being come, they could by no meanes change his determinat on.
Hauing then lost all hope, falling to teares and entreaties, they sent the chiefe ofThe Gen^eses on their knees at the Princes feet begge life. all their troupes to the Prince, who weeping and falling at his feete, entreated him for the loue of Almightie God, and in pittie of their calamities, to take commiseration of their present miserie; confessing that they had till then like enemies executed diuers enterprises against the Venetians, as well by Sea sa Land, but that it was only for dominion, and not for greedinesse of mens liues: which might bee easily testified, in regard that during the warres all prisoners on both sides, had  beene oftentimes redeemed or exchanged, and sometimes likewise by conuention set at libertie: Namely that lately at the taking of Chioggia, not any one was iniuried by them, that were found without Armes, except some few, who by the rashnesse and follie of some particular persons, and not by the generall consent of

all men, had beene slaine. And that besides, they had neuer refused to giue anie man his life that had requested it. That victualls beginning to growe scarce, they dismissed their prisoners, fearing least they should be famished in Prison. They did not denie but that they had tried all meanes before they wou^d yeelde; which neuerthelesse they had not done so much for any hatred they did beare to them, as because they would not bee counted Bisonians and cowards among their Countriemen. And that now being vanquished rather by famine than by Armes they did not request to carrie away with them their owne gold, siluer, or moueables, but onely their liues: the which if it should bee denied to men vnarmed, and who did humbly craue it, would for euer bee accounted a deed both cruell and inhumane: Yet whatsoeuer should befall the Genoueses in this warre, they had next vnto God placed their hope in the meeknesse and mercy of the Venetians. They besought them then to bethinke what regard they meant to haue, to their prayers and teares, and lastly to their greiuous calamitie. For they could not belieue, nor neuer would, though they should endure the vttermost extremitie, that they who had so many times felt the thwarts of aduerse fortune would forget the alteration of wordly affaires.The replie made vnto them.
To this there was no gentle replie made, but only that they might bee sure to bee soone imprisoned, and that then the Senate would at leisure determine of their life or death: That in the meane time, it was both iust and reasonable that  those should remaine in darke captiuitie, who to obey their owne vnbridled passions, had lost their libertie. They were then commanded to depart, and to take heed least that by their owne fault they lost not the offer made vnto them, and thatFamine enforceth them to yeeld. they should speedily dispatch what they had to doe. Being returned to the Citie they brought newes of nothing but sad calamitie, how the losse of their goods, imprisonment, and their liues were in danger, But being grieuously afflicted by famine (for there were some among them who of a long time had seene no bread) they resolued to yeeld howsoeuer rather than to die with hunger. Therefore setting vp an Ensigne on the highest Tower of the Citie, the Genoueses fleete came forthwith from their vsuall place of aboade into the Cities view, but the besieged  did soone take it downe: whereat those of the Gallies being moued, sought by all meanes to encourage them: but they within the Citie returning them no signall for an answere, they were certainely perswaded, that both they and themselues were wholly vndone: whereupon, being sad and disconsolate they retired to the Fossoni.
The Captaines in the meane time sent into the Citie to separate the mercenarie Souldiers from the Genoueses, and to put the richest bootie into a certaine place. Foure thousand prisoners fell to the Venetians, three thousand of whom were Genoueses, two hundred Paduans, a few Forlani, and the residue Dalmatians and Illirians with some Greekes, who were all brought prisoners to Venice. The Souldiers being disarmed, were let goe. The whole spoile being laid on a heape in Saint  Maries Church was for the space of two daies sold to such as bid most: the monie was distributed among the Souldiers, and the Citie was by the Captaines yeeldedThe Venetians recouer Chioggia to the Venetians. In this manner did the Venetians recouer Chioggia, ten months after it had beene taken by the Genoueses. Prince Contareni, Victor Pisani, Carolo Zeno, and the chiefe of the Armie entred it on the foure and twentieth of Iune: and hauing in all places erected the Venetian Ensignes, they brought home to the Common-wealth ninteene Genoa Gallies well armed, with diuers ships, and a meruailous great quantitie of salt.
The end of the sixth Booke of the second Decad.



THE SEVENTH BOOKE  OF THE SECOND DECAD OF THE HISTORIE Of Venice.

The Contents of the seuenth Booke of the second Decad.



THe Venetians recouer Bebia with all the other Forts on the Lakes soone after the reduction of Chioggia. The Thryestines reuolting take parte with the Genoueses Cap-Histra is taken by the enemies. The Genoueses passing with their fleete before the Hauen of the Citie come into Histria. The Venetians mightie Armie recouereth Cap-Histria. The Genoueses take Arba. VICTOR PISANI dieth at Manfredonia. CAROLO ZENO is made Generall of the nauall Armie. Treuiso is a long time besieged by the Carrarians. The Venetians attempt in vaine to relieue Treuiso with men and victualls. The Venetians giue the Citie of Treuiso to LEOPOLD Duke of Austria. CAROLO ZENO refuseth to fight with the enemie on the Frontiers of the lower Sea. The great danger that the Genoueses prisoners were in, vpon the newes that the Venetian prisoners were all staine at Genoa. What great harme three Genoueses Gallies did to the Venetians. LEOPOLD commeth into Italie with tenne thousand horse. Peace with the Genoueses and their associates by meanes of the Duke of Sauoy. The Venetian Dames relieue the Genoueses prisoners with cloathing and money for their iourney. Diuers who aboue the rest had succoured the Common-wealth during the warre, are made Senators.

CHioggia being recouered in this manner, the VenetiansThe Venetians besiege Bebia. because they would not stoppe the fortunate course of their victories, did forthwith send to besiege  the Fort of Bebia, thereby to make free passage for their Merchants who traffique into Lombardie. The Genoueses in the meane time, dislodging fromThe Genoueses take certai^ venetian ship^ laden with corn^ all places neare to Venice, did neare to Corbolles set vpon diuers ships loden with corne, who tarried in that place till such time as the Genoueses Fleet were remoued (that they might with more safetie goe to Venice) the which at the first they tooke, and furnishing their Gallies with corne for their owne prouision, they threw the residue into the Sea, and then failed into Histria.
The Citie of Thryeste at their arriuall (being before solicited by the Forlani)Thryeste reuolteth and (...) to the Genoueses did reuolt from the Venetians. The Genoueses placed a choice troupe of Archers for the guard thereof. The Thryestines hauing taken armes, did first of all seize on

the Palace, then on the person of Donato Troni Gouernour of the Citie, and imprisoned all the other Venetians, whom they first despoiled of their wealth. After that, they assailed both the Forts, (for there were few people in them) which withinThe Castles of Thryeste are razed by the Inhabitants. two daies yeelded, and were presently razed downe to the foundations.
Prince Contareni hauing prouided for the affaires of Chioggia, left Carolo Zeno for the guard thereof, and making Pisani Admirall of the Sea, he returned to Venice where he was generally welcommed with signes of great ioy. The newes of the Thryestines rebellion being brought at the same time to Venice, did in some sort interrupt their mirth. For at the Princes arriuall the Citie was troubled thereat: But on the very day of his entrie, other newes no lesse distastfull arriued, how that  Cap-Histria was taken. It was reported of a certaine that the enemies Armie was soCap Histria taken by the Genoueses. mightily encreased, as besides the Gallies (which were fortie in number) they had diuers other small boats of two ranks of Oares: and that the enemies after they had taken the Towne, had wholly spoiled it, certaine houses of banished men excepted, by whose means and trecherie they had surprised it, but that the Castle did still hold out for the Venetians, into the which Crispolino Azo of Treuiso perceiuing the Citie to be lost, had with certaine troupes entred.
The losse of these two neighbour Cities, brought great discontentment to theThe Senate much troubled with the losse of these two Cities. whole Citie: And then the great Armie which the enemie was reported to haue, did much trouble the Senate. For it was very likely, that vnlesse their Armie were  as strong as that of the enemies, the Genoueses would in short time become Masters not only of Histria, but of all the Venetian coast. Resoluing then forthwith to leuie a mightie Armie, they tooke order that no day should passe, but some Gallies should be Manned and Armed.
But during these preparations at Venice, the Genoueses hauing restored CapHistriaCap-Histria is giuen to the Patriarch of Aquileia. vnto the Patriarch of Aquileia, departed thence with their Gallies, and speedily encamped before Brondolli, where so soone as they had viewed the fortification of Chioggia, and perceiued how all passages were shut vp from them, they sailed towards the Citie. The Fleet remained in order of battaile for a time beforeThe Genoueses fleet before the Hauen of the Citie. the Hauen, but not with great assurance. For diuers light boats going speedily  forth of the Hauen, did greatly molest them by arrow-shot, and stones throwen forth of engines. But no signe of a battaile appearing, the Genoueses returned towards Histria, when hauing attempted to cause the Piarnes to reuolt, they did furiouslyThe enemies Armie before Piarna. assaile the Citie, because the inhabitants and the Souldiers would not consent thereunto: But being brauely defended, the enemie was with great disgrace beaten thence.
The Genoueses did likewise at the same time assaile Parenza, but their attempts as well there as at Piarna were to no purpose. The enemie departed thence, and came to the Frontiers of the Carnori where they trimmed their Gallies in the Hauen of Marran.
The Venetians did at the same time recouer the Fort of Bebia. It is certaine^ebia recouered. that the siege lasted for a while: for threescore Genoueses were within it, who at the first did valiantly defend the place, but when they perceiued the Venetians who were entred into their defences, to beate downe the Fort, thirtie of the besieged by swimming ouer the Riuer escaped, and fled to Padua: Those which continued within, hauing valiantly defended it were either all slaine or taken: Those likewise who kept the Tower would neuer yeeld till they perceiued it to be set on fire.
Bebia being recouered, all the other Forts and Townes which are in the Lakes or at the mouthes of Riuers, were recouered by the Venetians, Cap-darger excepted  which was held by Carrario. On these termes stood the Venetians affaires, whenPola is taken by the Genoueses. on a sodaine newes was brought that the Genoueses had taken Pola, and burnt it for the most part. This caused the Venetians, sooner than they had determined toThe Venetian Armie in Histria passe ouer with a mightie Armie into Histria: At their arriuall the enemie being

danted, (for the report was that they had seauen and fortie Gallies, and manie boats of two ranckes of oares) hauing spoiled the Citie, did retire to Zara. The Venetians Armie being come into the Prouince, was forthwith encreased by many GalliesThe Venetians haue a nauall Armie of one hundred vessels. from the Piarnes, Parenzanes, and other inhabitants of Histria, who had continued loyall to the Venetians, so as it amounted to an hundred warlike vessels. The Venetians neuer had a better furnished nauall Armie, For euerie Gallie had fifteene men at Armes, besides the rowers, Archers, and other mariners.
Pisani commanded this mightie Armie. Caballa of Verona was there likewise, who had beene (as hath beene said) at the beginning Generall of the Armie by Land. The Venetians being come into Histria, sent forth two Gallies in the euening towards  Cap-Histria, to discouer the state of the Citie. Michaeli Delfino and Petrucio Maripetro commaunded those two Gallies. These being assisted by the night, did breake the bridge which the Patriarch of Aquileia had made from the Citie to the firme Land. For being thus broken there was some likelihood that the Venetians being encamped before it, those within could not hope for reliefe from any place. Diuers of the Bandetti who had bene the cause of the taking of the Citie, so soone as the bridge was broken did the same night escape to the firme Land, by the foordes neere to the Citie. By day-breake the residue of the Armie approched: the light vessells went before being followed by the residue with greatThe Uenetians recouer Cap. Histria. cries. Those who kept the Castle would not loose so faire an occasion, but presently  making a sallie vpon those of the Citie, did so afright them as they presently yeelded. Foure hundred Forlani were taken there, among whom were Nicolao Spilinghergo Gouernour of the Citie, and Simon Pampergino. The Citie in detestation of the Bandetti was wholy spoiled, and then left to the guard of the inhabitants who were not then (in regard of the miserie of the time) verie many: they placed a good Garrison in it to defend it with them, fearing least the enemie should againe seize on it, by reason of the small number of the inhabitants.
Cap-Histra being recouered, Pisani would haue directly gone to Pola, but that he tarried for an expresse commandement from the Prince and Senate, to knowe their pleasures, whether they though it fit that he should passe with his Armie ouer the The Venetian Armie before Pola. Fanaticke Gulphe: which being granted him, the Armie soone after drew neere to Pola. The Genoueses in the meane time were not idle: For whilest the Venetian Gallies remained at Cap-Histria, they brought theirs to the Isle of Scardona, neare to Liburnia, where they enforced Arba the chiefe Citie of the Island to yeeld, hauing for a time sustained a siege. They yeelded on these conditions, That if the Inhabitants would deliuer to them all the Venetians which were in the Citie withOn what conditions Arba was deliuered to the Genoueses. Lodouico Contareni their Gouernour, the residue of the Inhabitants should haue no harme. The Arbians did euer till then affect the Venetians, and had often beene besieged during that warre, choosing rather to endure all extremitie than to quit their obedience.
Chinatius who more than any other Author hath curiously written the last Genoueses warre, saith, that the Arbians did not for many daies eat any bread, liuing onely on flesh and white meates* but that at last being daunted by the cruell assaults of the enemies, they yeelded on composition, not such as they were resolued to haue done, but on such as they could obtaine of the enemie. The Genoueses entring into it, left three Gallies for the defence thereof, and afterward departed thence.The Paduan^ besiege Trenis^.
This was done at Sea, at such time as the Paduan came and besieged Treuiso, hauing builded two bridges on the Riuer, one at Casal, and the other neerer the Citie, where Carrario in hast had builded a Tower. He did resolue at first, to tame the Venetian Souldiours and the Tre^isans by famine, by shutting vp all the passages of the  Riuer, by which victuailes were brought from Venice thither. The Paduans Camp laie neare to the Tower from whence they made daily incursions euen to the gates. The Towns-men were besides greatly tormented by the enemies peeces of battery.
At this stay stood the Venetians affaires at Treuiso, when Pisani being come neere

to Zara, and hauing begun to batter the Hauen, vnderstood by spies, that twelue Genoueses gallies were a while before gone from thence into Apulia to fetch corne.Pisani pursueth twelue Genoueses Gallies into Apulia. Hauing intelligence hereof (notwithstanding that he was sicke of a Feuer which had held him from the fifth of August) because he would not loose so faire an occasion, he departed from Zara and went after the enemies whome he ouertooke on the coast of Belligion, but the darkenesse of the night at their verie first encounter made him to loose sight of them. Catharino Corberio Captaine of one of the Gallies was slaine at their first meeting.
The Venetian hauing lost the sight of the enemie, retired to Manfredonia, wherePisani dyeth and is bewailed of all men. Victor sonoe after dyed to the great griefe of the whole Armie. It is reported that  neuer any man was better beloued of his Countrie-men, whereupon whilest he liued they called him their Protector, and being dead they all bewailed him as their father. Lodouico Loretano commanded the Armie in his sted till such time as the Senate had prouided another. Pisani his bodie being brought to Venice, was with a great pompe brought by the Senate with a great concourse of people to Saint Anthonies Churche. His Tombe is at this day to be seene neere to the high Altar, bewtified with Marble and guilding.Pisani is honorablie buried at Venice.
There was neuer any funerall more followed with teares and sighs than this, so greatly was he beloued of all men. The Senate gaue his place to Carolo Zeno, who was commanded to depart speedily to the Armie, two Gallies being made ready Carolo Zeni is Generall of the Armie in his sted. for his conduct.
But whilest the Citie thought on this businesse, the Venetians had not forgotten Treuiso, where the passages being shut vp they were brought to all extremitie for want of victuailes, whereat the Senate being highly displeased, did attempt to open them and to send prouision to the besieged. Therefore they made an engine of shippes which should plucke vp all the Piles which had beene driuen into theAfter what manner the Paduan had enclosed the passages towards Treuiso. Riuer, which was accompanied with foure and twentie Ganzarioles, and with diuers other vessels well armed, with part of the troupes which were at Chioggia, and of those which lay about the Hauen of the Citie: the managing hereof was committed to Marino Carrauall a diligent and valiant person, who had charge of the opening  of the Riuer. The Paduans had planted athwart the Riuer of Silla from one side to the other, on that side neere to Crete, three ranckes of Piles so neere one to another, as it seemed to be a chaine. Sarazino Dandulo commanded those troups which were to bee conducted to Musestra, by the shoare opposite to the enemie. Musestra is within a mile of Casal, where the enemie had a Fort. Being come to this place, this engin of ships well armed with all necessaries did sodainely mooue towards the enemie, hauing for conuoy on the shoare a good troupe of Souldiours, and being come to the inclosure, they were busied two full dayes, in plucking vp two ranckes of Piles, in which meane time they fought brauely with the enemie. There was nothing to be seene on both sides but Arrowes and Dartes flying in the  Aire. But the enemies brazen Peeces of batterie, did greatly endamage the Fleete, and chiefly the engine which pluckt vp the Piles, which being battered with many blowes was made vnprofitable, being in all parts full of leakes. Those likewise who were on the shoare did continually shoot.
The Paduan troups which besieged the citie ran to Casal at the Venetians first arriuall, vnder the conduct of Girardo Caminensis, so likwise did all the Souldiors nere to Padua, who were called thither in hast: by meanes whereof they often fought at Musestra: but in euerie encounter, the enemie had still the better. Diuers Venetians were slaine, but more taken, among whome was Iohn surnamed le Grand, 2The Venetians enforced to giue ouer the enterprise retire to Musestra. French man of a verie noble house: whereupon the fleete gaue ouer the enterprize, and retired to Musestra. But the enemie, albeit he saw the Venetian gone, would not stand still, but hauing staked diuers trunkes of trees, and great peeces of timber, and other things which they abundantly found there in the mouth of the riuer, they shut vp the passage more strongly than before.
The Venetians perceiuing their encamping in that place to bee to no purpose departed thence some two houres before day, and came to Mestra, to make triall whether they could relieue the Treuisans by land, seeing by water they could not. Dandulo in the meane time fell sicke, and was constrained to goe home to his house, in whose steed Pietro Hemo was sent by the Senate. The fleete likewise so soone as the footmen were departed from Musestra, was brought backe to Venice. Now when the Venetian fleet was dislodged, the enemie brought backe his troupes to the campe: Then, fortifying the Tower with men and victuals (for he had no other safe place of retreate) fearing some encombrance from the Venetians, who were encamped at Mestra, he dislodged, and in all hast besieged Noualla which he beganne Noualla besieged by the enemie. forthwith to batter with his engines.
Meane while the Treuisans being at times relieued with victuals by those of Mestra,Great dearth in Treuiso. the dearth was in some sort diminished. For the scarcitie was so great in the Citie* as the ordinarie measure of corne was worth foure crownes, and in regard thereof, diuers of the common people did voluntarily abandon the Citie, the most part of whom retired to Venice. The enemie hauing no good successe at Noualla, being wearied with so long a siege, and being out of hope to take the Citie, raised his campe, and returned to the Paduan territorie. Where because winter drew neere, he disposed his armie into diuers garrisons, and sent them away to winter. This is all that was done on the firme land that Summer, and a  part of Haruest. At Sea Lauretano approached with the nauall Armie neere to Ancona, and afterwards sailed into Histria* But soone after, departing thenceBressia and Senia taken by Loretano. he tooke Bressia and Senia on the frontires of Liburnia by assault which hee spoyled: howbeit through an vnfortunate fire at that time hapning in Senia, the whole bootie was almost consumed.
At the report of the comming of this great Armie, the Goritani being affrighted forsooke the Citie, and retired with their wiues and children to the highest hillesWhat Loretano did after Pisani his death. in the Island. The Bishop of the place came to the Venetians, and offered them the Citie, and humbly entreated Loretano, not to suffer his souldiers to commit any hostile actes in a Citie that yeelded. Whereupon there was no outrage done, not so much for present curtesie, as in regard of the faithfull friendship which the ancient Lords of that Island had borne to the Venetians, wherein they had by mutual offices stil continued, till such time as king Lewis tooke all Dalmatia from them. From thence he came to Bocharis: which being taken by force, hee wholly burnt and spoyled it. Then he departed towards Pola, where by the Senates letters he was aduertized that Carolo Zeno was appointed Generall of the nauall Armie, whereat all men highly reioyced: For, besides his valour, he was next to Pisani theZeno arriueth in the Armie. most popular man. From Pola he came to Parenza, wherein few daies after Zeno arriued.
Hauing mustered the Galley-slaues, he found that many were wanting. VVherevpon  fearing that for want of rowers, he might incurre some danger, if he should happen to meete the enemie, he disarmed seuen of the formost gallies, and with their spoiles manned such as had need, and being thus disarmed (because without rowers, they could not serue in the warres) he sent them backe to Venice, into which Caballa of Verona entered with the troupes of the land-Armie, being called home by the Senate by reason of the warre of Treuiso. Three of these gallies being come to Venice were presently armed and giuen to Marco Phalerio for the defence of Romagnia, and La Marca. For the Genoa gallies making daily incursions neere to Ancona, had in such sort turned the marchants from commerce with Venice, as the dearth began alreadie in the Citie. But Phalerio his arriuall restrained the enemies  boldnesse* whereupon the dearth ceased.
The passage at sea being assured to the marchants, Phalerio by the Senates decree went with his gallies to Zeno in Dalmatia. The Armie after diuers passages to and fro through Histria and the frontires of Dalmatia, not finding the enemie any

where, was brought backe to Venice, about the first of Nouember, hauing done no memorable matter, leauing onely foure gallies to guard the Prouince.
VVithin a while after Carolo departed from Venice with three hundred smallZeno besiegeth Marran a town of the Forlani. vessels well armed, and came and besieged Marrana a sea-towne of the Forlani. By the way hee met with threescore well armed vessels of the same sort, belonging to those of Grada and Piran, who came to him at the hauen of Lignana, wherewith hauing ioyned his owne, hee gaue a furious assault to the Citie: But, it being circled on euerie side with the Sea, and well fortified, their attemptes proued bootelesse: The Venetian hauing viewed the place, perceiued that he should but loose his labour. But because he would not seeme to depart thence for feare hauing brought  his forces to the walles, for a while they fought fiercely: but at last diuers being hurt, Zeno retired without any further losse.
The great expences of the warre had exhausted the publike treasure, when as theThe venetians treasure wholly exhausted. Senate being enforced by the dearth commaunded sixe Gallies, and sixteene boates with two rankes of Oares to be prepared to goe into Candie, to fetch thence the richest wares of certaine particular persons, to the end that they being sold by their consent, the money might be imployed for entertainment of the Armie, being lent for a time to the Commonwealth. At the beginning of the spring (for sooner they could not by reason of the tempestuous VVinter) the fleete went to sea vnder the conduct of Simonetto Michaeli. But I finde in the meane space that these preparations  were made in Venice, That diuers light skirmishes were made on either side, as well on the Treuisan, as in Histria, and that they fought with different successe as aduantage was offered.
The Garrison which the Venetians held in Castell-Franco, hauing receiued noAn vnworthie Act of a garrison for want of pay. pay for certaine moneths, first chaced away Andrea Paradiso the Cities Gouernour, and afterwards assisted by the inhabitants receiued Carrarto into their wals. This reuolt caused diuers others on the Treuisan shortly after to doe the like. The newes of this losse being brought to the Citie, another soone followed. For the Hungarians that were encamped on the mountaines, and who from thence did ouerrunne the Countie of Ceneda, had imprisoned Gulielmo Caminensis an associate of the Venetians, accusing them to haue, contrarie to the agreement, relieued during the warres, the townes of Sacilla, Cogniliana, and diuers others subiect to the Venetians, with victuals, and they demanded to haue the Hauen of Bufatere deliuered to their hands, and that Caminensis with all his family should retire to Conigliana.
The Venetians affaires being in this sort brought to all extremitie on the firme land, and not knowing from whence to be supplied, either for victuals or money, to sustaine the charge of the warre, the Senate resolued to send to Leopold Duke of Austria, and in the Commonwealthes name to offer him the Citie of Treuiso, with herThe venetians are enforced to offer Treuiso to the Duke of Austria. confines, which if the Paduans should not hereafter desist to molest, it was certaine that the Almaine would on a sodaine come into Italie with the greatest forces he  could leauie, and that thereby the Commonwealth, being elswhere sufficiently busied with Sea-matters, should by forraine sorces be eased of the warre on the firme land. Pantaleon Barba was by the Senates decree sent to the Duke.
In the meane time, aboue a thousand horse of those at Mestra for want of their pay went from the Venetians to the enemies side. Those who remained after the others departing, did in the night bring some victuals to Treuiso, and in their returne thence were surprized by the enemies ambush, wherevpon, some of the horse being taken, and the residue put to flight, went first to Treuiso, and afterwards to the campe, so as all the troupes which were at Mestra, were in a short space brought to nothing. The Venetians being daunted with so many losses, sought meanes  of agreement with Carrario, referring themselues to the arbitrement of Alberto d'Este. And to this purpose they sent vnto him Frederico Cornari, and Pirrino Rotta, the one being his Procurator, and the other his Goship, and ancient friend. But they could procure him by no meanes to deale in the businesse, so mischieuously

at the same time were their neighbours bent against them.
And because the report then was, that they were alreadie mounted on the carriages,The venetians* hated of al their neighbours. the Venetians on a sodaine made great Causies and Rampiers on the banks of Mussiona, as men goe by water to Mestra, thinking that all the enemies practises were wholly bent to surprize and inuade Mestra. But his designes were elsewhere. For Carrario being come to Noualla, began furiously to batter it, and hauing broken downe the cawsies round about Moggiana, on which men went to Treuiso, and placed a strong Garrison at the breach, hee tooke from the Treuisans all hope of reliefe. The Garrison in Treuiso being aduertized of the Ambassade sent to Leopold (for all men certainly beleeued that  Pantaleon Barba was sent to offer Treuiso with her confines to the Almaine:)The garrison of Treuiso mutineth for want of pay. fearing in this alteration to be defrauded of their due, and hauing receiued no pay of a long time, they chose Horatio Malespina a discreete person, to vndertake and debate the souldiers cause. They did all sweare and promise to accept of agreement, truce, warre, peace, or whatsoeuer he should conclude; saying, that at his command they would take and lay by Armes, so that he would onely take their cause in hand, and take such order for them, as they might not bestow so great labour and trauaile as they had endured for nothing. This Horatio being a wise and discreet Gentleman, came with all the Captaines to the Venetian Magistrate. Leonardo Dandulo was Gouernour of the Citie, Marco Zeni chiefe Iustice, and Andrea Venieri Prouidator, vnto whom it is said, he spake in this manner.




Malespina his speech to the Magistrates of Treuiso.
IT is reported for certaine, my Lordes of Venice, that the Prince and Senate haue sent to Leopold Duke of Austria, to offer him in the name of the Commonwealth the Citie of Treuiso with her confines, the which which we may suppose, (if he be not senselesse) that hee will willingly embrace. Who doubteth but that when he hath accepted thereof, he will soone come hither with forces, and commit the guard of the Citie to his owne souldiers? or (that which I can hardly beeleeue) if delaying to come, he should afterward arriue in Italie too late, Carrario is heere, vnto whom whether we will or no, we must of force yeeld, he hauing shut vp all the passages, and taken all hope from vs as well of victuals as of souldiers: Now because we are iealous of them both, and vnwilling to loose so many monethes pay wich is due vnto vs, we haue determined, respecting the Venetian dignitie, and the faith of souldiers, to looke to our affaires in time, and gently to demaund our pay. And because we will doe nothing rashly, we are resolued to containe our selues a while longer in our dutie, till such time as one of you shall goe to Venice, to take order that our due be sent vs. In the meane space you may safely relie vpon vs. But heerein wee will endure no delay, nor haue the Senate advertized heereof by letters or messengers: one of your selues must needs goe thither, to the end all may fall out prosperously. Wee will expect the returne of him, whom ye shall send, so long time as we shall thinke to be sufficient to prouide money: For there needeth no long determining in matters that are iust. The fault shall bee in you, if we be not such hereafter as wee haue hitherto beene, or if yee enforce vs by iniuries to commit ought against your profit and reputation. For we will keepe our faith and promise with you, euen so long as yee shall please.




This vnciuill demaund of the Souldiours greatly amazed the Venetians: for there was no man but easily knewe whereto their deseignes tended. Albeit they made a gentle replie, yet euerie one fearing as much his owne particular danger asDandulo goeth to venice about the souldiers demaunds. that of the Publicke, they concluded betwixt themselues that Dandulo should forthwith  be sent to Venice, to aduertise the Prince and the Senate on what tearmes the affaires of Treuiso stood. Departing therefore by night somewhat farre off from the enemies Campe, he came with two trustie friends by woody and by-waies to Musestra and from thence to Venice. The Senate being aduertised in what danger Treuiso was, resolued by a common consent to prouide money; but they were

at a stand by what meanes safely to conuey it thither: For they could not do it without great danger, the enemie possessing all the passages; besides, they had no forces readie to conuey it thither. Therefore they concluded to write to Zeno that he should deale with the chiefe of the Citie, that some of them would in the Common-wealths name paie the Souldiours their due; saying that they were readie to make ouer the same summe into what Banco they pleased: But in regard of the length of the warre those who were thought to be best monied, said that they were so farre from hauing any summes of money lying by them, as on the contrarie they had not one pennie; that their continuall losses one vpon another, had in such sort stript them of all meanes, as they were in a manner readie to begge. Whereupon The Garrison of Treuiso are paid their due. leauing the Townes men they delt with two strangers who did put forth money to interest: who on the assurance of the Common-wealths word did presently tell downe the money, and by this meanes the Souldiours were paied.
But whielest these things were done at Treuiso, the enemie hauing assembled all his forces from diuers places, came and besieged Asil, where there was no great Venetian Garrison. Francisco Delfino Gouernour of the place, and those that were with him, distrusting their small number retired into the Castle. The enemie comming to besiege them, hauing battered it with engins of warre, and vndermined it in sundrie places, did in fiftie daies take it by force. Some say that eight and fortie of those that were within it were slaine by the enemies arrowes and engins. But the  Castle Walls and the tops of houses being much shaken by the engins of warre: and besides vtterly despairing of succour, the Inhabitants who with the Gouernor were retired thither, vrged him to parley. Delfino being thereunto enforced, capitulated in this manner, That it should be lawfull for himselfe and as many as should follow him, safely to depart thence with fiue and twentie waggons which the enemie should furnish them for the carriage of their stuffe and furniture. The Castle being in thisAsil yeelded to Carrario by composition. sort yeelded, Delfino going towards Venice, neere to Crespiniano met with Leopolds troupes, who came to free them from the siege. Some Authors affirme, that at the same time Lofinastro Calderio Generall of those troupes, was corrupted by Carrario: and thereupon he slackt his iourney, till such time as hee imagined the Castle was  yeelded. The Garrison of Noualla likewise hauing expelled their Gouernour forThe Garrison of Noualla for want of paiment yeeld it to Carrario. want of pay, did yeeld vp the place to Carrario.
The Tower of Corania being assailed at the same time by the enemie in the marshes, was not onely brauely defended, but diuers Ganzarioles were taken from them and brought to Venice. Arcuano Buccecharino came at last from Prince Carrario with great forces and besieged Treuiso, lying incamped neere to the Church of the fortie Saints: Diuers and sundrie exploits were made on both sides, and at times more than fortie Horse were taken from the enemie; which was the best atchieuementThe Citie of Serrauall followeth the example of Treuiso. that was there performed.
The Gitie of Serrauall following the example of the Garrison of Treuiso incurred  the like danger. The Soldiers began to mutinie for certain moneths pay which was behind, and and on a sodaine fell vpon Nicholao Velleresso the Gouernour, and seized on the Castle. Afterwards they dispatched messengers to the Senate at Venice, to excuse themselues for what was done, laying all the fault on their want of victuailes and paiment, both of them hauing beene badly supplied to them, whereupon they had beene enforced whether they would or no, to enterprise nouelties; and withall demaunded their pay: which if within eight daies they might receiue, the Garrison and the Castle should continue obedient to the Venetians: or else, otherwise prouiding for themselues they would let all men know, that there is nothingThe Senates answere to the Garrison of Serrauall. more dangerous for such as make warre, than to detaine the Souldiours pay.
The Senate was not greatly moued at these newes, being certaine that Pantaleon had alreadie made the offer: Yet neuerthelesse fearing least the inhabitants who had euer loued the Venetians, might thereby fall into some mischiefe, they sent them word, to vse meanes in some sort to content the Souldiours, to free

themselues from the danger which threatned them. Heereupon those of Serrauall (for they were resolued to endure all extremitie rather than to beare Carrario's tirannous yoake whom they extreamly hated) sent Francisco Lardonio to the Gouernour of Belluna, to request him, That seeing by the Venetians offer made to Leopold* they were his vassalls, that he would defend them from the danger wherein they were: telling him that the Souldiours possessed the Castle, who demaunded their paie, which vnlesse they might speedily receiue, it was certaine that they would soone deliuer it to Carrario; whereunto as the Tyrant had a long time aspired, so hee would now doe any thing to obtaine his desire: And that therefore it behooued him to make hast, least (as it often happeneth) some  small delaie might bring some great daunger to the wretched inhabitants.
The Gouernour who would not seeme to abandon their new subiects, forthwith caused money to be deliuered to the messenger, which was paid by Giacomo Spiritello of Belluna a man of exceeding great wealth, who did it for the Gouernors sake. Chinatius saith, That three thousand fiue hundred Crownes were sent to Serrauall, which beeing giuen to the Souldiours, they did forthwith quit the Castle. This is that which was done on the Treuisan: whilest the Venetians (vpon report that the Genoueses had newly taken Armes* and were alreadie departed from Genoa) fearing least the Gallies which Simonetto had at the spring time carried into Candie should be met with by the enemie, caused eight Gallies  to be made readie, and to be giuen to Zeno, who was made Admirall for a yeare, who with them put out to Sea.
He first directed his course, as he was commanded, towards Candie to the succour of his Countrimen. But going along the Coast of Dalmatia, he met with twelueZeno taketh twelue ships of Genoa. Genoa ships, which he tooke and spoiled, and then burnt them* Soone after, neere to Morea, he espied a great ship of Genoa, loden with rich marchandize, which he tooke and sent into Candie. From thence he sailed towards the Promontorie of Mailles, where he resolued to tarrie for the Gallies which returned from Candie: Within few daies after Simonetto came thither with tenne Callies: which were forthwithThe (...) fleet of thirtie Gallies. followed by the residue of his fleete, so as in few daies, he had thirtie Gallies. And  because the enemies Fleete which was not farre off, was reported to be but one and twentie Gallies: Zeno resolued to leaue fiue Gallies at Modon with the marchandize, and with the residue to make towards the enemie.
Two daies after he descried the Genoueses Fleete nere to Ionia, the which (auoidingThe Genoueses fleet flieth. the fight) he pursued in vaine all that day till night, when by reason of the darknesse he lost sight of it. The Venetian being come to Ancona, sent ten Gallies for the guard of the Citie, and with the residue he determined to rauage the Riuer of Genoa, where hauing with good successe crossed the Adriatick, Ionian, and Tuscan Seas, being entred on the enemies confines he descried six Genoa Gallies, to whom he gaue chace for a time. But hauing giuen ouer his pursute, he was likelie soone after  to haue beene intrapped before Porto-uenieri by foure and twenty Genoa Gallies,The Genoueses fleet of foure and twenti^ Gallies. who hauing intelligence of the Venetians comming into the lower Sea, were speedily come from Dalmatia to resist their attempts. Two Venetian Gallies which Zeno sent forth to discouer, hardly escaped from the mouth of the Hauen: but making way by the strength of their oares they soone came to their Fleete, which from thence went to Liuorna; then on a sodaine they returned to Morea, where receiuing a new supplie of fiue Gallies from Lodouico Loretano, they sailed againe towards the lower Sea, intending (as I thinke) to fight with the enemie if he could meete with him; if not, to spoile all the Coast* Townes on the Riuer of Genoa.
Whilst the Venetian ranne thus vp and downe, the enemie was not idle. For, so soone as Carolo departing from Ancona, sailed towards the Riuer of Genoa: hauingCap-Histria taken by the Genoueses. made readie seuen and twentie Gallies, he came and besieged Cap-Histria, which in a moment he tooke, spoiling and burning it for the most part. The Castle was defended

by meanes of the Garrison within it. But hauing intelligence that Zeno was gone to rauage the Riuer of Genoa, fearing that the Frontiers being without Garrison, the Venetian might wholly spoile them, hauing left six Gallies in Dalmatia to molest the Venetians, he came speedily with one and twentie to the reliefe of his Countrie. They were those with whom the Venetians met (as hath beene said) at Porto-uenieri, and which had like to haue surprized two of his Gallies.
Whilest these things were done at Sea, on the Treuisan Conigliana had like to haue beene taken by treacherie. Two Captaines of the Garrison had intelligenceTreacherie of 2. Captaines of the Garrison of Conigliana. with the enemie who had the guard of the Hill, aduertizing him to come in the night with ladders, which they should without any resistance reare against the wals, and so enter into the Towne. The enemies vnwilling to loose so faire an occasion, did not faile to come at the time appointed; and diuers of them were already come ouer the wall vnder the Tower, when those aboue hauing descried the enemie, began on a sodain to giue the alarme. At this noise all the Townesmen ran speedily to the Castle, by whose assistance those aboue who defended the place did beate the enemies from the walls with great slaughter. Twentie men at Armes were taken,The traitors punished. and eight and twentie of the Traitours were apprehended: who beeing conuicted of the fact were hanged, to serue for an example to others.
About the same time the Bishop of Verseil, sent by Amadeo Duke of Sauoy,The Duke of Sauoy a mediator for peace. arriued at Venice, and in his Masters name requested the Senate to send Ambassadours  to his Highnesse, who greatly desired to heare the deputies, as well of the Venetians, as the enemies, and maturely to vnderstand the cause of their strife, and that he would doe his best to attone them, and to procure a peace; saying that hee had already for that purpose sent to Genoa, and would likewise send to King Lewis and their associates, whom he did not doubt but that they would accept of peace.
Vpon this offer, Michaeli Morosino, Giouanni Gradonico, and Zacharia Contareni were sent Ambassadours to the Sauoyan, who accompanied the Bishop: The Ambassadours beeing gone, the Senate were aduertized by letters from PantaleonLeopold accepteth the Uenetians offer. that Leopold had accepted the offer of the Citie of Treuiso, whereupon the  Duke sent two Almain Gentlemen to receiue it of the Venetian officers: These according to their Commission did muster the Souldiours of the Garrison, and gaue them pay onely for one moneth, till Leopold with his forces were arriued.
Newes was brought at the same time that the Venetian prisoners at Genoa were so hardly delt with by the enemie, as more than three hundred and fiftie of them were in few daies dead with hunger, whose bodies they had inhumanly flung into the Sea: Some thought that they had beene poisoned in regard so many of them died at one time. Vpon this report all men were so enflamed with choller, as they presently ranne to Terra-noua to the publike prison, where  breaking open the prison dores they had like to haue slaine all the Genoueses. But thinking it to be a diuelish deede, they would be reuenged in an other kinde, by depriuing them of all their commodities, as of kniues, beds, couerlets, and their kitchin: forbidding women who for charitie did minister vnto them, not to come anyThe Genoa prisoners in great danger at Venice. more there. Their ordinarie pittance was but bread and water and that verie sparingly: But the Citie did soone after remember their accustomed elemencie, and all that had beene taken from those poore creatures, was by a publike decree restored vnto them.
Whilst these things were done at Venice, and on the confines of the firme Land,The Genoueses tooke 14* Uenetian vessells loden with wine. three Genoa Gallies did in the Hauen of Pisauro take foureteene Venetian vessells  loden with wine, which they burnt, and taking away the Marchants whom they found in the houses neere to the Hauen, they speedily departed thence, and rauagingWhat harme three Genoa Gallies did to the Venetians. from Pisauro euen to Chioggia, they did infinite harmes to the Venetians, in the Hauens, and at the mouthes of Riuers.
Hauing afterwards taken fiftie vessells loden with Marchandize, they sailed towards Ancona, and from thence, fearing least the Venetians would come to their rescue, they sent them speedily to Zara.
Vpon report that the Genoueses Armie was greatly encreased, Zeno in the meane time beeing with the Gallies farre from home, the Senate fearing least the enemie would on a sodaine come and assaile the Citie, did speedily fortifie the Hauen, and the forces being called from Mestra, which since the yeelding vp of Treuiso were there to no purpose, they appointed a Campe at S. Nicholas on the shoare. They had besides eight Gallies in a readinesse to saile whither neede should be vnder the conduct of Nicholao Michaeli.
In the meane time* the siege of Treuiso was not discontinued but daily augmented by new supplies which the enemie sent thither. Arcuano Buccecarino the Princes brother in Law commanded there: whereof Leopold being aduertized, came withinLeopold with ten thousand horse before Conigliana. few daies after his people had taken the possession thereof with tenne thousand horse, and encamped on a sodaine before Conigliana. He was reported to haue in his Armie besides that great number, more than foure Hundred Knights and great Lords. Arcuano hauing intelligence of the Almans comming, sent speedily to his Campe to treate with him about some matters. But he was so far off from hearingLeopold his proud answere to the Paduan. the messenger, as he would not vouchsafe to see him, but commanded him speedily to returne and tell the Paduan* That he attended him: and that the next day they  might conferre together about their affaires. Arcuano did soone perceiue whereunto those words tended: whereupon fearing to be ouerthrowne by his sodaine arriuall, the morrow after by breake of day he raised his Campe, and fled thence. Which Leopold hauing notice of, was highly displeased that he had lost so faire an occasion of a battaile, who soone after departing thence, caused his troupes to passe ouer the Riuer of Piaua, and came and encamped neere Treuiso, in the same place where the enemies had beene. And he with the chiefe of his Armie entring into the Citie,Leopold entreth Treuiso. brought thither such abundance of corne and wine and all other necessaries, as the Citie was in an instant deliuered from the siege and famine.
In this manner did the Venetians loose Treuiso, fortie yeares after they had taken  it from the familie of Escalla: But the Senates constancie in dissembling such a losse,Ambassadours sent from Venice to Treuiso to Leopold. was so great, as they sent Ambassadours to Leopold, to congratulate his welcome and entrie into Treuiso. Giacomo Delfino, Pietro Hemo, Bernardo Bragadino, Marini Memo, and Alberto Contareni were sent thither.
Prince Carrario albeit that at Leopold's comming, hee had raised his Campe from before Treuiso, did not cease for all that to molest and make incursions on the Treuisan, where he tooke certaine* Townes since the Almains arriuall, saying openly that he did it by the King of Hungaries commandement, albeit Leopold was newly allied with the same King, and at his entrance into the Citie, had caused his roiall Armes to be set aboue his owne. It was thought that King Lewis had speciall regard  to Leopold's profit, but because he would not seeme to abandon his associates* he entreated them to take Carrario his wilfulnesse in good part: whereupon he did often intreate them by Ambassadours (the which hee might haue done by force) and chiefly the Paduan, to desist from his enterprize. But neither entreaties nor threates could make him to abstaine.
Zeno who (as hath beene said) was of late come from Morea to the lower Sea, arriuing at the mouth of the Riuer Arno, was aduertized by the Senates Letters that peace was concluded with the Genoueses: wherupon being sad and displeased to seePeace betwixt the Venetians and the Genoueses. himselfe snatched forth of the enemies throat, he went back again towards Morea, and from thence by the Senates commandement, he returned with his Armie to Venice. And by this meanes this sommer which was the last of the fourth Ligusticke warre was spent without any memorable action.
By the mediation then of the Duke of Sauoy, peace was concluded with the Genoueses, King Lewis, and their allies: six yeares and foure moneths after that this last

warre beganne. The conditions of the peace were: That the prisonners of warre onThe conditions of peace. both sides should be set at libertie: That the Paduan Prince should deliuer Cap-darger and Morensana to the Venetians: That he should raze all the Fortes which he possessed in the Lakes, and neere to the Riuers: that the Venetians should giue him the Tower of Corania: that Alberto D'Aeste should be iudge of the controuersie betwixt the Venetians and Paduans concerning their limits: that the Venetian should withdraw the Garrison that he kept in Tenedos, and that the Duke of Sauoy should haue the keeping of the Island for two yeares, and that it should be kept at the Venetians and the Genoueses charges: that at the two yeares end the Fort should be razed, if the Genoueses thought it fit to be done, and that the Venetians  should then giue ouer the entire possession of the Island: that the Florentines should be caution in the summe of two hundred thousand crownes, that neither the Venetians nor the Genoueses should euer after possesse the Island: that both the Genoueses and Venetians should not trafficke neere to the Riuer Tanais, for feare least by ancient ielouzie, (as it had oft hapned) they should beginne the warre a newe: That euerie ten yeare the Venetians should paie seuen thousand Dukats to King Lewis, who in regard of the said summe should be bound to free the Sea-cost of Dalmatia of all Pirats; and that no Sclauonian nor Dalmatian should make any salt. But Chinatius of Treuiso who hath more truely than any other written of this warre maketh no mention of any tribute giuen to the King.
Some say that on the same day that the peace was published, a childe was borneA monster borne at Venice. Charitie of the venetian Dames towards the Genoa prisoners. in Venice which had foure Armes and foure Leggs, and did liue till it was baptized. The Venetian Dames made a collection of money to relieue the Genoueses that came forth of prison halfe naked, with cloakes, shirtes, hose and shoes, and other cloathing according to euerie mans need, and did besides furnish them with money to beare their charges home, to the end they should not be enforced to begge by the way. Those that went thence were aboue fifteene hundred persons, the residue dyed with the stentch of the prison, and others with too much filling their bellies. Besides it was found that aboue eight thousand naturall Genoueses, did dye in this warre, and of the Venetians halfe as many. The Senate being freed from this  warre, because they would performe the promise made by the Common-wealth, called thirthie of those into the number of the Senate, who in the heate of the warre had at their owne costs relieued the Common-wealth: and for others, the summe of fiue thousand crownes euerie yeare was appointed to bee distributed among them. Those who were made Senators before they came into the Senate went all together to heare diuine seruice, then being brought before the Prince and Senators, they tooke their oathes, to continue loyall and not to reueale the secrets of the Common-wealth. Chinatius saith that Caballa of Verona for his great and notable seruice done to the Venetians in this warre, was honored with the same  dignitie.
The end of the seuenth Booke of the second Decad.




THE EIGHTH BOOKE  OF THE SECOND DECAD OF THE HISTORIE Of Venice.

The Contents of the eighth Booke of the second Decad.
HOw greatly the difficultie in deliuering vp the Island of Tenedos did trouble the Venetians. The Thryestines in fauour to LEOPOLD doe reuolt. The Carrarians by LEOPOLDS permission, become masters of Treuiso. A law against murtherers. Prince ANTONIO VENIERI suffereth his Son to die in Prison for wronging a Senatour. The Venetians aide GALEAS VISCONTE against those of Escalla and the Carrarians: whereby they recouered Treuiso and raised the siege before Mantua. The Paduans for saking GALEAS returne  to the Carrarians subiection. The Duke of Austria and the French Kings Nephew come at sundrie times to Venice. The Citie newly beautified. The Genoueses nauall Armie comming forth of the Higher into the Lower Sea, doth for a time keepe the Venetians in suspence. The Genoueses being ouercome in battaile before Modon, doe wholly loose the possession of the Sea. The Carrarians possesse Verona by deceit. VINCENZA, BELLVNA, and FELTRA are reduced vnder the Venetians obedience. The cause that moued the Venetians to warre on the Carrarians; who pursued them by Sea and Land: Warre for a time against those of Aeste, because of the Carrarians. The Venetians take Verona from the Carrarians. A briefe description of the Citie of Verona. The Carrarians (Padua being taken) become subiect to the Venetians, and afterwards by the Senates commaundement are strangled in Prison. The Ambassadours of Padua and Verona arriue almost at one time at Venice, which did greatly reioyce the people.

PEace being thus established by Land and Sea, the yeelding vp of the Isle of Tenedos did for a whileThe Venetians are troubled about the yelding vp of the Isle of Tenedos. trouble the Venetians: Mutatio was at the same time Gouernour there, who being too indiscreetly transported with the loue to his Countrie, had almost hazarded the publicke credit of the Common-wealth. The Senate had giuen commission to Pantaleon Barba who was sent thither for that purpose, to deliuer the Fort of the Island according to the agreement into  the hands of Bonifacio, Deputie to Amadeo Duke of Sauoy. The Genoueses Agent was come thither to see it done, and to pay the Souldiers that were there.
Mutatio hauing receiued the money which the Venetians and Genoueses hadMutatio his answere to the Venetians and Genoueses. brought, declared to Boniface and the Commissioners his owne determination with that of the Islanders, saying; That they had heard how in the Articles of peace it was expresly mentioned that the Fort of the Island, their only refuge, should be razed, wherein both the Genoueses who had requested it, and the Venetians who consented thereunto, had carried themselues basely: But he told them that the Islanders would looke to their owne affaires, and that therein they should doe wisely: That they had neuer yeelded to the Venetians on that condition, that their Fort being razed, their Island in time should become desolate. And therefore calling now to minde that which concerned them, they were resolued to hazard all, rather  than to see their Island in such sort to be wholly ruined: And to that end, they had instantly entreated him to take their Citie, Castle, and meanes, into his protection. The which he finding to bee great both in shew and effect, he was determined to keepe and defend the Island as his owne, seeing it belonged neither to the Venetian, nor to any else: He willed them then to depart, and not any longer to expect the deliuerie thereof vnto them, saying, That they were well dealt with in being suffered to goe freely thence: Then was there a great noise made by the Souldiers, and the Inhabitants of the Island, calling Mutatio their Lord and Captaine: who commanded the Venetians and Genoueses speedily to depart thence.
Some say that Mutatio made a shew that this came wholly from himselfe, to  the end that the Greeks should not afterward reedifie the Fort which the Venetians should demolish. But on what pretence soeuer he did it, the Commissioners being enforced to depart thence, came to Venice. The Senate tooke this refusall in bad part, knowing that vnlesse Tenedos were deliuered, the Common-wealths credit through one mans follie, would be crackt among the Italians and forraine Princes, and that all men would impute the blame to the Senate and not to one man alone. And that besides their breach of faith, it was to be feared, that so soone as the Genoueses, King Lewis, and the other associates should heare that the Island was not deliuered to the Sauoyan, they holding the couenants of peace to be broken, would forthwith take Armes: They therefore decreed to send to Mutatio and the Islanders.
Carolo Zeno was sent thither, who neither by entreaties nor threats could alterZeno is sent to Tenedos, who likewise effected nothing: his determination. At Zeno his entrance, because by one mans rashnesse the Common-wealths promise should not be infringed, they decreed to proceed by Armes; whereupon a speedie leuie of Souldiers was made, vnto such a number as was thought sufficient to subdue the Island. Fantino Georgio was made Generall of theseA venetian Armie to subdue the Isle of Tenedos. forces. He departing from Venice with sixe Gallies well Armed, and arriuing at Tenedos, landed his men, and in an instant gaue a furious assault to the Towne and Castle.
There were great numbers of Archers in the Camp, so was there in the Castle, by meanes whereof at euery assault and sallie, diuers died on either part: Some say, that they fought more eagerly than against ordinarie enemies; For if any one wereCruell Warre at Tenedos. taken he was forth with hanged, or else being put into one of the engines of Warre, was in sted of a stone throwne into the Camp, and so from the Camp into the Citie: whereby it plainly appeared that it was neither the Prince nor Senates fault, that the Island was not deliuered according to the treatie of peace; but only through the wilfulnesse of Mutatio.
The siege lasted aboue seuen Moneths: but victualls failing, they yeelded on these conditions; That neither Mutatio, nor those who were with him should beeOn what conditions Tenedos was yeelded. called in question for detaining Tenedos, to the hindrance of the Common-wealth: That the Inhabitants should depart forth of the Island, with their gold, siluer, and  other moueables: That as many of them as would go dwell in Candie, should haue as much Land there as they had in Tenedos, and as many as would goe to Constantinople or else where, should receiue money for the iust value of their Lands: And in this sort, those within gaue place to the Garrison.
The Castle being recouered, Fantino entred it with two hundred Archers, dismissingThe Fort of Tenedos razed. the residue of the Armie. Giouanni Memo by the Senates decree did afterwards succeede him. The residue of the Articles being performed, and the Inhabitants being gone, the Fort was at the last razed.
The Thryestines who in the hottest of the warre were reuolted from the Venetians, fearing that so soone as they should be at quiet both by Sea and Land, they would on a sodaine come and inuade them, did yeeld to Leopold. Soone after KingThe Thryestines yeeld to Leopold. Lewis died. At the first it was thought that his death would in some sort abate the pride of Prince Carrario, who till then had neuer ceased to molest the Treuisans: but on the contrarie in sted of desisting, he assailed them more furiously than before, and Leopold rendreth Treuiso to Carrario on conditions gaue them so many assaults and ouerthrowes, as Leopold despairing of being able to defend the Citie, did on certaine conditions giue it ouer with her confines to the Paduan, who in a manner was Conquerour.
All this hapned almost three yeares after that peace had beene established by Sea and Land. But in the meane time Prince Contareni died, after he had gouerned fourteene yeares, and was honourably buried in St. Stephens Church.



 MICHAELI MOROSINO, the 61. Duke of Venice.





MIchaeli Morosino succeeded him. At his entrie into the Gouernement, a Law was made against Murtherers, that whosoeuer should kill aA law against murtherers. man, should loose his head, whereas in time before they who were conuicted of such crimes, were hanged according to the custome of the Countrie. It was thought of a certaine that if his Principalitie had lasted any long time, he would haue beautified the Common-wealth with sundrie holy Lawes and Statutes: But by how much the hope thereof was greater, by so much was his Regiment shorter. For about foure Moneths after his Creation hee deceased, and was buried in the Church of the Twinnes.





 ANTONIO VENIERI, the 62. Duke of Uenice.








ANtonio Venieri being absent was subrogated in his sted, a man who besides his ancient Nobilitie, was of a meeke and gentle disposition, and beloued of all men. Being called home from Candie where he remained, he arriued the thirteenth of Ianuarie at Venice, on S. Nicholas shore, where the whole Senate, and a great part of the people receiuedThe peoples great ioy at the Dukes arriuall. him; and from thence after diuers reciprocall embracements, going into the Bucentauro he was with great ioy brought to the Ducall Palace: His presence was the more welcome to all men because by reason of his long absence it had been so much desired: He had beene seuen yeares absent with his familie, and had well gouerned  the Common-wealth in diuers places, and chiefly at Tenedos. His gouernment was very meeke and gentle, without any tumult or strife in the Citie, with plentie of all things which was greatly desired of all men: But his owne domesticke losse did in some sort trouble the fortunate successe of his affaires. Albeit I doe not well know whether his seuere iustice did purchace the old man more honour and reputation, than his sonnes death did afflict him with griefe and sorrow.
He had a Sonne named Lodouico, who was enamoured on a Senators wife. But asSeuere iustice of a Father on his owne Sonne. it often happeneth, some jealouzie arose betwixt the two louers, whereupon this yong Lord by chance, in disgrace of his Mistris, whom he then hated, caused hornes to be hung vp at her husbands gate. Inquirie thereof being made, the Prince being  moued at the iniurie done to a Senator, commanded his Sonne forthwith to be imprisoned, where he remained till he died, to the great griefe of all the people.
The same yeare at sundrie times the Marqueses of Aest, and Mantua, came to Venice, with diuers other Princes, and Princes Ambassadours to treate with the Senate concerning great affaires of State, albeit some of them came but to see the Citie. A while after, peace still continuing abroade and at home, great warre and contention arrising betweene Antonio Escalla of Verona, and Francisco Carrario the elder,Antonio of Escalla is defeated by Giouanni Galeas Visconte. Giouanni Galeas Visconte (whose power was at the same time very great) at Carrario his entreatie did make warre vpon Escalla, and hauing vanquished him, he tooke from him Verona and Vincenza. Then, (as the desire of getting doth encrease when prosperitie doth follow vs) he did as furiously assaile Padua, as he had not long before Galeas Visconte taketh Padua. done those of Escalla. Some say that Carrario attempted to set Bernabo his Allie at libertie, whom Galeas, his Sonne in Law and Nephew, Sonne to his Brother, kept prisoner in the Castle of Trecy, because he had beene aduertized by Katherine his

wife, that Bernabo had laid waite to kill him, whereat Visconte, being moued, made warre vpon him.
The Venetians in this war^e ioyned their forces wish Galeas who assailed the Paduan, and hauing armed foure hundred boates vnder the conduct of Giacomo Delfino, did in a manner selze vpon all the Cities, Forts and townes which Carrario possessed on the lakes (...) at the mouthes of riuers. Galeas likewise on the firme land, did not alone (...) all the Cities of the Paduan territorie* but likewise in few moneths that the (...) lasted, the verie Citie of Padua. Where after he had taken the elderCarrario imprisoned in the Medociatnewer. Carrario* (...) imprisoned him in the Medozian prison. His sonne surnamed Nouello, escaped into Germanie: Galeas would not stand still in so faire a way, but pursuing  the course of his (...) (...), came and tooke Treuiso by force. This warre was verie painfull and bloudie.
At the last, Carrarios forces being broken, and wholly ouerthrowne, Galeas byCarrario his lands diuided. agreement had Padua, (...), and Belluna; the Venetians Treuiso, and the Marques of Aest, who was one of the associates against Carrario, recouered all the townes which did belong to his ancestors. Then not long after, Galeas hauing proclaimed warre on the Bolognese and Florentines, and his forces being alreadie suspected of all the people and potentates of Italie: The Venetians, Florentines, Bologneses, Francisco Gonzaga, the Marquesse of Aeste, and Carolo Malateste, entered into leagueLeague against Galess Visconte against him. Robert Duke of Bauaria was entreated to bee of the number (with  whom Nouello remained and to march with his forces into Italie against the troups of Visconte.
Galeas leauing the Bolognese, came and furiously besieged the Citie of Mantua,Galeas besiegeth Mantua with fortie thousand men. and pre^ming on the great number of his souldiers (for his Armie was reported to be fortie thousand) he enuironed the Citie by land and water. The Venetians armed a great ^mber of boates against him, to deliuer a friend and confederate Citie from the siege: and because Gonzaga was more molested by water than by land, the Venetians hauing added certaine gallies to their fleete, this audacious enemieGaleas is repulsed by water and land. was repulsed with great losse from the Citie by the Venetians aide, on the same side of the Citie, by which the enemie had thought to haue taken it. And soone after  being in countred by Malatesta Generall of the land Armie neere to the village of Gouern^lla, and being broken and defeated by him in a set battaile, he was with great disgrace chased farre from thence.
Nouello remained not idle in so faire an occasion. For Robert vsing delaies, he returnedNouello sonne to Carrario recouereth Padua. into Italie in disguised habite vnknowne to the Venetians and their associates. And by that meanes he en^d Padua and enioyed it. The Almaine, following him afterwards with a great Armie, came and besieged the Castle of Padua, which held out for Galcas. Those of Verona being amazed by their neighbours example, tooke Armes, and hauing expelled Galeas his Garrison, they sent for Antonio of Escalla from Tuscan, but they vnderstood that he was dead a while before: whereupon, repenting of what they had done, they sent to Vgoletto Blanchardo, whoVerona pillaged. commaunded Viscont his Armie in the countrey of Cremona, and hauing obtained pardon of him for their reuolt, and for the obtaining of it paid a great summe of money vnder the name of lendings for the souldiers, they receiued him into their Citie: ino the which entering ^umultuously, the souldiers desirous of bootie could not be kept from spoyling. The wife of Galcas being sorie for the mishap of so excellent a Citie, commaunded three daies after they began to pillage, to spoyle no more. Robert in the meane time being discontented for that he was deceiued by his associates of his promised reward, raised his campe from before the Castle of Padua, and went backe with his forces into Germanie. The Florentines did at the same The Castle of Padua recouered for Nouello. time send Iohn Hancute, one of the famouse Cstaptains of his time, with forces to aid Nouello by whose valour the Castle was in few daies recouered: diuers and sundrie attempts were made on either side, but because they do no whit concerne the Venetians (for they were done on the firme land, and farre from the Sea) we do of purpose omit them.
At the last, peace being concluded for ten yeares was as acceptable to afflictedPeace for ten yeares. The Duke of Austria and the French kings Nephew come to venice to bee transported to the holy Sepulchre. Lombardie, as pleasing to all men else. At the same time the Duke of Austria arriued at Venice, where being bountifully entertained, he remained till such time as two gallies were made readie to carrie him to the Sepulcher of our Lord. The same yeare the French kings Nephew arriued there, who had the like entertainment as had the Almaine: he made readie a Galley there at his owne charges to transport him into Syria for the same purpose, as the Austrian was gone thither.
In processe of time, all things being quiet by sea and land, newes was brought that an Argozie of Genoa of meruailous bignesse was gone forth to robbe at Sea. The Venetians vpon this report rigged forth three great ships of warre, which were  ma^ed with fiue hundred armed men, which went to Sea. But that great Genoueses Argosey being cast away by a great tempest, the Venetians returned (...) and sound home to their houses.
The Ci^tie during this long peace, was beautified with diuers publike works. TheThe market place of Saint Marke paued with bricke. market-place of Rialto, with that great and spacious place before Saint Markes Church, were paued with bricke, and with square stone. At the same time Prince Venieri died, the eighteenth yeare of his principalitie. His funerall was accompanied by great multitudes of people to the Church of the Twinnes.




 MICHAELI STENO, the 63. Duke of Uenice.





MIchaeli Steno Procurator of Saint Marke succeeded him, who being  chosen in the beginning of December, came not (by reason of a disease whereof he lay sicke) to the Pallace till the tenth of Ianuarie.
The people did neuer doe the like honour to any of his predecessors as to him. All the Trades of the Citie euerie one a-part, did prepare costlyDiuers publik^ shewes made in the Citie for loue to the Duke. shewes for his sake, each of them inuenting new, so as no holy day passed in the whole yeare, but some shew or other was presented: And that whole yeare would haue beene spent in mirth and pastime, if the vnexpected losse of certaine Citizens had not marred the sport. Sixe gallies laden with forraine marchandize vnder the  conduct of Leonardo Trenisano returned to Venice about the end of Autumne, but it fell out, that neere to the Islands of the Egean sea, at Irene (called by corruption of language Turin) foure of them (which had seldome happened) being beaten with a tempest suffered ship wracke. Yet neuerthelesse few of the men perished the marchandize

being scattered heere and there was with great labour recouered. The Viari,Foure Venetian Gallies lost by tempest. Delfino, Sourance, and Sagreda, were lost. Cornari and Gradonico resisting the seas furie earne safe to Venice.
The yeare following three Gallies departed from Venice: the Duke of AustriaLadislaus crowned king of Hungarie. had prepared two of them, and Prince Carrario the third, to fetch and conuoie from Apulia the sister of King Ladislaus, who being newly restored to his kingdome, was Crowned King by Barthimeo Iuliari, Cardinall of the Sea Apostolike, sent from Pope Boniface. This sister was promised to one of the Dukes of Austria. But these Gallies came back to Venice, by reason that Ladislaus refused to send his sister.
Some Annales make mention how that the Emperour Robert with his wife came  the same yeare to Venice, where he was magnificently entertained, and honouredLadislaus defeated by Galeas Uiscont. with diuers rich presents. But those Authors whom we follow conceale the cause of his comming. I finde in some, that Robert being vanquished by Galeas in the Territorie of Cremona, hauing in a manner lost all his Armie, retired to Trente, where hauing leuied new forces, he came to Padua, and from the firme Land to Venice, where being curteously entertained, after he had familiarly discoursed with the Prince and Senate of the wrong which Galeas had done him, he returned into Germanie: But because mention is made of his wiues being there with him: we must think that he left her at Venice, because himselfe went on pilgrimage to Rome. For it was the yeare of our Saluation one thousand foure hundred, at such time as Pope  Boniface the ninth celebrated the great yeare of Iubilie.
The same yeare the bridge of Rialto was reedified. In this manner did the Common-wealth peaceably flourish, and the greatest care of the inhabitants was set on trade of Marchandize. But this quiet was interrupted by the Genoueses new stirs. They had about the same time armed one and twentie Gallies, and sixteene great Argosies: Some Authours make no mention of Argosies. The report was, ThatBoucicault a French-man Generall of the Genoa Armie. this preparation was made against the King of Cyprus. Boucicault a Frenchman, was Generall of the Armie. The Genoueses had beene for a time, as they were then, vnder the French Kings protection, and the most part of their Gallies were manned  with French-men. The Fleet departing from Genoa, arriued after a tedious course, at Scandelora a Sea-Towne of Cilicia. (those who are most expert in Nauigation, affirme this place from the firme Land to be opposite to Cyprus) The Genoueses receiuedThe Genoueses great losse. there so great a losse, as of all the Gallie-slaues in one and twentie Gallies, there were not so manie left as would furnish eleuen. Departing thence, they sailed into Syria, where surprizing Barut, they ransackt and spoiled as enemies all the Venetian ships, and others, who by chance were then in the Hauen. From Syria they sailed into More^.
Carolo Zeni whome the Senate, at the first report of the Genoueses preparations,A new Geno^ Fleete. had sent with eleuen Gallies into the Adriatick Gulph, hauing at Sea narrowly pursued the Genoueses Fleete, had speciall care that they should not attempt on any place belonging to the Venetians: (for their Armie spoiled all places where they  came) and yet he would not fight with them because they were not proclaimed enemies. In this sort both of them dissembling, the Venetians kept the GenouesesBoth the Fleetes dissemble. in aw, and the Genoueses the Venetians. But both of them staying neere to Modon, they made shew of other matters than they had done at the beginning. Zeni fearing least by his patience the Venetians affaires might incurre some great danger, did on a sodaine set forward towards the Genoueses Fleete, who vnder colour ofThe two Armies fight. taking in fresh water, lay betwixt Modon and Ijonches. At Carolo his vnlookt-for arriuall, there was a sharp-fight, and the Venetians fortune was so much the worse, because the Genoa Gallies were better manned than theirs.
It is reported that euerie Gallie had besides the ordinarie banke of Rowers, fortie The Venetians in danger, before the comming of Hermolao. men at Armes, and all French-men, who fought furiously with the Lance and sword, after the manner of their Countrie. And the Venetians did but in a manner beare off the blowes, at such time as Hermolao the Lombard returning from a long voiage,

came thither opportunely with two Gallies. He perceiuing the danger wherein the Venetians were, did with great furie turne the prowes of his Gallies vpon the enemie who was busied in fight, and strooke one of their Gallies with such force, as he ouerturned it into the Sea with the Souldiers and Marriners. At Hermolao his arriuall fortune sodainly changed.
For the enemie who had alreadie in a manner wonne the victorie, for the losse of one Gallie began to faint: The Venetian on the contrarie being strengthened by these two Gallies, did valiantly renew the fight. Their fortune hung for foure houres space in equall ballance: at the last three of the enemies Gallies being sunke, and asThe Geno^eses Fleet^ defeated. manie taken, the residue which were fiue, betooke themselues to flight. More than  fiue hundred of the enemies were slain and drowned, and more than eight hundred were taken prisoners. The Venetians for their part, obtained not this victorie without bloud* shed, who found an hundred and three and fortie of their men to be wanting.
It is said, that, after the victorie, certaine Captaines of the Gallies were disgraced and noted of cowardize for comming too slowly on the enemie at the beginning of the fight, and because by their basenesse they had endaungered the state of the Common-wealth. Others, among whom was Gyles the Black, were honored with greatGyles the Black greatly honoured rewards, because they had brauely borne themselues in that conflict. The fiue Genoueses Gallies which fled from the fight, encountring with a Venetian Gallie loden  with victualls they easilie tooke it* after that, they tooke an Argosie, wherein were diuers Venetian Gentlemen. Much more harme besides they did to the Venetians; but because after this defeate, they knew no safe place of retreate: they returned verie disconsolate to Genoa.
Within few daies after, a French-man, of the number of those who were takenA French man punished for indiscrecte speaking. prisoners in the fight, being wearied with imprisonment, said in choller, That he hoped one daie to wash his hands in the bloud of the Venetians. This cruell presage being reported to the Senate, did so highly offend euerie mans eares, as they all with one voice commanded that hee should bee hanged betwixt the two Columnes.
In this mean space Nouello Carrario commanded in Padua, where he was some few yeares before replanted by the Venetians. This vnthankfull man did hate the VenetiansThe hatred which Nouello did beare to the Venetians. more than euer his Father had done. He practized day and night against them and their state; he dreamed on nothing else, and all his attempts tended to that purpose. The Venetians, hauing knowledge of a long time how he stood affected to them, had I know not by what meanes, discouered all his practises, and vnderstood by the French prisoners, that he had been^ the cause of the setting forth of the last Genoa Fleete that was defeated. They knew likewise by letters found in the coffers of Galeas Visconte lately deceased, the traps which those Tyrants had laied for them. And besides all this, after Galeas his decease, hee had earnestly solicited William of Escalla, who had beene created a Gentleman of Venice, and dwelt at the same time there,Perfidious trecherie. to recouer the Principallitie of Verona: whom after the recouerie thereof, he perfidiously poisoned: notwithstanding that before he had sworne and protested all loue and friendship to him, and releeued him with Armes and Councell. After which hauing surprised Antonio, and Brunora of Escalla his children, he caused them to be murthered. The race of Escalla being thus extinct: Francisco caused his son Giacomo, or according to some, his brother, to enter Verona, the Ensignes of the EmpireVerona possessed by the Carrarians. and his owne being displaied before him, and created him Prince of the Citie: Yet not being satisfied with so great a Principalitie, he besieged Vincenza, hauing first spoiled the Vincenzans Territorie.
The Vincenzans detesting the name of Carrario, resolued to endure all extremitie,The Carrarians make incursions on the Vincenzans. rather than to submit themselues to their Tyrannie. They speedily sent to Katherina, widdow to deceased Galeas (for Carrario already made hauock of their countrie, to get that by force which he could not obtain by right) and intreated her to assist

them against the violence of the Carrarians, giuing her to vnderstand their great danger, vnlesse they were speedily relieued: alleaging for instance, That on the oneThe Vincenzans aduertisement to Galeas his widdow. side they had Padua for neighbour, where the Tyrants made their retreate; and Verona on the other which they had lately seized on, hauing vilely murthered their hosts; and that being enuironed and shut in on euerie side, they were openly pursued as enemies, because they would not open their gates to the Tyrants* and that the Vincenzans knew not of whom or from whence to expect reliefe, but from thence where the power of Galeas had beene in force and Authoritie. Earnestly therefore they entreated her presently to send them aide, or if she had not the meanes so to do, yet to send them word in what manner shee would will or commaund the Vincenzans  to prouide for their safetie. This did the Commissioners deliuer vnto her. But she being a woman, and troubled with the death of her husband, and busied elsewhere in greater affaires: (For Carolo sonne to Bernabo after Galeas death began to (...), and diuers pettie Princes of Italie had seized on the Cities which belonged to her husbands Dukedome, so as she had busines enough to keepe Milan) for resolution in these difficulties assembled her Councell: by whom it was concluded, That,The resolution of the Councellors of the widdow of Galeas. in regard they being so streightly pressed, could not continue in her obedience, it was much better for Verona, Vincenza, Feltre, Belluna, Collogna, and Bassan with their dependances to be giuen to the Venetians, than to leaue them for a prey to those wicked Tyrants.
The Venetians, albeit they had already refused the offer which the Vincenzans had made to them of their Citie, not that they did it to gratifie Carrario, or were vnwilling to helpe their poore afflicted friendes, but only for that they were ashamed to possesse the goods of an other man without iust cause: so soon as they perceiued the offer to be made, contrarie to their expectation, by the true Lord (albeit they knew that great warre would follow with Nouello) they would not loose so faire an occasion. Therefore they courteously entertained the Vincenzans CommissionersThe venetian: entertaine the vincenzans commissioners* (the chief of whom was Giacomo Thyeni, sent with the Cities keies) and willed them (after they had receiued their oathes of fidelitie) to be of good cheere, and not to doubt but that they would deale in such sort, as if this Paduan, who filled all places with  tumult and menaces did not desist from molesting them, they would shortly set him such taske-worke, as he should no more trouble his neighbours, nor any else. Besides, seeing that the Vincenzans had esteemed from the beginning nothing to be more profitable for their Citie, than to be vnder the protection of the Venetians, they would take order that so loiall a Citie should neuer repent her loue and affection towards them. Heereupon they willed them then to depart, and to carrie home with them the ensignes of Saint Marke, (whom they besought to be fauourable to them both) and to erect them in the publicke places of their Citie, assuring them that the Prince and Senate would take order for the rest.
In this manner were the Commissioners sent home. Giacomo Suriano followed A venetian garrison sent to vincenza. them soone after with a good troupe of Archers for the Cities guard. They sent likewise to Carrario to signifie vnto him in the name of the Common-wealth that he should abstaine from further molesting the Vincenzans, because they were become subiect to the Venetians. But al this aduertisement notwithstanding so farre off was he from giuing ouer his enterprise, as on the contrarie, in contempt of them,Carrario wrongeth the venetian Ambassador* and against the law of Nations, he caused the Ambassadours Nose and Eares to be cut off, and willed him besides, to tell the Venetians, that it was too saucily done of them to prescribe lawes vnto those, who were commanders in possession: That they should doe well to containe themselues within their small inclosure of the Sea, and leaue Cities to those who from their Ancestours had receiued the power to gouern.
The Senate being mooued by the Tyrants arrogant answere, would (before they proclaimed open warre) contract alliance with Francisco Gonzaga. In the meanThe venetians allie themselues with Goazaga. time, the Feltrians, the Bellunois, and Bassans, following the Vincenzans example, voluntarily submitted themselues to the Venetians. Colognia gaue occasion of a

great battaile. The Paduan euerie where opposing himselfe against the Venetians attempts, did greatly molest them. The Senate on a sodaine caused great forces to be leuied, and gaue the charge of them to Carolo Malatesie of Arimini, who wasCarolo Malateste of Arimini Gene rall of the venetians land Army. sent from Flaminio for that purpose. The Armie was reported to be of thirtie thousand as well horse as foot.
Howbeit Carolo staied longer than was expected, yet being come to Venice he was entertained with great ioye, and receiued the publicke Ensignes in St. Markes Church. Then marching towards the enemie he came to Mestra, which was the Rendes-uous of all the Venetian troupes, and diuers great personages were in that Armie who receiued good pay of the Venetians. The Generall at his arriuall made  certaine attempts vpon the enemie, but of no great moment, and therefore not worthie of memorie. But in the hottest of the warre he gaue ouer his place. ThoseMalates^e giues ouer the Generals place. Authors whome we haue read giue no reason why he did so.
Whilest these things were done on the firme Land, the nauall armie had no better successe on the Lakes. Marco Grimani Generall of the Fleet which the Senate had sent forth against the Tyrant, hauing remained for a time on the Lakes neere to the enemies, and caused a great number of light boates to come thither, did violently force certaine of the Garrisons: but being assailed on a sodaine by the Paduan,The Venetians nauall Armie defeated. neere to the Church of Saint Hilarie, he was defeated, hauing lost the greatest part of his vessels, which the enemies drew on shoare with hookes of Iron; and himselfe  being taken prisoner was committed to the keeping of the Sacceans.
Malateste his dismission being knowne at Venice, they beganne carefully to consider, whom they should appoint for their Generall. At the last among so many*Paulo Sabello a Roman, General of the venetians Armie. noble persons as were then in great number in the Armie, Paulo Sabello a Roman Gentleman for his valour and great experience was alone thought worthie of that place. By his conduct diuers places were in short space taken from the enemie, and the Venetians beganne to haue better successe vnder this new General. But the Tyrants arrogancie did no whit diminish: whereby they knew of a certaine that he was to be dealt with in more places than one. And therfore they leuied new forces, and a new Campe as great as the former, which should spoile and ouer-runne the territorie  of Verona. They made Francisco Gonzaga, their associate in this warre, GenerallFrancisco Gonzaga Generall of another Armie of the venetians. of that new Armie. He comming sodainely on the Veronois, did spoile all places, and brought away with him a great bootie, as well of prisoners, as of Cattle; he burnt the Farmes and Countrie houses; he tooke certaine strong places, and among the rest Hostilio; and in a word, he left the enemie in a manner nothing. Carrario being then assailed in two seuerall places, that great vsuall heat of his beganne by litle and litle to coole. For he could not intend both places together, nor were his forces sufficient being diuided into two, to resist the enemies attempts. His affaires therefore were of necessitie to goe backeward in both places, or at the least in one of them.Albert of Aeste maketh warre on the ven^tians in the behalfe of Carrario.
In the meane time Prince Albert of Aeste being mooued with compassion of his friend and allie, proclaimed warre on the Venetians, who were readie enough to accept it. He first sent aid to the confederates, and after draue the Venetians foorth of the Pollesin. Some Authors say that it was Nicholao sonne to Albert, which made warr on the Venetians, to whom Carrario had giuen his daughter Liliola to wife. But whether it were he, or the other (according to the Venetian Annals) who at theAccio of Aeste is repealed from Ca^die to make warre on Albert. same time relieued the Carrarians; the Venetians being displeased thereat did repeale Accio D'Aeste from Candie, whither they had in time before confined him in fauour of Albert, and hauing giuen him forces, they caused him to warre on the territorie of Ferrara.
This Accio was before that time a deadly enemie to Albert, and had without doubt driuen him from his estate, if the Venetians, the Florentines, and those of Bolognia, had not ouerthrown him in the height of his good fortune, and confined him farre from Italie. There was then some likelihood that so soone as this man

should assaile the Ferrarois in his Countrie, that he would either greatly molest him, or enforce him to laie aside his Armes against the Venetians: Therefore they armed certaine Gallies, and gaue them to Giouanni Barba, who at the mouth of Po sailed vp the Riuer, where he did greatly affright those of Ferrara. In the meane timeThe conditions of peace made with Albert of Aeste* diuers and sundrie skirmishes were made on the Riuer and else-where. And the Citie of Ferrara being thus hardly pressed by water and land, Albert, to quench this great domisticke flame, inclined to peace, the which he obtained of the Venetians on these conditions: That no more salt should be made at Comaccia: and that hee should sweare besides to continue euer a friend to the Venetians.
These things were done neere to Ferrara, but on the Paduan territorie they fought  fiercely. The Venetian had fortified his Campe at Nogara: Then the Generall being gone from thence with part of his troupes, came and encamped at Bassanelto. Those Authors whom we follow expresse not on what occasion he did so. The sonne of Francisco Carrario, surnamed Tertius, a valorous young man, being sent by his father with a choise troupe of horse, came and assailed the Campe. The VenetiansThe venetians are afrighted at the arriuall of young Carrario. Sabello ende^oureth to stay his amazed Souldiours. at the first were so affrighted, as the enemie came euen to the Generalls Tent, and trode the Venetian Ensignes which where there erected vnder his feet, before any man made resistance. Sabello in this amazement with much adoe recalled his Souldiours: and by earnest intreating now one and then another he restrained their shamefull flight, sharpely reprehending their feare. Then he commanded them to  turne their faces towards the enemie; and as he exhorted them hee marched foremost. But so soone as the enemie perceiued the Venetians in armes, and furiously bent to begin the fight, and fearing if he should ioyne with them he should be enforced to bring all his forces to the battaile, turning his backe, he retired on a gallopThe enemies retreate. towards his Ensiignes, who alreadie by their Captaines command had begunne the retreat. The Venetians not being able to cause the enemie to stay suffered him to depart with certaine of their Ensignes which at his arriuall hee had taken from them.
Some say that they fought at Mansana, and that the Venetians lost six hundred horse; but they altogether conceale the losse of their Ensignes. This victorious  young man returning to the Citie as it were triumphing, presented the people with a ioyfull shewe. It is reported that afterwards diuers and sundrie exploits were executed, and that diuers Townes were taken from the enemies, as well of theThe death of Paulo Sabello. Paduan as the Verona territorie. Whilest these things were attempted, Paulo Sabello dyed. His bodie being brought to Venice, was in great solemnitie accompanied by the whole Clergie, the Prince, and Senate, to the Church of the Friers Minors. His Image is to be seene on horse-backe before the high Altar. Galeas Grumello ofGaleas Grumello of Mantua subrogated in the place of Sabello. Mantua was by the Senates decree subrogated in his place. Others say that Gonzaga brother to Prince Francisco, succeeded him; and not Grumello.
This man beganne his charge with as great care and diligence as could be desired  in a great Captaine. In the meane time Giacomo Suriano, who lay in Vincenza, becauseCertaine venetian troupes defeated. i there was no doubt to be made of the Vincenzans loialtie and affection towards the Venetians, resolued by the permission of the Prince and Senate, to goe with a companie of men at armes to the Venetians Campe on the territorie of Verona. The enemie lying in ambush came forth and assailed this troupe of men at armes at Soaua, and easily defeated them, and being thus broken, they tooke Suriano with diuers others, prisoners. The Veronois being wearied with so long and tedious a siege, were alreadie determined to yeeld. For they likewise did detest the Carrarians. Giacomo Carrario commanded in the Citie, who (as we said in the beginning) was Giacomo Carrario departing from verona is taken in flight* giuen to the Veronois for their Lord and Prince. Hee of himselfe perceiuing all things to be doubtfull, and imagining that he should bee safer abroad than in the Citie being out of hope to keepe it, attempted secretly to flie thence. He came first to Hostilio; and from thence crossing the Po, he was taken on the Riuers bancks and brought to Venice. But I know not what should mooue him to goe to Hostilio,

seeing it was at the same time vnder the power of Francisco Gonzaga, vnlesse it were so that he came thither in disguise, thinking to deceiue the enemie in that habite, till such time as he had crossed the riuer. Some say that he was surprized at Asellario a village of the Veronois. But be it that he were taken there or elsewhere, it is certaine that he did not depart from the Citie before such time as he knew that the inhabitants intended to yeeld.
Those of Verona being reduced to the Venetians obedience, all the CastlesVerona in the venetians power. neere to the Citie did the like. The yeelding of so mightie a Citie gaue the Venetians great hope of executing higher enterprizes. And this victorie was as much and more pleasing to the Senate, than any other which they had obtained for a long  time before, and not without cause. For Verona (to speake somewhat thereof) isIn what esteeme the Citie of verona is. among all other Cities of Lombardie, the most famous, as well for the reputation, as the situation thereof. It is thought that the Gaules were the first founders of it, because the notablest Cities of Lombardie were built by them. And likewise because Trogus Pompeius referreth her original and foundation to those Gaules which came with Brennus into Italie. But whosoeuer the first founders were, I doe thinke them to haue beene famous men, because they vndertooke so great and admirable a peece of worke, and likewise that they were wise and discreet persons, and not blind like those founders of Calcidonia, whom in times past Apollo's Oracle thoght to be so*
For besides that the territorie neere to the Citie is most fruitfull in corne, oyle,The goodly situation of verona. wine* and cattaile, and that it hath goodly stone quarries, riuers, lakes, and pondes, among which is that of Benac, the pleas^ntest of those of all Italie, streames of waterBathes in time past at verona. both holesome and profitable; the which I dare affirme to haue in times past serued for bathes* by reason that they are hot, and because at this day the ruines of the walles are to be seene, which doe verifie the opinion which the common people hold thereof. VVhat shall we speake of her situation and structure? There is nothing to be seene more faire and pleasant. Neuer could any Painter how excellent soeuer he were, represent a place of more delectable recreation* For the whole CitieTwo forts at verona. almost being seated in a plaine countrey, looking towards the South, East, and West, it hath a little hill on the North side, the top whereof by a short and pleasant circuit  doth in a manner represent the forme of a Theater: The bottome betwixt them both is filled with vine-yards and goodly gardens, so delightfull to those who behold them a farre off, as their spirits (as it hath hapned to some) surprized with a sodaine and vnlooked-for ioy, are instantly (as it were) depriued of all sense. On the top of the hill two goodly Fortes are to be seene, the one of which doth in a manner hang ouer the riuer Ladissa, which with her pleasant streames watereth a great goodly bottome, the other seated in a higher place, and almost ouer the valley, looketh on the Citie walles which are below, and extendeth her view on euerie side ouer all the plaines watered with the Po, and in a manner ouer all Lombardie. There An Amphitheater in verona. are to be seene besides, diuers goodly bridges richly builded ouer the riuer; an Amphitheater in the midst of the City, with diuers old triumphant Arches, with a thousand other antiquities, which declare how notable the greatnesse of this Citie hath beene in former times. That which we haue hitherto said is verie great, but that which followeth is much more admirable.
This Citie hath had from the beginning a certaine Seminarie of excellent men, and as famous in all sciences, as any other Citie whatsoeuer. All these things being knowne, to the Venetians, did make their victorie more notable.
They forthwith manned it with a strong Garrison, and sent P^etro Arimondo thither for Gouernour, and Rubro Marini for chiefe Iustice. VVhilest these things wereGonzaga besiegeth Padua. done at Verona, Gonzaga hauing spoiled all the Paduan territorie, and taken diuers  townes, came and besieged Padua. There is a place without Holy Crosse gate, called Terra Negra, or the blacke land, in which place the Venetian was incamped, and held the Citie s^teightly besieged, keeping the Paduans in continuall alarme. The Carrarians in the meane time (perceiuing their affaires to bee in great danger) did

brauely defend the Citie walles, opposing themselues euerie where against the Venetians attempts; they ceased neither day nor night from labour* they fortified their Citie, placed the guardes, and encouraged the townsmen, and did at times sallie forth vpon the enemie as occasion serued: Borh sides had labour and care sufficient.
But whilest Padua was thus besieged and defended. Massolerio the VenetianMassolerio the venetian being accused and conuicted of trea son is punished. was suspected secretly to haue shot arrowes into the Citie with letters tied to their heads, wherupon being imprisoned he was sent to Venice, where being conuicted of the crime he was hanged from the highest place of the Palace with a long rope. The same day his brother and two young Priests, were put aliue into the ground betwixt  the two Columnes their heads downewards: The which punishment being not asAcruell and vnusuall punishment. yet vsuall, did greatly terrifie all men. The common report was, That they had determined in the night to set the Citie on fire in diuers places, and that they had diuers complices, some of whom were found within a while after dead in sacks on theGiouanni of Pauia is punished for hauing secret conference with the enemie. shore, not being knowne who they were, Giouanni of Padua likewise who had great pay in the Venetian Armie, being accused to haue had secret conference with the enemie, was sent to Venice, and there hanged betwixt the two Columnes.
These executions did greatly trouble the tyrant, for besides that he perceiued all meanes to be cut off from him of discouering any thing in the Armie, he was certaine  that the shamefull death of a noble person did serue for an example to others how to cast themselues headlong into apparent dangers. Now therefore to discouer his enemies designes, he tried another way. For pretending as if he ment to harken vnto peace, he craued a safe conduct saying that he would confer with Gonzaga, and treat with him of peace before all men. A pasport being sent him, he came to the Campe, where these conditions (as it is reported) were propounded to him. ThatConditions of peace propounded to the Paduan he should leaue Padua to the Venetians, and that he with his children should goe and dwell an hundred miles from thence: That the Venetians would deliuer vnto him Giacomo his sonne, and would permit him to carrie away all his treasure, apparrell, and other rich moueables that he had, and that they would ouer and aboue giue  him for a present the summe of threescore thousand crownes. The enemie contemning these conditions, returned to the Citie without effecting any thing, resoluing rather to hazard all than to accept of so base a peace.
The Venetians then perceiuing that the tyrant had lost that haughtie and proud spirit which he was wont to haue, did presse the Citie more furiously than before.The venetians enter Padua in the night by Scalado. Padua circled with a triple wall. And at the last, hauing about midnight reared ladders to the wall, diuers went vp vpon them: where those of the guard being heauie with sleepe all were murdred with out noise at the gate of holy Crosse, whither all the troupes speedily ranne, and forthwith entred the Citie. Padua is circled with a triple wal, the vttermost wherof being lost by the enemie, he kept himself within the other two. But his forces being alreadie The Paduan s^cth to Gonzaga. broken, and being hopelesse of better fortune, hee sent to entreate Gonzaga to take him into his protection; that he would cast himselfe betwixt his armes, withGonzaga h^s answere to the Paduan. his children and all his meanes; requesting that hee might come safely to him to parley and compound with him about his yeelding. But Gonzaga by the counsell of his friends sent him word that he should doe better to haue recourse to the Prince and Senate, and that with teares casting himselfe at their feete, he should perhaps obtaine of them more than he hoped for. He then craued assurance that hee might safely goe to Venice, but he was answered that the Senate would send Commissioners to Mestra, who should heare him. Both sides being come neere to Mestra, the matter was a long time debated without any conclusion at all, whereupon The poore entertainment which the Paduas gaue to Carrario returning without peace. they departed thence without doing any thing, and the tyrant returned being conducted by Gonzaga into the Citie: where being arriued without tidings of peace, he was so bad^y welcomed by the inhabitants, as diuers were so bold to tell him; That the Paduans were no more resolued to liue as they had done. They willed him then

to depart thence, and (if he did mean to looke well to himselfe) to embrace such peace as the victorious Venetian would offer; and not such as he desired. That the wretched inhabitants had rill then endured too much by their Princes arrogancie; that the enemie was alreadie within their walls: and therefore nothing else to be expected, but that the Souldiers hauing forced the inner Rampire, would come and spoile the Citie; which God rather than any mans valour had til then safely preserued: And that it was madnesse, rather than wilfullnesse, not to yeeld, when men could not helpe it.
The Tyrant being daunted with these ignominious, speeches, sent again to Gonzaga, and with teares entreated him to take pittie on the affliction of his familie, and  to procure so far as he might with honor, that his own and his childreus liues might be saued: Then at the Citizens request, they without any further fight entred the Citie on the 22. of Nouember. Padua being recouered, Nouello with Francisco surnamedPadua being taken, the tyrant with three of his children are brought to Venice. Officers sent by the Senate to Padua. Tertius and William, his children (for Hubertino, and Marsilio, before the Citie was yeelded, were fled into Tuscan) were brought to Venice. The Senate caused them to be carried into the Island opposite to the Hall where they vsed to meet, and placed diuers smal boats for the guard thereof for feare least they should escape. Zacharia Treuisano was the fiest gouernour that was sent to Padua after it was taken, and Marini Caraualla was Iudge: who did forthwith fortifie the Citie with a strong rampire, and a good Garrison: Then they did put diuers forth of the towne whom they  knew to affect the Carrarians, bannishing them into sundrie places, and by that meanes did carefully prouide for whatsoeuer they knew necessarie to keep so excellent a Citie vnder their obedience.
The Tyrant and his children being by night transported into seuerall prisons (to the end that the people should not see them, who for the great hatred which they had a long time borne them would haue torne them in pieces) were by the SenatesThe Prisoners by the Senates commandment are strangled. commandement strangled. The Father was buried in S. Stephens Church, and the children in S. Georges monasterie. Such an end had the Carrariaus, who not long before did fill all places with feare and menaces: and who not being satisfied with commanding so excellent a Citie, did rashly prouoke those by whose meanes their  predecessours had acquired the name of Princes. But diuers did iudge that the cruel tyrannie of Francisco deserued such an end.
The report was that he kept dogs of a meruailous bignesse, vnto whom he gaueFrancisco Carrario his great ^rueltie. the wretched inhabitants to be deuored. There is to be seene at this day in the great Hall where the councell of the Tenne do assemble, two Scorpions, with verie sharp stings, who did sting such strangers, as he called thither to talke with him. I conceale his impudent and vnnaturall conditions, wherewith he was infected, as vnworthie to be mentioned.
By this so triumphant a victorie the Venetians purchased Vincenza, Verona, Colognia, Feltra, Belluna, and the last of all, Padua with her confines. The expence of this warre which lasted two yeares, was so great, as two millions of gold of the publike Now much mony was spent in the warre with the Carrarians. Treasure were spent in it: And yet neuerthelesse this excessiue cost was verie pleasing in regard of the proffit and renowned victorie which ensued it.
At the same time as the warre was ended, whilst the whole Citie was busied euery night in making of bonfiers, and other signes of ioy for the good newes which daily arriued from al parts, the top of the Tower, which is neere to S. Markes church was burned; but it was forthwith reedified, and guilded with fine gold. That side likewise of the Palace which looketh towards the South, and had been a long time before begunne, was then ended. All things being quiet, fortie Gentlemen of Verona,Fortie Gentlemen of Verona come to Venite in Ambassade. The entertainement giuen to the Gentlemen of Uerona. clothed in white, came well accompanied to Venice. And their comming being  expected, because the people should receiue the greater content thereby, the Senate commanded a Theater to be set vp richly furnished neere to Saint Markes Church: whereupon the Pri^ce with his familie clothed in white, did stand, all his Ensignes being for that day white. He was attended on by all the Magistrates of the

Citie, and honoured likewise with the companie of the greatest part of the Senate.
The Veronois being come to the Theater, went vp in order, where after theyThe Ambassadors speech. had saluted the Prince and Senate, they laied downe their publicke Ensignes, and the keies of their Citie-gates at their feete, entreating them to accept thereof, and beseeching God, that the offer might be both to the Venetians and themselues as fortunate and profitable, as that was an assured and perpetuall pledge of their fidelitie, as well publicke as particular, towards the Venetians; requesting them of their accustomed goodnesse to continue in the defence, preseruation, and maintenance of them, their Citizens, their meanes, fortunes, with all other Diuine and humane matters: And as for their vnfeigned loue towards them, they durst freely say and  affirme, that they would be extreamely sorry, if among so manie people as did obey them, any should goe before them in loue, dutie, and affection.
The Ambassadours being curteously entertained, receiued great thankes: AndThe answer^ which was made them. they were assured, that so long as they did continue such as they had promised, the Senate would ere long let them know, that the greatest happinesse which can befall those which haue not meanes to maintaine and defend themselues, is to be shrowded vnder a lawfull gouernment; and that they would finde it to be as pleasing in that they had recourse to the only Fort of libertie, hauing cast off a Tyrants yoake, as doth that man which hath escaped out of a terrible tempest, when he entreth into a safe Harbor: They might then depart when they pleased, and take with them  the Venetians Ensignes, (and in so saying, the Prince gaue them to the chiefe Ambassador) and erect them in the middest of their Citie, which he wished might proue to the Venetians and them, alwaies profitable and honourable: and being so erected, to hold them in reuerence: Then he willed them to execute justice and equitie, in regard they had in times past obaied the vniust commandes of Tyrants. In this sort the Ambassadours of Verona were dismissed. Those of Padua following their example, came sooneThe Paduans come in the s^me manner to Uenice. after to Venice. They were entertained as the former, and the only difference was, that in sted of white, the Paduans were clothed in purple.

The end of the eighth Booke of the second Decad.




THE NINTH BOOKE  OF THE SECOND DECAD OF THE HISTORIE Of Venice.

The Contents of the ninth Booke of the second Decad.
LADISLAVS King of Hungarie restoreth the Citie of Zara to the Venetians. Warre for a while in Dalmatia, by meanes of the Sibensans. What great hurt a sodaine storme hapning on the thirteenth of August did to the Citie, and places neere about. The Scythians make incursions on the Faires of Tane. PIPVS entreth violently into Italie with great troupes of Hungarians. FREDERICK soone followeth him thither. Diuers encounters with the enemies on the Treuisan and Forlane. Certaine new Magistrates are created in the Citie. How the Venetians by the contention of those of Vdina entred in Armes into the Countrie of Friul; which is reduced vnder the Venetians obedience. Strangers come twice into Italie, vnder the conduct of LEWIS Bishop of Aquileia. CARMAGNOLLA forsaking  PHILIP VISCONTE comes and serues the Venetians. Sundry opinions of the Senate touching the warre in behalfe of the Florentines, against PHILIP. And last of all, war is proclaimed against PHILIP: the Venetians being allied with the Florentines.

PEace continued three whole yeares, as well within the Citie as abroad; All which time, according to those whom we follow, we finde no memorable accident to haue hapned. In the end whereof, being the yeare of our Saluation one thousand foure hundred and nine, Ladislaus leauing Italie, departed towards  Hungarie, to possesse his Fathers Kingdome. Hee made a stay in Dalmatia before Zara. This Prince was sonne to the same Charles, who in the time of the Genoueses warre, did for a while besiege Treuiso; from whence being afterward called, hee went into Apulia, to reuenge the death of King Andrew on Queene Ioane his wife, where he conquered the kingdom of Naples; but returning afterwards from Italie into Hungarie, he was murthered by his owne subiects. He left behinde him his sonne Ladislaus, who in processe of time, being likewise called to recouer his Fathers Kingdome, came, into Dalmatia, and recouered Zara, after hee had for a while besieged  it. In the meane time being aduertized by letters, that the Neapolitanes with diuers great Lords of the Kingdome were readie to rebell, fully resoluingLadislaus king of Hungarie, selltth Zara to the venetians. to returne into Italie, he sold that Citie with her Territorie, Hauen, and other appurtenances to the Venetians for the summe of one hundred thousand

crownes. Whereupon Francisco Cornari, Leonardo Mocenigo, Antonio Contareni, and Fantino Michaeli, were sent thither with a strong Garrison to take possession thereof.
We finde in some others, that the Venetians receiued Zara before the PaduanGreat contention among the Sibensans. warre was ended. This negotiation was very pleasing to the whole Citie, as well in regard of the hauen, which is one of the most commodious in all Dalmatia, as also, because it being reduced vnder their obedience did seeme to promise them the entire Dominion of Dalmatia, as it fell out soone afterward. Some say that the Venetians did together with Zara, buy of Ladislaus all his Title to Dalmatia. Whereupon they made generall Processions in the Citie* and a decree was made, That the same  day should be kept holy.
Within few Moneths after, there arose great dissension betwixt the Sibensans; the Nobilitie holding for the Venetians, and the rest of the people for the King of Hungarie. This seditious multitude did put on Armes, and hauing thrust all the Gentlemen forth of the Citie, they tooke the publike gouernment into their owne hands. Those who were expelled went to the Venetians, and hauing promised to yeeld themselues vnto them, entreated them speedily to passe ouer into Dalmatia, to recouer Sabenica. The Venetians did forth with arme foure Gallies, with about fiftie other smaller vessells. The Citie being besieged, was not only well defended, but the Venetian was expulsed thence with great losse, whereby they knew that it  behoued them to haue a greater Armie: whereupon, the Senate sent thither Lodouico Buccecharino with great supplies to besiege it by Land.
At his arriuall they built a Fort neare to the Citie, and all the passages were shut vp, that no victualls, armour, nor reliefe might come vnto it. And besides, Ambassadours were sent into Hungarie (Giouanni Barba, and Tomaso Mocenigo, both of them being Prouidatori of S. Marke, went thither.) The affaires of the Sibensans being for a while debated, was by the consent of the Hungarian and the Venetians, referred to Pope Iohn to be decided.
But in this meane time Marsilio Carrario, and Brunora of Escalla, being then fugitiues in Germanie, did each of them by Letters and trustie Messengers solicite their  friends to stirrevp rebellion: whereof the Venetians being aduertized, it did greatlySecret practize: of Marsilio Carrario, and Brunora of Escalla. The conspiracie discouered. trouble them. At the last it was knowne by letters intercepted by chance, that Marsilio would be shortly at Padua, where certaine of the Inhabitants, who were louers of noueltie, had put him in hope to be kindly welcommed. One of those who were faultie, being taken, and conuicted of the fact, was cut in foure quarters: And an other of them being brought backe from Ferrara to execution, lost his head betwixt the two Columnes. Diuers were reported to haue a hand in the conspiracie, but the Senate were of opinion that it was better to defer the punishment till some other time, thinking in the meane time that they had sufficiently prouided for the Common-wealth, if by containing the Paduans in their dutie, they should for feare  of danger keepe the Tyrants farre from Italie. They appointed fiue thousand crownes for reward to any that should bring either of their heads to Venice.
About the same time, on the thirteenth of August, there hapned in the Citie soA meruailous Storme. great a Tempest of Winde, Haile, and Raine, as diuers ships were cast away, some being swallowed by the waues, and others dasht to peeces against the Sea-banks. Diuers buildings as well publike as priuate were ouerthrowne, and among others S. Sauiours steeple: Trees were pluckt vp by the rootes, and carried farre off by the violence of the winde. This was reputed for a wonderfull prodigie. And that which some affirmed, to haue seene diuers monstruous and terrible representations in the aire, did encrease mens feare and amazement. Two Moneths after, newes was  brought to Venice, that the Scythians had robbed and spoiled the Faires of Tane,The Faires of Tane robbed and spoiled by the Scythians. with great murther of Christians, and that among others, diuers Venetians who were come thither with very rich merchandize, were slaine by the Barbarians. They had assured testimonie that this losse happened at Tane, on the selfe same day, as

that horrible Tempest did afflict Venice. The steeple of S. Iohns Church at Rialto was the same yeare finished. The order of the Celestines which was founded in the Church of S. George of Alega, was at the same time, by the pursute of Lorenzo Iustiniano, and other Honourable and deuout Persons, made very famous and much frequented. This Order had at the beginning besides these men, sundrie other more rich Benefactors, among whome was Gabrieli Candelmaro, who being afterwards Pope, and called by the name of Eugenius, did much beautifie that place with buildings and reuennues.
At the same time one of those foure Gallies which returned home loden with rich merchandize from France, was castaway at the entrance of the Sicilian Sea, not  by the violence of the winds or waues, but by the only ignorance of the Marriners. Those who were within it were almost all saued, and the most part of the goods were recouered.
Such was the state then of the Common-wealth abroade and at home. But this quiet was disturbed by the inuasions of the Hungarians. For Pipus the FlorentinePipus the Florentive makes incursions on the venetians Territorie. ouer-running Italie at the same time with ten thousand Horse, made incursions on the Venetian confines. The Venetian Annales make no mention, for what cause the Emperour Sigismond (in whose name the Tuscan made these stirres in Italie) did beginne this Warre: But it was to bee presumed that it was by reason of the ciuill Warre of the Forlani, the Lords and People of that Prouince contending about  the publike Gouernement. Some of them would haue the Venetians, others the Hungarian, or the Bishop of Aquileia: whereupon it came to passe that at Pipus his arriuall, Frederico Sauergnane with all his faction, being retired to Venice, those of Vdina yeelded to him. Pipus hauing receiued Vdina, did forth with come vpon the Treuisan, and tooke from the Venetians, Serauall, Belluna, Feltre, and La Motte. It is certaine that the sale of Zara made by Ladislaus, and the siege of Sibensa were cause of all those troubles. Some Authors neuerthelesse doe affirme, that the King came into Italie at the pursute and entreatie of Brunora of Escalla, who did still aspire to his Fathers Principalitie. But whatsoeuer the occasion of this Warre was, it is certaine that Pipus after diuers warlike exploits, being corrupted with money (as  they say) did leaue the Prouince, and returned into Hungarie, where the HungarianThe death of Pipus. caused him to die, by pouring molten gold downe his throat: And that soone after he came downe into Italie with fortie thousand men; others make the number lesse. This latter attempt of Warre, albeit it carried a greater shew, yet was it not so fortunate as that of Pipus, for he did hardly passe the confines of the Forlani. Some Historians say that Sigismond did make Warre on the Venetians with Pipus. But whether it were so, or (as others affirme) a-part, it is certaine that the Venetians at the first report of this Warre, made great preparations of Souldiers and munition, and chose Carolo Malateste for Generall of their Armie, who was a man of great reputation, whom for that purpose they had called from his house. It is reported that they  fought at times on the Treuisan and Feltrian confines, as occasion was presented, and that the Hungarian did still vse such crueltie, as all those who fell into his hands,Great crueltie of the King of Hungarie. came from him lame of some of their members. For he did cause the prisoners hands to be cut off, and their eies to be put out. After hee had in this manner prosecuted the Warre for a time, they sent Ambassadours to him. Francisco Foscari, Tomaso Mocenigo, (who were afterwards Princes) and Antonio Cornari, came to his Camp and concluded a truce with him for fiue yeares.
Armes being laid a-side against Sigismond, Prince Steno soone after deceased in the thirteenth yeare of his Gouernment. His body was laid in S. Marinies Church.




 THOMASO MOCENIGO, the 64. Duke of Uenice.





THomaso Mocenigo who was absent, was subrogated in his place. Hee  was at the same time Ambassadour at Cremona to Gabrino Fondulo, from whence being called, hee came to the Citie, and was receiued of all men with great ioy.
At the beginning of his Gouernment certaine Magistrates were by the Senates decree translated to Rialto: And to the three Tables which were there from the beginning, the fourth Prosenitica was added, called vulgarly the Messetaria. For that purpose a Palace was builded on La Riuade Ferro, where these foure Magistrates doe at this day execute Iustice. The great Douana was there at the  beginning. Since then, it being diuided into two, that concerning the affaires of the firme Land hath still remained there, and the other for marine matters, was transferred neare to the Church of the Trinitie.
The Citie was not long at rest, a new warre being raised on the confines of the Forlani, concerning the contentions of Vdina. Lodouico Techia was at the same time Bishop of Aquileia, who at his owne pleasure gouerned the whole Prouince, which lieth betwixt the Riuers of Liuenza, and Timaua, the Adriatick Sea and the Alpes. Some Authors say that this Prouince belongeth to the Forlani. But the vulgar doeStrife betwixt the Bishop of Aquileia and the vdinois. at this day call it Friul, and the Inhabitants the Countrie of Friul. Therearose great strife betwixt this Bishop, and those of Vdina, by reason that the Vdinois  would haue those of Sauergnane his faction, who in the last war tooke part with the Venetians, and in regard thereof being in a sedition driuen thence, and were retired to the Venetians, to be called home into the Citie. Techia on the contrarie did impugne it, saying that he would neuer permit it. Whilest the Citie of Vdina was in this contention, and by consequent the whole Prouince almost, the Venetians seized on Sacila. The Bishop perceiuing that the matter was to bee determined by armes, had recourse to the King of Hungarie. For hee felt himselfe too weake to deale with the Venetians.
In the meane time the Ciuidalians did yeeld to the Venetians, who kindly receiuedThe Ciuidalians yeeld to the venetians. them, not as vassalls, but as associates. The Bishop soone after returning from  Hungarie with foure thousand Hungarians, came (with the aide of the Patrians who had still continued faithfull to him) and besieged the Ciuidalians. But being strengthened with a good Garrison, which the Venetians had left there, they did without feare receiue the enemie, The Hungarians were before the Citie for the

space of fifteene daies, who hauing spoiled all places round about, being enforced by the great frost and snow (for it was winter,) they raised their Campe.
The Bishop being out of hope to effect any thing, did follow them into Hungarie:The Venetians recouer Feltre, Belluna and other places. The Venetians recouered Feltre, Belluna, and other places which had beene lost in that warre: they entred the Patrians confines, where they wholy ruined the Citie of Prata. Philippo Arcia was Generall of the Armie, one of the best experienced Captaines of his time. He (Prata being ruined) marched towards Vdina, where the gate on the side of Ciuitade, being opened to him by Fredericke and others of his partie, the Citie was then like to haue beene taken by that treacherie: But a great noise raised on a sodaine, and the alarme giuen on euerie side all men ranne to armes. The Bandetti being amazed at this sodaine and vnlookt for feare, hauing lost diuers of their Souldiours who were at hand with the armed Squadrons of the Citie, retired without doing any thing. Afterward the Venetian Ensignes, ranne here and there vpon the Patrians territorie: and the Vdinois for certaine yeares were in danger. Diuers Cities and Lords of the Forlani did acknowledge the Venetians.
But the Vdinois perceiuing, that it was in vaine to expect reliefe from any place,The Udinois doe voluntarily yeeld ^ the Venetians and that the Bishop his arriuall was vncertaine, they resolued likewise to yeeld. Therefore they sent their Agents to Venice, to offer vnto the Venetians their Lands and meanes as well publicke as particular, and in Generall all matters both diuine and humane. The Agents being friendly entertained, the Senate decreed  that Fredericke and his associates should be restored to their Citie and their goods. By which decree not onely the Sauergnans but their adherents and all those who had beene banished, returned into the Citie and their inheritances. The whole Countrie of the Patrians in Friul, followed the example of the Vdinois. The Bishop being aduertized of the Vdinois yeelding, thinking it no time to delay, came through Germanie with great troupes of Hungarians, and fell furiously on the Forlani: and at his arriuall in the streights of the Alpes he tooke the Castle of Clasino, a most strong and well defended place, and neere thereunto that of Mutiano, a place then, as now well fortified. And the Patrians were like to haue receiued a great losse, if the Venetian forces sent thither for that purpose, had not opportunely  by their arriuall, broken the enemies designes, who were still in the streights of the Alpes.
The enemies did not onely refuse to fight, but they durst not attend the VenetiansThe Barr^nis fly so soone as the venetians arriued. who came towards them; for they came into Italie with an intent rather to robbe and spoile, than make warre. And by this meanes within few daies after this great stirre, all the Countrie of the Patrians was at quiet, all those places which the enemie had seized being easily recouered. Within a while after, the Bishop returned into Italie with a greater Armie, and entring the Patrians confines, he assailed Mansane, and soone after Rosacia. But this iourney prooued as vnfortunate as the former whereof we now spake. The Venetians at the first newes of the enemies comming  were in the field, whereat the Bishop being greatly astonished, departed forthwith out of Italie: And within a while after practizing nouelties he deceased. By his death the Vdinois and Patrians were afterward at quiet vnder the gouernement of the Venetians. These things hapned abroad. But the Citie sustained greatThe Ducall Palace for the most part burnt. losse by fire as it had oftentimes done before. The fire breaking forth on a sodaine from the Dukes Palace, did in an instant take hold on Saint Markes Church which is verie neere to the same, where the flame did so terribly encrease as the lead beeing melted, (wherewith it was then couered as it is at this day) there was nothing left but the open vaults. They tooke great paines neere to the Church to keepe the fire from the neighbour-houses. The fire being quenched, the Senate decreed, that  no man vnder paine of forfeiting a thousand Ducats, should dare to propound to the Senate to pluck downe the old Palace and to reedifie it more sumptuously. It is reported, that then the Prince, preferring the honour of the Common-wealth before his owne priuate profit, brought the same summe to the Senate, and requested

the Senators that they would permit and command, that the fore-part of the Ducal Palace, which was much defaced, might be reedified in more sumptuous manner as was befitting for the maiestie of the Common-wealth. The publicke Aduocates and Procurators, did forthwith craue that the Prince might pay the forfeiture for that he had enfringed the Senates decree. The Prince hauing liberally paid theThe Prince is constrained to paie the forfeiture for infringing the Senats decree. The occasion of the warr against Philip Duke of Milan. summe, did so constantly pursue his proposition, as the Senate reuoked their former decree, and ordained that the Palace should be new built, whereupon the ancient structure was pluckt down, and another more sumptuous was begunne. But the Prince dyed before it was finished after he had gouerned ten yeares and almost  three months. His bodie was buried in the Church of the Twinnes* Francisco Foscari succeeded him.




 FRANCISCO FOSCARI, the 65. Duke of Uenice.





HIs promotion was so pleasing to all the people, and to the whole Venetian  State, as in signe of gladnesse there was no holy day for one whole yeare, wherein fight at Barriers, running at Ring, or other sundrie shewes were not presented. The yeare following the Porch of Rialto was builded at the charges of Scipioni Boa, and afterward built new againe by him, because the former building was thought to be of no long continuance. The same yeare likewise, warre was begunne against Philip Duke of Milan. The cause of which painefull and tedious warre we must fetch from farre, to the end that all men may know that it was not vndertaken rashly or without cause  against so mightie a Prince, and a great friend as then to the Venetians, but that they were constrained so to doe.
This Philip was sonne to Galeas Visconte, who being left verie young with Iohn Maria his eldest brother, did loose a great part of his Principalitie. For Galeas being dead, diuers Tyrants and pettie Kings, beginning to stirre here and there, each of them seized on one or many Townes of his Dukedome: and like a bodie, being left in the middest of them, they tare it in peeces. But in succession of time, as well by his owne valour as that of Francisco surnamed Carmagnolla, one of the greatest Captaines of those daies, hee did not onely recouer the greatest part of that which did belong to his deceased father, but by a wonderfull course of victorie  became master of diuers Townes which were neuer possessed by his Ancestors. At the last comming to besiege Genoa, and the Genoueses being brought to all extremitie, it is certaine that they were relieued by the Florentines with a great

summe of money, on condition that they should giue them for assurance of the lent summe, the Citie of Liuorne a verie strong place on the mouth of Arno. Philip perceiuing that the same warre would beget matter of new dissension, did neuerthelesse dissemble, deferring the reuenge till some other time.
He had determined (as he said afterward) to succour Pope Martin, whom he vnderstood to be basely dealt with by his neighbours: Whereupon he gaue out that he tooke armes for that purpose, and marching forward, he did fight with and defeate the Florentines neere to Zagonare, because (as he said) they would haue stopt his passage. But it was sufficiently knowne to all men that Angelo Pergolesi, who atThe Duke of Milan his victorie ouer the Florentines. the same time did so fortunately winne the battaile against the Tuscans, was sent by  Philip to raise the Florentines campe before Forli, the inhabitants hauing entreated him so to do. But vpon what occasion soeuer it was that the Armie came thither, it is certaine that the warres being begun in those quarters, it came to passe afterwards that the Florentines by the carelesnesse of their Captaines (or rather by their owne malice as some haue thought) being vanquished at diuers times, after sundrie losses, thought vpon nothing more than how to preserue their libertie. And because there was some likelihood, that they could not long without some forraine aide resist the force of Philip, they resolued to haue recourse to the Venetians, whome they had attempted at the beginning by diuers Ambassadors to draw into that warre.
At the last they sent Lorenzo Ridolpho their Ambassador to Venice, to entreat and  exhort them to contract alliance with them against Philip, with this charge; That if their entreaties would not moue the Senate, that he should aduertize the SenatorsTho Florentines ambassage to the Venetians. of the danger that was like to ensue; that hauing ouerthrowne the Florentines, he would striue to doe as much to the Venetians. For as touching the euent of the present warre, he should giue them to vnderstand, that they would defend their libertie against that cruel enemy, so long as their forces and meanes would giue them leaue: but if he should perceiue the Venetians to incline and giue eare to the prosperous successe of Philip, to assure them that it would be too late to talke of peace at such time as Florence being besieged, all things should fall out contrarie to them. But because it was for one man to commit the error, they would endeuour to free  themselues of this warre, in becomming tributarie to him, and then it would come to passe that the Venetians would perceiue how that it had beene more expedient for them to haue made warre in the Florentines companie, vpon him who would one day become their enemie, than afterward to vndergoe the whole burthen alone. And being thus instructed to moue the Venetians on all sides, he departed from Florence.
But the Senators hauing beene alreadie sundrie times importuned by the Florentines (for they had still for two yeares space continued their solicitings for that purpose) had to that end sent diuers times to Philip: First Andrea Contareni, and Lorenzo Bragadino were sent vnto him. Then Nicolao Maripetro, who was afterward followed Venetian Ambassadors sent to Duke Philip. by Andrea Mocenigo, and the last of all was Francisco Serra one of the Secretaries; all of them being commaunded to entreat, and exhort him to giue ouer the warre against the Florentines, and hauing laid by Armes, to referre himselfe to the Venetians for all wrongs which he could pretend to haue receiued of them, albeit they knew well enough that if the Florentines had offended him, they had alreadie receiued sufficient punishment. Besides, that the Venetians did highly account of his alliance, the which they were resolued to entertaine so long as they should perceiue it not to be preiudiciall to their libertie: Neither had they forgotten humanitie, which did constraine them to haue pitie and compassion of a free people. They did then entreat him if he desired to continue their allie, and to haue them for his  friends, to make peace with the Florentines, the which ought to be as pleasing toPhilip his dissimulation. him, as to any of those whom it neerest concerned. Philip heard them verie courteously, and gaue them to vnderstand both by gesture and word, that he would in fauor of the Venetians grant their demaunds: yet neuerthelesse, he did not cease vnder

vnderstand streightly to presse the Tuscans, alledging now one reason, and then another, and by dissembling drew the matter forth at length. The Venetians albeit they knew whereunto Philips designes tended, neuerthelesse because they would not seeme to doe any thing rashly, they did last of all send Paulo Cornari to him, to giue him to vnderstand what the Senate had determined to doe, if he did not presently cease from molesting the Florentines: Francisco Carmagnolla his comming to themCarmagnolla leaueth Philip, and commeth to the venetian. (who had forsaken Philip) had in some sort heartned them to warre, if so be that he did not lay aside his armes, seeing they were before then doubtfull openly to denounce warre against him. This man hauing vnderstood by vicious young men (for so he termed them) that Philip did no more beare him the same affection that he  was wont, with cholericke speeches and threats he forsooke him, and came by bywaies to Trente, and from thence to Treuiso.
Now this which followeth is in effect that which Cornari spake to Philip. ThatThe effect of Cornari his Oration to Philip. among all the Princes of the earth he did not know any man who was more bound to giue thanks to Almighty God than Philip: Because he had not only recouered his lost principalitie for the most part, but likewise by an admirable successe had wonderfully encreased it: That he did peaceably enioy that part of Italie, the which in fertilitie of soyle, in goodly and rich Cities, and in number of skilfull and ingenious men, either in time of peace to till the earth, or in time of war to beare Armes, was not only to be compared, but wholly to be preferred before any other Region  whatsoeuer. But his estate being such as it was, he did not referre the successe therof to the diuine prouidence, by saying that his youth, industrie, strength, and wisdome were not worthie of such a fortune, the which without all doubt were sufficient to conquer a verie great Kingdom or Empire, and being conquered* brauely to desend it; but that his speech rather tended to this, to put him in mind, that being placed in so high degree, he ought not to forget humane affaires, nor the vncertaintie of them, but to be contented with his owne estate. The which the Venetians did hope would fall out according to their desire: in regard whereof they had freely made firme alliance with him for ten yeares, which was not a limited treatie, but a perpetuall league of friendship. Which being so, the Venetians did greatly meruaile that hauing  recouered his fathers Dukedome with many other Cities, and among others Genoa, enemies in times past of their greatnesse, at such time as in the middest of so many felicities he ought to take his ease, he had seised on Forli in Flaminia, and had marched into Tuscanie against the Florentines: That they were not ignorant of the pretence he alleadged, that the Florentines had contrarie to the agreement relieued the Genoueses with money, that they had seized on Liuorne, at such time as Genoa was alreadie in a manner taken. Nor were the Venetians likewise ignorant, what these pretences were, and whereunto they tended; that the common prouerbe was true: That man who is cunningly dealt with, doth sometimes as plainly perceiue the deceit as he that vseth it. And that it oftentimes commeth  to passe that bad designes fall vpon the Authors heads. Besides, that the Venetians held nothing in this world so deere as libertie, that vnto it alone they referred all iustice, elemencie, pietie, and all other duties as well publike as particular, thinking all things to be well done, which are done by the onely contemplation thereof. That there was no contract, agreement, nor any diuine or humane law, that was able to empeach the publike libertie: And to come to the matter in question; That the Venetians were no lesse moued with the Florentines danger, than if they perceiued the Armie of Philip to ouer runne the lands of their obedience. For by being carefull of the libertie of other men, in regard they held the same forme of gouernment, as the Florentines did, it hapned to them as to diuers others, who were as sorrowfull  for the harme of their neighbours, as for their owne. And that they did not doubt but that he who as an enemie doth assaile the libertie in Tuscanie, would likewise if he could do the like eueriewhere; and chiefly tyrants, who do euer feare and detest this name of libertie. That when the Venetians made a league with Philip, it was

with this intent to continue frenids and allies with him so long, as he being satisfied with his Fathers principallitie, should abstaine from molesting his neighbours, and should liue in peace and quiet: But that they could not allowe, nor would by no meanes suffer him by a continuall warre still to molest the Florentines, whose only fault hath beene in that they did not valiantly defend themselues: wherefore if he did not speedily dislodge forth of Flaminia and Tuscanie; if hee did not remaine within his owne confines limited by the agreement, and satisfying himselfe with so flourishing an estate did not heareafter liue at peace: the Venetians, as well to defend themselues as their friends the Florentines, would both together make warre vpon him, and leauie the greatest forces against him they could, as against  a Tyrant and cruell enemie.
Cornari his speech did greatly moue Philip; who dissembling his anger for that present, answered him with a smiling countenance in few wordes, saying, That heePhilip his answere to Cornari was well assured that the Venetians by their constant and faithfull promise would euer obserue the agreement sworne betwixt them, and that hee could not beleeue, though there were none at all, that they would preferre the Florentines friendship (whose treacheries, deceits, and thefts, the Venetians did greatly detest both in publique and particular) before his: That there was no occasion (if the Venetians would call to memorie the ancient friendship of his Ancestours, the affection of his Father Galeas, and the respect which hee had euer borne to them) whereby hee  ought to expect any wrong or discontent from them. But as concerning warre, albeit hee knew for a certaine that the Florentines treacherie and rashnesse would be punished, before that the Venetians or any other could come to their succour; their affaires being in very great hazard: yet neuerthelesse hee was content for the Venetians sake, vnto whome hee would refuse nothing, to referre the whole matter, (if the Florentines were so contented) to be decided by them, and Nicholao of Aeste.
Cornari being dismissed with this answere, returned to Venice. Giouanni Areti^ who had beene Secretarie to deceased Galeas, and Bertrand Lamponiano did soone after follow him. For, the report was that new Ambassadors were come to Venice  from the Florentines: And therefore Philip fearing least the Venetians who were already of themselues sufficiently enclined to leaue him, should make a league withThe Ambassadours of Philip come to venice. the Florentines; he would likewise haue his Ambassadours to bee there, to the end that if need were, they might plead his cause in the Senate.
So soone as they were arriued: the Ambassadours were seene to walke vp andThe Florentines Ambassadour at Venice. downe the Citie in different manner. Lorenzo (as it became him) representing with a sorrowfull countenance the miserie which afflicted his Countrie, went here and there pensiue and disconsolate, entreated the Senators whome hee met with, and visited others at home at their houses, omitting nothing that hee knew might serue for his purpose. On the contrarie those of Philip, besides their brauerie  and goodly shew, being full of hope and confidence, went vp and downe viewing the Citie, and the admirable situation thereof, wondring to see it all Sea, and yet all Land. They did curteously salute all men: being demaunded any question, they gently answered, and generally in their gesture, speech and gate, they represented the greatnesse and prosperitie of their Prince.
Now the Senatours were of opinion first to giue audience to the Tuscan, who being brought into the Senate spake in this manner.








The Oration of the Florentine Ambassador.
YEe may easily coniecture, most excellent Prince, and yee conscript Fathers, albeit Iwere silent, what businesse I haue to handle in your presence, and whereunto this last Ambassade of the Florentines doth tend. Those who haue seene my speedie comming out of Tuscanie vnto this Citie, haue vnderstood, that an Anbassadour of a free Citie, is come to demaund aide of a free people for the conseruation of their libertie. This is thesumme of our demaunds, the wich I craue for our Countrie, which hath begotten and bred vs, and raised vs vp into some degree of honour aboue the vulgar, and if it bee possible, by our entreaties, to obtaine it. If I shall be so happie, most excellent Prince, and ye Senators, as to perswade yee to accept of the Florentines alliance, and to ioyne your armes with ours against this cruell Tyrant who thirsteth after our libertie and yours, my Ambassadge shall bee most fortunate, and my Countrie being highly contented, shall welcome mee home with teares of ioy, will embrace me for such good newes, and will account it selfe by your meanes to be freed from all danger. My desire maketh me to hope well, and chiefly when I consider, that I come vnto those, who besides their knowledge (which doth no lesse concerne them than the Florentines) how to quench and roote out the Tyrants neighbour forces, as though it werea new fire, are esteemed to be so zealous of libertie, wherein their Citie is borne and encreased, as they will likewise wholly maintaine, and free all such places from wrong, where they perceiue any sparke of libertie to shine, and will with a mutuall consent hate all Tyrants, as enemies and disturbers thereof. I could alleage diuers examples, how for loue to this libertie, the Athenians accounted Philip of Macedon for an enemie, the Romans Mithridates, Antiochus, and diuers others, who with an vnbrideled desire of rule, or rather enuying the libertie of other men, did rashly stirre vp against themselues, the Armies of that inuincible nation. But wherefore doe we seeke ancient or forraine examples; when we haue in abundance so many new and domestick: There is none of vs (as I thinke) which hath not seene or heard of their Fathers and Mothers; how vehement an enemie to this Citie Prince Carrario shewed himselfe, during the Warre with the Genoueses, first at Chioggia, and then at Treuiso. What did King Lewis? what did many others who haue not ceased to disturbe the peace and quiet of your state? And we likewise haue euer without intermission had an hereditarie Warre with the Viscontes, euer since the Principalitie of Luchin. And to speake truly, it is commonly seene, that those who haue vsurped other mens libertie, doe hate those vnto whome they cannot doe as much. I esteeme your Common-wealth most happie, and your selues O yee Venetian Fathers; in that yee haue extinguished the Carrarians race your capitall enemies, before such time as this rauening Lyon, with whom we haue to doe, was growne great: For if he had now found them liuing, he would not haue beene satisfied with assailing you only on the Lakes of Bebia, (as they did) but comming both by Land and Water, he would not only haue endangered your state, but your libertie it selfe: whereupon I thinke that it fell out well for vs that day that you smothered that neighbour flame; vnlesse the great assurance which you haue conceiued by that victorie, doth hinder you from thinking on the danger, which threatneth you from this cruell Tyrant. He is your enemie, beleeue me, he is your enemie, and lieth in wait on euery side, and therefore so much the more dangerous as he is yet least knowne, and there is nothing so difficult, which he presumeth not to atchieue by his good fortune, or dareth not to attempt. For, hauing with seuen thousand men assailed our forces, who were then excellent in Armes, meanes, and good fortune, and sometimes, twise or thrise greater than his, hee hath neuerthelesse broken and defeated them, sooner than we thought that he had descried them. He hath no (...) (according to the Poets fictions) or cruell Centaures in his Armie: They be men like ours, but much more hardie and valiant, vnto whom he hath giuen in marriage, the Daughters and Wiues of wretched Citizens, with their Houses, Lands, and Possessions. Wherevnto doe you (...) thinke that their haughtie courages will not aspire? Is it likely that they thinke or desire any other matter, than after that they shall haue ouerthrowne our forces, how they may one day assaile the Venetians more mightie than wee in reputation and power, so

greatly hath their good successe encreased their boldnesse. Let vs then finde meanes to ouerthrow their wicked Councells, and detestable vowes, to expell their Wiues and Children, with their Gouernours of Cities, Fields, and Townes, from the confines of Lombardie, and to enforce them to busie themselues about their owne domestick affaires, or else to take forraine pay. I am afraide, most excellent Prince, to speake what I thinke; yet I will tell it, seeing that necessitie enforceth me thereunto: That vnlesse yee speedily ioyne your forces with ours, Florence being subdued, will bring Philip to that passe, that without the aide of any else he will come to disturbe and beate downe the Venetians State. But (say yee) the Venetians are accustomed to maintaine their alliances as sacred and inuiolate. I beseech God, most excellent Prince, and yee conscript Fathers, that those vnto whom he hath giuen so good a minde to obserue their promise, may likewise know the cunning and deceits of those with whome they are to deale, and being knowne, to auoide them by speedie wisedome. I thinke yee remember, with what subtiltie and craft he deceiued you when as he expelled Pandolfo Malateste from his State, and from that of his Mother, whome yee so much desired to maintaine in the Principalitie of Brescia. Yee haue heard how by deceit, and contrarie to the agreement, hee hath suppressed the Soueraigne Magistrate of Genoa, and brought that mightie Citie into bondage. Yee are not ignorant likewise, how contrarie to the assurance of peace, infringing all lawes and customes, he hath ouerthrowne vs by a sodaine and vnlookt-for assault: who is it then which doth not plainly see how often he hath broken all Diuine and Humane lawes? It is not lawfull to keepe promise with a periured person. But your silence doth make me alreadie in a manner to beleeue, that yee doe sufficiently know, that I doe not so much craue by this mine aduertizement the safetie of our Common-wealth, as your prosperitie, good fortune, and preseruation, the which this perfidious, craftie, and well aduised, great Souldier, no lesse audacious than readie, doth daily lay wait for; trusting to the fidelitie of his Souldiers, to the treasure which he hath gathered together, and to the great yearely tribute which he receiueth, deferring to make Warre on you, till he hath wholly ruined vs. But doe not contemne our alliance, although we seeme to be reduced to all extremitie: For albeit we haue without measure spent great wealth, we haue yet greater, though not publike, yet particular, the which we are readie franckly to employ, for the preseruation of our libertie. Ioyne then your armes, ioyne your forces with ours, and by wholesome Counsell and Sacred alliance, conserue both our Liberties, Common-wealths, and Countries. And as concerning the meanes how to accomplish it, we prescribe no conditions, but are readie to embrace such as yee shall propound.




Lorenzo hauing ended his speech, all the Senators were greatly moued; not one against an other; but in themselues being of sundrie opinions, each of them debating with himselfe the power of Philip on the one side, with the Common-wealths danger, and on the other the Florentines example, with the great expence of the warre. Whereupon they concluded to heare the Ambassadours of Philip, before they would giue an answere. And to the end they might make an easie reply to that which Lorenzo had vttered, certaine Senators were commanded to relate to the  Milanois, vnder colour of particular friendship, that which he had spoken. Wherevpon, a day being appointed for their comming to the Senate, Gio^anni Aretin famous for humane learning, and eloquent in the Countrie language, with the consent of his fellow, spake in this manner.




The Oration of Giouanni Aretin.
I Vnderstand, most Illustrious Prince, that the Florentines who are great enquirers after newes, are desirous ouer the whole Citie to know wherefore, and vpon what occasion, Philip Duke of Milan hath sent vs hither to you, and to this most Sacred Senate: whome in some sort to satisfie, I will in few words vtter the effect of our Ambassade; and I assure my selfe that when they shall vnderstand it, it will not greatly content them. We are not then come hither, conscript Fathers, to stirre vp any troubles, nor for to ouer-turne any Diuine or Humane Law. Philip

leaueth those cunnings to the Florentines, vnto whom by nature they belong: For he thinketh on nothing more, than carefully to obserue the precepts and documents which he hath receiued from his Ancestors, and how to reuerence by all good meanes and offices your friendship, confederacie, and good will. And seing that by the diuine bountie it is come to passe that it is not needful in such a bond of friendship, to renew any treatie of peace or alliance betwixt you and him, the Florentines must giue place, and with their good leaue (if they please) to permit Philip according to his owne manner, and that of his Ancestors, to salute you, most excellent Prince, and all these well-beloued Senators, by his Ambassadours, together with the whole Citie: Let it be lawfull for vs to say, that Philip liueth not but for the good of the Common-wealth: that the Duke of Milan an inward friend to the Venetians, liues not but to preserue their dignitie and greatnesse: who for the great loue he beares them, and in regard of the sound alliance and contract betwixt you two, and in respect of the correspondence of all fortunate and happie euents, that he hath with you, giues yee to vnderstand, that his enemies the Florentines, are ouerthrowne and vndone, who by euill counsell, would with a shameles boldnesse haue ouer-whelmed him, if hee had not diligently preuented it, in a most dangerous warr. This is most wise Fathers, this is the chiefe end of our Ambassade. This is the cause why Philip hath commanded vs to come hither. Moreouer because we haue vnderstood, that these men goe about with an affected speech, wherewith they naturally helpe themselues, and with teares and sighs, say, not onely in the Senate, but likewise in the streets and publicke places of the Citie, that they are not the cause of the warre, for which they are at this day so badly delt with; that Philip did beginne it; he willingly referreth the whole matter to your iudgement, being resolued to embrace such conditions as ye shall propound: Let the Florentines if ye please, come into this place, and excuse themselues: but let them not inuent vnheard of falsities, whereby they endeuour to animate against all right and alliance, your Authoritie and constancie against Philip. Ye must (say they) beware of him, if his power doe encrease: For all Kings Princes, and Tyrants, doe enuie and are enemies to Common-wealths, and doe abhorre that name. They alleadge Philip of Macedon, Mithridates, and Antiochus; I would he had remembred Porsenna, who by a so daine warre did in a manner smother the Romans libertie at her first birth: But he did of purpose forget it (as I thinke) because he would not haue it knowne that Tuscanie hath in times past brought forth any, who hath attempted on other mens libertie. But if they take such delight in Histories, why doe they not rather alleadge. Hieron, Massinissa, the Ptolomies and Attalus, who were trustie friend^ to the Romans. King Lewis was a capitall enemie to the Venetians, so were the Carrarians, but the Viscontes, for a hundred yeares space that they haue enioyed their excellent State, were neuer enemies, but alwaies friends and allies to the Venetians. The Tuscan hath not knowne this; nay rather, knowing it, he hath like a subtill and cunning Orator of purpose concealed it. Let him produce but one onely example of this family which doth so much affect you, he cannot doe it, and therefore it is sufficient to ouerthrow his vntruethes, fables and slanders. And not to speake of his Ancestors, so farre off were the Venetians from euer suspecting the forces of Galeas father to this Philip (which vndoubtedly were verie great) as on the contrarie he did not let to ioyne his Armes with their forces, the better to helpe to increase theirs. As it fellout at such time as being your allie, he tooke Verona, Vincenza, Padua, and last of all Treuiso. Yee haue seene this my Lords (to the end that no man may reprooue me of false-hood) or you may haue heard it of your fathers who were there present. But the Viscontes haue euer beene enemies to the Florentines, and haue still from father to sonne euen (...) now, made warre vpon them. Doe you not thinke that they had iust cause so to doe? Were they not by wrongs prouoked to take Armes? For to speake of the occasion of this present warre, by which they say they are greatly molested. They complaine of the taking of For li contrarie to the Contract as if wee had neuer heard of this fable till now: Philip hath giuen you all authoritie together with Prince D'Aeste, to enquire this matter Why doe they not rather tell, vpon what cause against all right they did succour the Genoueses with a great summe of money, whilest Philip besieged them? why did they attempt to shut vp all passages to the Armie of Philip, which went to succour Pope Martin? what mooued

them to passe their bounds on the confines of the Riuer Migra? why did they seize on Liuorne? and would not giue audience to the Commissioners of Philip, till they had head-long throwne him vnto the hazard of an open warre? These are the causes which haue now mooued Philip to vndertake this warre: The (...) cause likewise had the Viscontes in times past. They can impute it to nothing but to their owne manner of life, their pride, and couetuousnesse. Let them cease then before you to blame our Prince, a friend to peace and quietnesse, and one that is stuffed with all bountie and liberalitie. But we are satisfied (being prouoked thereunto) that we haue answered this little, for much more which might be said, which is so true as they themselues, albeit they are vaine lyers, dare not affirme the contrarie. As for the rest, we haue alreadie said and will againe say, that Philip is readie and resolued to referre the whole matter to your iudgement, wisedome and equitie. We are come hither to this purpose, and not (as the Tuscan presumeth) to renew the alliance, which hath not yet beene violated by you nor by vs euer shall.




So soone as Aretine had made an end of speaking, the Ambassadours wereDifferent opinions of the Senators. put forth of the Senate: And then the Senators opinions were diuers: Some cried out that Philip was to be preuented, and warre to be denounced against him, who drawing forth the matter in length, durst not assaile them till he had vanquished the Florentines: Others said it behooued them to beware least they vndertooke such a matter inconsideratly; and that it was verie easie for any man to beginne warre, butCarmargnolla is called into the Senate. verie hard to end it. Vpon this diuersitie of opinions, they decreed to call Carmagnolla into the Senate, and to heare him.
This man after his arriuall at Treuiso, was euer highly extolled, both in publick and priuate by Prince Foscari and all his adherents, publishing his great renowne and experience in martiall matters, with his long and faithfull seruice to Philip a most vnthankefull Prince. They affirmed that without all doubt vnder the conduct of such a man, (who knew Philips forces, and was well acquainted with all his designes yea with his most inward secrets) they might easily breake and ouerthrowe all the attemps of the Milanois. That which the Prince and his fauorites said of Carmagnolla was true; but many did suspect his loyaltie, fearing that after he should haue thrown the Venetians into the hazard of warre, being wonne by faire promises, hee might  againe returne to Philip.
But to cleare this doubt, it happened at the same time as this matter was debated, or not long before, that he had like to haue beene poisoned by Iohn Alitprand the Milanois. This man had in time before married the daughter of Bernabo Visconte, but because he had fauoured Hector de Monze whome Philip besieged, fearing the vanquishers furie, had retired with his wife to Treuiso. And in regard thereof Carmagnolla did often visit him, as one whome he knew to bee greatly hated of Philip. He in meane time being reconciled to Visconte did determine to poison his friend and guest, but being apprehended by the accusation of his maide-seruant, and put to the torture, he confessed the matter, and had his head stricken off. The Senators  then imagining that which fell out, that the same had more animated Carmagnolla against Philip (for he was at the same time come from the firme land to Venice) they called him into the Senate, where (being by nature chollericke) he beganne to inueigh against Philip, complaining with great vehemencie of his treacherie and ingratitude, saying That by his skill and diligence, hee had not onely recouered his fathers state, but much more beside: That by his conduct and dexteritie, he had reduced vnder his dominion, Alexandria, No^arra, Monza, Lauda, Coma, Pauia, Placentia, Bergamo, Cremona, Bressia, and last of all Genoa, enuious in times past of the Venetians greatnesse: And that therby he had extolled the name of Philip, not onely beyond the confines of Italie, but of Europe, in regard of the taking of Genoa. And that he would not haue them to thinke that his labours had beene recompenced because that he had beene greatly honoured by him and married a wife of that kindred, and taken vpon him the surname of that familie: for that was no remuneration for his paines, but a bond of his militia, so as by that meanes, this vnthankefull man

had tyed him to serue him till such time as he perceiued his affaires to be settled according to his wish, as the euent did afterwards manifest. For besides his suffering of certaine shamelesse and detestable persons, whome he abused, to slander him, and in that regard holding him in some suspect, had enforced him retire thence, he had moreouer being thus banished attempted to take away his life. But that it fell out well (...), for that escaping the present danger in recompence of his Countrie, wife and children, and all his meanes left to a Tyrant, he had met with another true nurscrie of all integritie and iustice, where euerie man was rewarded according to his deserts, where vertue and valour were honored, and where bad men had none accesse nor retreat: which being so, he did not thinke on his lost wealth, but that he had purchased much greater: That he felt not himselfe to be danted by any aduerse fortune, but that he was well recompenced for all his losses, were it not that his wife and children did so abate his courage, as he had not the meanes to hurt that Tyrant. As for the warre which they propounded, he said that Philips power, nor his forces were not so great as men boasted: And that the Florentines were not vanquished by the valour and conduct of their enemies, but by the malice and rashnesse of their owne Captaines: Nor that the other victories obtained in former time, were gotten by Philips conduct, but by his alone. And besides, that he was but needie, in regard he had spent all his meanes on those Armies which he had sent forth by Se^ and Land against the King of Arragon, so as that Armie which he now had in Tuscanie had not of a long time receiued any paye. That he durst affirme, that Philip whome they thought in shew to haue alreadie surmounted all men, was in effect n^erer to be vanquished than to vanquish: That his treasure cleane was exhausted, his subiects consumed, and his reuenue in a manner wholy engaged, and that little which remained, was by his detestable and shamelesse loues, rob'd, spoiled, and consumed: That he knew of a certaine that his Armie had not beene paid for the space of a whole yeare: and that the report of some was not true, which said that his Souldiours followed him to the wars freely and without money. He willed them then to consider what might happen, if the Venetians should roundly assaile the people of Lumbardy who were drawn drie of their wealth by continuall subsidies: If the Lombard merchants were prohibited their traffick with them, which was onely left the of all Italie: if their husbandmen and cattell should be enforced to retire into the circuit of their wals, their lands would become barren and vnfruit full: if after the spoile of one years fruit famine and want of all necessaries should afflict them, they should then perceiue, that he who now was thought a Conquerour, and whose onely name was fearfull to all men, being by these meanes vanquished, would find enough to doe to defend himselfe and his subiects. And that they should not find him such an one in beating backe his enemies, as he had been before, in inuading and pursuing them. Moreouer that the Florentines forces were great at the first, but that those of the Venetians w^re much greater. That there was great difference in making warre in a forrain Countrie, and in a mans owne. That his reputation could much auaile them in that enterprize, as hee who had fortunatly ended all the warres which hee had begunne, and vanquished all those against whome hee had fought, and had learned by so many hazards, dangers, and labours, both to obay and commaund. But as concerning Philips good will towardes the Venetians (because by longe onuersing with him, hee knew all his secrets) hee assured them that he did deferre the warre, which he had long since resolued in his minde against the Venetians, till such time as hee should wholly ouerthrowe the Florentines. Hee wished them then whilest they had time to quench this flame which was so neare them: and if they thought him fit to manage the warre for the seruice of ^he Common-wealth, hee entreated them to vse the power which they had ouer him. Because hee was determined in regard of Philips ingratitude, to march against him with the same zeale, affection and heate of courage to his ouerthrow, as hee had done when hee was his friend to purchase him the soueraigne Principallitie. The Venetians should doe well then to embrace so faire an occasion, who in so doing should not alone defend their owne estate, but mightily enlarge it, and should aide the Florentines their fellow brethren in libertie, who were then greatly afflicted. And this ought chiefely to excite them so to doe, in that they had him for their Generall in this warre, whom if they thought fit to serue them they might dispose of at their pleasure. They might peraduenture emploie

others more excellent in valour and reputation than himselfe, but none who was more affectionate to the Venetian people, nor with more iust cause and veh^mencie animated against their enemie.
Carmagnolla by his discourse had so well mooued the Senatours, as all of them in a manner inclined to warre. Prince (...) thinking it vnfit to stand still in so faire a way, did with great vehemencie pursue the same discourse. For the Venetians good happe was, that the Common-wealth had then a Prince, who besides his admirable wisedome was borne for all haughtie enterprizes, and an immortall and daily enemie to Tyrants. Hee then spake in this maner.




Prince Foscari his Oration.
THere are two things in the Common-wealth (most excellent Fathers) which though in effect and name they seeme to bee very sweete, haue of tentimes neuerthelesse brought many mischiefes to very great and noble Cities; namely, peace, and sparing of the publique treasure. For being only considered a farre off there is no danger seene in them, and being viewed neare at hand there is yet none to be seene, or if there be, men will so flatter and fauour them, as they despise it, in such sort as wee sooner fall into an euident danger, than haue any leisure to redresseit by a sharpe warre, or by some expence, which is odious to the Common-wealth. The which wee haue found to bee most true by diuers losses which our Ancestours haue sustained, and by some likewise hapned in our time. The Florentines losse may serue for a sufficient present example, who being able to haue ouerthrowne the power of Philip at such time as it encreased, many goodly occasions being presented vnto them, they would not doe it for feare of expence. What is come thereof? They doe now vnprofitably spend the Golde and Siluer which in time of Peace they had so curiously gathered together* And that which is more to bee lamented, they cannot, (their libertie preserued) obtaine peace, nor giue end to their expences. I say then that it behoueth vs to foresee future dangers, and being foreseene to preuent them by counsell and mature deliberation. It is in a manner one selfe same gouernment (and no man doubts thereof) that of a Commonwealth and that of a shippe at Sea. I demaund of you, if any man in calme weather (as they call it) the windes gently blowing, holding the helme shall fall a sleepe and take his rest, without considering from farre such aangers as may happen: or whilest other men make vse of the sailes, mast, and saile-yardes, should omit that which were needfull to remedie the suddaine fortunes of the Sea, nor exactly consider the time when hee saileth, vnder what climate or planet, or in what Sea, what rocks and shelues hee ought to auoide: would yee not say that such a man suffering shipwrack by a sodaine tempest did iustly merit such a losse? The verie selfesame is now happened to the Florentines: And the like will still happen to such, which doe not foresee from farre the imminent dangers which threaten Common-wealths: or hauing foreseene them, doe not speedily applie the remedie hauing the meanes to doe it. The Florentines might (not to stray from their example) easily haue ouerwhelmed, if they would neuer so little haue attempted it, the power of Philip, when it began to increase: but they would not intend it, either through negligence, or rather co^ctousnesse. What is come thereof? Being often vanquished in battaile, and bro^ght to the verie hazard of their libertie, hauing lost their meanes they are deceiued; and in sted of being accounted wise, well-aduised, and prouident people, they are esteemed dull fooles and senselesse creatures. Wee must beate backe (I say) we must beate backe mischiefes, not only those which hang ouer our heads, but those likewise which doe nearely presse vs. Besides, were I in the farthest partes of Libia (let other men be of what minde they please) or beyond the Riphean mountaines, and should heare tell that the libertie of any Nation were troden vnder foote, although I could not succour them, yet certainely I could not choose but be a partaker of their griefe. And shall we suffer a proud Tyrant, to tear^ in peices,

oppresse, and abollish the libertie of a Noble people our Neighbour, (...) (...) (...) vp in our common Mother, Italie? VVee doe not well consider that which wee see before our eyes, nor that which all Italie saith, that The same d^y as (...) (...) loose her libertie, will be the first that Philip will assai^e the Venetians. The which seeing all men doe thinke will come to passe, I greatly wonder (...) some men, who albeit they say they haue well considered the matter, are neuerthelesse of opinion, rather to endure any thing, than to relieu^ the Florentines, and bad people, a enuious of our nauigation. It is a madnesse certainely, it is a madnesse, belieue me, to be contented to sustaine a great losse, so as the enemie may suffer a greater. And yet, thankes bee to God, their affaires neither abroad nor at home are to be compared to ours. If vntill now their forces haue beene so great, as wee had good cause to suspect them, they are at this present so abated, as of a long time they will not be able to recouer their former strength. Yet neuerthelesse, I doe not say they are so meane, but that so soone as they shall vnderstand that the Venetians will ioyne with them, they will then vpon hope of better fortune bring forth so much gold and siluer as shalbee sufficient to entertaine the one halfe of the Armie. And besides, Philips forces are not so great, as false report hath made vs to belieue. Carmagnolla hath sufficiently acquainted vs with what he is able to doe. Moreouer, the hope which we may conceiue to recouer and ioyne to our state, Bressia, Cremona, Bergamo, and all the Territories of ancient Venice, is no small spurre to animate vs to beginne the warre. This is it I know which yee haue along time thought on, and for which ye daily studie, But he who durst demaund of the Prince of Mantua (whome he knew to be our friend and allie) the Citie of Pescara, do yee thinke that he will not attempt to haue by force, if yee will not giue it him with good will, Verona, Vincenza, and in a manner all that we possesse in the firme Land? Therefore if yee will credit me, there is none expence, the which, God be thanked we may easily beare, nor labour, seeing it is to purchase vs an assured peace, which may bee of force to hinder vs from speedie ioyning with the Florentines to make warre on the Tyrant; I say a warre no lesse profitable than necessarie.




The Princes vehement speech, with his authoritie, which herein exceeded the Ducall dignitie, did in such sort moue the Senatours, who alreadie of themselues were inclined thereunto, as the alliance with the Florentines was by a generall  consent of them all concluded. VVhereupon their Ambassadour being calledAlliance concluded with the Florentines. before the Senate, the agreement betwixt their two States which was to continue firme and inuiolable betweene them during the whole time of the warre following* was solemnely concluded and confirmed in such manuer as h^reunder followeth.The Articles of agreement.
It was therefore concluded that the Venetians and Florentines should Arme at their common charge, sixteene thousand horse, and eight thousand foote. They should furnish two Nauall Armies; with the one the Venetians should saile vp the Riuer Po to resist the forces of Philip; and the Florentines, along the Riuer of Genoa with the other: That no man should speake of peace neither  before, nor otherwise, till the Venetian should commaund it. That all the Cities, Fortes, and Townes, taken on the confines of Flaminia, should belong to the Florentines; the others should be ioyned to the Venetian state, orgiuen to whom the Venetians should please.
So soone as Lorenzo in the Florentines name had allowed of these written conditions, he did cast himselfe at the Princes feete, and voluntarily with a loud voice began to protest, That the Florentine peopl^ should bee for euer mindfull of such a benefit, and besought God that the Venetians affaires might daily prosper better and better: And that if euer it did happen, that the Venetian people should haue neede, the Florentines would be euer readie according to their meanes, to aide the  Venetian Common-wealth. This new alliance was strengthned by Nicholao de Aeste, Francisco Gonzaga, Amadeo Duke of Sauoy, King Alfonso (reconciled not long before to the Florentines) and by those of Sienna, in respect of their neighbour-hood.
The Venetians sent Francisco Serrano one of their Secretaries to Philip, to entreate him speedily to desist from making warre on the Florentines, who were newly allied to the Venetians, and vpon his refusall, he should in the Common-wealths name, according to the custome of their Ancestors, denounce warre against him.The Venetians denounce warre against Philip. But he was so farre off from condescending to the tenour of this Ambassade, as on the contrarie, he did with great courage entertaine their defiance, imagining by how much the matter was more painefull and dangerous, so much greater did he hope the honour and glorie would bee, if hee should  chance to winne the Victorie.

The end of the ninth Booke of the second Decad.







THE TENTH BOOKE  OF THE SECOND DECAD OF THE HISTORIE Of Venice.

The Contents of the tenth Booke of the second Decad.
CARMAGNOLLA Captaine Generall to the Florentines taketh Bressia. The Armie of PHILIP returning from Tuscanie besiegeth Bressia. The great Trench which the Venetians made about the Castle of Bressia: The enemies being wearied with the long siege, yeeld vp the Castle of Bressia. Peace being concluded with PHILIP, doth not last long through his owne fault. The Milanois Oration to PHILIP to stirre him vp to renew the warre. The Venetians hauing renewed their alliance with the Florentines, doe againe beginne the warre. The banished Fregoses being vanquished in battaile by the Genoueses, were driuen  from the Genoa Coast. The Nauall Armie of PHILIP, broken by the Venetians, a little beneath Cremona: two infortunate incounters hapning soone after to the Venetians, not farre from Cremona. The enemies falling into an Ambuscado neare to Bressia, doe loose many of their Horse. The enemies so daine sallie on the Venetians Campe neare to Otholenga, doth greatly trouble them. A battaile neare to the Riuer of Olia, where they fought on both sides without any losse. Last of all, PHILIP is wholly put to rout at Macal, whereupon peace ensueth.

WArre being thus denounced, the Senate did  forthwith make a speedie leauie of Souldiors ouer all Italie. But in the meane space, notCarmagnolla Captaine Generall to the Venetians. to loose any time, they gaue to Carmagnolla their Captaine Generall all those troupes which they had then readie. Hee hauing receiued them, being full of courage, beganne to thinke in what manner hee might by some braue exploit begin the warre. For his hatred to Philip on the one side, and on the other the great opinion which the whole Senate  and people of Venice had conceiued of him, did animate him to high and difficult enterprises. Hee attempted first of all to enter the Castle of Bressia by intelligence, hauing to that end wonne diuers, who promised him in the night time to kill the Gouernour

of the place: But the businesse falling out vnluckily, he practised by goodly promises the chiefe of that faction, whome hee certainely knew did not affect Philip, and especially Pietro, and Athilles Auogadres, very couragious persons, and great enemies to Philip. Hee drew both of them by promises and exhortations to this point, as they granted about midnight to breake downe the Citie wall, and toThe Venetians enter Bressia by treacherie. let in the Venetians. This being executed, diuers of the contrarie part, being awaked forth of their sleepe by the noise in the night, did in great feare retire to the strongest place of the Citie where the Garrison (which Philip had a few dayes before sent thither) did lodge: Oldrado Captaine of those men at Armes kept them backe that night, as they would haue runne into the Citie which they possessed, thinking if he could but defend that part of the Citie, with the Castle seated aboue it, that the Venetian after a notable losse should be at last enforced to quit the place which he had inconsiderately surprised.
Bressia hath a Castle (as is alreadie said) on the top of an hill, which doth commaundDescription of Bressia. the Citie, from whence two walles doe sundrie waies descend towards the bottome; that which looketh Eastward, enuironeth the Citie; and that which goeth athwart, cutting through certaine houses and old buildings, separateth the remnant of the hill, and is called the old Cittadell. But this old Cittadell was so named three yeares before this happened, when as by Philips commaundement they made a wall ioyning to it, which was called the new. None else in a manner dwelt in the  old but those of the Gibelline faction. Some say that Pietro Auogadres at the firstPietro Auagadres chief of the enterprize. report of the warre entred the Citie with a great troupe of Pesants of the mountaines, and that the Prince of Mantua followed him with two thousand horse, and that at last Carmagnolla came thither with his troupes. But in what manner soeuer the Citie was taken, it is certaine that so soone as the Venetian was master thereof, he did sodainely fortifie that side, where the wall separated him from the enemie, fearing least they aboue should make some sodaine sallie vpon them.
They say moreouer, that at the same time as Bressia was taken, Nicolao D'AesteThe Florentines ouercome the Cremonois vnder the conduct of Nicholao D'Aeste. Captaine Generall to the Florentines in this Warre, entring the Territorie of Cremona, brought thence a very great bootie. Philip, although at the first he made no  shew of any great feare for being engaged in so great a warre (for neither in Milan nor abroade he had not leuied any new forces) and had besides suffered those which he then kept in Flaminia for want of victualls and pay, as if they had beene disbanded and cast, to retire themselues into the Townes of that Prouince which hee possessed, was neuerthelesse by these two notable losses hapned in so short space, greatly troubled, and grew fearefull of his state. But nothing moued him so much as the losse of Bressia. Yet neuerthelesse when hee knew that the Castle, and that part of the Citie next to it, did yet hold out for him, he had some hope to be able to recouer it, and determined to send aide thither, and to raise an Armie: but being doubtfull with what troups he might first of all oppose himselfe against the enemies attempts, the newes which hee heard how that King Alfonso had forsaken the Venetians and the other Confederates, did not only giue him hope to atchieue some great enterprize, but did wholly assure him thereof. His first resolution then was to recouer Bressia. And on a sodain he commanded Francisco Sforza, whom he then called fromFrancisco Sforza is commaunded to goe and releeue Bressia. Flaminia to Milan with a few Horse to conferre with him about the Tuscan warre, speedily to march to the succour of his people who were besieged within the enclosure of Bressia. Other Authors say that Sforzas Camp lay then in Lombardie, and not in Flaminia, where hauing notice of the losse of Bressia, became with speede to meet Philip. But it is most certaine that all the Cauallerie which Philip had in Lombardie at that time, did not exceede two thousand Horse; with which and certaine  other troupes leuied in hast, he marched against the Venetians. Others say that he had but foure hundred Horse.
The way was still open to the besieged, so as of themselues, before they receiued any supplies, they came from aboue and gaue the Camp many hot alarmes. It was

thought at the first, that the Venetians hauing receiued some losse were desirous to leaue Bressia, and that they remained there till Sforza came thither with his cauallerie, who was commaunded by Philip to molest by all meanes the rebellious Bressians, and especially to keepe the Castle, if hee could not driue the Venetians thence, till such time as his forces were come from Tuscanie into Lumbardy. But the Venetians Generall in the meane time, hauing made a strong Rampier, enuironed with a great ditch, opposite to the enemies Fort, dealt in such sort, as albeit at SforzasDiuers skirmishes at Bressia. arriuall many sallies were made, yet neuerthelesse, they did not greatly terrifie them: and they fought likewise at times neere to the walles with different euents. But these skirmishes were light, and such as were vsually made vpon the like occasions.
Carmagnolla considering the enemies attempts not to be so terrible as he had in the beginning imagined: and that albeit Sforzas presence, and couragious vigor, did make the enemie more bold and audacious, his furious sallies neuerthelesse began daily more and more to coole: hauing left the guard of the Rampier and trenches to Francisco Gonzaga, a braue and couragious person, he went and assailed the gates, called the Piles: Where he omitted nothing that was necessarie for such an assault; and hauing approached with his engines of batterie, he would not suffer the enemie day nor night to be at rest.
But his watches and continuall trauaile, did renew in him a weaknesse and disease  Carmagnolla being sicke goeth to the Bathes at Padua. in the sinewes, which had in former time seized on him at Treuiso by the fall of an horse, whereupon he was enforced to goe to the bathes at Padua.
It is reported that in his absence, all things were so carefully gouerned by Francisco Gonzaga, as the Generals presence was no whit lamented: For albeit in that meaneFrancisco Gonzaga a braue and couragious Captaine. time, the enemies made more sallies on the Venetians, than they were wont: he was so farre from being discouraged thereby, as on the contrarie he did brauely resist all their attempts, and did besides place Corps-du-guard without the Citie to surprize those who were accustomed till then to carrie victuals to the besieged.
At this stay stood the affaires of Bressia, whilst Philip by diuers messengers one after  another, did call home his troupes forth of Tuscanie and Flaminia. The Senate by reason heereof were greatly troubled, how to hinder if it were possible their passage into Lombardie. For they feared if all Philips forces were assembed into one bodie, that in sted of taking the Castle and Rampiers of Bressia, the Venetians might be enforced to leaue the Citie, land fall into the hazard of receiuing some notable and vnlooked-for ouerthrow. In the meane time then that they were busied speedily to preuent so many of the enemies attempts, because they were said to be alreadie on their way, the Venetians hauing no towne on the Po, nor neere to the Alpes, where they might resist them, they sent to Nicolao d'Aeste who commaunded great numbers of the associates troups of horse, that breaking all the bridges and ferries on the Modenois (where are the Appenine hilles and the riuer of Po,) that  he should encampe neerer to the Marishes. They sent likewise Victor Barbaro a Venetian Gentleman with sixe thousand choice souldiers as well horse as foote, to hinder (if it might be) at Vignolles, which is the midde way betwixt the Alpes and the Po, the enemies passage. They did moreouer by letters entreat Carmagnolla, who continued still at the Bathes of Abbana to returne speedily to Bressia, for feare leastCarmagnolla returneth to the Armie. in his absence the Commonwealth might receiue some losse. The which he did: and being returned to the campe, he did in such sort stay the enemies boldnesse, as they durst not onely make any more sallies, but they did suffer themselues to be braued and prouoked euen in their owne Fort.
In the meane time Philips forces came and encamped on the Bolognian territorie  neere to Vignolles, there being a great deepe riuer betwixt them both. These great marishes doe emptie themselues neere to Creuacore, and doe make a riuer which runneth into the Po, which is in no sort foordable. The enemies hauing tried all possible meanes to passe it, were enforced to their great griefe to remaine

on the bankes therof thirtie daies. At the last hauing made a bridge at Percicete they did on May day by day-breake passe the riuer neere to Scultenna. The bridge was made in this manner. The enemies tooke twentie great Tunnes of one length and bignesse, binding them together verie streightly, and being made fast to trees on both sides the riuer, they laid vpon them great hurdles of Ozier twigs, which they couered with small shrubs and grauell, by which meanes they did easily passe ouer their cauallerie.
Hauing crossed the riuer, the enemies by their sodaine cries did so greatly amaze the Venetians who were incamped in the neighbour Forrest, as none durst present themselues on the riuers bankes. Mirandola and Concorda, two Cities neere  thereunto, and trees which were heere and there cut downe, did afford a safe place of retreate to the Venetians. Guido Fabrianico being sent with a squadron of horse to reenforce the troupes of Barbaro, arriuing inconsiderately on the same side of the riuer which the enemie had passed, and thinking that the noise came from the Venetians campe, was cut in peeces with all his cauallerie. Some thought that NicolaoCertaine venetian troups are defeated by the Armie of Philip. d'Aeste might easily haue stopt the enemies passage, but that he would not do it, for feare least the whole burthen of the warre should fall vpon his territories. And thus as if hee had not beene able to stop the enemie, he suffered him to passe on without any fight.
Philip fearing in the meane time least the Florentines should seize on those places  which he had taken in Flaminia, being disfurnished of Garrisons, commaunded that they should be deliuered as from him, into the hands of the Legate of Pope Martin, who was resident at the same time in Bolognia. Two moneths were almost spent betwixt the reuolt of Bressia, and the returne of the Armie from Tuscanie. Whereupon it was plainely perceiued, that if it had come sooner, or if that forthwith after it was come they had fortified the Castle and the other Rampiers, (as they might easily haue done) the Venetians would haue beene enforced to leaue the Citie.
Angelo Pergulan who brought backe the enemies troupes into Lombardie, being come within two mile neere to the Castle, did there encampe and fortifie the  place, resoluing on a battaile if the Venetians would hearken to it. Carmagnolla, (whose counsels and designes only tended to take the Castle) would not suffer them within the Citie to attempt any thing.
The Venetians in the meane time were not idle in so great danger, but forthwithThe Venetians send new supplies to Bressia. made a new leuie of souldiers, and sent them in hast to Bressia, to assure their forces. The Florentines likewise with the other associates sent supplies thither with diuers Captaines, among whom was Nicolao Tollentino, a man besides his great exploits in warre, most expert in the besieging of Cities. He hauing viewed the Venetians Fort with that of the enemies, told them that the Castle would not be taken, though they should besige it neuer so long, vnlesse by a Rampier and trench made round about  it they did cut off the victuals which was brought thither, saying, that for the effecting thereof, it behoued them to haue great numbers of pioners and labourers speedily to end the worke. This being resolued on, great numbers of workemen were called thither, and the Rampier was made within three thousand paces of the Castle: whose forme was after this manner.
A double ditch was made euerie where of equall bignesse, with a rising in the middest of thirtie foot high, and by how much the two Dikes aduanced forward,A Rampier builded against the Castle of Bressia. by so much more did the furthest points of the rising shew higher by the clods and turfes which were heaped one vpon another in forme of a wall. The Rampier followed after, being strengthned on all sides with many woodden towers verie neere  one to another, so as in lesse than threescore paces foure towers were to be seene.
This Rampier had besides, twelue gates well fortified with strong towers, to issue forth vpon the enemie when need should require. Some say that the newes of this Fort newly begun being brought to Philip, one of his courtiers said presently, that

the Duke ought to wish nothing so much, as that the Venetians would but continue such a work, wherein they would not only consume al their wealth, but as much as Xerxes was reported to haue had, before they should end it.
Pergulan in the meane time was not idle. For to diuert the enemie from his purpose, he entred furiously on the Mantuan Territorie, putting all to fier and sword; yet for all that he could not cause the Venetian to giue ouer his new worke. And not being able by any meanes to draw him thence, he brought his campe neere to the Fort, and fortified it on euerie side. But he could not be perswaded by Nicholao Picinino a great warriour, nor by Sforza, and other great Captaines of Philips Armie, to giue in vpon the new imperfect fortifications, telling them often times that hee  was satisfied by his incamping in that manner to please Philip, who had giuen him the honour of Generall; and to be assured of his intent.
The Fort in the meane time being defended, the Venetian Generall encamped betweene the enemies Fort, and the rising of the new-built Rampier, hauing in his Armie, (with the troups of the associates) foureteene thousand horse, and ten thousandThe number of the Venetians Armie. foot, and besides Carmagnolla the Generall diuers noble personages; namely, Giouanni Francisco Gonzaga, Lodouico Sanseuerino, Paulo vrsini, Lodouico Vermio, and Lorenzo Contemoli. And vnder Nicholao Tolentino diuers ancient Captaines and olde Souldiers, who had a long time followed the war. The most part of the foot-men were placed in Garrison vpon the rising, and they were expresly commanded not to  stirre from thence in any sort, not though they should perceiue the General with his troupes to be enuironed on all sides by the enemie, and to craue their helpe, yea though they were sure to free him by their aide, but to keepe good guard, and carefully to looke to the Fort, that the Common-wealth by their carefullnesse might not receiue any losse.
The enemies campe consisted of twelue thousand horse and eight thousand foot,The number of Philips Armie. beside those foureteene hundred foote which Francisco Sforza had left within the Castle and Citadell, when, as at the arriuall of Pergulan he came to his Campe. Foure great Captaines did command these foote companies that were left in the Castle and the Citadell, being denominated after the names of their natiue Townes, the Bressan, Plaisantin, Bergamese, and the most noted of them all Andrew of Treuiso.
Carmagnolla, in regard of the great number of men that he had, euermore found worke for those foure Captaines. Some times he reared ladders against the Walls, and then on a sodaine would make approaches with his engins of warre, being assured though it did no present good, yet at least wise that shew of an assault would expose the enemies to the mercie of the Venetian Archers (of whom there were great numbers in the Campe) vntil that their number should be so diminished, as it would be afterwards an easie matter to ouercome them. This determined ouerthrow of the enemie did not deceiue him. For within a short space, more than a thousand of  the enemies were either slaine or hurt by the Venetian Archers. But notwithstanding all that, the enemies seeing their Captaines to be aliue were no whit discouraged. The continuall batterie had beaten downe a great part of the Wall, so as the ditch was almost filled with the ruines, and especially neere to the Gate called Garzette.
Now because there was some likelihood, that the Souldiers by taking some littleAn assault giuen to the Castle of Bressia. paines might with ladders easily enter on that side; the assault being resolued on, the Magistrate of the Citie promised the Souldiers this reward, That he who first should mount the Wall should haue foure hundred Crownes; the second three hundred; the third two hundred; and a hundred to each of those ten who should  second them; and tenne Crownes to each of twentie who should follow next after them. Both sides fought at this assault with such vehemencie and courage, as those who beheld them could hardly iudge, who defended best, either those who mounted the Wall, freely exposing themselues to danger, or the saml number of the besieged.

At last, the enemies after great losse remained masters of their Walls, and were ready to endure as long a siege as the Venetian would, had not famine which ouercommeth all things, afflicted, and enforced them to craue truce for tenne daies; conditionallyAn agreement made with the Garrison in the Castle. if within that time they were relieued by Philip with sufficient aide, to defend the Fort, otherwise (that time being expired) to leaue that place to the Venetians, and depart thence with their Armes.
This Treatie being thus concluded; the Souldiers in the Rampier were commanded to keepe good guard; and to watch more carefully than before, to the end that no supply of men and victualls might from any place come to the besieged. In the meane time those of Philips Campe did fret with choller, and stuck not aloud  to taxe the cowardize of their Commanders; saying that by their malice or basenesse, the Castle was as well betraied as Bressia was sold to the Venetians by her own Citizens: That there was no doubt, but if such an Armie as theirs was had at times giuen in vpon the enemies Fort, they might easily haue beaten downe the Rampire and the Mount, and haue raised the siege.
Pergulan made answere, That it was no reason in that manner to expose the Souldiers to their deaths against an Armed enemie, who kept himselfe looked vp in his Fort; that it was much better (for that present) that the Garrison should come forth of the Castle safe and sound, and leaue the remnant to the enemie. That it might so fall out, that hauing receiued those supplies which they expected, they might assaile  them at their departure thence, and enforce them to fight, and requite them with some greater losse. Picinino there upon being bold and sodaine, said, That itBoldnesse of Picinino one of Philips Captains was ill aduised, to giue ouer a place of safety, and afterwards to fight for it in plaine field without any aduantage. But if there were any man which desired the good and commoditie of Duke Philip, or would bee held worthie of such an enterprize, hee should follow him vpon the enemie; and hauing so spoken, he departed on a sodain in a rage forth of the assembly, and as he went forth Francisco Sforza promised to follow him. But whilst he ordered his Souldiers to march against the Venetians, Sforza staied behind to perswade Pergulan and the rest to take Armes.
The Venetian Captaine, whose Souldiers were well instructed for such an enterprize: so soone as he perceiued a bow-shot off the enemie comming towards him* opened the Gate, and commanded his Souldiers to set forward. Then Picinino perceiuing that no man followed, made a stand, blaming the want of courage of his fellowes, and without other fight returned to the Campe. Those in the Castle perceiuing the retreate of their Countrie-men, did abandon the Gates of Pilles and Garzette, and retired into the Citadell, where they will fully held out for certaine daies after the time of truce was expired: but at the last being vanquished by famine, they did not giue ouer, but left that place to the Venetians.
The Souldiers comming to assaile the Castle, the Plaizantine presented himselfe with fiftie braue Souldiers. The Venetians in few daies space, did so batter the walls, as the vttermost in a manner fell into their Campe: whereof Philip hauing notice, he sent word to the Plaizantine and the rest, that (their liues being saued) they shouldThe Castle of Bressia yeelded to the Uenetians leaue the place to the enemie. In this sort the Venetian entred the Castle seuen moneths after the taking of Bressia.
Carmagnolla being freed from the siege, and commanded to goe against the strong Cities and Townes there about, he receiued on their faith and homage the Salodians, with all the inhabitants of the Lake of La Garda, which lieth towards the Bressans Countrie, before euer he tooke Armes against them. Soone after at the arriuall of the Popes Nuncio, they began to talke of Peace; and Ambassadors from each side were sent to this end to Ferrara, where the assemblie was held: which was co^cluded  on these conditions; That Philip should friendly quit to the Venetians, besides thePeace betweene Philip and the Venetians. vale Commonica, Bressia with her confines, together with that part of CremonaTerritorie which is contingent to the Riuer of Olio in the Bressian, being 40000. paces in length: and That the Duke of Sauoie should keepe all that he had taken.
The articles being thus agreed vpon on either side, and sealed with the seale of Philip and the rest, the Nuncio for the better assurance of them would needes carrie them to Milan, where finding Philip (who complained of the wrong that was donePhilip his complaints to the Popes Nuncio. him, accusing sometime the pride of the Florentines, who had throwne him headlong into this Warre, and then the Venetians couetousnesse, who not being satisfied with taking Bressia from him, did likewise seize on a part of the Cremonois,) he had much to doe by faire speeches and exhortations, to cause him to condiscend to that which had beene agreed vpon: Which the Nuncio hauing at last obtained,The Venetian Commissioners ill dealt with at Milan. so soone as he perceiued the Venetian Commissioners, (who were come thither according to the Articles to receiue the Townes) to bee despightfully vsed in his  presence, he returned to Rome and left the businesse vnaccomplished.
Some thought then that this sodaine change did proceede from the hope he had to make an attonement with the Duke of Sauoy; and others thinke that the entreaties and exhortations of those of Milan were the cause thereof, who so soone as they had heard of the conditions of peace, came to him in the name of the commonwealth, and spake in this manner.




The Oration of the Milanois to Philip.

YOur subiects of Milan (most excellent Prince) come to you to obay your

commandements: and there is nothing how grieuous soeuer to be borne (so as it be profitable for your greatnesse) which doth not seeme light and sweet to them. For we are all of this minde, that if euer heretoyore we haue beene readie, to doe you all seruice which a good Prince can expect of a most obedient Citie, we are certainly much more readie now at this present: and we may freely speake it with so much more affection, as we haue seene you in this wretched time most to distrust our forces and meanes, or else to be ignorant of them, when for one iniurie receiued in hast from the Venetians, you are so mightily discouraged, and transported beyond your selfe, as you haue shamefully giuen ouer to

the couetous enemie, that which the hazard of warre had not yet taken from you. For what else meane you by giuing ouer to the Venetians all the strong Townes of the Country of Bressia, and a great part of the Cremona Territorie, with the shore of the Riuer Oglio, but only to present the Citie of Cremona to the Vsurper of Bressia? Is it not a meanes more to animate this audacious enemie, who hath along time aspired to the entire Dominion of Lombardie? and to embolden him to enterprize greater matters? For if your affaires were so desperate (which God forbid) that you were of necessitie to giue place to the enemie, and to grant him all, we would then consent with you to attribute it to fortune and to time. But seeing you haue a mightie Armie, with which the enemie being often prouoked durst neuer fight, what may we else thinke hath moued you to embrace so dishonest a peace, but only your feare that

you haue not sufficient meanes to entertaine so great an Armie? But you haue wealth enough as well of the publike as of your particular Subiects of Milan, of whom when you please you may freely dispose. You haue besides a very great and rich reuennue, sufficient to entertaine not only those troupes which you haue at this present, but others greater than they, if neede require. Make vse then of your subiects meanes which lie open to you, and doe not suffer the Venetian vnder colour of libertie, to come and subiugate the Milanois with the residue of Lombardie which doth obay you, but rather trie how we stand affected to your State, and to that great libertie which your Dominion promiseth vs. For we are ready in respect of that not only to expose our goods, but our liues likewise where neede shall be.






Philip gaue them a very gentle answere in few wordes, laying the whole blamePhilips answer to those of Milan. of the Warre on the Florentines, and the Venetians, who by their ouer-weening and treacherie had forcibly drawne him into this Warre. But because hee was of necessitie either to obserue the contract or to renew the Warre, as they counsailed him, he told them that he was desirous to know in what sort they could assist him:

willing them to depart, and to conferre with the people about it, to the end that hee might bee assured on what ground hee might againe vndertake so great a Warre.
The matter was debated in a generall assembly of the Citizens, who concluded to giue the Duke this answere, That if he would suffer the Milanois to gather theThe Milanois offer to Philip. Cities reuennue, they would furnish him while the Warre continued in Lombardie, with ten thousand Horse, and as many Foot.
It was thought that Philip would haue granted it, had it not beene for one of his Courtiers; who knowing this Prince to be naturally fearefull and suspitious, wished him to consider what he did: For, to permit Citizens to gather the reuennues of  Cities, was nothing else but to reare them ladders whereon to mount to libertie: That without all doubt it was a most dangerous matter for him, making warre on two free Common-wealths, and both of them very mightie, to giue his subiects any hope of libertie, which of all men is chiefly to be desired.
Philip lent a willing eare to this aduertizement. And being resolued not to acceptPhilip changing his minde: The Milanois (...) cold. those conditions which should bee propounded to him, nor yet openly to refuse them, because he would not by a scornefull answere displease his Citizens, hee sent word to those who were appointed to come to him, to report to Giouanni Riccio whatsoeuer they had to say to himselfe. This did by little and little coole the former affection of the Milanois, and being thus cooled, the businesse remained vnperfect. But Philip hoping by art and subtiltie to draw from them that summe so liberallyPhilip reneweth the Warre with the Ven^tians. offered, if they would not giue it gratis, renued the Warre; first of all prohibiting to yeeld vp those strong Townes lately promised by the treatie, and soone after making a furious entrie on the Mantuan Territorie.
The Venetians aduertized by letters from the Popes Nuncio, that Philip wholly tended to Warre, being thereby iustly incensed, they renewed the warre with greater furie than before. But because whilest the treatie of peace lasted, they had dismissed a great part of their troupes, they forth with made new leuies from all places: And when they vnderstood that the enemie made incursions on the Mantuan; the Senate forthwith decreed to renew the warre with all speede. First, they renewed  their alliance with the Florentines; who (albeit they were tired with warre, and desired nothing so much as peace) did neuerthelesse by a generall consent take armes. Amadeo Duke of Sauoy who in the precedent warre did in a manner no memorable matter, vnder promise of doing better hereafter entred into the league. The Marquis of Montferrat, and Orlando Paluicin, who then possessed diuersA new league against Philip. Townes in Lombardie, would needes be registred in that new alliance. The like did the Bandetti of Genoa, promising to molest the enemies on the Sea*coast, who being forsaken by King Alfonso were vnable of themselues to doe any thing at Sea.
Philip, albeit he perceiued so many to take Armes against him at one time, was no whit discouraged; neither did he shew himselfe slow in assembling his forces, and prouiding all things necessarie for the war: And because he would make a shew of the greatnesse of his forces, he resolued to assaile the enemie in three seuerall places at once: For, hauing armed certaine vessells at Cremona, hee seized on Turricoles,The exploits of Philip. a Castle on the Parmesan, seated at the mouth of the Tarro: which the Venetians had for a time possessed. Likewise presuming on the great numbers of his Infanterie, he made incursions on the mountaines of the Bressan Territorie, and at the same instant hee forraged the plaines with his Cauallerie, vnder the conduct of Pergulan. The third and most fortunate exploit was against the Bandetti of Genoa, vnder the command of Francisco Sforza. Thomaso Fregosa (who being followed with  great troupes of banished Genoueses, and with the Florentine succours, had in times past so disturbed Genoa, as he durst at times assaile the Citie) being aduertized of Sforza's comming, had commanded his brother, a couragious yong man, to tarrie for the enemie with part of his troupes at the entrie of the Valley of the Swine.
The Florentine forces in the meane space hauing receiued no pay from Florence of along time, began by little to drop away, and hauing neither victualls nor commaund, they left their ensignes so bare and vnfurnished of men, as Fregoza could number but eight hundred in his Camp. The which being by spies reported in theThe (...) (...) (...) Geno^ are (...)* Citie, presuming on Sforza his comming, who was said not to be farre off, the Citizens made a sodaine sallie vpon Fregosa's troupes, which at the first they defeated. Thomaso and Baptista his brother with certaine others escaped to Rechia; the residue were taken, and their Camp stuffed with great wealth was taken and spoiled. And thus by Sforza his arriuall, as if a more fortunate Starre had shined on the Genoueses, their affaires till then wholly ruined by warre begunne againe to prosper. Pergulan, on the other side, placed Garrisons in the most commodious places of the Bressan, whilest Picinino with his troups drew neare the Riuer Po: who hauing caused the nauall Armie to come to Casal-Major, a Citie of the Cremonois, he did besiegeCasal-ma^or taken by Picinino. it by Land and Water, and enforced it to yeeld. Then, crossing the Riuer he seized on the Citie of Brisseles on the Po, by treacherie: But the Castle could notBrisseles taken* be wonne.
In this sort the enemie beganne the Warre. But the Venetians slept not in the meane time: For they likewise sent forth a mightie nauall Armie whereof Francisco Bembo was Generall. Now vpon the report that it was gone vp the Riuer Po, as far as the Mantuan Territorie: Eustace of Pauia, Captaine of the Enemies nauall Armie  determined to leaue the Camp at Brisseles, and to oppose himselfe against the Venetians who were not farre off. Picinino was of a contrarie opinion, and would haue the siege to be continued. The Captaines being diuided by this diuersitie of opinions, the siege of the Castle of Brisseles went forward more slowly; by meanes whereof those who were sent from Bressia to relieue it, did enter into it without any impeachment.
Those of Brisseles presuming on this supply, and on the comming of the VenetiansPhilips force^ driuen ^orth of Brisseles. nauall Armie, did recouer the Towne, and expelled the enemie, who left many warlike engines and instruments of batterie behinde him. Certaine troupes were speedily sent from Brisseles against Eustace, who was incamped a little beneath Casal;  but in the meane time he was come within foure miles of Cremona. Bembo hauing there ouer-taken him, did on a sodaine embattaile his Souldiers. The Galions on both sides were neare to one an other: so doe they terme these Vessells, being like to those which the Greekes call Dromons. This kinde of Vessell is long, the belly thereof being nothing like to a ships bottome, but in a manner all flat, couered sometimes with two or three floores of plan^ks: at the toppe of the mast there is a place made where ten or moe Souldiers, if neede be, may fight. When one of these lieth at an Ankor ready for fight, it resembleth a well-rampierd Fort.
Bembo placed eight of these vessells fast ioyned together in the foremost rancks, and commanded the residue of the Fleet closely to follow them. The enemie did  not refuse the fight, but embattailing his Armie, he placed foure Gallions in Front* who were forcibly carried by the tide and strength of Oares vpon the enemie. But being come before one an other, the enemie passed on beyond the Venetians, and turned his prowes on the Venetians Poopes; thinking that being followed by his Vessells, the Venetians finding themselues to be assailed on their backs, those which were in the foremost rancks would be easily defeated: But it fell out otherwise. For Bembo presently accounted those who had passed on beyond him for lost* and brought his ships into a round compasse, so as in a manner hee filled the whole current of the streame, to the end that with more courage and lesse difficultie, he might assaile those which had passed by. Picinino stood with his troupes on the Riuer  bankes, who not being able to helpe his fellowes by armes, did by his tongue encourage them in the heate of the fight. The battaile was for a time doubtfull. At the last the victorious Venetian tooke foure Gallions from the enemie, besides those which we said were shut in at the beginning.
Eustace then thought too late perceiued himselfe nothing equall neither in strength nor dexteritie to the Venetians. whereupon perceiuing the enemie busied in defeatingThe venetians nauall Armie obtaines the victorie. those whom he had enuironed, on a sodaine he turned the Prowes of the reresidue of his fleet, and went a pace towards Cremona: where being arriued, and fearing that which came to passe, to wit, That the Venetians would soone followe, he disfurnished all his ships. Those who at the first were inclosed, perceiuing the flight of their fellowes, made towards the Land, and leaping on shoare, forsooke their vessells. Bembo seizing on them, pursued the enemie, whome he could not ouertake. Being come neere to Cremona he was enforced to fight after a new manner.
Philip neere to that place had caused three Castles to bee made in the middest ofFortes builded by Philip in the middest of the Riuer. the Riuer, which did in such sort shut vp the channell of the Po, as he verily imagined that no nauall Armie, how mightie soeuer, could come to besiege the Citie, or passe on farther into Lumbardie. Two of them were opposite to the Citie and builded on Piles which appeared aboue the water and the banckes. The third was builded in the middest of the water of a more grosse substance with so small a space on both sides, as no ship could passe either on the right hand or left without being greatly molested with arrow-shot. Bembo resolued to assaile that which was farthest from the Cittie, and with ease tooke it: Then comming to the other whichThe fortes taken by the venetians. was neerer to it, hee became likewise master thereof with like facilitie: but the assault  of the last was more painefull, because the Souldiours which were in it had more hope to bee relieued, by reason they were neere to the Citie: but the Venetian assailing it by night, and by that meanes with more labour, did take it by force.
Bembo being victorious caused these Castles to be burned, and the Piles where on they were builded to be pluckt vp, fearing least the enemies should seize on them, and make the like vse of them. But the Venetian abusing his victorie landed part of his Souldiers and Marriners in that small space of ground which lieth betwixt Cremona and the Po, not hauing sent before to discouer the place: whereupon ChristoferoA troupe of venetian Mariners defeated by Philips forces. Lauellano Gouernour of the Citie, making a sodaine sallie vpon them, did put  them in great feare. All his Sailers were in a manner Histrians and Dalmatians, who being well whitled with Wine doe apprehend no danger whatsoeuer: Lauellanos troupes comming vpon these men, did in a moment kill three hundred of them.
Bembo being angrie at the Pilots for landing them without his knowledge, took them in againe, and commanded the fleet to row vp against the streame, and hauing taken the Fort, which was on the verie point of the Riuers Po and Adda, he went vp against the streame of the Riuer Thesina, and came to an Ankor neere to Pauia. This Citie was in times past called Ticina in regard of the riuer Thesina which is neere to it. But finding that place to be desert and abandoned, fearing some ambushe, he returned  towards Cremona. The Generall being arriued there was desirous to reuenge his late losse, and landed diuers of his soldiours, hoping if he were but to fight onely with Lauellanos Souldiours, he might be recompenced for the same: But about the same time Nicolao Guerrieri was come to the Citie with a troupe of horse, which beingA skirmish neere to Cremona where the venetian had the ^orst. mingled with Lauellanos troupes, would haue more rudely entertained the Venetian than before, had not Bembo who at the first perceiued diuers of his Souldiers to droppe downe, caused the retreat to be sounded in time.
This happened on the water. But on the Land, Sommer drawing on, and the troupes which the Venetian had then leuied being readie on the Mantuan, Carmagnolla being departed from Padua, hauing from Lanzisa to Salles crossed the Lake  of Benac, was come within fiue miles of Bressia, at such time as Alberico Count of Cunies, and Petrino of Dortonne, surnamed the Turke, leauing Ottolenga (where they lay in Garrison eight miles distant from Bressia) came and made a sodaine incursion euen to the verie gates, and did greatly amaze the Bressians,

and carried away foure hundred victuailers prisoners who were taken in the Suburbs, when as Pietro Lauretano Gouernour of Bressia hauing intelligence of the enemies being there, sallied forth of the Citie on horse-backe vnarmed at Saint Nazares gate, where finding many without order who would willingly haue gone forth, h^ did sharpely rebuke them, and would not suffer it, nvtil Paulo Vrsino who was within the Citie was armed, vnto whom hauing giuen three hundred horse next at hand he willed him to lead them by a shorter way towards Ottolenga, and that in the mid-way he should ambush himselfe, and presently the residue of the Cauallerie to  the enemie, with expresse commaundemont still to amuse them going foreward by light skirmishes vnto the verie place of the ambuscado, where they were commanded on euerie side brauely to charge them, that none might escape. This proiect fell out luckily; For the enemie falling into the ambush was hardly delt with, and Petrino with a hundred and fiftie horse were taken prisoners, the residue were put to route.
The verie same day, Carmagnolla entred Bressia, who was much discontented that the first exploit was executed by any but himselfe; And hauing assembled whatsoeuer was needfull for the warres, captaines and Souldiours being sent for from all places, the Venetians Generall departed from Bressia on the fifteenth day of March with foureteene thousand horse and six thousand foot, and incamped first The number of the Venetians Armie. Carmagnolla before Monteclaro. at Monteclaro where hee tarried till his other Troupes were arriued with his warlike engins and instruments of batterie. Certaine daies being spent rather in expecting his own forces than in besieging the Town, which was strong in situation and well fortified, Carmagnolla thinking it but lost time to besiege it, raised his Campe and marched directly towards Ottolenga.
A thousand horse of Duke Philips were within it: The Venetian being in great hope to take both them and the Citie, came and encamped with great noise neere to the walles: But not long before Guido Taurello, Christofero Lauellano, and Nicolao Guerrieri were come thither with their Cauallerie: These men without any noise kept themselues a while enclosed in the Citie, that they might more commodiously make a sallie vpon the enemie. The Venetians being come before the Citie, most  of them wearied with the extreame heate lay downe on the ground disarmed,A f^rious salli^ of the besieged. others fell a sleepe, expecting nothing lesse than the enemies sallie. Some of Nani Strossi his troupes whome the Marquis of Ferrara according to the conuention had sent to the Campe with foure hundred horse, kept the guard: vpon these men, towares the euenning Philips horse-troupes gaue a furious on-set: Strossi did brauely sustaine their assaults: but being too obstinate in defending that place, and being oppressed by the great number of the enemies and his owne Souldiours he fell downe dead. But the alarme being giuen ouer all the Campe; some beeing halfe a sleepe, and others vncertaine vnder what Ensignes or Captaines to place themselues, and diuers running inconsideratly vpon the enemie with their Armes were ignominiously defeated: and this amazement continued vntill Carmagnolla beeing followed by a braue troupe of Souldiours marched foreward with the Ensignes. For then, the Venetians numbers encreasing at the sound of the Trumpets and Drummes, the  enemies in a manner triumphant and victorious retired into the Citie, with the losse of fifteene hundred horse. The Venetian Generall would not stirre from thence till the troupes not long before leuied at Padua were come to the Campe. Blondus makes mention hereof, who (as it is reported) was the same time in Bressia, and perhaps in the Campe.
But wee reade in the commentaries of Mariot Montano who was present in all these exploits, that they fought the same day with equall fortune, and that the Venetians sustained no greater losse in that fight, than of a few who by reason of the  extreame heate were smothered in their Armour. Carmagnolla euer after encamped after another manner. For hauing two thousand Pioners in his Campe to make plaine the wayes for the munition Waggons and engins, and to digge Trenches

and Rampiers, he diuided them into bands, and to euerie band appointed a Captaine to command it, who should make sure the dislodging of the Campe, and the carriage of the engins of war. And he commanded them besides that so soone as the Camp should be set, to place all their carriages in forme of a Crescent or halfe Moon, which should in manner of a Rampier enclose the Camp, to the end it might serue in sted of a strong Fort, against the enemies sallies and incursions.
Determining still to encampe in this manner, he departed thence, and albeit he left behinde him diuers Townes and Fortes of the Bressian country which were possessedCarmagnolla raiseth his camp from before Ottolenga. by Philips souldiers, he resolued neuerthelesse, because he would not spend much time in surprizing them, roundly to besiege Cremona, imagining that the taking  of so famous a Citie, would excite the rest without further fight to submit to the Venetians.
The Riuer of Oglio which diuideth the Cremonois from the Bressian and Mantuan, hath two bridges well fortified, the one more high and neere to the mountaines of the Bergamuse, and the other at the bottome of the plaine called Bina. The Venetian with great furie assailed this, as being lesser, and therefore more easie, to the end that from thence he might haue free passage from the Mantuan territorie to his campe if he should chance to passe the riuer. The neighbourhood of the Po did likewise moue him thereunto: By which he might with lesse labour and danger haue all things brought to him which was needfull for a siege. Hauing in foure  daies taken it, hee marched with his forces into the enemies countrey, and came and incamped within seuen miles of Cremona along the riuer of Po.
Philip hauing notice of the enemies great numbers, (for the Venetians ArmieThe venetians Armie much encreased. was of eighteene thousand horse, and eight thousand footmen, sixe thousand of the associates souldiers, not accounting the souldiers boyes, landresses, and other troups of followers of the campe: besides, the nauall Armie conducted by Bembo, was not farre from thence, amounting to more than two thousand men) was astonished at their great attempts, and began to feare and doubt his owne estate. Therefore leauing his former wilfulnesse, he called for the Citizens of Milan (whereunto he could neuer before be induced) and told them that the time was now come for to know who  were his trustie friends, and who till then had dissembled: That it was not needfullPhilips speech to the Milanois. in so dangerous a time to vse many words to acquaint them with his meaning: That all those who did mean to preserue their goods, should goe along with him to helpe to quench that fire, and that he did not wish them all in generall to go with him, but such as were fit for the wars: He caused the same to be published by a tru^pet through the whole Citie, and then departing from Milan, he marched towards the enemie.
Great numbers of the Milanois, and those of Pauia followed him to the warres. He encamped betwixt Cremona and the enemies, within three miles of the Venetian: He had before then in his Armie twelue thousand horse, and halfe as many footmen, and he brought with him as well of his friends and associates as of others, fifteene thousand horse and foote: so as both the Armies were reported to haue thirtie thousand men apeece at one selfesame time. The which was scarcely euer seene before; That since the declining of the Romane Empire, two Italians to hauePhilip commeth to the Armie* The number of both Armies. had two such mightie Armies readie to fight one with another. The presence of Philip had greatly animated his souldiers to enterprize some great exploit, so that they craued nothing more than to fight, they wholly desired it and with loud voice did cheerfully beg it. Then being embattelled they marched couragiously against the enemie. The Venetian was at the same time encamped at Suma, and his campe was not fortified with trenches nor Rampiers, but enuironed onely with wagons, and with a riuer which diuided the plaine: the enemie hauing no way to come at him but by a bridge distant three Stadij from his campe.
The enemie comming to that place made a stand, expecting that the Venetian in regard of his great numbers would fight beyond the bridge. But the Venetian attended him in order of battaile, on the plaine neere to his campe, determining

to ioyne if the enemie came foreward. Pergulan and Taurello counseled him not to passe the bridge; but the bold counsell of Sforza and diuers others was followed,A battaile betwixt the venetians and Philip who were of opinion to march directly against the enemie. These being commanded to march before, and the fight alreadie begunne, all the rest followed in order to the battaile, a few excepted who staied behind for the guard of the bridge, to the end that thereby the retreat to their Campe might be assured: They fought from noone till night, running with such furie and vehemencie one vpon another, as on a sodaine there arose a great dust like to a blacke clowde which did in a manner blinde them, by meanes whereof they did inconsideratly throw themselues into danger: Eyes were to small purpose in that darkenesse, they Great disorder in the battaile by reason of the dust which blinded the souldiers onely knew one another by their voices: the fight was doubtfull, and the aduentures of the combatants vncertaine. Euerie one might iustly boaste in fighting to haue come euen to the enemies Ensiges, or to haue performed that day some generous exploit* Some say that diuers of Philips Armie thinking in that confusion to retire to their fellowes who kept the bridge, did neuer perceiue that they were in the enemies Campe, till they came to the waggons: at the last* the retreit being sounded both sides retired without any aduantage.
Carmagnolla was wont to say that he had taken that day more of his own souldiers than of his enemies, and that the enemie might sundrie times haue taken him if he had beene knowne. The same likewise hapned to Sforza, Picinino and diuers other  noble men. Philip being glad for that which had beene done in his presence, andThe Dukes of Sauoy and Montferrat m^ke incursions on the Milanois imagining that he had wonne the victorie, because he had not lost the battaile, being speedily called home by sundrie messengers, because the cauallerie of the Dukes of Sauoy and Montferrat entering by Vercelles on the Milanois made incursions euen to the gates of Milan: he forth with departed, hauing dismissed those forces which he brought with him, whom he willed (if they so pleased) to goe home to their houses.
The Venetian perceiuing Cremona to be strongly manned (for excepting those troups whom Philip had dismissed, the residue of the Armie after the battaile was retired thither) imagining that a Citie so well fortified would not easily be forced, came and encamped at Casall Major. (for so is it called) Bembo with the nauall Armie  came thither likewise soon after. Francisco Sforza with a braue troup of souldiers pursued Carmagnolla in his march, but perceiuing his Armie to be so well guarded and circkled in on all sides, and being loth to attempt any thing rashly for feare of ambushes, he went backe againe, and without any difficultie recouered Bries, where he threw those whom he found in Garrison there into the Riuer, because the Venetians not long before had done as much to their souldiers.
Casall for a time was in vaine besieged by the Venetian by land and water, by reason of the strong Garrison that lay in it. Antonio Pisani a valiant Captaine was Gouernour there: who day and night keeping good guard on the Rampier with foure hundred braue souldiers, did by his prouidence frustrate all the enemies attempts. The Citie was enuironed with good Rampiers and banks which defended it from the engines of batterie. But it is reported that there was a tower neere to the gate of Po, the which being battered with greatest violence did wholly in a mannerThe venetians take Casal Maior. fall downe into the vttermost ditches. The Venetians hauing by sundrie assaultes attempted to enter in at that place, and the Garrison of the Citie being repulsed withgreat slaughter, the inhabitants stubbornnesse being daunted, they were receiued by them vnknowne to Pisani.
The Venetians Generall being proud of this victorie did determine to make a bridge ouer the Riuer of Adda, to the end to send his troupes to spoile and rauage the Milanois. But hee wanted victualls, and it behoued him to prouide for that. And therefore he encamped still at Casal, til all necessaries were brought him from the neighbour Townes.
Philip in the meane time perceiuing his Captaines to bee diuided among themselues, euery one thinking himselfe equall both in valour and reputation with the

best, and by that meanes refusing to giue place to one another either in counsell or authoritie, in regard whereof there was some likelihood that his affaires might receiue some notable losse if it were not speedily remedied, hee made Carolo Malateste Generall of his whole Armie. It is thought that in this choice of Generall he had not so much respect to the valour of the man, as to his wisedome and NobilitieCarolo Malateste Generall of Philips Armie. in bloud. Some say that hee did it, because that euer since Pandolfo his gouernment, hee had beene greatly beloued of the Bressians* and that hee did hope by his meanes the Citie would reuolt from the Venetians. The Venetian in this meane time was gone from Casal. And Carolo hauing accepted the charge was not idle, but leading his Armie through by-waies he did opportunely frustrate the enemies  designes.
At the last, the Venetian came and encamped before Maclodia, (called by theThe Venetians besiege Macale. vulgar Macale) a Citie of the Cr^monois. Philips Captaines and his whole Armie did hardly digest the enemies boldnesse, and did greatly blame their owne patience and their Generalls, saying, that there were many Cities in the Cremonois and Bergamese besides left by the enemie which they might with more safetie besiege, and yet neuerthelesse hee had encamped before Macale, as if the taking of that Towne would much auaile him; but that he did it in his owne and their disgrace: and therefore if he desired to purchase the reputation of true Generall of an Armie he should doe well to take from himselfe and them who vnder him fought for Philip that  shame and reproch. At the first this was spoken secretly among a few, afterwardsDiuers opinions in Philips Army publiquely ouer the whole Campe. Sforza and Picinino desired a battaile: Pergulan and Taurello contradicted it, saying that they were to deale with an enemie, who might more easily bee vanquished by temporizing than by fight: That a battaile was that which the Venetian Generall demaunded: That they were most assured that the same day as Philips forces (who were lesse in number and good fortune to the Venetians) should fight with them, Philips affaires would altogether receiue some notable loss^. Carolo did heare them, but hee fixed his eies on Sforza and Picinino whome hee was wont publiquely to call his Hectors: Hee did besides willingly giue eare to the residue of the Armie, who craued that they might come to  battaile.
It is reported that those two who more couragiously than the rest were of opinion to fight, being requested by Carolo to deliuer their opinions whether it were necessarie to assaile the enemie, made this answere. That hee among many other was giuen vnto them for their Commaunder, and that it was his Office and not theirs, to commaund what hee would haue to be done. And that if of himselfe he knew not what was fittest, he should doe well to follow the aduice of others: For as concerning themselues they were both readie to march in what rancke he should please either in the first or last, because no man doth euer vndertake great and difficult matters, so much at the perill of another man as at his owne.
Carolo at last condiscended to a battaile, and commanded Taurello and Pergulan with strong supplies to remaine for the guard of the Camp, Lauellano and Sforza to fight in the first rankes, and Picinino to follow the Ensignes with the residue of the troupes. But Pergulan and Taurello, thinking they had great wrong to be placed out of the danger of the battaile, because they had been of opinion not to fight with the enemie, did runne to the foremost rankes, and spake aloude, that they would with all their power repulse that mischiefe and losse which by their counsell they could not diuert. Carolo granted it, and by changing the rankes, commanded Picinino to stand readie with the succours, and hee first marched against the enemie with the troupes of light Horse, as hee had determined in the beginning. Hee commanded  Taurello to follow him in the fore-ward, and Sforza and Pergulan to come after, and so the residue in order. The way was plaine, though somewhat crooked, fromPhilips Armie marcheth in battaile against the Venetians. Pompiano, from whence the Philippians came, euen to the Venetians camp, without any hedge or ditch, because in Winter all those places are Wet and Moi^t, and in

Sommer full of Thornes and Shrubs; and neare therunto is a goodly fruitfull plaine on which to march, because on the fore-part thereof the mar^hes are neuer drie: the hearbs and grasse in diuers places being drie in Sommer, it made a way both drie and beaten, but the paths were very crooked, and the Venetian had fortified some of them with deepe Trenches, and others with shallow Dikes. Taurello hauing viewed these places in part fortified, and partly abandoned, turning towards Sforza and the rest, he cried out aloude, and said, that God was Almightie, but that no man could diuert the ouerthrow which did that day threaten Philip and his Captaines.
So soone as the Venetian Generall perceiued the enemies to approch, hee commanded Tollentino to goe with two thousand Horse to the marsh which lieth neare  to Terentiana, and to returne afterward to assaile the enemies on their backs, whilest they should bee busied in the fight: Then hee placed great troupes of footmen on both sides the waies in the mar^hes, and himselfe with the residue of the Armie marched furiously in front against the enemie. Carolo at the very first had beene enuironed and defeated, for that hee had inconsiderately sent his light Horse before, and a great part of his Footmen, had not Taurello, Sforza, and some others with the Ensignes, forthwith come to his aide, who after they had repulsed the enemies forces, made the fight in that place equall. Then there beganne on either side a cruell bickering: But the Footmen who were hidden by the way in the bushes and shrubs, did in short space with their darts and arrowes make a great slaughter of Horse. Taurello who at the first did follow Carolo to the fight, being assailed on euery side, made a retreate, and escaped on the other side of the marshes: In the meane time in the rereward a great shout was made (for Tollentino was come thither.) Pergulan retired forth of the battaile, perceiuing that all was lost: Sforza followed him with his troupes in a manner whole. But Picinino being enforced to fight in Front, in Flanque, and behinde, had much to doe to get forth of the middest of the presse; but at the last by the valour of his Souldiers he escaped to a place of safetie: Then they beganne openly to flie, and great slaughter was made euery where. Carolo was taken, and with him eight thousand Horse and Foote, as many of the one as of the other. Some say that sixe thousand Footmen were taken, and three thousand Horse. All the baggage of the Armie fell into the Victors hands, where they found great quantitie of gold and siluer, and much rich stuffe.
It is thought that Carmagnolla had at the same time meanes to haue driuen Philip from his state, if hee had kept the prisoners, and had forthwith after the battaile marched against the enemie, but he knew not how to make vse of this victorie, or rather would not doe it. Being returned to the Camp the night following hee set all the prisoners at libertie, not being intreated so to doe, which did purchase him the ill will of the Venetians: Some thought that it was the chiefe cause of his death.The chiefe caus^ of Carmagnolla his death. Three hundred more being brought vnto him the morrow after, whom hee had not seene the night before, he gaue them leaue to depart likewise, saying aloude that  therein he followed the ancient custome of the Warres.
Vpon report of the losse of the battaile, all the Townes and Forts of the Bressan did freely yeeld to the Venetians, excepting that of the new Orges, which beingThe Uenetian^ take the new Orges. besieged by the Venetian was in few daies taken by force: But whilest this siege lasted, Philip made hast to renew his Armie, and in short time made great leuies of armour and horse, in regard the Commanders, and the most part of the Armie were escaped. There were at the same time two Artificers in Milan who did vndertake in short space to arme as many thousands of men, as were reported to haue beene taken in that battaile.
Sforza and Picinino were not in the meane time idle; For ioyning with those that  escaped, they surprized the Venetians victualls, and did greatly trouble the forragers, and those which went to the enemies Camp. Picinino did moreouer attempt by night to recouer Pontoglio, but it was in vaine. Captaine Bressan a very famous Gentleman died at this enterprize, being surprized by the Townes-men.
Although Philip perceiued his affaires to be reduced to great extremitie, yet neuerthelessePhilip bath recourse to the Emperour Sigismond. he did not omit all possible meanes to stop the Venetians, pursuing the course of their victorie. He sent to the Emperour Sigismond (vnto whom hee had in former times beene as great an enemie as to the Venetians) to entreat his aide, and that he would send Brunora of Escalla with an Armie into Italie against the Venetians. He did afterwards practize with Amadeo Duke of Sauoy, with whom (hauing quitted Verseill vnto him) he did not only make a league, but entred into his affinitie, taking his Daughter to Wife, whom he neuer touched after the first night. HePhilip marrieth the Duke of Sauois Daughter. did moreouer entreat Pope Martin to vse all meanes to disvnite the Florentines from the Venetians. But the more he went about by these meanes to raise himselfe, the more did contrarie fortune deject him, by the death of diuers of his best Captaines. Angelo Pergulano died within a while after, who was followed by Fabricio Campana, and diuers other notable persons who died one after another. At the last Visconte being afflicted with this latter losse, consented to peace.
This businesse was for a time debated at Ferrara in the presence of the Popes Legat, where peace was granted on these conditions: That the Venetians shouldPeace betwixt the Venetians and Philip. haue Bressia, with all the Bressian and Bergamese Territorie, and that part of the Bergamese which stretcheth towards the Riuer Adice, together with all the Castles which they then held vpon the Cremonese. The Florentines had little or nothing giuen to them, but only this, that it might bee lawfull for them to fixe their owne  Ensignes vpon their Gallies, in regard that before then, by an accord made with the Genoueses, they were woont to vse those of the Pisans. Those of Ferrara, Mantua, Paluicin, Montferrat, and those of Sienna likewise, at the entreatie of the Florentines their associates were freed together with those Countries vpon the Riuer of Genoa, which lay towardes the Leuant. But the Malspini, the Fregozas and the Fiesci, very Noble families of Genoa could not obtaine leaue of Philip to returne home to their houses, notwithstanding that the Florentines did earnestly sue in their behalf; yet neuerthelesse he promised to reckon them in the number of his friends. Carmagnolla receiued his wife and children, and Palace, which he had most  sumptuously built at Milan before his banishment.



The end of the tenth Booke of the second Decad.






THE FIRST BOOKE OF THE THIRD DECAD OF THE HISTORIE  Of Venice.

The Contents of the first Booke of the third Decad.
THe cause of the second warre in Lombardie. The forces of GVENESIO of Luca arc on a sodaine defeated by NICHOLAO surnamed  STELLA. A treacherous attempt made on the person of Prince FOSCARI by ANDREA CONTARENI. FRANCISCO SFORZA his iournie into Tuscanie, where hee restoreth those of Luca to their libertie. NICHOLAO PICININO passethinto Tuscanie against the Florentines PHILIP putteth SFORZA in hope of a future alliance. The Turkes take Thessalonica on the Sea Thermaic. A great frost round about Venice, where Cartes went vpon the waters. The Florentines care and diligence to preserue Pisa. Warre renewed against PHILIP. vpon the Cremonese. The Venetians nauall Armie is put to rout vpon the Po. The Venetians defeate the Genoueses vpon the Rapalitane Sea. LAVRETAN brings supplies to the Pope to Ciuita-veccbia. PHILIP giueth ^attaile to CARMAGNOLLA neare to Somma, where the fight is equall. Cremona almost taken. PICININO wasteth all places vpon the Riuer of Genoa, and driueth the Prince of Monferrat an associate of the Venetians from his whole State. The Venetians haue no good successe at the siege of Chios. CARMAGNOLLA being suspected a Traitour to the Senate and conuicted of the crime, hath his head stricken off. The Venetians are put to the worst in the Camonian Valley. And lastly peace is concluded with PHILIP.

PEace was not alone in Lombardie, but (which hadThe cause of the renewing of war betwixt the Venetians and Philip. not beene seene of a long time) ouer all Italie, at what time the rebellion of those of Bolognia against  Pope Martin did disturbe this rest: and within a while after warre was renewed betwixt the Venetians and Philip. And the better to vnderstand the occasion thereof, we must fetch the matter from farre.
Peace being concluded with Visconte, the confines of that part of the Cremonese which had beene adiudged to the Venetians were cause of continuall controuersie betwixt them, and of procuring that warre which ensued. For althoughPhilip contrarie to his promise maketh warre vpon the Band^tti of Genoa. the Marquesse of Aeste was at the beginning chosen Vmpier for both sides, the same neuerthelesse was some cause of renewing the warre. Besides, the next Sommer after the peace, Philip made fierce warre vpon the Fiesci and Fregozas which were banished from Genoa, whome during the treatie of peace hee would not comprehend in the Florentines Articles, but had promised to hold them in the

number of his friends. He tooke from them diuers Townes and Castles, first by meanes of the Genoueses, and aftewards by Picinino, whome he sent against them with a mightie Armie. But these matters, which were not small, were neuerthelesse too weake to renew this warre all at once.Paulo Guenesio Tyrant of Luca.
Another farre greater subiect, which was neuer dreamt on, ministred a lawfull occasion to take Armes. Paul of Luca of the Guenesian Familie, had for the space of thirtie yeares vsurped as a Tyrant the Signorie and Gouernment of Luca his natiue Countrie, and did in the meane time so Gouerne the Cities important affaires in his owne name, as in the middest of so manie stormes of warre which did at that time thunder vpon Italie, he could neuer be drawne to take Armes nor to encline  to any side. This had greatly offended the Florentines, for that they could neuer in their aduersitie draw any aide from him, as from their neighbour. VVherevpon all men both in generall and particular did hate the Guenesian name and enuied his prosperitie. Therefore, peace being made with Philip, the chiefe of the Citie deuised by what meanes they might intangle him in some affaires of importance. They wanted not iust matter whereby to make warre vpon him. For Ladislaus his sonne being in the Florentines pay, was gone from them without their leaue: knowing very well that they would not haue suffered him to haue serued against Pope Martin in the troubles of Bolognia. But the people of Florence being tired with warre, would by no meanes heare any talke of Armes.
The principall of the Citie who detested the Tyrants power, seeing they couldThe chiefe of Florence are animated against the (...) not be suffered to raise open warre, would helpe themselues by a secret meanes. To this end, they wonne priuately to their side Nitholao, surnamed Stella, Nephew to that great Captaine Bracchio, who being a young man was in the Florentines pay, that he giuing ouer his charge, should openly say, that hee would (as his vncle had done) beare Armes for himselfe; and that afterwards hee should attempt vpon the Lucan Territories, telling him what claime he might pretend thereto: to wit That it was knowne ouer al Tuscanie that Guenesio was in times past tributarie to Bracchio, and that by right of succession he might demaund that tribute of the Tyrant which he had paid vnto no man since his death.
This young man being so daine and resolute, did not refuse the businesse. Whereupon hauing openly giuen ouer his charge he did in a short space assemble two thousand men, and remained for a while vpon the Florentines Frontiers, as though he made preparations for a farre iournie. By reason of which assemblie the Sienois were in greater feare than those of Luca. This expeditious Captaine discampingThe incursions of Nicholao Stella vpon the Lucan Territorie. about twilight, the next morning by breake of day fell fiercely vpon the Lucan Territorie; where finding all things to be abandoned, hee carried away with him great numbers of prisoners, and much Cattell. Hee continued two dayes incamped vpon the plaine of Luca: in which time he wasted and burnt whatsoeuer hee met with. From thence going to besiege the Townes, hee tooke from the Guenesian within a few dayes eight Castles, of which hee razed those that hee tooke by force, and preserued the rest which voluntarily yeelded.
Many vpon report of this newe warre ranne to his Armie on hope of bootie. The tyrant and those of Luca being amazed at this sodaine incursion, and not knowing at first whence this tempest came, were fearefull of all things. But when they vnderstood who was the Captaine, and how that it was a practise of the Florentines: hauing recommended the guatd of the Citie to the young Guenesians, they first sent to Florence to complaine of that iniurie as proceeding from them. TheThose of Luca craue aide of the Venetians, of Philip, and of the Sienois. Florentines being ignorant of the matter did confidently repell that slaunder. But those of Luca sent to Venice to complaine vnto them of their Confederates, and  at the last to Philip and to the Sienois; earnestly entreating them for reliefe in their affliction.
The Florentines in the meane time, perceiuing that the exploits of yong Bracchi^ did daily prosper: thinking that it might shortly come to passe, that by hauing a

hand in that warre they might annexe the Citie of Luca to their State, which was oppressed with so many miseries, did by a publick decree write to Nicholao his camp,The ^lorentines do (...) that which (...) had done, and ^oe entreate him to goe forward. (who already of himselfe was no more able to beare the burthen of so great an Armie,) That he should continue the pursuite of that warre in the Florentines name; that they were ready to furnish him with men, victualls, supplies, and monie, and generally with all necessaries for the warre; that his only care should be to goe forward as he had begun and to end that warre, whereby he should purchase the peoples loue, and immortall praise; saying, That the Florentines would prouide for all  the rest. Those of Sienna on the other side, fearing if their neighbours should subiugate Luca, this storme would afterwards fall vpon their libertie, sent to entreate the Venetians to diuert the Florentines their common associates from that war by some great menaces, if by other meanes they could not effect it. But it hapned by chanc^ that at the same time as the Ambassadors of Sienna came to Venice for that purpose, the sacred Soueraigne Magistrate of the Citie was by the follie of a Citizen highly outraged.
Andrea (...), issued from a verie noble and ancient familie, being by a disease become (in a manner) lunaticke, sued for the office of Admirall of the Adriaticke Sea. It came to passe, that after it had beene denied him in the generall assembly, he was in the companie of certaine yong men; who lesting with him, laid the cause of  that denial on the Prince, telling him he should neuer be preferred so long as Foscari liued. This man being heereupon prouoked with rage and griefe, (two mightie spurs) became so vnmeasurably and inordinately furious, as he went and assailed the Prince, as he was comming downe the staires to Diuine Seruice in S. Marks Church. But the better to effect his purpose, hee made shew as if he would haue spoken with him in secret; whereupon such as were neere him gaue place, that he might speake to him with the more priuacie: Thus hauing gotten opportunitie, he drew forth a poniard that he had hidden vnder his gowne, and had (without all doubt) slain the old man, if one of the Ambassadours from Sienna, who was verie neere him, hadThe Prince is outraged by a mad man. not laid hold on his Arme, and turned aside th^ blow, which strook him on the face, neere to the nose. The Senators and the Princes Officers did presently encompasse  the wounded Prince, and the Traitour; they defended the one, and haled the other to execution, who made meanes to escape. His right hand was cut off in the same place, which being tyed about his neck, he was hanged on the highest top of the Palace; or (according to some Authors) betwixt the two Columnes. The Republick being troubled with so strange an accident, did in hast answere the Ambassadours, That the Venetians did desire to maintaine and defend the Sienois libertie; but thatThe Uenetians answere to the Ambassadours of Sienna. it belonged not to them to meddle with the controuersie betwixt those of Siena and the Florentines their associates. And with this answere the Ambassadors were dismissed. The Florentines in the mean time did hardly presse those of Luca, which at the last caused Guenesio, and the Sienois, to sue vnto Philip and to the Genoueses.
Philip, vsing the same policie as did the Florentines, perswaded Francisco Sforza, that asking him leaue, he should leuie the greatest forces he could, and march into  Tuscan to the aide of those of Luca. Whereupon Sforza being valiant and couetous of honor, did forthwith passe the Alpes, and speedily brought a great Armie to Luca. Vpon his arriuall, Stella retired to the con^ines of Pisa, because he would not be enforced to fight at one time neere to the Citie Wals with Sforza's forces, and withSforza comming to the aide of those of Luca causeth the enemie to raise his Campe. the Guenesians, being induced thereunto by his vnckles example, whom he remembred to haue beene defeated in the same manner at the siege of Aquileia. He resolued therefore to draw the warre out at length, vntill that Sforza's Armie should be enforced through want of all things to abandon the Lucan Territorie. For, they  being gone, hee determined to continue the siege so long, till he had constrained the Tyrant, or (in despight of him) the inhabitants to yeeld.
Sforza hauing razed the Fortes which the enemies had builded neere to the Citie-gates, entered the Towne in a triumphant manner, where, (being receiued by Guenesio with a reciprocall congratulation), he made no long aboad, but went intoGuenesio going about to treate with the Florentines is discouered by Sforza. the Torritorie of Pistoia, where in a short space he tooke diuers places by force. Guenesio considering with himselfe what the euent of that warre would be, supposing that the aide he then made vse of, would not continue long with him, and though they should remaine with him for a long time, yet neuerthelesse they did not seeme vnto him to be able wholly to free him from that warre, and that therefore it might happen that whether he would or no, he should one day be enforced to yeeld: And likewise because he knew, that with far greater aduantage he might treate of peace  whilst his affaires were in perfection, than afterwards, he began secretly to deale with the Florentines. But hauing acquainted his familiar friends and seruants with the whole matter, Sforza was forth with aduertiz^d of his negotiation by those vnto whom hee had discouered himselfe. Whereupon Sforza by the commaundement of Philip, vnto whom he had written concerning that businesse, did sodainely seize vpon the Tyrants person and children, and sent them to Milan; and all his rich moueables he gaue to his Souldiers. Now hauing by this meanes restored those of Luca to their libertie, he left a strong and mightie Garrison with them for their guard. The Townes-men at his departure, gaue him manie rich and costly presents. The Florentines likewise furnished him with victualls for his iourney, and presented him with thirtie thowsand crownes, for that he had procured their peace.
The affaires of Tuscanie beeing thus pacified, and Sforza beeing growne great both in wealth and reputation (two sure ladders to ascend to greatnesse) he departed with his troupes forth of Tuscanie, and came into Lombardie. After his departure the Florentines came againe and besieged Luca. Philip to free them from that danger, making vse almost of the former manner, sent Nicholao Picinino in the namePicinino commeth to the aide of the Luquois. of the Genoueses, (into whose protection those of Luca were reported to haue cast themselues) to breake the Florentines designes. He came with great forces and rumor into Tuscanie.
The Venetians hauing notice of Picinino's iournie against the Florentines, although at the first they could not be perswaded to take Armes for the war of Luca, yet neuerthelesse being moued by the danger which threatned their associates, they sent to Philip, to let him know that they did greatly wonder, how that the Genoueses, who were vnder the power of an other man, were able to raise so great an Armie against the Florentines, for it was apparant to all men, that Picinino, and Lauellano, who went with him into Tuscanie, had of a long time beene pensioners to Philip, and not to the Genoueses; and therefore that he should doe wel, in all points to obserue the agreement, and not to wrong the associates of the one partie; or if he were determined to aide the Luquois by meanes of the Genoueses, he should not take it  in euill part, if the Venetians likewise did afterwards aide the Florentines their associates with their forces. And for the rest it was at his owne choice whether hee would obserue the peace or no which he had sworne with the Venetians: As for themselues, they promised to obserue the accord so long as they should perceiueThe Venetians summons to Philip. the affaires of their associates not to be disturbed by Philip or by any other: which they perceiuing otherwise to fal out, did wish him to desist from any more troubling their associates; otherwise he should be assured that if he did continue in molesting the Florentines, that the Venetians in their defence were already prepared for war.
Although the Ambassadors brought back from him no certaine resolution vpon  this summons, the Senate neuerthelesse thought it not fit to take Armes vpon a sodaine.The Florentines defeated by Picinino. Picinino in the meane time defeated the Florentines neere to the riuer Arno. This being reported at Venice, they decreed no longer to delay, but to beginne the warre. Whereupon they sought to draw Francisco Sforza to their partie, who after

his returne from Luca had still made his aboad in Mirandola. The Florentines likewise made meanes to haue him, vnto whom he most inclined in regard of their friend-ship towards his Father. But so soone as Philip had an inckling thereof, the better to oblige that courageous young man to himselfe by some stricter bond, he promised him his only daughter Bianca in marriage, putting him in hope,Philip promiseth to giue his daughter in marriage to Sforza. that if he had afterwards no male childe, to make him his successour in all his Dominions.
We haue read in the Commentaries of Montanus, That Philip for feare of losing Sforza, because he saw Picinino his corriuall to be preferred before him, and to haue the command of his Armie, did put him in hope of this affinitie and alliance by  marriage. Pope Martins death did for a time delay this warre to the which both sides were well addicted. Both the one and other thought it verie necessarie before they tooke Armes to see who should be the next Pope. Gabrieli Candelmario a Venetian was chosen in the place of the deceased, and assumed to himselfe the name of Eugenius. Although this man did at the beginning of his Papacie acquaint all Princes and Common-wealths by his Ambassadours, that he would doe nothing rashly, saying, That he would be vmpier of their controuersies, and in friendly manner establish peace betwixt them, Philip neuerthelesse suspected him in regard of his Countrie. And therefore he did not cease first secretly, and afterwards by open meanes, to practise whatsoeuer he could against him. And thus molesting him in all  matters, at the last he entangled him with a domestick warre in Rome by meanes of the Colonnessi.
Whereupon the Venetians perceiuing Philip, in sted of acknowledging the Pope, openly to make warre vpon him, after that they had in the fourth moneth of Eugenius. Papacie renued the league with the Florentines, they proclaimed warre against him. They did moreouer releiue the Marquis of Mont-ferratThe Venetians proclaime warre against Philip. with monie, and the Palauicins, whom they receiued into this new league. Besides, they set forth a great nauall Armie, which went vp against the streame of the Riuer Po to oppugne the enemie. Carmagnolla in the meane time lay with his forces at the new Orges, ready to march at the first rumour of this warre. Philip sent Tolentino and Francisco Sforza against him with gallant troupes. Hee likewise put into Cremona, vpon which all men thought that the whole burthen of the warre would fall, Lodouico Colonna with braue Souldiers; and opposed Lauellan^, who was well accompanied, to the Prince of Mountferrat that had small forces.
Whilest these things were done in Italie, certaine sparkes of a verie dangerous warre (which the Venetians had within a while after by Sea and Land against Mahomet Ottaman the mightie Turkish Emperour) appeared at Thessalonica a Citie of Macedonia. This Towne which in former times was verie famous, is seated on the Thermaic Sea, but in our time so desert, as tenne thousand Barbarians  did easily force it. It did belong to the Venetians, and was gouerned by Giacomo Dandulo and Andrea Donato, who seeking to escape forth of the middest ofThessalonica Macedonia ken by the Turket. the tumult, Dandulo was taken by the enemies. At the same time two sorts of monies were coined in the Citie; that of most value was worth eight souls, and the lesser, two. There was likewise a Bridge built of white stone neere to the Church of the Fryers Minors. It is moreouer recorded, That the watersAn extreame ^rost. round about the Citie were so frozen, as men went drie-foote from the Citie to Tourcelles, Malamoc, and (that which is more strange) to Chioggia. It is reported that a bride was brought from Mestre to Venice in a waggon, the which before that time was neuer seene; that waggons did passe vpon those  waters which are betwixt the Citie and the firme Land-
The Florentines after the losse of the battaile in Tuscanie neere to the riuer Arno, would again haue attempted by reason of Picinino's absence, to besiege Luca (for after the battaile, he had retired himselfe towards Pontremolle to force certaine places

belonging to the Fiesci neere to the Alpes) had not Bartholomeo Fornari Captaine of fiue Genoa-gallies, and two ships of burthen, come and encamped before Liuorne. Whereupon fearing least by reason thereof the Pisans would reuolt, they were constrained to send part of their forces in Garrison into the Citie. VVithin a while after Picinino returned, who with a wonderfull speed had in a manner reduced al the towns belonging to the Pisans vnder his power. The Florentins after that they had lost all the rest, fearing least the victorious enemie would seize on Pisa, did make a verie cruell decree, That all the inhabitants from the age of fifteene yeres to threescoreA cruell decree of the (...). should depart forth of the Citie, before that a candle lighted vp for that purpose should be burnt out, and by that meanes did vnburthen the Citie which they  suspected of a great number of inhabitants.
The enemie leauing the Pisan territorie marched to that of Volterra, which iourney was as prosperous to him as that of Pisa. For hauing taken all places of thePicinino scoureth the volterian territorie, as he ^ad done that of the Pisans. countrey, Volterra likewise would haue beene mightily endangered, if Michaeli Attendulo sent by Pope Eugenius to aide the Florentines had not by his opportune comming freed it. These things were done in Tuscanie, whilest that Philip was greatly troubled, because that Carmagnolla lay at the new Orges with his troupes in a readinesse, hauing beene there a long time; and fearing least that he would beginne as in the precedent warres by some vnlooked-for reprisall, he began heedfully to looke to his affaires, that the enemie might not enterprize vpon him, by some secret practise: VVherefore after diligent search made, he discouered that they within theAn enterprize vpon the Castle of Lodes discouered. Castle of Lodes had promised to giue him entrance: VVhereupon hauing speedily smothered that treacherie, he was desirous to trie if he could take the enemie in his owne trappe. He did secretly counsell the Gouernour of the Castle of Socinna to promise the Venetian Generall, that for a certaine summe of money, he would deliuer vnto him the Castle, Munition and garrison. The Generall did not refuse this offer, for which he promised him a great summe of money, and had a day appointed him when he should bring his troupes thither. Philip being aduertized heereof, commanded Sforza and Tollentino to march thither verie secretly with part of their forces, to seize on all the waies, and to lay an Ambuscado for Carmagnolla to surprize  him and his forces if it were possible.
Carmagnolla failed not at the day appointed, and hauing sent before him certaineDouble trechery vpon the Castle of Soncina. troupes to seize on the place, he made a stand neere to the towne with the residue of his forces. Those which were sent before, being receiued into a corner of the Castle were at the enemies mercie, when on a sodaine the Gouernour of the place cried out with a loud voice, calling diuers times to Carmagnolla, saying; That he was no traitor to Philip but a beguiler of his enemies. And thereupon Sforza and Tollentino arising forth of their ambush, and assailing the Venetians on euerie side, did greatly terrifie them. Carmagnolla then perceiued that he was taken in his owne subtilties,Carmagnolla escapeth by flight. and presently turning his backe, fled in disorder as fast as he could. The  report was, that hauing lost more than a thousand horse, he escaped by meanes of Tollentino.
VVithin a while after, the Venetians being rather detained than encamped vpon the Cremonese, did fearelesse runne vp and downe: Lodouico Colonna (who as weThe venetians are put to rout vpon the Cremonese. haue said was sent to guard the Citie) went and assailed them being disorderly scattered vpon the riuers bankes, where he brake and defeated them with forces farre inferiour to theirs in number, and tooke three hundred horse from them. But I finde nothing recorded by Historians, concerning this second defeate. During these exploits in Lombardie, Tuscanie was much afflicted with warre, and especially the Florentines, who had Picinino still at their elbowes. For hauing a long time  made incursions on the Volterran territorie, he marched towards that of Arezzo, where by intelligence he had like to haue taken the Citie. But being disappointed of his expectation, he began to batter Townes and Castles of which he tooke manie; some by force, and others by volunrarie yeelding. At this stay stood the state

of the affaires of these two Prouinces, when Tollentino disdaining that Duke Philip should make more reckoning of Francisco Sforza, and Picinino than of him, hauingTollentino leaueth Philips partie. to the one promised his alliance, and to the other committed the sole commaund of his Armie, and thereby as it were held him in contempt, did leaue Philips partie, and retired with a gallant troup of his own followers into Flaminia. The Venetians and Florentines sought to draw him to their parties, offering him the sole commaund of the Armie if he would come into Lombardie. But matters being delaied, he went from Flaminia to the Popes seruice, against the Colonessi neere to Rome. Philip was enforced by Tollentines departure, to call backe Picinino into Lombardie.
The Venetians in the meane time, although they well knew that they had renewed that warre with bad successe, did neuerthelesse leauie forces, and made great prouisions of victuals and Armour, and besides their land-forces, they made readie a mightie nauall Armie, to send it vp the riuer towards Cremona, wherein was ten thousand fighting men besides the Marriners and Pilots. Nicolao Treuisano wasThe venetians nauall Armie vpon the Po. made Generall, and in euerie vessell a Venetian Gentleman commaunded. There was besides great store of warlik engines of all sorts, as many almost as there were men. Carmagnolla likewise was encamped neere to the towne with twelue thousand horse, and as many foot. Philip had prepared a nauall Armie vpon the Thesin, which in number of vessels, souldiers, and in all other prouisions was inferiour to  the Venetians, but for the valour of the Generall, and skill of the Pilots, if it did not surpasse it, it did at leastwise equall it. Giouanni Grimaldi the Genouese was Generall, a man among his countrymen the most famous and expert in marine matters of any of his time, of whose choosing Philip manned the vessels with Pilots, and the best Archers of Genoa. Picinino likewise being returned from Tuscanie had greatly augmented the land-Armie. But by how much his presence did further the affaires of Philip in Lombardie, by so much more did his absence cause them to decline in Tuscanie. For soone after his departure, Alberto Earle of Cunes, vnto whom he had committed the charge of those troupes that he left in Tuscanie, falling into an ambuscado neere to the towne of Colle lost aboue a thousand horse, whereupon  he was suspected to haue done it willingly, for that he had a meaning before to turne to the enemies partie.
But whilest these things were done in Tuscanie, all the burthen of the warre in Lombardie lay neere to Cremona, where the enemies were much weaker hoth by land and water than the Venetians. VVhereupon Picinino and Sforza perceiuing, that if to their weaknesse they did not ioyne some pollicie, they should not be able in both places to resist the Venetian, they did by wit and discretion supplie the want of force. And therefore they made often incursions into the enemies trenches, as though they had contemned them, and not remembred their nauall Armie, which by how much neerer it approached comming vp the stream, by so much more fiercely  did they prouoke both the one and other campe. But in the night they did secretly conferre with Grimaldi, discoursing by what meanes they might giue battaile vpon the riuer Po: And resoluing betwixt themselues by what pollicie they might obtaine the victorie, the audacious Genouese hauing from farre descried the Venetian vessels which kept the watch, did forthwith set forward against them, thereby to cause them to returne to tell Treuisano of their approach, and by the way he cameStrat^geme of Philips Captains before the walles of Cremona, where full of hope and courage he tooke Picinino and all his men at Armes into his ships, which were equally distributed among the vessels: Then he fel downe softly with the streame towards the enemie. So soone as they that were in the ships tops had descried him, the alarme was sounded. The Venetian  who craued nothing more, did speedily commaund that by strength of oares they should draw neere to the enemies vessels, to the end they might come to handie strokes, the which Picinino was so farre off from refusing, as on the contrarie, he did fiercely set forward before the rest with a part of the vessels. The Venetians wondering

at first at the enemies boldnesse, so soone as he perceiued their vessells to glister with armour did suspect the truth of the matter, how that he was to fight with the Land-Armie, and presently sent message vpon message to Carmagnolla to let him know that Picinino and Sforza were at strokes with him together with their whole troupes, and therefore he entreated him, if he did wish the good of the Commonwealth, to come speedily to his aide.
It is reported vpon this arriuall of the messengers one after another Carmagnolla who was by nature cholerick grew extreame angrie, and with a loud voice did abhorre and condemne the Venetians fault, who reiecting his counsell would not distribute that great summe of monie to the land Armie, saying that he could not belieue  that which they reported to bee true, but that their Generall being affrighted at the shadow of an armed man did dreame that he had seen Gyants in the enemies shippes. The battaile in the meane time rested doubtfull, and alreadie about sunset foure Gallies of the Venetians which the enemies drew to them by hookes did fight neare at hand, not as before with arrow-shot and warlike Engines, butFoure Venetian Gallies taken. hand to hand with sharpe swords and axes made for that purpose. At the last these foure Gallies being lost about the beginning of the night, the other Venetian ships which had fought with the enemie, retired to the hauen from whence they came. Picinino hauing carried away with him the vessels that hee had taken, and caused Sforza to come into the shippes with a companie of men at Armes, commaunded  Grimaldi againe to set forward against the enemie about the fourth watch of the night. The Generall of the Venetian Nauie had intelligence thereof; and because he was out of hope of the aide of the land-Armie, by so much the more speedily and carefully he had ordered his forces in battaile. So soone then as daie began to breake the two Nauall Armies descried one another, and the battaile was on both sides demaunded with great clamours. The Venetian had, (like to a battaile on Land) closed his ships together, as if he had ment to haue giuen in vpon them, supposing, that by the continuall casting of Engines, hee should bee able to hinder the enemies approch who in numbers of men were stronger than he: which being perceiued by Philips Captaines, they presently commanded their Marriners by force of  oares to draw neare to them, that notwithstanding all danger they might come to handie strokes: This being speedily executed, and with equall courage hauingA bloudie fight. from both sides throwne iron hookes and cordes to grapple together, there was a fierce fight, whereof not any man that was there did remember to haue euer seene the like. Stones, Darts, Pots of artificiall fire lighted from both sides on the Souldiers that were on heapes together; they thrust burning torches in one anothers faces, they slew one another with swords, poniardes, axes; sundrie kindes of death being presented to their view. Then the ancient maner of Sea-fight betwixt the Venetians and Genoueses, did equally torment both parties. They did from the ships tops throw downe vpon the enemies, earthen pots full of oile and glew, which  breaking with the fall made the ships so slipperie as no man could stand vpom them; and there withall baskets full of vnslakte lime to dazell their sight. The Venetians from the beginning had the worst, as well by reason of the fresh supplies that the enemies had taken into their vessells the same night, as for that they were better armed than the Venetians. The experience hereof together with the remembrance of the former dayes losse, had daunted the courage of Treuisano and the rest, who perceiuing fortune to fauour the enemies, and remembring that he had there with him a great summe of monie belonging to the Common-wealth, he went forthThe Venetians N^uall Armie defeated. of his Admirall Gallie into a small vessell, and with the monie made hast away. Hee being gone, the residue of the Armie, trembling with feare began to flie. The  enemie still keeping neare them, did breake and put them to rout. Fiue Gallies only, and no more, of so great a number escaped, who speedily comming vpon the confines of the Palauicins, and being not wel entertained there went to the mouth of Po; all the rest were taken by the enemie. It is reported that two thousand men of both

parties were slaine vpon the place; sixe thousand Venetians were taken; among whome were thirteene Senatours; and that of the whole bootie that was taken nothing was so welcome to Philip, as the vessells: the biggest whereof hee caused to be drawne vp against the streame into the Riuer Thesin, and the tackling of the others that were disarmed to bee laid vp in the Castle of Cremona.
This losse, which vndoubtedly was very great, was followed by the reuolt of Palauicin,Carmagnolla giues ouer his charge for sorrow that hee had committed a fault. and Carmagnolla his dismission from his charge; who knowing that he had committed a fault would no more through his owne obstinacie meddle therein; so as  it was reported, that with despight and choller, he was brought to such despaire, as the Senate by their Ambassadours had much to doe to comfort him. As for their partes, this losse was so farre off from discouraging them, as on the contrarie being readie to repell all assaults of fortune, they resolued to assaile the Genoueses in their owne Hauens, because they had conducted Philips Nauall Armie which had vanquished them vpon the Riuer. They Armed eighteene Gallies with Souldiours, Armes, victualls, Marriners, and made Pietro Lauretano their Generall, who was a man well experienced in marine matters. He being come with his Fleet soonerA new Uenetian Nauall Armie against the Genoueses. than was expected, forth of the higher Sea into the lower, arriued at Liuorne: where being reenforced with fiue Florentine Gallies, hee did honourably receiue for associates in that warre Giacomo Adorini, and Antonio Fiesca, who at that time  were banished from Genoa. The Familie of the Adorini is one of the noblest among the people, out of the which the Genoueses did for a long time choose their Soueraigne Magistrate. And the Fiesci haue euer held a very honourable rancke among the Nobilitie. It was supposed at the beginning, that the presence of those great persons accompanied with a mightie Nauall Armie of a free people would haue prouoked the Genoueses to haue recouered their libertie, to haue expelled Philips Officers, and with great affection to haue imbraced their fellow-Citizens. But the Genoueses vpon report of the Venetians comming had armed foure and twentie Gallies, among which was one ship of burthen. Franciso Spinola was byThe Genoueses Nauall Armie, Philips appointment made their Generall, a man besides his ancient nobilitie verie famous for his valour.
The Venetian Fleet in the meane time was come vpon the Rappallitan Sea ten miles from Genoa: It laie there at an anckor, when Spinola hauing intelligence thereof did in such hast depart from the Citie, as some vessells that were of his number could not ouertake him all that day. The Genouese set forward full of courage and assurance, occasioned by the remembrance of the late victorie obtained by his Countriemen vpon the Po. Being by day-breake come to the Promontorie of RapallaA Naual battaile betwixt the Venetians and Genoueses. (called at this day the Cape of the mount) perceiuing the enemie before him he commanded his Souldiers to make all things fit, and to prepare for the fight. Then without any delay, making vse of a faire wind, hee hoised sailes, and hauing giuen the Signall to his Souldiers hee went against the Venetians intending to sinke the first Gallies he met with. Lauretano perceiued Spinolas designe, and as though he had not ment to fight, did speedily put forth of the Gulph, whome the Genoueses followed (as though he had fled) with great clamours. But the Venetian being come  to a place where by turning his face vpon the enemie he might haue a fore-wind, he commaunded his Marriners sodainely to turne the prowes vpon the enemie, who perceiuing him to returne to the fight, did brauely receiue him, and comming to handie strokes there began a bloudie battaile betwixt them. Great numbers of arrowes flying from both sides, in front and in flanke, did kill many of both fleets. And by this time three Venetian Gallies were neerely pressed by the Genoueses who had from the beginning of the fight encompassed them, which Spinola perceiuing, and supposing that with small aide he might easily sinke them, by strength of  oares and the force of the tide he made speedily towards them: where his Gallie striking a long Florentine ship vpon the broad side, had like to haue beene sunke. But whilest the Marriners were busied in clearing of her, the enemie fell on a sodaine

vpon her prow, so that in one Gallie the Genoueses fought in the poope, and the enemie in the prow. Both of them fought with such fiercenesse, as the working of the sea which was somewhat swelled, had like to haue swallowed them both. TheThe venetians defeate the Genouese nauall army. Venetians in the meane time had with yron hookes drawne eight Genoa-gallies vnto them, who brauely defending themselues, so soone as they perceiued theyr Generall to be in danger, did yeelde to Lauretano. The others being well beaten, escaped by flight, whome the Venetians being wearied with fight did not pursue.
The victorious fleet came neere to the Towne of Reca which did voluntarily yeeld to Fiesca: From thence it returned to Liuorne, where they found that eight hundred men had beene slaine in the battaile, and about foure thousand hurt. Lauretano, hauing first sent Spinola Generall of the enemies fleet with eight Captaines of the Gallies, and three of his Councellors taken in that encounter, first to Florence, and then to Venice, he did put to Sea, and comming to Ciuitauecchia, did at the entreatie of Pope Eugenius tarrie there, vntill he had taken the Castle which commandeth the Hauen. That within a short space being recouered, he departed thence, and hauing coasted round about Italie, he landed at Corfu.
Fiesca and Adorini, after Lauretanos departure, goeing from Pisa to FlorenceFiesca and Adorini are treacherously slaine. there to spend the time till Lauretanos returne, were treacherously assaulted by one Buffettio of Pauia, who valliantly defending themselues because they would not fall into their enemies hands, and being sore wounded fell downe dead in the place. These things hapned along the coast of the lower Sea. But in Lumbardie, Philip, after the victorie vpon the Po, hoping for some greater fortune came to Cremona, to congratulate with his Souldiours for that victorie. The Venetian Armie was then at Summa, a place neere the Po, whither Philips Captaines, determining to fight ifA f^erce sight by land. the enemies so pleased, did march in Battalion. The Venetians Generall did not refuse the fight; whereupon, both sides with great furie comming to ioyne, they fought with such eagrenesse, as there was no Souldiours either on foot or horse (which doth not vsually happen) but did that day fight. In the end, fortune inclining no more to the one side than the other, the retreate was on both sides sounded. The other exploits of the remainder of the yeare were of no great moment, except that of the fifteenth of October; when as by the valor of Caualcabouis (who held a verie honorable rancke in the Venetian Campe) Cremona had like to haue beene taken.
This man about mid-night had without any noise stollen with his troupesAn enterprise of the venetians vpon Cremona. neere to the Citie, where hiding themselues in the hedges and bushes which shaddowed the Dike he lay a great while, vntill that the Sunne being risen and the Sentinels retired, he perceiued the walles to be abandoned. For then his Souldiours hauing reared their Ladders did forthwith mount the walles, placing a strong Garrison to guard them. Carmagnolla with a braue troupe was come within three miles of the Towne, and had sent certaine foot companies before, who being opportunely  arriued, diuers of them ascended the walles by the same Ladders that were alreadie reared, and they marching into the Citie, surprised the Corps-de^guard and seized on the next Gate; by which the others entring did easily sustaine the attempts of the Inhabitants, who ranne to the alarme. If Carmagnolla had sent his supplies, Cremona had beene taken; but failing therein, and pretending that the enemie had laid an ambush to entrappe him, those which had entred the Towne, hauing lost many of their fellowes, retired to their ensignes. Some saie that the Venetians held that place which they had taken two whole daies together: And others (whome I rather beleeue) eight houres onely. This opportunitie of taking the Citie being  thus lost, the Venetian Generall (for winter was alreadie come, and then the great raine that had fallen in Autumne, had made both the weather and the waies verie bad) did lead his Armie to their wintering Stations.
Vpon the coast of Genoa, after Lauretanos departure the affaires had no great good successe. For after the defeate of the Genoueses vpon the Rapallitan Sea, Bernabo

Adorini with thee hundred horse, which the Marquis of Montferrat had giuenPicinino defeateth Bernabo Adorini. him, had caused all the coast of Genoa in a manner to reuolt, on the lands side. Picinino being sent to pacifie these tumults hauing defeated Adorini and all his Cauallerie at Nouara, there was no kind of crueltie which he did not execute vpon the poore Inhabitants. For besides great numbers that were slaine in two battailes, hee did by the Hang-man execute all those whome the hazard of warre had pardoned. Afterwards being glutted with bloud, he set to sale to them that offered most yong children, Matrons and reuerent Priests. Then he marched against the Prince of Montferrat, from whome in a short space he had taken thirtie Castles.
The Generall Lauretano being come to Corfu; had acquainted the Senate with  his need of supplies, together with the want his Gallies had of trimming, which were halfe broken in the last battaile. He could not speedily obtaine his desire in regard of another Nauie which the Senate had a while before sent to take the Isle ofThe venetian fleet before Ch^os. Chios belonging to the Genoueses. This fleet consisted of ten ships of burthen and foureteene Gallies, with diuers other small vessells vnder the conduct of Andrea Mocenigo; who arriuing in the Island with the fleet, did by Sea and Land besiege the principall Citie of that place, of the same name. And after that he had battered it on all sides with engins and warlike instruments by the space of two months, yet he could not take it, being manned with a verie strong Garison. In the meane time there was a great rumour spred that great number of vessels were arming at Genoa. Whereupon Mocenigo (hauing lost many men in that siege) perceiuing that hee must needs raise his Campe: and being out of hope to take the Towne ere succours arriued, did in a rage and despite spoile the residue of the Island by cutting downe the Vines and Fruit-trees. Hee departed thence before any supplies came from Genoa.
The enemie hauing intelligence that the Venetians had dislodged; certaine GalliesSupplies come from Genoa to Chios. and some fewe ships of burthen sailed thither to continue there the remainder of the winter. The Summer following Pietro Spinola went thither with a greater fleet of foureteene ships of burthen, seauen Gallies, and eight thousand fighting men.
The Venetians vpon the first newes of this fleet of the enemies, did likewise augment theirs which lay at Corfu to the number of thirtie three vessells, to resist the attempts of the Genoueses. Lauretano departed thence, and with wonderfull speed came whilest the enemie coasted Sicil, to Liuorne; from whence the Genoueses not long before departed. Spinola being come sooner to Corfu than he was lookt for did mightily affright those of the Island who had not as yet finished their fortifications. Therefore the Senate in all hast did by letters aduertize Lauretano of the danger wherein Corfu was, if speedie aide were not sent thither. He hauing notice thereof, sent sixe of his best Gallies thither, to which the Senate hauing ioynedSiluester Morosino is sent to the aid of Corfu. foure more, did make Siluestro Morosino their Generall, who was commaunded to  follow the Genoueses whithersoeuer they went, and to defend the Sea-coasts together with the Gulph.
Whilest these things were done at Sea, Picinino hauing wasted all the Marquisat of Montferrat, returned to the Cremonese, where in short space he recouerd Torricelles and Bordelan, whereat all men did greatly wonder, in regard that Carmagnolla with his troupes was not farre from thence. The Senate being mightily incensed thereat, did at last reuiue that which a long time before it had propounded Many had suspected him from the beginning, who did openly crie out in the Senate, that the suspition which they had conceiued of the man was so farre off from beeing smothered, as on the contrary it was much increased and daily augmented, acknowledging  nothing in him, but the name of Generall, which was not an enemy to the Venetians. Others were of opinion not to haue him called in question as culpable, vntill that the presumptions of his trecherie were approued. The Aduocates and Procurators Fiscall required to haue him committed to prison, and if after hee

had beene tortured hee should be found conuicted of treason, to haue him punished with death. This determination which was of long continuance, did manifest the Venetians faithfull and secret constancie in the managing of their publique councells and affaires. For the Senate which is composed of sundry orders of officers, being assembled for this purpose, the Senators came in the euening by torch light into the pallace, and departed thence the next morrow by day-breake, stil consulting vpon that busines. Carmagnola was at the same time in Venice, who comming in the morning to salute the Prince as hee came from the pallace, asked him with a smiling countenance, whether he should bid him good night or good morrow, in regard he had not gone to bed that night. The Prince answered smiling, that the  Senate being assembled about important matters, had in that nocturnall councell often mentioned him: Then on a sodaine he changed his discourse for feare lest he should suspect any thing. Eight moneths were spent from the time of this consultation till the day of his execution, during which time the matter was kept so secret, as Carmagnola neuer suspected any thing, although diuers of the councell were his familiarHow secret those things are kept which are determined in the Senate. friends, and some of them very poore, so as both the one and other might haue drawne from him what summe of money they had pleased, by discouering vnto him that which had beene concluded against him.
About the same time (for they had already begunne to treate of peace with Philip) being sent for by the Senators letters, hee came to Venice, where comming  forth of his Gondola, diuers gentlemen, according to the manner, went to receiue him, and after sundry reciprocall embracements, they conducted him to the pallace, although they were not ignorant of that which was concluded against him. There being imprisoned, and put to the torture, hee was conuicted by his owneCarmagnola being conuicted of treason is bebeaded. letters, which he could not deny, and by the testimony of his domesticke seruants: wherupon, on the 19. day after his imprisonment, his head was strucken off betwixt the two Columnes, and his goods were confiscate to the publique treasurie. The chiefe points of his accusation were, his refusall to relieue Treuisano, and the losse ofThe prince of Mantua Generall of the Venetian armie. Cremona by his disloyall delay. Before his execution, and at the same time that he was sent for to Venice, the prince of Mantua was sent to the army in Lombardy, and Georgio Cornari and Marco Dandulo were chosen Prouidatori.
Picinino in the meane time being puffed vp with the fortunate successe of his exploits, did very earnestly pursue his victories begunne in the time of Carmagnola. And if he had not bin grieuously wounded at the siege of Pontoglio, so that the phisitions held him for a dead man, or else likely to languish for a long time, he would in a short space haue recouered whatsoeuer the Venetians did then possesse on the Cremonese. The newes of this hurt, was cause that the Marquis of Montferrat,The Marquesse of Montferrat commeth for refuge to Venice being wholy driuen from his state by Picinino, was in some sort better entertained. The Marquis, so soone as he saw his forces to be broken, passed the Alpes, and went through the Treuisan into Germany, and from thence returning to Treuiso, he  made meanes to the Venetians as to his friends and associates, where hee was entertained by the Senatours with such magnificent bountie, as during his abode there, he was neuer desirous (as he afterward said) to returne home into his country, nor yet to recouer his state.
In the meane time Philips affaires declining in Lombardie had no better successe in Tuscanie. For Tollentino being dismissed by the Pope, and soon after entertained by the Florentines, did make fierce incursions vpon the territorie of the Sienois, and with great violence did waste all the sea coasts. Afterwards ioyning with Attendulo whom he knew to be giuen him for companion, hauing taken certaine townes fromAttendulo recouereth sundry places for the Florentines. the Sienois, he did in short space recouer all the townes which the enemie enioyed  vpon the Pisan territorie. At the last, ioyning battell with Philips forces neare to mount Tepulo, he put them to rout, and tooke Bernardino Vbaldino prisoner, with three thousand horse. Others say that he tooke but a thousand.
The same day of the fight neare to mount Tepulo, Sigismond, sonne to Charles

King of Boheme and Hungarie, who at the earnest entreatie of Philip was come into Italie with foure thousand horse, did enter Luca. He staied for certaine daies atSigismond in the behalfe of Philip commeth into Italie. Milan, where being crowned (according to the manner) with the Crowne of Iron, and resoluing to go to Rome, he did at Philips perswasion come to Luca, from thence to goe to Siena, for feare least vnder colour of hospitalitie hee should contract any league with the Florentines. Tollentino and Attendulo, by the Florentines command drew neere with their troupes to Luca, at which time it is reported that the Hungarians made a sallie; and that their cauallerie did so boldly giue in vpon them, as some of them came to Attendulos Tent, vnto whome one amongst them of a big stature (fighting with an iron mace) gaue him a great stroke vpon the head, but his  caske being of excellent temper, he did not long delay to recompence him: For hee did presently thrust his sword through his bodie: And that the Hungarians and Luquois being brauely repulsed, did speedily retire into the Citie, hauing in that sallie lost many valiant men.
They say moreouer that Sigismond, after this losse, went at last to Siena where forSigismond crowned Emperour at Rome. a time the Pope and he were at great controuersie; but by meanes of sundrie ambassades sent from either side, being made friends, he went to Rome where he was crowned Emperour.
There is nothing found worthie of memorie to haue beene done during that Sommer by Lauretano a-long the Coast of the lower Sea. The Sigestins only were  for a time besieged by Sea and Land; but the businesse had no good successe. For hauing lost certaine Marriners of those whome hee had sent with Abrahamo Fregosa to giue the assault on the Land-side, hee retired from thence without doing any thing. Afterwardes hee made incursions vpon those of Clauara, of whome hee got no great bootie. That being done, the Armie returned to Venice.
The Genoueses that Sommer had no better fortune, but somewhat worse. ForThe two Nauall Armies of the Venetians and Genoueses returne home. sayling along the Coast of Sicill, they lost three Gallies by a tempest that arose, and hauing afterwards done nothing of note, about the end of Autumne they brought backe the Fleet to Genoa. In Lombardie Sanchio Venieri subrogated at Dandulo* request in his sted, and Cornari, the Prouidators of the Armie, did exploit brauely  for the Common-wealth, hauing recouered from Philip, Bordellana, Ruminenga, Fontanelles, and Socinna.
Such happie successe had the Venetians affaires, when vpon the returne of the Prince of Mantua home to his owne house they beganne to talke of peace. The Senate at the Prince of Montferrats entreatie, sent Fantino Michaeli to Ferrara, only to know what conditions of peace the enemie would propound. The Florentines likewise sent Palla Strossi thither. Philip had alreadie sent Francisco Gallina thither for that purpose. But whilest they treated of peace at Ferrara, the Prouidators hauing assailed the inhabitants of the mountaines, reduced vnder their obedience first the Camonic valley, and then that of Tellina. Daniel Vitturi, successour to Venieri, ioyning with Cornari in the vale of Tellina, attempted to make a bridge ouer the Riuer Adda, to passe ouer into the enemies Countrie. But this designe came to nothing: the enemie valiantly opposing it. Cornari neuerthelesse did still with three thousand men keepe the vale Tellina (vulgarly called Valtellina) whither Picinino, being sent for by the chiefe of the Gibelline faction which fauoured Philip, ran with disbanded troupes, but with some losse he was rudely repulsed. The subtile enemie knowing that the Venetia^s in regard of this fortunate successe wold become more bold and couragious to attempt any thing, hauing first placed his Ambush, he returned the next day, and of set purpose began to skirmish, and drew the Prouidatour with all his troupes into the place of Ambuscado, where with a sodaine reuolt  of all the inhabitauts neare at hand, hee brake and defeated him with all his troupes. Three hundred horse making way through the middest of the enemies escaped into a verie thicke Forrest that was at their backes. The Prisoners, besidesThe Venetians are de^eated by Picinino. Cornari, were Thadeo De Aeste, Caesar Martinenga, Italus of Friull, Baptista

Capitio, and Antonio Martinasco, who were all famous Captaines.
Neere to the Po likewise there were great combustions. For whilest the sethings were done in the mountaines, Philips Captaines recouered Casal-maior and Brixelles. The losse of the vale of Te^lina being reported to the Senate, they presently resolued to appoint a new Generall of their Armie. The Prince of Mantua, though some were against it, was by the Senate chosen to commaund the Armie. Hee hauing accepted the charge, went forthwith to the Campe, and on a sodaine recouered the Camonick valley which was reuolted; Then by the aduise of Contareni, Cornari his successour, he conducted all his troupes (for winter was alreadie come) to winter in the neighbour vallies.
Peace being debated on all that winter, was at last at the spring-time concludedThe Articles of peace betwixt the Venetians and Philip. on these conditions: to wit That Philip should restore all the Townes and strong places which he had taken vpon the Bressan and Bergamese Territories during the treatie of peace: That he should surrender to the Prince of Montferrat his whole estate which he had taken from him during the warre: (although some say that he had alreadie done it for Sigismonds sake:) That he should giue all assurance to Lodouico Vermio and others who had borne Armes for the Venetians: That all prisoners of marke on both sides should bee set at libertie. That hee should likewise restore to the Florentines, all those Townes taken from them in the Pisan and Volaterran Territories, and should doe his best to cause the Sienois  likewise to surrender to the Florentines within a moneth, whatsoeuer they had taken from them; and if they refused so to doe hee should giue them no aide nor assistance; As concerning the Luquois, Thomas^ Fregosa, and Lodouico Plombino, (for this man during the warre, had likewise borne Armes against the Florentines) it was decreed that they shold restore whatsoeuer they had taken from the Florentines, and that the Lord of Plombin should no more bee vnder Philips protection: But as for Fregosa, it should be lawfull for him to follow what partie he pleased.
There was a long disputation about Pontremola, yet neuerthelesse Philip did at last obtaine that Towne, on condition to restore to the inhabitants of the Florentines partie, whatsoeuer hee had taken from them. The Senate perceiuing Cornari dyeth in Prison. that Cornari did not returne, was so troubled, as they would not establish the peace, vnlesse Philip (according to the contract) did send home their Senatour: but the Ambassadors sent to Philip for this purpose, affirming that he was dead a day before, they did in Philips name satisfie the Prince and Senate,



The end of the first Booke of the third Decad.




THE SECOND BOOKE  OF THE THIRD DECAD OF THE HISTORIE Of Venice.

The Contents of the second Booke of the third Decad.
FFRANCISCO SFORZA seizeth on the Marca d'Ancona, and on a part of the Dutchie of Spoleta. Pope EVGENIVS is driuen from Rome. The Armies of SFORZA and BRACCHIAN are readie to ioyne battaile one with an other at Vetrale. PICININO in a manner did renew the Warre on the Sabins. Hee doth wholly defeate the league-troupes neare to Imola. MARSILIO CARRARIO is beheaded at Venice. King ALPHONSO is defeated at Sea by the Genoueses neare to Gayetta. The Genoueses reuolt from PHILIP. Luca is streightly besieged by the Florentines. The Emperour CONSTANTINE PALEOLOGO, with diuers Christian Bishops commeth to Ferrara to conferre with the Pope concerning matters of Religion. All the Venetian troupes are in a manner put to rout neare to the Riuer Adice. The Florentines send COSMO DE MEDICIS to Venice. The great exploits of SFORZA and PICININO neare to the Alpes. SFORZA allieth himselfe with PHILIP and the Florentines. PICININO taketh diuers Townes from the Venetians on the Bressan and Bergamese Territories. The description of the Lake of La Garda. Lastly, the Venetians fight with good successe in the Camonick Valley.

BY this accord, for the space of foure yeares there was  neither certaine Warre nor Peace with Philip. At the beginning vnder-hand he molested Pope Eugenius, and afterwards by open Warre; which caused the Venetians who withstood it, to attempt by al meanes though it were contrarie to the accord, to maintaine their Countriman in his Pontificall dignitie. In the meane time sundrie warlike exploits were done here and there, and in sundrie places they fought with different successe. Moreouer, many treasons and suspitions were discouered on either side, not only abroad  but at home in the Citie, as shall be hereafter more at large mentioned. Wee will now briefly set downe that which happened farre from the Citie, for the better vnderstanding of the cause why the Venetian did recommence the Warre with Philip in Lombardie.
He had entangled (as hath beene said) Eugenius at the beginning of his PapacieThe cause of the renewing of the warre betwixt the venetians and Philip. in a domesticke warre, from whence toward the latter end of the warre of Lombardie great quarrels, and contentions arose as well without as within the Citie of Rome: which although sometimes they seemed to be raked vp, could neuer for all that be wholly extinguished. But this furie running from one place to another, did at last so farre spread it selfe abroad, that there was no Prouince, Citie, Towne, Village, nor any place belonging to the Church of Rome, which had not a feeling thereof. And not to fetch our Historie from farre; Lombardie being quieted, Francisco Sforza disdaining that Philip had made Picinino, his corriuall, Generall of his Armie, notwithstanding that the Visconte had promised him his future alliance, yet neuerthelesse this braue and couragious young man, being not able to containe himselfe, hauing after long suite obtained leaue to go his way, departed from Lombardie with two thousand horse, and a great number of foot, vnder colour to serue King Renatus, who laid claime to the Realme of Naples, against King Alphonso. And passing through Flaminia, he fiercely entered vpon the Marca of Ancona, where finding all things at quiet and no resistance, after that he had taken great bootie, and wasted all the countrey, he reduced vnder his owne commaund partly by force, andSforza scizeth on the Marca of Ancona. partly by a voluntarie reddition, all the Townes, Villages, and Castles, and other places of La Marca. This iourney was verie commodious to Sforzas troupes for their wintering.
Picinino, who greatly suspected Sforzas actions, did by Philips aduise depart forth of Lombardy at the spring time with a thousand choise horse to thwart Sforzas designs, and giuing out that he went to the wholesome bathes of the Sienois, he came into Tuscanie. Then by the meanes of some of his friends he dealt with Nicolao surnamedPicinino and Stella make an accord together. Stella, that they might ioyne their forces together, and afterwards make warre both on the Pope and Sforza. Stella at the same time possessed certaine townes neere to Rome; and as a neere neighbour did greatly molest Eugenius, presuming vpon the Colonessi. And by this meanes the Churches patrimonie being exposed as a prey betwixt them, was at one time wasted and torne in peeces by two enemie factions, the which although they began but to spring vp in Italie, did neuerthelesse  surpasse all those that had preceded them.
Sforza in the middest of these troubles left his wintering places, and first marched into the Dutchie of Spoletta, where with wonderfull successe he tooke Tuderta,Sforza his successe. Ameria, and diuers other places by a voluntarie reddition. And hauing crossed the Tyber, and filled the whole countrey with feare and terrour, he went and encamped on the Viterbian territorie. The inhabitants of Viterbo did relieue him with victuals, and did counsell him (as it is reported) to reconcile himself to the Pope, and to take his partie against the Bracchians his enemies. Picinino was at the same time encamped at Montefiascone. This caused Sforza to make hast, fearing least he should ioyne his forces with Bracchian, who lay not farre from Rome. For he had rather  fight with one alone, if he must needes come to battaile, than to deale with the whole Bracchian faction, which he had like to haue done. Eugenius in the meane time being enforced by the Bracchians who were backt by the Colonessi forsooke his Pallace,Pope Eugenius leaueth Rome, and commeth to Florence. and withdrew himselfe all trembling to the Castle Saint Angelo, and from thence taking boate vpon the Tyber, and passing through the enemies shot, he went to Ostia, and from thence to Florence.
The Pope being thus driuen from Rome, victorious Bracchian thought on nothing more than on meanes how to defeate Sforza. But Sforza hauing ioyned the troups of Micaeli Attendulo to his owne, did raise a verie great and almost inuincible Armie. Picinino and Stella came and encamped betwixt Viterbo and Rispampane* Sforza likewise marched thither; whereby it happened that in a short space all the Sforza and Attendulo ioyne together. forces of these two great factions were readie to fight with one another. Sforza determined to giue battaile if the enemie would tarrie for him, and had alreadie caused his foot forces to seize on the forrest of Vetrale, so as there was some likelihood

that the Bracchians would haue that day receiued a great ouerthrow, if VrbanoThe two ar^ies are readie to fight. de Dertonna sent from Philip, had not arriued, who running betwixt those two Armies did with teares in his eies entreate now the one and then the other, earnestly requesting them in Philips name not to commit so great an error: He besought them to remember that they had in former time borne armes together vnderThe remonstrances of Vrban of Dertonna to keepe them from battaile. one Prince: that vnder Philip, they begain their strength and greatnesse: That those Armies though they were not friends in name, neuerthelesse they were such in effect and by alliance: That the victorie of one of the parties could not but procure  all mischiefe to Philip: He entreated them then to respect him who held them both (as they well knew) so deere, and vnto whom they ought to ascribe whatsoeuer they had either of force or reputation in both their Armies.
The authoritie of so great a Prince, although he was absent, did mightily preuaile with both parties: and Armes being laid downe, they began to talke of agreement. At last it was concluded betwixt them that Picinino should returne into Lombardie,Accord betwixt Sforza and Picinino. and that it should be lawfull for Sforza with his troups to go whither he pleased: those townes neere to Rome excepted held by the Garrisons of Stella But Picinino (who as it seemed was not well pleased with those conditions of peace) marching within a while after against the Sabines, where he had renewed the warre, Sforza did likewise hast thither, who hauing crossed the Tyber, went to Ottricoli. Bracchians Armie lay at Maillana not farre from thence, where after certaine light skirmishes, and sundrie posts being come from Philip, Picinino craued that he might in safetie returne with his Armie into Lombardie; The which hee freely obtained of Sforza, who of a long time had beene euill disposed of his person.
Picinino had alreadie peaceably entered into Flaminia, when neere to Imola he met with a great Armie composed of the forces of Eugenius, the Venetians andThe Pope, Venetians and Florentines in league together. Florentines, who were leagued togither. These men had assembled great troupes together with great Lords and Captains, to force Bolognia which at the pursuite of the Caneduli had reuolted from the Pope; And they had alreadie recouered certaine Cities of the Bologneses, at such time as those of the Pope and the associates quitting  their enterprize came to stop Picininos passage. The charge of this resolution being committed to Tollentino, who with all the leagues troups went and encamped at Imola, Picinino likewise came and encamped vpon the same territorie. Tollentino was accompanied by Paulo Vrsino, Cato Mellito, Guido Antonio Fauentino, Thadeo d'Aeste, and diuers other noblemen.
It happened in the meane time that Mellito did surprize two hundred horse ofPicinino deseateth the Armie of the league. the enemies, whereupon the others being spurred forward by iealousie, and by a desire of bootie, did sodainly and inconsiderately craue the battaile, to the which comming disbanded, and in disorder, they were broken and put to rout, and Tollentino, with Aeste, Vrsino, and diuers others, who till then had gotten much reputation, were taken by the enemie. Three thousand horse, and a thousand foote were taken prisoners, and such a great modestie and courtesie in warre was then vsed, as the like had not beene seene, for it is reported that foure men only were slaine in that encounter, and about thirtie sleightly hurt. The victorious enemie marched towards  Bolognia: And it is likely that the Pope and his associates would haue done their best to haue diuerted him from that designe, for it is certaine that Philip who had sent for him from Tuscanie, did openly fauour the Bologneses.
Picinino after that he had for a time at the request of the Caneduli in vaine besiegedPicinino besiegeth CastellFranco. Castel-Franco, went into Lombardie, leauing his sonne Francisco with sixe hundred horse vpon the Bolognia territory. It was afterwards thought that he left that cauallerie with his sonne, because he should speedily aid Marsilio Carrario to seize on Padua.Carrario commeth forth of Germanie to take Padua. This Carrario was sonne to that Francisco Carrario, who thirtie yeares before  being with his two children imprisoned at Venice was by the commandement of the Senate strangled in the prison with them. Philip had sent for him from Hungarie, and for a time had kept him secret in Lombardie, in which space he did by

faire and great promises winne certaine Paduans, that they receiuing him into their Citie, should seize on the gates and the Castle, vnprouided at that time of Garrison, promising them without all doubt to relieue them, for he was presently ready to furnish them with whatsoeuer should be needfull for the preseruation of the citie with the inhabitants, as souldiers, money and victuals, and that himselfe (which was the chiefest) would speedily come thither with a great Armie: That those of VeronaPhilip soliciteth the Paduans against the venetians. and Vincenza did secretly resolue to reuolt. All which was afterwards knowne to be forged by him that he might with more ease induce the Paduans to doe what he would haue them.
Hauing by these promises, and sundrie others, drawne diuers debauched companions  of the Citie to commit this hainous treason, the fifteenth of March was the day appointed that Marsilio should enter into Padua, who was alreadie come in disguised habite as an Almaine marchant going to Rome: and comming vpon the Vincenzan territorie accompanied with a few, that he might the next day enter into Padua, he was discouered by some that had familiarly knowne him in his fathersCarrario being discouered was executed at venice. life time, who caused him and his companions to be apprehended, and carried to Venice, where with two of Philips friends sent to assist him, he was put to death, and twentie Paduans were conuicted of the conspiracie.
Picinino within a while after returning into Flaminia with a braue cauallerie Sforza (being sent for out of the Dutchie of Spoleta by Pope Eugenius, with whom  being in fauour, he had made a league) was sent to dash his attempts. The conditions of the league were, That Sforza by a decree of the Pope and Colledge of Cardinals should during his life enioy the Marquizat of the Marches of Ancona, and should be Gonfalloniero or Captaine Generall of the Church of Rome, and haue entertainment giuen him for three thousand horse and a thousand foote.
The Prouince had beene a long time molested, and Bracchians forces had sufficiently runne vp downe: and that peace was treated on, at what time the Florentines with wonderfull speed receiued newes, that the Genoueses had defeated kingKing Alphonso is taken and vanquished by the Genoueses. Alphonso at Sea neere to Gayetta, and taken him prisoner with two of his brethren, namely king Iohn, and the Infant Henrie, and Iohn Antonio Prince of Tarentum, with  three hundred other noble persons which were all brought to Genoa. This caused the Florentines to hasten the conclusion thereof, which was done vpon gentler conditions, than if Philip had vnderstood before of that victorie. By this peace the affaires of Lombardie, Tuscanie, and Flaminia seemed to be wholly pacified, if a new contention had not risen betwixt the Venetians and Philip about the confines of the Cremonese. To end which, besides Nicolao d' Aeste who was chosen Vmpire for both parties, Pope Eugenius did greatly labour, at what time speedie newes wereThe Genoueses reuolt from Philip. brought, that the Genoueses hauing slaine Oppicino Alciat their Gouernour, were reuolted from Philip.
The cause of this rebellion was reported to be, because that Philip in despite of the  Genoueses had commanded that Alphonso and all the prisoners should be brought to Milan, who hauing royally entertained them, not as enemies, but as his guestes, he gaue them leaue to depart. Francisco Spinola, who in the second warre of Lombardie was taken by Lauretano vpon the Rapallitan Sea, was Author of this rebellion.
It is reported that the Venetians during his imprisonment did oftentimes tell him and other Gentlemen taken with him, when they came to visite him, how wretchedThe venetians perswasions to the Genoueses. and ill beseeming a thing it was to see Genoa, a Citie verie famous for her high attempts by sea and land, borne in libertie and to command, and which at the same time possessed diuers Cities in Europe, to degenerate from the magnanimitie of her  Ancestors, and to be so deiected without any remembrance of her ancient splendor, basely to obay an insolent tyrant, like some other poore towne founded in seruitude. They willed them then to get them home, and to shake off that vnworthie yoake of tyrannie; that they should not doubt but that they would relieue them

with money, ships, and whatsoeuer should be necessarie to repulse such an iniurie: That they were readie with the Florentines their associates (as well in disgrace of Philip, as because it was iust and reasonable that those who are at libertie should defend that of other men) to maintaine and defend the wealth and safetie of the Genoueses, as much as if it were their owne.
These men being animated by these remonstrances came to Genoa: But Spinola returning from his imprisonment, did voluntarily banish himselfe to Gayetta, because hee knew that Philip suspected him: Some say that Philip sent him thither toSpinola Author of the Genoueses rebellion. guard that Towne, which hauing beene defended against Alphonsos attempts, especially by his diligence and valour, he thought in regard thereof that hee had done a  notable seruice to Philip, and giuen him sufficient proofe and assurance of his loyaltie: whereupon he returned to Genoa after the battaile of Gayetta, where being coldly entertained by the Officers and Magistrates of the Citie, hee did incite the people to recouer their libertie.
Now the rebellion of the Genoueses being knowne, Picinino was commaunded speedily to march against them, who hauing remained a while vpon the Genoan Territories, did nothing there worthy of memorie. The Florentines at the Venetians pursute did relieue the Genoueses with victualls and Souldiers, not caring greatly to obserue the accord, which Philip had first broken, in that he had, contrarieThe Florentines relieue the Genoueses. to the treatie of peace, made a league with Alphonso, and had a hand in the affaires of  the Realme of Naples. But in some Authors I finde no mention made of this accord, which lasted so short a time. The Pope had before recouered Bolognia with the consent of the Caneduli, where the motion of peace was first begun. Francisco Sforza being come from La Marcainto Flaminia by the Popes commandement, had caused Philip to condiscend to very reasonable conditions. For the presence of this yong man did in some sort qualifie his obstinacie. Truce was euery where granted by reason of the great hope the Pope had of peace, when the sodaine commotions of theA treatie of peace, almost concluded, is wholly broken off. Genoueses did breake all, who comming to Portouennere which lieth vpon the Genoueses Sea-coasts, surprized the Castle, and expulsed the Arragonian Garrison.
King Alphonso held three places vpon that Sea-coast which Philip had giuen him not long before. Picinino being called forth of the Parmesan where he lay, vpon report of this surprizall (for Philip did openly then take Alphonso's partie) went speedily to recouer that Fort. But finding it to bee impregnable, both by situation and art, turning his forces elsewhere, hee seized on the Towne of Sarsane; then taking Castel-nouo, and certaine other Townes vpon that Coast; and hauing contrarie toPicinino his exploits against the Florentines. all ancient and moderne accords crossed the Macra, he w^nt to Luca, where he enforced the Luquois to breake the peace which they had sworne to the Florentines; and entring into the Pisan Territorie, hee tooke diuers Townes from the Florentines* Some say that the Luquois sent for Picinino, who attempted to recouer the  Towne of Bargues from the Florentines, and during the siege of Bargues, Picinino was defeated by Ciarpelion and Pietro Brunora* sent by Sforza. He would vndoubtedly haue much entangled the Florentines affaires, if the hope to take Genoa by a commotion, had not made him to quit Tuscanie, and to goe speedily to the Genoueses Territorie.
Sforza in the meane time hauing crossed the Riuer A^o, did in short space recouerSforza recouereth that which Picinino had taken. vpon the Pisan Territorie* whatsoeuer the enemie had taken by force, and hauing brought his Campe nearer to Luca, and made certaine Rampiers neare to the Gates, he beganne streightly to shut vp the Inhabitants. Picinino, being disappointed of his enterprise, marched to the Parmesan to get victualls and supplies. But  whilest delaies were vsed therein; The Luquois, by reason that their corne was partly spoiled by the enemies whilest it was green, and partly reaped by them when it was ripe, fell into great want of victualls, as without some forraine reliefe, the Inhabitants would vndoubtedly haue beene forced to yeeld. Sforza went afterwards

to the streights of the Appenine hills to meete Picinino, who was comming speedily to succour the Luquois: who hauing attempted in vaine to force the passages, and being out of hope to effect it, retired.
The Venetians that were in the field did earnestly solicite, that the CountrieThe Venetians craue aide of Sforza. round about Luca might bee forraged, the sooner to enforce the Inhabitants to yeeld. Sforza with a part of his Armie went into Lombardie. For they had determined, after that they had crossed the Riuer Adda, and furnisht the opposite shore with a strong Garrison, to make incursions vpon the Milanois Territories: from whence Philip drew great sums of money. There was some likelihood that there by the power of that proud enemie would be so danted, as laying downe armes (which  he loued too well) he would be constrained to embrace peace vpon any conditions whatsoeuer.
The Florentines being therewith discontented, conceiued some enuie against the Venetians, as though they could not endure to haue Luca a very famous Citie in Tuscanie, to fall into the hands of their associates. But the Venetians were so far from being blamed therefore, as on the contrarie, waiting no longer for Sforza's comming, they sent in that iourney Francisco Gonzaga as Generall of their troupes. Pope Eugenius was then (as hath been said) at Bolognia, being come from Florence to make himselfe master of the Citie by meanes of some excellent fortification. Whereupon with great expences he caused trenches, and a rampier, in forme of a A Citadell made at Bolognia. Citadell, to be made at the Gate of La Galera. This fortification and the murther of Bentiuoglio (who being newly receiued into the Citie was slaine by the stroke of a Polax by Baltazar Offidane, Gouernour of the Citie, for that he perceiued the people to make too much of him) did in such sort estrange the Bologneses from the Pope, as the rebellion which soone after ensued, happened vpon none other occasion. But whilest Eugenius made his aboade at Bolognia, there arriued at Venice Iohn PeleologoThe Grecian Emperour, and the chiefe of the Greeke Empire come to Venice to conferre with the Pope concerning Religion. Emperour of Greece, Ioseph Patriarch of Constantinople, and Demetrius Prince of Morea, accompanied with the Agents of the Churches of Alexandria, Antioch, and Ierusalem, with the Ambassadours of Trapezond, and the Metropolitan Prelates of Iberia, and Misia, who from thence being come to Ferrara where the Pope was, conferred with him in an open assembly about the accord and vnion of the Christian faith. It chanced since some fiue hundred yeares, that from our faith which in effect and name is but one, two haue seemed to spring. For the Greekes did in sundrie points differ from the Latine Church, who although they had beene often reconciled, were by the fault and negligence of Emperours fallen more obstinately into the Heresies which they had abiured. This Conference, which was rather a Disputation, lasted diuers Moneths; and at the last the matter was concluded (as shall be hereafter mentioned) to the Popes content.
The Venetians about the same time being out of hope of Sforza's comming into Lombardie, had commanded (as hath beene said) the Prince of Mantua, Generall The Prince of Mantua Generall of the Uenetian Armie. of their Armie, to make a bridge vpon the Riuer Adda. Those that did then beare Armes for the Venetians were Mellato Tibertino, Brandolino, Pietro Nauarrini, Guido Antonio, Asturi Fauentio, Sigismondo Malateste, and Bartholomeo Coioni, Guido Rangoni, Guerriero Martiano, Antonio Martinenga, with diuers other great personages. Mellato who had first counsailed the building of a bridge, being commanded to lead the first battaillon ouer the water, departed about midnight with his Cauallerie, which were readie for that purpose, and crossed the Riuer at a Foord; and hauing at his leisure seised on the shore, the Footmen on the other side without any noise did passe the Riuer that night in boates prepared to that end.
Now the Venetians being busied on all sides in making the bridge, that they  might before day passe ouer all their Armie, a sodaine raine falling the same night from the Alpes (which the Armie had not notice of) did in such sort swell the Lake of Laris, and by the morning likewise the Riuer Adda, as by violence of the waters roring betwixt the two shores, the worke new begunne was not only broken, but

their small boats became vselesse through the swiftnesse of the current. Hereupon diuers tried by swimming to returne to their fellowes. For it was likely, that so soon as it was day, and that the Inhabitants should descry them, they should in regard of the small number of those that were past ouer, be forthwith all cut in peeces. But the first of those that in such manner with their Horses attempted the Riuer were drowned, where with the rest were so affrighted, as they durst not aduenture. When the Sunne was vp, the Inhabitants of the next Mountaines descrying the enemies on both sides the Riuer, at first stood amazed at the strangenesse of the matter, and aboade together in one place: but eftsoones perceiuing the small number of those that had passed the Riuer on their side, and what feare they were in, they instantly  repaired to Lodouico Sanseuerino, who wintered in the neighbour Villages, vnder whose conduct in troupes they ranne to the Riuer. Mellato for a time brauely sustainedTh^se which had crossed the riuer are assailed. their charge, whilest his Footmen escaped to the body of the Armie, of whom many were drowned by violence of the streame; but the most of them by swimming hauing gotten the other shore, the Horse-men soone after got ouer likewise:Mellato his valour. Mellato himselfe being the hindermost in the Rere was the last man that tooke the Riuer (therein imitating that Noble Roman Cocles) and so by swimming came safe to the Armie.
The businesse hauing thus vnfortunately succeeded, the Venetian Generall marched into the Countrie of Gyradade: where hauing surprised Lugniana, hee would  in short space haue made himselfe master of diuers other Townes of the Countrie,The Venetia^ take Lugniana. if Picinino vpon the report of what had passed had not speedily come thither with his forces. Departing therefore from Lugniana hee came to the Riuer Po where he spent a whole day in passing ouer his troupes; then three dayes after hee went and shewed himselfe to the enemie. The Venetians being aduertized a while before of the enemies passage, did possesse a boggie place, through which only hee could come at them, and there staied for a time. But afterwardes being enforced to change place either through feare, or for want of victualls, they retired into a place of safetie; at what time Picinino perceiuing them freely to quit that place, hauing speedily led his troups through the streights of the mountaines, and ouertaking Picinino defeateth the Venetians at Pontoglio. them neere to the Fort of Pontoglio, hee fiercely assailed them, and in a manner vtterly ouer-thr^w them; hauing cut off fiue waggons of their baggage from them.
Now this enterprise falling out contrarie to the Venetians proiect, who determining to assaile the enemie was himselfe beaten by him, it caused them more earnestly than before to entreate the Florentines to send Sforza vnto them who was then on the further side of the Po: But neither hee nor the Florentines resoluing to doe so, they alleadged sundrie excuses: At the last, entreating that he might at least wise come to Regio to enforce the enemie to retire for feare of loosing Parma, it came to passe as they wished. For Picinino, hauing ruined Calepia vpon the Bergamese, inuaded the vale of Trescoria, and taken the bridge three miles distant from the Citie, he went on couragiously and besieged the Castle of Bergamo.Sforza at the venetians entreaty commeth to Regio.
Sforza being importuned by the Venetians letters came to Regio. But hee was scarce gone forth of Tuscanie, when Picinino being aduertised of his departure, came likewise with speed to Parma. Sforza being come to that place, beganne greatly to distrust Pope Eugenius, notwithstanding that he had beene reconciled to him, and made Prince of La Marca. For tyrannie leadeth this mischiefe along with it, to make a man distrust his best friends. Whereupon, fearing least in his absence they should practise ought against his brethren whom hee had left to command in the Prouince* he sent Italus of Friull thither with certaine troupes of horse. Hee had  likewise left a great part of his forces to continue the fiege before Luca: so, as after Italus his departure hee had with him at Regio but the one halfe of his Armie. During his abode at Regio the Venetians on the one side entreating him to crosse the Po, and Sforza on the other crauing according to the conuention to haue his

troupes compleate, time ranne on without any memorable exploit. Picinino in the meane time being mindfull of the Luquois, assembled great numbers of labouring men and peasants, and departed from Parma towardes Luca to raise the siege.Sundry exploites betwixt Sforza and Picinino. Sforza's troupes likewise went speedily through the Countrie of Modena to the Alpes. Sundrie atchiuements were there performed on both sides, and diuers skirmishes of small importance: howbeit as often as Picinino (wo was strongest) came to fight Sforza did not only make head, but couragiously repulsed him.
During these passages in the Alpes, or within a while after Francisco Gonzaga hauing voluntarily giuen ouer his charge retired to Mantua. It is reported that he departedFrancisco Gonzaga giueth ouer his place of Generall. scarce well pleased from the Venetians. The cause of his discontent proceeded  as some say from the Venetians distrust of him, at such time as the troupes crossed the Riuer Adda, where they said he had not done his dutie: Yet neuerthelesse, he carried himselfe modestly, for hee left his cauallerie behind him in the Venetian Armie: but that which followed makes it apparent to what end hee did it. Gonzaga being gone, Frederico Contareni the Prouidator did for a time take the charge of the Armie. Afterwards, Paulo Troni was sent thither from the Citie, who by the Senates aduise accusing the negligence of some and the treacherie of others, gaue occasion vnto diuers that stood alreadie badly affected to them to craue leaue to depart, among whome were Antonio and Asturo Fauentij, and Borsia D'Aeste sonne to Nicholao. These with many more being departed, such as had serued vnder them, and were desirous to stay stil, did according to their merit receiue good pay.Sforza his dem^d in Senate.
Sforza in the meane time demanded of the Florentines and Venetians payment of that which was due vnto him. And sending to Venice for that purpose, his Agent being brought into the Senate, tolde them that he was expresly come to put the Prince and Senate in mind of Sforzaes good seruices done vnto them, and to receiue such summes as were due vnto him. It is reported that prince Foscari by the Senates appointment, answered, That the Venetians were euer accustomed bountifully to satisfie and pay those who in any sort had loyally serued the weale publique,The Prince and Senates answere to Sforzaes Agent. according to their promise; but as for Sforza, hee had beene so farre from employing himselfe for them, as hauing beene earnestly intreated to aide them, he  flatly denyed it. Whereunto the Agent replying, That they should doe well, eyther to pay Sforza his due, or else to discharge him both of his place and promise, that he might more freely prouide for his affaires; it is reported, that thereunto all men generally answered, That the Senate was well pleased, that he should take his leaue and be gone.
Sforza being nettled with this answere, resolued to reconcile himselfe to Philip,Sforzas demand to the Florentines. whereunto till then he could neuer be induced, for that he would not abandon the Pope and his confederates. Whereupon being inflamed with choller and disdaine, he went to the Florentines to demand that which they and the Venetians did owe him, or if they should refuse it, presently to discharge him as the Venetians had  done. The Florentines promised to pay him for them both; they onely intreatedThe Florentines answer to Sforza him to haue patience for a while, and to execute his charge whilest money might be raised on the people, whose means were much exhausted; and that they might send to Venice to the Prince and Senate. For they knew well enough, that Sforza being gone, they should altogether be out of hope of taking Luca, and were besides doubtfull lest some other new warre should assaile them from elsewhere.
According to this promise they sent Cosmo de Medicis to Venice, a man, besides his great wealth, very wise, and beloued of the people. Hee had in former times dwelt at Venice, at such time as through enuy he was driuen from Florence* where during his abode he had behaued himselfe with such modestie and curtesie towards  all men, as well in publique as priuate, that he was generally beloued and esteemed.Cosmo de Medicis is sent to Venice. Whereupon, being afterwards restored to his countrey (for the hearty affection which he conceiued to that City, where he had bin so kindly entertained) his countrymen called him, the Venetian.
Being come to Venice, and brought into the Senate, it is reported, that with great feruencie he spake vnto them in this manner: That his loue and affection towards the Venetians being remembred by his Countreymen, it fell out, that, not as a Tuscan, and borne in Florence, but as a Venetian, hee was sent to the Venetians, to acquaint them with the Florentines great want of money, and that they were no longer able to make anie leuies vpon the people for the entertainement of the Army: That his fellow-Citizens were not cause of the renewing of the warre against those of Luca, but Picinino onely, who without anie cause giuen by the Florentines, had furiously entred vpon the Pisan territorie, and had enforced the Luquois to practise nouelties against them, hauing by force drawne them to the warre: But that by the diuine goodnesse it was come to passe, that being enforced to take armes, they had brought their enemies the Luquois to that point, that despairing of peace from anie place else, than (according to the report) from the Venetians, they were readie whether they would or no to fall into the Florentines hands. Hee did afterwardes adde; That Sforza being commanded to passe the Appenine hilles, came to Regio, so that during his absence the Luquois had some small relaxation: That the Florentines had neuer hindered Sforza, who was so often intreated by them to crosse the Po: But that he, distrusting the Pope, feared by going too farre, lest some attempt would be made vpon La Marca, and that afterwards when he would he should not be able to free it from warre, resoluing by all meanes to defend it: That the Florentines had intelligence from very good place, that of a long time since hee had not beene payd his pension, hee determined to reconcile himselfe to Philip; And that without all doubt, if they did continue to depriue him of his due, he would speedily doe so: if they should lose him, it was certaine that they should not onely be out of all hope to take Luca, but their affaires likewise would be greatly endangered. And therefore he did intreate and adiure them by the sacred League sworne betwixt them, and by the particular loue which he bare to the Venetian name, more safely to aduise both for themselues and their associates in so great danger, and to pay Sforza, (though he had not deserued it) that which he said was due vnto him: But if they should still refuse to satisfie him, and that for want thereof, he should goe to the enemies side, he did let them know, that the Florentines resolued to follow him whither soeuer he went, not as their Captaine, (seeing they could no otherwise doe) but as their Lord and Gouernour.
This being said, Prince Foscari by the Senates aduise answered: That the Florentines did well in holding him for a Venetian, euer since that being driuen foorth of his Countrey, he retired himselfe to Venice: as also for that since the same time, the goodwill and affection of the Venetians, as well of publike as particular persons, had euer beene such towards him, as the Senate and people would willingly doe him all courtesie, and would as soone commit any charge of importance vnto him as to any one of the chiefest Senatours: By meanes whereof, the Venetians had for his sake granted diuers things to the Florentines, which otherwise they would haue refused. But concerning his complaint, that the Luquois expecting to haue peace by the Venetians meanes, had refused to yeelde themselues, he knew not how to answere it, because it was the first time that euer he heard that fable: That the Florentines should find that the Luquois had inuented that report, who did secretly write so to their Countrymen, diuers of the wealthiest among them being retired to Venice. And that he should not imagine that the same proceeded from any Senator: if it were otherwise, they should doe well to shew some presumptions or letters sent to the enemie; for they would take order, that those who should be conuicted of such a crime, should serue for an example to others, not to enterprise in time to come any such matter against the friends and allies of the weale publike; yet he would not denie but that the Ambassadors of the Luquois were in full Senate willed to depart, and if they could not enter the Citie by reason of the siege, they should certifie their fellow-citizens by letters, that if they would quit Philips party, the Venetians, who desired the wealth and aduauncement of the Luquois, would in such sort deale for them, as the Florentines their allies should leaue both their siege and the warre; whereunto the Luquois had neuer since made anie answere: They did likewise freely confesse, that they had giuen them such an hope, but he denyed that euer they had promised them anie aide or succour. As concerning Sforzaes demands, hee could not accuse the Venetians of auarice or ingratitude,

for not paying that which they had promised. For, he was to beleeue that their Ancestors had appointed stipends and rewards for souldiers to this end, that their pay-masters who payed them, might when need should be make vse of their seruice. But as for Sforza, whom the Florentines so much affected, he neuer fought for the Venetians, but rather when they stood in need of him, he had boldly denied them all fauour and aide. That he might at his pleasure depart, and that they whom he had euer so curiously assisted should take care to pay him his due: And whereas they threatned them to break the league, and to follow Sforza, he said that it was an easie matter for the Florentines to breake their faith when they pleased, but that he did hope, that ere long they might repent them of so disloyall and discourteous a resolution, and withall be punished both by God and men (who had hitherunto preserued them) according to their deserts, for breaking their league and alliance.
Cosmo with this answere taking his leaue of the Senate within a while after wentCosmo goeth to the Pope. to Ferrara to Pope Eugenius, and entreated him to send in his owne name to the Venetians, to trie whether they would quit their former resolution. The Florentines after Cosmo's departure sent Iuliano de Vantiati to Venice, who being entertained with lesse respect than Cosmo, and being a verie wise man, did soone acquaint his fellow-Citizens with the small account which the Venetians made of any thing that concerned the Florentines.
Picinino in the meane time (as hath beene said) being come to the Alpes, andPicinino cannot passe the Alpes. perceiuing that in regard the passages were held by the Sforzians, he could not passe, turned backe againe, and went into the Modenois territorie. Attempting againe afterwards to passe into Tuscanie, through the territorie of the Bologneses, marching by that of Aemilia, he went and encamped vpon the riuer Illice: And from thence (hauing sent Asturo Fauentio with two companies of men at Armes to forrage and wast the Florentines countrey) he followed him at the heeles with the bodie of the Armie, and by the way tooke the tower of Aureola. In that place he receiued certaine newes of the treatie newly made betwixt Philip and Sforza, and of the contents therof, which were (as some say) That the Florentines not mentioned in the accord (because without the Venetians consent they durst not doe it) should make truce for ten years with the Luquois, and in the meane time keepe whatsoeuer  they had taken from the^, sauing whatsoeuer lieth round about within six miles compasseThe articles of agreement betwixt Philip and Sforza. neere to Luca: That Sforza should be Iudge of the controuersies which should arise during that truce, and the reuenger of the wrongs done by either of the parties: Hereupon alliance was contracted betwixt Philip and Sforza on these conditions, That neither Picinino nor any else bearing Armes for Philip should molest the Florentines, in regard Sforza was then as before, in their pay: And that Philip should giue him his daughter Bianca to wife, whom he should send with her traine and dowrie vpon the Parmesan to the Castle Firmiano, a place appointed for the wedding.
The Venetians were displeased with this agreement: but Picinino much more;The Venetians and Picinino are disple^sed with this accord who after that he had mightily complained of Philips ingratitude towards him, and  runne vp and downe void of counsell through Flaminia with his Armie, he did at last assaile Ostasio Polentano Prince of Rauenna, who for a long time had beene vnder the Venetians protection, and neuer gaue ouer to pursue and torment him, till he had enforced him by his owne Citizens to follow Philips partie. Rauenna by this meanes being no more at the Venetians deuotion, he attempted a greater matter. For he did at the same time take Imola and Bolognia from the Pope.
At this stay stood the affaires of Tuscanie and Flaminia, whilest that Mellato (vnto whom after the Prince of Mantua his departure, the Venetians had giuen^ellato conducteth the Venetian Armie. charge of their Armie, and yet not honouring him with the title of Generall) after he had recouered the vallies and Castles which Picinino had taken vpon the Bergamese the precedent winter, entered furiously into the Cremonese, where he  made great spoyle. Picinino being moued at these newes, sent for Italus of Friull forth of Vmbria, and his sonne Francisco; and commanded his sonne to guard the Cities and strong Townes which he had lately taken in Flaminia, and the other

to follow him into Lombardie with his Cauallerie. Being gone forth of Flaminia, he went and incamped with his Armie neere to the Po, at that place where it neerely presseth the Citie of Cremona: Then hauing forthwith crossed the riuer, he went and besieged Casal-maior. The Venetian hauing notice of the enemies comming, and hauing committed the guard of other townes to the Inhabitants, put a strong Garrison into Casall-Maior, and Soncina, two strong townes on the Cremonese: They did besides enioyne Mellato to guard the shoare of the riuer Oglio with all his forces. He came and encamped at Bina twelue miles from CasalMaior, where after that he had fortified his Campe, hee did aide the besieged, and by manie Sentinelles and Corps-du-gard defended the other shoare of the  Riuer.
There was in the meane time a rumour spred, that Gonzaga, who lay still atGonzaga maketh alliance with Philip. Mantua, had secretly made a league with Philip. This being reported to the Senate, it was thought most expedient to appea^e him if it were possible by their Ambassadors. And to this purpose diuers of the chiefest Senators were sent vnto him, who had of a long time beene verie familiarly acquainted with him. They being come to Mantua, the better to winne this Princes heart; beganne highly to praise him, and to extoll his perpetuall loyaltie towards the Venetians, and their reciprocall affection towards him: And although that in their passing by the ArmieDiscourse betwixe Gonzaga and the venetians. they had found a great part of the number of the Cauallerie to bee wanting, which ought to haue beene compleate, they would neuerthelesse pay him for the whole, and whatsoeuer he could say was due to him, though it amounted to neuer so great a summe. Afterwards they entreated him to beare Armes againe for the Venetians, and did againe offer him the place of Generall, which hee had voluntarily left. But hee excusing himselfe sometimes by reason of his small experience in the art militarie, and afterwards saying, That hee was desirous to liue at rest, went about to stop his eares to the Venetians perswasions: WhereuponThe Mantuan^ excuse. the Ambassadors entreating him that since himselfe did determine to liue at peace, hee would at leastwise permit Lodouico Gonzaga his sonne to bee enrolled in their pay: he did not altogether refuse it, nor yet wholly granted it. At the last they came  so farre, as to entreate him if he would not beare Armes for the Venetians, yet to continue in their ancient friendship and alliance. The which he did not only promise to the Ambassadors, but likewise by letters to the Senate, saying, That no man should euer see him follow Philps partie, till newes were first brought him (which God forbid) that Venice were either taken or ruined by him. The conclusion of their whole discourse was, That as a louer of peace he detested warre: And that the Venetians ought not to meruaile if he did reenforce his owne troupes; for he did it, fearing least if he should leaue his frontires naked of Gar^ison, whilest the warre was so neere him, he should not be able when hee vvould, to keepe and defend them from being vvronged. The Ambassadours vvere heerevvith dismissed.
Picinino in the meane time had for nineteen daies together battered Casal-major*Picinino (...) peth before Casal-Maior. His Armie consisted of twentie thousand fighting men, and that of the Venetians of halfe as manie: But that long siege had put the Senate in hope, that Picinino's terrible attempts would be brought to nothing, before he could attaine to that which he had conceiued in his minde, in regard he had so long, contrarie to all mens expectation, continued before one place onely, and done no great good there: whereupon they hoped that his vehement heat would at last be cooled: And that Soncina in the Cremonese, and diuers other places elswhere, were as strong by situation and in munition as that which he then besieged; euery of which might not alone amuse  the enemie, but likewise altogether wearie and distaste him. These were the Senators ordinarie discourses.
But the fall of a Tower did in such sort daunt those of Casal, as they began openlyThose of Casall desire parley. to talke of yeelding. The enemie at the first would not accept their submission,

vsing delaies of purpose, till such time as he had made agreement with the Gotolengians and Gambarians concerning the treacherie, which they had secretly practized; who were determined to reuolt. Whereunto being solicited by Picinino's Agents they did with him vndertake an horrible villanie; which was to enclose Mellato, with his troupes, as he passed through the Bressan Territorie; to the end that the Venetians troupes being at one time assailed on the one side by the peasants, and on the other by the Souldiers, might be wholly defeated. This treacherous plot beingA complot to assaile the Venetian Armie on all sides. thus concluded, those of Casal were receiued on composition. Picinino had thought at his first arriuall vpon the bankes of Oglio to haue broken the Venetians as they were marching; and therefore he would not compound with the Casalins, till hee  were assured of the ambuscado laied for the Venetians, to the end, that whether they tarried still in one place, or went forward (as he rather thought) they might certainly be defeated.
Casall being thus yeelded, he drew about midnight towards the Riuer Oglio, andCasall yeeldeth to Picinino. hauing sent certaine light horse before to sound the foord; he learned by them that the Venetians kept the opposite shoare* yet neuerthelesse he held on his way, and encamped by daie-breake vpon the bankes of the Riuer Oglio, foure miles beneath Bina: And forthwith, so soone as his Armie drew neere to the place, he prepared all things necessarie for an assault.
Mellato suspecting that it was but a pollicie of the enemie, and that his designes  tended elsewhere than he made shew for, tooke diligent care of all things. The Mantuan Prince was likewise in person neere to the Towne of Macharia, which lieth in the mid-way betwixt Bina and the Po, with three thousand men, who exhorted the Venetian Generall to ioine his troupes with his, assuring him that both Armies beein ioined together, they might with more ease breake the enemies attempts. This he said, although he was not ignorant of the enemies designe. Mellato in the meane time was readie to send Cristofero and Giouanni Tollentino with their companies of men at Armes in Garrison to Verona. The Mantuan was not of this opinion: The Prouidatori that were present at this consultation, and reposing more trust in the Mantuan than he deserued, were likewise of his opinion. He on the contrarie, either by Treachery plotted against the Uenetians. chaunce, or else because he had some suspition, not of the whole matter, but of some part of the plot, did still persist in his owne opinion.
The enemie remoued his campe from place to place, whereupon the Venetian was greatly troubled to see him so often day and night to shift places; who after he had spent certaine daies in such like faigned shewes, all things being in readinesse, about midnight he sent the third part of his forces, without any rumor at all to passe ouer the Bridge, which was forth of the enemies view, to ioine with Gonzaga's troupes: And he in the meane time still shewed himselfe on the opposite shore the better to colour his enterprize, himselfe resoluing within a while after to passe ouer at the bridges of Macharia and Canet.
The Venetian Armie had like to haue been ouerthrowne, being enclosed by the enemies ambuscado, and by the treacherie of the inhabitants. But that good God vnto whom (as we haue often said) all Republicks are pleasing, and especially those whose beginning (like that of the Venetians) hath beene Religiously established, would not suffer it to be so. It happened verie fitly for this purpose that a certaine man whose name was Bareta Gotholengian sent by his compartners to the enemie toThe treacherie is discouered to Mellato. this end, was taken by the Venetian forragers, and brought to Mellato; who, after that he had promised to free him from all punishment, did discouer vnto him the danger wherein the Venetian Armie was. Mellato hearing it, made no longer delay,Mellato doth speedily dislodge. but sodainely discamping, did with all his troupes without any danger take the  way of Bressia. Picinino had alreadie about the fourth watch of the night sent his forces ouer at Macharia, where the troupes, sent to the Mantuans Campe, did goe and receiue them: In the meane time word was brought them that the Venetian hauing speedily dislodged was twelue miles onwards on his waie; That

the inhabitants of the Countrie, did not dare to m^ddle with them in regard they saw no man pursue them.
The Mantuans reuolt being vnderstood at Venice, they presently decreed to Arme a mightie nauall Armie against him of threescore and fiue Gallies and fiue Gallions, with a great number of other small vessells. Pietro Lauretano Generall of this ArmieA Uenetian n^uall Armie against the Mantuan. entring by the mouth of the Po, into the Mantuans Countrie, was expresly commanded to wast and spoile whatsoeuer he met with* Mellato in the meane time was come to Bagnols, where he had fortified his Campe with trenches and rampiers. He determined to send part of his forces to Bressia, which was not farre off, whereunto the inhabitants of the Citie opposing, and crauing to haue the guard of the Gates  giuen to themselues, hee thereby perceiued that the Venetians were safer abroad than in the Citie. Francisco Barbaro commanded in the Towne, a man verie discreet, and well acquainted with affaires of importance. He by good aduise hindered them from so doing, and shewed them the danger whereto the Cities State would be brought; if those of one partie alone committed to the guard of the Citie, the rest should be accounted enemies, and traitours, seeing they reposed no more trust in them: For then they would practize nouelties, and would in hate to the contrarie partie, openly hazard all things possible for them. The authoritie of the man didThe Martinenga's and Auogadres in Bressia are reconciled together. much preuaile with them, and according to his aduise, the Venetian Magistrates which were within the Citie, garded the Gates: Then he did reconcile the Martinenga's and the Auogadres together, the heads and chiefe of the two factions by a new alliance; wherein by meanes of Leonardo Martinenga, and to the great profit of the Common-wealth, he made Paris de Lodron who held certaine Castles in the Mountaines of Bressia, and Pietro Auogadre who were mortall enemies, good friends.
Picinino resolued to shut vp the Lake of Benac, and the riuer Mincia from Mellato'sPicinino his designe to (...) the Venetian Armie. Armie, to the end it might receiue no Venetian succour: and being in this manner starued (for it was certain that it could get victualls no where, but from the Towne) he assured himselfe of the entier ruine of the Venetian forces: Whereupon in this resolution he diuided his troupes into two parts. Gonzaga, and Lodouico Vermio, did fiercely fall vpon the Verona-territorie, and hauing seized on Valeza and the bridge  thereof by treacherie, sooner almost than their comming was knowne, they made themselues Masters in a verie short space of whatsoeuer lieth betwixt the riuers Adice and Mincia. The sodaine losse of Valeza was cause that Giouanni Malauolte who conducted three hundred horse from Bressia to Verona, falling by misaduenture neere to the bridge into the enemies hands, was wholly despoiled of his Cauallerie. He did besides reduce vnder his command all the inhabitants of the Lake of Benac: and the Mantuan Prince tooke Pescara, seated at the head of the Riuer Mincia, and Lonata vpon the Mountaines of Bressia, which had beene his.
The Lake of Benac, by some termed La Garda, (to speake somwhat of it) is theThe description of the lake of ^enac. pleasantest Lake of all Italie, and is more long than broad. It extendeth in length  from the West to the North some thirtie miles, filling itselfe with the riuers Sarca and Ponalis on the West and North side, and emptieth it selfe to the Southward into the Riuer Mincia. The water thereof is so pure and cleere, as one may see the bottome, except in the middest where it is verie deepe. But it is not so pleasant in calme and faire weather, as it is dangerous and terrible when it is tossed with tempests. It is the onely lake of all Italie which being stirred with the wind, hath her waues swelling like the billowes of the Sea. It feedeth excellent fish, of which the Carpes are best, which are in season from the end of haruest till the beginning of the spring, and are with great labour taken from forth the deepest places of the water. It is moreouer enuironed on all sides with goodly Oliue trees, entermingled heere  and there* with delicate gardens full of excellent fruite trees, as Citrons, Pomegranates, and Peaches, which the inhabitants of those places call Adams apples. That side thereof which lookes towards Verona on the right hand, hath besides Pescara, Langissa, Bardolin, and la Garda, whereof the Lake taketh the name, the towers of

Malsesina which some call Malaselse. And opposite to that vpon the Lake is the Town of Sermion, the Countrie of Catullus the sweet and eloquent Poet, with that great huge stone, a marke of antiquitie, which appeares aboue water. After Sermion commeth Riuoltella, called by some Riualtella, Manerbia, Feliciana, Portuesia, and lastly Sales, the chiefe of the Prouince. It hath besides on the North-side, verie high and steepe Mountaines as farre as Riua. This place with Penetra which appeares not farre from thence vpon a Rock, did in times past belong to the Territorie of Trent. The Borough of Nac is to be seen aboue the Fort of Penetra, whereby wee may coniecture that the Lake was in olde time called Penac, which wee by changing of a Letter call Benac. The Ancients called it Penac because it was so  neere to Nac.
Now all the places from the Lake on the hither side and beyond the Riuer Mincia being taken, the Mantuan marched with his forces to Vidizolles, where Picinino lay encamped. Blondus saith that he departed from that Campe when he went the first time to scoure the Verona-Territorie: But let it be how it will, it is certaine that Philips forces during the incursions vpon the Veronois, were encamped at that village seated vpon the Riuer Clesia, in the midway betwixt Bressia and the Lake of Benac: Against whom Mellato, being desirous to oppose his forces, went with his troupes to Gauarda. Barbaro sent him from Bressia a braue troup of yong foot-men; and from the Mountaines great multitudes of Souldiers came vnto him, so as in a  short space fiue and twentie thousand men were in the Venetians campe.Fiue and twentie thousand men in the Venetians Campe.
Mellato with his forces seized on all places along the Mountaines, from St. Euphemius euen to La Garda. The Riuer Clesia separated two goodly Armies readie to fight, by reason that it was too deep in that place, nor in any sort foordable. Mellato resolued to fight: But vnderstanding afterwards that Picinino's Armie was mightily encreased by Gonzaga's arriual, he abstained from battaile; As also because he distrusted certaine Captaines, who had a long time followed Gonzaga's campe; but the euent did afterwards manifest whether he had cause to distrust them. For diuers of them hauing an inckling thereof, and perceiuing that he took from them the meanes to do hurt, did with-draw them selues from his camp and went to that of the Prince  of Mantua. Mellato then fearing least some sodaine reuolt might draw the Venetians affaires into some danger, and being desirous to take all occasion from those who practised nouelties, hauing lodged the greatest part of his forces in Bressia, he sent the residue into Garrison to the Cities, and Townes neere adioining, which were vnder the Venetians obedience. And by this meanes Picinino had time and leisure to remoue his camp from place to place: whose only aime tending to keepe the Cities victualls from Mellato's troupes, he went with his Armie and besieged Sales: But those within it hauing brauely defended themselues, he approched with his Armie neere to Feliciana and Manerbia.
Thereupon, the Forlani, and those of Monteclaro embraced Philips partie. Within Those of Sales and other town neere adioining yeeld to Philip. a while after hauing receiued those of Sales, and all the other inhabitants vpon the Lake in Philips name, he marched to Bagnolls; from whence on a sodaine coasting about with his Armie, he first tooke Pontoglio, then Palacicla, and diuers other Townes without any difficultie. All this was done in the Champaine. But in the Camonick valley, they fought at the same time with better successe. For Antonio Bechari with two thousand horse did by the consent of the inhabitants make himselfe Master of the whole valley. Barbaro sent Giouanni la Conte, Bartholmeo Coioni, and Leonardo Martinenga against him with great troups of Mountaniers, who did greatly affect Martinenga, who entring on a sodaine into the vale, and hauing madeGreat spoile in the Camonick valley. a great slaughter of the enemies, did put all those of that rebellious  valley to the sword, spoiling and burning the whole Countrie..
The end of the second Booke of the third Decad.



THE THIRD BOOKE OF THE THIRD DECAD  OF THE HISTORIE Of Venice.

The Contents of the third Booke of the third Decad.
A False rumour being spred in Venice concerning the battaile wonne at Coloignes doth put the whole Citie in danger of a nocturn^ll sedition. MELLATO attempteth in vaine to goe from Bressia to Verona. NICHOLAO D'AESTE maketh sundrie attempts against the Venetians. The Venetians surrender the Polesin to AESTE. MELLATO with great trauell ouer the tops of the Mountaines arriueth at Verona. A great nauall Armie commeth by the Po, vpon the Mantuan Territorie. Bressia is streightly besieged. The Senate determineth to renew the alliance with SFORZA. MELLATO being made Generall of the Armie, resolueth to relieue Bressia with victualls. PARIS LODRON vanquisheth the enemies neere to the Riuer Sarca. The Venetians resolue to prepare a nauall Armie for the Lake of Benac. Gallies are carried by maine strength ouer high Mountaines into that Lake. SFORZA allieth himselfe with the Venetians and Florentines. PICININO and the Prince of Mantua hauing crossed the Riuer Adice take diuers Townes on the Verona and Vincenzan Territories from the Venetians. The Venetians fight against the enemies by Land along the Lake of Benac with good successe.

WHilst al these warlike actions were done in theThose of Chiau^ yeeld to Philip. Camonicke valley, those of Chiaua yeelded themselues to Philip. This new Rebellion was accompanied with a greater losse. For  Guerriero Martiano, and Michaeli Gritti (whom Mellato had sent with three hundred foot, and a hundred and fifty horse to lie in Garrison in that place) were defeated. Picinino went afterwardsPicinino besiegeth Rhoades, and encamped before Rhoades: whereat the Venetians being moued, marched thither with a companie of Mercinarie Souldiers, all young men, chosen among the inhabitants of the Mountaines of Valtropia and Seroliana* to raise the siege. These troupes setting forward at the beginning of the night, staied neere to Passirana and Paderna. Picinino being aduertized of their approach  did presently discamp, and returned to Coloignes three miles from Rhoades: The next day hauing placed part of his forces in ambush in the neighbour Mountaines to entrap the Venetian, he marched with the residue of the Armie against the enemie, as it were to assaile him with all his forces. And being come neere to

one another, Picinino did embattaile his Souldiers. Mellato did not refuse the fight; but sent some of his troupes disbanded to scoure the plaines, and the skirmish being begunne, he did by little and little send troupes of horse among his footmen against the enemie, and without any disorder, retired his wearied and hurt men, putting those that were able and fresh in their places; both sides dealing so cunningly, asThe two Armies ^kirmish. when Picinino's troupes came forth of the Ambuscado, Mellato's not being moued remained firme.
Now the fight hauing continued from day-breake till it was almost night, with greater losse on the enemies side than on the Venetians, both sides retired; Picinino to Coloignes, and the Venetian to Bressia. And although Fortune at that time no  more fauoured the one than the other, neuerthelesse to satisfie the inhabitants of Bressia, who were desirous to vnderstand the successe of that encounter, the Magistrates commanded that it should bee giuen forth how that Mellato had broken and put the enemie to rout. This rumour was not only spred in the Citie of Bressia, but being brought to Venice, the whole Citie receiued such content, as the people being ouerioyed, came running from all parts to the Market-place to reioyce with one another; by meanes whereof the Republike had like to haue fallen into a great and wonderfull danger.
There were in the Citie great numbers of Histrian and Dalmatian Marriners, and Rowers, who were sent for thither expresly to furnish the Nauall Armie which  was then making readie. Manie of these fellowes being heated with wine ranne to the Market-place, where hauing kindled fires in diuers places (in signe of ioy) seeking vp and downe for wood to feed it, they beganne to plucke downe the shoppes of the Bakers and those that sold herbes, which stood in the Market-place, to make fire-wood of them: and hauing beaten away the watch that went about to pacifie them, they gathered together about three thousand men, who vsing no respect toThe vnlook^ for danger whereinto the Commonwealth was like to haue fallen. the Magistrates, nor chiefe Senators that were come thither to appease the tumult, they beganne to breake open greater shops, and to fall into an open rebellion. But at the arriuall of Pietro Lauretano this sedition was soone quieted. It is reported that these Mechanick people at his verie name stood still and offred to doe whatsoeuer it  should please him to command them; and he hauing giuen them his word that none among them should bee punished for that which they had done that night, euerie man returned home to his owne dwelling place.
Lauretano by good deserts had in such sort gotten the loue and good will of all men, as not onely those meane people of the Citie, but those of greatest place and authoritie did reuerence and respect him. The which hee had easily obtained byLauretano respected and beloued of euery one. his curteous meekenesse and heartie loue towards the Republick, which doth as much cherish and embrace their vertues, as it doth abhorre and detest pride aud ambition. As also for that the Common-wealth had for the space of twenty yeares emploied him in euerie warre of importance. And that time also when the affaires  of Lombardie were in great danger, and that the Venetian forces were not thought comparable to those of Philip, the Senate did choose him, notwithstanding his great age, for to command the great Nauall Armie which it had prepared against the Mantuan.
It consisted of greater number of vessells than had beene at any time before seeneThe number of the vessels in the Venetians Nauall Armie. in any fleet vpon a Riuer. For there were more than an hundred and threescore vessells of all sorts, among whom were fiue Gallions higher and greater than were vsually made, and about threescore and tenne Gallies; the residue being smal vessells like to little Brigantines. But whilst these things were making readie in the Citie, Picinino foure dayes after the incounter comming backe from Coloignes to Rhoades Rhoades and diuers other townes, yeeld to Picinino. with all his troupes, enforced the inhabitants to yeeld. The like did those of Bomedes, Paternia and Passeria. The next day after, the Monticulans, Iulians, Omians, and Brienses yeelded vnto him vpon his word; and at the last, hauing by force seized on Isea, he did on the mountaines take Valtropia.
And within a while after he possessed al the plaines on the Bressan Territories, with a great part of the mountaines: the new Orges excepted, which hee determined to assaile vpon the first occasion. M^llato, Barbaro, and the other officers of Bressia suspectingPicinino his designe. that Picinino's designes did only tend to shut vp the passages from the Venetian troupes, to the end that all reliefe being kept from them, he might famish them in Bressia; did secretly resolue that Mellato, leauing certaine troupes for the guarde of the Citie, should goe his way with the residue of the Armie to Verona, or whither fortune should lead him.
Now Blondus saith, That about the third watch of the night hee came forth ofMellato co^meth forth of Bressia. Bressia with fiue thousand men both horse and foot. We doe not find in Montanus commentaries, that he had at that time so manie men: Pasius of Arimini sets downe but three thousand: And because both of them were present at this warre, I doe the rather follow them: But of what number soeuer this Armie was it marched speedily to the bankes of the Riuer Mincia: where after it had attempted beneath the Bridge of Valeza to passe at a foord, and could not by reason of the depth ofMellato is constrained to returne to Bressia. the waters, and for that the enemies were encamped on the opposite shoare, hauing lost some horse, it returned to Bressia with as great speed as it came thence. Picinino marched towards Bressia with an intent to surprize the Venetian, but hee was preuented by his enemies speed, whereupon he blamed his own negligence for loosing so faire an occasion; and without more delaie hee marched against the new Orges, who as hath beene said were still obedient to the Venetians. Mellato in the meane time attempted to passe by another way, which although it was as dangerous as the former had neuerthelesse better successe.
Whilest these things were done neere to Bressia, Nicholao D'Aeste did make greatThe Duke of ^errara complaines to the Pope. complaints to Pope Eugenius who remained still at Ferrara, how the Venetians did hate him; saying, That hee knew of a certaine that they had of late prepared a Nauall Armie: And because he was assured that they did suspect him to haue beene the cause that the Prince of Mantua had forsaken their alliance, hee had cause to doubt that the same great preparation was rather made against him than any other. The Pope sought to comfort him, and to feed him with better hope, assuring him  that he should not need to feare the Venetians, for their designes tended to another end; and if he did stand in feare of them, hee would take order, that all assurance should be giuen him on their partie.
But notwithstanding all this, Aeste leuied a braue Cauallerie, and sent for GuidoNicholao d'Aeste forti^ieth his owne Estate. Fauentio with fifteene hundred horse, and three hundred foote, and called home his sonne Borsia, who was in Sforza's Campe with six hundred horse; saying that he raised those forces only to defend his owne, and not to offend any man, Hee did afterwards cause a great quantitie of ground to bee cut which lieth betwixt the Po and Padua drawing a broad and deep trench from the Riuer to the marishes; commaunding the Ferrarois to take Armes, and that a speedie leuie of Souldiors should  be made at Regio and Modena.
The Pope beganne to exhort Nicholao D'Aeste who was with him, and the VenetiansNichol^o (...) f^eed from feare and suspition. by his Ambassadours, to laie downe Armes, and to embrace some honourable accord, but with this condition, That the Venetians should surrender to Nicholao D'Aeste Rouigo, with seuen Castles of the Pollessin Island, which seuen and thirtie yeares before had beene engaged to them. Aeste being ouercome by the Venetians bountie, did forthwith change his determination, and releeued the Venetian Armie with victualls and all other necessaries, which alreadie was going vp the Po; the like did the Ferrarois following their Princes example.
In the meane time those of Orges in the Bressan Countrie did valiantly resist  Philips forces. But thar which neither strength nor any attempt could execute, was done through the trecherie of Pietro of Luca. Hee being sent by Mellato withThe new Orger, are yeelded vnto Picinino by trecherie. three hundred horse for the guarde of the Towne, within a short space after it was besieged, did deliuer both the Towne and her inhabitans into the hands of Picinino.

But whilest the enemie was busied at this siege Mellato did attempt to passe towards Verona: Barbaro and the other Officers of the Citie being desirous to haue it so, to the end that the Citie being discharged of such a multitude might bee lesse afflicted with the dearth of victualls; as also because they thought it most profitable for the Common-wealth to haue some troupes neare to Verona that might make head against the enemie if he should chance to march thither.
Mellato hereupon tooke that way which seemed most commodious. And because that of the champain country had proued successesse, he resolued to iourny through the high Mountaines and Forrests that were in a manner in-accessible. Giacomo Antonio Marcello a verie valiant person, and Giouanni Villano Captaine of a companie  of light horse being sent before for discouerers, did diligently view the whole countrie. Now it being resolued that Thadeo d'Aeste with six hundred horse, and a thousand foote, should tarry behind for the guard of the Cittie, the residew were commanded, euerie man to be readie with their Armes and baggage to depart aboutMellato departs from Bressia and marcheth toward the mountain^s. the second watch of the night. The troupes being come forth of the Citie at midnight marched through the vale of Sabia to the mountaines. Diuers Bressans, some being persuaded, but most of them prouoked by their owne proper motion, did folow the Venetian Ensignes, among whome were Pietro Auogadre, Leonardo Martinenga, with Antonio his brother.
Those of the valley of Sabia being amazed to see these troupes, tooke armes, being Those of the valley of Sabia seek to stop their passage. assured of the hatred which the Bishop of Trent their Lord did beare towards the Venetians; but not daring to assaile them openly, they brake downe the strait passages through which the Venetians were to passe, and if they met with anie straglers, they did either villainously murther them, or else throw them downe headlong into those deepe vallies. The Venetian Captaine dissembled all these wrongs, and intreated the souldiers to make haste, and not to abandon their ensignes. And hauing with great labour and trauell passed the first dayes iourny, about the second watch of the night on the top of the mountaine of the last valley, hee made a stand, and commaunded the wearie souldiours to eate and take their rest: Then by daybreake the companies being dislodged, Paris Lodron, who was before reconciled to  the Venetians hauing driuen the enemies before him, came and shewed himselfe to them, and embraced Mellato, who hauing followed him with all his forces ouer those difficult mountaines of Italie, without anie feare of the Mountaniers did late in the euening encampe in an assured place.
Al men thought it fit in that place to rest the tired souldiers and horses who were wearied with a continuall march of two whole daies and nights. But Mellato would by no meanes suffer it, saying, that it behoued him to make haste before that the Bishop of Trent were aduertised of their passage through his territories; yet neuerthelesse for all his haste, the enemie had notice therof, who hauing the same night sent Polonians and Maclouians to cause the Mountaniers to take armes, the armie  had like to haue bin inclosed in those streights, and if it had not made great haste (as hath bin said) it would there haue receiued a great ouerthrow; howbeit it did not passe those streights, but in great feare.
There was in the middest of the mountaines a ragged vneasie way; on the one side whereof rockes and great ruines of stone-quarries did ouer-hang, and on the other appeared verie deepe vallies, full of torrents, and of so great a distance to look vpon, as whatsoeuer was throwne downe into the botome, of what bignesse soeuer it were, would yet appeare lesse by the one halfe. The cruell Inhabitants of those mountaines meeting with certaine straglers from the troups threw them headlong into those deep bottoms. The enemie had seized on those streights, and the Venetians The enemies intent. had alreadie perceiued his intent, which was, to rowle downe huge stones vpon the Armie, which would haue greatly endangered them.
Griefe and despaire had in a manner seized on all the troupes; not so much in regard of the difficultie of the waies, as for feare of their liues. Which the Generall

perceiuing, he commaunded Cauacalbon, Rangon, and Guido, three valiant yong men,The enemies are d^iuen (...) the mountains tops. to goe secretly with three hundred footmen, armed with swords and short pikes, to assaile the enemies in the crooked passages of the mountaines. These men hauing brauely executed his commandement, and driuen the enemies from the mountaine tops, the armie passed on in safetie.
These iij. hundred men, leauing their heauie armor in that place from whence they had driuen the enemies, did the remainder of that night march before the armie to discouer the waies and forrest. Then being come in the morning to Thegna, the Inhabitants of the place at the first did not stirre, but afterwards falling vpon the rereward, they tooke from the Venetians a great part of their baggage, and  two hundred horse. At the last, the armie being come downe into the plaine, neare to Arques, the scouts brought word that the Riuer Sarca which runneth from the mountaines of Trent into the lake of Garda was so risen by reason of the former nights raine, as it could in no sort be foorded.
The next day, the troupes which were to passe ouer, staying vpon the Riuer bankes, descried the armed enemies on the other shoare, who were brought thither by Lodouico Vermio whom Picinino had speedily sent by the Lake. Some say that Vermio and Francisco, sonne to Vinciguerra, went to beate backe the Venetians in the forest of Penetra. Whether it were there, or neare to the Riuer (for those places are not farre asunder) that the enemie shewed himselfe, it is certaine that the Venetians  being greatly amazed, perceiuing the enemies before, behind, and on euerie side, and the Lake on the right hand which did inclose them, sent Leonardo MartinengaThe Venetians great distresse. to Vinciguer Lord of Arques, whose neare kinseman he was, to vse meanes if it were possible by faire promises to draw him to their partie, but if hee should refuse the Venetians friendship, yet to intreate him to oblige the Venetians so farre to him, as not to enterprise aught against them, and to withdraw his forces forth of the forest of Penetra. Whereunto he was so farre off from giuing consent, as on the contrarie he did forthwith, against the law of Nations, take Martinenga prisoner, and bindingGreat (...) him hand and foote, sent him to Mantua where he died.
Martinenga's misfortune did much more amaze Mellato and the rest, and there  was likelihood that so many braue men would bee cast away, being enclosed by the lake, mountaines and riuers, or else that their Armes being laid downe, they would fall into the enemies hands; and if they did thinke to attempt to open their way by armes, yet they would in that enterprise loose their liues, had not Pilosus a Centurion, who being come into the forest of Penetra with a thousand men, or (according to some) with foure hundred to open the passage for his fellowes, opportunely arriued.The (...) of a Centurion. It is reported, That this man deceiued the enemie by a new stratageme. For the enemie possessing the forrest, through which they were of necessitie to passe, and the narrow passages, (where tenne resolute men would with ease haue kept backe thousands) being guarded day and night, he being not able to driue the enemie  thence by force, did it by cunning.
There was a wood neare to the toppe of the mountaine where the enemies lay, wherein he placed in the night time twentie tall souldiers, and commaunded them carefully to marke whether the number of those that kept on the toppe did waxe lesse, and if they should quit the place, speedily to seize on it: And himselfe, as though he had despaired of being able to passe, caused diuerse Torches, and other Lights to be fastned to Lances ends, and with them fained to goe further off. This did not onely make them belieue that the Venetians were gone away, but did confirme them in that opinion, in regard it did not auaile them to tarrie there. Whereupon  those of the guard leauing their place, those twentie souldiers that were left in the next wood did forthwith seize on the hill top, whither the Centurion came speedily with the residew of his troupes; who with great noyse shewing himselfe afterward to the enemie, did in such sort affright him, as he quitted the forrest and the riuers shoare to the Venetian. And in this manner so manie braue and valiant

men were preserued by the labour and industrie of one alone man.
By this meanes the troupes past along in safetie. Blondus affirmeth that the Venetians lost aboue eight hundred Horse in that iourney. M^ntanus, and Pasius of Arimini doe not mention so great losse. During these exploits in the Mountaines, Lauretano being come vp the Riuer Po against the streame, resolued to tarrie for the troupes that were appointed for the Nauie, at the separation of the Riuer, a little beneath the walls of Ficarolles. For, of eight thousand men, appointed for the Vessells, he had taken in but three thousand. But whilest the Venetians delaied time,The Mantuan fortifi^th the Po. and matters went slowly forward at Venice, the Prince of Mantua at Hostillia stopped the passage of the Po with a strong Rampier, and caused great piles to be driuen  into the Riuer: whereupon in euery foure rankes he builded Forts, encompassing them afterwards with three great yron chaines, and placed vpon each side of the Riuer great store of warlike engines, which were planted in such manner, as no vessell whatsoeuer could come neare, but in a moment was sure to receiue twentie or thirtie shot. He did likewise with the same care and diligence cause Sermena to bee fortified with a strong Garrison, which lieth on the Po in the mid-way betwixt Ficarolles and Hostillia.
All this was done vpon the Po. Philip after the taking of the new Orges, was very sorrie when he heard that Mellato with his troups had escaped through the mountaines. And although Haruest was ended, and that it was time to send his troupes Philip exhorteth his Captaines to besiege Bressia. to Winter, yet neuer the lesse he sent for Picinino, and the other Captaines of his Armie, entreating them to goe and besiege Bressia, telling them by word of mouth how desirous he was to haue that Citie besieged, and that the greatest pleasure they could doe him, was to haue that Towne taken by the valorous conduct of his Captaines, the which besides the great wealth would purchase him a very notable victorie. He willed them then to goe their way, saying, that he hoped that the same Citie, vnprouided of a Garrison, molested with famine and pestilence, would in a short space either by force or faire meanes be reduced vnder his obedience. After he had thus entreated and exhorted Picinino, and his other Captaines, hee dismissed them. Picinino within a while after, and without delay, went and besieged Bressia Philips Armie (...) Bressia with twentie thousand men, and brought great numbers of peeces of batterie neare to the walls, among which there were fifteene brought from Milan, of such bignesse, as the least of them did carrie a bullet of three hundred pound waight. The batterie was great and furious against the tower of Mombellane, and other places of the Citie, whereof ensued such ruine of the walls, as the Inhabitants being daunted at the very first, beganne openly to talke of yeelding.
In this siege the Officers of the Citie were for a time more carefull and diligent,The order which the besieged kept in the Citie. than were the enemies attempts fearefull or dangerous. And therefore it was concluded among them that Christofero Donato, the Cities Magistrate, should remaine in his owne house, and curteously entertaine as well those that should come to visit  him, as such as he should expresly send for, and should with great promises exhort them to continue loiall to the Venetians: That Barbaro in like manner who was Gouernour,The besieged are greatly assured. and Generall of the Garrison, being a valiant and braue Gentleman, should still be neare to the walls and gates of the Citie; should place the corps-de-guard; and by his speech giue hope to the Souldiers and Townesmen. The which he did so cunningly by feigned letters and messengers, and did so comfort them all, as there was none among them, notwithstanding death and wounds, but had rather to obay the Venetians than to fall into the enemies hands. In this resolution they fought thrise with the enemie with good successe, sometimes from the walls, and otherwhiles by sallies. And as much as the Bombards (for so we will terme these engines  of batterie) had beaten downe by day, so much did the Inhabitants repaire by night with strong Rampiers. In these reparations the Women did no lesse employ themNotable seruice (...) Women. selues than the Men, among whom diuided into Hundreds, and Tens, Braida Auogadre, as Valiant as Noble, did a notable seruice to the Common-wealth.
But two insupportable mischiefs daily encreasing, plague and famine, the MagistratesFamine and pestilence assl^ct the besieged. permitted those who were lesse fit for the Cities defence to goe whither they would. Hereupon diuers left the Citie, and especially those of the Gybelline faction. The Towne was so desolate, as of seauen thousand which were numbred at the beginning of the siege for the Cities defence, there remained but three thousand with the Magistrates and the Garrison. This small number did encrease the enemies boldnesse, so as they beganne more than before nearely to presse the besieged, by new mounts and mines, and by all other warlike engines. And on the other part the besieged did in all places very valiantly resist the enemies, not eschewing any paine or danger.
An assault being giuen to the Tower Mombellane, and the wall being beatenThe valiant defence of the besieged. downe flat to the ground, they did not only make head against the enemie who was almost entred into the Citie, but valiantly repulsed him from the ruines of the wall vvith great slaughter and losse; and not only once, but diuers and sundrie times. In the end, the Inhabitants loialtie was so great, together with the valour and industrie of Barbaro and the rest, as the Citie being well defended, Picinino grinding his teethPicinino is enforced to raise his Campe from before Bressia. and weeping in a manner for spite and rage, discamped in the middest of Winter, hauing lost in this siege aboue two thousand men, among whom were many Noble persons; and the besieged, accounting Townes-men and Souldiers, lost not halfe so many.
The siege being raised, the Souldiers were sent to Winter. During the siege of Bressia, Mellato accounted whatsoeuer he had till then done to be nothing, if hee did not open a way to releeue the besieged with men and victualls. And himselfe with his troupes pursuing his iourney did in the Valley of Lagarina (as Pasius of Arimini writeth) take Burgo and Coruario by force: Then comming to Penetra, he receiuedPenetra yeelded to the Venetians it at the hands of Francisco, Sonne to Vinciguer. It is reported that in this iourney Pilosus, who by his valour had in former time saued the Venetian troupes, was grieuously hurt, and that the next day after hee died of his wound. His disaster beingPilosus death. known at Venice, the Senate did speedily send the skilfull est Phisitians and Chirurgians  in the Citie to looke to him; but by the way they had newes of his death, whereupon they returned. The Venetian Captaine seized on Torbolles, a place depending on Penetra, where the greatest part of his Armie spent the remainder of the Winter.
The Senate in acknowledgement of these exploits and others of great consequence, performed by Mellato, did in his absence declare him Generall of their Armie, and did daily send him supplies of money, and victualls, and did by letters exhortMellato is made Generall of the Venetian Armie him to releeue Bressia with victualls, if it were possible. For the danger of that Citie, which by Barbaro's letters they vnderstood to bee furiously assailed by the enemie, did very much trouble them.
Pietro Auogadre was present; who comming to Verona with the Venetian  troupes, did afterwards goe to Venice, and being brought in before the Senate hee did vnfold the fortune and miserie of his Countrie, which was most loiall to the Venetians, humbly requesting them to remember it; telling them that he knew of a certaine, that his fellow Citizens were resolued to hazard all danger, and endure all extremitie, rather than to returne vnder Philips obedience. Yet hee greatly fearedAuogadre his r^monstrance to the Senate. that vnlesse they were speedily reliued with men and victualls, they could not long withstand so mightie an enemie: That they should do well to make hast, and if they had any remembrance of their owne State and reputation, and of the safetie of their subiects, to prouide for the conseruation of that Citie, whose singular loialtie they  had already made triall off; and to prepare money, men, and victualls: That he was assured that the Venetians power was so great, as there was no warre, how difficult and dangerous soeuer, but they were able to end it; and yet in this, they needed nothing so much as good will and speede: and that Time and the Venetians good fortune would performe the rest.



Prince Foscari his frequent exhortations likewise did herein much preuaile with the Senate: Wherein whilest all men were busied, newes was brought that Bressia was freed from the siege. This did not onely raise their daunted courages, but gaue then hope of better fortune, the which was strengthned with another more recent, namely, that for the better fortifying of their alliance, they might draw Sforza and the Florentines to their partie.
It is reported that Nicolaod' Aeste was the first that motioned it to the Senate, who being reconciled to the Venetians, came to Venice to visit the Prince and Senators,Nicolaod Aeste his motion made to the Senate. where comming into the Senate cloathed in white, after sundrie speeches of his great and loyall affection towards them, he began to talke of meanes how to  make warre, and acquainted the Senate with the goodly occasion which was then offered, not onely to withstand Philips forces, but to make warre vpon him: which was by their Ambassadors, and faire promises to draw Francisco Sforza to their side, who was reported to haue left Philips party in a discontented humour, for that he had lately refused to accomplish the marriage betwixt him and his daughter: That he doubted not but this couragious Lord, so renowned for his high attempts, would snatch the present victorie forth of the enemies hands, as well in regard of his ancient emulation and hatred to Ricinino, as for his discontent newly conceiued against Philip.
Aeste his speech did greatly moue the Senators who gaue him infinite thanks for  that in so dangerous a time he had, as became a faithfull friend, manifested to theThe Senates answere to Nicolao d' Aeste. Senate his sincere affection towards them, and likewise for that he had familiarly discoursed with them concerning the profit and seruice of the Commonwealth. But the Senate told him that they would more maturely determine on that which had beene propunded. Some say that the Venetians did at that time present him with Rouigo and the whole Polesin; but I thinke that it was rather an approbation of what was alreadie done, concerning the restitution of the Pollesin.
The Senate being heereby put in some hope, had intelligence by letters from Giacomo Antonio Marcello, which were read in the Senate, That Mellato after the taking of Penetra and Torbolles, tooke great care by what means he might relieue the  Bressans, and that he had certainly found an occasion to be offered, whereby to open the lake to the Venetians. This hauing more confirmed them, they did presently resolue on sundrie Ambassades. They sent Giouanni Pisani to La Marca to Sforza,The Senate send to Sforza and the Florentines. Francisco Barbadico to Florence. They called Pietro Auogadre into the Senate where they acquainted him with that which Mellato had done for the victualling of Bressia, whereupon they entreated him that he would speedily goe to the Armie, to the end that both of them together might consult on that which should be necessarie for the iourney. And that he should write to Paris Lodron to entreat him still to hold firme his alliance and amitie with the Venetians: and to the Bressans, that they should want no supplies nor victuals, onely they should doe their best to hold out  till necessarie preparations might be made.
These things were treated of at Venice. Mellato determining to relieue the (...) after that he had gotten together a great quantitie of whea^e at Penetra, resolued to passe ouer the mountaines, seeing he could goe by no other way* Therefore he didMellato maketh prouision ^a relieue Bressia. by expresse messengers request Paris Lodron to come and meet with the sorage^s as farre as he could. Then he commanded foure Captaines, that after they had distributed the wheate among the souldiers, they should first goe to Paris Lodron, and afterwards to Bressia. The enemies in the meane time had placed a strong Garrison in Arques and in Tengues, and had sent Ittalus of Friull (for they had notice which way they meant to passe) to lie in ambush with sixe hundred horse and foote, to surprize  the forragers by the way. Mellato's souldiers had alreadie passed through the forrest of Tengues, and supposing that they were out of all danger, they were come downe into a deepe bottome, when the enemie shewing himselfe on a sodaine* andThe enemies assaile the forragers. vnlooked for, did greatly affright them.
There was by chance neere to that place a little hill, whither the Venetian souldiers all trembling marched with their burthens, but being inuironed in that placeWhat Philip did in the vale of Sabia. on euerie side, and molested with sundrie assaults (for many were slaine there) the third day after both they and the corne fell into their enemies hands. Mellato was at the same time at Torbolles, where it was commonly reported that his designes only tended to relieue the afflicted Bressans. Philip on the other side, the better to take all hope of reliefe from them, did in the moneth of Ianuarie, march with sixe thousand men, together with the Prince of Mantua into the vale of Sabia, where hee remained till three forts which he there caused to be built, were made defensible and manned with strong Garrisons, the one at Nosa, the other at Cagri, and the third at Solecetta, the which three Forts being well guarded, there was no probabilitie at all that the Bressa^s could hope for any reliefe.
Some say that Picinino builded these Forts neere to the Citie at that time, when he raised his campe from before Bressia, namely the one at S. Euphemias Church, the other at the hill-top, and the third at the fountaines Monpianes. Ittalus his enterprize against the Venetians being executed, he was desirous to march against Paris Lodron: But his purpose being discouered, Barbaro the Gouernour of Bressia, who was verie circumspect, did speedily send sixe hundred footmen to the reliefe of Paris,The venetians send succours to Paris Lodron. the Venetians friend, vnder the conduct of Gyrardo Dandula. He being come neere to the Fort at Nosa, assailed a troupe of Philips horse, which hee easily defeated. Then diuers of the Guelpt faction of Valtropia being ioyned with him, he went to Paris with a thousand men. Ittalus on the other side hauing raised two thousand peasants as wel of the Mantuan ar of the Gibelline faction of the Bressans territories marched with them against the enemie, together with the footmen which hee had brought with him at the first, crossing the riuer Sarca at the bridge which is vpon the confines of Romagnia. He had alreadie begun to ascend the next mountaines, when Paris being conducted through couert vallies, went on a sodaine, and assailed those footmen whom he had left to guard the bridge, where in a moment he made a great slaughter of them. Many were slaine there, among whom were Ittalus his sonne, Pietro Capocia, with Polonus Colonell of the Bishop of Trents troupes. Ittalus cut off his iourney, and returned thither, being either called back by the great noise, or else sent for by an expresse messenger. Paris perceiuing him comming downe like a tempest driuen from the mountaines, did brauely receiue him, and at last wearied himThe ^igh betwixt Paris Lodron and Ittalus. Ittalus being vanquished retireth into the mountaines. with fighting. There was a cruell battaile for the space of three howers, but in the end Ittalus retired the next way into the mountaines. Paris being victorious, made himselfe master of the latter squadron: and the enemie had beene wholly ouerthrowne, had not the night with her darknesse beene fauourable to him. The next morrow by day-breake Paris marched freely against the enemie, and was alreadie come to the mountaines, at such time as the enemie (being prouoked by shame) returned likewise to the fight. This encounter continued with greater furie than the  former, wherein diuers of the enemies were slaine ere they betooke themselues toThe bickering being renewed, Ittalus is wholly ouerthrowne. flight, but at last they turned their backe, Paris being victorious pursued them thus disordered. A thousand of the enemies were taken, and as many slaine. Ittalus after this ouerthrow, with much difficultie through by-waies, and steepe mountaines retired himselfe to Riua d'Trente, whither likewise within a while after came three hundred horse, and a thousand foote which had escaped by diuers passages.
Pi^inino hauing intelligence of the route of his forces assembled those troups which wintered neere to Bressia, and speedily marched through the vale of Sabia, and ouer the tops of the mountains to Lodron which he streightly besieged, so as after the fifteenth  day of the siege he tooke it. Then he went to besiege Romana (for this towne did likewise belong to Paris) but finding it strong both by art and nature, and that there was a strong garrison in it, by reason that it was winter he raised his camp on the first day of Februarie, and sent his troupes to winter along the lake of Benac.
This in briefe was all that was done in the Alpes: whilest Lauretano hauing a long time in vaine expected forces from the Citie, went (because he would not haue it said that he had done nothing) and besieged the Citie of Sermone. Gonzaga hadLauretano besiegeth Sermone. before (as hath beene said) carefully fortified that place, which could not be taken by so smal a company. The Senators were suspected to haue refused to send supplies to Lauretano, rather through enuie than for want of meanes, which happened, for that they gaue eare to sundry detractors, who were desirous rather to see Lauretano's fame to decrease, than to be augmented by any notable exploit. But he falling sicke by the distemperature of the aire, and waxing daily more and more weake, was brought to Venice. Stephano Contareni was sent in his steed.
Lauretano, after he had a while beene sicke, died, and was buried (according asThe death of Pietro Lauretano, and his strange buriall. he had appointed it by his last will and testament) in S. Helens Church, his feete being bare, a stone vnder his head, and without any funerall pompe.
Mellato, after he had taken Penetra, did not cease by letters to aduertize the Senate, that a way lay open to chace the enemies from the lake of Benac, whereby they might afterward with ease relieue Bressia. This businesse was verie difficult, and euerie man demanded how it would be done, and how a nauall Armie might be sent into that lake, seeing there was no forrest neere, nor any riuer whereby to bring the vessels. This consultation had for certaine daies troubled the Senate, when a certaineA wonderfull proposition of a Candiot. Candiot called Sorbolla, who (as I suppose) had viewed the places, went to the  Senate, and told them that he wanted neither courage nor skill to transport the vessels from the Citie to the lake of Benac. This being thought by all men impossible for him to draw great vessels by maine strength aboue two hundred miles off, he was esteemed to be a foolish and idle fellow. But being afterwards knowne to be a man of an excellent wit, and still perseuering in his opinion that it might be done if they would furnish him with necessaries for the purpose, the Senate gaue him leaue, and committed the businesse to him, who gladly accepting it, did presently fall to worke; all things necessarie for such an enterprize being supplied.
The vessels were drawne vp against the streame of the riuer Adice to Verona, fromAfter what manner the vessels were brought to the lake of Benac. thence with great labour and trauaile vnto the burrough of Mora, by Oxen tied to  gether: And after that he had laid slipperie peeces of wood to make the Gallies slide on, (and yet Pasius maketh mention but of one Galley) it was drawne by strength of Men and Oxen through a plaine of sixe miles in length to S. Andrewes lake, the other lesser vessels were carried in carts. Blondus saith that they drewe two great Gallies, and three other smaller ones, and with them fiue and twentie small vessels: Some others who were present at that action, say that there were two great Gallies, one of which was scarce finished when they carried it from Venice.
Ouer this lake where the vessels were first brought, a rocke ietted forth much like to a wall, which to make smooth and euen great numbers of peasants were imploied, who hauing throwne part of that stonie substance into the lake, made the place so  leuell, as the vessels with all their tackling being by little and little drawne forth of the water, began to ascend the top of the next mountaine. For betwixt the two lakes there is a verie steepe mountaine, which on the bending thereof is cut through by a streame which runneth heere and there through rocks and precipices, through which the vessels were first to passe. These rocks being on euerie side made plaine, and the streame filled with boughes, and trunks of trees, with earth throwne vpon them, the way was made so euen, as rowlers being laid to slide the Gallies on, they were as easily drawne vp the hill as on the plaine. Those who haue viewed these places, do greatly wonder and can hardly beleeue it, that so great a masse could be drawne through such craggie rockes, by any labour or skill whatsoeuer, were it not  that certaine old steps and traces are there to be seene, which restifie to after-ages that such a thing was done.
It is reported that they had no lesse trouble in bringing them downe, than they had to get them vp: For all men feared least that the same huge weight being caried

ouer those precepices and steepie Rockes should fall and breake it selfe in peices. The third moneth after their departure from Venice, they came downe to Torbolles, where the Gallies being viewed they found that one of them had neede of trimming before they could launch it into the water. The residue of the Armie was embattailed at the mouth of the Riuer Sarca, which was enuironed with three rankes of piles in forme of a semi-circle for the better safetie thereof. The Venetians besides built a Fort at the going forth of the Riuer, to keepe the enemies who were reported to haue a Gallie and certaine Ganzarioles at Riuoltella, from comming to them. It was thought that the Senate did vndertake this enterprize rather to feede the Bressans with hope than for any opinion it had that those vessells The S^nate taketh care to preserue Verona and Vincenza. would doe any seruice, in regard that there were in all places vpon the lake such great numbers of enemies as it was not only impossible to enter Bressia in despite of them, but they were much incumbred with care, how they might the Summer following keepe Verona and Vincenza from them.
The Venetians affaires were (without all doubt) in great danger, when they being thus deiected, fortune turned towards them and smiled. Philip had the most part of the winter deluded Sforza with promise to giue him his daughter Bianca to wife. But excusing himselfe sometimes by reason of his daughters indisposition ofPhilip delaieth and deludeth Sforza. bodie, and afterwards by the sharpnesse of the winter, hee did of set purpose delaie the matter. But Sforza soon perceiued his double dealing, and finding by his delaies  that he went about to deceiue him; he sent Troillo a trustie friend of his own to Milan; to sound the meaning of Philip and his daughter; from whence he bringing him backWhat moued* Sforza to make a league with the Uenetians. nothing but words, in rage and choller he gaue eare to the Venetians more than he had done. Within a while after there arose a new suspition. For it is reported that at such time as Picinino exhorted his Souldiers to assault Bress^a; a certaine friend of his asked him, why he did expose himselfe and Souldiers to such a manifest danger; seeing he knew very well that the same Citie and all the rest should neuer be his, but were destined to Sforza as Philips future heire. His reply was. It is all one; let yourPioinino flouteth Sforza. selfe and the rest only doe your best to take Bressia; for that being done, wee will bee at La Marca before this delicate bridegroome shall haue any suspition thereof, and then, I will play the bride, and ye yong fellowes shall be the dancers. This being reported to Sforza, he did not only hearken to the Venetians, but did forthwith dispatch messengers to Florence, whither (as wee haue said, according to Pasius) Francisco Barbadico was sent.
Blondus saith that Giacomo Donato was sent into Tuscanie. The Florentines, although they were well assured, that Philip, so soon as the Venetians should be ouerthrowne, would presently come and assaile them, and notwithstanding that they were desirous by all meanes to withstand the Tyrants attempts, yet neuerthelesse, because they would hardly beleeue that Sforza would forsake his Father-in-law, they wereA league concluded betwixt the Venetians, Florentines, and Sforza. not easily drawne to enter into the ancient league with the Venetians. But being  prouoked by this alteration, and perswaded by Pope Eugenius who was then at Florence, they did on the eight day of Februarie conclude a league for fiue yeares with Sforza and the Venetians.
In this accord it was expressely mentioned that Sforza should be the allie of both those Common-weales, and General of al their forces, and that they shold giue him pay for three thousand horse and two thousand foot: That the Venetians and Florentines should leuie such forces as hee should thinke fit for the mannaging of thatNicholao D'Aeste is receiued into the league. warre. Nicholao D'Aeste was receiued into this alliance, with whome they concluded that hee should entertaine at the costs and charges of those two people Guido Fauentino with fifteene hundred horse and three hundred foot, and his sonne Borsia with a thousaud horse for that warre.
I find in Montanus commentaries that two hundred and twentie thousand Duccats were appointed for Sforza's pay, whereof the Florentines were to giue fourescore and ten thousand, and the Venetians the rest: And besides, that whatsoeuer

they should take from Philip should be giuen to Sforza, (Cremona excepted) which should returne to the Venetians, and if they should take none other Citie but Cremona, that then it should be allotted to the Generall. For the rest it was expresly concluded that Sforza should presently passe into Lombardie, to free the Venetians from the warre there. Pasius saith that the league was renewed in Tuscanie during the siege of Bressia; But if it were concluded on the eighth of Februarie (as Blondus saith) I cannot see how that could be done, seeing it is certaine that the siege before Bressia was raised before Ianuarie, although it was afterwardes much molested by the Garrisons round about it, and the waies stopt by the enemies, so as victualls nor reliefe could come to them. But whether it were then (as hee saith) or  afterwards; it is certaine that Philip was mightily daunted when hee vnderstood of his sonne-in-lawes reuolt.
But Picinino not thinking it fit to temporize, or to tarrie till the Venetians forces should be augmented by Sforza's comming, beganne to treate with the Prince of Mantua concerning the passage of the Adice. There was some likelihood that it would auaile Philips affaires, if the warre might bee transported into the Paduan or Vincenzan Territories. Now this seemed easie to be done, if entring into either of the Countries, they might on a sodaine surprize some towne or other. This was reported to be the Mantuans plot who thought it fit to send the warre farre from his owne Gates, and to draw those vessells which were vpon the Po neare to Sermona,The Mantuans plot to send the warre far from his owne Country (for by the Senates commandement Contareni had brought backe the nauall Armie to Chioggia) by the Riuer Tartar into the marshes and lakes of the enemies, and then from thence to transport them by land, (if it could not bee done by water) into the Riuer Adice. Mellato by his spies hauing intelligence heereof, did sundrie times aduertize the Prince and Senate, aduising them forthwith to send a nauall Armie into the Adice.
In the meane time they were not quiet neare to the lake of La Garda. Pietro Zeno Generall of the Nauall Armie which lay at Torbolles comming forth by little and little from the Hauen, did in such sort open the way to his Countriemen on that part of the lake which is betwixt Torbolles and the mouth of Ponal, as through  the crooked windings of the mountaines, by which the Riuer falleth headlong into the lake, hauing to that end cut the solid rocke in forme of staires; he caused someBressia is somewhat relieued. small quantitie of corne to bee carried vpon mens shoulders, first ouer the high mountaines, and from thence to Bressia.
But whilest these things past in Lombardie newes came from the Ambassadours that were in Tuscanie and La Marca that the league was renewed. It is reported that the letters and the accord being read and seene in the Senate, it was differently receiued, according to euerie mans humour. Diuers murmured, and often toldNewes of the league is brought to Venice, those that approued it, that they should beware that some deceit did not lurke in that new league: That they were not pleased with that which the Florentines had  set downe conditionally: That they thought it more necessarie to make peace with Philip (if they might obtaine it) although it were to their disaduantage, than to thrust the Republike into danger. These complaints had moued the Senate, and diuers seemed to be of opinion that the league newly made with Sforza and the Florentines was of no force, had not the Princes graue speech confirmed the Senatours who were in some sort estranged.





The Princes speech concerning the league.
FIrst he rebuked the Senatours for their inconstancie, who so inconsiderately had repented them of the accord so much desired: Hee told them that they needed not to feare and suspect the Florentines, who had freely embraced warre to pleasure the Venetians, but that they ought rather to account them mindfull and not ingratefull for the benefits which they had in former times receiued, as men that did remember ^ow by the Venetians aide they had in time past beaten Philip their (...) from their Gates: That this then was an acknowledgement of that which was past, and no deceit: That they should beware least they rashly lost so goodly an occasion offered for the preseruation of their state which came rather by diuine miracle than by any humane deuice or counsell. That he verie plainely perceiued, that by that meanes onely specified in the accord, and not by any other, the State of the Republick might be preserued and maintained in so wretched and dangerous a season: He willed them then to rest satisfied, and if they were desirous of the publike good to embrace that alliance, which did not only bring them speedie reliefe but likewise opened them away to obtaine a gallant victorie.




The Princes speech was of such force, as hauing foorthwith chaunged their mindes, they did generally approue whatsoeuer their Commissioners had negotiated: and decreed besides, that the Ratification sealed with the golden Seale should be sent to Florence and to La Marca. The Senate moreouer leuied great summes of money, the most part whereof was by the accord appoynted for Sforza. TheyThe Venetians doe ratifie the league. did afterwards raise forces ouer all Italie. Cristofero and Giouanni Tollentino were sent for: These men came by sea to Chioggia; for by land they could not come by reason of the rebellion of Rauenna.
Whilest the Venetians made these preparations, Picinino with his troupes was come to the riuer Adice, where attempting to crosse it he was affronted with Andrea Donato on the opposite shoare; who being newly returned to Florence, was sent to command in Padua, with Ieronimo Contareni in his company. Gonzaga in the  meane time caused eight Gallies which hee had made at Hostilia, to passe at the mouth of the riuer Tartar, hauing first for that purpose with great labour opened the Channell, and brought them into the Fennes which lie betwixt Legnaga and the cawsey of the Po; and it behoued him not onely to cleanse the Channell, butThe Mantuan^ pollicie for the passage of his Gallies. after all the mudde was taken out which lay betwixt the Riuer and the Fennes to make a great deepe dike, and through that to make a passage into the Riuer Adice. This riuer, the cawseis being broken downe, did emptie a great part of it selfe into those Fennes at the Borough of Castagnaria, fortie stadij beneath Legnaga, and at the place called Malapietra. But the Venetians had before stopt vp those Passages with strong Rampires, and placed great numbers of small light vesselles to defend  them, vnder the command of Marino Contareni, and Lodouico de Molino.
Now the enemies first attempts were at Castagnaria, where vsing meanes to breake downe those obstacles, Molino and Contareni did valiantly withstand them. The enemie hauing begunne the skirmish, and perceiuing that hee preuailed nothing, and that the shoare on the other side was kept by those whom Donato had brought thither in hast, hauing about sunne-set made a fruitlesse brauado hee departed thence about midnight, and sailed to Malopietra; where being arriued, and the bankes beaten downe, he did without any difficultie put eight Gallies into the Riuer Adice, and landed a thousand men vpon the shore, the most part of whom were Archers. Donato contemning so small a number of enemies, as though hee were assured  easily to vanquish them, to the end he might fight with them at his own pleasure,A Nauall battaile betwixt the Venetia^s and the Mantuan. resolued to tarrie a little beneath the bridge of Balde, where whilest he embartailed his forces, Tibertino Brandolino did fiercely march against the enemies which were past. The Captaines likewise of the Nauall Armie hauing followed the enemie,

beganne a cruell fight in the middest of the Riuer, where Contareni fighting valiantly was slaine, being stricken through the bodie with a dart, and Brandolino was sore wounded in the right legge. But at last the enemies being out of hope to passe that way, they retired to Sanguaneta, and afterwards sailed towards the Riuer Busset, where with six thousand Peasants they did vnder-take to cut a trench into the Adice, the which being filled by night by the Venetian Souldiers who came thither in small boates, made them to change their determination, and to vndertake a matter almost like to the former: which was to clense and emptie the ancient channell of Panegia. And to the end the Venetians should not hinder this worke, as they had lately done the other, they went and incamped at Angleria, an house  of pleasure in the Countrie two miles from Legnaga, vpon the high way towardes Verona.
This trench being drawne from Panegia to the Riuer Adice, the enemie beganneThe Mantuan Gallies passe into the riuer Adice. to bring his Gallies into the Riuer. But whilest his fleet lay at Malopietra, the Venetians did extraordinarily elect (without casting lots) Dario Maripietro to command their Nauall Armie. Mellato, who lay at Penetra, being sent for, hasted thither with eight thousand Horse, and sixe thousand foote: howbeit some Authors mention not halfe so many. Maripietro was come to Legnaga with fiue and thirtie Gallies taken from that Nauall Armie, which (as we haue said) by the Senates command had been brought backe forth of the Riuer Po to Chioggia. Picinino had planted fortie peeces  of Ordnance vpon the bankes of Adice, to terrifie Molino's nauall Armie, and to keep it from hindring the arriuall of the Vessells, which they were drawing from Panegia and the old Channell into the Riuer. This being considered by Mellato, after that he had embattailed his troupes vpon the other shore, he aduertized Maripietro and Molino forthwith to saile vp the Riuer* and that the enemie, if the nauall Armie did not withstand it, would passe on in despite of him. Molino beleeued it, and with his owne vessells and fiue Gallies of Dario's which followed him, hee passed on beyond the enemies Armie, and the mouth of Panegia. Some say that one of his GalliesThe Venetians Nauall Armie doth retire. being pierced by the enemies Ordnance was taken: which being perceiued by Dario, he was so amazed as he could by no meanes be perswaded to follow Molino. Picinino perceiuing the Venetians amazement, did forthwith cause the Ordnance to be drawn from thence where it was planted at the enemies comming. In regard whereof Dario and Molino not knowing what to resolue on, nor yet daring, being so diuided, to assaile the enemie, each of them sought by all meanes how to auoide the frequent shot of the Ordnance: by meanes whereof the enemie at his owne leisure put his Vessells into the Adice: whereat they that stood vpon the opposite shore being affrighted, beganne to flie disorderly not abiding the enemie.
Diuers hold that Mellato was Author of that base flight, but the greater part lay the fault on Donato. Two things there are which induce mee to beleeue that it was rather the Venetians fault; first, the authoritie of Pasius of Armini, who saith that  Donato had sent word to Mellato to forsake the Riuer bankes, and to retire with his troupes into a place of more safetie: and the second is, because I finde that hee was within a while after cited at the request of the Aduocates Fiscall for that matter. Those which affirme that Mellato by Donato's commandement did quit the shore,Sundrie opinions concerning the Venetians retreate. stick not likewise to say that Christofero Tollentino was sent to Verona with a companie of men at armes; Tiberto Brandolino to Montagnane with his Cauallerie; Giouanni, brother to Christofero to Vincenza; and that Mellato with the residue of his armie went and encamped at the Baths of Abana.
The enemie hauing entred the Adice, and comming to besiege Legnaga, he firstPicinino besiegeth Legnaga. of all seized vpon the bridges, where Carolo Gonzaga a couragious yong man did valiantly  behaue himselfe. Legnaga is diuided (as it were) into two Townes, which are ioyned together by a bridge vpon the Riuer. That part towards the East is called the Hauen; which being assaulted by the enemie was easily wonne; and at the other he found better resistance. This place was kept by the Chioggians that lay

there in Garrison, whom the Venetians had found to be confident and loiall. Frederico Contareni, and Pietro Quirini, were there likewise with other Gentlemen. Some there are that in sted of Pietro Quirini set downe Andrea Mocenigo, who were all sent thither for the guard of that place. But, as it often happeneth, when fortune once beginneth to decline, shee cannot be staied, neither by counsell nor any reason what soeuer: euen so it came to passe that by the sodaine yeelding of the Townes-men, these men, together with the Chioggians, fell into the enemies power.Legnaga is take,
Legnaga being taken, Picinino and Gonzaga began to scoure the Vincenzan and Paduan Territories. They found a while some resistance at Balde; but that once taken, with wonderfull good successe they became masters of Longina, Brendole, Montechia, Arciniane, Montorsse, Valdersine, and Dagne. Diuers places besides on the Mountaines yeelded vnto them. But all these Townes in a manner were wholly of the Territorie of Vincenza. Vpon that of Verona, Soaue with all her dependances was taken by the enemies. Picinino being proud of this successe brought his Campe neare to Verona, whither Gonzaga likewise came with all his forces.
At this stay stood the Venetians affaires along the Riuer Adice, when as they fought with better successe vpon the lake of La Garda. Italus of Friull laie at Sales with a great cauallerie, and diuers foot companies, being followed by many of the Gybelline faction of the Bressan Countrie. With these forces he sought by all meanes  how to driue the Venetian from Maderna, Penetra and Torbolles. Pietro AuogadreA fierce fight neare to the lak^ of Benac. with a great troupe of Guelphes was there readie to withstand their attempts. They fought cruelly at Maderna; for this Towne likewise did at the same time belong to the Venetians. Zeno, who commanded the Venetian Nauall Armie, did approch so neare to the place of battaile, as his Souldiers being landed had their share in it. The fight lasted from three a cloc^e in the morning till late in the euening. At which time Italus by little and little retiring his forces from the battaile, and conducting them through a very narrow way hanging ouer the lake, Zeno with his vessells pursued them with arrow-shot and did greatly infest them by reason of the commodiousnesse of the place. In the meane time Auogadre did streightly presse  the Rereward, and with great slaughter staiedit. The enemies being then gauled behind and in flanke with great multitudes of arrowes, did in disorder betake themselues to flight. The victorious Venetian gaue them chace, slew many of them, and took diuers prisoners: great numbers of peasants were there slain. AboueThe Venetiant victorie neere to the lake. foure hundred prisoners were taken; among whome were fiftie Gentlemen. Italus by fauour of the night escaped to Sales.



The end of the third Booke of the third Decad.




THE FOVRTH BOOKE  OF THE THIRD DECAD OF THE HISTORIE Of Venice.

The Contents of the fourth Booke of the third Decad.
SFORZA through the Countries of Flaminia and Ferrara leadeth great troupes first to Chioggia, and then to the Paduan Territorie. MELLATO ioyneth with SFORZA. The Venetian passing ouer the mountaines causeth the enemie to raise his Campe from before Verona. PICININO with all his forces retireth beyond the Riuer Adice. The Venetians Nauall Armie is put to rout vpon the l^ke of La Garda. PICININO is defeated by night in the vale of Lodron. SFOR^ (...) in battaite vanquisheth the enemies at Thienna. PICININO and the Mantuan surprise Verona, but not the Castle. SFORZA recouere^h  Verona thirtie dayes after it was lost. Bressia in the middest of winter is victualled by the way of the mountaines. MELLATO faileth sicke. PICININO sendeth forces into Tuscanie against the Florentines.

SForza was in the meane time come from La Marca with diuers braue men in his companie, among whom were Alessandro, Giouanni, and Leon his brethren, Roberto Sanseuerino, Dominico Malateste, Lodouico Duke of Hadria, to whose daughter hee was betrothed, Franciso Ortonio, with many other notable  Captaines. From Esia which was the Rendezuous they came to the temple of Fortune, and from thence to Arimini, where mustering his troupes hee found Guido Fauentino to bee wanting, who was gone to the contrarie side: which when he vnderstood, for a time he remained doubtfull with what place he should first begin. For he perceiued it to be Philips practise by that new enemie to stop his passage into Lombardie. But being sodain in his resolutions, supposing that there was nothing which could more auaile their intended iournie (seeing they were of necessitie by Armes to win themselues  a passage to the Venetians camp) than to take Rauenna and Forlimpopoli from the enemie, from whence he might open himselfe a very short way into Lombardie, he besieged Forlimpopoli, and enforced them to yeeld the second day of the siege. FromForlimpopoli is taken by Sforza. thence marching towards Rauenr^, speedy newes was brought him that the enemies had crossed the Adice, and taken in a manner from the Venetians whatsoeuer

they possessed on both sides the Riuer, (Verona and Vincenza excepted) and that those of Verona were streightly besieged; that the Paduans and Vincenzans, hauing expulsed their Garrisons had mutined; and that vnlesse he made hast, it was to be feared that all would fall into the enemies hands.
But it is reported, that concerning the commotions in those two Cities, it wasThe cause of the commotion of Padua an^ Vincenza. made by the Souldiers, who by ouermuch libertie did spoile and rob the wretched Townes-men, as though they had beene enemies taken in warre. As for the Paduans, if by reason of these outrages they tooke Armes, they were presently appeased at the Gouernours comming. But those of Vincenza being troubled vpon the like occasion, hauing driuen away the Garrison, said, That they were loyall to the Venetians;  that they needed no forraine forces to keepe them; that their constancie and loialtie was well known to the Senate; and that by those Rampiers their Citie would bee better guarded against the enemies attempts, than by any Mercinarie succour.
Mellato vpon the first report thereof went thither, greatly commending the Vincenzans, and exhorted them still to perseuer in their ancient loue and loialtie, and gaue them leaue, according to their owne desire, to guard their Citie them selues. These newes being greater in apparence than in effect, caused Sforza to change his minde, so that leauing the way of Rauenna, he returned speedily to the bridge of Roncanes. Then hauing enforced Guido, and Francisco, sonnes to Picinino, to retire  to Forli with a great cauallerie, he departed the fifth day after, and by the Bolognese Territorie, he came to Bondina. From thence hauing sent all his baggage by the Po to Chioggia, he marched by Ferrara, which was opened to him to Goria, and presently after to Hadria, (whereof the neighbour-sea taketh the name.) It was a CitieFrom whence. the Hadriatick Sea taketh the name. belonging to the Tuscans, and for a long time very rich: But thus much I thought good to speake by the waie, because I would haue no man thinke, that the Adriatick Sea did take name of that Hadria which is in La Marca.
Now this mightie Armie came sooner than it was looked for to the Venetians aide vpon the Paduans Territorie, notwithstanding that it was to passe foure great Riuers. First they made a bridge at Goria ouer one of the Armes of Po, on two and  thirtie long boates strongly ankored, and vpon them long plankes were laid couered with sand, with strong Railes on both sides, for feare least the horses being frighted with the shaking of the bridge, should fall into the water, and twelue vessels strong lyarmed, were appointed for the guard therof, to the end, that if the enemie should come downe the Riuer to make any attempt, they might defend and guard the bridge.
It is reported that Sforza's troupes held it for a prodigie, because that on a sodaine the Po did in such sort swell as it had almost ouer-flowed the bankes, and with the inundation had like to haue drowned the Campe which lay not far from the Riuer, and also for that great numbers of serpents had gotten into the Souldiers cabines. The other passage was at the Fornaces, on foure and fortie boats made verie fast together: And because that place was more commodious for the enemie to place an Ambush, twelue Gallies well armed with an hundred archers a peece were appointed for the defense of the bridge. The third was at the mouth of the Adice neere to the Fossoni, composed of fourescore small boats, and that being passed, the troupes were conducted along the Sea-side to Brondolles, where the Armie did likewise passe. But because that passage was verie broad, the bridge was likewise made longer than the rest, containing 90. vessels. Sforza being from thence come to the Hauen of Chioggia found three hundred small vessells, ready to transport the troupes to the firme Land, with the horse and foot companies, who were with a faire wind  carried through the Lakes, which are betwixt the Sea and the Land. Manie tooke great delight, and especially the Generall, who was well acquainted with Land Armies, but not with Sea Fleetes, to see at one time three hundred saile floting vp and downe, with more than a thowsand other small boates of all sortes, dispersed heere

and there abroad, which were come to meet him; some to offer him their seruice; others with a desire to see him; some were likewise sent in the Common-wealths name to congratulate his happie passage, and to present him with rich guifts. TheThe number of Sforz is troupes. Armie being landed vpon the Paduan Territorie, they numbred six thousand two hundred fortie foure horse, and sixteen hundred footmen. Those which make the number lesse, set downe but foure thousand horse, and two thousand foote.
So soone as Sforza saw his Armie on the firme Land, he desired nothing more than to ioine his forces with those of Mellato, and with the rest wheresoeuer they were that did belong to the Venetians, that he might presently march to fight with the enemie: Mellato likewise hauing intelligence of Sforza's arriuall, did not delay to  come and meete him, but the verie next day after his arriuall he came to him with twelue thousand horse and foot. Some say that these two Captaines did ioine theirThe number of the whole Armie in generall. forces together vpon the Colonois Territorie, where a generall muster being made, they found the Armie to consist of foureteene thousand horse, and eight thousand foote.
But during all these warlike preparations, the Bressians were no lesse tormented with plague and famine, than with the continuall assaults of the enemies. For twoThe great distresse of the Bressans. thousand men whom Italus had left not farre off from the Citie, did in such sort disturb them by their ordinarie incursions, as they within the Citie had no more rest, than when they were besieged by Picinino and Gonzaga. The Inhabitants being oppressed  with so many miseries would without all doubt haue yeelded at last, had not Barbaro by a wonderfull prouidence foreseen all these difficulties. For it is recorded, That there was nothing whatsoeuer could bee imagined, whereby to giue hope to the Citizens, and to containe them in their duties, which readily hee did not execute, so as it is scarce credible, in what manner and how great summes of money he raised from sundrie places to paie the Garrison. For from Venice none could come to them: all the waies and passages being intercepted. As also it was very admirable what meanes he vsed together with the aide of Pietro Auogadre, for the bringing in of so great a quantitie of nuts, roots, chestnuts, and other sorts of fruits as he drew from the inhabitants of the Mountaines therewith to slack the hunger of the Citizens: And it is almost impossible to be belieued how often he deceiued the enemie,Barbaro his politike w^sedome. feigning one thing, and dissembling an other; and with what patience he could temporize with that froward multitude in a time of so great scarcitie. He refused not to conuerse and talke with al men, and namely with those whose houses he knew to be infected with the Pestilence: for that contagious sicknesse was so dispersed ouer that wretched Citie, as there was no daie, but it buried more than threescore persons: his Gates were open at all houres, and he did euer eat in publike; and yet during that miserable time, there was neuer seene any bread of Wheat vpon his table, but either of Rie or Barley. Some say that he did at times bring forragers into the Citie in sted of victuallers, with sacks full of Straw and other substance, to put the inhabitants in  hope of some new kinde of foode; hee did moreouer priuily cause arrowes with small skrowles about them to be stuck in the steeples and high Towers of the Citie, as if they had been shot thither by some friends of theirs, which did aduertize them not to expect any fauor of the enemie, for he had vowed, if euer he did enter Bressia, wholly to ruine it, and to put all the inhabitants with their wiues and children to the edge of the sword. By these artificiall dealings he did not only defend the CitieThe Bressans terme Barbaro the Father of their Countrie. committed to his keeping, but had gouerned matters in such sort, as the Bressans termed him the Father of their Countrie.
At the last, at Pietro Auogadre his returne, and vpon assurance of aid from the mountaines, hauing on a sodaine assailed the Fortes, the one at Santa Cro^ and the other  at Mompiana, he caused them to be razed downe to the ground. The Bressans being incouraged by this successe, (for Italus was encamped at Castagnedola the better to free himselfe from the infected aire) determined to besiege Sales, supposing that it would come to passe, that they besieging it by Land, and the Venetians nauall Armie

by water, the Salodians would be inforced to yielde, either by composition, or force. For this purpose Thadeo d'Aeste with three hundred horse of the remainder of those which had bin left with him for the guard of Bressia; Pietro A^ogadre with three hundred Mountaniers, and Theosaluio with six hundred souldiers met at Gauarda. Italus hauing intelligence of the enemies designe, marched to Feliciana,Fight betwixt the Bressans and Italus. whither those of Bressia went fiercely to assaile him. But hee hauing speedily displayed his ensignes, came foorth, and beganne the fight vnder the towne-walls, which continuing from day-breake til noone with equall valour on either side, both parties being tired, they beganne a soft retreit; but as the Venetians retired, the enemie came vpon them with such furie, as hee disordered them and put them to The Bressans are put to rout. rout. Thadeo hauing lost many of his souldiers, did without any stay gallop into Piedmont, from whence returning soone after to Gauarda, hee went with those forces which Barbaro had assembled foorth of the Bergamese for feare of greater losse, to besiege and take the Fort which the enemies had built at Saint Euphemias.
On these termes stood the affaires of the Bressans, when as Sforza being ioyned with Mellato (as hath bin said) marched against the enemies which besieged Verona,The enemies raise their camp from before Verona. who with their ordnance furiously battered it. But they being assured of his comming, presently sent away their Artillerie and baggage into the Mantuan Countrey, raised their campe, and went to Soaue, which is a Towne lying on the  Veronois territorie. In that place they fortified themselues, and drew a trench from the next marshes vnto the riuer Adice, which they strengthened with diuers towers and rampires, so as those Forts being wel defended, there was no likelihood that Sforza could passe forward to relieue Verona, Bressia, and Bergamo.
Sforza in the meane time besieged Longina, and took it the same day, the spoileLongina is taken by Sforza. whereof he gaue to his souldiors (as Pasius saith.) Blondus writeth that it endured diuers assaults, and that it was brauely defended, in which assault Pietro Brunora and Troillo, two of Sforza's speciall friends were slaine; the one with a dart, and the other with an harquebuze-shot; whereupon being inflamed with choler, he caused all his forces to assaile it, intending not onely to sacke the Towne, but wholly to  raze it: For preuenting whereof the townesmen did voluntarily yield themselues, and thereby auoided all further mischiefe. The enemies forces lay not farre thence, and yet during the assaults giuen vnder their noses, they durst not once stirre.
This towne being recouered, Sforza in a square batallion marched against theThe enemies answere to Sforza who offered them battell. enemies, and in their view ordered his squadrons, offering them battell. But they hauing answered that they would not fight before the new Moone, hee perceiued their feare, and marched away to recouer the townes vpon the Vincenzan territorie, diuers of which hee tooke in a short space, hauing promised them all fauour and impunitie. Some say, that then, and not before, the enemie incamped at Soaue, resoluing after the losse of all other places, to keep that, as most commodious, the better to withstand Sforza, on what side soeuer he would turne to march to Verona. And because that trench drawne from the Marshes could not be forced without great slaughter, Sforza and the rest resolued to goe to Verona by the way of the mountaines. He came to Ronques called S. Iohns before Picinino had any notice of his resolution.
Tollentino and those that lay in garrison in Verona, sallying foorth on a sodaine (which they were expresly commanded to doe) hauing fired certaine Forts which Philips forces had built neere to the Citie, did place garrisons of their owne souldiors in two of them, which they had then forced. Sforza in the meane time being incamped at Ronques, ski^mished with Picinino neare to the forts which he had  before assured on the toppe of the mountaines: At the beginning Sforza's troupes were shaken, but Troillo and Nicholao Pisani, being forthwith sent with a great squadron of horse against the enemies, the fight became equall, and Picinino in the nightSforza goeth forward towards Uerona. being retired with his troupes to Soaue, Sforza without anie greater resistance ascended

the mountaines towards Verona. The Venetians being come to the top, Picinino for a time followed the troups, that he might with strong garrisons defend the Townes and Castles which he had taken in the neighbour-hilles, abstaining by all meanes from fight. For Sforza had left him no place fit for an ambuscado, and was farre superiour to him in number of souldiors.
Blondus who onely makes mention of the mercenarie souldiers, saith that thereThe number of the enemies cap, and that of the Venetians. were foureteene thousand men in the enemies campe, and sixeteene thousand in that of the Venetians, howbeit in the one Armie as well as the other there were great numbers of Bisognios or fresh-water souldiors. Sforza being come to Verona, would not lodge in the Citie, but incamped certaine furlongs from it, neere to  the high way of Hostilia. Some say that hee went and incamped in the field of Mars, which is neere the Citie-walles, and that vpon the report that hee did meane to passe ouer Adice, Picinino (who remained neere to Porcilia) did sodainely crosse the Riuer, and retired to Vigasio vpon the Mantuan confines with all his troupes. And then thereupon Sforza returning from whence he came, besieged Soaue; and hauing taken it, in a short space he recouered all the townes on the other side of the Riuer Adice, Legnaga excepted.
Whilest these things happened neere to Verona, the vnion of the Greek churchThe vnion of the Greek church with the Latine. with that of Rome insued soone after. This busines after a long and serious disputation, being debated in the Assemblie at Ferrara, was by the assistance of the holy  Ghost brought to a happie end. For it was found that those two Nations more learned than the rest, did agree in that wherein they seemed to dissent; but with sundrie circumlocutions.
All the Townes which the enemie possessed on the hither side of the Riuer being recouered (as hath bin said) the Venetian armie drew neere to the lake of Benac and besieged Bardolin, in regard that all Sforza's designes with those of his associates tended onely by some meanes to open the lake, it being the onely way whereby Bressia could be releeued, the which was reduced to all extreamitie by famine and pestilence. For beside the great losse it had sustained during the siege, the contagiousThe great extremitie of the citie of Bressia. sickenes had taken away fiue thousand men: Famine moreouer did now  afflict them more than before, hearbs and rootes, wherewith they had bin a long time fed, beginning to faile them. The rumor was, that this Citie oppressed with so many miseries, would shortly yeelde, if by the opening of the Lake it were not speedily relieued with men and victualles: And because the enemies nauall armie was in some sort stronger than that of the Venetians, Zeni durst not come neere Bardolin which his Country-men besieged. Whereupon Sforza perceiuing that hee did no great good there (in regard the inhabitants were relieued by the Lake) raised his campe.
Now because his comming hither had been to no great purpose, Caualcabon, Gu^rrieri, Martiano, and Giouanni el Conte, Roman Gentlemen, were sent with a thousand  horse and three hundred foot to relieue Bressia with men and victualles. These men being come through the vale of Sabia into Piedmont, were desirous before they entred into the Citie to feede their horses in a medow, which were wearied with their long iourney. Barbaro in the meane time hauing determined to burne part of the enemies nauall Armie that lay at Sales, sent Thadeo d'Aeste, Andrea Valerio, and Andrea Leon thither: Zeni Admirall of the Venetians fleete was likewise commaunded to be there, and to assaile the enemie.
Picinino and Gonzaga hauing intelligence as well of this designe of the enemie, as of the arriuall of the victualles, did secretly depart from Vigasio with two hundred horse, and by Pescara came to Feliciana, where they ioyned with Lodouico Sanseuerino and Italus of Friull: who being commanded to follow them, they fell vpon the Venetian cauallerie which still remained in Piedmont, brake them, and despoiledThe Venetians are put to rout at Feliciana. them of all their baggage, and taking some prisoners, put the residew to flight who escaped to the Citie. From thence marching against the rest who were comming

to the Lake, they diuided themselues into three bands. Sanseuerino embarking himselfe in the vessells, was commanded to fight vpon the water; Italus with the footmen to goe vp to the mountaines of Maderna; and Gonzaga together with Picinino to conduct the cauallerie by the way which lieth betwixt the Lake and the mountaines. In this maner the enemies nauall Armie did assaile that of the Venetians. Thadeo vpon this rumour made haste with his troupes, that hee might come to the timely rescue of his Countrey-men; but the enemies with great cries fell vponThe Venetians nauall armie is defeated vpon the lake of la Garda. the Venetians in front and in flanke. Thadeo being incompassed on euerie side, vsed all meanes to preserue his souldiers; yet neuerthelesse, the nauall Armie and those that fought on land, were in a moment defeated by the enemie: The Venetians  nauall armie consisted of two gallies, foure brigantines, seuen ganzarioles, and oth^r vessells, two of which ganzarioles at the beginning of the fight fled to Torbolles: All the rest with Zeni their Generall fell into the enemies hands. Thadeo likewise was taken prisoner, with Valerio and Leon the Prouidators.
This ouerthrow was accompanied with an other. For the next day after this vnfortunate battell, the enemie tooke the Castle of Maderna. It is reported thatThe enemies take the Castle of Maderna. Sforza had a long time before foreseene this defeate, and had often aduertised the Senate to send supplies to the Lake, and that if they did not, it was to bee feared that their nauall Armie there would be defeated by the enemie. But hee did speedily assure Torbolles and Penetra by a strong garrison, for feare lest the enemie  being prowd of that victorie, should sodainely march to surprize them. This ouerthrow being reported at Venice did greatly trouble the Senate; and yet because they would shew no signes of discouragement, they presently resolued to send a new fleete into the Lake, but after an other fashion than the former, namely, to send to Torbolles in six hundred cartes all the substance and matter wherewith toA new venetian Army for the lake. make them, which they had in readines, and there, as in an hauen neere to the water, to make eight gallies, as manie gallions, and foure brigantines. All the workmen of the Venetians ships were sent thither speedily to make an end of the worke.
Stefano Contareni was chosen Generall of that Armie, and in euerie gallie a Senator was appointed to command. They did besides send certaine moneths pay  for the souldiers to the campe. All this was done in a maner during that Summer. Autumne was alreadie come, which being subiect to diseases had in a short space infected the third part of the armie with agews, whereupon Sforza with his troups retired to Gibeta. The enemie was incamped at Vigasio, where his Armie was no lesse afflicted with sickenes; for besides Agews, the plague was crept into it. TheThe Senates care for the Bressans. Senate taking great care to free the Bressans from danger, wrote to Sforza, and earnestly intreated him if it were possible, before he sent his Armie to winter, to relieue that loyall Citie with men and victualls. And for the safetie and assurance of that which he should leaue behind him, the Senate resolued to turne backe the Riuer of Adice into the olde channell, so soone as it should be cleansed, some foure  miles beneath Legnaga. For that being don^, it was certaine, that waters running in that maner ouer the Countrie, would make the Paduan, Vincenzan and Verona territories which lie on the farther side of the Riuer, more assured against the enemies incursions, and would besides be verie commodious for those that should saile to Verona. Foure thousand pioners were imployed in this worke.
Contareni in the meane time (for they could not bring masts for the shippes so farre) being come to the Campe, went to the mountaines of Trent, with skilfull workemen to view those Forrests, and to see if there were anie trees in it of that height fit to make masts. All men were of opinion, that hee might there furnish himselfe, not onely with masts, but all other matters necessarie for manie vessells*  whereupon, hee caused sixe hundred Carpenters to come thither, besides the great numbers which he had alreadie brought with him.
Picinino who had intelligence of those great preparations, that he might in some sort frustrate the enemies designes, did about the shutting in of the euening

depart from the Citie of Riua (whither he was secretly come) marching along the lake, through a secret and almost vnknowne way, he attempted to set fire on a GalleyPicinino attempteth to bur^e the venetians nauall Armie. which was newly made. Troyllo by chance had the guard of that place, who not onely withstood the enemie, but comming valiantly to the fight, made good his partie. Picinino being in the middest of the throng beaten from ^is horse, and being remounted, did hardly escape, hauing lost three hundred men, Sforza hauing notice therof, fearing lest the enemie with greater forces would returne to end what he had begun, commanded Mellato to go with his troups to guard those places,Mellato fortifieth the passages neere to Torbolles. who being come thither, caused his souldiers to make a wall of stones without any morter, ex^ending from the lake to the hilles of Riua, of two hundred paces long, and of twelue foot high, and as many in breadth, with a Fort on the top of the hill builded of the same matter, heaped vp together in forme of a wall, and with diuers small towers. These places being guarded with small forces, were able to assure the vessels which were then at Torbolles, and as many as should be there afterwards, against all the enemies attempts.
Now whilest they were preparing the nauall Armie, a^d that the turning aside of the riuer Adice was by a new aduise interrupted, Sforza resolued to send victualles to Bressia by the mountaines. Wherefore hauing at Torbolles and Penetra made great prouision of corne, and hoping either by entreaties or money to winne the Lords of th^se mountaines, or if that failed to open himselfe a passage by force of  Armes* he came forth of Penetra with three thousand horse, and a thousand foore of the choisest in the whole Armie, and went and encamped within halfe a mile of Thyenna. He did besides carrie with him certaine great peeces of Ordnance meaning with them to batter some townes if occasion should serue. But whilest he remained neere to Thyenna, Philips forces who had discouered the enemies designs being come to Riua, did on a sodaine seize on the vale of Lodron: and Picinino and Sanseuerino hauing left eight hundred foot, and three hundred horse in the forrest of Thyenna to guard those passages, they went backe againe with the residue of their troupes.
In the meane time Martiano and G^ouanni el Conte, being sent by Sforza had ambusht  themselues with all the cauallerie at the end of the lake which is in that valley,A new designe of Sforza to relieue Bressia. and there lay in great silence expecting the enemies arriuall. Now so soone as Picinino and the rest drew neere them, the Venetians gaue a charge, whereupon there began a cruell fight. Martiano's troupes did not onely continue the fight all day long but a great part of the night* for when day-light failed, they fired the neighbour houses, and by that light fought so long till Picinino being weatie and tyred beganPicinino is put to rout. by little and little to retire. Bu^ in the retreit the Venetians charged him with such furie, as they did forthwith put him to rout, hauing lost all his cauallerie, and the greatest part of his Infanterie, and himselfe getting vp to the top of the mountaine Ponall, which looketh vpon the lake of La Garda, and by the helpe of an Almaine  (whom he still kept neere him for such purposes) with much difficultie escaped those fearefull precipices. At length being come to the bankes of the lake, he embarked himselfe in a poore boat, and went to Riua. Sanseuerino in great feare escaped through the mountains with twentie horse to Maderna: Fourescore of the chiefe prison^ were by Barbaro his commandement brought to Bressia.
Picinino nothing danted with this ouerthrow, taking Sanseuerino along with him, presently marched to seize vpon the pace of Thyenna. Sforza was already vpon the mountaines, resoluing to passe forward, although it were through the middest the enemies. Thyenna is seated vpon an high hill, there being on either side of it dangerous precipices, in one of which on the right side of the towne standeth  a Castle strong by art and nature; the left side is verie barren and craggie. The enemie with a companie of footmen seized on that place: Carolo Gonzaga had emba^ailed his cauallerie forth of the Citie gates: The Venetians Generall stayed at the foot of the hil, where the enemies footmen were encamped, where he perceiued

that the passages being on euerie side kept by the enemie, he could not passe without fight. Thus standing amazed, not being resolued by what meanes to passe through the enemies, he did from farre descrie a fresh band of men at Armes comming from Riua to Thyenna. And supposing that the enemie had sent for the residue of his troupes which lay at Vigasio, he did on a sodaine cause Troillo with all the cauallerie to march against Gonzaga, and then turning himselfe towards his Infanterie (of whom he had euer a braue band neere vnto him for his guard,) he shewed them the toppe of the mountaine which was couered with armed men, and did earnestly exhort and entreat them, That if they did desire to be accounted such as he had euer esteemed them, if they would euer acknowledge those many benefits which they  had receiued from him, if (in a word) they were desirous, as became loyall and valiantSforza exhorteth his souldi^ ers. souldiers, to execute some generous action in his presence, that they should by that daies valour purchase immortall glorie and renoune, and march couragiously against the enemies, who being defeated and ouerthrowne, they should not onely preserue a Citie most loyall to the Venetians, but open themselues a way to obtaine a gallant victorie.
In this manner did he speake vnto them, and then marched vp towards the hill at the head of the Armie with a pike in his hand. And although the souldiers did withSforzas great valour. great difficultie march vp that craggie and steepie mountaine, yet neuerthelesse being animated by their Generals speech and presence, they mounted to the top thereof. Then Sforza shewing them his friend Troillo valiantly fighting neere to the Citie, he did entreat them to make hast, and to take from the cauallerie the honor of that victorie. Afterwards running to an high place from whence he might be seene and heard of his souldiers, he began with a cheerefull voice to call out aloud, sometimes to Troillo, then to Nicolao Pisani and the rest, willing them to breake the enemies Armie with a close battaillion, telling them that himselfe with a troup of footmen had beaten the enemies from the top of the mountaine.
Then tnrning towards his Infanterie, and running to encourage them, he perceiuedThe part of a, t^ue Generall of an Armie. his souldiers a farre off to throw the enemies into those fearefull precipices, and with a cheerefull voyce shaking his pike, he said vnto them, On, on, my valiant f^llowes, charge and pursue this fearefull enemie on euerie side, that he may no more returne to the battaile: and hauing done thus to the foot forces, he returned to encourage the Cauallerie.
The Victorie in that place was somewhat difficult by reason of the arriuall of certaine companies of men at armes, but when they vnderstood that the Garrison had beene throwne headlong downe the mountaine, the enemies beganne to giue backe. In this bickering Caesar Martinenga fighting valiantly in the middest of the battaile was taken prisoner: Whereupon the enemies forsaking the place, did openly betake themselues to flight. Sforza's victorious souldiers pursued them vp and downe, slew great numbers of them, and tooke make prisoners. Besides Caesar, Carolo Gonzaga was taken with two hundred horse, and three hundred foot. SforzaThe enemies ar^ vanquished a^ Thyenna. at the beginnnig thought that Picinino had beene taken, but not finding him after search made among the prisoners, he promised fiue thousand crownes to any man that would vndertake to fetch him backe. All this notwithstanding hee escaped to the Citie, where he hid himselfe for one whole day, fearing if the enemie shouldPicinino escapeth in disguised habit. know that he were in Thyenna, he would presently haue besieged the Citie, and taken all meanes of escape from him. Therefore about midnight disguising himselfe in ragged habite like to a poore lame souldier, he was carried vpon mens shoulders forth of the Citie, and through by-waies at length came to Riua, whither a great part of the cauallerie had escaped.
The next day after the battaile, Sforza besieged the Citie, and during the siege,Malateste prince of Cesenna is taken prisoner. certaine light skirmishes were made, where Malateste Prince of Cesenna a couragious young man, comming forth to fight with the enemie was taken prisoner. Pasius of Arimini saith, That the Venetian Generall after the victorie at Thyenna,

marched in order of battaile to Riua, and that Malateste was taken in a salley there. Alardo of Verona in his Oration made in praise of Sforza saith, That Picinino the next day after that he escaped from the battaile, came with his Army and presented battaile to the Venetians. Wherein his valour appeareth more notable, by how much his forces seemed wholly to be ouerthrowne. For therby all men knew; that Sforza and the rest had to doe with an enemie, who whether he were victor or vanquished,The disposition of Picinino. could not be at quiet. Yet neuerthelesse howsoeuer it happened, it is most certaine that Sforza sent victuals to Bressia, and would daily haue sent more, had not the losse of Verona which happened at the same time, called the Venetian forces elsewhere. Philips Captaines had laid a plot to surprize the Castle of Verona which standeth on  the West side. For they had intelligence from an Almaine souldier, who was (as Blondus saith) one of the dead paies there: That small Guard was kept there in the night. Pasius saith, That a Mantuan gaue them this intelligence, who being taken prisoner the Summer before, had for a time dwelt with Giacomo Bolognese, the Gouernour of the Castle, whilest his ransome was prouiding, and that during hisAn enterprize vpon verona. imprisonment, he went freely about the walles, and had at his leisure viewed the munitions and all parts of the Castle.
They had (as hath beene said) a long time before determined to vndertake this enterprise: but they had deferred it till the enemie should send his troupes to winter, that they might the more safely fortifie themselues in Verona, and before  the Venetian souldiers could be drawn from their garrisons. But perceiuing matters to be brought to that passe, that they could not hinder Sforza from going to Bressia, they resolued to put this enterprize in speedie execution there, the better to draw him from that iourney. To this end hauing secretly assembled their forces, leauing Riua, they came to Pescara, before those whom they had sent for thither arriued, and commanding them to follow after, they speedily marched to Vigasio, and tooke along with them all the souldiers that lay there in garrison.
Departing from thence on the eighteenth day of Nouember at the beginning of the night, they came in great secrecie neere to Verona. Afterward about midnight  rearing their ladders against the walles, the Author of the enterprize mounted first, who was forthwith followed in great secrecie, by all the rest, who killing the guardes, and breaking open the next gate, the Captaines with all the troupes had enterance. The cries and groanes of wounded men, with the clattering of Armour, did assure those who had the guard on the walles neere to the old Castle, that the enemie was entered, whereupon the Allarme was giuen. At these fearefullAllarme in verona. cries and nocturnall rumours the whole Citie ranne to Armes, and comming forth on euerie side, they put themselues in order in the market-place. The enemies were alreadie heard to come forward, and Picininos and Gonzaga about the fourth watch of the night had sent their troupes into the Citie. But perceiuing  the resistancce which was made by night they changed their mindes, and abstaynedThe enemies are in Verona. from fight, because that all their troupes were not yet arriued. Some say that the bridge Raffiolane being broken downe by the force of the assailants, the fight in that place ceased.
But whether it did cease or no, they began to affright the inhabitants, by breaking downe the houses behind the Castle: In the meane time many that did affect the Venetians being come to the Market-place counselled the fearefull Magistrates which knew not what to doe, that in regard they had no Garrison to defend them, euerie man should that night retire to some place of safetie, and take order for the Guard of the strong places: For they being well defended, there was no doubt  but that the enemie would be forthwith enforced whether hee would or no to abandon the Citie: That they should besides, suffer the wretched inhabitants to giue place to the miserable condition of the times. Bartholomeo Peregrino, a man of great authoritie amongst them and a friend to the Venetians, did accompanie those that

went their way as farre as the same Bridge, for feare lest some sinister mishap might hinder their escape. But so soone as it was day, the enemie without any resistance entred the Citie at the Gate Raffiolane. Pasius saith that he entred it before breake of day.
A terrible feare had seized vpon the inhabitants being ignorant what wouldThe doubt of those of Verona become of their Citie. For it was doubtfull whether the victorious enemie would preserue it, or giue it as a prey to his Souldiers. Lodouico Ver^o was one of the formost amongst the enemies, who after that Carmagnolla his father-in-law had beene condemned did stil follow the contrary party, and had voluntarily banished himselfe. He comming to his owne house, where hee vnderstood Mellato's richest goods and  houshould stuffe was, being inflamed with choller did presently giue them to the spoile of his Souldiers. By his example others that were hard by, being desirous of bootie fell to breaking open of Citizens houses. Some say that Francisco Picinino, sonne to the Generall, was the first that beganne to spoile, who had the guard of the gate Rassiolane. But whether it were he or the other, it is certaine that the Citie would that day haue sustained a notable mischiefe, had not Maguis, one of the excellentest Lawyers of his time, and a man of great authoritie among his Countriemen,Maguis entrea ^eth the Prince of Mantua not to spoile Verona gone to the Prince of Mantua, and entreated him not to suffer that Citie which had euer deserued well of him, and was fallen into that danger to be ruined without the fault or desert of the inhabitants; That hee ought to bee satisfied  with being Conquerour of so noble a Citie, and not to defile it with bloud and rapi^e.
These words no lesse profitable, than true, did greatly moue the Prince; who presently commanded the souldiers to desist from spoiling, and that all the Ensignes should be drawne vp in order of battaile to the Pallace, where within a while afterThe Mantuan is proclaimed Prince of Verona. he was proclaimed Prince of Verona. For in the league betwixt him and Philip, against the Venetians, it was expressely mentioned, that if Verona and Vincenza should chance to bee taken in that w^rre* that then they should bee giuen to the Prince of Mantua. After this proclamation, he, determining to recouer the strongest places in the Citie, did speedily make himselfe master of the Gates, Bridges, Walls, and all the rest except the two Castles on the top of the monntaine, and that which is in the plaine, called the old Pallace. Then hee resolued to batter the old Pallace, whither he vnderstood that his sonne Carolo was lately brought as a Prisoner and he determined either to breakedowne the bridge which is neare to it vpon the Riuer, or else to make a great trench before it with a Fort, to take all hope of succours from those within it. He did likewise send Giouanni Gonzaga his brother toThe Mantuan^ preparation for the defence of Uerona. the Castles vpon the Mountaine to depriue them likewise of all reliefe. Hee did moreouer attempt to seize on the streights of Clusina to keepe Sforza from comming to the relie^e of the Citie. He sent word to Giacomo Maranico Gouernour of the (...) of Policella, that he had the night before seized on Verona, that with the  Citi^ he had his wi^e and children in his power, and that vnlesse he did speedily take order to haue the s^eights of Clusina shut vp and safely guarded, hee would giue his house in spo^e to the Souldiers, and put his wife and children to death. But he was so farre off from being daunted with his menaces, as one the contrarie, hauing roughly repulsed his messenger, he speedily marched with a troupe of Peasants to meet with Sforza. For the night of the very same day that the Citie was taken, newes was brought thereof to Sforza's Campe.
The Generall who first heard of it was much amazed at the newnesse of the matter, being scarce able to belieue it, had not certaine Letters written to him from particular friends confirmed the truth thereof, and entreated him speedily to come to  the reskue of that which was almost lost. Whereupon, he raised his Campe, andSforza marcheth to the reskew of Verona. sending for Mellato from Torbolles, hee marched thitherwards with his Armie, staying in no place, but a little vpon the banks of the Adi^, which ha^ing passed he went about Sun-set with a small troupe to the streights of the Mountaines. The

Riuer Adice in that place, where a Castle is to be seene vpon a craggie Mountaine, doth wax verie narrow towards the end of the valley Lagarina, and glideth through the streights of the broken Mountaine, hauing on euery side fearefull rocks in forme of a wall aduancing still forward as high as a man can shoot an arrow more than twoThe description of the (...) Adice. thousand paces in length, and betwixt the Riuer and the rocks there lieth a narrow way wherein two Armed Souldiers can hardly passe in front: but neare to the Castle, both sides of the Mountaines doe shut themselues vp together, so as the Riuer betwixt the two rocks makes a great Gulphe: on that side likewise where the Castle standeth, there is a path cut through the rock a croshow-shot in length, where one man at once whether he be on foot or horse-backe can but passe. I dare affirme that  these two hilles which are at this day to be seene there, haue in former times beene but one, the which by viewing them may be easily discerned. For both their tops, and the cutting of the rocks, doe so much resemble one another, as nothing can bee more like.
Now Sforza being come thither (as hath beene said) in the euening, had intelligence from those that lay in Garrison in the Castle, that Francisco son to Picinino had attempted to take that place, bu^ perceiuing his labour to proue vaine he had retired his troupes. But the Venetian Generall fearing some Ambuscado, did by day-breake send Nicholao Pisani before with armed horse to discouer those suspitious wayes, and chiefely the streights. He presently returned galloping, telling him that great  numbers of enemies were at the going forth of the straights. Sforza being greatly moued with his report, spake to Mellato, Marcello, and the rest, telling them, That they were that day either to die in those streights, or to passe forward to the enemies cost. ThatSforza his speech to his Captaines. he was certaine that the enemie before them had enclosed the going forth into the valley, and that hee was moreouer in doubt that they had done the like behind them. It behoued them therefore to goe forward, and in the companie of Sforza and his good fortune to runne fiercely vpon the enemie: That they should be well assured, that there was nothing so difficult, nor any power so great, whichthe valour of braue men accompanied by fortune, could not vanquish and ouercome. And there upon he marched forward in battaile, resoluing to fight with the enemie; at what time certaine word was brought him that  there was no danger at all, and that Giacomo Mor^nico was beneath in the valley with a thousand Souldiers to keepe the enemies from seizing on the passages; and that he might boldly march on without any feare of Ambush.
This newes made Sforza ioyfull, who caused the ensignes and Souldiers speedily to march. Being come into the plaine the ensignes made a stand at Volarnea, till such time as the whole Armie was embattailed, that they might from thence march in a square battalion to the Citie. In some Authors there is no mention of this feare, nor of Sforza's speech to his Captaines. At night the Venetian Armie encamped at Saint Ambrose Burrough some eight miles from Verona. There they vnderstood of whatsoeuer had been done in the Citie for three daies space* what attempts  the enemie had made vpon the Castles; and how that the Mantuan Prince being come to batter the olde Palace with his ordnance, the Gouernour of the place sentThe braue message of the Goue^nor of the olde Palace, to the Prince of Mant^a. him word, that vnlesse he did giue ouer that manner of besieging, hee would b^de and lay his son Carolo on that part of the wall which he first battered that he might be beaten in pieces with the Canon, whereupon the Prince being daunted with (...) threatnings, did presently withdraw the batterie.
Now the fourth day after they were come from the Mountaines, they came to the Fort of ^eliciana. Some say, that the enemies for a ti^e fought at the Rampiers and trenches which they had made, to keep backe the Venetians; and that being driuen thence by the valour of Sforza's troups, they did easily giue place And that Sforza puts supplies into the Fort of (...) then Sforza did with ease put a companie of foo^-men into the Fort; sending h^s brother Alexandro, Mellato, and the other braue Captaines, with all the cauallerie to the Bishops Gate, where certaine Vero^ois standing by chance, were entreated to goe and open the Ga^e for their friends, and if they could not doe it by faire means

to breake it open by force. So soone as the enemies knew that it was taken, and thatThe (...) Sforza's Souldiers were in the Citie, they forthwith fled ouer the Riuer; and the amazement of the horse-men neere to the new bridge was so great, as the woodden bridge which stands betwixt that of stone, and the Tower, being broken with the great weight of Runawaies, fiue Knights, or nine according to some Authors, fellThe enemies (...) from Verona. into the water; and by the weight of their armour together with their horses, were all drowned; only one man by the goodnesse of his horse escaped to the shoare.
Sforza vnderstanding that his Souldiers were in the Citie, and that the enemie fled, caused his foot-men to march forth of the Castle. They did for a time fight  vpon the bridges: But fire-workes being throwne vpon that of wood, and by theThe Venetians (...) the (...). he^pe of the inhabitants, Sforza's troupes made themselues way into the middest of the Citie. Thus writes Blondus: But Pasius saith, That the troupes came from the Castles in two bands and marched against the enemies, so as beyond Saint Z^nos Church which stands at the Hills foot, the Cauallerie went on the left hand, and the bodie of the Infantrie, was sent from beyond the Fort of Feliciana, and that of Saint Peter, which is somewhat lower directly to the Citie, and that about sunne-set there was a cruell fight with the enemie on both sides the new bridge: after which, the enemie fled; and that in feare running by heapes ouer the bridge, it brake vnder them. The same Author affirmes that Giouanni Gonzaga was sore wounded in that  fight, whereof within a while after he died; and yet for all that Blondus saith, That he was slaine before the Fort of Feliciana with an harquebuze-shot before Sforza's arriuall. But both of them agree, that the woodden bridge was burnt by night* and that the same being broken, Picinino and Gonzaga, who had stood all night in battaile before the Palace, hauing notice of the violent incursions of Sforza's forces into the Citie, did speedily retire into the Citadell. Some others say, That it was in the euening. But, whether they quitted the place then or about midnight, all of them agree together, that before day they speedily left Verona, and went to Vigazio. The enemies flight being di^ulged, Troillo and Ciarpelion being commanded to follow them, gaue in vpon the taile of the Runawaies, and slew many of them. A great  multitude of Mantuan peasants were taken in the Citie; some of whom, in hatred to Gonzaga, were murthered by those whom they had rob'd. Al the towns men that had kept themselues shut vp in their houses for feare of either partie, expecting the doubtfull issue of the bickering, perceiuing the chance of the dice to be sodainely turned, the enemie in feare and amaze, did from their windowes raile vpon them, and furnished the Venetians that night with victualls, light and counsell; and so soone as it was day they came into the Market-place to congratulat Sforza and Marcello for theirThe Veron^is (...) (...) cleere themselues. victorie, and with teares in their eies called them Fathers of their Countrie, recommending to them all their publike and particular means, and entreated them to beleiue, that the enemie had not taken the Citie through the Citizens fault, who were  altogether innocent thereof; saying that at the first newes that the Citie was taken, they ranne with their Armes to haue repulsed the enemie; but that they were enforced to giue place for feare of greater losse, seeing the magistrates did the like: And that now so soone as they saw the Venetians ensignes, they had not only giuen them entrance, but many of them had presently taken Armes and ioined with them to expell the enemies, and had still aided the Venetians neere to the bridges.
The apparent loyaltie of the Veronois was much esteemed, and after many embraces and salt teares shed they were willed to take courage, and that none should sustaine either generall or particular losse, but such as were guilty: For if they could finde any one (which they did not thinke to doe) that had beene Authour of that  treacherie, he should be punished according to his deserts. Then, Sforza, M^cello, and the rest did comfort the sorrowfull inhabitants, and did put them in hope of better fortune. It is reported that Ci^rpelion had almost spoiled Mag^is by forceMaguis brought before (...), (...) (...). dragging him, like a Traitour, before Sforza: And that he did so constantly iustifi^

his owne cause with that of the Citizens, as he did not only cleere himselfe from all obiections, but gaue them to vnderstand, that the Citie had beene taken neither by his fault nor by any of the Citizens: whereupon by the consent of all men he was declared guiltlesse, and as one that had well merited of the Venetian State, was greatly commended.
Sforza from the vale Clusiana had aduertized the Senate of the di^aster of Verona, and how that he was going thither with an intent to reduce it quickly vnder their obedience, or else to hazard the liues of himselfe, his brethren, and the residue of the Armie. He wished them therefore to be patient for a while, and in the meane time to pray vnto God for the happy successe of that iourney, for they should shortly  heare either the one or other. ^he Senate after these newes were continually in the Pallace, and the Nobilitie, sad and disconsolate, walked vp and downe the Market-place, floating betwixt hope and feare, when on a sodaine by letters vpon letters both of publike and particular persons, they had notice of the recouerie thereof, and the enemies shamefull flight the fourth day after it was lost. The Cities ioy was then so great, as the Senate bei^g ouerioyed could not refraine fromThe great ioy in Uenice vpon the recouerie of Verona. teares, and great multitudes of people from all parts of the Towne ranne to the Pallace: the Senatours and common people reioycing together: Generall processions were made for three dayes together: with prayers and thanksgiuings vnto God in all Churches. The posts were recompenced according to their speede, some more  than others.
The Commissioners of those of Verona who came thither within a while after,The commissioners of Verona, c^me to Venice. had audience. These men with teares in their eyes did relate the wretched estate of their Citie, protesting their own innocence, and that the cause of their comming was to assure them of their loyaltie in generall. The Senate did curteously entertaine them, and congratulate the present victorie; assuring them that their fidelitie had beene a long time knowne to the Prince and Senate, in regard whereof they had euer beene desirous of the con seruation of that loyall Citie, and that they did therefore greatly reioyce, that the matter was ended without any further losse orThe Senates answere to the Commissioners. danger to them. Sforza's valour was highly commended, with Mellato's prowesse, and Marcello's speed, for that they had opportunely recouered that which was almost lost, and vanquished the enemie so soone as they saw him: Wherefore they thought it not onely well beseeming, but did allow of it, that the Magistrates of their Citie should present Sforza with ten thousand crownes for hauing so brauely borne himselfe in that action; and Mellato with two thousand.
The Commissioners, being dismissed and rewarded, returned to Verona. Sforza in the meane time (because winter was wel forward) resolued to tarrie at Verona. But his care for Bressia did greatly afflict him and the rest: which caused him to leaue his winterning-place before the first of Ianuarie, and returne to the siege of Aranes and Thienna. The Campe abode certaine daies in the plaine of Arques;  where many were reported to perish with extreme cold. Mellato by the sharpnes of the weather lost all feeling, and was so benummed, as he lay like a dead man, who was presently by the Riuer Adice carried to Verona. Sforza being then enforced by the vehement cold, and by the enemies resistance, to returne to his wintering place, did send by Ciarpelion and Troyllo, accompanied with three hundred men, certaine victuals to Bressia by the way of the mountaines.
It was reported, that the Bressians were reduced to such extremitie and want, as they sustained themselues with filthie and vnholesome diet. And moreouer, That at such time as the enemies took Verona, accounting all for lost and desperate, theyThe great extremitie of the Bressans. were at the point to haue yeelded: which they had done, had not Barbaro opportunly  come to the assembly, and with great importunity broke^ that which they had determined. Besides, it is most certaine that Picinino and Gonzaga, had by Philips commandement sent new forces, who with great heed were to keep the Bressians more closely mewed vp, and carefully to prouide that no victuals might from any place be brought vnto them.
Now S^orzas troupes being come to Franzacorte, or (as others say) to Guzac,Bressia (...) (...) w^th ^alls. they fell to blowes with Philips forces, who being daunted with Sforza's arriuall; before day fled, and lost three hundred Horse. But the better to disburden the Citie (freed now from the siege, and in some sort from famine) of so great a multitude, those which had brought the victualls, returned by the same Mountaines and went to Winter with Sforza. The Nauall Armie in the meane time went forward at ^orbolles, where they had slowly wrought, because that after the taking of Verona, the Carpenters and other workmen being scattered here and there for ^eare, the worke had for a time beene discontinued. Likewise Mellato, who had the charge of the Hauen, and the workmen, by extremitie of cold which he had taken, died the  same winter: but it happened not in the Armie, as I finde in some Authors. The remainder of the Winter was more free from troubles, by reason of the extreme cold weather.
It was reported that Gionanni Cornetano, of the Familie of Vitelli, who commanded the Popes troupes, and who for the secret practizes he then made was much suspected of the Pope, had about the beginning of the spring-time made a secret league with Philip and Picinino: who had concluded together, That at one time CornetanoA league betwixt Philip and Corn^tano the Top^s Generall. with his troupes should inuade La Marca, and Picinino should crosse the Po, and come into Tuscanie; the one wholly to ruine the Florentines state, and the other to ouerthrow Sforza's Principalitie. The report hereof was hardly beleeued; when  Picinino vpon the eighth day of Februarie, was then alreadie come forth of Garrison, and with his troupes had crossed the Po. Sforza being troubled with these newes, went himselfe to Venice to conferre with the Prince and Senate about the state of that Warre. He was afraide least Cornetano would speedily inuade La Marca, which was wholly vnfurnished of aide and Garrisons. The Venetians at his entreatie sent to the Pope, who dealt so with him; That whatsoeuer had beene granted vnto Sforza as Prince of La Marca, should in peaceable and safe manner remaine vntouched. They did likewise entreate the Florentines speedily to arme, and not only to driue the common enemie from their confines, but to stop him if it were possible from making incursions vpon Sforza's state. Picinino in the meane time made diuers Picinino maketh warre in Flaminia. and sundrie attempts on Flaminia which were valiantly withstood by Sigismund Prince of Arimini, and Malateste his brother (who being taken at Thyenna, was exchanged for Carolo Gonzaga) who receiuing a thousand Venetian footmen, and as many from the Florentines, together with Sforza's Cauallerie made hast to the aide of La Marca.
The enemie hauing left Guido Fauentino to continue the siege of Magellana, came to passe the Appenine hills. In the meane time the two bretheren Malatestes wentThe Malatestes take the enemies partie. to the enemies side. Picinino tooke certain Townes in the Appenine Mounts, which he forthwith pillaged. Philip supposed by meanes of that voiage, that Sforza would altogether quit Lombardie and runne to the rescue of his owne State, and to that  of his Neighbours; Now whilest he soothed himselfe with this hope, sodaine newes was brought him, That by the Popes commandement Giouanni Cornetano was imprisonedG^ouanni Cornetano (...) committed to prison in S. Angelos Castle. by Antonio Ride of Padua, Captaine of the Castle of S. Angelo. These newes made him thinke that Picinino in despaire would returne into Lombardie. But this could not restraine him: For sending for the Malates^es, Guido, and Asturo Fauentini, hee came more furiously than before from the top of the Appenines into Tuscanie, hauing (not without great labour) caused the Snow to bee taken forth of the waies through which hee passed. The Florentines during these troubles were not idle: For they leuied forces from all parts. Pope Eugenius, who was an Associate in that warre, commanded Bishop Lodouico, That as Legate Apostolicall, he should  conduct all those troupes which had beene Cornetan's, into Tuscanie.
The Florentines gaue entertainement to Paulo Vrsino, and Michaeli Attendulo with a great Cauallerie, and many foote companies: they did likewise procure to haue Troyllo (whom Sforza, with a companie of men at armes, had sent to La Marca) to

be sent to ioyne with them, that with all these forces together, they might be able not only to withstand the enemie, but brauely to assaile him.
During the Florentines preparations, Picinino although he had beene brauely repulsed and with great losse from Primolcoria by Nicholao Pisani, who then was at Florence, and had beene sent with a band of yong Souldiers to guard the streightsPicinino passeth the Appenines and encompeth before Politiana. of the mountaines, yet he hauing soon after ouercome the difficultie of the mounts went and encamped at Politiana. The newes that he had passed the Appenines did greatly terrifie the Florentines, and most of all in regard of his great speede, so as at first they knew not what to resolue on. Watch by night was placed ouer the Citie,The feare of the Florentines. with strong guard at the Gates; But the arriuall of Borsia and Troyllo, reuiued the appalled  Spirits of the fearefull Citizens.
The enemie lying incamped before Politiana, greatly afflicted these two renowned Common-weales, and draue Sforza for a time into many doubts; which was the cause that at the Spring-time he came not into the field so soone as men did expect him. The Florentines likewise on the one side were very importunate with him, to haue him come to them. And the Venetians on the other side did detaine him and earnestly intreated him to tarrie still; fearing if he should change his former course of warre, that he would afterwards be enforced to begin againe (as it were) and to recouer a new victorie forth of the enemies hands, which he had already in a manner with so great trauaile taken from them; with all alleaging, That the Florentines  state might be easily defended and kept by the Popes forces, and those of the other Confederates; but that the Venetians affaires (being exposed as it were in an open Theater in the middest of Lombardie) could not by any meanes succeed well without him.
With these sundrie cogitations was Sforza greatly perplexed; whilest all men beganne to condemne his long staying. But in the meane time Picinino, after the takingPolitiana is taken by Picinino. of Politiana, marched against the Casentines, ruinating all places that hee met with in his passage. This mischiefe also was accompanied with an other, almost as great as it. For Borsia d'Aeste (on whose arriuall in regard of the great Cauallerie he brought with him, as on the sole refuge of the warre, the Florentines had grounded  their hope) did on a sodaine take Philips partie. All which accidents notwithstanding Picinino's affaires in Tuscanie became euer after lesse fortunate and successefull: For being come to the Pace of Arezzo, as if he had meant to make incursions on the Sienois, or on the Territories of the Church, he dwelt so long vpon his resolutions, as he did wholly foreslow the course of his happie fortune.Picinino his good fortune beginneth to d^line. For in the meane time the Popes forces entred the Towne, and shortly after Vrsino, Troyllo, and the rest came thither likewise with the whole bodie of the Armie: whereupon hauing intelligence of the leuie of so great Forces, with all speede hee retired to  the foote of the Mountaines.
The end of the fourth Booke of the third Decad.




THE FIFTH BOOKE  OF THE THIRD DECAD OF THE HISTORIE Of Venice.

The Contents of the fifth Booke of the third Decad.
SFORZA determineth on the passage of the Riuer Mincia. CONTARENI Generall of the Venetians Nauall Armie, defeateth the enemie vpon the Lake of Benac, and recouereth the Townes neare to the Lake. The Venetian Armie hauing crossed the Mincia, recouereth all the Townes on the Bressan Territorie. SFORZA vanquisheth the enemie in battaile, betwixt Soncina and the new Orges; and bringing his forces to the bankes of the Riuer Adda, putteth those of the Co^ntrie of Gyradade in great feare. LEON, SFORZA'S brother, is slaine with an Harq^ebuze* shot before Carauazza. PICININO in a set battaile  is vanquished at Anglare (...) Tuscanie. Winter approching SFORZA commeth to Venice. Great Triumphs are made at Venice in fauour of GIACOMO FOSCARI the Princes Sonne, which continued three daies. PICININO returning from Lombar die in the middest of Winter takes d^ers Townes on the Bressan Territorie. The Venetians Armie and th^ of PHILIP commeth at one time to Martinenga. Peace is made with PHILIP according to SFORZA'S will and pleasure. Hee marrieth BIANCA, PHILIPS Daughter* in Cremona* and after the publishing of the Peace he commeth with his Wife to Venice, where he is most magnificently entertained.

THe Spring-time was farre spent, and Sommer was at  hand, when Sforza hauing intelligence of the successe of the affaires of Tuscanie (for he was out of feare of any danger towards his owne state, or that of his Associates) with a mightie Armie matched against theSfo^za w^th a (...) (...) march^h ag^inst the enemie. enemie. It is reported* that the Souldiers neuer before had so large pay as at that time, whereby they were all exceedingly well furnished with Armour, Horses, and all other furniture for the Warres. And (...) the speedie relief^ of Bress^a with men and victuals, hee reso^ued to passe through the middest of the enemies;  for he was (...) encouraged by that which Contareni had lately done vpon the Lake of La (...).
This man (as hath beene said) being declared Generall of the Nauall Armie, which the Senate had with wonderfull speed made ready at ^orbolles, had already

lanched certaine Gallies into the lake, together with other vessells: but the number of Gallies is not agreed vpon by our Authors. Pasius of Arimini mentioneth but foure; Lagisiano of Verona, sixe; and Montanus halfe as manie, nor can we certainly finde in what part of the Lake they fought. Some say, That the enemies departed from Riua, and that they fought neare to Torbolles. Others, That it was betwixt the mouth of the Riuer Ponalis and Riua: And others againe, That Philips Armie departing from Pescara, and being tossed with the waues and a contrarie winde, met with the Venetian Armie in the middest of the Lake: But they agree generally, That the enemie at the same time, had many more vessells than the Venetians, which were commaunded by Blasio Assereta a Genouese, a man verie  skilful in marine matters, who was accompanied with man^ other (...) that were inured to sea-fights. Italus of Friull had manned their vessells with souldiers. Pietro Brunorio was with Contareni, with whom were certaine bands of choice footmen.
Now whilest Italus remained at Riua, hee brought his army many times arranged in battell before Torbolles, to fight with the Venetians, if he had found them so disposed. But Contareni did by all meanes shunne the fight, distrusting the small number of his vessells: Howbeit growing afterwards more bold (as Pasius saith) in regard of foure new-come Gallies and diuerse other small vessells of sundrie sortes which were well armed, and perceiuing moreouer that the enemies had the winde  against them, he sent a Gallie to charge two vessells loaden with victualls and armor which were going to Riua. Now the enemies perceiuing from their hauen, that the same Gallie made way against theirs, they forthwith, to rescue them, made towards the Venetians: Likewise Contareni being loth to leaue his Gallie as a prey to the enemie, speedily came forth of his Hauen, and with full sailes viered towardes him: All which his haste notwithstanding Italus had well neere taken his Gallie. Some there are that say, that the enemie did take it, before it could be rescued butA battell vpon the lake betwixt the Venetians and Philips forces. withall, that at the ariuall of the Venetian with the residue of his gallies and twelue other vessells, there beganne foorthwith a cruell fight betwixt them, which for a long time was very doubtfull; and likewise that they fought hand to hand, in regard  of the yron hookes and chaines that grapled them together.
This was a bloudy battell to the beholders: great numbers of slaine bodies on euerie side dropping into the water. But that which made it more hideous and frightfull were the ^easlesse and terrible reports of the cannon, together with the lamentable cries that were heard: all which (as it were at once) reuerberating the concauities of the neighbour-mountaines, gaue a double Eccho of those (...) of thunder. The aire, earth, and waters being troubled by the winde, and ^orcible motion of the vessells, did all togeth^r make a terrible noise. Many and different were the dangers of death; of all which one only is most remarkable: There was a rope tied athwart two Gallies, vpon which fifty men had taken hold that were fallen  into the water by sundry accidents, thereby to sust^ine themselues from drowning, esteeming that (vnder God) the onely meanes of their (...); but (...) so fell out that one of the ends being cut asunder, they did all ^n one ^nstant miserably perish.The venetians are (...) vpon the la^. After a long fight, the Venetians had go^ten the vpper hand of the enemies, by the valor and prowesse of Contareni and the rest, when (...) perceiuing fortune to frowne, entred into a little boate, and betooke him^elfe to (...): Assereta and his fellowes being amazed at their Generalls absence, sought meanes likewise of escape. Then the Venetian on euery side did straitly presse and enuiron them, and followed the victorie, till such time as hee had made himselfe master of all the enemies vessels, two only excepted which escaped (...) with great ioy drew them  to Torbolles, where with great difficultie his helmet was taken from his head, inThe valour of Contareni. regard it was extreamely battered with violent strokes in that fight receiued.
The newes of the victorie being brought to Bressia did greatly comfort the afflicted Citie, and gaue euery one hope of better fortune. For it was likely, that the

Lake lying free and open to the Venetians, nothing could hinder them from receiuing aide and victualls in aboundance. Therefore they resolued to send Ambassadours to Venice, to congratulate the Senate for that victorie. Pietro Auogadre wasThis victorie did greatly reioyce the Bressans. The Bressans send Ambassadours to Venice. the chiefe Commissioner who carried thither a golden ensigne, wherein was written, Brixiamagnipot^ns, Caeteris vrbibus fidei praebuit exemplum. Bressia the magnificent hath giuen an example of loyaltie to other Cities, the which in the Common-wealths name, as a presage of the future victorie was hung vp in Saint Marks church, where it is still at this day to be seene.
Contareni and Brunorio in the meane time stood not breathing in so faire a way, but departing on a sodaine from Torbolles, they went and besieged Riua both byRiua is taken by the Venetians. land and water, which though it was valiantly for a while defended, yet at last they forced it, and being taken, it was sacked as an enemie. They dealt roughly with the Inhabitants, because that they, more than the enemies, had abhorred the Venetian name; young children were violently dragged foorth of their parents armes, virginsGreat cruelty. were defloured, and wiues with their husbands were grieuously tormented. The Venetian presently after this recouered La Garda, which as some say wasLa Garda, Bardolin and Lansiza are taken. ruined; and as others, that it had no hurt. Next, for the recouerie of La Garda they tooke Bardolin, Lansiza, and diuers other townes vpon the Lake; whereof those which they tooke by force, were giuen in spoile to their souldiers; those that voluntarily yielded, they did freely pardon.
During this fortunate successe of Contareni vpon the Lake, Sforza had brought his Campe neare to Manerba, where hauing intelligence (as Pasius saith) that Borsia d'Aeste was gone to the enemies side; that many thousands were on the Bressan territorie; and that Gonzaga their capitall enemie was with great forces come to Marmirolla to assaile them in front and in flanke, he remained for a time doubtfull whether he should passe the Riuer Mincia, or not. For, hauing passed it, he was to open his way to Bressia by dint of sword; but his greatest care was, from whence to haue victualls to supplie his Armie; for there were twentie thousand men in his Campe: wherein, because he would doe nothing without counsell, he was desirousSforza's aduise to the Prouidator and Captain^ of the Armie. to conferre with the Prouidator and the other Captaines. Being in consultation about  this expedition, it is reported, That he did oftentimes aduise them heedfully to consider the greatnes of their enterprize, and how, the Riuer being once crossed, they were to march to Bressia through the middest of many thousand enemies, and that then if anie thing should fall out vnluckily, it would be too late to talke of had-I-wist.
Pascali Maripietro was at the same time Prouidator in the Armie, who answered,The Prouidators answer to Sforza It becommeth not me, O Sforza, nor anie here, who vnder thy commaund doe follow the Venetian ensignes to prescribe a Law vnto thee concerning martiall affaires: but it belongs vnto thee who art our Generall; and by long experience art most expert in martiall discipline, to aduise that which is necessarie to be done, and afterwards to commandit. For it is our dueties which fight vnder thy conduct to follow thy counsell and commaundement. AtThe effect of Auogadres speech to Sforza. this speech hee made no shew of any sodaine resolution; but Pietro Auogadre being come to the Armie did incite him by a vehement Oration. The summe whereof was, That acquainting him with the state of the affaires of Bressia, he told him, that vnlesse it were speedily relieued with victualls, men, an^ armour* it would come to passe (which hee should be verie sorie for) that that most loyall Citie, through want of timely succour, would be forced in despaire to yeelde to the enemie: and therefore he earnestly intreated him hauing obtained so faire a way, not to abandon so well-deseruing a Citie, surpassing all others in constant affection and loyaltie to the Venetian Republike, saying, That hee needed not fe^re the want of victualls, seeing that corne was alreadie ripe on the ground; which being reaped, he for his owne part promised to furnish out of his owne lands, a sufficient quantity to feede the Armie for ten daies.
Sforza being moued by these speeches caused the bridge to bee instantly made, whereupon the Armie crossed the Mincia neere to Monzabane, which towne being

being assailed, was forthwith taken and sackt by the souldiers. From thence heMonzabane is taken. went to Riuoltella, where the inhabitants perceiuing themselues to be streightly besieged by land and water, did presently yeeld. Contareni drew neere to Sales, andRiuoltella yeeldeth. Sforza being come to the riuer Celsia, encamped within tenne miles of Bressia. Thither did Barbaro and the chiefe of the Citie come to salute him. From thence Br^norio, and Scariot Fauentino, being sent with two bands of men at Armes to assault the towne of Sales, by helpe of Contaren's nauall Armie, they tooke it by force; where the Venetian dealt cruelly with the townsmen. Those of Caluisa, Gauarda,Sales taken. Calcina and Bagnols, did by their deputies yeeld themselues to Sforza whilest he renained at the riuer Celsia.
In this fortunate progression the Generall changed his determination, and in steed of going to Bressia, he resolued to march against the enemie. Barbaro (whom Sforza highly esteemed) exhorted him thereunto, telling him that it was much betbetter to pursue the victorie almost wonne, than to goe to Bressia, which was byThe Generals sodaine resolution. newes of his arriuall alreadie sufficiently assured. Being come to Bagnols, to make incursions on the enemies (who were said to be encamped at Manerbia) those of Otholenga and diuers other townes sent their Commissioners to him, suing for peace, and giuing him to vnderstand that the enemies being terrified at the report of his approach were retired from thence. The next day a thousand of the gallantest yong men of Bressia came to the Campe to salute the Generall, vnto whom, (for their  ancient hatred to Philip) they offered freely to follow him, and to beare Armes at their owne cost. Sforza did courteously entertaine them, and willed them to follow the ensignes.
Vpon the report that was bruted that Lodouico Sanseuerino, Ittalus of Friull, and Vermio, Philips Captaines, had fortified themselues betwixt Soncinna and the new Orgies, the Generall departing by night, went speedily against them, and hauing fiercely assailed them being fortified with trenches, and two bridges vpon the riuer Oglio, sent part of his cauallerie in front, and his infantery in Flanke, to prouoke them with Arrow-shot and warlike engines. Then hauing vnder colour of flight, drawne them on the otherside of the riuer, he returned couragiously to charge the^. He rode  vp and downe among his troupes, commending those who did valiantly, and sharply rebuking those that were backward. The enemies likewise did their best for a long time to make good the place. But Ciarpelion comming with a band of old souldiers ouer the wodden bridge which lieth on the Oglio, and hauing filled the trenches and broken downe the Rampiers, the victorie eftsoones inclined to the Venetians, the which being perceiued by the enemies, who were able to make no longer resistance, in great disorder they betooke themselues to flight. Pasias faith that a thousandSforza vanquis^eth the enemies. of them were either slaine or wounded, and twousand horse, and as many foot taken. Others lessen halfe the number. The chiefe of the Armie with those which escaped from the fight, fled to Crema. Some Authors affirme, That the victorious  Venetian being mingled with the runnawaies, entred pel-mell with them into Soncina, and that the Citie was in that sort taken, with great numbers of the enemies.Soncina take^. Others againe maintaine that the inhabitants did voluntarily yeeld after the battaile. Borsia d' Aeste lay at the burrough of Ienepalt with fifteene hundred horse, which is two miles from the place whe^e the battaile was fought, determining in the shutting in of the euening to ioyne with Philips Armie. Sforza's souldiers pursuing the enemie, gaue in on a sodaine, and vnloked-for vpon him, who supposing that the whole Armie was there, fled, hauing lost his baggage and the third part of(...) de Aste is put to r^nt. his cauallerie. It is reported by some others, that he came to the latter end of the battaile, and that he fought there together with his cauallerie, but that the victorie  inclining to the Venetians, and not being able to remedie it, he fled with the rest
Philips affaires by these defeats being reduced to extremitie, those of the new Orgies returned vnder the Venetians obedien^: And not that they alone, but all

the Townes, Castles, Forts, and Villages of the Bressan and Bergamese territories, together with the inhabitants of the (...) valley. The price of victuals did afterwards greatly fall at Bressia. Corne and all other fruites were sold for a lower rate by the tenth part than before they were. Bergamo likewise had a share in this good fortune. The Ambassadors of these two Cities came to Sforza's campe fi^st to congratulate him for his victorie, then to giue him thanks, for that by his valour, and that victorie, they had beene freed from so long and redious a siege, which had continued almost three yeares, at such time as they were (...) to haue made no moreAmbassadors come to Sforza (...) Bressia and Bergamo. resistance. Therefore they acknowledged and did prom^e euer after to confesse, That there was none next to the Venetians, vnto whom they were so much bound  as to himselfe; that they did through him alone enioy their safetie and wealth, and generally all whatsoeuer they possessed, and life it selfe, which to men is more pre^ious than all things else. These speeches were followed with some presents, befitting the time and their pouerrie, who with teares in their eies entreated him to respect the Bressans loue, more than their presents, saying that they certainly knew how that a generous Captaine craueth nothing of his followers aboue their means but onely loue and obseruance.
Now Sforza after his victorie hauing crossed the Oglio (for corne was ripe, and therefore there was no feare of any want of victuals in the Armie) hee recoueredSforza rec^ereth Casal Maior. Casal Maior, and diuers other townes in that countrey* Cara^zza except which  he besieged. But because there was a strong Garrison in (...), and that (...) likewise knew that, in regard of the riuer Addda which runneth (...) the walles, they mightBreguan, Triuil, and R^molca (...) the countrey of Gyradadeart recouered by Sforza. both by day and night bring all manner of v^ctuals thither, he ^aised his campe, and went first to recouer Bregnam, then Triuill and Reinol^* townes in the Gyradade. In regard of these approaches those of the Dutchie of Milane (...) greatly affrighted: The poore countrey men bringing their cattell and goods into the good townes.
Philip hauing from all parts assembed forces, builded certaine Forts vpon the riuer Adda, placing strong Garrisons in them. After the battaile of Og^, hee did continually send messengers to Picinino to call him from Tuscanie where hee remained.
The Venetians not being ignorant how many places of importance, which were still possessed by the enemie he lef^ behinde him, and receiuing certaine intelligence that Philip had called home Picinino into Lombardie, fearing an alteration of fortune, that if by chance he should be enforced to retire, he should no^ easily do it vpon an vrgent necessitie: Notwithstanding that oftentimes he made shew as if he were desirous to crosse the riuer Adda, neuerthelesse he abstained. Afterwards returning to besiege Carauazza, Leon his brother being shot into the bodie with an Harquebaze died within a while after, whereat being enflamed with choller, withSforza taketh Carauazza. greater courage than before he oppugned the besieged, vsing all meanaces and other  fearefull meanes to make them yeeld; which soone after had happened. Some say, That Leon, Sforza's brother, died of his hurts after Carauazza was taken.
Picinino in the meane time hauing notice of the ouerthrow of Oglio, and being pressed by Philips importunate letters to returne with speed in to Lombardie, supposingPicini^s proiect. that after his departure from Tuscanie, his associates together with the townes which had yeelded to him, would be afterwards defeated, and taken by the enemie, resolued to giue a battaile, to the end that, if he wanne it, the forces of the Florentines and the Pope being broken, his associates with the rest might more easily be wonne to per^ist in their affection.
Now all hope of taking Perugia being lost, the which he had promised to himselfe  to get by means of some within it, and hauing besieged Tiph^rnu in vaine, he passed on to the burrough of S. Sep^lcher, and from thence marched in battaile to Anglare where Bishop Lodouico Paulo Vrsino, and others were encamped. This towne standeth at the foote of the Appenine hilles in a verie high place, and beneath it is a bottome.

In this place, because the ascent is not sleepie, the Florentines troupes with those of the Pope were encamped, although some of them lay in the bottome as farre as the riuer, ouer which is a little bridge.
At Picinino's arriuall the first encounter was neere to the bridge. It is reported that some had assured him that he should that day defeate the enemie, as being vnprouided and not expecting his comming, especially vpon that day which was the nine and twentith of Iune, a day religiously obserued, in regard of the Feast of the holy Apostles. Thus b^ing confident and full of hope, he left the burrough, hauing brought with him some thousand of the townesmen to make them spectators of his assured victorie. But finding the enemie at his comming readie ranged in battaile, he was inforced to change his manner of fight, and to order his Armie afterThe battaile of Anglare betwixt Picinino and the l^ague. an other fashion. Neere to the bridge (as hath beene said) and the riuer side was the first encounter, where Picinino's sonne giuing a furious charge, the Tuseane was beaten backe, and the bridge wonne, but at the foote of the rising hee made a stand. Nicholao Pisani a braue Captaine was surprized neere to the riuer, and Attendulo fighting valiantly was almost taken by the enemies. Now in that little space of the bottome which lieth betwixt the riuer and the mountaine, they fought without any aduantage* Picinino did all he could to beat the enemies from their place, but all his attemptes w^re vaine. Whereupon, perceiuing that the enemies Armie stood fast, hee commaunded As^uro Fauentino, and the other valiant Captaines, to march with the Cauallerie in a close Battallion against the enemie. The Popes troupes comming fiercely from aboue vpon these men, did assaile them with such valour, as in great disorder they draue them as farre as the riuer. As^uro and many more of note being taken in that place, the enemiesThe defence and flight of the Venetians. on a sodaine in verie great feare did repasse the bridge, and dislodged.
Picinino afterwards supposed, That by reenforcing the troupes, he might easily march thence in battaile, but it fell out otherwise. For being readie to depart, the Florentines horse with those of the Pope did not eease to pursue him, euen as he mounted on horsebacke, and with their whole forces did so charge him, as they gaue him no time to reenforce his Armie, but disordering his troupes: they enforced him to flie, and slew greate numbers of his souldiers. The slaughte^ was great, but the number of the prisoners exceeded. For, besides As^ura, who was (as hath beene said) taken in the middle of the fight, eightThe great number of prisoners. and twentie Captaines, and eighteene hundred horse, with all the Inhabitants of the burrough, were carried away prisoners.
Picinino thus vanquished, escaped to the burrough, where vnderstanding, whome hee had lost, he cried out aloud; That Philips s^ate was ouerthrowne, vnlessePicinino dispa ireth after the losse of the batt^le. the enemie sent backe the flower of all Italie which ^ee had then taken. Lagisian^ writes; That with verie griefe he would twice haue slaine himselfe, and had vndoubtedly done it, if his sonne Francisco had not stayed with him day and night to  comfort and perswade him.
Whilest these things were done in Tuscanie, Sforza, after hee had taken Carauazza,Sfo^zas great conquest. and left Auogadre of Bressia at the siege of the Castle, deparred thence, and at that time (as some say) recouered Casall*Maior and diuers townes vpon the Cremonese. The Castle of Cauazza being yeelded, hee tooke Azola and Caneda from Gonzaga. They lay a while before the Castle of Macharia, those within it refusing to yeelde till such time as they perceiued part of their walles to be beaten downe with the Cannon. Those of Lona hauing seene Sforzas ensignes, did forthwith put themselues vnder his protection, the like did those of Monteclaro, Cauriana, and Riuoltelles. At the last, the campe drew neere  to Pescara.
This Citie (as hath beene elsewhere said) is seated at the mouth of the Riuer Mincia. It hath a goodly Castle neare to the Riuer with a bridge, and diuers Turrets. Sforza being encamped before it, Nicholao D'Aeste came thither vnlookt for.
He, resoluing to motion a peace, came to the Camp to talke with Sforza and MiripietroNicol^o d'Aeste commeth to Sforza's Campe to (...) of peace. the Prouidatour. And after a long discourse of the inconstancie of fortune (which he said, the Venetians and Sforza were to remember) made a motion of procuring a peace with Philip, and promised, if Sforza thought it fit, to bee the Author and Agent thereof. He added besides, (which hee knew would bee verie pleasing to Sforza) that he would doe his best to caufe Philip to giue him his daughter Bianca to wife, which till then hee had refufed, and that hee should send her to the Campe (if he pleased) with a rich and sumptuous traine. Sforza made answere, that he craued nothing but peace and quiet, and that hee likewise knew, that the Venetians did desire it; prouided that Philip were so content; As for Bianca, hee would  conferre with her father and kinffolkes. Aeste departing with this answere went to Milan to Philip. Pescara in the meane time, the fourth day of the siege, was taken byThe Venetians take Pes^ara. force, by the valour of Contareni and his Marriners (for the Nauall Armie came thither at Sforza's arriuall) and was sackt. Then they planted a great piece of batterie (wherewith the walls of Macharia of a meruailous greatnesse had beene beaten downe) to ouerthrow the Citadell, which ouerlooked the Citie. Some write that the report of this peece was so great and forcible as diuers houses of the inhabitants fell downe at the only noise thereof, and that the ships which lay at ankor vpon the lake, aboue fiue hundred paces off, did strike one against another as often as the peice was shot off.
Now this Tower being battered with that Engine, was at the tenth shot beaten downe to the ground, whereat those of the Citadell being daunted did forthwith yeeld. Sforza crossed the Mincia, and in a short space made himselfe master of Villa-Franca and Vigasio, then of Vallessin and the bridge ouer the Riuer, with diuers other small townes gotten from the Mantuan.
During those exploits along the Mincia, Aeste hauing remained a while with Philip,N^colao d'Aest^ bringeth the Ladie Bianca to Mantua. brought Bianca dow ne to the Po to Mantua. This caused the Venetians to suspect Sforza, for that he was so soone reconciled to his father-in-law; and they were afraide least the Common-wealth would receiue some detriment by that reconciliation. But Sforza being intreated to goe to Marmarioles a village of the Mantuans  where Bianca lay there to conferre of peace and Marriage, hee answered that heeSforza's answere to those that entreated him to go thither where Bia^ca lay. would not goe without the Senates leaue to an enemies Countrie, the which hee thought they would not suffer him to doe. This answere caused the Venetians no more to doubt of his loyaltie. Hereupon the Ladie was by the Riuer Po brought from Mantua to Ferrara; and Aeste three daies after followed her thither.
Picinino after the ouerthrow receiued at Anglare, departed from the Burrough whither he had retired after the battaile, and went into Flaminia; and being safe in the companie of his associates, hee did by great iourneis arriue at Milan. Lodouico, Generall of the Popes Armie, did within a while after goe into that Prouince, where (the Brethren Sigismund and Malateste being called backe to the Popes seruice, although  Malateste did afterwards returne to Philips partie) hee recouered in a short space certaine Townes by a voluntarie reddition. The Forlani would haue done the like, had not the garrison with Picinino left in their citie kept them in awe. Then ioyning with the troupes of Giacomo, Antonio Marcello, who was sent from Lombardie into Flaminia with fiue companies of men at Armes, hee thought it verie necessarie to besiege Rauenna.
Ostasio in regard of his ancient friendship with the Venetians, did vpon MarcellosRaucnna vnder the Venetians. word, receiue the Venetians into the Citie, committing the gouernment thereof to him, whereupon hee with his wife and children re-withdrew himselfe to Venice: Some say that the people yeelded in despight of Ostasio, which seemeth vnto mee  to be most true, because that I find within a while after that hee was banished into Candie. But whether he or the inhabitants were Authors of that yeelding, it is certaine that Lodouico tooke it in ill part; and in indignation thereof did within a while after giue Bagna and Cauallo, which he had taken by force to Nicholao D'Aeste*

And because the Autumne of that yeare had beene very vnseasonable by reason of the continuall raine, they were enforced by the bad disposition of the aire to send the troupes to Garrison sooner than they vsed to do. Thereupon the Popes forces left Flaminia, went into Tuscanie, and from thence to Rome.
Sforza likewise, Winter drawing on, hauing recouered all sauing Legnaga, which for a time he besieged in vaine in regard of the strong Garrison within it (although it is most certaine that it was more defended by the continuall raine and tempests than by Armes) sent his Armie to winter, all sauing one band of men at Armes which hee led with him to Verona for his Guard. Hee distributed the residue of the Armie along the riuer Adda as far as the Treuisans Territorie in townes  and villages. This being done he came to Venice with a small traine to salute the Prince and Senate.
Neuer was any Generall of an Armie entertained with greater ioy both of theThe great entertainement giuen to Sforza at Venice. people and Senate, than Sforza was. For they did not only commend him but had him in great admiration, they gazed attentiuely vpon him in regard of his great valour, and thought that they saw somewhat in him that was venerable and more than humane. All the States of the Citie went to meet him and brought him to the Pallace where he was magnificently entertained. Francisco Barbaro, who byFrancisco Barbaro highly esteemed in Venice. the Senates appointment after Sforza's arriuall was come to Venice with Pietro Auogadre and an hundred Bressan Gentlemen, was likewise highly praysed and esteemed. All men did no lesse admire him than the other, for that hee had preserued Bressia, and was of all men greatly honoured. The Bressans likewise were entertained and embraced by the Prince and Senate with teares in their eyes, being ouer-ioyed: and their loyaltie was infinitely commended; all men were of opinion that it ought to bee commended to posteritie by some acknowledgement; whereuponThe Bressans are recompenced for their loyaltie. they were declared worthie of all franchise and exemption. And to the end that the common people might likewise taste of his grace and bountie, the yearely tribute of the Mills amounting to twentie thousand Duccats was for euer quitted to the people.
Pietro Lodron sonne to Paris, for that he and his Father had deserued well of the  Common-wealth, had great guifts giuen him, with three houses; the one in Padua, the other in Vincenza, and the third in Verona. Besides, diuers gallant and vnusuall shewes were to bee seene in the Citie, all of them in honor of Giacomo Foscari the Princes sonne, who at that time was married in great magnificence. But of all the shewes, one especially, being very rare and delightfull, hath deserued aboue the rest to be commended to posteritie: which was, That from Saint Samuels Church vnto Saint Barnabies shoare, a bridge was made for that time ouer the water, for theGreat triumphs at Uenice at the wedding of the Princes sonne. pompous traine of Knights to passe ouer to goe to the Palace of Leon Contareni Father to the Bride* who comming forth of her Fathers house entred into the Bucentaure which was richly tapessed, wherein she was accompanied with all the Ladies  and Gentlewomen of the Citie sumptuously apparrailed. Afterwards fights at barriers, and other kindes of sports continued sundrie daies and were acted by sundrie persons in honour of the Prince.
In these shews was the Citie busied, whilst* Picinino (who as hath been said though neither victorious nor vanquished, could not liue at quiet) hauing renued his Armie in Lombardie, came in the midest of winter, when no man thought he would haue come into the field, and made a fierce march vpon the Bressan Territorie, filling the whole Countrie with feare, so as before Sforza's departure from Venice, he enforcedPicinino his vnlookt for (...) into the Countrie of Bressia. all the champaigne Countrie of Bressia, and whatsoeuer the Venetians held vpon the riuer Adda, and on the Bergamese confines (the new Orges excepted) to yeeld;  and likewise defeated twelue hundred Venetian horse at Monteclaro. Sforza's troups being speedily drawn from their Garrisons retired into the strongest Towns. This losse was accompanied with the reuolt of Ciarpelion, who with three hundred horse went to Picinino's side: The Duke of Hadria within a while after did the like.

For he forsooke Sforza, and carried a great Cauallerie awaie with him.
During these stirres there happened a meruailous reuolt of Townes; but within a while after there followed a greater, vpon the false rumours that Picinino spread abroad concerning Sforza, How that being at Venice he had beene committed to prison, and afterwards secretly murthered by the Senates commandement. The enemie by these forged matters made all things more easie for himselfe, vntill that Sforza to wipe out these false imputations, came speedily to Bressia. And because the extreame colde weather would not permit him to execute anie enterprise, after that hee had by his presence confirmed those that had continued loyall, and put them in good hope, hee returned to Verona, where hauing intelligence of that  which had beene done at the bridge of Valeza which the prince of Mantua had taken, he sent for all the troupes that wintered thereabouts, and went in haste to besiegeSforza recruers the bridge of Valeza. it; and being taken in a short space, he manned it with a strong garrison. Some write, that at his departure from Bressia, Monteclaro, Soncina, Martinenga, and Casal-major reuolted; and that he was not greatly troubled for that losse, hauing rather to loose them in that manner than by force, knowing for certaine that those Townes would proue his, who the next summe^ should be strongest in the field. Philips troupes spent the remainder of the winter in those places.
The Spring-time being come, they beganne on both sides to make great preparations for warre, and to prouide armour, victualls, and generally, whatsoeuer  might serue for the obtaining of a victorie. Lombardy did not only attend the successe of that warre, but all Italie. For all men perceiued that the warre would neuerThe Venetians place Attenda^ in Mellato's (...). end but by the death of one of those two great Captains, or by his entire ouerthrow. Michael Attendulo being sent for by the Venetians, was in the meane time come foorth of Tuscany into Lombardy with two thousand men to command the troupes in Mellato's place, who drew towards his end.
Sforza (whose great authoritie and commaund did not onely extend ouer the Venetian forces, but ouer all those of the associates) in regard it was time to leaue the Garrisons, had assembled all his Armie, when as the enemie, who was wont by his Spies to haue intelligence of the least of his proceedings, was in the field a little  before him with sixteene thousand men, and incamped vpon the Bergamese on the bankes of the Riuer Serioles. His Campe neere to Algesia was in this sort fortified. Before him lay the Riuer, and on both sides of him were the high mountaines, atAfter what maner Picinino incamped. his back the Riuer Oglio with a bridge guarded by a strong Garrison. I find in some Authors Mella for Serioles, and Legnaga for Algesia. But whether hee incamped there or not, (for vndoubtedly it was in a place naturally strong) he thought himselfe able by long delayes to frustrate all Sforza's designes.
But it fell out otherwise than he expected. For so soone as the Venetians Generall with a gallant Armie came in view of the enemies, and that he had considered the situation of the places he foorthwith resolued to ioyne battell, and to enforce  the enemie to quit the place. Therefore he beganne to exhort his souldiers to the fight, telling them: That it was greater in shew than substance, and withall assuring them,Sforza his speech to his souldi^s. that with ease they might defeat Philips souldiers, and their fearefull Generall in those narrow straights, wherein they had enclosed themselues; and that they being vanquished, they should purchase same and a great booty: He told them that hee would vse a longer speech, if those with whom they were to deale were not already sufficiently knowne vnto them: being euen the same men whom so often they had ouerthrowne, beaten, taken, and basely disgraced. He willed them then to march forward, and at the first signall of the battell to beate downe the enemie, who by his owne confession was more than halfe vanquished; For hee did not send them to the fight, but to the victorie, as being much stronger than they in number, valour, courage, and good fortune.
This being said, hee called for the crossebow-men, and hauing giuen the signall to the sight, the battell beganne to be very cruell on the shore, where Caualcabon a valiant man, and diuers other men of note were slaine; many likewise were hurt, among

whom was Troillo. And certainely there would haue bin great slaughter on both sides, had not night giuen end to the battell which beganne very late. Some say that it lasted from morning to noone. Pasius writes, That Philip willed Picinino not to fight, and that by reason thereof, the night after the battell hee crossedThe fight betwixt Picinino and Sforza is broken off ^y the approch o^ night the Oglio about midnight; and leauing a strong Garrison at the bridge, hee went and incamped on the Cremonese. But that which Montanus sets downe seemeth most credible, to wit, That they fought more than once with sundrie euents, and that the enemie did not passe ouer the Riuer, before that Bartolomeo Coyone, a valiant man, had taken Pontologia fiue miles from thence, or as others say Antonio Martinenga: and vntill he had notice that the Venetian troups were come vpon the  Cremonese. I can not certainely tell which of them passed first ouer the Riuer, in regard of the great diuersitie of Historians. But all agree in this, that so soone as Sforza came into the enemies Countrey, he went and besieged Martinenga.
Giacomo Gaiuano was in the Towne with a gallant troupe of horse. There wereSforza besiegeth Martinenga. likewise great numbers of footmen, so that the mercenarie souldiers were farre more in number than the Townesmen. There was in the Venetian Armie more than an hundred and thirtie troups of horse, and great numbers of foot-forces. The Venetians Generall vpon the assurance of his forces, did encompasse the whole Towne: and hauing fortified his Campe with trenches and rampires, he resolued to keep the enemie besieged vntill he should constraine him by force or faire means  to yeeld vp the place. The next day after that the Venetians were incamped, Picinino retired a mile off into a place full of wood and water, watching all occasions, that if the enemie should commit anie errour, he might cut off the Victuallers, or those which kept the guard, determining not to fight with his whole forces.Philip is reduced to great (...).
At this stay were Philips affaires, who although hee were reduced to that want, as after Picinino's returne he was inforced for the renewing of his Armie to borrow money of certaine of his Courtiers, to take vp Armes on credite in shops, and horse and victualls forth of the townes vnder his subiection, yet neuerthelesse, because he perceiued that the whole burthen of the warre would light vpon him, and being of a great and inuincible courage, and alway busied in warre, he vsed all  possible meanes to assure his subiects by new supplies. The Venetians in like maner did the same, beeing already in a manner victors. And to make a greater shew of their power, they leuied souldiers from all parts with greater pay than had euer bin giuen, so as in a few daies they had before Martinenga aboue thirtie thousand fighting men, besides the Souldiers boyes, Laundresses, and mechanicke people which vse to follow Campes.
The ordnance in the meane time still playing, had made a very great breach,The number of the Venetian armie before Martinenga. which might haue beene easily approached, if Sforza had giuen an assault: But hee would not doe it, fearing (as some thought) that Picinino would haue assailed his Campe, while he should be busied at the assault. At the same time it was by some  supposed that the businesse was expresly drawne forth at length without any battel by the two Generals; and that there was some secret practize and agreement betwixt them to diuide together the towns of Italie, they supposing by the assurance of so great forces, to be able with ease to seize on the Prouinces. But this rumor had no certain author, though perhaps some held it for certain. But the Venetians who in no sort doubted of Sforza's loialtie, had no mistrust thereof. Sigismond of Ari^ini, vnto whom Malateste gaue his daughter Polixena in marriage, came at the same time to Sforza's Campe.
Ostasio Polentano, who lay at Treuiso, being taken as hee was going to the enemie with Ieronimo his sonne, were confined into Candie, where both of them not long  after died by sicknesse. In the meane time nothing was done before Martinenga. The two Armies were not farre off from one another; the one intending the f^ege, and the other how to surprize. But the businesse on both sides went slowly forwards.
Philip being either incited by the reports that were dispersed of the trecherous accord made betwixt the two Generalls; or else being wearied with the great expences of the warre: or rather, as some affirme, being vrged with the insolent demandsPhilips resolution. of Picinino and the rest that were in pay vnder him, turning sodainly from Armes to peace, resolued to commit his daughter Bianca and all his meanes to the trust and discretion of Sforza. He secretly therefore sent one called Vrbano Rosan of Pauia, or as others write, Eusebio Caiman to Sforza's Camp: Howbeit those that haue most faithfully written this Historie, say, That Antonio Guidebon of Derthonna was first sent to sound him how he stood inclined to peace, and presently after him, Eusebio Caiman, who finished the businesse.
It is reported that Sforza alone treated with this man from the second watch of the night, till brode day-light concerning the conditions of peace: and that in the morning both of them comming forth of his cabinet, they publikely shewed themselues with smiling countenances. Manie were already come to the Generalls tent (as the manner is) to bid him good morrow, among whom was Maripietro the Prouidator:Peace is conclud^d by Sforza and Philips commissioner. Sforza turning towards him and the rest smiling said, Gentlemen I proclaime peace to you, wee must talke no more of warre nor Armes, we must only thinke on peace and quiet.
This aduertisement being new and vnlookt-for, seemed verie strange to the Venetian and the rest, who asked of one an other what was meant thereby, and why  Sforza was so soone turned from Armes to peace, and of Philips capitall enemie become his friend. These newes were forthwith spred ouer the whole Campe: And the Generall presently commanded the Souldiers no more to execute any hostile actions. The like did Philips Commissioner cause to be done in Picinino's Armie. It is reported for a wonder, that the verie selfe-same day, there was such a mutuall congratulat on among the Souldiers, and such frequent comming to and fro, from one Armie to the other, vpon the only speech of peace, as both Campes seemed to bee but one, and that the next day the Captaines did publikely embrace and entertaine one an other.
Sforza in the meane time had sent Angelo Simonetto to Venice to acquaint the  Prince and Senate, with what had beene done.
Picinino did not long conceale his griefe; but hauing drawne the Garrison forth of Martinenga, he marched to the Territorie of Lodes, where he greatly complained on Fortune and Philip; for that they had betraied a poore, lame, and olde man.
O Fortune (quoth he) and thou Philip most ingratefull, could ye without my knowledgePicinino his complaints vpon ^he report of pence. treate of a businesse of so great consequence? and is this the recompence of my seruices for the space of so many yeares in heate and cold, faire weather and foule, done to an vnthankfull Prince? O how vaine are all my toiles and forepassed dangers? To what purpose hath my loialty beene, to what end my industrie? why hath my labour and speed so often restored Philips  affaires wholly ruined? I haue serued and defended him in his soueraigne authoritie, that now proueth mine enemie; for certainely hee holdeth mee for such an one; nor doe I thinke but that hee hates mee more than an enemie. Hee hath giuen his daughter to Sforza, he hath committed all his meanes vnto him; But of wretched Picinino, of whose loue, affection, and industrie, he hath had so great triall, hee hath no remembrance, esteeming him not only vnworthie of greater honour, but reputeth meanely of him, not vouchsafing to acquaint him with the motion of the peace. O how more than true is that saying, That there is nothing more vaine and vncertaine than the fauour of a great Prince, and that there is no more assurance in depending vpon such an one, than in the wordes and actions of a mad-man.
Such were Picinino's complaints: when Sforza, after that he had recouered Martinenga, and other Townes on the Cremonese, and committed the troupes to Maripietro the Prouidator, went to Venice, where comming into the Senate he spake in this manner to the Senators.





Sforza his Oration in the Senate.
WEe haue O Prince and Senators by the fauour of Almightie God and your good fortune, till now, so daunted Philips great forces, and in such sort lessened his greatnesse by many ouerthrowes one after an other, as hee hath beene of late enforced to send to your Campe, and humbly to sue for peace whereof he hath made me Iudge and Authour. Your Armie is safe and in good estate, wee haue recouered the Townes which hee tooke from you, which are vnder the commaund of your Prouidator. Besides, I bring you peace if you thinke it worthie of you, and such, as being receiued may profit the Common-wealth. Receiue it if ye so please, with as good a will as it is offered. But if yee thinke it more expedient still to continue the warre (seeing it lieth in you to embrace which of the two yee shall best like of) command what you will haue to be done. As for my selfe, I will endeuour, if fortune answer^ my desire, to finish this war to your contentment, with as great loialtie and constancie as I haue vndertaken it, and by Gods helpe to continue it to the end.




Sforza's arriuall was very pleasing, much more his sweet and gratious speech; but peace most of all. For they could not haue wished for one more iust and aduantagious: Therefore they highly thanked him, for that by the selfe-same valour and loyaltie asThe Senates answere to Sforza. hee had begunne that long and tedious warre, he had brought it to the desired end. And concerning peace they answered him, That the Venetians were pleased with it, and would hold that for firme which he had made with the enemie: Hee had leaue then when he pleased to depart, and to dispose, (they praying God that it might be to the profit and honour of the Republike and his owne) of the publike businesse, as hee should thinke fit. For they were assured that he could doe nothing, but that which would be profitable and honourable for the Common-wealth.
In this manner he went forth of the Senate, reioicing as much for that peace as for a victorie, and so returned to the Campe. From whence sending the Armie to Garrisons, he stayed at Capriana, to giue audience to Ambassadours who he knew would come thither to him from all parts of Italie. There came to him at the same  time the Patriarke Lodouico Nuncio to Pope Eugenius; who taking his leaue of him to returne to Rome, Blondus of Furli the Historian remained with Sforza. Nerius C^pare and Angelo Acciarole were sent from the Florentines; Francisco Barbadico and Paulo Troni from the Venetians, to the end that if neede were, some might be there to defend the Venetians cause. Nicholao Arcimboldi, and Franchino Castellone were sent by Philip from Milan: diuers others came thither, as Ambassadours from other Princes and Common-wealths.
Philip according to his promise at the beginning, hauing called backe his daughter from Ferrara, did send her with a gallant Nuptiall traine to Crem ona. Commissioners likewise were appointed from him and in his name to giue the Citie and Castle  of Cremona to Sforza for her dowrie; The which to receiue together with the Ladie, he came thither, attended on by three thousand horse. And entring the Castle glistring in Armes with a numer of his choice friends, comming neare to the Ladie he spake vnto her in this manner.




Sforza's speech to his future Bride.
I Haue along time laboured (my dearest Spouse) to attaine to this so much desired marriage. The good will which I haue euer borne to thee since I first made suite to haue thee to my Wife, hath neuer suffered me to take rest, but night and day thou hast beene imprinted in my minde: And it did greatly despight me to see those that enuied our good fortune, to haue so much credit with thy Father Philip, as that by their meanes hee denied mee his Daughter. I resolued

either to die valiantly, or else to winne thee: if not by faire meanes, at leastwise by force of Armes. I will not deny but that I tooke armes, and did enterprize a dangerous warre, but it was to let thee see how that there is nothing how difficult soeuer but I would attempt for thy sake. I neuer hated Philip, because he was thy father, and by thee my father-in lawe: nor did I euer so much desire to hurt him, as I was willing to keepe him from offending mee. The which may easi^y be discerned by the effects that ensued. Hee was desirous to haue mee lay downe Armes, I presently did so; He made me Iudge and Vmpire of the peace, I haue procured him a perpetuall peace with the Venetians. Whereunto hath all this tended, but to let thee know that I neuer had anie intent either to hurt thee or thine? And doe not thinke, because thou seest me armed, that thou art sent to an enemie, and not to a louing husband. For it beseemeth the daughter of a great Prince, to be in this manner first saluted by a souldior and great Captaine her husband. There remaineth nothing to doe, but that with mutuall affection we loue one another, and that by thy meanes thy father may heereafter thinke well of vs: And for mine owne part, I will loue and honour him as our common father, with the like affection as thy selfe.




This he spake (according to Pasius of Arimini) and the better to oblige the Ladie to himselfe he presented her with many rich gifts. Others say that hee was betrothed vnto her in Saint Sigismonds Church without the Citie; and they make no mention of Sforza's speech to his wife. The Nuptialls being solemnized hee spent certaine dayes in dispatching the Ambassadours. For on the one side the Popes  Nuncio craued Bolognia which Picinino held, and Rauenna which was possessed by the Venetians. On the other side the Venetians were not well pleased, because that Legnaga, and those Towns which they had formerly possessed in the Gyraldade, were taken from them. Philips cause was well debated there as was that of PrinceSforza is busie in hearing and satisfyng the Ambassadour. Gonzaga by those whom they had sent thither. The one craued Lonada Pescara and diuers other Townes; and the other Bressia and Bergamo, two most excellent Cities, In the end after sundrie contentions, Sforza pronounced his sentence in this manner, That Philip should pretend no claime to the Bressan nor BergameseSforzas sentence co^cerning the strife betwixt the Ambassours. Territories, but that those two Cities with their dependances should remaine to the Venetians: Cremona and all the Cremonese should bee the dowrie of Bianca his  wife. That the ^etians should surrender Martinenga to Philip, with all the Cities in the Gyradade: That they should ha^e (...) (...) (...) (...) Gonzaga should haue againe whatsoeuer belonged to the Mantuan (...), (...) ^is condition neuerthelesse* That after h^ had drawne (...) Garrison (...) (...), he should deliu^r both it and the Hauen to the Venetians: That the (...) ^ould enioy Riua, Torbolles, and (...), which they had wonne by right o^ Armes, together with Rauenna. That Pope Eugenius within two years should ha^e ^olognia restored from Picinino* That (...) Fauentino hauing restored to the Florentines those Townes which ^e had taken from them and which hee (...) held, should bee freed from his impri^ent* Th^ (...) Genoueses should (...) ^heir libertie and should  haue no more to do with Phili^* And besides ^oncerning ^eace (whereof he had an especiall care) his ^ill was, ^hat euerie one should religiously obserue it.
This sentence of Sfo^ (...) with (...) of the rest approued, was by the Popes Nuncio reiected, who went about to cause others to dislike of it, because, as he thought, they had done no great matter for the good of the Roman Church. Whereupon, in a rage hee went to Florence, and from thence to Rome. Peace was in this sort concluded on the (...) and tw^eth day of September, the yeare one thousand and twentie from the Cities foundation, and in the fourth yeare of the last warre with Philip. In Venice, enerall processions were made for three dayes space, and thanksgiuing to Almightie God for that the Common-wealth was not only  freed from a most dangerous war, but, for that by peace they had encreased their State. The Prisons were set open, and offenders quitted. Those that lay for debt vnder the summe of one hundred pounds, were discharged, and those that ought more paid but the one halfe.
Sforza the third yeare after his comming into Lombardie, went to Venice withSforza with his wife commeth to Venice. his wife: the Prince and the whole Senate went forth to meet him. The Princes wife being attended on by all the Ladies of the Citie receiued the new married wife in the Bucentauro, and were lodged in the Pallace of the Bernardi, which for that purpose was sumptuously furnished. The publike streets, and all the shoppes from Rialto to Saint Marks were stuffed with all sorts of rich merchandize, which gaue great admiration to strangers. All the treasure which is kept in a part of the Church, was laid abroad to be seene and viewed of all men: Then great presents were giuen to both of them: And at last, when they tooke their leaue to goe to La Marca, the Prince and  Nobilitie accompanied them as far as Malamoc.
The end of the fifth Booke of the third Decad.







THE SIXTH BOOKE OF THE THIRD DECAD  OF THE HISTORIE Of Venice.

The Contents of the sixth Booke of the third Decad.
WArre is renewed by EVGENIVS and PHILIP. SFORZA'S troupes  hauing continued aboue foure yeares in La Marca, were at the last driuen thence. Warre at the same time was made in sundrie places against the Turkes. The Honourable entertainement giuen in Venice to the Wife of LIONELLO D'AESTE. The Bologneses recouer their libertie. FRANCISCO PICININO in his Fathers absence is wholly bereft of his forces in the Mount Volmea. The great reuolt of SFORZA'S Captaines was the cause of his defeate in La Marca. NICHOLAO PICININO, the great Captaine, dieth at Milan. MICHAELI ATTENDVLO hauing taken armes neare to Cremona, defeateth PHILIPS troupes vpon the Gyradade. The Senate hauing intelligence of the new alliance made betwixt PHILIP and SFORZA, taketh from him all the benefits which the Common-wealth had  bestowed vpon him. The Venetian Armie approcheth twise neare to Milan. The Venetians doe greatly molest the enemies neare to the Lake of Coma. The death of PHILIP Duke of Milan. The Venetians reduce Lodes and Plaisancia vnder their obedience. SFORZA comming into Lombardie taketh Plaisancia by force and sacks it. He burnes the Venetians Nauall Armie neare to Casal-Major, and defeateth the Venetians at Carauazza. The Venetians make a league with SFORZA against the Milaneses. Those of Milan with in a while after, hauing made a league with the Venetians, doe attempt to defend their libertie against SFORZA.

LOmbardie after Sforza's departure was for a time  peaceable, but in the meane space, the Venetians affaires were not very quiet: Their care for the Warre of La Marca, and the tumults of the Bologneses did a long time hold them in suspence, till such time as Philip renewed the Warre against them vpon the Cremonese, the which after his death was dispersed ouer all Lombardie: but wee will hereafter set downe what was the cause thereof, and likewise what end it had. And now seeing that the order of the affaires doe  so require it, we will insist a little vpon that which the Venetians did as well at home in the Citie, as abroade forth of Italie. The which we thought fit to insert in the beginning, because we finde it first mentioned in the Venetian Histories.
Now Lombardie being at quiet, Andrea Dandulo was sent Ambassador to the king of Babylon, vpon a rumour that was spred, how that the Venetians had carriedAndrea Dandulo is sent Ambassador to the Soldan of Babilon. away diuers of his subiects forth of the countrey, and transported them into the West, hauing slaine them, and sold the rest, to the end that the Soldan might know that it was not done by the consent of the Commonwealth, seeing that the Author thereof for want of appearance at an appointed day had beene condemned as guiltie, although that a while after comming by the Senates leaue to iusti^ie himselfe, hauing proued that he had beene enforced ^o to doe, it is reported that by a generall consent he was acquitted.
About the same time Mellato that excellent Captaine, who had so well deserued Mellatos death. of the Republike, died. The Senate in memorie of his good seruices caused his statue on horse* backe to be erected neere to S. Antonies Church in P^dua. The same yeare three new Procurators of S. Marke were created. Lodouico Lauretano was chosen at the first assemblie, Paulo Troni at the second, (...) Fancisco Barbarico, surnamed theThree new Procurators of S. Marke created. rich at the last, so that then, they who were wont to be but sixe, were encreased to nine. There were besides at the same time three ships of burthen armed, and one galley, which were sent to Sea to free it from Pirates. For it was reported that the Sotolani verie famous Rouers, did scoure those Seas: And within a while after, foure Gallies departed from the Citie vnder the command of Ant onio Diede for the guardThe Citie of Antiuari subiect to the Venetians of the Gulph. This man by meanes of some others of the contrarie part that fauoured  the Venetians, tooke the Citie of Antiuari in Albania by force: the which he reduced vnder the Venetians command.
The same yeare which was the thousand and two and twentieth from the foundation of the Citie, on the sixth day of Nouember, the Sea did in such sort ouerflowA great deluge at Venice. all the streets in the Citie, as an incredible quantitie of Marchandize was therewith spoiled. It is thought that the marchants lost by that inundation m^re in value than a million of Gold. The Hungarians at the same time fought against the Turkes with prosperous successe, who within a while after receiued a greater ouerthrow in the lower Misia, at this day called Valachia.
The Pirates in the meane time were so strong at Sea as the Marchants vpon all  the Sea-coasts had no safe place of retreat, so that the verie hauens of Apulia, and Calabria where the marchants comming from the higher Sea were wont to touch, were not free from their piracies. The Venetians hauing oftentimes complained to Alfonso, and receiuing no other answere, but he was ^orie for it; that the merchants were not wronged by any of his subiects; and that he could hardly belieue it: Diede being moued with indignation, went to besiege the town of Bistonia,Bistice assailed by the Uenetians. the onely harbour at that time of those theeues (I suppose that the same Sea towne which stands vpon the confines of the Florentines, which at this day is called Bistice, was in time past so named) and at his arriuall summoned the Inhabitants to deliuer into his hands the Pirates that were there, and in so doing, he promised them to depart  thence, and to hurt none of them. Vpon the towesmens refusall, who threatned to discharge their ordnance vpon him if he made any attempt, Diede ranne to Armes, and comming to assault the towne, he would greatly haue endangered the enemie, had not a terrible tempest sodainly arose, which scattering his vessels heere and there, threw the Venetians into the enemies hands, whereupon the Generall of the fleet with his whole companies were taken, who afterwardes by Alphonsos commandement were set at libertie, and had their ships and goods restored to them: and of his bountie, the king added his promise to make good to the Venetians whatsoeuer they had lost in that incounter, which could not bee recouered.
Andrea Quirini drew forth the vessels which had beene taken from the Hauen of  Bistice, and to blot out that first disgrace, pursuing the Pirates, he recouered from them diuers Venetians ships, and tooke some of theirs, who fearing the punishment that would haue beene inflicted vpon them if they should be taken and carried

to Venice, they would by no meanes fall into the Venetians hands, but forsaking their Liburnian vessels, they went on shore in the next Hauen they came to, where they continued till such time as they vnderstood that the nauall Armie was returned to Venice. For then they began more fiercely than before to spoyle and take whatsoeuer they met with. But their vnbridled libertie lasted not long. For Philippo Canalus was speedily sent against them with three ships of burthen, and one Galley. Some write that about the same time certaine Gallies were armed at Venice against the Turkes; but they that write this, doe not set downe the number of the Gallies, nor vnder whom they were sent forth.
Of those ships which returned from Syria ^oden with marchandize, that of Contareni by a sodain tempest was cast away, the marriners hardly escaping with their liues to the bordering shore: But afterwards being taken into Antonio Abramo his ship, they did againe suffer shipwracke, and were cast all away neere to Modon. This carried with it two losses, namely of men, which was the greatest, in regard they were many, and also in rich marchandize, which was thought to be worth fiftie thousand crownes.
Two Gallies were likewise furnished in the name of Lionello d' Aeste, the sailesThe king of Arragons daughter commeth to Venice. of one of them were of purple silke, which brought from Ortona, a towne of the Peligniani, to Venice, the king of Arragons daughter betrothed to this young Prince* Victor Capello, and Francisco Lauretano commanded those two Gallies. The Bride  for the Princes sake her husband, who was a friend to the Venetians, was honorably entertained at Venice. The Arcenall was shewed vnto her, and to the great Lords that attended her, among whom was the Prince of Salerne: From thence being brought backe to the Rial to thorugh the Mercers street, it was so abundantly set out with costly warres, as all men did admire it. Such great multitudes of people came from all parts to see her, as with their weight both sides of the Bridge of Rial to fell downe into the water, and carried with it many people who were spoiled and drowned. At her departure from Venice she was honoured with sundrie rich(...) d'Aeste comes to venice. presents. For which, within a while after Lionello came in person to Venice to salute the Prince and Senate, and to thanke them for the honourable reception of his  Bride.
At the Spring-time eight Gallies were on a sodaine armed at Venice against the Turkes, at the expence of Pope Eugenius. The Pope referred the execution of that businesse, to Cardinall Iohn his Nephew, of the familie of the Candelmares. Lodouico Lauretano, Pietro Zenti, Marini de Molino, Paulo Lauretano, Lorenzo Moro, Nicolao Contareni, and Antonio Candelmare were Captaines of the Gallies. Besides these, the Duke of Burgondie caused foure others to be armed there at the same time, which were commaunded by foure Venetian Gentlemen, namelyDiuers Gallies armed at Venice against the Turkes. of the familie of the Venieri, Contareni, Lauretani, and Georgij. This French and Papall fleete being readie to set ^aile against the Turkes was commaunded by  Lodouico Lauretano their Generall, who departing from Venice with the Cardinall Candelmare, and with all mens prayers, that their iourney might bee prosperous, put out to Sea. The Christian fleete opportunely arriued at the streight. Amurath Ottoman Emperour of the Turkes hauing left his sonne at Salonica, departed at the same time, by the aide of the Genoueses (as it is said) forth of Europe into Asia, whither he was speedily recalled by sundrie messengers. The rumour was, That king Caraman marched against him with a mightie Armie: But haing composed the affaires of Asia, returning into Europe, he found the streight toThe Christian^ possesse the streight. be shut vp and guarded by the Christian fleete. This had put all men in hope, that this cruell enemie being diuided from his forces, might by his absence  receiue some notable ouerthrow in Europe. For it was reported that Ladisla^ King of Poland, hauing caused his Armie to crosse the Danubie in three seuerall places, did fiercely march against the Turkes in Europe.
But it is now time to returne to the affaires of Italie, from which wee haue

somewhat digressed, the better and more plainely to dispatch that which remaineth behinde. Eugenius (as hath beene said) tooke it in euill part, That by Sforza's sentence, he might not enioy Bolognia till two yeares were expired. But Philip was more displeased to see that all his sonne-in-lawes attempts were bent against Alfonso whom at the Spring he meant to assaile with his greatest forces.The Pope and Philp^ d^scontent Although Sforza's hatred seemed to be hereditarie from his father (for Sforza's father seruing valiantly in the Realme of Naples in the quarrell of Queene Ioane, had brauely withstood all Alphonso's attempts) it was neuertheles^e augmented by a new displeasure, which was, that Alphonso had seized vpon all the townesThe cause of Sforzas hatred taking Alphonso. which by succession belonged vnto him in Samia and Apulia; vpon which occasion  whilest he remained at Cremona, he had made a league with king Renatus by meanes of Nicolao Mace, who for that purpose came to him to intreate his aide.
Alphonso being troubled with the report of this league, entreated Philip if it were possible in some sort to mitigate the furie of his sonne-in-law. Philip, being moued by the intreaties of the King his inward friend, and displeased likewise with Sforza for that hee had rather recommended Cremona to the Venetians than to him, as also because that since the marriage with his daughter, hee was in a manner estranged from his partie, did importune Eugenius to take Armes against him: withall aduising him to take Picinino into his seruice, seeing he couldThe Pope, king Alphonso, and Philip make league against Sforza. not finde a better Captaine, nor one that was more readie to procure his ruine. To this end they made a league together, and King Alphonso was receiued into it as a third man.
Sforza was fully resolued to relieue king Renatus whom Alphonso by sea and land had besieged in Naples, and vndoubtedly would haue performed it to the vttermost if before his comming to La Marca, Pope Eugenius had not entangled him in a ciuill warre. Whereupon, changing his determination, because he might not himselfeSforza sends his brother to the aide of Renatus. be so farre from home, he sent his brother Giouanni to the aide of Renatus. But his iourney proued vnfortunate. For ioyning with the Cappilistes, and comming by chance to fight with Alphonso, he lost at Carpenona both his campe and cauallerie. Afterwards the king entering Naples, did not only fauour Picinino in hatred to Sforza, but adopted him into the familie of Arragon: who hauing receiued of the Pope and King money for his pay, went with great rumour through the territorie of Perugia into the Dutchie of Spoleta, where at his arriuall he tooke Tuderta from Sforza. Then marching through the territorie of Sisa to La Marca, he did streightly besiege Bellafort. Diuers that were present at that iourney say, that warre was begunne in La Marca before Sforza departed forth of Lombardie: and that from thence proceeded Sforzas great hatred to Ciarpelion who came to meete him, which was thought to bee the cause of his death: For being of a bold courage and free speech, he taunted Sforza, telling him, That whilest he spent the time in kissing  and embracing his wife Bianca, he basely suffered the enemie to take the countrey of La Marca from him.
Warre being thus kindled, Sforza came to La Marca, and within a while afterPicinino departeth from La Marca. comming in sight of the enemies, he enforced Picinino that was retired to Amandola, a verie litle towne, to sue for peace, which was granted him on condition, That he should depart forth of the countrey of La Marca* and all other territories belonging to Sforza.
The Prouince being in this sort quieted, Sforza marched against Alphonso; And it fortuned in his way that through the stubbornnesse of the Transionates he commaunded their Citie, which stands on the frontires of the Prouince to be sacked and spoiled.
Picinino hauing thereupon taken an occasion, and being prouoked thereunto by the Popes Agents, as though hee had outraged one of the Popes townes, did presentlyWarre renued in La Marca. seize vpon Tollentino, Galde, Nucernio, Asisio, hauing driuen Alexander,

S^orza's brother, from thence. Sforza being called backe vpon these sodaine newes was inforced to winter in La Marca.
Renat^s in the meane time hauing lost all hope, returned home into Fraunce. Whereupon Alfonso, within a while after entring the royall Castle, which till then had beene in the enemies hands, was by Pope Eugenius declared King, on condition that hee should presently march into La Marca to ouerthrow the power of Sforza^.
At this stay stood the affaires of La Marca, and there was likelihood that there would be great warre about the possession of that Prouince, when Francisco, sonne to Picinino, whom his father had left at Bolognia at the beginning of the warre of  La Marca, tooke Haniball Bentiuoglio, who had bin a long time suspected in regardHani^al Be^tiuole prisoner. of the great power and authority of those of his partie, and sent him prisoner to the Castle of Variana. But he escaping thence by meanes of Galeas Marascot and Virginio Maluesia, went to Bolognia, where hauing incited the people to regaine their libertie, he defeated by surprize Francisco Picinino, and most of his Garrison. FranciscoThe Bologneses hauing recouered their liberty craue the alliance of the Venetians and ^lorentines. was afterwards exchanged for Gasparo and Achilles Bentiuoles. But the Bologneses, the better to assure and maintaine their recouered libertie, sent to the Venetians and Florentines to craue aide of them, and to be receiued into their alliance, vnto whom both their demaunds were presently granted.
Being confident vpon the alliance and forces of these two great States, they did  not onely maintaine their libertie, but after they had driuen Lodouico Vermio from their confines, in a short time they recouered all their Townes and Castles. And the better to increase their Republike, they thought fit to repeale Baptista Canedo^a with all those of his faction, who had beene banished from the Citie since the time that Eugenius had recouered Bolognia, whose neece Hanibal Bentiuoglio should marrie, thereby to extinguish all their ancient enmitie: But neither the new alliance, nor any other bond of affinitie could root out the hatred which time had planted. For H^nibal being treacherously surprized by Bertucio Canedola and other his complices was most inhumanely murthered. The Bologneses being mooued with this monstrous impietie foorthwith ranne to Armes, and on a sodaine slew the chiefe of the  Canedoli with diuers others, amongest whom Baptista was the first that tasted ofHanibal Bentiuole is tr^acherously slaine by his enemies. their furie: whose bodie after they had dragg'd it ignominiously about the Cittie, was at last in the market place burnt to ashes. Their libertie notwithstanding by the supportance of their associates, stood inuiolate. But these two Common-weales were not onely carefull for Bolognia, but likewise for the danger they saw Sforza engaged in. And now the Venetians beganne to repent them that they had so soone dismissed Christofero Tollentino, with diuers other excellent persons; and that Bartholomeo Coioni was gone to Philips party. In the meane time Philip had sent William of Monferrat, and Carolo Gonzaga to make warre on those of Bolognia. The Venetians being troubled with sundrie cogitations, dispatched thither Tiberto Brandolino, Thadeo d'Aeste and Guido Rangone. The Florentines had sent thither not long before, Asturo Fauentino a^d Simonetto. These men hauing easily broken the enemie, did in a short space expell them out of the Bologneses territories. Whereupon all places neere Bolognia being in this sort pacified, the associates troupes departed by seuerall wayes.
The Venetian Captaines were by sundry messages called backe into Lombardie by reason of the war renewed vpon the Cremonese. The Tuscans were commanded to goe to La Marca to Sforza's aide: For vpon the arriuall of King Alfonso and Lodouico the Popes Legate, both of them were come to La Marca with great forces, where Sforza was brought to great extremitie by meanes of sundrie ouerthrowes  happening one vpon an other. But nothing hurt him so much as the reuolt of his friends: For Troilio with a thousand horse went to the Kings side, hauing first deliuered vnto him the Towne of Esia where hee lay in Garrison: and Pietro Brunora had alreadie done the like with eight hundred footmen. This valiant captaine

being amazed with those losses and many others, although of himselfe hee was of courage inuincible, after the losse of Stella, and whatsoeuer almost hee possessed in La Marca was retired to Santa Maria de la Fortuna. It is thought, That at this time hee sued to Philip, and made a secret league with him; wherein it was agreed, That Philip should inuade the frontires of the Cremonese: Against whome there was some likeliehood that the Venetians would oppose themselues, and presently take armes to defend that which belonged to Sforza: who comming afterwards  to fight, should (as a man enforced) turne to his father-in-lawes side, and fighting for Philip in Lombardie, should strait presse the Venetians.
In this manner, as they had plotted it, not long after warre was renewed in Lombardie, but with farre better fortune to the Venetians than the enemies expected. But before we proceede to that which was done in Lombardie, we will briefly set downe, what was the end of the warre in La Marca. The Venetians vpon report of Sforza's losses had sent Thadeo d'Aeste, Guido Rangone and Tiberto Brandolino to his aide; and the Florentines had sent Simonetto: who being all ioyned together, had foure thousand men in their Campe at Marignane. But Picinino lay vpon the hill Laura to keepe them from ioyning with Sforza; which although for a time he endured,Picinio entirely defeated by Sforza. yet at last he assembled all his troupes and marched against the enemie, who being in battell vanquished, left his campe to be possessed by the Victor. This happened in the space almost of three yeares: But in the fourth yeare of the warre of  La Marca, Picinino and Alfonso hauing renewed the warre about Spring time, Picinino was vanquished by Ciarpelion vpon the mount Millo: and Alphonso not beeing satisfied with raising a land-Armie at Eugenius instance, did besides, arme eight gallies to molest Sforza by sea.
The Venetians (as some say) vpon report of Alphonso's nauall Armie, did likewise arme certaine vessells of theirs, which were appoynted for the guard of Rauenna. In this sort was Sforza streightly prest by sea and land, when Philip sent Francisco Landriano to call home Picinino, vnder color to conferre with him concerning the affaires of the warre. Francisco his son, in the meane time being left with the troupes in La Marca, and vanquished in the mount Volmia by Sforza, hauing  lost his Campe and the greatest part of his forces, was taken prisoner in the companie of Cardinall Firmiano the Popes Legate in the Armie, with diuers other great Lords. Manie at that time thought that it was Philips pleasure to haue it so, to the end that Picinino's Armie being defeated, Sforza his sonne-in-law might bee freed from that warre: whereby wee may perceiue that the common reports then currant, were most true, That Sforza was before then reconciled to his father-in-law, and that hee had secretly made a league with him, to the vtter subuersion and ruine of the Venetian estate.
But Picinino vpon the news of this rout, was not able to conceale his griefe, but lamented and exclaimed, taxing Philip oftentimes, That he had left him nothing but his life, and that he should doe well to depriue him of that; and in this manner falling sickePicininos death. with extreame sorrow, the greatest and best aduised Captaine of his time, did in a short space decease at Milan. Sforza at Philips intreatie set Francisco at libertie, and soone after peace insued with the Pope, although Sforza possessed diuers Townes of La Marca, and Pope Eugenius some others.Carpeli^ns death
At the same time Alexander Sforza's brother did cause Ciarpelion to bee hanged, who was a man very famous for his skill in martiall discipline, onely because he had an intent to goe to Philips partie.
About fiue yeares after the Pope renewed the warre, and sent the Patriarke ofLa Marca is reduced vnder the Popes obedience. Aquileia to La Marca, who in a short space reduced all the Prouince (Firmia excepted) vnder the Popes obedience. And it was not long after but that Firmia likewise with the Castle was recouered by his Holinesse Armie.
Sforza being retired to Pisaura with his wife, did there spend the remainder of the Winter. At the spring time beeing solicited by some of his friends, hee came

through the Dutchy of Spoleta, an hauing crossed the Tiber, the better to disturb the quiet of the Citie of Rome, he encamped vpon the Viterbian Territorie: From whence in hast departing, and returning into Flaminia by the Lake of Trasimene, he staied at Metaura* In the meane time, his brother Alaxander with the Tower ofAlexa^der, Sforza his brother reuolteth from him. Pisaura reuolted from him. Being on euery side enuironed with enemies he came within a mile of Vrbin, and after that, no great exploits were done on either side, vntill his arriuall in Lombardie.
Philip on the other side in the Countrie of La Marca caused Italus of Friull, andItalus of Friul and Giacomo Guiuano are put to death. Giacomo Guiuano to be beheaded, vpon suspition that they had intelligence with the Florentines. Soone after hauing notice of Ciarpelions death, as if that had giuen him  new occasion to hate Sforza, he commanded Francisco sonne to Picinino, whom hee had sent for into Lombardie, to scoure and wast the Cremonese Territorie. Whereupon Francisco making a furious roade into the Countrie, after sundrie spoiles and depredations, he besieged the Citie of Cremona: which gaue occasion to the Venetians to haue recourse vnto Armes. But because they would not seeme to doe anyThe Venetians in Sforza's behalfe, denounce warre to Philip. Disgrace offered to an Ambassador. thing rashly, they sent Lodouico Foscari to Philip; who, according to the custome of their Ancestours, should denounce war vnlesse he would desist from inuading that which did belong to Sforza. Answere was made him, that Philip had no time nor leisure to heare any Ambassade, and that Milan was no safe place for him: That he should doe well presently to get him forth of the Citie, vnlesse he meant to be outraged. The Venetians being moued at this indignitie, commanded Michaeli Attendulo General of their Armie, to march speedily against the enemie, who by this time had seized on the greatest part of the Cremonese. He making hast, according as he was commanded, with six thousand horse, and as many foot, hauing crossed the Oglio, went and encamped vpon the Cremonese at Casall-major; but on a sodain dislodging thence, hee marched against the enemie, who with his Armie was in the Countrie of Gyradade very neere to Casal. There, ioining battaile, after a cruell fight which continued from daie-breake til noone, the Venetians draue the enemies from their Campe, and in their disorder, tooke foure thousand horse from them. This victorie was not obtained without losse: For diuers of their brauest men wereThe Venetians vanquish Philips forces. slaine in fight, a great number of whom perished in the water. Diuers of the enemies were likewise taken. And it was thought that Picinino would haue made one of the number if, when he first saw the alteration of fortune, he had not gotten into a little boate, and escaped forth of the battaile. Others say that hee went ouer the Po, at a Bridge.
After this famous victorie, the Venetian Generall did in a short space recouer whatsoeuer the enemie had taken on the Cremonese; and being strengthened with the troupes of Lodouico Gonzaga hee went and encamped on the Gyradade. In this place likewise did the Venetians affaires so prosper, as Attendulo in a short space leftAn other victory of the Venetians. Philip nothing on the hither side of Adda but Crema and Lodes. From thence his  Armie crossed the Riuer; where some say they fought againe vpon the bankes, and that six hundred of the enemies horse were taken, and with them two thousand peasants, two Ganzares, and as manie Galliots, which Lodouico of Seuerine had sent to breake the bridge, by which the Venetians had ioined the Riuer to the Marshes. Pietro Auogadre, Giacomo Antonio Marcello, and Antonio Martinenga, because they had fought valiantly that day, and borne themselues more brauely against the enemies than any else, were honoured with the order of Knight-hood.
Whilest the Venetians were entangled in this warre of Lombardie, Sforza, as though he had beene reduced to the last extremitie, did at the perswasion of Pope Eugenius and King Alphonso, who enuied the Venetians greatnesse in that Countrie  hauing quitted La Marca, went openly to Philip. The Venetians had beene before aduertised of his meaning, and vpon the first intelligence of it, they thought it fit toThe Venetians reuoke all that which had beene giuen to Sforza. commit Angelo Simonetto to prison, who was then in Venice, and to take away Sforza's pension, and the Pallace which the Prince and Senate had giuen him: To

reuoke likewise all gifts giuen to Sforzas friends, which were so many and so rich, as that it is scarce cre^ble which we find in the Venetian Histories; how that in the last war of Lombardie the Venetians spent fiue Millions of gold. And afterwards they drew from Simonetto the true ground of Sforza's reuolt. The Senate vpon this new rebellion did forthwith leuie 400. Archers for the guard of Rauenna together with certaine vessels: Commandement was likewise sent to those forces which the Florentines had sent to Bolognia; to suffer none whosoeuer to come forth of Lombardie.Philips Ambassadors come to Venice to treate of peace. Philip after al these ouerthrowes sent his Ambassadors to Venice to treate of peace; who were not only entertain'd as friends and louing guests, but were moreouer suffred to tarrie a month in the Citie: But the businesse being for a time debated on, had not  such successe as was desired wherupon, they returned, the matter being imperfect.
Attendulo after the battaile of Adda hauing fortified the bridge which iojned the Riuer to the marshes, and placed a strong Garrison vpon it, did with great rumour make incursions into the State of Milan, and in the middest of winter did with his cauallerie runne to the verie gates of Milan, from whence, hauing set fier on diuers houses of the suburbes, be carried away manie prisoners, and great store of Cattaile.
Whilst these things were done in Lombardie, one of those gallies which in trade of marchandize had been at the Tana, and was commanded by Zeni Morosino, was cast away by a storm on the Pontick-sea; but the goods within it and al the Marriners being cast vpo^ the shore were taken by the Turks; the other gallies arriued safely at Venice.
Such successe had the Venetians affaires, when newes was brought of Pope EugeniusPope Eugenius death. death, in whose place, Thomaso Sarsania was chosen, who was afterwards called Nicholas; in whom we haue set before our eies, the onely example of humane happinesse. For in one yeare he was made a Bishop, created Cardinall, and elected Pope. The Venetians presently decreed to send Ambassadours to him. Foure of the chiefe of the nobilitie were chosen, Lodouico Lauretano, (who after sundrie braue exploits against the Turkes had brought home the fleete to Venice) Lodouico Venieri, Pascalis Maripietro, and Christophero Moro, who was Aduocate to the Common-wealth, andAmbassadours sent to the new Pope. the other two were Procurators of Saint Marke. But Moro not being able to trauaile through extremitie of sicknesse, Zacharia Treuisano was sent thither in his sted.
Giacomo Foscari the princes son, being cited by the councel of Ten, was in his absence condemned, for not appearing at the day prefixed; But afterwards his innocence (as I thinke) being knowne he was by the Senates decree sent from Thryeste where he remained to Treuiso, with expresse charge, not only not to go forth of the Citie, but not to walke vpon the Mestrine without the leaue of the Potestate: but afterwards, either for his Fathers sake, who was at that time matchlesse for his wisedome and pietie towards his Countrie, or as I suppose, rather for his innocencie, he was repealed from Treuiso home to Venice. But as Fortune when she once beginneth to frown vpon a man, doth euer after pursue him, euen so it hapned, that soon after his returne to the Citie he was accused of a murther, and that by his procurement Hermolao Donato had  been slain, as he returned in the night from the Palace towards his own house: wherupon diligent enquirie being made, and no greater proofes found, he was confined into the Isle of Candie. After that, being again brought to Venice in a Gallie sent ofThe Princes son is confined into Candie. purpose to fetch him, for that the Senate knew by his letters that he practised treacherie, and being vpon the torture demanded if he had written those letters which were directed to the enemies, he confessed that he had written them, and that he had vsed means to haue them fal into the magistrates hands, that therby he might be called home into his countrie, which though it might not be as he desired, would neuerthelesse be as it might. At the last when they found he was guiltlesse, he was againe confined into Candie: where he died. Andrea Donato likewise being at the same timeAndrea Donato being accused to haue beene corrupted is condemned in a pecuniarie fine. accused to haue been corrupted by Sforza, was sent for from his gouernment of Candie, and being enforced by the Senates decree to answere before the Lordes of the Councell of Tenne, he was put to torture, and by them condemned in 1400. Ducats, and being depriued of all publik gouernment, to endure ayeares imprisonment.
In the mean time, Carolo Montone son to that great Captaine Brachio hauing intelligenceCarolo Montone taketh the Venetians partie. that Philip and Sforza were reco^ciled, did in hatred to the co^trarie faction come to the Venetians side. The Venetian Armie had alreadie taken from Sforza Casalmajor and other strong towns neere therunto: Afterwards Attendulo going again vponAttendulo his incursions vpon the Milanois. the territories of Milan, commanded Tiberto Brandolino with a braue troup of horse to scoure as farre as the Citie Gates, where in the enemies view erecting the Venetian ensignes, he inuited the Milanois to recouer their libertie; But perceiuing the enemie not to stir, he turned his forces elsewhere, and went on wasting the Countrie as far as Pauia; from whence hauing carried away a great booty he again drew neere with his Armie to Milan and inuited manie of the Townes-men to recouer their libertie.
In this place, as they abode neere to the riuer Adda, foure valiant men were knighted hard at the Citie gates; namely Tiberto Brandolino, Theote Saluia of Bergamo Lodouico (...), and Gilberto C^rregiano. At length, the Venetian hearing no tumult in the Citie, after he had spoiled all that quarter where he had planted his ensignes hee went to besiege Brebia in Briansa, which he presently tooke. From thence heeThe (...) take Brebia. scoured and wasted all the Prouince of the Briantines. It is reported that they did there vse great crueltie vpon the inhabitants not onely killing men, but young children of two yeares olde, rauishing maides, and abusing married wiues. The Souldiers did not commit this crueltie, but the Voluntaries of the contrarie partie, who to glut their hatred towards the poore vanquished, did like brute beastes fall to  murther and spoile. The bootie which they brought from thence was thought to be more worth than two hundred thousand Crownes.
Besides, Mount Barri being forced by Attendulo was sacked and spoiled. Leco afterwardsMount Barri^ taken. which is seated on the mouth of the Lake of Coma being for a time besieged could not be taken. Moreouer diuers small townes neere to the Lake, whose inhabitants were supposed would not long continue loiall were giuen ouer to be spoiled. In this manner all places from the riuer Adda as far as Coma on both sides the Lake being reduced vnder the Venetians obedience, the Souldiers being loden with bootie were brought back on the hither side of the riuer.
Whilst these things were done abroade, the Citie of Venice was greatly afflicted  with the plague, the which daily increasing, generall processions were made, and praiers said at the Saints Altars which were in the streets (so greatly was the citie at that time giuen to deuotion). Great fiers were made in the night time in sundrie places of the Citie, with sweet and odoriferous perfumes, to amend and purge the aire. Besides,The plague in Venice. al those that were infected with the sicknesse were carried two miles off from the Citie to a place commonly called the Lazaretto. Six boates were by the Signorie appointed for that purpose to the end there might be one in euery of the six quarters of the Citie, into which the towne is diuided. And because this place was found to be verie commodious, not only to lessen the sicknesse, but likewise for the reliefe of the poore (for the sicke were there better and more commodiously look't to) it hath  been since then by little and little stored with buildings and all other necessaries. An other hath been added neere vnto it for the same purpose, of a costly structure, which a far off seemeth to be a little towne.
Philips affaires were (as hath beene said) much disiointed, when Sforza departing from Flaminia with 4000. horse and 2000. foot whither he was come from La Marca to assemble forces, went through the Territorie of Ferrara to that of Parma. At his departure the Pope recouered al places of La Marca, Ancona excepted. For the Anconitans being besieged by Land and Sea (Alphonso's nauall Armie did vex them by Sea, and that of the Pope by Land) fearing if they should too rashly giue credit to the Souldiers, who solicited them to yeeld, their towne would be sacked, did erect theThe Anconitans yeeld to the Venetians. Venetian Ensignes, whereupon, shippes of warre came presently from Venice, who entring the Hauen, defended the Citie; The Anconitans beeing receiued into the alliance of the Venetians and Florentines as were those of Bolognia not long before. Lorenzo Mini was sent thither with seuen Gallies for the guard of the Citie:

Some Historians write thus; But many make no mention at all of the tumult of the Anconitans. Two ships of war at the same time departed from Venice against the Pirates, who troubled all the Sea-coasts the one was set forth by Giacomo Morosino, and the other by Andrea Leone.
At Sforza his arriual in Lombardie, the cauallerie which the Senate had appointed to withstand him, marching through the Paduan territorie comming by an other way was sent on the hither side of the Po to Attendulo's Campe. The preparations for war were great on both sides, at what time Philip the greatest warrior that euer was in the family of Viscontes, being first troubled with a feauer, and then withPhilips death. a flux, dyed. By his death all those of his partie and his subiects being amazed were  possessed with sundrie thoughts: Those of Lodes louing the name of libertie, didLodes yeeldeth to the Venetians Plaisancia doth the like. voluntarily yeeld to the Venetians. Foure daies after those of Plaisantia opened their Citie gates to the Venetians. Giacomo Marcello, placed strong Garrisons in both these Towns: Then causing his troupes to crosse the Riuer Oglio, he did in a short space recouer Colombana and in a manner all the Countrie of Lodes.
The Milaneses in the meane time did with great courage vndertake to pursue in their owne name the warre begunne by Philip, and chose Sforza for Captaine Generall of their troupes against the Venetians, on these conditions, that if hee could take Bressia from the Venetians, it should be his owne, and if he should become masterAn accord betwixt those of Milan and Sforza. of Verona likewise, that then Verona should be his, and Bressia should returne  to the Milaneses. Some say that presently after Philips death, Sforza wrote to all the Captaines of the Armie, entreating them to perseuer in their loyaltie, that hee would shortly be with them, if those of Milan would send for him, and that then, their forces being ioined together he did hope with ease to ouerthrow those of the Venetians. He then being made Generall by those of Milan, came to Cremona. From thence, hauing crossed the Riuer Adda at Picigatone, he ioined with Francisco and Giacomo Picinino, and with the other Captaines of deceased Philip, and presentlySforza comes to the field. departing thence, he did in a short space recouer Colombana.
The Venetian Armie, because it was lesse than that of the enemies, retired towards Lodes. Those of Pauia being prouoked by their owne particular passion, did  proclaime Sforza's sonne by his wife Bianca, Earle and Lord of their Citie, in memorie of his Grand-father. The Milaneses in a short space sent three Ambassades to the Venetians one after an other, to demand of them that which had belonged to Philip. The Ambassadors were still answered after one manner, that notwithstand all those Townes till then taken from Pqilip, were well purchased by right of armes, yet neuerthelesse, that the world might see that the Venetians did loue peaceAmbassadours sent from Milan to Venice: with the Venetians answere. better than war, they were readie to surrender that which they demanded, so that the Milaneses would truely pay them the great quantitie of gold which they had disbursed in that warre: But they offering nothing, were dismissed with nothing.
The Senate perceiuing the great warre they were to sustaine against Sforza and  the Milaneses, decreed to set forth a nauall Armie, which should saile vp the Po, toA nauall Armie determined against the Milaneses. the farthest places of Lombardie, and to that ende foure Gallies were armed, and two and thirtie Galliots vnder the command of Andrea Quirini and Georgio Lauretano.
During these preparations at Venice, Sforza hauing assembled all the forces of Lombardie went on a sodaine and besieged Plaisancia, and hauing beaten downe a great part of the Walls betwixt the gates of Saint Lazarus and Saint Raymond, and the Pobeing so risen at the latter end of Haruest, as the vessells might easily come to the Walls, he did by an assault by Land and Water take the Citie, which was giuen to the Souldiers to spoile. Gerardo Dandulo and Thadeo D'Aeste that lay in Garrison  there with a thousand footmen and great troupes of horse were taken prisoners. The one yeelded, with the Castell of the Garrison, and the other was taken as hee fled, when he perceiued all to be lost.
But whilest Plaizancia was besieged, Attendulo hauing crossed the Adda at Colombana,

went to waste the territorie of Pauia, from whence he carried away a great bootie. From thence, the better to diuert Sforza from his enterprize, he still marched vp and downe the territorie of Milan wasting and spoyling it, where, as weeAttenduloe^ incursions vpon the Milanese. finde in some Authors, he seized on Melssa: He had determined if Plaizancia had not beene taken, to haue besieged Cremona. Marcello being at the same time called from the Armie returned to Venice: After his departure, Lodouico Lauretano and Matheo Victorini, came as Prouidators into the Prouince. And because winter drew neere, and the Armie not being able to lie in campe by reason of the cold weather, they went to winter in the villages and farme-houses neere adioyning, where the Common-wealth had like to haue beene endaungered by a mutinie amongst the  souldiers.
Peace was again motioned, by the commissioners of the Venetians and Milaneses,A motion of peace. who for that purpose met at Bergamo: Those of Milan demaunded Lodes, the Venetians on the contrary refused to surrender it, vnlesse they might be satisfied for the expences of the warre: And although the Florentines and the Popes Ambassadors did exhort both sides to imbrace peace; yet neuerthelesse they would not bee drawne to anie agreement. At the Spring, although the Senate had wholy bent their designes vpon the war of Lombardie, yet neuerthelesse, because there was a report that two shippes of burthen returning from trafficke forth of the Ponticke sea had beene taken by Pirates, there was a decree made to arme three shipsA nauall armie against pirates. of warre and fiue Gallies to chace those Pirates from the Seas. Lorenzo Lauretano was appointed to commaund the Gallies, and Lodouico Bembo the other shippes.
Sforza in the meane time was not idle, but comming from his wintering places he tooke certaine townes from the Venetians.
The nauall Armie which was set forth against the Pirates (as hath beene said) defeated Vitalis Sarde whom it encountred at sea, who not long before had surprized three ships of burthen who were going to the Vintage of Candie: hee being taken,Vitalis Sarde the pirate hanged. was hanged. Within a while after, it surprized two other ships of Pirates neere to Naples, where all those that were in them were likewise hanged. Alphonso being moued with the matter, commaunded all the Venetian Marchants that were in his  realme to be imprisoned, and their goods to be seized on. The Senate sent messengersAlphonso imprisoneth all the venetians in his kingdome. to the King, to know whether he would haue peace or war, and why, without proclaiming war against them, he had contrary to the law of Nations outraged their Marchants and Factors. Alphonso after he had complained of the Venetians, for that in the view of the chiefe Citie of his kingdome, they had suncke shippes which hadAlphonsoes answere to the Venetian Ambassadours. offended no man, and shamefully put their Captaines and Mariners to death, who peraduenture had not deserued it, tolde them, that notwithstanding that iniurie was very great, hee would not at that time re-sent it, nor by anie meanes preferre warre before peace, but that hee desired to haue the Venetians deale with him in such sort, as hee might haue occasion to be at peace with them: Therefore they  might when they pleased depart, and with a prosperous winde returne home into their Countrey with their Marchants and all their goods, and thereupon he commaunded all the Venetian prisoners to be enlarged, and all their goods to be restored to them.
Bartolomeo Coyone whom Philip for a time had kept prisoner (who after his death had found meanes to escape, and went to the territorie of Pauia, where he vnderstood that Philips cauallerie wintered vnder the commaund of Nicholao Guerriero of whom he was kindely entertained, and within a while after honoured by the Milaneses with the command of 15. hundred horse) marched and fortunately fought with (whilst Sforza besieged Plaizancia) Renaldo of Dreux, who after Philips death  had beene sent by king Charles into Italie with a mightie French Armie.
By an accord made betwixt them against the Venetians, the French had receiued the town of Ast of Visconte, but after his death, they not only seizd vpo^ Ast, but vpon a great part of the Countie of Alexandria. Coyone being accompanied with

Asturo Fauentino, went and assailed them before Bosca which they held besieged, and in open field defeated them and draue them from their campe: Diuers of the French(...) takes the Venetians party were slaine in that fight* and many were taken prisoners. Coyone being renowmed for this victorie, did within a while after go to the Venetians side with fifteeno hundred horse.
The Spring time was almost spent, when as Sforza comming from garrison, besieged Mozzaniga, and speedily inforced the inhabitants to yeeld: from thence going  into the Countrie of Gyradade, hee did in a short space become master of theSforza taketh diuers townes. whole Country, Carauazza excepted. He did besides take Cassan from the Venetians. Attendulo likewise was incamped with his Armie at Calce beyond the Oglio. And both the Armies remained for a time in those two places without anie exploit worthy of memorie. At the last Sforza going from thence, went by land and water against the Venetians nauall armie which wasted all the Cremonese. All Quirino's designes aimed at the breaking of the bridge, which Sforza during the siege of Plaizancia had caused to bee made vpon the Po neere to Cremona. There was a sharpe fight, and the Venetian did not cease to assaile it, till hee vnderstood that the enemies approached.
Sforza had sixe and twenty Galeots, which were not well furnished with men nor armor. At his arriuall the Venetians were repulsed as farre as Casal-maior. The Venetian vessels being there inuironed by the enemies both by land and water were  by reason of the vnfitnesse of the place in such sort beaten with the artillery whichThe Venetians nauall armie is broken. that skilfull Generall had planted vpon the Riuer bankes, as being all bruzed and battered Quirini like a desperate man, hauing about midnight caused all their tackling and furniture to be carried to the next towne, burned the vessells, for feare lest they should fall into the enemies hands. Quirini being come to Venice, was by the Senate deliuered ouer to the Procurators fiscall, by reason that they suspected that hee had not done his dutie in sauing the nauall Armie. The Procurators condemned him to perpetuall imprisonment* Some thought that Quirini might at the first haue retired with the fleet into a place of safetie, and that he would haue done so, had not Attendulo promised him, that so soone as he should beginne the fight, hee with all his forces would come to his reskew (which not being done) the Venetian being betrayed, did through an other mans fault receiue a verie great ouerthrow.
The enemy being gone from them (for he needed no longer to stand in feare for Cremona) went and incamped before Carauazza, which was manned with a VenetianSforza besiegeth Carauazza. garrison. Attendulo who had followed Sforza when he went against the Venetian nauall armie, almost to the verie place where the execution was made, so soone as after the rout he vnderstood, that Sforza being come into the Gyradade had besieged Carauazza, he likewise approached with his troupes neare vnto that place, to make it famous by the Venetians ouerthrow. Neuer before in any other  warre of Lombardie had there beene seene so great Cauallerie, nor so many notableThe number of both the armies. men assembled in one place. For the Venetian armie besides Attendulo, who was their Generall, had in it Lodouico Gonzaga, Bartolomeo Coyone, who not long before was come to the Venetians party, Gentil Leonesio, Carolo Montone, Tiberto Brandolin, Giouan la Conte a Roman Gentleman, Guido Rangone, Alberto Bodiense, Caesar Martinenga, Nicolao Guerrieri, and with them twelue thousand horse, and great numbers of footmen. In Sforza's Camp were Alissandro Borsia and Conrade his brother, Roberto Sanseuerine, Francisco and Giacomo Picinini, Gulielmo of Montferrat, Carolo Gonzaga, Lodouico Vermio, Giouan Tollentino, Cristofero Tourello, and Bartolomeo Quartiero, and with them sixteene thousand horse. They often fought in that place  by skirmishes, which sometime continued from morning till night, not comming to battell with all the forces.
Frederico Contareni, and Hermolao Donato were at the same time come to the campe with commandement to enioyne the Venetian Captains, to relieue Carauazza. Frederico

at the same time being bitten with a dog, died. Hermolao and Gerardo Dandulo, who before was Prouidator in the Armie continuing the same request, Attendulo and diuers other Captaines, although they were assured that vnlesse the inhabitants were relieued they could not long hold out* were not for all that of opinion in Councell to giue battaile: but others insisting on the contrarie, they did at last conclude, that it was better to hazard the last fortune of warre, than by a lingeringDiuersitie of opinions in the venetians camp. encamping to suffer the inhabitants being tired with the siege to yeeld: This determination held good for certaine daies. For they could not resolue, principally by what way the Venetians might passe through the enemies. Tiberto Brandolin offered to giue the first charge, by the new way, because that the same side by reason  of the marshes was not well guarded by Sforza. For he, being disguised like a meane souldier had beene ouer all the enemies campe, and had at leisure well viewed it.
Tiberto, Guido Rangone, and Alberto Bodiense were commanded to go vpon a holiday when no man would thinke on their comming, to giue in behind vpon the enemies camp. Sforza was gone to heare diuine Seruice in our Ladies Church of Carauazza which is not farre from the towne, whither certaine horsemen one anotherThe venetians on a sodaine and vnlookt for, doe assaile Sforza's campe. comming to him told him that the enemies were in the trenches, who comming with great furie to assaile the campe, had alreadie forced the Rampiers, where vndoubtedly all would be lost without speedie remedie: Some say, that returning from Seruice as he was sitting downe to meat, this word was brought him, and others  say, that riding about noone towards the new way, he was in hast aduertized how that the enemie assailed the campe. But whensoeuer, or wheresoeuer it was that he vnderstood of the enemies comming, it is certaine that without any trouble or amazement he gaue order for all matters.
The Venetian troupes in the meane time made good the way which lay betwixt the two Armies: Carolo Gonzaga, Alexandro, and Sforza's other Captaines being at the Venetians first approach beaten backe into the Rampiers, could hardly sustaine the enemies charge: Some say that Carolo Gonzaga being wounded, did not onely leaue the fight but the campe, and that being affrighted, he went to Milan, where he assured them that the Venetians had defeated Sforza: Such at the beginning was the  enemies feare. But being afterwards encouraged by Sforza's presence, who with the body of the Armie ran to that place where the fight beganne, the fight was not only made equall, but they did beate the enemies forth of the Rampiers: Then giuing a fiercer charge, the Venetians who had fought in the forefront being tired by the enemies who were stronger than they both in force and courage, Alberto, and GuidoSforza defeateth the venetians. Rangone, who were much troubled to renew the battaile, and to keepe the souldiers in their rankes, being enuironed with a troupe of enemies were beaten downe dead: and then the Captaines being slaine, the souldiers began openly to flie: wherein besides the difficulties of the places, the enemies pursuits did much hinder them. For those of Mozainga so soone as they saw the Venetians had the worst, stopt the runna  waies, so as they were enforced to yeeld or to fall headlong into the neighbour marshes.
On the other side, the two brethren Picinini which were at Triuia on the one side of the Armie, did giue in with two thousand horse in another place vpon the Venetians camp. Coyoni who was left to guard it, did for a time make it good, but perceiuing his friends to flie, and the lower end of the campe to be taken from the enemies, did on foote escape into the neighbour forrest: Attendulo and the rest, so soone as they knew the formost ranke broken (whether they did it vpon malice, or else because they knew that all was past remedie) betooke themselues to flight. Eight thousand men both horse and foote were taken together with the  Prouidators. Dandulo the Prouidator being aduised by Attendulo to saue himselfeDandulos braue answere. by flight, answered, That he had rather die neere the publike ensignes, than escaping by a shamefull flight purchase a perpetuall disgrace. The Victorious enemies were masters of the Venetians campe which was stored with meruailous abundance of

all things, wherein were two thousand waggons. Attendulo retired to Bressia, whither the enemie pursuing his victorie within a while after brought his campe.
The Venetians notwithstanding this great losse were not discouraged, but hauing speedily appointed two new Prouidators, Lodouico Lauretano, and Pascalis Mariptetro,A new Armie of the venetians. Sforza besigeth Bressia. they did leuie the greatest forces they could. Phe Prouidators being sent to ressia with thirtie thousand crownes could not enter into the Citie, which was  enuironed by the enemie. For Sforza being come thither with his Armie, had by the commandement of the Milaneses diuided it to Lodouico Verinio, Carolo Gonzaga, and other noble persons. The Prouidators were day and night at Verona busied in making new leuies. They did in a verie short space by meanes of great pay assemble many troupes of horse and foote: Diuers great Lords likewise did by their expresse letters and messengers promise to enter into their pay, and to be quickly with them if the Senate thought it fit, with great numbers of horse.
Victorious Sforza in the meane time rcouered Casal-Maior, Riuoltelles, and diuersMany townes yeeld to Sforza after the battel. other townes from the Venetians. Carauazza the next day after the ouerthrow yeelded. But whilest he lay before Bressia, Picinino went with the residue of the Malan troupes, and encamped before Lodes.
On these termes stood the affaires of Lombardie, when those of Milan had, notwithout cause, some suspition of Sforza, as fearing that he did secretly aspire to the The Milaneses. suspect Sforza. same principalitie like Philip. They then being desirous to preserue their libertie, did by little and little, retire their forces, and did daily diminish his credit, and reputation. But Sforza perceiuing that ere long he should bee esteemed no more a friend to those of Milan than to the Venetians, he resolued to renew his ancient league and alliance with them, for he knew well enough that the onely power of that Commonwealth might serue him for a ladder to mount vp to the principalitie.Sforzas resolutio^
Now among all the prisoners of note that were taken at the battaile of Carauazza, and carried to the castle of Cremona, was Clemento Thealdino one of the Secretaries of the Signorie, with Hermolao Donato. Angelo Simonetta had beene acquaintedSforzas secret practises with the venetians. with him a long time, whereupon he brought him secretly to Sforza, who sent him  to the Prince and Senate, to let them know from him; that if peace were pleasing to them, they should secretly send to him Giacomo Antonio Marcello, or Pascalis Maripietro.
The Senate although it had after the ouerthrow at Carauazza, by vertue of their ancient alliance obtained great supplies of the Florentines, and had at that time mightily encreased their Armie, yet for all that, supposing the successe of warre to be vncertaine, they did willingly he a^ken to peace. And because Marcello was at that time Gouernour of Verona, they sent Maripietro to the Fornaces, a place neere to Pescara. The Venetian and Simonetta had many secret conferences in that place, where they agreed vpon these conditions of peace: That Sforza and the Venetians  should declare themselues enemies to the Milaneses; That the Senate should furnish him with foure thousand horse, and two thousand foote vntill he had conquered Milan, and should besides for his entertainment send him monthly thirtie thousandAccord betwixt the venetians and Sforza. crownes. Moreouer, it was expresly mentioned, that the Venetians should possesse whatsoeuer Philip had held on the hither side the riuer Adda, and should purchase Milan and the residue of the Dutchie for him.
The accord being in this sort made, and all the prisoners set at libertie, Sforza crossed the riuer Adda, and marched against those of Milan. The Venetians hauing dismissedSforza mar^heth against the Milaneses. Attendulo from his place, sent him to the Treuisan territorie. Those of Lodes, because they would not fall into Sforza's hands, hauing sent away the Venetian Garrison, yeelded to them of Milan. Sforza in a short space recouered whatsoeuer the Milaneses held betwixt the Adda and the Thesin (Lodes and Coma excepted.) Then from thence he went and encamped within fiue miles of Milan.
The same yeare about the end of Haruest, there was a bloudie fight betwixt the

Turkes and the Hungarians vpon the confines of Adrinople wherein fourescoreA battaile betwixt the Turkes and Christians at ^drianople. thousand Turkes were slaine, and of Christians halfe as manie. The Venetian Gallies surprized a Foist of the Pirats, all the Rouers were hanged, and they that were lesse faultie were made Gallie-slaues: within a while after they met with a Marchants shippe belonging to the Gotholans which was loden with oile, the which they tooke in hatred of their Countrie-men who were all Pirates.
Tortona in the meane time, Nouara, Alexandria, and at the last, Parma, yeeldedDiuers townes of the state of Milan yeeld to Sforza. to Sforza: These newes being brought to Venice, did greatly reioice the whole Citie* and this ioy was by so much greater, as they supposed these conquests to haue beene made in part by the valour and conduct of Marcello: The Senate according  to the treatie had sent him with two thousand horse, and two Prouidators, Lorenzo Lauretano, and Pascalis Maripietro: and Sforza had afterwards sent him with Alessadro his brother to recouer diuers Townes beyond the Po; most of which being recouered and assured by strong Garrisons; this valiant Captaine called for the VenetianSforza besiegeth Milan. forces, and went to besiege Milan. In the meane time newes was brought that Lewis Duke of Sauoy, who had leagued himselfe with the Milaneses against Sforza, had (...) great trouples into Italie, vnder the command of Iohn Compensio to wast and spoile the confines of Nouara; who at their first arriuall attempted to surprize Nouara* But their enterprise sailing, they went from thence and encamped vpon the Territorie neere adioining.
Coyoni whom the Venetians had sent with Marcello to Sforza, was commanded to march against them, who were reported to bee sixe thowsand men. Hee ioiningCoyoni his victorie. fight with Compensio vpon the bankes of Thesin, did put them to rout, and took Compensio prisoner with foure hundred of his horse. This victorie did highly renowne Coyoni and did greatly further him afterwards in mounting to those honours which he obtained.
At the same time Lrrenzo Pisaure was sent with a Gallie to the King of Babilon: The cause of his Ambassade was, for that the Venetian Marchants had beene badly dealt with by the Barbarians in the Faires of Syria. Angelo Pisaure did likewise put to Sea with two Gallies against the Pirats.
The Milaneses in the meane time affecting libertie which they had a little tasted, did on a sodaine murther diuers of the chiefe in the Citie who were said to take Sforza's partie, then going forth of the Gates in heapes, they ranne towards the enemie: Sforza did at that time batter the Fort of Mellignana, who vnderstanding of the enemiesThe people of Milan come forth disbanded against Sforza. The Milaneses feare of Sforza's Armie. comming forth who were reported to be three score thousand men, hee did in such sort order his battallions, as those of Milan hearing of the excellent order of his Armie, durst not approch Marcello who was with him, perceiuing the great skill and dexteritie of that braue Captaine in a matter so sodain, did write to Venice, that not only the Venetians, but all Italie would haue had cause to haue feared that inuincible Captaine if he had taken Milan. The enemies being retired he continued  the siege. But all his designes tended to famish the Citie; Therefore he did so streightly besiege it, as at times running to the very Rampiers hee did with sodaine incursions set fier on the Suburbes. At this stay stood the Citie of Milan, at such time as the Citie of Venice, had like to haue sustained a losse as great as vnlooktfor.
A certaine Greeke named Stamatus, borne in Candie, being by chance at Venice at that time when they did shew (according to their manner to great Lordes that were strangers) vnto Borsia D'Aeste the publike treasure which is kept in a part of S. Markes Church, it happened after this manner; That this Greeke being vnknowne,The famous theft which a Greeke did enterprise. and thrusting himselfe among his household seruants, did enter into the Vestrie. Then he was so far off from being amazed at the view of such great and admirable wealth, as on the contrarie, hee did forthwith determine in his minde to commit a notable theft. The Walls of (...) Markes Church, which in the beginning wee haue termed the golden Church, in regard of the excellent guilding thereof both

within and without, is down to the pauement seeled as it were with great tables of marble. In that part of the Church where the Innocents Altar standeth, this cunning theefe remoued a marble table, Then falling to worke in the night time (because the wall could not be sodainely opened) he did before day light put the stone in the vsuall place, and stopt all the chinkes and crannies with lime, so that nothing might be discerned, and long before daie carried all the rubbish which he had made to a place farre from thence; And hauing wrought in this manner sundrie nights at last he got into the treasurie, from whence by little and little he began to carrie all those rich and exquisite iewels, which are admired of al those which behold them. For besides great numbers of inestimable stones richly inchaced, there were twelue  Crownes of gold; and as manie corselets curiously inriched with sundrie pretious stones, whose sparkling luster doth no lesse dazell the vnderstanding, than the sight; There are moreouer diuers Cups of verie precious stone, whose brims and feet are enterlaced with an other kinde of stone of an inestimable valew: I speak not of Altar cloathes, candlesticks and other things for the Churches seruice, whose substance beingThe inestimable valew of the tresure of Venice. of pure gold is nothing in comparison of the fashion and worke-manship wherewith they are adorned, and pretious stones of sundrie coulours wherewith they glister: nor of Vnic^rnes horne of an vnualuable worth; nor of the Princes attire for his head, nor of diuers other matchlesse peeces of worke, which this famous theefe had at leisure taken from thence. But (according to the prouerbe) Adulterie and theft  will not be long concealed, and because it would haue beene an hard matter to haue discouered this of a long time it fell out that himselfe bewraied it. Hee had a Coship whose name was Zacharie Gria a Candiot like himselfe, but of a noble family, and a man, as this one example can witnesse, of an exceeding good conscience* Stemmatus after that he had sworne him vpon the Altar, told him what hee had done, from thence carrying him to his poore cottage, he shewed him his great and famous theft; But this honest vertuous man, being stricken dumbe with beholding it, could not of a long time make him any answere; The sacrilegious villaine was once minded to haue murthered him, and would haue heaped sinne vpon sinne, if he had not preuented him, by telling he was fallen into an extasie with sodaine ioy to beholde  so great wealth: this his speech made the theefe forbeare to hurt him: Gria in the meane time hauing receiued a most rich stone of him in guift, which for the worth thereof was well knowne, (for it was the same which the Prince at this day weareth on the fore part of his ducal Crowne) tooke his leaue of him, saying that he would go and dispatch some: businesse, who presently went to the Palace, and being admitted to the Princes presence, he did discouer the whole matter to him, saying, That it behoued him to make hast, for feare least he whom he had with much to do deceiued with faire wordes, should change his minde, and hide himselfe with his bootie in some secret place: and to manifest the truth of what he spake, hee drew the pretious stone forth of his bosome, which being knowne, men were presently sent to apprehend  him; he being committed to prison* they recouered whatsoeuer he had takenaway (without losse of any one thing) which was esteemed to bee more worth than two Millions of gold. The theefe was hanged betwixt the two Columnes:The theese is hanged betwixt the columnes. The accuser is recompensed. His accuser, besides a present recompence, had by the Senates decree a perpetuall pension allotted him forth of the publike treasurie.
The Picinines in the meane time forsooke the Milaneses, and came to Sforza's side with three thousand horse, and two thousand foote: but because it was certainly reported, that the Picinines being drawne by Sforza's faire promises had left the Milaneses, the Venetians tooke it not well, by reason that it was expresly mentioned in the accord made betwixt them, that it should not be lawfull either for the  Venetians or Sforza to receiue any into their pay that had borne Armes for the Milaneses. This did in some sort lessen the Venetians affection towards Sforza; forThe Venetians suspect Sforza. his potencie did beginne, more than was needfull, to be suspected of the Venetians: but the Picinines being soone after suspected to practise against Sforza's life, whereof

Marcello had often wished him to beware, they on a sodaine returned with their troupes to Milan: Some neuerthelesse doe say, that the Picinines came from Milan to Sforza, with an intent to spend the winter abroad, and then to returne to Milan at the beginning of Summer, as they did.
Sforza in the meane time did greatly vex and molest the Milaneses, when as Alphonso, to free them in some sort from this warre, did by an Edict expell all VenetiansAlphonso expelleth the Venetians out of his dominions. forth of his dominions: This warrelike threatning, did presently cause the Venetians to make readie a great nauall Armie: They armed fiue Gallies and ten shippes of burthen against the King, whereof Lodouico Lauretano was made Generall: This warrelike preparation of theirs by Sea made Alphonso to attempt, both The Venetians nauall army against Alphonso. by Lionello d'Aeste, and by Ambassadors to obtaine peace, who being come to Ferrara, the Senate sent them word that they should not come to Venice, where mens courages being once moued, it was but in vaine to seeke to appease them.
Victore Capello in the meane time who lay at Sea for the guarde of the Gulph, did giue chace to a Gallie of the Gothelans as farre as Ortona, which long before had taken a Venetian Gallie; so soone as he saw the enemies landed, and that by aide ofThe Gotholans are vanq^shed at Ortona. the townesmen, they prepared to offend him, he turned the prowes of his Gallies and commaunded his souldiers to leape on land, which they perfourming, there was a fierce fight vpon the shore: The enemies being there put to rout and enforced to enter the Citie, their Gallie was drawne from thence and burnt; together  with some other shippes. At the same time the houses in the suburbs which were full of Marchandize, being spoiled, the victorious Venetian retired to his vsuall place of abode, where he resolued to tarry for the nauall Armie which was prepared against Alphonso.
The Venetians being tied to the warre by sea, did by their Ambassadours sent to Sforza trie if they could ridde themselues of that by land. Vrso Iustiniano and Pascalis Maripietro went to him in the name of the Common wealth with commissionA motion of peace betwixt Sforza and the Milaneses. and commaundement to treate of peace, which the Milaneses propounded very aduantageous for them: The motion thereof had beene alreadie made when as Crenia hauing beene many moneths besieged by Malateste (for the Florentines according  to their league, had sent him after the battell of Carauazza to aide the Venetians with two thousand horse, and one thousand foote) did yeeld vnto the Venetians by meanes of Andrea Dandulo, and by Sforza's aide likewise, who would notCrenia yeeldeth to the Venetia^s. haue accepted of their yeelding: Gentili Leonesio was commanded to go and receiue them with a strong Garrison.
Peace at the same time being almost concluded with the Milaneses, was referred to Sforza vpon these conditions, That seuen cities which had obeyed Philip, shouldThe articles propounded to Sforza. be his, but that he should leaue Lodes and Pauia to the Milaneses. If (...) did accept of these conditions, hee should bee a friend and allie of both the Commonwealths: And Lombardie being by this meanes at peace, the Venetians should entertaine  sixe thousand horse, the Milaneses two thousand, and Sforza one thousand, and no more: And if he would not haue peace with the Milaneses, hee should be declared an enemie to them both, and that the Venetians should make warre vpon him with eight thousand horse, and the Milaneses with six thousand.
Maripietro hauing propounded these Articles of peace to Sforza, hee did neither allow nor reiect them; but it is reported, that gnashing his teeth, he did lament and complaine of the Venetians loyaltie, and that hee made answere, that hee was not onelie content to quit Lodes which the Venetians had decreed should be surrendredSforzaes answer to the proposition of peace. to the Milaneses, but all those townes which by an accord made betwixt them were to be his owne, if hee did but thinke that they would haue it so, in regard his  onely desire was to obey them: That he would send his brother to Venice, there in the Senates presence to ratifie that which had beene concluded. After this, Alessandro, Angelo Simonetta, and Andrea Biraga were by him sent thither, who hauing a while debated the matter, did soone returne without any resolution, first to

Ferrara, and from thence to Sforza. Some write that these men did approoue the peace with the vsuall solemnities, but Sforza would not ratifie that which Alessandro and the rest had doone, as though hee had giuen them no such commission.
So soone as the truce was expired which had beene graunted for certaine dayes,Accord betwixt^ the Venetians and Milaneses* that they might in that meane space treate on the conditions of peace, the Venetians and Milaneses made an accord: For which agreement, if the Venetians had not some reason, they might seeme to haue degenerated from their ancient custome, by contracting a new league, and abandoning Sforza. But without all doubt they did it vpon great occasion, because Sforza not long before had forsaken them, and he merits no pardon that sinneth by an other mans example: Besides, the loue to  libertie (which the Venetians haue euer as much maintained in forren Cities as in their owne) caused them to forget all accords, and to follow their new associates. Nor can any man therein accuse them of disloyaltie or auarice; I meane if he wil exactly and iustly consider the matter. For by the accord made with the Milaneses the Venetians purchased no greater part of anie thing that had belonged to Philip, than by that which they had formerly made with Sforza: Notwithstanding, they did not ^ease to doe all good offices for this Prince their friend: For whatsoeuer (in a manner) had belonged to Philip (Milan excepted which they desired to set at libertie, together with Lodes which before then was tributarie to it) did by their meanes become his owne.
Supposing therefore that he would be satisfied with these conditions, they were desirous to treate with him of peace. Nothing therein was done vnder-hand or fraudulently, but openly and plainely, and in the selfe same manner as they had dealt with him from the beginning. Now as the Venetians had taken Armes against Philip in the Florentines behalfe: euen so by a solemne defiance, (as beseemedSforza maketh warre on both the Commonwealths. a free and potent Republique) warre was denounced as well to this man, a^ to them. But this inuincible Captaine by a fortunate aduice made choice rather to follow the victorie which he had in his owne possession, than the Senate, and accepted warre against both those Commonwealths, which by his owne valour and  conduct hee fortunately ended.
The end of the sixth Booke of the third Decad.





THE SEVENTH BOOKE  OF THE THIRD DECAD OF THE HISTORIE Of Venice.

The Contents of the seuenth Booke of the third Decad.
THE Venetians nauall Armie burneth diuers ships in the Hauen of Siracusa. GIOVANNI PICININO, and SIGISMVND MALATESTE, victuall Milan. Those of Milan hauing slaine the Venetians Ambassador proclaime SFORZA their Prince. The Honourable entertainment in Venice giuen to the Emperour FREDERICKE and LEONORA his wife. King ALPHONSO maketh great warre vpon the Florentines. The Venetians Armie fighteth with good successe against SFORZAS forces neere to Otholenga* They fight afterwards with different successe in sundrie places. King RENATVS in the behalfe of SFORZA and the Florentines commeth into Italie against the Venetians: STEPHANO PORCIO is beheaded at Rome. The taking of Constantinople by the Turkes, giues terrour to all Christians. Two nauall Armies prepared against the Turke. Peace with SFORZA and the Florentines is published. The Citie of Venice and all places neere adioyning are greatly astonished by a terrible tempest. And lastly are mentioned sundrie exploits of the Turkes, in Greece and Asia.

DVring these new Treaties, Lauretano with a mightie  nauall Armie hauing coasted all the higher Sea, came vpon that of Sicily, where with sodaine incursions he assailed the hauen of Messina, and set fire on a new Argozey of the kings of a wonderfull bignesse, which had neuer beene lanched, and on diuers ships which rode neere to the hauen. He did sink moreouer neere to the neighbour shoars such Gallies and other smaller vessels as came to the aide of those of Messina. From thence entering farther into Sicily, he assailed two ships of burthen of fifteene hundred tunne a peece which lay at Anker in the Hauen of Siracusa. The Genoueses, who owned one of these ships, with diuers others, and for feare of the Venetians, had in hast gotten from Sea into that place, had sunke two ships of burthen at the mouth of the Hauen, and drawne a great chaine athwart it, with a Rampier, so as they thereby seemed to be out of the enemies danger: They had besides made bridges from the top of the Citie wals

to the ships, that they might with more ease if need should be, desend them from assaults. Lauretano at his first arriuall attempted after he had beaten downe their fortifications, to enter by force into the Hauen, and neere to those ships there began aA cruel fight at the mouth of the hauen of Siracusa. cruel fight. But the Venetian hauing lost many of his men, perceiuing that he laboured in vaine, went backe to Sea. Then he inuented another meanes to offend the enemie, he filled a ship of burthen with drie vine branches and brimston, and manned it with thirtie valiant men, whom by faire promises he had drawne to that businesse, who with the wind and tide sailed towards the Hauen. This ship by the force of the wind striking vpon the Chaine and Rampier, did despight of all the enemies attempts, and to their amazement passe forward to the ships that lay in the Hauen: those  within the ship after that they had on a sodaine set fire to the sulphurie matter, leapt into a boate which they had expresly brought with them, and by force of oares escaped to the fleete.
In the meane time the vehement flame which came forth of the Venetian ship, tooke hold vpon the rest, which could by no meanes be quenched, so as diuers others which at that time lay in the Hauen besides those two great Argozies were burnt in the Cities view.
The Venetian departing thence, sailed to Corfu, from whence he dispatched Zacharia Donato with one Galley to Venice, to acquaint the Prince and Senate with what he had done in that voyage, and how that by a wonderfull successe he had burnt  seuen and fortie of the enemies ships: As also to know from them, whether they would haue the fleete to tarrie abroad, or else after that he should haue cleared the Seas from the Pirates and enemies, to bring it home to the Citie against the beginning of Winter. The whole Senate and Citie were verie ioyfull for these newes, and all men commended Lauretano in his absence, there was no talke but of him: The Senate was of opinion to call home part of the fleet to Venice, and that the rest should continue at Sea to assure the nauigation.
In the meane time the Ambassadors of the Pope, Florentines, Milaneses, Sforza,Ambassadors assembled at venice. The venetians resolue on warre against Sforza, and choose Malateste for their Generall. and Duke of Sauoy, remained for certaine daies at Venice, where first of all the contention betwixt Sforza and the Milaneses was amply debated. But when they  perceiued that the matter would not be ended without Armes, the Venetians made choice of Sigismond Malateste for Generall of their Armie, and commanded the Florentines to trade no longer with their Citie, because they would not make warre on Sforza.
Sforza likewise had opportunely prouided for warre with the Venetians. For duringSforza his preparations. the treatie of peace he had fortified his townes. He had manned Lodes and Picigithone with strong Garrisons, and made a league with Lewis Duke of Sauoy. And to take all hope from the enemies of any reliefe by the Venetians, he made an attempt to surprize Brebies, wherein failing, he encamped not farre from thence, where he builded Forts, and leauing a strong Garrison in them, (because Winter drew  neere) he resolued to inuade the Milaneses in the next townes and villages. Sgismond within a while after came and assailed the Forts neere to Brebies, two whereof he tooke, and presently burnt them, and would haue taken the rest had not Sforza in time arriued, at whose comming Malateste retired beyond the riuer Adda. Coyoni likewise comming through the valley of Sassina to the lake of Coma, did for the easier getting of victuals attempt to ioyne himselfe with the troups of Giacomo Picinino: Francisco being newly dead. But the Cauallery which was sent him from Milan, by the treacherie of certaine persons fell into the enemies hands. Sigismond afterwards arriued, who ioyning with Coyoni in Bianza, in a short space became master of mount Barri, and then by stealth victuals were sent to Milan: but in regard of the  great multitude of people within it, the dearth was little amended, or rather on theA great dearth in Milan. contrarie it so mightily encreased, as a bushell of wheate was sold there for twentie crownes. The Venetians in the meane time did by all meanes seeke to draw Sforza to a battaile, who was encamped or rather lodged at Vimercata, Me^ze, and

Caratta. But he still auoided it, knowing like a wise and discreet Captaine, that bySforzas wise and discreet resolution. the continuance of the siege, the Milaneses would by famine be sodainly reduced to such extremitie, as they would be enforced whether they would or no, to yeeld. The Venetians Armie after the taking of the mount of Brianza went to ^rezzia* Winter was alreadie much spent, and yet neither the one or other were idle, but still as occasion was offered by one of the sides sometimes towards the Rampiers of Brebies, and then neere to the bridges which were made ouer the riuer Adda, there did daily in a short space happen sundrie light encounters, and yet all their forces neuer ioyned.
Sforza's constancie was admirable in the continuation of that siege, who although The venetians Ambassador is mu^thered in Milan. he vnderstood, that besides the Venetians and Milaneses, king Alphonso did openly arme against him, neuerthelesse constantly continued his siege, till such time as the Milaneses being by famine reduced to all extremitie, hauing on a sodaine taken Armes, and murthered Lenoardo Venieri in the Pallace, who from the beginningSforza is proclaimed Duke of Milan. had beene sent thither by the Venetians as their Ambassador, yeelded themselues and saluted Sforza for their Prince, whom they sent for into the Citie.
Sforza hauing obtained what he desired, commanded the Venetians to be set at libertie, who had beene imprisoned after Veniero's death: This valiant Captaine was desirous to oblige the Venetians to him by all good offices: for they being reconciled, he knew well enough that he needed not feare any warlike menaces from any  place else. He had an inkling that there was a motion of peace made with king Alphonso,Peace betwixt the venetians and king Alphonso. which if it tooke effect, he was in some feare of great warre not onely against the Venetians, but in a manner against all Italie. The businesse being begunne at Ferrara whither Pascalis Maripietro had beene sent to that purpose, had at last such successe as they desired: for peace ensued about the fifth of Iune: the treatie hauing continued certaine monethes.
This yeare was the yeare of Iubilie, and from all parts of Europe multitudes of people came to Rome. It happened that a Germane Ladie in the companie of certaine knights going in pilgrimage through the Mantuan and Verona territories, was seized on to be rauished, and her friends slaine: But she abhorring such wickednesse An excellent example of chastitie in a Germain Ladie. would neither by intreaties nor force be drawne to consent to the vnbrideled appetite of the rauisher. Whereupon she chose rather to suffer her chast bodie; after it had beene miserably tormented, to be put to the edge of the sword, than to defile it by a voluntarie sinne. Sigismond of Arimini, whom the Venetians had newly cassed, was at the same time encamped there about, who because he was young and valiant, was suspected to haue seized on this strange Ladie, being enflamed with her rare beautie. But he, in regard the Senate was highly moued at the matttr, to cleare himselfe from that imputation, sent some of his Captains as guiltie of the crime, bound hand and foote to Venice, who being found to be guiltlesse, were sent backe againe without any hurt.
Peace being concluded at Ferrara, was to the great content of euerie one published ouer all the Citie by sound of trumpet. Lauretano who had beene commandedThe Emperour Fredericke with his wise commeth into Italy. to send seuen Gallies for supplies, at such time as they were vncertaine of peace, hauing left some of his Gallies for the guard of the Gulph, brought home the rest of the fleete to Venice. This yeare was not onely famous for deuotion, but for the arriual of the Emperour Fredericke and Leonora his wife into Italie, who were crowned with the imperiall Diademe by Pope Nicholas in S. Peters Church.
The same yeare the Venetian Prince was by the same Pope honoured withThe Pope hon^reth the veneti^ prince with the golden sword the girdle, and ornament for his head. A motion of peace with Sforza. the golden sword, with the girdle, and ornament for his head. Nicolao Canalis, who at that time was Ambassador for the Signorie with his Holinesse, brought these presents  to Venice, which the Prince in great solemnitie did weare vpon that day that the peace was published. Peace at the same time was treated of with Sforza by Ambassadors. Pascalis Maripietro was to that end sent to Crema, whither Ambassadors were come from Milan to treate of that businesse. The Senate likewise sent

Ambassadors to congratulate Borsia d' Aeste for his promotion to his new principalitie, who after the death of Leonello had beene with a generall consent proclaimed Prince. At the same time likewise Hermolao Donato, a Venetian Gentleman, wasThe death of Hermolao Donato. murthered. The Senate by a decree, made sharpe search for the murtherers, and promised a perpetuall pension (besides a present recompence) to him that should bewray them. The Duke of Austria, the Emperours brother, in his iourney from Rome towards Germanie came to Venice: The Prince and Senate went ^o meeteThe Duke of Austria commeth to Venice. him, and being receiued into the Bucentauro, he was conducted to the Pallace of Aeste which was sumptuously prepared for his lodging: and hauing at leisure viewed the Citie, he went home into Germanie. In the accord which they made with king  Alphonso; the Sienois, the Duke of Sauoy, the Maquesse of Montferrat, and the Lords of Corregia were included: their Commissioners sent for that purpose, did at one time meete at Venice.
Ambassadors came from the king of that part of Illiria, which at this day is called Bossina, who from their master did present the Prince with foure gallant horses,The king of Bossina sendeth presents to the venetian prince. hawkes, and flagons of siluer; they said that they came, to bring the presents, and in their masters name to congratulate in the presence of the Prince and Senate, the marriage of his daughters; one of whom had married Stephen the Vayuod, and the other, Caloianes Viceroy of Hungarie. And that therfore the King their Lord did wish perpetual happinesse to the Prince, Senate, and people of Venice his friends, for  that he had made new alliance with two such great personages. That he did besides take a solemne oath to continue a perpetuall friend to the Venetians, which so long as he should liue, he would religiously keepe. The Prince and Senate did highly thanke the king, and gaue kinde entertainment to the Ambassadors.
Whilest these things were done at Venice, Gentilis Leonesio, and Tiberto Brandolino,Coyone is on a sodaine and vnlookt for assailed by the Senates command. (some Authors mention Picinino in steede of Brandolino) did by the Senates commandement take fifteene hundred horse from Coyoni which he had with him on the territorie of Verona, against whom, (hauing practised some noueltie) they came on a sodaine as they had beene commanded: But himselfe escaping, went to Mantua to Prince Lodouico. At the same time king Alphonso, the Venetians and their  associates, did chace the Florentines from their confines, in hatred to Sforza whom they had assisted with money. Carolo Gonzaga vpon the first report of this warre came to the Venetians to implore their aid and succour against his brother Lodouico, who he said had wrongfully bereft him of those lands which he had till then possessedCarolo Gonzaga imploreth the venetians aide. by his fathers testament. The Venetians did louingly receiue him, and did put him in hope, whether that they had peace or warre soone to repossesse him in his estate: and the Commonwealth gaue him in the meane time a thousand crownes a moneth for the entertainmenr of himselfe and familie.
Lodouico Bishop of Aquileia came to Venice, and within a while after Pietro Barbe Cardinall (who when hee came to be Pope, would needs be called Paulo:) great  troupes of Gentlemen went forth to meete either of them, and both of them were honorably entertained. But the Emperour Fredericke had more princely reception, who with Leonora his wife came to Venice about the Spring time of the yeare following. For such great numbers of boates neuer went forth to meet any PrinceThe great entertainment giuen to the Emperour Fredericke, and Leonora his wife at Venice. whatsoeuer. It is reported that besides the Bucentauro richly hung with cloath of gold wherein the Prince and chiefe Senators were, foure great vessels were set forth, whose poopes were all guilded, in which were the whole nobilitie of Venice: These followed the Bucentauro as their Admirall: The Gallies went after them. The Ganzares and patischermes which are lesser vessels, to the number of sixscore, were as gallantly decked as those of the Clarissimi, in which were the common  Citizens, who did striue to exceed one another in brauerie. The whole Citie was hung that day with cloath of gold, purple, scarlet, and violet colour: In euerie place musicall instruments, songs, and sweet* voyces were heard, which did in a manner rauish the hearers. Fredericke being come to S. Clements Church, where the

Prince met him, came forth of the Duke of Ferraraes Barge, and went into the Bucentauro where the good old Prince Foscare welcomed, and seated him in a throne of Golde, and then sate downe next to him: He was with great ioy and generall applause conducted through the middest of the Cittie to the Pallace of Aeste; which the Common-wealth had richly furnished for his lodging.
The Empresse Leonora within a while after came to Venice; and to the end that her entrie into the Cittie might be more magnificent, shee tarried three dayes at S. Nicholas on the shoare; then vpon an holiday she was receiued into the Bucentauro, by the Princes wife, and two hundred of the fairest Ladies glistering with gold* purple, and pretious stones: The same order of boates as had serued for the Emperours  reception did wait vpon her through the Cittie, as farre as Saint Eustace his Church vnto the pallace of the Vitturi where shee landed: The chiefe Senators went to visite her, and to doe her seruiee in the Morning and Euening: The day was spent in feasting those great Guests: The Councell Chamber was richly hung which was filled with the fairest and noblest Ladies of the Cittie: The Senate presented the Empresse so soone as she entred her Chamber with a Crowne of Golde set with three pretious stones which were esteemed to be worth two thousand sixe hundred crownes, and with a coate for a little childe as a presage of her future progenie, with a Cradle-cloth of purple, powdered with pearles. Both of them danced together; The day was spent in all delights and pleasures; And the whole Citie  did keepe many Holie-daies in honour of her great Guests, although they had not neglected their care for the warre of Lombardie. Heereby wee may perceiue how curious the Venetians haue euer beene, more than any other people of Italie to giue entertainement to forraine Princes. Fredericke being gone, the Senate the better to prouide for the expences of the warre, made a Decree, that all Officers,The Senates Decrce to get money to furnish the expences for the warres. aswell in the Cittie, as abroad, Iudges, Registers, and others of meaner qualities vnder great Officers, who in anie kinde had pension of the Common-wealth, should pay a certaine tribute to the Signiorie: And that the Gentlemen, after that they had executed their yearely charge (for euerie one at the yeares end receiued his pay) should serue the Republique gratis for sixe moneths longer: At this day  they serue but foure moneths, whereby wee may perceiue that as the tribute hath beene altered (the which is very true) so hath the time prefixed likewise beene.
At the Spring time warre was renewed with Sforza when Leonesio the Venetians Generall, hauing for a time scoured the Countrey round about Lodes, Otholenga, Manerbia, and Pontoglio, and taken certaine small Townes by a voluntary yeelding, crossed the Riuer Adda, at the bridge of Ripata, and went as farre as Milan, vpon the assurance of some Bandetti, who said, That if the Venetian troupsThe Venetian troupes come to the gates of Milan. would approach the Cittie, that the people within it would presently rise in their behalfe: But notwithstanding the Venetians arriuall, and that certaine of their light horse rode into the suburbs, there was neuerthelesse no commotion in the citie.The Uenetians besiege Soncina* The Venetian within a while after besieged Soncina, and battered it with his ordnance.
The enemie thinking to raise the siege did crosse the Oglio at Canedulla, andSforza with 20000. men commeth into the Bressan territorie. The Venetians march against the enemies. with twentie thousand men marched into the Countrey of Bressia, where hauing taken Gambare by assault he besieged Ponteuico. The Venetians hauing made a reasonable breach at Soncina, inforced the Inhabitants to yeeld; and from thence, hauing made themselues Masters of Romanenga, they marched towards the enemie, who in the meane time had taken Ponteuico vpon the Riuer Oglio, and were gone to Gella, thereby to be the better able to presse those of Bressia: Leonesio being incamped in a verie commodious place neare to the enemie, did seize vpon the  streights of the Marshes: They fought many times in those places with different euents: There were great numbers of souldiers in both armies. The Venetians hadThe number of both Armies. fifteene thousand horse, and sixe thousand foote; and Sforza had three thousand foote, and eighteene thousand horse. Some Historians say, that they fought fiercely

at that time for three houres space and more, neare to the Towne of Porsane, and that the losse was equall on both sides, but, that by reason of the vnfitnesse of the place they lost more horse than men, and that both sides would haue fought till they had gotten the victorie, had not darke night separated them, Fortune inclining to neither partie.
This was done neare to the Riuer Adda, when as William of Montferrat with foure thousand horse made fierce incursions vpon the territorie of Alexandria, and  from thence riding towards Tortona and Pauia, he wasted and spoiled the wholeWilliam of Mont ferrat is van quished by Sacromor Visconte. Countrey: Sacromor Visconte, and Antonio Burgese whome Sforza had sent against him to withstand his attempts, comming sodainely to strokes with him vpon the confines of Alexandria, did defeate and inforce him to retire to Castelnouo. But whilest these things were done in Lombardie, twelue Venetian Gallies vnder the commaund of Marco Zeno, hauing scowred the high and lower Seas, came to Liuorne. And King Alphonso's royall armie vnder the conduct of Ferdinand, hauing attempted to cause Cortona to rebell, went to the Territorie of Rezza, where assailing Foilano, they tooke it the fortieth day of the siege after sundrie toyles and interchangeable losses.
It is reported that Asturo Fauentino whilest Ferdinand lay before Foilano, was twice put to rout by the Kings armie; so that at both times hee lost a thousand horse, and certaine foote troupes. From thence the Arragonian Ensignes beeing  come to the territorie of Siena, hauing in vaine besieged Castelina, went to winter vpon the sea-coast. Sigismund of Arimini Generall of the Tuscan troupes did greatly vex them.
The Florentines fearing the Arragonians and Venetians forces by sea and land, did by Sforza's aduise send Angelo Acciola knight of the Order, to the French king,The Flarentines send to the fie^ch King. who hauing represented to his Maistie the Florentines ancient affection towardes himselfe and his predecessors, the King graunted that hee would commaund the Duke of Sauoy to cease from making warre on Sforza, and would perswade King Renatus (promising him to that intent men and money) to vse meanes to recouer his kingdome of Sicill. This did the Florentines craue, that they might diuert the  Venetians and Alphonso's attempts from Italie.
Sforza likewise had sent to the same King to intreate him to procure Renatus to come speedily into Italie. But Lombardie was still in tumult. Bartolomeo Coyone, who (as hath beene said) was by the Senates command dispoiled of his forces, being followed with a thousand horse, tooke manie prisoners and great store of cattellCoyone makes incursions on the Bressanterritorie from forth the Bressan territorie.
Within a while after Giacomo Picinino and Tiberto Brandolino with foure cornets of horse, defeated six Ensignes of Sforza's troupes. The enemie being aduertized by chaunce, that the Venetians departing from the new Orgies were gone to make incursions vpon his territories, did speedily from his Campe at Quinssana send Bartholmeo Quartiero and Giacomo Salernitano with sixe Companies of horse to surprize them. But the Venetians hauing intelligence of the enemies comming, and being charged with greater hope than discretion neere to Iauenotta a towne on the Cremonese, they did couragiously abide them, and without anie difficultie did absolutely defeate them.
It is reported that more than an hundred and sixtie of Sforzaes men at Armes were taken that day, and that within a while after they tooke a great bootie foorth of the enemies Countrie. For Leonesio hauing made a bridge ouer the riuer Adda at Caretta, and fortified both the ends thereof with strong Rampires, sent part of his cauallery to scoure the Milaneses territories neere to Pauia: whereupon Sforza to insnare these Venetian boot-halers, commanded Alessandro his brother to march thither with part of the troupes: Leonesio hauing intelligence of the enemies designe, caused Carolo Montone to march with like number of horse, to be there before him. Now Alessandro staying in a place not farre from the Venetians Fort, and

not hauing any thought that his enemies were so neere him, Carolo on a sodain gaue a fierce charge vpon him: with which vnexpecte^accident he was so affrighted, as without any other fight he forthwith brake him and became Master of the Campe and the whole bagage. But some few of them by good fortune escaped to LodesSforzas troupes are defeated. with their Captaine, who otherwise had all beene taken prisoners by the Venetians.
Sforza being troubled with this losse departed from his Camp at Gades, and marched to Quinzzana. Mattheo Campana being fauored by the Venetians good fortune, made a furious rode with his cauallerie into the state of Milan. At his returne, being loden with spoile, hee met with Thadeo D'Aeste who then serued the enemies, with diuers others: both sides comming presently to the incounter, after a confused  fight, the victorie remained to the Venetians: who hauing taken foure hundred horse from the enemie, retired with his whole bootie to a place of safetie. They had no certaine intelligence what Sforzas purpose was, after that he had crossed the riuer Mella; and therefore* the Venetians Generall went speedily and encamped atSforza taketh Caluisians. Bagnolls* Sforza within a while after tooke Caluisiana, hauing made his iournie thither to none other end, but to make it a wintering place for his troupes in the enemies Countrie. Leonesio went to Gades. This is that which was done in Lombardie during the summer season. The Venetian Captaines hauing intelligence by their espialls about the middle of haruest, that great store of victualls was going to the enemies Campe, with a thousand horse to conuoy it; Giacomo Picinino, Carolo Gonzaga and Tiberto Brandolino, did with part of the Armie encounter the enemiesThe death of Hector Brandolino. betwixt Othelenga and Issea, two towns on the Bressan Territorie; who issuing forth as from an ambuscado, did at the first charge breake and defeate Sforza's his cauallerie, and tooke diuers waggons loden with victualls, armour and other warlike necessaries. But as they were carrying away this rich bootie to their Campe, Sforza being vexed with this losse, with expedition made after them, and assailed them on their waie: whereupon the Venetian sodainely turning from his bootie to fight, did couragiously sustaine the furie of the enemies. Now fight being fiercely begunne, Hector Brandolino brother to Tiberto, a valiant Gentleman, fighting in the foremost rankes was slaine, by his death amazing those that were neere him; And although  the Venetian for a time brauely withstood the enemies assaults, he would notwithstanding in the end haue been enforced to giue place, had not Leonesio come to their reskue with the rest of the Armie. By his arriuall the battaile was not only reenforced, but made equall, where the fight on either side was a while verie doubtfull. In the end Sforza being enforced by the enemies great multitudes, quitted the bootie and retired with his whole forces to the marshes neere to Otholenga. And thus theA fierce fight with victorie on neither side. Venetians being Masters of the bootie, went home to their Campe.
Winter alreadie was at hand, when as the enemie hauing sent his bagage before him, soone after repaired to his wintering places. But it is reported that Sforza bebefore his departure, at such time as he remained at Caluisiana, presented battaile to  the Venetians. They were at that time at Gades and had twentie thousand men in their Armie, wherefore they resolued to fight and came downe into the plaine. But the enemie beeing retired, the Venetian Armie followed him somewhat closely, where Sforza being againe inuited to fight could not be drawne to it. Wee finde in some Authors that Sforza had ordered his Armie readie to fight, but that whilst he expected the Venetian, there fell a great shower of raine which enforced him to retire before the Venetians arriuall. This seemeth to be truer than that which some Annalists write: How that he durst not fight, but did flatly refuse the battaile. If this were true, I doe greatly wonder that so valiant a Captaine who had so often fought with displaied Ensignes, and obtained so manie victories, (and who, if any  of our time may be compared to Caesar the Dictator either in magnanimitie, prosperitie,Sforza (...) red to Casar. or good fortune, is the only worthie reputed Captain in most mens iudgement) hauing purchased so goodly a Principalitie with such gallant forces and braue Souldiers, without any great losse, and being prouoked to fight, should refuse the battaile.

It may be that fearing the alteration of fortune, he was become more deliberate: as he to whom we haue compared him was likewise in his later yeares: who after so manie gallant victories is reported not to haue fought so vehemently as hee was wont. Perhaps his new purchased State was the cause thereof, the which, being on euery side encompassed with enemies, he might haue endangered, if he should haue put it to the hazzard of abattaile: But whatsoeuer it were that kept him from it, it isSforza resusing to fight reth ret^ (...) to his winter garrisons. reported that without fight he went to his winter-garrisons. After his departure, certaine townes of those which he had taken the summer before, in the following haruest returned to the Venetians obedience. Coyoni, or (according to some Authours) Alessandro, Sforza's brother, hauing giuen an assault to the Fort which the Venetians had built at Sarretta, tooke it by treacherie. He was afterwards commanded to march against the Marquis of Montferrat, where being despoiled of part of his troups, and bagage, he returned like a Run-awaie to the Camp. The Venetians on the other side were not idle, but being come from their winter-garrisons, they entred furiously vpon the Mantuan Territorie, where hauing taken Streueres, they brought awaie great bootie. Carolo Gonzaga in like manner draue all those of the Gybelline Faction forth of the valley of Sassina in the Bergamese, and left it free to the Venetians. During these exploits in Lombardie, King Alphonso did still pursue theAlphonso pursueth the Florentines. Florentines, intending wholly to ruine them, and to those endes made great warlike preparations against the spring time: For it was reported that his intent was to take  Liuorne, hoping thereby within a while after to become Master of Pisa; And to that ende he speedily caused two Argosies to be made of a wonderfull greatnesse. The Venetians likewise by the accord betwixt them, did furnish him with certaine armed Gallies. The French king on the contrarie partie had caused the Duke of Sauoie to lay downe armes, and had perswaded Renatus to passe into Italie against Alphonso, assuring him that by the helpe of the Florentines and Sforza, who promised him men and money, he should shortly recouer his kingdome.
About this time newes came from Greece How the Turkes grew strong neere to Constantinople, and that Mahomet Ottoman their king, a Potent, rich, and ambitious Prince, and then in the prime of his yeares, had builded a Fort at the Out-let of the  Pontick-Sea, neere to Saint Georges Arme, and that thereby it was euident to all menThe Turkes intend to inuade Constantinople. that his designes tended to the entire subuersion of the Greeke Empire. Pope Nicholas being troubled these warlike menaces, as well abroade as in Iatlie, whilest hee first made meanes to settle a peace in Italie, was by a domesticke conspiracie like to haue beene vndone himselfe. Stephano Porcieri or Portius, was the Principall conspirator, Diuers of that family so terme themselues and deriue their originall from Marcus Portuis Cato that noble Roman; but the armes of their house doe argue the contrarie.
This man being richer in nobilitie of birth than wealth and substance, and withal verie eloquent, was alreadie somewhat suspected by the Pope in regard of his insolent Stephano Porcio his conspiracie against the Pope. carriage; and therefore to restraine him from practizing any sedition in Rome he sent him first into Germanie vnder colour of some negotiation, from whence returniug home, he was inioined to dwell at Bolognia, on condition neuerthelesse, dailie to shew himselfe to the Bishop of Nice who commanded there as Viz-legate: But he being desirous of innouation did practise vnder-hand by trustie messengers, or rather by letters written in caracters, (for it is not certainely knowne how it was) certaine debauched Romans, to execute a damned act; which was, That vpon a ptefixed day all the conspiratours should meet at Rome, where hauing at once assailed the Pope and Cardinalls in the Church during the time of Diuine seruice, they should kill them all, and then inuite the Roman people to embrace their libertie. Heereupon  feigning to be sick he kept his house, till he had assured notice that the conspirators were all readie in Rome. For then leaping on horse-backe, hee came by great iournies to the citie. But his departure was not long concealed from the Bishop, who doubting some treacherie, did by sundrie messengers aduertized the Pope, how that

Stephano Porcio without his knowledge had left Bolognia, and that he could not learne whither he was gone, but that hee chiefly feared that he was gone to Rome, to disturbe the peace of that Citie. Porciero being wearied with his long trauaile and watching, betooke himselfe to rest, which gaue the messengers leisure opportunely to deliuer their letters, which the Pope receiued the night before the day of execution, who being amazed at the matter, did sodainly resolue to put him to death: The charge thereof was committed to Giacomo Lauaniola of Verona, who at that time was a Senator of Rome, and to diuers others. These with a troupe of armed men being come where Stephano was, he heard a noise, and being amazed, escaped to his sisters house, hauing left Baptista Sarra in his, with the armed men whome  he had assembled for the execution of that mischieuous plot. Now Baptista being a valiant man, so soone as he perceiued himselfe enuironed with fire and armes, made way by force through the Popes souldiers. But the Author of the conspiracie beingStephano Porcio is put to death. taken at his sisters house, was put to death. This matter in some sort diuerted the Popes affection from peace.
About the Spring-time of this yeare, the Florentines aswell with their owne troupes as with those of Sforza, recouered Foglian which they had lost the yeareThe Florentines recouer Foglian before, when Alphonso as yet had not raised any tumults in Tuscanie. Sforza in the Winter-time came to Cremona to aide Lodouico Gonzaga whom his brother Carolo did neerely presse: But he thought it necessarie rather to relieue the Manerbians  whom the Venetians had a long time besieged. The Venetian hauing repulsed him after some skirmishes betweene them which neuer came to any set battaile with a resolued constancie continued his siege. But whilest Leonesio in that place performed the part of a vigilant Captaine, he was shot into the bodie with an arrow,Leonesio his death. whereof shortly after he died. Some say that he was slaine before that time, and that the Generals place was giuen to Picinino, before Sforza came forth of his Winter Garrisons.
This disaster was within a while after accompanied with another. For CaroloSundrie combats and in counters betwixt the Uenetians and Sforzans. Gonzaga hauing made a rash attempt vpon his brothers troupes betwixt Gades and Villafranca was broken and put to rout, with the losse of seuen hundred horse. Picinino was not idle, for after that he had taken Manerbia, Quinzano, and within a while after, Ponteuico, which was manned with a strong Garrison, he went and besieged Seniga, from whence by reason of Sforzas arriuall, he discamped and retitired to Ponteuico. The enemie gaue an assault to Gades, and tooke it. Then there was a cruell fight neere to that place by meanes of Picininos arriuall, where Lodouico Gonzaga whom Sforza had sent for thither, had like to haue beene defeated by the enemie (for the Venetian charged first vpon him) had not Sforza opportunely come to his reskue. The Venetians departing thence went and encamped at Porciana betwixt two marshes. Sforza in the meane time commanded Roberto Sanseuerino, and Tiberto, to go and wast the Bressian countrey. Picinino went and assailed them being  loden with spoile, and tooke the greatest part of their bootie from them. Sforza therupon speedily marched against him, but the bickering being quickly ended, the Venetian with his Armie retired safely to his campe.
Both Armies did often skirmish with one another as occasion was offered; and Summer was halfe spent, when king Renatus hauing driuen the enemies from theKing Renatus commeth to Sforzas companie. confines of Alexandria, came to Sforza with foure thousand horse. At his arriuall he sent an Herald at Armes to denounce warre to the Venetians. The enemies forces being thus encreased (for they had in their Armie, together with the French succours, sixe score companies of men at Armes) they departed from Gades, and hauing crossed the riuer Mella, they went and encamped at Bassan betwixt Manerbia  and Ponteuico. The Venetians likewise (for Antonio Marcello, and Pascalis Maripietro were come as Prouidators to the camp) marched to Manerbia, and from thence went and encamped at Porciana. The enemie so soone as the Venetian had dislodged,Manerbia and Ponteuico yeeld to Sforza* did by a voluntarie yeelding enter into Manerbia. Then Sforza and Renatus

gaue an assault to Ponteuico, which they tooke by force, hauing besieged it a while, and ouerthrew the walles down to the ground. It is reported that the French in that place did deale verie cruelly with the wretched inhabitants, which did in such sort amaze all the townes round about, as whatsoeuer the Venetians held in the plaines of Cremona and Bressia, (Soncina and Romanenga excepted) did in a short space yeeld themselues to the enemie. Picinino by this reuolt being enforced to giue place, did sodainly march towards Bressia, and encamped in a verie strong place, betwixt the Citie, the mounraines, and a lake, which commeth forth of the riuer Clesia, from whence he might easily defend the inhabitants of the mountaines, and all the Bressan countrey which lieth towards the lake of La Garda.
Such successe had the Venetians affaires in Lombardie. But the Senate was not so much troubled for the danger of this warre, as with the newes from Greece, How that Mahomet the Turkish Emperour had besieged Constantinople. Whereupon, for feare of loosing so commodious a place for Christians (for, that being lost there was no more hope of trafficke vpon the Ponticke Sea) the Senate made a decreeto send forth tenne Gallies to the aide of the Citie vnder the command of Giacomo Lauretano: They did beside command two great Argozies of two thousand tunnes a peece to be made readie. Lauretano within a while after departed from Venice with fiue Gallies, for by the Senates command he was to take other fiue out of Dalmatia and Candie. Alphonso promised to send tenne Gallies, and the Pope as many, which  fleet of thirtie Gallies was in their names to be sent to the aide of Constantinople. But Othoman in the meane time had besieged the Citie by Sea and Land with threeConstantinople besieged. hundred thousand fighting men, and three hundred seuentie fiue ships of warre, among which were seuenteene Gallies of three Oares on a banke, and others of two, with many other smaller vessels. This they report which were present at the siege. The Venetian Annals set downe lesse by the third part, as well of souldiers, as of vessels.
Constantine Paleologus did at that time command the Greeke Empire, who to withstand the enemies, had caused an yron chaine of a wonderfull greatnesse to be drawne athwart the Hauen from Constantinople to Pera. The Venetian Gallies returning  from trafficke forth of the Ponticke Seas, remained in the Hauen for theAide entereth into Constantinople by Sea. aide of that Christian Citie. Certaine ships of Candie were likewise there, and an Argozie of Genoa of a wonderfull bignesse, whereof Georgio Doria was Captaine. Then three other Genoa ships of like bignesse which came from Chios arriued there being loden with men and victuals. As they entred the Hauen in the Cities view, the Turkes vessels went and assailed them, whereupon there began a bloudie fight on both sides, which lasted long without any aduantage to either partie. In the end, the Gallies and other vessels that lay at Anker not farre from thence comming to their reskue, the Turkes quitted the place, and retired to the pillars of Pera. The last that arriued there, was Giouanni Iustiniano of Genoa surnamed the Long, with two Argosies wherein were three hundred souldiers.
The Emperour hauing embraced him, and entertained him with faire promises, he committed vnto him the guard of the Romane gate. Nicolao Molino, and Giouanni Lauretano kept the gate Chersina: Baptista Gritti with diuers other Venetians, who by chance were at those troubles of Constantinople, guarded the Pallace of Paleologus: And by reason that the enemies nauall Armie had beene beaten forth of the Gulph, all was safe on the Sea side: The Turkes greatest furie was towards the land. They had brought diuers great peeces of Ordnance in sundrie places neere to the walles, and especially at the gate Sutrina.
There and elsewhere the continuall shot of Ordnance had beaten downe a great  part of the walles: But the Turke, that he might diuide the forces of the besieged in sundrie places, and thereby make them weaker, resolued, (for otherwise he could not doe it) to cause part of his vessels to be carried by land ouer into the Gulph. He did without resistance draw seuentie fiue Gallies from the pillars of Pera into the

waters of the castle neere to the walles, and commanded an assault to be giuen to the Citie on that side with threescore and ten thousand men. He himselfe came to guard those vessels whilest they were drawne forth of the water for feare least the Armie should on a sodaine come and set fire on them. He had beside planted certaine peeces of ordnance ouer-against the mouth of the Gulph, opposite to the cittie, not so much to batter the walls, as to keep the Christian Gallies from approaching. Some say that those of Pera might haue hindered the Turkes in their enterprize of carrying their Gallies into the Gulph, but that they were vnwilling to doe it for feare of drawing that warlike tempest vpon themselues.
The Gallies being thus drawne into the Gulph, there was nothing more certaine, than that such ill neighbors would soone procure the ruine of the cittie. The Venetians and other Christians, although in number of men and ships they were farre inferiour to the Turkes, did neuerthelesse resolue to assaile them; supposing that by a sodaine assault they might amaze them, and in that feare, to set fire on their vesselles. To further whose purpose the night was verie darke and mistie, whereby the enemie was so farre off from discerning them, as they could hardly descrie one another. It is thought, That the enemie could by no meanes haue discouered the intent of our men, and that perhappes the Turkes nauie might haue beene defeated, and Christendome thereby freed from the losse of so noble a Citie, or at leastwise, that it would not haue happened so soone; if those of Pera, who desired  the ruine of the Citie, had not discouered the Christians designe to the enemies: By whose aduertisement Mahomet sent the same night as many souldiers to ouerthrow our nauall Armie, as he had done at the former time.
The Captaines of the Christians vessells being full of hope and courage, set forward against the enemie, thinking that their comming had not beene knowne; but the Turkes being prepared for fight, waited for them, and did not onely courageously receiue them, but hauing on a sodaine discharged a piece of ordnance vpon a Candiot gallie, which was commaunded by Zacharia Gria, they went to inuiron all the rest. The Christians being amazed to see them in that readinesse, turned theyr backes. One Gallie which was commaunded by Giacomo Cocco comming in considerately  with two others to charge the enemie, was by a cannon-shot suncke in the enemies view, with all those in a maner that were in her; Three and thirty men that fell into the enemies hands, were murthered before the Cities gates.
A great quantitie of the wall in the meane time on the other side of the Cittie neere to the gate Sutrina was beaten downe. This breach was foorth with repaired with new fortifications according to the vsuall maner. The Turke attempted to enter the Cittie by a mine, which tooke no effect; for by a counter-mine it was made vnprofitable. A Tower at the Roman gate which the canons had much shaken, fell downe, and had made a great breach, and neere thereunto the enemie had raised a rampire and gabions against the Christians ordnance. There was a great  breach neere to the gate Chersina, which caused Mahomet, vpon hope to enter the cittie there, to giue a furious assault. The Turkes, the more to amaze the besieged, did before day enter the rampires with fearefull and terrible clamours. The Emperour riding vp and downe the cittie, incouraged his souldiers to fight valiantly for their Countrey, wiues, children, and liues, telling them, That the time was come,The Emperours exhortation to his souldiers. that vnlesse they did brauely beare themselues, that famous Cittie would not onely he lost, but the fame and renowne of ancient Greece would bee cleane extinguished. Hee tolde them moreouer that they had to doe with an enemie, from whom they were to expect no grace nor fauour: It therefore behooued them, either to liue with their Countrey, or to die with her ruine.
This did hee speake to the souldiers as hee walked the round vpon the walles; but comming to the Roman Gate, hee found Iustiniano the Genouese grieuously wounded, who began to talke of yeelding, from which the Emperour could by no meanes diuert him. It is reported that the Emperour perceiuing those that
fought in Iustinians companie, to thinke on nothing but flight, did stand in his place with those few forces that he brought with him, and that hee did brauely attemptThe Emperour in despaire. to beate the enemies from the walles; but perceiuing that his souldiers were too weake to resist such multitudes, hee was well-neere ready to haue slaine himselfe. But considering that it did not become a Christian to vse such desperate meanes, he did intreate his owne souldiers to kill him, and vpon their refusall so to doe, he resolued to die more nobly. For hee threw from him his Imperiall ornaments, fearing if he should be knowne, that they would take him aliue, and with his sword in hand ran in among the thickest of the Turkes that were entring, where this Prince, worthie of eternall memorie, fighting valiantly with the enemies was flaine by The death of the Emperor of Constantinople. them. His bodie falling downe, together with that great Empire, was confusedly mingled among his other subiects: and being afterwards knowne among the dead bodies, his head by Mahomets commaund was stricken off, and borne in triumph through the Campe and Cittie. Some say that hee was smothered at the Roman Gate among the throng which fled, and that hee was afterwards knowne by his Coate-armour. The enemies nauall armie was not idle in the meane time: for the Venetian Gallies, and the rest of the Christian nauall armie, with diuers others who came running to the shippes at the enemies first assault, being out of hope to defend the cittie, presently went their way, but the Turkes tooke diuerse of them neere the sea-shoare. The city was wholly sacked, Virgins were defloured, yong The Turkish crueltie. boyes forced, and wines tormented with detestable filthinesse, according to the maner of that cruell Nation. Men that escaped death were made slaues. Diuerse Venetians were on that day slaine and taken, among whom were seuen and fortie Gentlemen.
In this manner was Constantinople the chiefe cittie of Grecia taken by Mahomet the Turkish Emperour, and thus was that most ancient Grecian Empire ouerthrowne, the yeare 1121. after the establishment thereof. The newes of this losse gaue great terrour to all Christendome. Pope Nicholas sent to Venice to haue fiuePope Nicholas recompence to as many as shold tak armes against the Turkes Gallies armed at his charge against the Turkes, and propounded to as manie as should take armes vnder the Ensignes of the Roman church against those Infidells  plenarie remission of all sinnes, which they had till then committed: And if anie souldier that was forth of pay should refuse to enroule himselfe for that warre, hee did incurre his bitter curse.
The Venetians sent Bartolomeo Marcello to Mahomet, to craue restitution of their countrymen with their goods. An other Messenger went ouerland before Marcello, who promised to returne to Venice from Constantinople within fiue and thirtie dayes. The Senate was verie desirous to vnderstand what was become of those Venetians which were in Constantinople when it was taken, whether they were still aliue or dead, and if they were liuing, in what state they were, either at liberty or captiues. The aboue mentioned Gallies, with certaine shippes of burthen, had  alreadie before then sailed to sea vnder the commaund of Giacomo Lauretano, who vpon newes of the taking of Constantinople retired into the Isle of Nigrepont.
The Senate thought vpon this new warre, whilest all Lombardie was filled withSforzaes exploits in Lombardie. armes and souldiers: for Sforza hauing recouered all towns vpon the plaine approched with his armie neere to Rhoades, that he might become Master of the mountaine: where during his abode, the townes of Romans, Martinenga, the Camonick valley, and Brisanza yeelded to him; the like did all the Inhabitants of the Gyradade. Rhoades also being afterwards taken, hee went to besiege the new Orgies,He takes Rhoads the O gies, Soncina, and Romanenga. in which meane space, those of Soncina yeelded to him. At the last, the Orgies being recouered, Romanenga, who alone did obey the Venetians, did voluntarily  yeelde as the rest had done. Afterwards, there were no greater exploits done in Lombardie.
Toward the latter end of Haruest when Winter drew neere Sforza was desirous in the behalfe of Lodonico Gonzaga to take Asola, but he was inforced to giue ouer

his enterprize, and to put it off till some other time, as well by reason of a mightie tempest which then happened, as in regard of the continuall raine that followed it. Renatus being in a rage (as it is supposed) against the Florentines and Sforza, went hisway in the middest of Winter, and returned through the countrie of Ast and Thurin into Fraunce.
But to returne to the affaires of Greece. The Venetians being desirous to vnderstand of the welfare of those, who with the cittie of Constantinople had beene taken by the Turks, had intelligence within a while after by some that came to Venice, that the Venetians that were taken in Constantinople were prisoners, and that the enemie had vsed no crueltie on those whom Fortune had saued: within a while  after Lauretano's letters did assure the Senate of the prisoners redemption, and that the Turkes for seuen thousand crownes would set them at liberty. The very same day of these newes, the Popes Nuncio came to Venice, who was receiued by greatThe Popes Nuncio commeth to Venice to treate of peace. troupes of people. Hee spake to the Senate concerning peace which he said he had motioned at Florence, and said, that at his departure thence, he would go to Sforza to treate likewise with him: And that the Pope did determine to quiet Italie, the better afterwards to preuent the great daunger which threatned all Christendome from the Turkes, and to that end, he was desirous to be Iudge and Vmpire of that peace, and that hee which should impugne it, should be held as excommunicate, and for an enemie, not onely to Italie, but to all Christendome. This aduertisement  beeing giuen, which the Venetians did willingly entertaine, hee tooke his leaue of the Venetians, and went to Sforza.
Lauretano who had intelligence (as hath been said) of the taking of Constantinople, was gone to Nigrepont, from whence he writ to the Senators, certifying themLauretano his exploits in the Iste of Nigrepont. That he was resolued to tarrie there for the guard of the Island; that he had sunke foure of the enemies great Gallies, and thirteene other small ones; that their Rowers and Mariners swimming to Land had beene all slaine by the Countrie people; and that he had hanged those whom he tooke in the Gallies. No sooner were Lauretans letters read in the Senate, but the Popes Gallies which were readie to set saile were commanded to goe and ioine with their Nauall Armie; with which Lauretano being strengthened, determined to tarrie for the Gallies from Alexandria and Syria, and then with that mightie Fleet to set forwards against the enemies, whom he had still forborne to meddle with, till such time as the troubles of Italie being pacified, he might increase the number of his vessells.
Within a while after, Christophero Moro and Vrso Iustiniano were sent to Rome toChristophero Moro and Viso Iustiniano are sent Ambassadors to Rome. treate of peace with the other Ambassadors of Italie in the Popes presence. The Venetian cauallerie before the Ambassadors departure had surprized certaine victualls from the enemie, together with those which conuoied it, but after that the treatie of peace was mentioned the Venetians made no more incursions into Lombardie: Yet, because they would not seeme quite to abandon the Prouince, they sent  acertaine number of Archers and some vessells thither by the Riuer Po. They did afterwards make a league with the Genoueses and those of Luca, for which, generall processions were made in the Citie. They did likewise at the same time procure Bartilmeo Coyoni vnderhand to come and serue them.
But whilest this was done, the Popes fiue Gallies which at the beginning went against the Turkes, about the Spring-time returned to Veniee without Lauretano's leaue. Giouanni Dandulo, Antonio Quirini, Andrea, and Nicholao Contareni who were Captaines of them, were by the Senates decree committed to prison: Andrea ContareniThe Captaines of the Gallies are punished because they left the fleet without leaue. and Giouanni Dandulo being found guiltlesse were acquitted, and the rest condemned in a pecuniarie fine and to indure imprisonment for half a yeare, and were declared  vnworthie euer after to haue any command at Sea: And against foure others of meaner qualitie who were known to haue been the cheefe motiues of leauing the army, they proceeded more sharply than against the gentlemen; for they were whipt from the market-place to Rialto, and their noses being slit they were for euer bannished the Citie.
Within a while after, peace was concluded with Sforza and the Florentines, which,The conditions of peace concluded by meanes of an Hermit. contrarie to the Popes opinion was effected by meanes of Simon Camertes the Hermit, who after sundry iournies concluded it on these conditions: That Sforza should restore to the Venetians whatsoeuer he had taken from them in the last warre (the Townes of the Gyradade excepted) That the Marquis of Mantua should reinuest his brother Carolo in his State: That the Florentines should receiue from Alphonso whatsoeuer he had taken from them, (Chastillon excepted and the Sienna Territorie belonging to the Florentines): And for the greater confirmation of that peace, the Pope interposed his authoritie, and it was expresly mentioned, that if henceforward any strife did arise betwixt them, that the Pope should haue ample authoritie  to decide and end it, That either of them which should first take Armes against the other, after the wrong knowne should presently be declared an enemie not only to the partie wronged, but to the Pope, and to as many as had beene present at that accord. And in this manner by these conditions of peace, euerie one was satisfied, sauing the Genoueses. For Alphonso would still continue warre against them; which we must suppose to haue beene graunted him, because otherwise hee would hardly haue beene drawne to haue consented to the peace which ensued.
The Citie of Venice being tired with so long a warre had neuer a more welcome day than that, when peace was published ouer the Citie with sound of trumpet: They did first appoint praiers to be made in Churches, and generall processions, in  which, the relicks and images of Saints were carried about with great solemnity, theThe great reioicing at Venice in regard of the peace. whole Clergie following them with the Prince and Senate, and all the orders of the Citie. The night following manie torches were lighted, and other signes of ioie were shewed ouer all the Citie. This was in the yeare of our Saluation 1454, and the eighth after the warre was renued in Lombardie against Philip concerning Cremona, and the fifth against Sforza in the behalfe of their associates the Milaneses. Italie was afterwards a long time quiet, and especially Lombardie, which was very peaceable till such time as it felt the terrible tempest of the Ferrarese war.
Zacharia Treuisano and Nicholao Canalis were sent Ambassadors into Germanie to the Emperour Frederick who had written to most parts of Europe, That Commissioners Ambassadours sent into Germanie to the Emperour. might be sent to him, with whom to consult in open assembly concerning the warre with the Turke. Bartilmeo Marcello did in the meane time returne from Constantinople, who in the Republikes name had made peace with Mahomet and freely obtained of him whatsoeuer he craued. Mahomets Ambassadours followed Marcello to Venice to cause that peace to be ratified. But the Senate fearing to do any thing inconsiderately, did delay the businesse a long time, till the league among Christians was contracted, and then, (for they rather wished the wealth and commoditie of ItalieThe Venetians great discretion in doing nothing without good advice. and all Christendome than any good to the Turke) they would haue war and no peace with him. Yet, in the mean space, because they would not seeme to contemne the friendship of so mightie a Prince, they returned the same Marcello together  with the Turkes Ambassador to Constantinople with new Articles, and commission, that if Mahomet should receiue them, then to conclude peace in the name of the Common-wealth, and that he should remaine there as their Magistrate.
But heere an occasion may seeme to be offered to condemne and tax the Venetians. It was very well knowne that the Venetians had forsaken the Christians alliance (will some detractor say) in regard they had inioined their Ambassador, that if the Turke should entertain the offred conditions, then to make peace with him, the which being once sworne to, it would not haue beene lawfull for them (their publike faith saued) to alter. But we must imagine that they did foresee this; for wee finde no certainetie thereof, because that the enterprise against the Turks had been  propounded in the Emperors presence two moneths before, so as it is to be supposed, that it was then concluded, whereupon they had time ynough to determine which was the profitablest way for their commonwealth, though perhaps some wil be of another opinion. But according to al mens saying, the Venetians dealt very discreetly,

as they haue alwaies done, who would not rashly thrust themselues into so dangerous a warre, wherein being entangled by Sea and Land, the other Princes of Europe might in derision haue looked a farre off vpon their losse and ouerthrow, as it hapned within a few yeares after, when the Venetians beeing enforced to make warre on the Turke, they were not onely forsaken of all other Christians, but were betraied in the verie confines of Italie. But we will speake of this in his place.
Let vs now returne to that which happened after the peace in Lombardie, which seemeth to be worthy the noting because that armes being scarce laied down, a new war had like to haue entangled the Venetians at their doores. The Senate demanded  Bagnacauallo a dependant on Rauenna, and some other Townes of the Pollesin, of Borsia D'Aeste. To this end they sent messengers to him to Ferrara to denounce war according to their custome, vnlesse he did surrender those Townes which they demanded. But he being a louer of peace, and one that made great account of the Venetians friendshippe, did by his Ambassadour write to the Prince and Senate, that hee desired peace with them and no warre, and that hee would referreThe honest answer of the Ferrarois. himselfe to their discretion: Vpon this honest answere they did presently lay down their Armes which they had alreadie put on, and attempted nothing against him.
Then the Venetians hauing changed the warre by Land to that by Sea, did Arme  two vessells against Nauipator the Venetian, who hauing receiued some disgrace of his fellow-Citizens, was become a Pirate. The Senate accounted it an heynous matter that any Venetian should in those dayes scoure and robbe the Seas, seeing that their Ancestors from the first foundation of their Citie had rigorously pursued such theeues. About the same time Victore Capello was sent to the Princes of Morea, who foreseeing the great danger which threatned them from the Turkes had sent to the Prince and Senate of Venice, to treate with them about the deliuering vp of their Island into the Venetians hands, prouided that they would giue them in recompence as much reuenue in Italie as would suffice for their honourable entertainment according to their present fortune, though not so much as they were The Genoueses come into Morea for the same purpose as the Venetians did. wont to haue.
At Capels arriuall, the Genoueses had approached the Island in hope to become Masters thereof, their Nauall Armie consisting of tenne Gallies and eighteene other shippes of warre. Lauretano likewise was come thither with his Gallies; Each of them did but waite for a fit occasion. The same yeare there were such Terrible tempests ouer all Italie and especially vpon the Venetians Coasts, as wonderfull hurt was done thereby. It is reported that one storme brake as manie glasse windowes in Venice, as were thought to be worth seuen thousand Ducats. The Venetians being at peace euer sinte the taking of Constantinople, there was no Prince nor Common-wealth in all Italie that had warre, but only Pope Calixtus and the Genoueses: who for the losse of Pera (for so soone as Constantinople was taken, those of Pera yeelded) had some attempts vpon the Turkes. Calixtus all the time of his Papacie did not cease both by Letters and messages to stirre vp all Europe to take Armes against those Infidells, and to those endes, himself Armed thirteene Gallies, whereof Lodouico Patriarke of Aquileia was made Generall. This man for three yeares space, did scoure all the Sea Coasts of Asia, doing great harme, and tooke diuers Islands from Mahomet.
This cruell Tyrant in the meane time preuailed so farre in Europe by an admirable course of victorie as he subdued all Thrace, the Tribals, and Macedonia: andThe Turkes good successe both in Asia and Europe. in Asia likewise he vtterly subuerted the Empire of Trebisond, howbeit rather by  treacherie than force of Armes: Then he tooke the old and new Foglies; and drawing one war from an other, he seised on Imbria and Smirna: Then he tooke from the Gathelosis of Genoa (against whom he began the war about a child) the Isle of Lesbos which yeelded on conditions: He did afterwards vsurp vpon Bossina, killing the king

thereof: And in a manner, reduced vnder his Empire whatsoeuer the Christian Princes had till then enioied, from Constantinople as farre as Albania and Dalmatia, betwixt Hungarie and the Danubie, and the Ionian and Aegean Seas. But whilest the Infidell made all these conquests, the Venetians attempted nothing, although their aide sundrie times had beene earnestly implored. Morea onely (which at last they tooke from the Princes Thomas and Demetrius) did certaine yeares after Arme against the Turke. We will in the bookes following set downe the originall and successe of that warre. But whilest Othoman executed these exploits the which we thought good briefely to touch, in regard they do in some  sort belong to our Historie, the Venetians had no warre.
The end of the seuenth Booke of the third Decad.







THE EIGHTH BOOKE  OF THE THIRD DECAD OF THE HISTORIE Of Venice.

The Contents of the eighth Booke of the third Decad.



THE Prince accompanieth the funeralls of his Predecessour, which was neuer seene before, since the custome of associating a Colleague was abolished. The cause of the warre against OTTOMAN. The Description of Morea. The Venetians hauing taken Argiers, fortifie the Streight. The Venetian Armie hath no good successe at the siege of Corinth. The Venetians in Italie besiege Thryeste. The Turkes driue the Venetians from the Streight. They fight twice with good successe against the Turkes before Naples. The sieges before Thryeste and Arimini are raised at one time. The Venetians being vanquished at Talamata in Morea, receiue a notable ouerthrow. VRSO IVSTINIANO doth twice assaile those of Mitylene in Lesbos with great losse of his souldiers. SIGISMVND of Arimini taketh  Sparta by assault. VENIERI his Gallie hauing in the night-time passed beyond the Dardaneans, returneth safely to his Countrymen. Pope PIVS being come to Ancona, dieth within a while after that the Prince and Venetians nauall Armie came thither. Supplies of money are giuen to the King of Hungarie in the name of all Christendome. VICTOR CAPELLO after that hee had fortunately executed diuers gallant enterprises vpon the enemies, at last receiuing an ouerthrow at Patras, dieth with griefe. BARTHOLOMEO of Bergamo, surnamed COYONI, comming into Flaminia had like to haue endaungered the Venetians with a new warre. NICHOLAO CANALIS Generall of the Venetians nauall Armie ruineth Oenos. MAHOMET hauing a long time besieged Nigrepont, takes it in fine, to the great hurt of the Venetians.

THE Venetians State for the space of tenne yeeres had peace both by Sea and Land. But this securitie was mixed with feare and care. For the Venetians in this meane time might well be likened to that man, who seeing his neighbors house on fire although his owne be free from it, can not for all that but feare, lest the same flame being dispersed should take holde of his, and runneth foorthwith (according to the prouerb) to the Riuer. Euen so the Venetians, though they  had no open warre against the Turkes, omitted not carefully to obserue his tenne yeeres actions in Asia and Europe; to ruminate diuers things in their minds; and to premeditate on that warre which they foresaw they should one day be inforced to make vpon that barbarous

Tyrant. Yet in all that time they kept themselues from taking Armes, till some iust occasion should enforce them. But heereof we will speake heereafter. Now wee must set downe that which happened at Venice during that peace. The Venetians limits were mightily extended during Foscari his principalitie. Which came to passe, as well by reason of the publique felicitie and good fortune of the State, as by the long time of his gouernement, which was managed with singularThe happinesse and cont^t of the city of Venice during Foscari his principalitie. skill and discretion: And not the State alone, but the cities selfe was illustrated with rare and costly buildings. For in his daies, the Porch of the Pallace was on the outside beautified with white Marble. Saint Gregories church, which was begunne to be repayred from the foundations, was finished in costly manner. After all this the  Prince, when hee had gouerned the Common-wealth foure and thirtie yeeres, being foure score and tenne yeeres old, and in regard of his age being no longer able to manage the publique affaires, was deposed from the soueraigne Magistracie. And because his fortitude and vigor of spirit was not yet diminished, although his bodie were enfeebled, hee was reduced among the ranke of Gentlemen.



 PASCALIS MARIPIETRO, the  66. Duke of Uenice





PAscalis Maripietro (the other yet liuing) was subrogated in his sted. But Foscari suruiued not long after the creation of the new duke. The honorable Ensignes that had beene taken from him in his life time, were  restored to him after his death: For he was buried with Ducal pompOne Prince waiteth vpon an others funeralls. in the Church of the Friers Minors; and by this meanes it came to passe, that one Prince accompanied anothers funeralls, which had neuer hapned till then, since that the custome of associating a Colleague was abolished. His Nephews built him a Tombe of white Marble, richly guilded, neere to the high Altar.
In the time of Maripietro that great Earthquake happened, which about the fift day of December, did shake all Italie, especially the Realme of Naples. This Prince was adorned with diuers eminent vertues: Hee had a sound and excellentThe new Princes vertues. iudgement, without faining or dissimulation. He was a louer of peace, a friend to Religion, and a seuere punisher of vice: Hee did execute offenders according to  their deserts, or at leastwise banished them from the citie. The peace which hee had receiued from Foscari, as by tradition, which had beene well obserued in all times and places, was by him deliuered entire to his successor.
To this felicitie and other fortunate euents which happened in his time, the Art

of Printing may be added, which in those daies was inuented in Italie. The inuentionThe inuention of the Art of Printing is attributed to a Germane. thereof is attributed to a Germane. But this diuine art being by succession of times dispersed ouer all Italie, the chiefe workemen in that misterie did openly contend for the garland of singularitie: In which art we finde Nicolao Iansonio of Venice to haue exceeded all the rest. Maripietro hauing gouerned foure yeares and a halfe, departed this life, and his bodie lieth honourably buried in the Church of the Twyns.




 CHRISTOPHERO MORO, the 67. Duke of Uenice.





CHristophero Moro succeeded him. The second yeere of his gouernment, the warre began against Ottoman: We must briefly set downe the cause thereof. The tyrant hauing done much hurt to the Christians of Grecia and other Prouinces of Europe, determined to takeThe description of Morea. Morea. This Prouince is almost like an Island, and is (as they terme it) one of the three rockes of Europe, ioyning to the streight of Corinth. For the Ionian Sea on the one side, and the Aegean on the other, doe in a manner make an entire Island of it. It is in forme like to a leafe of a Plane tree, by reason of the Seas which enuiron it, towards the North the Ionian, the Sicillian towards the West, the Greeke on the South, the Aegean on the East, and that of Mirtona towards the Solstitiall. It is in circuit (according to Isidore) three hundred and threescore  thousand paces. Towards the streight on the North side lieth the Sea of Corinth, at this day called Patras: Iust opposite to that is the Saronic Sea, where in times past the ancient Hauen of Cencrea was, and in the other, that of Leches. This whole countrey in former times was called Iappigia, afterwards Pelasgis, and for a long time Peloponessus, which name by diuers is yet giuen vnto it. It is commonly at this day called Morea.
Ottoman hauing mightily enlarged the confines of his Empire was desirous to take this Prouince as a member of the Greek Empire from the brethren Thomas and Demetrius.The occasion of the Ottomans warre against the Uenetians. In regard of the situation therof they might haue defended it a long time, if they had beene assured to haue beene relieued by the Christians in time, or if the  brethren with a mutuall consent would haue vndertaken it: But both those meanes were wanting. For Demetrius went to the Turkes side, which was the first and chiefest cause of the ruine of that state. He gaue his daughter in marriage to Ottoman, and gaue him entrance into one of the goodliest Prouinces of Grecia. Thomas made some

resistance neere to the streight, but in vaine. And hauing lost all, flying from the rage of that cruell enemie, he went to Rome whither he brought with him S. Andrewes head: in regard whereof, Pope Pius being accompanied with all the Cleargie wentSaint Andrewes head is brought to Rome. to meet him as farre as the Miluian bridge, and appointed a marble Chappell to be built in that place where he had first saluted the Apostles head, and another larger than that in S. Peters Church where the head was afterwards laid vp with great solemnitie.
The Dominion of the Greeks being extinct in Morea, the Venetians still kept those townes there which they had a long time enioyed. But the violent and perfidious inclination of the enemie would not long let them rest. For after that he had taken  Argers by treacherie, he entangled the Venetians in a warre more necessarie than profitable. The Senate being thereby enforced, did presently take armes against him Victor Capello was then Admiral of the Sea, who being entreated by the chiefe of the Isle of Lesbos, (at that time when Ottoman tooke it from the Cateloses of Genoa) to come and defend the Island, would not do it: as also when the Theodorans sent to him who dwelt in a part of the Island, that he would aide them, and receiue them vpon their homage, when the Isle of Mitilene was taken, he refused it, notwithstanding that he had a mightie nauall Armie, fearing least by any inconsiderate attempt, he might precipitate the Repulicke into a manifest danger of warre, although he might iustly haue taken Armes, seeing Ottoman had contrarie to the ancient accord, which  the Venetians had made with Amurath his father, and afterwards with himselfe, crossed the streight of Gallipolis with his Armie. This is the report of such as were there present. For there is no Venetian An^all, nor any other Historian whatsoeuer which makes mention therof: Cepio exepted, who in an eloquent stile hath written the notable actions of Pietro Mocenigo. Neuerthelesse it is certaine that so sooneThe warre against the Turks is begun in Morea. as the warre was proclaimed against Mahomet, it began in Morea where the wrong had beene first offered. And whilest they expected greater forces from Italie, certaine foot companies vnder the command of Pietro Palmiero together with two hundred light horse, which the Greeks call Stradiots, entering fiercely into the enemies countrey, did by a sodaine incursion surprize a small towne betwixt Arcadia and  Modon; the Garrison whereof being put to the sword, they brought away a great bootie.
Within a while after, Bertoldo d'Aeste, Betin of Calcina, Cicco Brandolino, Giouanni Attellano, Roberto Thyente, Giouanni Massano, Leon Illirico, and diuers other great persons with gallant forces arriued at Modon: From thence the whole Armie went speedily to Naples, where making no long stay, Aeste, who was Generall of theThe Venetian Armie before Argers. Armie, went to besiege Argers. This towne among all others of Greece was verie famous, as well for the originall thereof, as for the residence and Court of kings. It was easily taken, and as soone giuen to the souldiers who spoiled it. The Turks in the citie who were no great number were retired into the Castle. Two daies after the  Christians arriuall in that place fiue hundred Turkish horse came and assailed the Christians neere to the Citie, and in the skirmish slew an hundred of our souldiers, and among others Martin of Dalmatia, who held an honourable ranke in the Venetian Armie. Those of the Castle yeelded within a while after. The Priest who had deliuered the towne to the Turkes being taken in that place, was put to death. BertoldoThe traitor punished according to his deserts. hauing left three hundred Candiot Archers in the Castle, brought backe the troupes to Naples.
VVithin a while after, the Venetian Generall departed from Naples with fifteene thousand men. He went first and encamped at Basilia, the which being taken at his first arriuall, he marched the morrow after to the streight through the territorie of  Corinth, and fortified his campe neere to the Saronich Sea. Lodouico Lauretano was there with a mightie nauall Armie. They had before placed a Garrison on the the other side of the streight, opposite to that place: Sixe Gallies rode at Anker not farre off. Now (because that the Sea and Land troupes were come thither for that

purpose) they presently with great courage began an admirable peece of worke, which in 15 daies was finished. They fortified with a wal and double tre^ch the wholeThe Venetians make a wall at the streight. length of the streight, which from the Aegean Sea to the Ionian containeth 4000. paces, though the circuit of the walls makes it appeare greater. It is reported, that in the same place they did set 30000. men on worke, but the great number of men did not so much preuaile for the speedie ending of the worke, as the aptnesse of the matter wherewith it was made, which was readie at hand. The stones of old buildings were scattered heer and there which had bin in times before cut foure-square for the same purpose. With that the wall was easily builded, with Rampiers and trenches on both sides: This Streight was by the Greeks in Xerxes time enclosed with wals It is certain  that many great Princes in diuers ages haue attempted to cut through that streight to make it Nauigable: King Demetrius first, then Caesar the Dictator, next him Calligula, and lastly Domitius Nero, whose enterprizes neuerthelesse were in vaine.
Foure thousand Turkes that were encamped neere to the walls of Corinth, didThe Turks attempt to hinder the Venetians enterprise. within three daies after their comming thither, attempt to diuert the Venetians from their enterprize; but being repulsed and enforced to retire to their Campe, the night following before that the streight was enclosed with walls, they dislodged without any rumor at all, and went their waie through the places which were yet left open, leauing no Garrison in the whole Island. The Venetians being freed from their encombrances, did at the same time as they were busied in the worke execute  some slight attempts. Benedetto Coyoni was sent to Misistrate. Some Cosmographers say, That the same Towne is that which was in olde times called Sparta. All the places round about it were taken at the first: the Castle excepted, with t^e enemie held, at the assault whereof, Coyoni the chiefe of the enterprize wasThe death of Benedetto Coyoni. slaine.
Iohn, surnamed the Great, with a troupe of Souldiers hauing assalted the Citie of Londaria, did presently take it, but not the Castle. The Fortification of the streight beeing finished, and manned with a strong Garrison, Bertoldo went with the rest of the troupes to besiege Corinth. This Citie is seated in a place as difficult as commodious;The description of Corinth. whereupon, Philip King of Macedon was wont to call it one of the keies  of Greece: It stands almost in the middest of the streight neere to the Mountaine in times past called Ephiro, threescore stadij distant from the one and other shore: From the heighth of the Castle which is called Acrocorynth it looketh vpon two Seas, the Ionian on the one side, and the Aegean on the other. The Venetian assailed it in three sundrie places. Bertoldo encamped toward the West, Giouanni Attellano on the East side, and Lazaro Pontoliano towards the North, neere to the Walls, with certaine foote companies. They gaue two assaults to the Citie; but the first was in some sort most fortunate, because that Attellano tooke a very strong place from the enemie, which did afterwards keepe them more streightly shut vp. But whilest they prepared for the second assault, and that Bertoldo was  very busie in ordering matters, and approaching the ordnance neere the Walls, hee was grieuously hurt in the head with a stone which was throwne from the towne, ofBertoldo D'Aeste is slaine at the siege of Corinth. which hurt within a while after, he died. The Generalls misfortune did not diuert the Souldiers from the determined assault, but they gaue in furiously vpon the enemies Rampiers, and though all the defences wherewith the Souldiers couered themselues the more safely to approch the Walls, were broken, neuerthelesse with great valour they made good the place which they had once taken. But the night following those of the Citie making a sodaine salley, as many as remained neere to the Walls were throwne downe head-long from the Castle rocks, where they all died. And because great numbers of Turkes were reported to be neere at hand, they raised  The Venetians raise their camp from before Corinth. the ^iege and retired into the streight.
Bertino of Calcina, who after Bertoldo his death was made Generall of the Armie and the other Captaines, hauing in that place assured intelligence of the enemies number, who were said to be fourescore thousand horse, distrusting their owne

small number) for besides the Sea troupes which kept the vessells, they were far inferiour in number to the enemie) hauing left the streight without a Garrison, they speedily retired to Naples; whither they were scarce come, but word was brought them that the enemies were arriued. For after that they had recouered and burnt Argers, and made a great massacre of the poore Countrie people, they did the next morning by daie-breake without any rumour shew themselues before the Walls of Naples. But before their approch those within the Castle had discouered them fromThe Turks before Naples. farre. Their arriuall beeing diuulged ouer the Citie, certaine mercenarie Souldiers would needs make a rash salley vpon them, who being enuironed with thir^ie horse, most of them were in a moment slaine before the Citie gates, the rest escaped into  the Rampiers. The Turkes seized on a small Rising beneath the Towne, but great numbers of them were there slaine as well by the Archers which continually shot, as by the ordnance which scoured amongst them, wherewith they were not onely tormented, but in a manner wholly ouerthrowne.
The Venetians would not loose so faire an occasion, but diuers troupes did withThe Turkes losse besore Naples. great cries enuiron the Rising, and gaue great terror to the enemies: Others ranne fiercely vpon the troupes of horse which stood close together before the Cities Rampiers, and slew great numbers of them. Diuers that were there present report, That fiue thousand Turks were slain at that time; others lessen the number. They skirmished likewise vpon the Dike of the Citie, and along the rampiers from whence  the Barbarian was repulsed with great losse. The enemie being discouraged withThe Turkes leaue Naples. these two losses so soone as he perceiued that he lost but his labour to lie any longer before Naples, did on a sodaine make incursions vpon the Territorie of Modon, where at his first arriuall hee tooke Molines, and certaine other small Townes by force. This storme spred it selfe likewise vpon the Territorie of Coron, where the Greekes were wonderfully molested. The Turkes beeing desirous to depart from Morea, they did for three daies space besiege the Towne of Zonchia. Giouanni Crasso of Coma lay in Garrison there and did brauely defend it: whereupon the enemies dislodged, and went to their wintering places. After their departure the Venetian Captaines would needes haue their reuenge, and went with three thousand  men to scoure Arcadia, from whence they carried awaie a great bootie. They did besides make an attempt to force the Towne which at this day beareth the name of the Prouince, but not beeing able to doe it, they sacked the suburbes and went their way.
This happened in Morea during the summer and haruest season. The Venetians likewise in the meane time had some troubles in Italie, about a contention betwixt the Thryestines and those of Cap-Histria, by reason of tributes and high-waies; the strife on both sides grew so hot, as although the Senate were busied in a greater warre, they were neuerthelesse constrained to send forces thither. But for the easier vnderstanding of the matter, wee must fetch it a little farther off. The Alman  The cause of the war betwixt the Thryestines and those of Cap-histria. marchants were woont to come directly to Cap-Histria and other townes of the Prouince to trade, not comming neere to Thryeste by fiue miles. The Thryestines perceiuing that them selues had no profit at all by this commerce were greatly vexed. Whereupon they sent an Ambassador to the Emperor Frederick whose subiects they were, to craue that it might be lawfull for them to enforce all Germaine marchants which came into Histria to passe by Thryeste, supposing thereby that their citie would become the chief Mart of all Histria. And because the Emperor had not flatly graunted nor denied their request, they sought by faire and curteous meanes to diuert the Marchants from their vsuall way and trade, but if gentle meanes would not serue, they resolued to vse force, and to proceed by constraint. Those of CapeHistria  taking the matter in bad part, did speedily dispatch Messengers to the Prince and Senate, who complaining of the wrongs done to them by the Thryestines, did vnfolde the great discommodities which all Histria was like to receiue by that new insolencie of their neighbours. The Senate beeing moued with these complaints;

commaunded that certaine armed vessells should lie at anker neere to the moare of Thryeste, and should haue a speciall care not to suffer any victualls to enter into the city by Sea. The Thryestines seeming to make small account thereof, and constantly dissembling their griefe, it was resolued, the better to bring them to reason, to put garrisons for the same purpose in the fittest places by land. Gauardo Iustinopolitano was sent thither with some horse, who hauing borrowed a certaineGauardo Iustinopolitano is sent against the Thryestines. place of Count Gorician* and streightly shut in their confines, should aduise the Marchants to keepe their ancient way: And if the Thryestines should attempt by force (as they had done) to hinder their iournies then by Armes to repulse them.
By chance, one of those souldiers that were appointed to conuay the marchants, was slaine by a sodaine incursion of the Thryestines, and the rest put to rout; Gauardo not digesting this iniurie, went with a braue troupe of Histrians, and wasted the Thryestines territories on the other side of the Sea. The Senate, in regard this tended to an open warre, commaunded those of Cap-Histria to send three of their Townesmen to Venice that might instruct them more amply in the matter. The Senate by these mens report perceiuing that the strife could not bee ended but byAn Armie sent against Thryeste. armes, warre was on a sodaine concluded against the Thryestines: And according to this Decree, Antonio Martiano, Bernardino sonne to Carolo Montone, a young man, Girardo Martinenga, Antonello Cornetano and diuers other Noble men were  sent into Histria with foure thousand horse, and gallant companies of foote. Diuers that were present in that action say, that the armie consisted of tenne thousand men; others say the number was not so great. With these forces, such as they were, it was resolued to besiege* Thryeste. The Venetians encamped in three seuerallThryeste is besieged. places. The first was at S. Francis Gate on a little rising. The second towards that part of the cittie, which is opposite to the high way of Pucina: And the third not farre from thence on a high place vpon the way of Chersina. The Inhabitants were first assailed with the ordnance which did beate downe the toppes of the houses; whereupon they craued truce for three dayes to consult about the yeelding vp of the towne. Vitalis Lande Prouidator in the Armie did freely graunt it, for he had  determined to plant ordnance against S. Francis Gate, the which during that space he hoped to doe without impediment, because there was some likeliehood that he could not otherwise doe it without fight. But so soone as the enemies perceiued the ordnance to be remoued, doubting the matter, they did presently breake the truce, and shot at the pesants that wrought in the worke.
News in the meane time was brought to the Campe, that a companie of German horse was comming to the reliefe of the towne. The Prouidator sent Gauardo Iustinopolitano before with a braue troupe of light horse, to surprize them by ambuscado*
On these termes stood the affaires before Thryeste, when Giacomo Antonio Marcello Antonio Marcello Prouidator before Thryeste. came as Prouidator to the Armie. This man before then had beene Gouernor of Vdina. He at his arriuall hauing altered the forme of warre, the enemies Cauallerie without any let entred the Citie, and giuing in on a sodaine vpon the camp toward the high way of Chersina, tooke two hundred horse from the Venetians, and did not onely afterwards defend the cittie, but as long as the siege lasted, didThe Almaines make sallies vpon the venetians. greatly molest the Venetians by their continuall sallies and incursions. And because that by frequent shot of the ordnance, part of the wall had beene beaten downe, and that the souldiers in an other place craued to be sent to their wintering Garrisons, they resolued to giue a generall assault to the cittie. But the businesse had noThe assault giuen to Thryeste hath no good successe. great good successe. For an houres space they fought valiantly on both sides, some  with ladders mounting the walls, but the hottest fight was at the breach. The citie was brauely defended by the valour of the Almans and the townesmen; and the souldiers were inforced to retire with bad successe.
The siege continued all Autumne, and would haue lasted till the enemie had

been subdewed by famine or force: But Pope Pius, who besides his ancient friendship and alliance with Fredericke, was much vnwilling to haue the Thryestines receiue any harme, in regard hee had beene their Bishop, had from the beginning of the siege solicited the Venetians to abstaine from pursuing them, and euer after had not ceased to intreate and exhort them, to draw their troupes vpon certaine conditions from their Gates. It was concluded betwixt the Pope and the Venetians, That the Pope should cease from making warre on Sigisneund Malateste whom he besieged in Arimini after that he had vanquished him in fight by Frederico of Vrbin, and had taken from him the greatest part of his State; and the Venetians didThryeste and Arimini are freed from the siege. raise their Campe from before Thryeste: and so by this accord those of Arimini, and the Thryestines, were wholy freed from the warre about the thirteenth day of Nouember.
Sigismund hauing obtained the Popes pardon, for that in the warres of Lombardie hee had molested and wasted the Country of Flaminia, on promise euer afterwards to be obedient to him, and to the Venetians, went the Summer following into Morea against the Turkes.
Lauretans nauall Armie at such time as the land troupes abandoned the streight, and after it went foorth of the Sarronic Gulph, and had inuironed all the Islands, receiued of Cominius the Pirate the Isle of Lemnos in Morea. He with two GalliesThe Isle of Lemnos deliuered to the Venetians. had taken it from Mahomet, who had made it his owne, by reason of the Empire  whereon it depended, and after that hee had held it for a time, distrusting (as it is to be supposed) his owne forces, he did deliuer it into the Venetians hands.
The nauall Armie wintered in the confines of Modon, Zonchia, Naples, and Coron. Vrso Iustiniano did at the Spring time succeede Lauretano in the place of Generall. He departed from Venice about the beginning of Ianuary, but in regard of the extreme cold he arriued in the Prouince three moneths after with three gallies. At Zonchia he receiued one and twenty Gallies that lay in the Hauen; with those,Vrso Iustiniano is Generall of the venetian nauall Armie. and them which he brought with him, he sailed towards Modon, where halfe way he met Lauretano with three great Gallies, who after sundrie reciprocall embracements did according to the Senates commaund surrender the charge of the Gallies  to him, and retired himselfe to Sapienza.
Vrso stayed at Modon till the whole Armie were come thither together, then departing thence with two and thirtie Gallies, he sailed towards Coron, and within a while after, passing by Naples, he came in a short space to Nigrepont, and from thence, hauing coasted all the Islands of the Aegean Sea, he had heedfully obserued what state they were in But whilst Vrso made these reuiewes, Nicolao Ragio, and Iohn surnamed the fatte, Captaines of the bands of men at Armes, with those troupes that they had with them, tooke certaine small townes from the enemie vpon the Gulph of Patras. Francisco Sidicino, Cicco Brandolino, with diuers other Venetian Captaines were encamped with three thousand men at Mantinea, and the enemies  at Pithyma, fiue hundred of whose horse beeing come to Tulmutha (which was a towne betwixt both Armies) came to defie the Venetians, who contemning the small number of the Barbarians went forward presently to assaile them, who a long time stood firme against the formost rankes of the Venetians, vntill that the rest of their Cauallerie whom they had sent for by sundrie messengers did arriue. For then, by their comming, those which beganne the fight beeing slaine, they which were left aliue, were without armour, Captaines and ensignes, miserably massacred heere and there. It is reported that fifteene hundred Christians lay dead vpon the place, among whom were Brandolino and Giouanni Attellano, who the day before was come from Modon to Mantinca with Andrea Dandulo the Prouidator, Giouanni Massano, and diuers other noble men, who had commaund in the Venetians Armie. The Republique had no better successe neere to the Islands. For Vrso hauing viewed them, went to Lemnos, and from thence returned to Nigrepont, where within a while after hauing receiued supplies from thence, and hauing fortie

Gallies in his companie, he sailed fiercely against the Isle of Lesbos. From Nigrepont he came directly to Lemnos, and hauing by the way taken a ship of the enemiesVrso Iustinian^ saileth against the Isle of Lesbos he did put tenne Turkish Marchants to death that were in it, and hung vp the rest.
Then about midnight departing from Lemnos, he went with great rumour about the third houre in the morning, and encompassed Mytelene, the chiefe Citie of the whole Island. It hath two hauens on the North side, and one towards the South: The Armie entered into this as being further off. Those of the countrey betooke themselues to flight, and the whole Island was in allarme. Then three hundred Turkes that were brought to the Gallies, were by Vrsos command, impaled, throwne into the Sea, and some of them hanged. Within a while after, he did by The Venetians do giue two assalis to Mytilene day-breake giue an assault to the Citie by Sea and Land, hauing first sent a ship of Genoa* which to that end he had stayed by the way, and a Dalmatian Galley, to take the tower vpon the hauen: And himselfe in the meane time landed his troupes on the other side of the Citie. The two vessels being sent against the tower, did presently retire by reason of the Ordnance shot. The troupes being landed, went brauely to the assault, throwing themselues inconsiderately to manifest daunger, whereupon the fight lasted with wonderfull furie for sixe houres space to the losse and ruine of the Venetians, who being vanquished by the multitude of shot, and grieuously wounded, after a great ouerthrow were enforced to retire. It is reported that three thousand of them were slaine that day.
This losse did not abate the Venetians courage, for within a while after, returning againe to assault the enemie with greater furie, they were after sundrie vnprofitable attempts beaten from the wall with like losse as at the first. In the meane time newes was brought, that the enemies nauall Armie did approach, the which besides, other smaller vessels consisted of fiue and fortie Gallies. It was likewise reported that two thousand horse, landed on the other side of the Iland, would presently arriue. Vrso being daunted with these newes, after that hee had lost fiue thousand men, and the rest for the most part hurt, quitted Mitylene, and came to Nigrepont, where with remorse of conscience for such bad successe, he fell into so great sorrow and melancholy, as notwithstanding that he was a man of a great spirit, did neuerthelesse behaue himselfe like one that had lost hisVrso Iustiniano dieth with griefe senses. From Nigrepont being brought to Morea, and from thence to Modon, he was landed by his owne seruants, where on a sodaine being oppressed with griefe, he died within halfe an houres space. Such was the end of Vrso Iustiano, a man valiant and noble among his countrimen.
Giacomo Lauretano was after his death sent to command the Armie. He departing from Venice, was followed by Sigismond Malateste accompanied by a thousand Italians. A long time before, Pope Pius had made a league with the Venetians, the king of Hungarie, and Philip Duke of Burgondie against the Turks. But  Malateste so soone as he came into the Prouince where he heard of the death of Giouanni Attellano, and Brandolino, and saw the small forces there, made a lowde protestation, that he would neuer haue imbarked himselfe for that warre, if he had but knowne in what state the affaires of that Countrey had beene: yet, because men should not say that his comming thither was in vaine, he marched with all the troupes he could leauie to take Sparta (a Citie in old time most famous among the chiefest Cities of Greece) the which in a short space he forced. It being taken whichMalateste besieg eth Sparta. at this day is in a manner inhabitable, he began to batter the Castle with his Ordnance. That siege continued many moneths, and it could not be taken by reason of the strong Garrison within it.
About the latter end of Autumne, fifteene thousand Turkes arriued there, who encamped verie neere to the Venetians. Sigismond distrusting his owne small number (for he had but two thousand men in his camp) durst not assaile them with his whole forces at once, but skirmished oftentimes with them: And so long as the enemie remained there, he did by cunning and force so amaze him, as the

Turks hauing put some supplies into the Castle, dislodged without any losse to the Christians: And perceiuing his encamping there to be but to small purpose, after that he had burnt the Citie, he brought backe his troupes to Naples. During the siege of Sparta, Lauretano besieged Rhodes, and did great harme to the inhabitants,The Venetians assault Rhodes. he spoiled and burnt their farmes and countrey-houses. He did afflict them in this manner, because that the Rhodians not long before had by force taken forth of the Venetians ships which lay in the hauen certain Syrian marchants with their goods, and would in no sort giue satisfaction to the Venetians that carried it: This being done, he returned to Nigrepont. From whence he craued all the Islands on the Aegean Sea, without any other memorable exploit for that yeare.
But at the beginning of the next, he did put to Sea and came verie neere to theThe Dardanes are two sorts at the mouth of the streight. streight, meaning by force of Oares to passe through betwixt the Dardans, that hee might afterwards scoure the coast of Galipollis. The Dardanes are two Castles iust opposite to one another at the mouthof the streight, in which was great store of Ordnance to sinke all enemies ships that should passe that way. Mahomet so soone as he had made himselfe master of the Costantinopolitane Empire, caused one of these to be reedified which was in a manner ruinate, and builded the other from the foundat ons, that he might with a continuall Garrison keepe those of Europe from entering into the streight.
The sleete being come thither (as hath beene said) Venieri his Gallie which according  to the manner went before for discouerie, being deceiued by the Admirals signall, which as he thought willed him to passe through the streight, being driuen forward by the winde and Oares, went through notwithstanding all the shot. Some say that Venieri craued leaue to be the first to attempt that passage, and that the enemie would not spend all his shot vpon this one Galley, but determined to bestow his bullets vpon the rest of the fleete that would attempt to passe, whereupon, the next that followed it, being strucke through with the Ordnance, and many of her men slaine, and in great danger, returned: the like did the rest of the fleete, except the first Galley that went through. Venieri, who although he was Prouidator of the Gulph, did neuerthelesse follow the publike ensignes vnder the commaund  of Lauretano being a man of singular iudgement and experience in marine matters,Giacomo Venieri returneth safe to the fleet. did comfort his souldiers, and willed them to hope well: but in the darknesse of the night, he returned towards the enemies, sailing faire and softly without vse of Oares. Diuers c^non shot were made at him, and to speake truly, he did not auoid them all, yet at last, with the losse of some few of his men, he did contrarie to all mens hope returne to the fleete.
This same Summer Pope Pius determined to set on foot the voyage against thePope Pius commeth to Ancona to prepare an Armie against the Turkes. Turks which had beene propounded in the Councell at Mantua, and was afterwards neglected by the ambition and auarice of some Princes. For although all his associates should haue failed him (the Venetians excepted) he neuerthelesse resoluing  to bring it to passe, came to Ancona. Vpon the rumour of this holy voyage, great numbers of people from Lombardie, and both the Germaines were come to Rome before his departure thence. But as he passed through the Dutchie of Spoleta and La Marca, he met with greater multitudes. These men with plenarie remission of their sinnes, he sent home again^ into their countries, because they were come as well without meanes to defray the expences of that iourney, as for that most of them were men vnfit for warre. Christophero Moro, the Venetian Prince, came to meete him there with ten well-armed Gallies, to the end the Venetians might haue a share in the honour of that warre. Two daies after his arriuall theThe Pope dieth at ^ncona. Pope died of a lingring feauer. To speake truly he had but small store of money for  such an enterprize, which by a decree of the Colledge of Cardinals was giuen to Prince Moro, on condition that he should send it to Mathias king of Hungarie towards the expences of his ordinarie warre with the Turkes.
Some thinke that the whole summe amounted but to fiue and fortie thousand

^uccats. But the Venetian did not onely send this sunne into Hungarie to king Mathias, but a greater quantitie of gold for many yeares after, that he might with his forces stop the incursions of those Barbarians into Dalmatia and Histria. After Pope Pius death, the Venetians alone did for a long time vndergo the burthen of so great a warre, in the view not only of all Italie, but of all the Princes of Europe, who were not ashamed to be idle spectators, whilest the cruell enemie had alreadie ouerthrowne two mightie Empires, and many kingdomes: and yet it cannot be denied but that king Ferdinand and the Pope did at times send aide by Sea, but it was seldome; and then, when as they had no need of it. There was no memorable matter either by Sea or Land done during that Winter in Grecia. The next Summer, the  pestilence being dispersed in Naples, Sigismond went into Laconia, against whome came ten thousand Turkes, but vpon their arriuall, he with his souldiers retired to Mantinea. After his departure the enemies assailed Pithimia, and hauing beaten downe the fortifications, entered it by force. In the meane time Victor Capello succeededVittore Cape^o Generall of th^ nauall Armie. Lauretano, who hauing receiued the flee at Sapienza, sailed to Modon, from thence departing within a while after with fiue and twentie Gallies, he went to Nigrepont, and afterwards, going into the enemies countrey, he tooke Aulida by force,Capel his exploits. which stands in the firme land ouer against Nigrepont, with Larsa on the Salonicke Sea. Then he took Imbra in the AEgean Sea betwixt Thrace and Samothrace neere to the mount Athis. At the last, comming to Pirea, he besieged the  Citie of Athens, the noblest of all Greece, and hauing made a breach there before day, and burnt the Cities gates, he entered it. It is at this day called Sethina. Capel sackt the Citie, the bootie whereof was so great, as it did enrich the Marriners and Rowers.
Within a while after, the Fleet left Pirea, and came to Nigrepont, where taking in victualls, it went to Modon, from whence departing in secret, it sailed into the Gulph of Corinth. Those of Patras had promised him to deliuer the citie into his hands, and to kill all the garrison. Capel had three and twentie Gallies, and six and thirty other lesser vessells well armed for the fight; and besides the souldiers and mariners, Nicolao Ragio was there with two hundred men at armes. The souldiers, who the day before had been grieuously tossed in a tempest, and by reason thereof could not hold vp their heads, were presently conducted to the citty by Giacomo Barbadico the Prouidator, they were in number foure thousand: And bei^g comeThe Venetian^ are defeated, and Barbadico the Prouidator is slaine. to certaine Farmes within a mile of the cittie, the souldiers being desirous of bootie, did without any commaundement fall to pillaging those country houses. Whilest these were busied in spoyling, and expected nothing lesse than the enemies arriuall, three hundred Turkish horse did with great cries inuiron and assaile them, who were all slaine there, hauing no meanes of defence or escape. Barbadico riding vpon a Mule, and comming by chance to that place where the enemies made great slaughter, was beaten downe among a number of thicke bushes, and there trodden  to death vnder the horses feete. His body beeing afterwards knowne by his Coate-armour and Signet was carried to the Castle of Patras, and impaled vpon the highest tower thereof: and of so great a number, one thousand onely escaped. Ragio being taken by the enemies, was impaled aliue.
Capel for all this was not discouraged, supposing it to haue happened, rather by the carelesnesse of his owne souldiers, than by the enemies valour and prowesse. Therefore eight dayes after, he sent the brauest men of his troupes together with the Ensignes to assaile the Cittie. Vincimanica the Sicillian, who commaunded the nauall Armie as Vice-admirall, with Dominicke the Blacke, and other valiant men that followed the Ensignes, went and displayed them before the cittie. The enemies  did not refuse the fight, but making a furious salley, came couragiously vpon the Christians. There was a cruell fight for some houres space, at the last, fortune inclining to neither side, the Venetian resolued to send threescore horse of the remainder of those which were Ragios, downe the hill which was on the one side,

to charge the enemie in flanke, and thereby to make him retire, and abandon his standing: but they were not gone farre ere they discouered the Turkes comming forward for the same purpose; at the sight of whom, Ragios horse betooke themselues to flight, and fell in among the troupes of the Islanders. There a great slaughter of men, and horses, was presently made. The Turkes in the meane time arriued who did cut the disordered squadrons in peeces. And this losse would haue proued farre greater than the former, had not a great dust risen vp into the aire like to a blackThe Uenetians are againe put to rout neere to the former place clould which tooke away the sight both of Turkes and Christians. A thousand Christians lay dead vpon the place, and the rest with the ensignes escaped to the vesels.
Capello being daunted with these two ouerthrowes, went to Xant, from thence to Modon, and within a while after to Nigrepont where he remained sixe whole moneths without any memorable exploit. After the ouerthrow at Patras, he was neuer seene to smile, though Giouanni Diede the States Secretarie with diuers others of his familiar friends told him that it hapened not through his default. At the last being wasted with griefe and melancholie, eight monethes after the battaile of Patras, he died at Nigrepont. Giacomo Venieri after his death commanded the ArmieCapello dieth with griese. vntill that Giacomo Lauretano sent by the Senate to succeed the late Capello, arriued in the Prouince.
This man for the space of sixteene monethes that he was Generall of the Armie, did brauely defend all the Islands and Sea-coasts from the enemies assaults and incursions.
About the same time likewise, or soone after, or rather a little before Lauretans departure to the Armie, although the Venetians were in some sort quiet in Italie, the cause neuerthelesse is not knowne why Bartholomeo of Bergamo a great Captaine in his time, did by his sodaine incursions into Romagnia, in a manner trouble and entangle them in a new warre. This man departed from Lombardie with great troupes of horse and foot at the pursuit of Angelo Accaiuola, and Nicolao Soderino that were banished from Florence, vpon hope that they gaue him of good successe in Tuscanie by meanes of a popular commotion: this was the common rumour.Bartolomeo of Bergamo bringeth sorces into* Tuscanie. But others supposed that he departed in Armes from Lombardie at the soliciting of Pope Paul, to the end, that bringing his troupes through Romagnia and La Marca, he might on a sodaine in his name make warre on king Ferdinand, who refused to pay vsuall tribute to the Church of Rome. But whatsoeuer the cause was, it is certaine that al his attempts which seemed at the first to be fearefull to all Italie, did soone deceiue euerie mans expectation. For so soone as he came into Romagnia Galeas Maria Duke of Milan, a braue and couragious young Prince, made head against him: Then did the forces of king Ferdinand and the Florentines withstand him, wherewith this great Captaine being troubled, did in some sort begin to decline. A battaile was presently giuen at Molinella, a towne on the confines of Bolognia,The battaile of Molinella. which was fought in the absence of Galeas vnder the conduct of Fredericke of Vrbin. Those that were at the battaile affirme that in memory of man there was neuer a more furious or mortall in Italy.
The Senate fearing if his forces should be broken (for till then he had euer beene in the Venetians pay, and therefore it was thought that the Venetians did fauour him) the aduerse Princes and Commonwealths being armed, would cast the whole burthen of the warre vpon them, sent him some supplies of horse and foote, with expresse charge to make peace, and safely to bring backe the Armie into Lombardy. Ieronimo Barbadico, a man of excellent wisedome and aduise, and who not long before was made Procurator of S. Marke, was in the Armie; yet this new dignitie, nor the entreaties of his friends were of power to keepe him at home, nor to stay himThe death of Ieronimo Bardidico from assisting the Republike in so great a danger. But his authoritie and wisedome being grealy feared of the enemies, it fell out that before peace was concluded, he was by their meanes, (for so it was thought) poisoned. There is no other mention

made of Lauretans exploits at Sea, besides that which hath alreadie beene said.
Nicolao Canalis succeeded him. He departing from Venice with two Gallies arriuedNicolao Canalis Generall of the nauall Armie. at Nigrepont, from whence setting sa le with twentie Gallies, hee spoiled certaine farme houses, and villages in Thessalie, and then returned to Nigrepont; and from thence went to Modon, and afterwards to Coron. He resolued to seize vpon the cittie of Lagostitia on the Sea of Patras, which the Turkes had forsaken, and speedily to fortifie it, the which hee easily performed without any resistance. Ieronimo Nouello (for Malateste had left Morea) had well fortified it; and there the whole Armie remained, consisting of six thousand men, at such time as two thousand Turkes made an attempt to recouer it: but they being beaten from the rampires  with great losse did within a while after dislodge.
Canalis hauing left Giacomo Venieri with six Gallies for the guard of the citie, returned with the rest of the fleete to Nigrepont; and hauing there re-enforced the fleet with fresh supplies he sailed to Lemnos, and thence to Imbres, where he determined to assault Oenos; and comming by day-breake to assaile the citie he commaundedThe venetians take Oenos. his souldiers to reare ladders against the walls, which being done, they mounted them, and hauing broken open the Gates, they gaue entrance to the rest of the Armie. The towne was spoyled, and for the most part burnt, many were slaine, but more were made slaues, men and women that were taken prisonersGreat outrage committed in Oenos. were villainously handled, the Sacred places were polluted and prophaned without  any respect to the name of Christians; for although they obeyed the cruell Turkes, they had not changed their Christian Religion; besides all these outrages, Nunnes were rauished and defloured, whom the barbarous enemie for reuerence to Religion neuer durst touch. Diuers haue thought that for the punishment of this sinne, the taking of Nigrepont ensued, together with the Generalls banishment. A great bootie was brought to Nigrepont, with two thousand captiues. Within a while after he took and spoyled the new Foglies. But at the Spring time the Turkes with a mighty Nauall Army surprized the cittie Coccina in the Isle of Lemnos, and after they had spoiled it, and carried away the Inhabitants, they made it desolate. Canalis vpon report hereof, being come to Lemnos with foure  Gallies, so soone as he perceiued all places to be ruined (for the enemie was alreadie gone from thence) returned to Nigrepont. There he found six Gallies of new supplies, which were come from Venice. With these and the rest, he went to Modon, whither sending for all his Gallies that had wintered in sundrie places, hee made a fleete of fiue and thirtie Gallies, and presuming on his forces he returned to Nigrepont, determining to aduaunce forwards against the enemie. But whilest he was busied in preparing his fleete, those in Albania fought with good successe against the Turks. Alexis, and Nicholas brethren, straue for the principalitie there, who followed seuerall parties. Nicholas being aided by the Venetians, had 1200. souldiers, which were commaunded by Iosepho Barbaro as Prouidator. Alexis had  assembled a thousand Turkish horse. He comming in haste with his cauallerie encamped in the valley of the Blacke Hill, vpon the Riuer Drimon, where the next day hee drew his brother to battell, by whom being vanquished, all his horsemen were slaine, except two hundred that fled. Canalis was still at Nigrepont, when news was brought him thither, that the Turkes had aboue an hundred Gallies neere to Tenedos, and that their fleete did daily encrease by new supplies. Beeing mouedThe Turkish fleet at Tenedos. with this report* hee departed from Nigrepont, and went to Lemnos, and from thence to Imbres, where at his arriuall hee vnderstoode by the Islanders, that the Turkish fleet lay vpon the other side of the Island, and they being not able to tell him in Latine the number of their vessells, did by plucking the haires from their  heads demonstrate vnto him, that it was very great.
The Venetian gaue no great credit to this aduertisement, nor did he altogether reiect it. Matters seemed more terrible by the Islanders report, than they were discerned then to be. Now because he would be throughly satisfied, he commaunded

Lorenzo Lauretano to goe with tenne of the best Gallies in the fleete, to discouer the enemie, and if hee should perceiue that hee had but three score Gallies, to turne his prowes towards him, and hee foorthwith would come to his reskew with the rest of the fleete; if they were more, then to put to Sea, and to auoide the fight.
Lauretano sent Francisco Quirini with one Gallie, to descrie the enemies number, who should afarre make it knowne to him by his ordnance shot. Their number being knowne by Quirini his signall, the Venetian fleet speedily returned, and put to Sea-ward. The Gallies that were sent abroad for discouery, so soone as they saw the Turkish fleete, beganne to flie with saile and oares: for so soone as the enemies had from farre descried the Venetian Auisoes, and the rest of the fleete that The Uenetian fleete escapeth from the Turkes came after, they presently sent tenne Gallies foorth of the Hauen, who gaue chace to the Venetian fleete till late in the euening. Canalis with foure Gallies went into the Hauen of Paleocastra. The Turkes hauing by the darkenesse of the night lost sight of the Venetians directed their course to the Isle of Scyros.
The morrow after, the Venetian Gallies being all together, sailed in close battallion towards the Isle of Scyros. The enemie was on the other side of the Island, and fiercely battered the cittie. Against him thus busied in the siege the Venetian sent tenne Gallies which durst not goe neere to fight, but by their Ordnance shot, did from farre attempt to offend them. The Venetian would not assaile them, fearing lest the rest of the enemies fleete should come and inuest his Gallies, the  which without all doubt would haue beene done, if hee had offered to fight. The enemies sailed from Scyros into the Isle of Nigrepont, where at their arriuall they tooke Stora by force, a Towne in the Island seated towardes the West, and afterwards,The Turkish fleete before Nigrepont. that of Basilica: both which were burnt and spoyled. This being done, they went directly to besiege Nigrepont. The Venetian was come from Scyros to Cape Martillo. This place is neere to Nigrepont, and from thence before hee had possessed all the passages, hee sent three Gallies loden with victualls, through the chanell of Loretto to Nigrepont, and commaunded the Captaines of them to tarrie there for the guard of the Cittie, if the officers of the Towne should thinke it expedient. The victualls being receiued, the Gallies were returned to the fleete.
Not long after Giouanni Troni was commaunded to go thither with two Gallies. But all passages neere to the Cittie being alreadie stopt, and his owne Gallie beeing bruised with the shot of the enemies canon, he was inforced to returne.
Now the better to vnderstand the State of the siege, wee will make a briefe description heere of the situation of the Island. The Isle of Nigrepont being diuidedThe description of the Isle of Nigrepont. from Boetia, is an hundred and fiftie thousand paces in length, the breadth thereof is not aboue fortie thousand, and the narrowest not aboue twentie thousand. It is in circuite three hundred three score and fiue thousand paces. There are two litle hills in it, the one termed Gerasa, and the other Capharea. It was in auncient time inriched with very goodly cities, at this day there is in it but Nigrepont. The  citie of Nigrepont which is seated right ouer-against Aulida, is diuided from Beotia by a small Gulph: Wherefore the Turke the better to besiege it, made a bridge ouer that Gulph, so soone as the land forces were wholly arriued.
On the fifth of Iune the enemies fleet, wherein were three hundred vessells, and amongst others aboue an hundred Gallies, approached the citie; but by the valour of the Inhabitants and the souldiers which were in it, the enemies that then (...) were beaten backe to their ships. The 13. of the said moneth, the Emperour Ottoman being come with threescore thousand soldiers through Beotia, caused a bridge to be made ouer the chanell, as farre as Saint Marks Church, within a mile of theThe enemie buildes a bridge ouer the Gulph. Citie. In that place all the forces being landed, the Cittie was inuironed, and d^uers  peeces of Ordnance wereplanted in sundry places: and with fiue and fiftie canons euerie day the wall was much battered. The siege continued 30* dayes, in which time, besides sundrie light skirmishes made before the walls vpon occasions, the Turke, with all his forces, gaue three assaults, wherein he lost fiue and twenty

thousand men, as it was afterwards knowne at the muster of the Armie. Some report that they haue heard the Turkes say, that after the taking of Nigrepont, more than fortie thousand were found to be wanting in their Armie.
But during this siege by Sea and Land, the Venetian Fleete wanting victualls by continuing too neere Nigrepont, sailed to Candie, whereby the way meeting with some Turkish Fusts, it sanke them, and tarried there foure daies. Ieronimo Molino Gouernor of the Island, did presently take order to furnish them with necessarie victualls, and did besides in that short space cause seuen ships of burthen to be armed. Being strengthened with these armed vessells, and with his owne fleete of 35* armed Gallies, the Venetian returned from whence he came. The newes in the meane time  of the siege of Nigrepont being brought to the Senate, did afflict them with griefe and feare. It was certaine that without some speedie remedie, that most excellentThe Senate is grieued at the newes of the siege of Nigrepont. Island of all others of the Aegean Sea would be subdued by that cruell enemie, to the great losse of the Common-wealth: whereupon they speedily decreed to send as manie Gallies as could possibly be made readie one after an other without intermission, to the reliefe of Nigrepont. Canalis in the meane time, departing from the place where he ankored, went with his whole fleet, and lay in the streight of the channellThe Venetian Fleet entreth the the channell of Nigrepont. neere to Laureta: then with sailes, oares, winde and tide, he went forwards against the enemie.
Those within the Citie beeing tired with continuall fight, had already endured  the siege almost a moneth; and yet they durst not well trust some of their owne Citizens. For Thomaso of Sclauonia that was sent with a troupe of Souldiers to guard the citie, being conuicted of treason, and sent for before the Magistrates, was by commandement cut in peeces, Some say that hee did by secret intelligence sollicit the Turke to vndertake that enterprize: and that at the beginning he would haue deliuered the Citie to Ottoman, if he would haue but graunted him and the townesmen their liues and liberties. Ottoman promised the traitor any thing sauing that which he demaunded, and he would haue none other recompence but that. Now whilst theseThe treason is discouered. practizes continued on either side as well by those which fled to the enemies, as by letters tied to arrowes, the whole matter was discouered to the Magistrate by a yong  maide of Nigrepont.
The besieged being afflicted with so many miseries, had in their extremitie but only one hope left, which was, that the Venetian Nauall Armie, hauing first broken the bridge ouer the channell, would come and bring them aide and assistance. This did they talke of day and night, and wished for it with teares in their eies, when on a sodaine they descried foureteene Gallies and two ships of burthen, within view of the Citie, with which Canalis was come before the rest of the Fleet* There was then great ioy in the Citie, and the townesmen from the walls beganne to crie out vpon the enemies thereby to terrifie them. This Generall noyse did altogether amaze them.
Some say that Ottoman hauing intelligence of the Venetians approach, began to thinke on flight, and to that end he mounted a very swift horse, determining presently to passe forth of the Island into the firme Land, and that without all doubt he would haue gon his way, had not Mahomet the Gouernour of Asia, a valliant and courageous man, disswaded him from it, telling him, That if he fled, the Souldiers and his Nauie being affrighted with the departure of their Generall, would at one time together fal into great danger: And therefore that he should do better, to giue a generall assault to the Citie by Land and Sea, more fierce than all the former, and promise the spoile thereof to the Souldiers, with a great recompence to him that should first aduance his Ensignes on the Walls. The great Turke being moued with  this good counsell commanded his Souldiers to giue the last assault: His Gallies at Sun-set came forth of the channell neere to the Walls.
The Venetians that were come forward with the Generall (as hath beene said) went with full saile within a mile of the bridge. Then, because the winde, tide, and

necessity did inuite them to set forward against the enemie with as great courage as they were come thither, all men cried out that a fit time and occasion was offered to do a notable peece of seruice. Canalis alone was of opinion to tarrie for the rest of the Fleet, which staied at Politia; no man knoweth whether they did it for feare, or else because the Captaines of the Gallies were commanded so to do; howbeit Canalis did condemne their slownesse: Those which were there did earnestly solicite him to set forward, saying aloud that there was no good meaning in that delay. The Picemanes of Candie, bretheren, Captaines of a ship of Burthen, craued leaue that theyA memorable ^ffer of two bretheren of Candy. with theit ship might Saile against the enemie, promising, by the force of their ship, and by the winde and tide to breake the bridge, and if their enterprize should succeede  badly, they would at least thinke themselues happy to haue exposed their liues and fortunes in the seruice of the Common-wealth. The Generall commanded them and all the rest not to stir, but to tarrie still where they were, till the rest of the Fleete were arriued.
Those of Nigrepont who in the meane time were furiously assaulted by Sea and Land, perceiuing by day-breake that their Fleete Lay still, like men amazed could hardly hold their weapons in their hands. Great numbers of Arrowes coueredA generall assalt giuen to the citie the wretched inhabitants: The ordnance confusedly beat downe whatsoeuer it encountered, steeples, towers, walls, and people. Leonardo Caluo Gouernour of the Citie, Giouanni Bondomaria the Prouidator, Paulo Hericio the Magistrate, and manie  other Venetian Gentlemen were vpon the Wals and in the trenches, some to exhort and encourage the Souldiers, others to run vp and down to those places which had most neede of help. And although many thousand enemies were neere to the wals, they did not cease for all that still to fix their eies on that side from whence they had descried the Venetian Gallies: The wretched inhabitants held vp their hands and eies to Heauen and them. Then by day-breake they erected a black Ensigne vpon the higest tower of the citie to demonstrate their miserable condition, to the end that those which lay in the channel being moued with their disaster might come and relieue them. The fierce assault continuing without intermission, had in such sort tired the besieged as those which guarded the gate Burchiana being grieuously wounded  and weakned with hunger and watching, did quit the walls to the enemies, which they on a sodain seizing on, all other parts of the wals were in an instant abandoned.The Turkes take the Nigrepont.
Then they began in euerie place to murther the poore inhabitants, together with the Magistrates and officers. Leonardo Caluo was murhered in the Palace, Bondemario in the house of Paulo Andreatio, who hath written the historie of the taking of Nigrepont. And Hericio comming vpon Ottomans word forth of a verie strong place which he had made good, was by the tirants co^mand sawed a sunder in the middle; that trecherous scoffer saying, That he had promised to pardon his head, but not his flanks. Then he made a cruell decree, That all yong men of twentie yeeres of age should be slaine, and that he which should saue any one of that age, should himselfe be put  to death. Then was a horrible slaughter made vpon the townes-men, and against those whom aduerse fortune had brought thither, all places reeking with bloud. The heads of those that were slaine being laid on an heape in S. Francis market-place neere to the Palace before the Patriarkes house, did serue for a pittifull spectacle to women and children. The dead bodies lying heere and there, for feare least the stench should infect the aire, were throwne into the neighbour channell. At the very same time that the citie was taken, the Gallies whom the Generall had ouernight sent for, arriued when it was too late: And perceiuing that the Venetian Ensignes were no more vpon the towers, and that by other euident signes they knew that the Citie was lost, they did in sad and lamentable manner with teares in their eies, behold the  Cities wals; and because there was no safetie in abiding there, they weighed Ankors and sailed thence.

The end of the eighth booke of the third Decad.



THE NINTH BOOKE OF THE THIRD DECAD  OF THE HISTORIE Of Venice.

The Contents of the ninth Booke of the third Decad.
OTTOMANS nauall Armie contrarie to all mens expectation returneth whole and vnbroken to Constantinople. CANALIS attempteth in vaine to recouer  Nigrepont. PIETRO MOCENIGO commeth to the Armie. CANALIS is confined to the Port Gruario a Castle of the Forlani. Peace being for a time treated of with OTTOMAN, taketh none effect. MOCENIGO goeth to the frontires of Ionia* and returning within a while after into the same Prouince, he mightily wasteth Pergamene, and the inhabitants of Gnidos. He doth the same on the confines of Caria. He doth with the supplies of the Pope, and King FERDINAND take the Citie of Sattalia in Pamphilia. MOCENIGO giueth courteous entertainment to the Ambassador of VSSAN-CASSAN king of Persia, who was sent to the Venetians. The Turkes begin to make incursions into Albania, Dalmatia, and other places on the frontires of Italie. The troubles of Ferrara doe for a time hold the Venetians in iealousie. MOCENIGO taketh the Citie of Smyrna by assault: He wasteth and spoileth the territorie of Clazomene. A young man of a noble house doth in a night burne OTTOMANS Arcenall at Gallipolis. MOCENIGO rest^reth CARAMAN to his kingdome. He doth confirme the widow of the late king of Cyprus, who was a Venetian Ladie of the familie of the CORNARES, in her kingdome. OTTOMAN fighteth with good successe against VSSAN-CASSAN the Persian.

AAter the taking of Nigrepont, the Venetian fleet was for a time banished as it were from their countrey, wandering vp and downe in the neighbour Islandes. At last, returning to their first Rendeuous, it was in a short space, (though too late,) meruailously encreased. Giacomo Venieri came to it with fiue and twentie well-armed vessels, and within a while after fourteene other Gallies arriued, who were followed with sixteen others, after them presently came diuers more, so as in a verie short time, the number amounted to more than an hundred vessels fit for seruice. The ships of burthen, because they would not saile without winde, were left at the Isle of Cea, neere to Negrepont. The Gallies gaue chace to the enemies fleet which was loden  with bootie as farre as Chios. For Ottoman hauing left a stong Garrison in Nigrepont was gone forth of the Island, and retired by land with all his troupes.
The Isle of Chios lieth betwixt Lesbos and Samos, Ephorus hath termed it EthaliaDescription of the Isle of Chios. by the ancient name: Methodorus and Cleobulus say that it was called Chios, of

the Nimph Chione. It is in circuite an hundred and fiue and twentie thousand paces, and it is seated right ouer against Erithrea. It was in former times free, now it acknowledgeth the Genoueses for her Lords, who by a corrupted speech call it Sio. The Venetians being come to the Promontorie of Mastic in the enemies view, Canalis fearing if he should loose the battaile which he determined to giue, that then he should more encrease mens hatred towards him, called all the Captaines of the Gallies to councell, and craued their aduise, if they thought it expedient for the Commonwealth to fight that day with all their forces, and to giue the enemies battaile. Their opinions thereupon were various. At last, most of them being of opinion  not to precipitate the Commonwealth into an apparent danger, the fleete returned to Sea without fight.
It is reported that so soone as the enemie descried the Venetian Gallies neere to Chios, he presently determined to make away, resoluing by no meanes to fight inThe enemies fleet is afraid of that of the Uenetians. regard of his smal number of men, so as some of them were alreadie embarked in light vessels fit for flight; and others so soone as they perceiued the Venetians comming towards them, determined to leaue their vessels, and to swimme to the neighbour shoares. But when they descried that the Venetian fleet shaped another course, they presently left Chios and sailed to Lesbos to man their vessels with rowers. From Lesbos going to the streight, they were afraid lest the Venetian fleete should be  at Tenedos, and there whither they would or not, enforce them to fight. But hauing intelligence by their discouerers, that all there was quiet, after that they had passed by Tenedos, they sailed with great cries and wonderful ioy to a safe Hauen. It is reported that the Generall of the Turkish fleete hauing crossed the streight turned towards his souldiers, and with a smiling countenance said vnto them: The Venetians haue dealt verie courteously with vs, for they haue accompanied vs with great numbers of Gallies from Tenedos to Nigrepont, and then from thence to Chios.
The losse of Nigrepont did affect the Senate and people with such discontent, as they would hardly haue receiued greater if they had lost all that they possessed on the firme land or at sea. All men generally said that this losse did not onely concerne the Venetian State, but all Italie: That they had no Island, channell or sea-streight The venetians great griefe for the losse of Nigrepont. left, that was able to withstand the attempts of that barbarous enemie, but that he might at his pleasure with a direct course saile to Italie: That their owne negligence with that of others, had beene the cause therof, who hauing beene able in time to haue quenched that fire* had by their mutual hatred and auarice, suffered it to encrease: That they were to blush for shame, and to repent that they had not relieued that loyal Citie, during the siege. Therefore all men with one consent detested both the fleet and the Generall: and a Decree was made that hee should be dismissed of his place, and being sent for home, he should giue an account why he had not relieued Nigrepont. Pietro Mocenigo was by a generall consent subrogated in his place: whoPietro Mocenigo is chosen Generall of the naual Armie. was presently commaunded to make hast to the Armie. In the meane time, after  the fleete had made some aboad at Sea, Canalis and the rest determined to surprize Nigrepont, and by an vnlookt-for assault to attempt the recouery of the Citie. They concluded then among themselues that Giouanni Trono, Nocolao Molino, and Frederico Iustiniano should saile before with nine Gallies, and so soone as they from the channell should perceiue the fleete to be neere the Citie, then to land their men, and march to assaile it on the other side. But these men were somewhat too forward, for being euuironed with great troupes of Turkes, more than two hundred of them were in a moment slaine: among whom was Giouani Trono, a man whose valour did greatly appeare in that fight, although their forces were not equall. The rest of the fleete landing on the shoare being daunted with the death The venetians enterprize vpon Nigrepont is to no purpose. of their fellowes, and perceiuing those in the channell to goe slowly to worke, escaped to their Gallies: And in this manner the fleete retired without any good successe to Aulida, not farre from Nigrepont.
The same day somewhat before Sunne-set Pietro Mocenigo with three Gallies

came to the fleet, so soone as Canalis descried him, hee descended into a long boat, and went to meete him, where after mutuall embracements, hee acquainted him what his purpose had beene, and why he had assembled that great fleete, for theMocenigo commeth to the armie. Canalis speech to Mocenigo. recouerie of Nigrepont, which hee hoped to haue effected if hee had any longer tarried in commission. But his hope was, that what himselfe could not execute by reason of the losse of his place, the new Generall by his valour and conduct would fortunately bring to passe, all things being in a readinesse for that purpose. Mocenigo said vnto him; Pursue what thou hast begunne, and if thou hast anie hope toMocenigo his answere to Canalis. recouer the Citie, goe on a Gods name: as for my selfe, I am so farre off in this my new authority from hindering the publique good, as on the contrarie I freely offer  to aide and assist thee in this important businesse, as a friend or ordinarie Captaine: but he refusing to enter vpon an other mans charge, Mocenigo dismissed the Gallies that had beene sent for, and determined not to continue, to the weale publiques losse, and his owne dishonour, an enterprize which had beene so vnfortunately begunne. Then he departed (for winter was at hand) with the rest of the fleete into Morea, determining at the Spring to remoue from thence, and to attempt some notable exploit which should recompence the losse of Nigrepont. Canalis so soone asCanalis is condemned to perpetuall banishment. hee came to Venice was condemned to perpetuall banishment. Hee was confined to the Port of Gruare, a town of the Forlani, where to lessen the griefe for the losse of his country, he spent the time in hunting and studie.
Mocenigo during that winter was not idle, for hee repaired his Gallies, and sent to the Islands on the Aegean Sea to comfort and assure the Inhabitants, who were yet daunted with the losse of Nigrepont. Thus was he busied when Marino Maripietro and Lodouico Bembo, did about the beginning of the Spring come as Prouidators to the Armie, who were sent thither, that Mocenigo together with them might manage the affaires of the Republique. Ricaosa came thither likewise from Apulia with tenne Gallies, being sent by King Ferdinand to make warre on the Turkes, in the company and by the aduise of the Venetian Generall.
The losse of Nigrepont had troubled all the Princes of Italie, and especially king Ferdinand, who, the more he perceiued the frontires of Apulia and Calabria to lie  open to the Turkes inuasions, the more did he feare their prosperitie and aduancement. Ottoman fearing that by his taking of Nigrepont from the venetians all Christian princes would arme against him, was willing to trie if hee could make peace with the Venetians, or at least, if that could not be done, to draw the businesse out in length, to the end that time might sweeten the sharpenesse of that losse. But because hee would not haue them thinke that hee did it for feare, hee was content toA new pol^icie of Ottoman. vse the mediation of his mother in lawe, who was a Christian, and Daughter to George, who in former times had beene Prince of the Tribulles.
She hauing beene made acquainted with her sonne in lawes meaning, sent one of her houshold seruants to Venice, from her to aduertize the Venetians that they  should doe well to send their Commissioners to the Turke, and that if they were desirous of peace* it should be graunted them, and peraduenture vpon better conditions than they hoped for. Hereupon Nicolao Coco and Francisco Capello were sent to her by Sea, who found her in a village of Macedonia where shee remained, and from thence they went by land to Ottoman. But peace being treated of, and the Conditions propounded not pleasing, and the Commissioners beeing by Letters called home to Venice, Capello being troubled with a feauer, died at Constantinople: Coco in a fisher boat went to Lemnos, and from thence in a Gallie that he foundThe Commissioners returne without any conclusion. there by chaunce* sailed to Candie: And thus by the going to and fro of Ambassadors by treaties of peace at Constantinople, and by transporting of Letters from  both sides, all that Summer was spent to no purpose.
Winter drawing neare, the Kings nauie returned to Naples, and the Prouidators being called home by the Senate, went backe to Venice. Within a while after, Prince Moro died, hauing gouerned the Common-wealth nine yeeres and six moneths:

Hee was buried in Saint Iobs Church, which, together with the Monasterie neere adioyning, hee had erected at his owne proper costs. During his gouernement, the Citie was not onely beautified with that building, but the inner side of the entrie into the Pallace, which was begunne before then vnder Maripietro, was in his time wholly finished, where his Marble Statue is to be seene, with two others vnderneath him, representing our two first parents, wrought by Antonio Crispe the skilfullest Caruer of his time. Saint Peters Steeple of the Castle made of a white square stone, which is an excellent peece of worke, was then builded.






 NICOLAO TRONO, the 68. Duke of Venice.





NIcolao Trono succeeded Moro, whose short gouernment was verie fortunate, because the Venetians in his time made a league with the king of Persia, and vnited the famous Isle of Cyprus to their dominions.
The Senate sent Messengers to the Pope, and to King Ferdinand, to intreat the, that they would the summer folowing arme against their common enemie the Turk, and to tell them that the matter was not to be delayed, but that it was time alreadie to be at Sea. The Ambassadours were curteously entertained by either of them, who promised all assistance according to their power. Mocenigo likewise, did by Letters intreate the King of Cyprus, and the great Maister of Rhodes, that they would arme against the Turkes: Himselfe in the meane time visited all the Islands of the Aegean seas, and confirmed them by his presence. There is a small towne in Ionia opposite to the Isle of Chios, which is called Passage, whither from Asia all goodes were brought, at such time as the Italian Marchants did frequent the Isle of Chios, as into a common store-house. Mocenigo hauing intelligence that the same place was without garrison, came with his fleet before day neere to the shore, and sent his Mariners and some of the Rowers to fetchMocenigo his first exploit. this rich booty. The Inhabitants of this Towne being affrighted at this sodain incursion escaped into the neighbour-mountaines: the Shoppes full of Asian marchandise were rissed; and the whole bootie beeing brought to the Gallies, the towne was burnt. Mocenigo returning to Modon (for Winter was not yet spent) made some stay there. Then beeing prouoked by the common report, how that  the enemies fleete of fortie Gallies were ready to inuade Lemnos, he with his fleet speedily sailed into the Island. But finding this rumour to be false, and beeing vnwillingCoccina in the Isle of (...) is reedified. to haue his comming thither to be to no purpose, hee caused the towne of Coccina in the Isle of Lemnos to be repaired, which before had beene ouerthrowne

by an Earth-quake, and hauing reedified it, hee manned it with a strong Gar rison.
Hauing prouided for the assaires of the Island, he returned to Modon where hee found two new Prouidators sent from Venice, who were Stephano Maripietro, and Vittori Soranza, two of the chiefe Senators. At their arriuall, they concluded betwixt themselues, that in euerie Gallie, besides the Souldiers and Marriners, tenne horse-men whom the Greekes call Stradiots, should be placed: These men are more apt to take booties than to fight. They vse a buckler, sword and lance, few of them waere curases, but they quilt their doubtles and casocks with cotton to beare off the enemies stroakes. They haue very swift horse and wel breathed. The Venetians did  vse these kinde of men in the wars in Albania and Morea. But those of Morea neere to Naples wee reaccounted most valiant: The choicest of these, were put into the Gallies. The Fleete beeing furnished with such supplies, put to Sea, to waste and spoile the Prouinces of Asia. It spared the Cities and Islands of Greece, for respect it did beare to the Christian name, notwithstanding that they were subiect to Ottoman. From Morea hee went to Lesbos, where neere to the Promontorie on the East-side, where the Island is least habitable, the Fleete cast Ankor in a safe Hauen. Right ouer against it on the Sea shoare stands the Citie of Pergamus, a towneThe citie of Pergamus. in olde time very famous in the lesser Asia, it was well knowne to the Romans for the Tapestrie that was made there, but much more because it was the inheritance of king Attalus. There is nothing to bee seene at this day but the ruines of  tance of king Attalus. There is nothing to bee seene at this day but the ruines of olde buildings. The Territorie by reason of the fertilitie thereof is stored with villages. The Venetian departing about midnight from Lesbos, landed his troups on the opposite shoare in the lesser Asia, and commanded Giacomo Parisotto the Admirall of the Fleete, to place part of his troupes in Ambush, and with the rest to spoile and wast the enemies Countrie, putting all to fire and sword According to this commaundement, all places were spoiled to the great terror of the Countrie-people, and great store of cattaile with many prisoners were carried thence: But the Turkish horse-men of the neighbour Garrisons, hearing the lamentations of the poore people that fledde, did fiercely charge the Venetians, who retired to their shippes, and by that vnlooked for assault did greatly molest theThe Turkes are put to rout. Souldiers that were loden with bootie: Then the light horse of Morea comming speedily to their reskew, did easily chace and pursue them with great slaughter. The enemies heads together with the bootie were brought to the vessells, and for euery head the Souldier receiued a Ducat, the which recompence the Generall promised to all those that serued him in that iournie against the Turkes, and was exactly performed during that warre. The Fleet departing from the enemies Countrie, went and cast Ankour in a desert Island betwixt Chios and the firme Land: There was the bootie laied abroade, and sold to them that offered most. The Treasourers appointed for that purpose  distributed the monie to the horse-men, Souldiers, and Marriners. The same night the Venetian sailed to the Islands neere to Caria which in times past had belonged to the inhabitants of Gnidos, to spoile and wast them. Gnidos in timesWhat Gnidos was in former times. past among the Cities of Caria was very famous, in regard of her Arsenall and two Hauens, and at this day sundrie ruines of olde buildings are to bee seene there. The Territorie neere adioining, is not tilled, but frequented by sheepheardes. The Fleete being come to this place, both horse and foot were landed to waste the Countrie: many of all sex and ages were taken and brought to the Gallies, but of Cattaile no more than serued for their present vse. They found nothing else there but certaine tapestrie and fustians to make tents, such as the Numidians vsed when  they were wont to goe wandring vp and downe.
The Venetian putting to Sea went to Delos an Island of the Ciclades, famousThe Isle of Delos informer times for Apollos Temple, and the great concourse of people that resorted thither; it is now desolate and inhabitable; there is nothing now to be seene

but the ruines of the temple with those of an amphitheater of white marble, columnes and other statues, with a Colossus of fifteene cubites high. From Delos, Mocenigo directed his course to Morea because victualls grew scant. By the way neereThe Venetians ioine with King (...) fleet to the Cape of Mailles he met with Rachainesis the Generall of King Ferdinando his fleete with seuenteene Gallies, and after reciprocall salutations with great acclamations and other signes of ioy after the manner at Sea, they went together to Modon. There the Venetian had intelligence that the Popes Fleet would soone arriue there. But because he would make no long abode there, hauing victualled his Fleet, he and the Kings Generall departed from Modon, and with a faire winde sailed to the Islands of the Rhodian Sea next to Asia.
Those of Rhodes possessed the Cittie (which was exceeding strong by arte and manned with a strong Garrison) called the Castle of S. Peter, seated in that part of Caria opposite to the Isle of Coos, the only refuge of the Christians that fled forth of Asia. The Turkes were Masters of all places neere to the Rampiers, so as the inhabitants durst not come forth of their fortifications by reason of the enemies daily incursions,
There the Venetians were tolde a wonder of the skilfull sent of their dogs, how that the inhabitants kept fiftie dogges which in the night time they did put forth of the Rampiers for the guard of the Citie, and that their manner was, if any Christian did by chance come thither in the night they would gently fawne vpon him and  lead him to the citie, but if they met with any Turke, they did first by their loud barking as it were by a trumpet giue warning of their comming, and would then fall vpon them and teare them in peeces. Now the better to procure means for the inhabitants to come forth and to seeke for their commodities abroade, the Venetian resolued wholly to ruine all the Townes and villages neere adioining: And for the effecting thereof hauing sailed all night, hee came before day neere to the enemies shoare, where finding that all his Gallies were not come vp, hee determined to stay for the rest of his Fleete which the error of the night had caused to stray about the Promontorie: And early in the morning when the inhabitants perceiued the enemies on their shoare they sent their vnexperienced troups vp to the Mountaines determining  on the assurance of the steepinesse of the places there to fight with them. The Venetian perceiuing the boldnesse of those people, did put his Souldiers inThe defeat of the Barbarians. battaile, and gaue them a fierce charge. They did not refuse the fight, but answered them as brauely, the bickering was for a time doubtfull, and the horse-men could doe no great matter by reason of the stony and steep waies: the Souldiers and Marriners did with darts and arrowes charge the enemies from farre, and at last came to handie stroakes with swordes, pikes, and iron maces, but many of them beeing sore wounded by the Turkes fell downe dead. In the end the Venetian beeing stronger both in valour and number, euforced the enemie to quit the place, and with great slaughter brake and defeated him, diuers threw away their weapons and were taken  prisoners, but the greatest number being skilfull in the craggie waies escaped by the Mountaines. Then the Venetians fell to spoile, and hauing wasted all that Countrie they retired to their vessells loden with tapestrie.
In that part of Asia the women are cunning in weauing of tapestrie, and do not only deale in household businesse, but in trade of Marchandize. The heads of those that were slaine being numberlesse were carried to the Generall; many were taken in the fight, but very few in the fieldes and villages.
Foure daies after the fight, the Fleete departed thence, and in a morning beforeTabia a Citie of Caria. daie drew neere to Tabia a Citie of Caria. In that place, two Seas comming to ioine together, make part of Caria in a manner like an Island: The Territorie in time past  belonged to those of Halicarnassus, with their roiall Citie, famous for the magnificent tombe of King Mausolus: there is yet to this day (as Cariolan writeth) among the ruines of the citie certaine markes of that admirable worke to be seene: The inhabitants of those places, detesting husbandrie giue them selues to feeding of Cattaile:

from thence great store of Cattaile and many prisoners were brought to the Gallies. Then Mocenigo sailed to the desert Island, called Capraria, where whilest the bootie was diuided; newes was brought that the Popes Legat was at hand with his Fleete: The Venetian to do him honour prepared certaine Gallies and went to meete him, and after that he had welcommed him with the generall applause of all men with sound of trumpets and reciprocall embracements, Mocenigo said vnto him.




Mocenigo his Oration to the Popes Legat.



I Am sure (most reuerend and excellent Father) that you are not ignorant how valiantly hither to the Venetians haue borne them selues for the Christian faith. This is the ninth yeare we haue fought by Sea and Land against this cruell enemie, without the assistance of any Christian Princes, but of King Ferdinand onely: It is needelesse to rehearse the losses, trauailes, and dangers which we haue sustained; for there is no place in all Morea, no shoare in Greece, nor Island in all the Ionian and Aegaan Seas which is not watered with our bloud, or with that of our enemies: we haue not spared our labour, nor expences, and we hartily wish that whatsoeuer wee now doe, or shall heereafter execute, may be for the wealth of Christendome. We haue lately with fier and sword wasted Aeolia and Caria two rich Prouinces of the enemies; and now we hope by thine happy arriuall to bring to passe some nobler enterprize: It rests therefore on your part to teach vs what you know to be profitable for Christendome, and to prescribe vnto vs what to execute; and on our partes forthwith to obay thy commandements.
The Legat answered. It is sufficiently known with what zeale and affection the VenetiansThe Legats answer to Mocenigo. haue till this present defended Christian Religion; and how by their valour and industrie they haue preserued, Cities, Commonwealths and Islands: But for thy own particular, I may wel say, That although other Generalls haue done valiantly, yet thou hast not only c^rried thy selfe valiantly, but most fortunately, and (if I may so say) almost diuinely. This being thus, I entreate thee to continue as thou hast begun, and let not our conductor that of any else, interrupt the course of thy happy fortune: For my selfe (as it becommeth a Church-man) I will pray vnto God and his Saints, that all thy entreprizes may succeed fortunatly, and those troups which I haue brought with me, shall follow thy commandement.




After this they sailed into the Isle of Samos, intending there to consult whether they should shape their next course. This Samos is at this day desolate: for weeOf which (...)* he speaketh. speake not of that which is neere to Thrace, but rather of that which is right ouer against it. This that we now speake of is vpon the coast of Ionia, and is (according to Isidorus) an hundred thousand paces in circuite, called in olde time Parthenia, afterwards Adrisia, and Anthemusa, Melamphila, and Ciparissa, and lastly Samos. At this day it aboundeth in wilde Beastes, in regard of many desert places thereof. In this Island the Fleete made some abode, till such time as the horse that were tired  with their long beeing at Sea had refreshed themselues in the pleasant meadowes. The Souldiers and Marriners in the meane time going on shoare, spent the time in banquets and hunting. The Generall and Captaines of the Armie concluded to assaile Satalia on the sodaine, a Citie of Pamphilia builded by King Attalus. This Citie is at this day the greatest of all the Sea-townes of Asia. It hath an Hauen fortified on both sides, and is embarred with a mightie iron chaine. The Syrian and Aegyptian marchants do vsually come thither as to the ordinary Mart of the whole Prouince. Mocenigo commanded the Captaines of the Gallies speedily to prepare ladders the which being made readie, he departed from Samos with a gentlegale of winde, and sailed to the assault of Satalia: Being come to the Islands of Calidonia, he receiued supplies of two Gallies sent to him by those of Rhodes. The wholeThe number of the Venetians nauall Armie. Fleete consisted of foure score and fiue Gallies, namely twenty which the Pope sent, seuenteene from King Ferdinand, two from Rhodes, and six and fortie of the Venetians: The Fleet departing at Sun-set from the Calidonian Islands, did the next day

by three of the clock in the morning arriue vpon the enemies shoare. Mocenigo presently commanded Victor Soranza one of the Prouidators to go with ten Gallies to seize vpon the Hauen, and Maripietro the other Prouidator, to Land his Souldiers, and with them to giue an assault to the Citie on the other side, and he commanded the horse-men speedily to make good a little Hill neere to the Citie, from thence to send supplies where need should be: He did moreouer exhort them to remember their accustomed valour, and to consider that they were to deale with an vnexperienced enemie, and such an one as was to be taken vnprouided; and that they did assaile a Citie, which being taken would for euer enrich them. Thus beeing full of hope and valour they marched towards the Citie: Himselfe with the Captains  of the associates tarried in his Gallie to behold the assault. The horse-men without delay ranne to take that Hill. Souranza with force of oares being come to the Hauen, after that he had in the middest of a terrible shower of darts and arrowes broaken the chaine, was himselfe the foremost that entred into the Hauen. The other Gallies that followed him seized on the Fortes on both sides the Hauen and slew all those that were within them; then they brake in to the houses in the Suburbes and into them that were neere the walls, where the Marchants for the most part dwelt in regard of their trafficke, who at the first approach of the Fleete had abandoned their wares and retired them selues into the Citie: All the store-houses were full of pepper, cinamom, ginger, perfumes, and other costly marchandize. All The nauall Armie giueth an assault to Sat^alia. which being taken and brought to the Gallies, they set fier on the houses the more to terrifie the inhabitants: Then because their ladders were vnprofitable by reason of the great heighth of the Walls, the Souldiers fell to the spade and mattock.
The Generall of the Rhodes, whilest inconsiderately with his Souldiers he was busied in breaking open one of the Citie* Gates, was slaine outright with the fall of a great stone which fell vpon his head. His Souldiers carried his body to the Gallies. The death of this valliant man did greatly afflict the Souldiers, but their fierworkes most of all, which being throwne into the aire were by the winde carried into their faces, and falling thicke amongst the assailants did grieuously scalde them, whereby they weare enforced to giue ouer the assault and to retire to their Gallies. Maripietro likewise with his Souldiers fought valiantly on the other side of the Citie, which being encompassed with a double wall, the first was presently entred by scaling ladders with no meane slaughter of the Turkes; but comming to the second, and the ladders prouing to short, the courageous Souldiers fell instantly to vndermining. Our men did many gallant exploits there, and it was certainely thought that the Citie would haue beene taken that day, had not the darkenesse of the night preuented them, which enforced them to retire.
It is reported that a Dalmatian woman who had a long time beene a slaue to theA Generous act of a Dalmatian woman. Turks, was so valiant as with cries and exhortations from the walls she encouraged  the Christians, whereupon, some that were not farre off threatning her with punishment, she clapt her gowne round about her and leaped downe from the walls, where being wounded with the fall, she died among her Countriemen. The Prouidators hauing left a strong guard in all places neer to the Citie, that none might come forth or enter in, they retired in the night with the rest of their forces to the Gallies where after that they had well considered among themselues, that the Citie being strongly encompassed with high walls, and well-manned with Souldiers, could not bee taken without great ordnance, and that it would bee too long a time to send for anyThe Venetians resolution. from Morea, and very dangerous to bring it thither in regard of the continuall tempests which are vsuall along the coast of Pamphilia, exposed to the South-east wind  which doth fiercely tosse those Seas, they determined to depart the next day, hauing first burnt the Suburbs, and wasted the Countrie which was the richest of all Pamphilia.
The Fleete beeing gone from Sathalia, did within a few daies after come to

Rhoades, where, whilest it remained, the Ambassadour of Vsan-cassan King of Persia came thither. He told them, that at the intreatie and pursuite of Catharin Zeno a Venetian Gentleman and their Ambassadour in Persia, his King had determined to ioyne his forces with those of the Venetians to ouerthrow the power of Ottoman,The Ambassador of Vsancassan king of Persia. and that his troupes were already entred into the greater Armenia which was subiect to Ottoman, and had taken the Citty of Toccata the wealthiest of all the Prouince, and some other townes of great worth. Hee told them besides, that he had great numbers of men and horse: That the Persians in their warres did skilfully handle the launce, sword, and bowe, but that they were not accustomed to other armes: That he was sent to the Venetians, Pope, and other Christian Princes, to intreate them from the King to furnish the Persian Army with Artillery against their common aduersarie.
Mocenigo and the rest gaue a willing eare to the Ambassadours discourse, and did put him in good hope that he should easily obtaine all his demaunds: They shewed him their mighty fleete well furnished with men and armour, and told him that it was ready to saile whither his King should commaund it, if his pleasure were to imploy it. The Persian being in this sort dismissed, went towardes Italie, and they made themselues readie for some other enterprize, wherein to spend the remainder of that Autumne. But whilest these things were done at sea, Ottoman did inuade the Venetians in sundrie places: For the Turkes made incursions  into Albania and Dalmatia, and entred into Italie. They did at the beginning of the warre at a certaine time prefixed make incursions twice a yeare into Albania, namely in the time of haruest, and grape-gathering, neere to Scutarie, Lesia, Croya, and other places with the Venetians held in the Prouince. For before the Venetians were open enemies to Ottoman, Amurath his father had a long time before made warre in Albania, and especially then, when hee came to inuade Scanderbeg, whoScanderbeg a famous caplaine in his time was a famous and valiant Captaine, and such an one, as next to Pyrrhu^, who warred on the Romans in Italie, Albania neuer bred the like. Those which haue seene him in Apulia when hee came thither to the aide of king Ferdinand with six hundred horse, say, that he fought with his armes bare, sometimes with an yron  Mace, and sometimes with a Sword, and executed there so many braue exploits, as himselfe alone was more feared than all the rest of his cauallerie. He, after that he had by his owne industrie recouered the principalitie of Albania, did so long as he liued, with few forces defend it against the whole power of the Turks. He had six hundred choice horse, with whom he did ordinarily vse to ouerthrow farre greater numbers of his Turkish enemies. For which his glorious exploits it is reported, that the people after his death, in admiration of him, as if they had obserued in him somewhat that exceeded humane performance, did by Hymnes and Songs solemnize the memoriall of so worthie a Prince. Some credible Authors affirme, That in the hottest time of the warre when the Turkes filled all places with  armes and terrour, great multitudes of Virgins would assemble themselues together in those citties where he had commaunded, and euery eight dayes would sing the praises of that dead Prince, therein imitating those of olde time, who in theyr high feasts did publish the acts of notable men that were dead. But this (as I haue said) was done in former time. The Turkes likewise made sundry incursions into Dalmatia. But because it was done rather to forrage than to fight, it is not worthy of memory. It had beene good for the Venetians, if the Prouinces onely, and not Italie, had felt their cruell armes, who whilest Mocenigo executed his fortunate exploits in Asia, did enter the Confines of Italie, and came as farre as Vdina.
About the middest of Autumne, a company of Turkish horse in an euening  at Sun-set, came with great rumour and incamped on the Riuer of Sconcino, and many of them had alreadie foorded the streame, when on a sodaine they incounteredThe Turkes incarsions into Italie. the Venetian troupes. For diuers troupes of horse lying in the Villages heere and there vpon the riuer, assembled themselues vpon the enemies arriuall to stoppe

their passage; and although the Venetians vsed great speed, the Turkes neuerthelesse by their swiftnesse were gotten before them, and some of their cauallerie had alreadie crossed the Riuer, when as the Venetians vpon their first charge did beate them into the water, and enforced them to returne to the other side to their fellowes. The Italian cauallery remained on the riuer bankes most part of the night, but through feare of the enemies great number, before day they retired into the Isle of Ceruia. This place is neare to Aquileia, and is made an Island by the circumfluence of the Riuers Ronedula, Amosore, and Alsa. But so soone as itThe Turks come into the countrie of the Forlani. was day, and that the enemie had lost sight of the Venetians, he speedily crossed the Riuer, and with great out-cries made incursions into the Countrey of the  Forlani.
All those in the villages betooke themselues to flight, and they in the Townes thought themselues not secure. The smoke of the Villages and Countrey-houses which were seene to burne a farre off, had greatly terrified the Inhabitants of the cities, but much more the sight of the poore Countrie people, who dragged their wiues, children, and cattell to their very gates. The Inhabitants of Vdina, which at this day in wealth and populousnesse is one of the most renowned of the whole Prouince, was greatly affrighted with the approach of the Turks, who were come within three miles of the citie, no lesse than if the enemie had beene at their gates. In which amazement, mothers with their children stoode weeping before the Altars,The citie of Vdina is mightily affrighted at the comming of the Turkes. and others ranne vp and downe to the Market-place, and to the Castle. And it was certainely thought, That if the Cittie had beene assailed by the Turkes in that generall confusion, it might haue beene endangered without any notable danger. But so it was, That the Turkes fearing some Ambuscado, because they knew not whither the Venetian cauallerie was retired, went backe the same way they came with great numbers of prisoners and cattell. Now the Venetians at the same time were not onely molested in that place, but neere to the Po likewise, by reason of the troubles of Ferrara. After the death of Borsia d'Aeste the Venetians assistedThe venetians install Hercules d'Este in the principalitie of Ferrara. Hercules his brother with men, money, and shipping, for the obtaining of the principalitie of Ferrara against his Nephew Nicolao sonne to his brother Lionello, who  claimed it, and being therein established, they maintained him in it by force (notwithstanding that in other places, they were pressed with the burthen of a greater warre) when by the conspiracie of certaine particular persons, hee had like to haue lost it. In the citie of Venice, they called in all siluer coyne, which (for the most part) was counterfet, and coyned other bigger peeces of a new stampe, which were called Troni, by reason of the Princes effigies vpon it. After the Persian Ambassadours departure foorth of Asia, Mocenigo, and the Associates, being desirousMocenigo his incursions into Asia. to spend the small remainder of Autumne in some honourable exploits, directed their course towards that part of Asia which is opposite to Chios neere to Thermena a Promontorie of those of Mindos. The horsemen and mariners beeing landed  in that place, and sent vp and downe that Territorie which aboundeth with vines, oliue trees, and rich villages, they made a great spoile, and carried away infinite numbers of prisoners. The souldiers brought an hundred seauen and thirtie heades of the enemies to the Gallies. The prisoners were solde by the sound of Drumme, and the mony was equally diuided among the troupes. From thence being come to Nasso, the Generall of the Kings Gallies (for winter approached) took leaue of Mocenigo, and with his fleet went home into his Countrey.
The Venetian and the Popes Legate being desirous to attempt some memorable action before winter, leauing Nasso, sailed directly to besiege Smirna, in times past a famous Cittie of Ionia. They had intelligence, that because it was seated  in a Gulph farre off, it had not of a long time tasted any misery of warre; and that therefore, the Inhabitants of the place did liue in all securitie, which had bred in them a carelesse neglect of fortifying their Cittie, which in many places was much ruinated. They first arriued at Psira a desart Island: From thence sayling by night,

they came the third day after in the morning to the strond of Smirna. A great part of the Citie standeth vpon the hill, but the better halfe of it is in the plaine, andThe Christians besiege Smirna. yet the hill is most inhabited. The troupes being presently landed, gaue a furious assault to the walles of the Citie where they found small resistance: but so great was the terrour of the distressed Citizens, as all their attempts could not long bold out the Christians: for whilest they ran vp and downe confusedly, the Citie was spoyledSmirna is taken by the souldiers and marriners. Great was the lamentation of the flying townsmen, whilest women with their children, ranne into their Temples or Mesquets, embracing the Altars, and imploring the aide of Mahomet. At length the inhabitants being reduced to all extremitie, did from the ^ops of the houses throw tyles and stones  downe vpon their enemies. The victorious Venetians in the meane time ran vp and downe the Citie, and violently drew women, children, and maids forth of the temples: the men that were vnarmed they tooke prisoners, and such as made defence were slaine: They tooke away their goods, gold, siluer, and all their curious plate, and spoiled all places of what condition soeuer.
It is reported that a young woman being perforce led towards the Gallies, did byThe lamentation and great courage of a woman. the way fall downe vpon her husbands graue, and embracing it with warme teares, did often repeat his name, and spake in this manner. O my deare and welbeloued husband, the misfortune and fate of my countrey compels me, whom neither loue nor force could euer change from being thine, to be at this present carried away by  a cruell enemie into perpetuall bondage: I poore wretch am hurried from thy sight, and shall neuer more behold my louing country nor this deare monument. I powre these last teares of mine on thine ashes, and with sighes I inuoke thy Ghost: But why should I doe so? I will rather die than be drawne from hence. And in this manner lying close to the graue, she could not be remoued thence, neither by threatenings nor force, whereupon a rash young souldier thrust his sword through her bodie: happie onely in this to be entombed there where shee desired.
Balaban Gouernour of the Prouince, vpon report that the Citie was taken, came from the neighbour Garrisons where he lay, with great troupes leuied in hast. The  light horse of Morea incountred him, and they had scarce begun the fight, when as all the other troupes from the Gallies arriued: the fight for a time was equall, but on a sodaine the enemie was broken and put to rout with great losse. The victorious souldiers returned to the Citie, from whence carrying all the bootie to the Gallies, and the Citie being fired in sundrie places, it was in a moment burnt to ashes. Cepio saith, that he saw there among other old monuments, that of the excellent Poet Homer with his picture, and ouer his head his name written in Greeke. The towne being sacked and burnt, the whole territorie was wasted. Two hundred and fifteene of the enemies heads were carried to the Gallies. The fleet departed thence, and sailed to the desart Islands of Ionia, where the bootie was sold to them that  gaue most, and the money according to the custome was distributed among the soldiers and marriners.
The fourth day after, the troupes landed on the shoare of Clazomene. ThisThe Citie of Clazomene. towne is seated in the farthest part of the Gulph of Smirna, and was in old time verie famous in Ionia: From thence they carried away no great bootie. For the newes of the taking of Smirna had caused the people of the count^ey to retire with their goods, wiues, and children into the mountaines: verie few tarried in their houses, who were carried away prisoners, and with them many Camels and much cattell. From thence, because winter approached, the two fleets left Ionia, and with a faire wind sailed directly into Morea.
VVhen they came to Modon, it is reported, That the Popes Legate after he hadThe Popes Legate his speech to Mocenigo when he tooke his leaue of him. embraced Mocenigo, spake thus vnto him. I will take my leaue of thee O thou valiant man, and will be the publike witnesse and trumpet of thy heroicke deeds. And if it shall please God to send me safe into Italie, not onely the Pope and our most Reuerend

Colledge of Cardinalls, but all Italie, together with the Princes and remetest nations of Christendome, shall vnderstand what the Venetians vnder thy conduct, skill, and counsell, haue done against our common enemies the Turkes, in Asia, Licia, and Pamphilia. Goe forward braue Captaine as thou hast begunne to inlarge the Venetian glorie, to defend Christian Religion: and therby to immortalize thine owne name. I beseech Almightie God to fauour thine enterprizes, and I hope it will come to passe, that all the losses which Christendome hath sustained by this barbarous enemie, shall ere long by thine onely valour, and to their ruine, be fully recompenced.
Mocenigo in his owne behalfe answered him briefly; but for the Venetians he promised  much, prouided that the Princes of Christendome would assist them in that warre. Thereupon, the Legate sailed towards Italie, and the Venetian went to Naples in Morea, where, whilest the Generall fortified the towne, a young man of Sicilie came vnto him, (who was taken prisoner at the losse of Nigrepont) and told him that he had diligently viewed Ottomans Nauie at Gallipolis and his Arsenall there, and that it was an easie matter to burne them both, in regard they kept no nightly watch, and if that he would furnish him with some trustic marriners, he should shortly finde that he had told him nothing but the truth. The Venetian embraced the young man, and promised him great matters. The Sicilian hauingA braue deed of a young man. receiued sailers and a ship, counterfeited the Marchant, and with his vessell loden  with Apples sailed to Gallipolis, and all day long made sale of his trash: (though his head were busied with greater designes) the same night hee did set fire on an hundred Gallies which were rigged, but he could not burne all the rest that lay at Anker by reason of the great concourse of people that came running thither at sight of the fire.
This being done, he sought to escape forth of the streight, but his owne ship by mishap being likewise set on fire, he with his fellowes were enforced to hide themselues in the next wood. But when the Turkes saw the Apples float vp and downe the water, and the Barke sunke not farre from thence, they presently imagined that the Marchant of Apples had done the deed. The next day the Sicilian and  his fellowes were taken and sent to Ottoman, who demaunding of this young man what had moued him to doe it, he brauely and fearelesly answered, That hee had done it to hinder the common enemie of Christendome, and that his attempt would be much more glorious, if he might as easily runne his sword through his bodie, as he had set fire on his Gallies. Mahomet wondering at the young mans courage, did not like King Porsenna, but according to his barbarous crueltie he commaunded the bodies of him and his fellowes to be sawen a sunder in the middest. The Venetian Senate in regard it could not recompence him according toThe Senate recompenceth the young mans brother and sister. his desert, gaue his sister a dowrie forth of the publike treasurie, and to a brother of his, a yearely pension during his life.
The Fleet wintered at Naples, and the Generall was busied in prouiding all necessaries for the Citie and fleete, when as letters came thither from the king of Persia and Catharin Zeno directed to the Prince, and Senate, containing the selfe same demaunds which the Ambassador had craued certaine moneths before: Mocenigo in an expresse Galley sent them to Venice. The Senate being moued by these letters, did presently from all parts cause great quantitie of Ordnance to be prouided,The Uenetians present sent to the Persian king. and gold plate curiously wrought, with many peeces of Scarlet cloth of Verona, and a certaine summe of Duccates likewise for a present to the Persian king, with an hundred young men skilfull in Gunners art to attend vpon the Ordnance, whose Captaine was Tomaso Himolao. Iosepho Barbaro an old Senator, a man skilfull in the  Persian tongue, was appointed Ambassador for to carrie these presents to the king which loded three ships. All things being in readinesse, Barbaro imbarked himselfe, and with a faire wind sailed to Cyprus, from thence along the coast of Cilicia and Syria, he arriued in the countrey of the king their friend.
Moreouer, the Senate commaunded Mocenigo to make his fleete readie to saile with it whither soeuer it should please Vssan-Cassan to command it.
Mahomet in the meane time hauing left a strong Garrison in Constantinople, marched with great forces into Asia, to oppose himselfe against that warre. The Venetian lik^wise (because the common rumour was, that the Caramani, brethren, associates to the King of Persia, whom Mahomet had bereft of their fathers Kingdome, did inuade the Sea-townes of Cilicia) did at the Spring time in the behalfe of the king of Persia, saile with his fleete to Cyprus, from thence to goe to the aide of the Caramans. He had as many horse and foote troupes, and the same prouision for warre, as the yeare before. The Rhodians sent him two well-armed Gallies, and  the king of Cyprus their friend and allie, gaue him foure.The Venetian fleet in Cilicia
The Venetian fleete being thus augmented, sailed into Cilicia, neere to Seleucia, at the siege whereof Caraman was then encamped. There is an hauen called Theodora, which the Venetian fleete made good. There in old time stood a Temple of Venu^, and the place by reason of the commodiousnesse thereof was much frequented by Pirates; without the ruines of the Citie on the shoare there is at this day a verie ancient Temple to be seene, builded of square stone. Cassambet the younger of the Caraman brethren (for the eldest whose name was Piramet, and king of Cilicia remained in the king of Persias Amie) sent Ambassadors to the Venetian,Ambassadors come to Mocenigo. who after they had congratulated his safe arriuall, told him that the Caraman brethren, had euer grounded their hope and trust on the Venetians, in regard of the friendship and alliance betwixt their dead father and them; that Cassambet had for foure monethes besieged three Cities of Cilicia; Sichin, Seleucia, and Coric: which if he might take, he did assure himselfe in short space to recouer his wholeThe Ambassadors request. Kingdome; that he wanted nothing but Ordnance and other warlike engines to batter townes: That he did entreate him to aide the king a friend and allie to the Venetians, till such time as he had recouered his fathers kingdome, which Ottoman their common enemie did wrongfully possesse.
The Venetian after that he had put the Ambassadours in good hope, dispatcht Victor Souranza to Cassambet to consult with him concerning the forme of the warre. He learned of him that of those three Cities which were besieged, it behooued him first to take Sichin, for that being taken, the rest would presently yeeld. Mustapha the Cilician was Gouernour therof, a treacherous man, and one that with his fortune had changed Religion, and had in times past beene a friend to Cassambet and his brother, who so soone as he saw their Kingdome to be taken from them, did follow Ottoman^ Armie, and did wrongfully seize on that Citie. Cariolan Cepio of Trah^, being sent to view the towne, reported that the Citie was seated on an high place, but that the wall was weake and vnfortified, the people vnskilfull and disarmed, with other matters which did promise victorie. The Venetian resoluing to besiege that Citie, sent Lodouico Lombardo the Venetian with ten Gallies The Venetians besiege Sichin. to Coric by Sea, to keepe all victuals from comming to the inhabitants. By land Caraman with his troupes did neerely presse the enemie: the rest of the Armie drew neete to Sichin, and gaue an assault, but by reason of the difficultie of the place the town could not be taken. The inhabitants waxing proud for that good successe, did from the walles mocke the Venetians, saying: Get yee home O Venetians, and command the Sea and fishes, but leaue the Empire of the land to Ottoman. The Venetian byThe Uenetians take Sichin. an Herald of Armes sought to draw Mustapha to a voluntarie yeelding, wishing him rather to make proofe of the Venetians loyalty and gentlenesse than of their Arms: but perceiuing that the Turke contemned peace, he gaue a more furious assault to the Citie, and planting his Ordnance on the North side, and hauing made a reasonable  breach, the enemie being daunted, presently yeelded.
The Venetians suffering Mustapha with his souldiers to goe whither he would, deliuered the Citie to Hisafa Caramans Lieutenant. From thence going to Coric, he did by the way meet with Zanchio General of the royall Armie, with ten Gallies.

The Sea enuironeth two parts of Coric, the rest on the land side hath a verie depe ditch fortified with a double wall: The hauen lieth towards the East, whose entrance is likewise fortified. On the South side is the Isle of Eleusia three hundredThe sit^atien of Coric. paces from thence, fortified with a wall of white square stone. The Venetian from the poope of the Galley hauing curiously viewed the situation of the place, made a signe to his Gallies to enter: Thereupon the Gallies with discharging their Ordnance, and in a shower of arrowes did winne the Hauen, Mocenigo hauing landed his troupes, sent to the Gouernour of the Citie to know of him whether he wouldThe Gouernor of Coric his answer to Mocenigos Herald. yeeld and goe from thence: He made a proud answer, saying: Tell him from me, that the weake coward Mustapha is not heere, but another, who by his deserts commandeth  the royall troupes which are heere in garrison.
The Turkish Princes doe vse to appropriate to themselues the fifth part of all captiues. They make choice of male children from ten yeares old to sixteene. If thereAfter what sort the Ianizaries are made. be no captiues, they doe by their officers carrie away children of that age in despite of their parents, forth of such Prouinces as they haue wonne from the Christians. These by constraint hauing renounced Christianitie, are instructed in the Mahometan superstition, and then are deliuered ouer into the hands of tutors, who teach them martiall discipline, and when they come to be men, they follow the Prince to the warres. The vulgar call them Ianizaries: such among them as are wise and valiant, attaine to great honours: of these, the Baschas, Gouernours of Prouinces, Townes, and Castles are made: Some of them lie in Garrison in the Cities, and some of them remaine at the great Lords port, to be neere him with their Armes when he rides abroad. Out of these, he chooseth a Regiment for the Guard of his owne person when he goeth to warre. Ottoman had left many of these men for the Guard of Coric. Ismael the Cities gouernour presuming vpon them, would not endure to heare tell of yeelding. But when the Venetian perceiued it to be time toCoric yeeldeth. vse force and no threatning, he planted his Ordnance on the South and West sides of the Citie, and hauing made a great breach in the wall, Ismael yeelded on conditions to haue his owne life, and those of his souldiers saued. The Venetian surrendred the Citie to Caraman: From thence he went to besiege Seleucia.
Seleucus one of Alexander of Macedons successors builded it fiue miles from Sea. This Citie is now ruinate. Nessembeg lay in Garrison in the Castle which was strong by situation and art, who although at first he made shew not to yeeld, yet so soone as he perceiued the ordnance and other engins to be planted against him, he forthwith yeelded the fort and the garrison to the Venetians, who by Souranza did presently deliuer it to the king his friend. Caraman hauing won his kingdom, presented the VenetianSeleucia yeeldeth to the venetians general with a horse, bridled, sadled, and barded withsiluer, and with a tame Leopard giuing him infinite thanks, for that by his meanes he had recouered his fathers kingdome,Caraman his present to the Venetian. assuring him that whatsoeuer his brother and himselfe should possesse, they would euer confesse to hold it of the Venetians. Warre being in this manner ended  in Cilicia, and Mocenigo hearing no newes of the king of Persias Armie determined to inuade Licia, which had not as yet tasted the miseries of war. But newes being brought vnto him that Iames king of Cyprus lay grieuously sicke of a Dissenteria or flix, he sailed to Cyprus to visit him. The Venetian being come into the Island, hauing after reciprocall salutations enquired of his disease, and of the remedies applied thereunto, entreated the king to be of good cheere, and with patience to beare the force of his maladie, who made him this answere. I know verie well most excellent Captaine,The king of Cyprus speech to Mocenigo. and feele how that by the violent torment of my disease. I am in great danger of life, and not to flatter my selfe, I haue no hope to escape, I make my deerest wife with the childe which she beares in her body mine heires, and she is (as thou knowest) daughter to Marco Cornari, and being adopted by the Venetian Senat, was by it giuen to me in mariage. If I die, (which I make no question of) I recommend my wife, issue, and kingdome to the Venetians. And I heartily entreat thee, in regard of our friendship, and for the greatnes of the Venetian state (if it come to that) that thou wouldest defend and keepe, both her selfe, issue and kingdome from all wrong and oppression.
Thy body (quoth Mocenigo) most Royall King, is yet in good estate, and thou in theMocenigoes answer to the king. prime of thine age, which may put thee in good hope of speedy recouery, but if it should fall out otherwise (which God forbid) I bescech thee be confident, that neither my selfe, nor the Venetians forces will euer be wanting to thee or thine. And then taking leaue of him, he speedily sailed with all his fleete to the Islands neare to Licia, from thence going to the firme land, and carrying away a great bootie from that coast, he resolued to besiegeThe venetians besiege Micra. Micra a towne neare to the sea; and because hee had small hope that it would otherwise yeelde, hee planted his ordnance on both sides. The wall was in some places very much shaken, when Aiasabet Gouernour of Lycia shewed himselfe with great troupes of souldiers. The light horse of Morea went against him, and there  was a cruell fight on both sides. Aiasabet being slaine, the Turkes were with great slaughter broken and put to rout. An hundred and fiftie of the enemies heads were brought to the Campe, and being fixed vpon launces with that of Aiasabet, were set vp neere to the walles, to the end the besieged might behold them. Charago the Tribull, who commaunded in the Citty, being daunted with the disaster of his Countrymen, and perceiuing a great part of the wall to be beaten downe, he capitulatedMicra is taken by (...). for himselfe and the Inhabitants, that they might haue their liues saued, and depart whither they pleased. This being graunted, the Venetians sacked and burnt the citie.
From thence the fleet sailed to Flisca, which in times past was opposite to Rhodes, but at this day there is nothing to be seene but the ruines, the territorie round about it is filled with Villages. The horse of Morea and the Mariners being landed, wasted all that Countrey. The Generall had determined to passe the streight, and had already commaunded the Captaines of the Gallies, to bee ready to that end, when the Messengers of Charlotta sister to the King of Cyprus, (whom her brotherAmbassadours come ^o Mocenigo from the king of Cyprus sister. had driuen foorth of the kingdome, and like a banished woman had liued a long time at Rhodes) arriued, who certified the Generall of the King of Cyprus death, by whom his sister Charlotta (being borne in lawfull matrimonie) had been wrongfully expelled from her fathers kingdome. They craued his aide, and entreated him to assist the King of Cyprus daughter, and kinswoman to the Duke of Sauoy, and to restore her to her fathers kingdome, from which her brother, sonne to a concubine, had driuen her. Mocenigo, after that he had acquainted them with the auncient league and alliance which had beene betwixt the Venetians and King Iames, answered; That in the Common-wealths name, he would doe the Ladie CharlottaMocenigo his answer to the Ambassadors. all right: yet hee did greatly wonder that shee did not remember how that the right of Kingdomes is rather debated by the Sword, than by Law. And that the Realme of Cyprus had not beene onely taken from her, and from the Genoueses, who then held a part thereof: That for his part, hee knew how that the wife of the late King, the adoptiue daughter of the Venetian Senate being left with child, had beene, together with the fruit of her wombe, made heires by the deceased King before his death; and therefore hee tolde them plainely, That hee would in that iust quarrell take vpon him the defence of the Queene wife to the late King, who did hope ere long to be mother to a King. Hee willed them then to depart, and to seeke aide elsewhere against her, for hee was resolued, in honour of the Republique to defend her from all wrongs and oppression. The Ambassadors being dismissed with this answere, he determined to passe the streight, but in the meane time hee receiued LettersMocenigo his determination is broken (...). from Catharine Zeno which did aduertize him, that the Armies of the Persian king and the Turke were not farre off from one an other, and that their meaning was to fight with displayed ensignes for the finall deciding of their controuersie; that he should doe well, speedily to bring his fleete to the sea coast of Cilicia, whither  the Persian king promised to bring his troupes, there to treate with him after what maner the warre should be managed.
These Letters made the Venetian to giue ouer his iourney into the streight, and to shape his course towards Cilicia, and after that he had sodainely wasted the territories of the Mireneans in Lycia, hee failed to Cyprus, where after that hee had

comforted the mournefull Queene for her husbands death, he intreated her to bee of good cheere, and to feare no warrelike menaces; for he was readie to defend her and her kingdome from all assaults and attempts whatsoeuer. Then he made haste towards Cilicia. So soone as the fleet came to Coric. Lodouico Lauretano Captaine of one of the Popes Gallies came thither to him, and told him that hee came fromLodouico Lauretano comm^h from the Popes Legate. the Archbishop of Spalatra the Popes Legate who was arriued with tenne Gallies at Rhodes, to know of him what hee meant to doe, and whether he intended to preferre some notable seruice against the Turkes; for if his intention were such, he would meet him with his fleete, by which speech he gaue him to vnderstand, That the Popes Legate had no meaning to come forward, but vpon hope of some great  enterprize, thereby going about to inferre, that till then hee had done no memorable matter: Mocenigo taking his speech in bad part, could not so much masterMocenigo his answer to Lauretano. himselfe, but that he tolde him, That peraduenture the new Legate thought, that what hee till then bad done against the enemie, was but a trifle, yet those who had felt his forces, did thinke that no greater mischiefe could light vpon them, and that it was at his owne choice, whether he would ioyne with the Venetians fleete, or not: but for his owne part he promised for the Popes sake, to haue the gallies, souldiers, and Legates selfe in singular estimation, and that he would haue no lesse care of them in all places than of the Venetians.
The Venetian fleete had already remained certaine dayes on the confines of  Cilicia, when the Generall had intelligence by Letters from Catharine Zeno, that the Persian had fought twice with the Turkes. Ottoman had two of his chiefest Officers in his company, the one was the Gouernour of Natolia, and the other of Romagnia; The first commaunded the Prouinces of Asia, and the second, those of Europe. Moderne Cosmographers haue termed Romagnia, all the coast of the Ponticke sea from Tauris of Chersonessus, to the furthest part of Morea. This name (as some do thinke) was giuen it, at such time as the seate of the Empire was transported from Rome to Constantinople. Natolia, which in time past was called Ponticke containeth (with whatsoeuer belongeth to the streight,) all Caria, Lycia, and Pamphilia. The great Lord vseth the aduise and councell of these men in  any weighty and important businesse, and specially in martiall matters: in the Barbarian tongue they are called Baschas.
The Gouernour of Romagnia then, comming to fight with Vssancassans sonne,A battell betwixt the Turkes and Persians. Vssan-cassan his sonne is victorious. was vanquished and slaine in fight. Some thinke that the Persians are superiour to the Turks in number of men and horse, as the euent of that battell did testifie: For Ottomans army being broken and put to rout, they were in a manner all slaine, together with their Generall. The king being puffed vp with pride for this victory, did the next day encompasse the enemies Campe. Ottoman in the meane time had fortified himselfe in the middest of his Campe where hee remained as in a strong fort; hee had inclosed it with a trench of foure thousand paces in compasse with  rampires, neere to which he caused waggons made fast together with yron chains to be placed, vpon euery of which two field peeces were laid, then there was great store of ordnance planted in euery place, to defend the fortifications. Round aboutThe order of Ottomans campe. it fifteene thousand shot were appoynted, continually to play vpon the enemie: within the rampires were fiue and twentie thousand choice horse, all Thracians and Tribulls, and twenty thousand Ianissaries reputed inuincible, and like to the Macedonian Phalange.
At the enemies first approach, infinite cannon shot were at one time bestowed vpon his troupes which made a great slaughter of men and horse. In that place Vssancassans sonne a braue young Prince being emboldened by the precedent victorie, fighting in the former rankes was slaine with a cannon shot. The Persians beeingThe Persians are vanquished by the Turkes. amazed with the great slaughter of their men and horse, and being affrighted with the vnusuall report of the ordnance, turned their backes. The Turkes comming furiously foorth of their Campe, did pursue the vanquished, and made a great execution.

All the Persian Armie consisted of horse^, who by their swiftnesse did in a moment escape farre from thence. The victorious Turkes durst pursue them no further* The King retyred into the mountaines of Armenia, where his wife and children were. Ot^oman accounting himselfe the Conquerour, for that he had wonne the enemies Campe, dismissed his Armie, and returned to Constantinople.The number of both Armies.
The Persians were reckoned to be three hundred and fiftie thousand fighting men, and the Turkes three hundred and twentie thousand: of the Turkes fortie thousand were slaine, and ten thousand of the Persians. The Generall hauing intelligence hereof by Zenos letters, went from Cilicia into Cyprus. For Zeno sent him  word that the king in regard of the losse of the battell would not come to the Seacoast that yeare.
Mocenigo held the Queenes sonne which she lay in off, at the Font, and was his Godfather. Andrea Cornari the Queenes vncle was at the same time in the Island. The Queene and her Councell gouerned the affaires of the Kingdome. Mocenigo enquiring of Cornari concerning the state of the Kingdome found that all thinges were quiet there: Neuerthelesse, being vnwilling to leaue such a Realme altogether naked of forces, hee added two Gallies to those that were come thither at the beginning of Summer, and commaunded them to remaine at Famagosta vnder the commaund of Cornari. The Popes Legate likewise came thither  with two Gallies, for the Treasurer had carried the rest to Sio. Both of them within a while after departing thence went to Rhodes, from thence to Sio. And after that they had coasted the Islandes Ciclades, they sayled into Morea. The Legate taking his leaue, returned towards Italie, and Mocenigo went to Modon. This is all that was done abroad during that Summer. In the middest of Autumne Prince (...) died, hauing gouerned one yeare and eight monethes. He was buried in the Church of the Frie^s Minors, where his sonne Philip did afterwardes build him a verie sumptuous Tombe of white and blacke marble curiously guilt, neere to the high Altar.














 NICOLAO MARCELLO, the 69. Duke of Uenice.





NIcolao Marcello a man of singular vertue succeeded him. In his time they bega^ne orderly to paint in the great Councell-chamber that which the Venetians had done in times past for Pope Alexander against the Emperor Fredericke. The vndertaker of this worke was Gentile Bellino, the excellentest painter of his time, who after the peace being sent to Constantinople to the Emperour Mahomet shewed so many excellent  proues of his skill, as he receiued of him the honour of Knighthood, and was (...) home into his countrey with rich presents. During this Princes gouernment a new kinde of money was coyned in the Citie, which was called Marcello by the Authors name.

The end of the ninth booke of the third Decad.





THE TENTH BOOKE  OF THE THIRD DECAD OF THE HISTORIE Of Venice.

The Contents of the tenth Booke of the third Decad.
THE description of the Isle of Cyprus. The Islanders sedition, and CORNARI his death are mentioned in the beginning. The conspirators leaue the Island vpon the arriuall of the Venetian fleet. MOCENTOO by his presence assureth the state of the Island. The description of Albania and (...). SOLIMAN the Eunuch with great forces besiegeth Scutarie. The Venetians^ se all meanes by land and water, toraise the siege. The Venetians Gallies fight fortunately with the Turkes, at the mouth of the Boiano. The Turkes are with great losse repu^ed from the walles of Scutarie. TRIADAN GRI^TI being infected with the ^adayre of the Boyano dieth at Catharra. The king of Hungarie at the same time f^ghteth often with good successe against the Turkes. The siege of Scutarie is raised. ANTONIO LAVRETANO, who had defended Scutarie, being made  Generall of the Gallies, doth by his ^ppartune arriuall, first, keepe Lepanto, and afterwards Lemnos. The Venetians are vanquished, and receiue a great utter throw in (...) before Croya, and within ^ while after, another in Italie neere ^o the Riuer Lizonza, where they loose their Cauallerie. The Turkes put all the countrey of Friull to fire and sword. Scutarie is againe besieged by the Turkes more fiercely than it had beene foure yeares before. The Turkes make incursions into Italie. Peace is made with OTTOMAN during the siege of Scutarie; Yet scarce obserued in the Islands, about controuer sie for the Garrison of Xant. Peace being made with the Turke, warre is continued for a time in Tuscanie in the behalfe of the Florentines.

THE Isle of Cyprus being afterward entangled in new broyles, did in the middest of winter call the Venetian to heraide. The familie of the Goth^lans was verie powerfull in that Island, for king (...) hauing in a manner thrust all the nobility forth the country together with his sister Charlotta, had mightily enriched these men, and seated them in the chiefest places of his kingdome. In former times they had giuen themselues to piracie, and liued onely by theft. But  the king being dead, and they by his bountie possessing goodly inheritances were neuerthelesse desirous to embroyle the state of the Prouince. Of their faction there was a Cypriot Bishop, a man esteemed by his countri^en no lesse ingenious than fortunate. At the kings death, he was his Ambassador with King Ferdinand. This Bishop determined to

inuade the Realme by tyrannie, and the better to effect his purpose, he perswaded King Ferdinand to pursue by his meanes the marriage betwixt his bastard sonne, and the bastard daughter of the late King Iames gotten on a concubine. And for speedie conclusion of the businesse, the Bishop with two Gallies returned to Cyprus, with one of King Ferdinands trustiest Councellers.
Mocenigo who lay at Modon hauing intelligen^e of the arriuall of the kings Gallies, began to suspect that they were not sent thither but vpon some great occasion, whereupon he presently dispatched Coriolan Cepio, and Pietro Tolmiere the Dalmamatian with two Gallies into Cyprus, and commanded them to enquire of the Queene, whether those of the Island practized any innouation, and if the feared any  treacherie, boldly to send him word what she would haue him to doe, who would be readie to come to her with the whole fleete vpon any occasion. After their departure Mocenigo had intelligence by letters from the Gouernour of Candie, that theMocenigo is aduertized of the enemies purpose. Cypriots had an intent to rebell, and that it was to be feared, that vnlesse their designes were broken by the sodaine arriuall of the Venetian fleet in Cyprus, that the state of the Island would be greatly endangered. The Generall being moued by these letters, did speedily send Victor Souranza with eight Gallies into Cyprus, who comming to Candie before that the two Gallies which were first sent, were gone from thence, Souranza commanded Coriolan to pursue his iourney, and told him, that he with the rest of the Gallies would follow after.
Whilest the Venetians were on their way, the Cypriots hauing commplotted with their Bishop, did in the night come forth of their houses armed, and s^ue Polizappa of Cyprus, and the Queenes Phisitian, who being (...) with that sodaine rumour ranne to his chamber. Andrea Cornari at the first noise fled to the Castle, where the Captaine refusing to giue him entrance, he hid himselfe betwixt the two walles, but being discouered, and comming forth vpon the conspiratorsAndrea Cornari murthered. words, that he should haue no harme, he was presently by them murdered together with Marco Bembo his Nephew, sonne to his sister. They left their bodies naked in the place. These murthers being committed, they ranne with the selfe same furie to the Venetian Magistrates house, who remained in the Island to doe iustice, to his  conntreymen. Nicolao Pascali was then Magistrate: they told h^m that the souldiers had slaine Cornari, because he would not giue them their pay, and that they would not haue that nights murther committed through the couetousnesse of one man to be by the Venetians imputed to them, who protested still to continue loyall to the Queene and the Venetians, intreating him to write to the Venetian Generall, that Cornari had beene slaine by his owne fault for defrauding the souldiers of their pay: they told him besides, that they would send messengers to the Prince and Senate to assure them of the Islanders loyaltie towards the Queeene and her sonne, and of their friendship towards the Venetians.
Although Pascali knew all this to be false, he made shew neuerthelesse to beleeue  them, and promised them to write to Mocenigo. They in the meane time entring into the Pallace, betrothed the kings bastard daughter of sixe yeares old to king Ferdinands bastard. They intituled him Prince of Galilee (wherewith the successors in the Kingdome were wont to be honoured,) and assigned him diuers lands and signori^s for her dowrie. These things being done, they presently in a Galley sent away King Ferdinands counseller, who came th^ther with the Bishop, to acquaint the King his master what had past. They sent messengers likewise to Venice to satisfie the Senators with words, and to sweeten the bitternesse of (...) death, or if they could not appease them, yet at least in some sort to defe^ the warre which the Venetians might make vpon them, before their forces could be vnited. They  compelled the Queene to write to Mocenigo that Cornari her vncle had beene slain^ by the souldiers for his couetousnesse; that with her sonne she freely gouerned the kingd^me: that all the Cypriots were dutifull and loyall: all which the poore Princesse being enuironed with traitors durst not refuse to write.
That done, they beganne to strengthen their faction, and manned the Castles and strong places with men at their owne deuotion, and sharers in the conspiracie.
In the meane time Cariolan arriued, who seeming to be ignorant of matters past,The Prouidator commeth to the Island. told the Queene that the Venetians had receiued aduertizement, that the king of Egypt had promised the Realme of Cyprus to Charlotta, and therefore the Generall had sent him thither to confirme her and the Cypriots likewise: That Souzanza the Prouidator would shortly be there with eight Gallies, and that the Generall would follow him with the rest of the Fleete: That the Venetians determined to defend her selfe, her sonne, and kingdome against all forraine attempts. These news did comfort the Queene and her followers; and on the contrary, the Conspirators  beganne to feare. Foure dayes after, the Prouidator arriued. At his landing two of the Conspiratours came to him vpon his word; they entering into discourse of what had happened, imputing the cause of Cornares death to his only couetousnesse, promised to continue loyall and obedient, and to account nothing so deere to them as the Venetians friendship. Souranza although he knew the Islanders actions not to be answerable to their words, did neuerthelesse labour to quiet all matters, and promised them, that by surrendring to the Queene the forts and reuenew of the kingdome, they should not only be accounted friends, but inward friends to the Venetians. As for Cornares death, it concerned one priuate man alone, and not the common-wealth: He told them that they might depart and shew Souranza his proposition to the conspirators. by those meanes which he had propounded to them, what loue they did beare towards the Venetians. They promised to accomplish the Prouidators demaund. But procrastinating the performance, all their promises were found deceipts.
Then did Souranza write both to the Generall and Senate, that the Queene and her sonne were by the conspiracie of some traitors straitly kept, and that vnlesse some speedie remedie were vsed, it was ^o be feared that shee would shortly loose both the kingdome and the name royall.
In the meane time the Conspirators messengers being come to Mocenigo were roughly entreated, and sent backe without any hope of peace: Then being prouoked by the present daunger, although hee knew that Triadin Gritti was appointed  his successor, and foreseeing how daungerous it was to temporize in a businesse of so great importaunce, hee made a stay of seauen Gallies that were going in trade ofMoceniga^s diligence to relieue Cyprus. marchandize to Alexandria, and sent those of Alexandria to Candie, and them of Syria to Naples, that they might returne to him loaden with horsemen of Morea, and the other with Candiots. He commaunded the Magistrates of the Island to loade as many ships as they could find with victualls, and to send them to Cyprus. And himselfe on the other side hauing assembled all the souldiers of the neighbour garrisons, and embarking them in the vessells, which hee had made readie in the Island, and in other places of Greece, hee sailed towards Rhodes. By the way he receiued Letters from Souranza the Prouidator which aduertized him of the manifest  rebellion and conspiracie of the Islanders. These newes caused him to make haste. Beeing come to Rhodes, and expecting the troupes which hee had sent for, hee had intelligence by later Letters, how that the Conspirators hauing notice of his great warrelike preparations, together with his mightie fleete, were gone foorth of the Realme, and thereby all matters quieted: yet, the Queenes letters,The conspirators flie from C^prus. though they imported the same, intreated him, if his iourney might not preiudice the Common-wealth, to come into the Island, because that diuers partakers in the conspiracie were there, and did disquiet the peace of the Countrey, and that shee was well assured vnlesse the authoritie of some of them were abated, the Realme would ere long be greatly endaungered. Mocenigo being moued by these Letters, left Rhodes, and within a while after arriued in Cyprus.
This Island is seated vpon sundry seas: on the West side it is watered with theThe description of the Isle of Cyprus. sea of Pamphilia, towards the South with that of Egypt, towards the East with the Syrian, and on the North with that of Cilicia. It was in old time called Achamante.

Philonides saith, That it was tearmed Cerasa: Xenagoras, Aspelia, Amathusa, and Machare: Astimones, Chritona and Colinnia. There were in it in former time^ fifteene goodly Cities, but at this day there are very few. Tymostenes writes, That it is in circuit foure hundred and nine and twentie thousand paces, and Isidorus mentioneth but three hundred seuentie fiue thousand: and in length from the East to the West, betwixt the Promontories of Dinareta and Achamante, Artemidorus faith, an hundred sixtie two thousand, and Timostenes two hundred thousand. Damastus was deceiued to take the length thereof from the North to the South. Cyprus is inferior to none other Island whatsoeuer: it aboundeth in wine and oyle, it hath corne sufficient, it produceth mettals, and diuers other necessaries; in which  respect it is no lesse frequented by marchants, than for those other commodities which they transport to Syria.
The Venetian after his arriuall landed all his troops at Famagosta, and embattailed them, as if he intended to haue mustered them in S. Nicholas market-place, beneath the Royall Palace, in the sight of the Queene and the Cypriots, who were greatly terrified therewith. His musters being ended, he did on a suddaine dismisse the Gallies which went for traffique, and all the rest likewise which he had brought from the neighbour Islands, together with all the Cauallerie: he onely retained withMocenigo at his arriuall in Cyprus punisheth those that were guiltie of Cornares death. him the Candiot Archers, and the old Armie. Then he mand the forts with naturall Venetians. He did afterwards make a diligent enquirie of Cornares death, and  those that were attainted and conuicted of the crime, he punished with death, and banished such as were suspected of it. Those who in that commotion had continued loyall, were recompenced with the conspirators goods. The affaires of Cyprus being thus quieted, he receiued letters from Prince Marcello, and a Decree from theMocenigo is chosen Gouernour of Cyprus. Senate, whereby he was made Gouernour of Cyprus: where although he had carefully prouided for whatsoeuer was necessarie for the peace of the Island, and that all matters there were quiet, the publike Decree did neuerthelesse enforce him to remaine there for the defence of the Island.
In the meane time Giacomo Marcello, Prouidator to the new Generall, arriued in the Prouince, vnto whom at his comming into Cyprus Mocenigo surrendred tenne  Gallies, that with them he might defend the Islands of the Egean sea, till Triadans arriuall: but being certified by letters, that Triadan was come into Greece, and perceiuing the Realme of Cyprus to be quiet, leauing Souranza the Prouidator (who likewise by the Senates Decree was appointed to commaund the foot forces in the Island) with tenne Gallies for the defence of the Kingdome, he tooke leaue of the Queene, and entreated her to feare nothing, telling her, that the Venetian forces should be euer readie for the preseruation of her State. She gaue him a Targuet curiously wrought, and a purple banner in consideration of his braue exploits; then departing from the Island with the rest of the Fleet, he went first to Rhodes, fromThe Turkes besiege Scutari. thence to Candie, and lastly to Modon. Thither newes was brought him, how that  the enemie with great forces lay before the Citie of Scutari.
This Citie standeth in that part of Dalmatia, which being possessed by the Epirots, was by the modernes tearmed Albania by a particular name: it is seated on an hanging hill, and in some places the accesse to it is very difficult. On the West sideThe situation of Scutari. is a lake, in circuit fourescore thousand paces, though Authors make no mention of it. The inhabitants call it the lake of Scutari, out of which issueth a nauigable Riuer called Boyano. Plinie saith, That in former time the Riuer Drina did runne on the East side thereof, very neere to the Citie walls, where at this day the ruines of the bridge are to be seene: now the Riuer changing her course, it runnes neere to the Island, and deliuers it selfe by two channels to the sea, ten myles from Boyano. The champaine countrey, which lieth betwixt these two Riuers, and the fields neere adioyning, are so fruitfull, as seed being cast vpon the ground without any tillage, giue a wonderfull encrease; and they are enforced to driue their cattell forth of the pastures, for feare they should ouerfeed themselues. Alongst the sea coast are

goodly woods, wherewith they build shippes.
Ottoman, who aspired to the Empire of Italie, being allured by these commodities, resolued to attempt Scutari, the chiefe Citie of that Prouince, hoping by taking thereof, with ease to become master of the rest: hee committed the charge of theSoliman the Eu^ Generall of the Turks armie before Scutari. siege to Soliman the Eunuch, whom he made Gouernor of the Prouinces of Europe in his stead, who the yeare before was slaine in the Persian warre. And besides his other forces, he gaue him eight thousand Ianizaries of his owne guard, with an hundred Canoniers. He, hauing assembled great forces forth of all Prouinces subiect to Mahomet, had fourescore thousand men in his armie. The Citie being besieged, he made a bridge ouer the riuer Boyano, the guard wherof he committed to Alibeg,The number of the Turk^sh armie. with his fierce troopes of Tribulls. Then he caused foure peeces of ordnance of a wonderfull bignesse to be planted neere the walls, to make a breach: the munition belonging to those peeces did load foure hundred Camels. Hee did besides cause twelue other smaller peeces to be planted to batter the houses of the towne. So soone as Mocenigo had intelligence of the siege of Scutary, he went to Corfu, where he receiued letters from the Prince, and a commandement from the Senate, to be carefull of the defence of Scutari, and of the sea-coast of Albania. Therefore he presently passed ouer into the firm land, where at the mouth of the Boyano he met with Triadin Gritti his successor, and Lodouico Bembo the Prouidator. Then, although he might haue commaunded alone, yet being in no sort ambitious, he resolued to doe  nothing without their common consent. First of all then they sent Leonardo Bolda with foure Gallies to Catharra, and commaunded him to goe to Iohn Cernouich, whoThe venetian Captaines ^are for the reliefe of Scutari. commaunded the Sclauonians, neighbours to the Lake, and to entreat him from them, that he would (as became a faithfull associate) leuie forces from all parts, in some sort to relieue Scutari, if it were possible: That Leonardos selfe, with his vessels appointed for that purpose, should together with Ceruouich vse meanes to put some supplies into the towne by water. They did afterwards send fiue Gallies by the Riuer Drinon for the guard of the Island. The Citie is seated on a plaine, and is in no sort strong by Art or Nature. The riuer Drinon falling by two channells into the sea makes an Island, whither all the Country people of that Prouince which dwelt  in the Villages were retired with their wiues and children vpon the enemies comming.
Now for the defence of this Island, the Venetian Generalls sent diuers armed vessells beside the Gallies. They did moreouer assure Durazzo, with foure gallies, and certaine troupes of Albanian horse.
This cittie was in former time called Epidamnum, by the Founders name: hisFrom whence Dirrachium took the name. Nephew sonne to his daughter, added the Hauen to the Cittie, and would haue it to be called Dirrachium after his owne name. He lost his sonne Ionius in the war against his bretheren vnder the conduct of Hercules, who slew him by misfortune, and threw him into the neighbour Sea, of whom it afterward took the name. This  is the opinion of the Greeke Authors. The Latines do not reckon the place to be of such antiquity, and affirme that the Romains named it Dyrrachium, in sted of Epidamnum, because that name seemed to presage some misfortune to such as went thither. It was in old time a very famous cittie, and much renowmed during the ciuill warres of the Romans. For Pompey in that place made all his warrelike preparations against Caesar; but it is now desolate and vninhabited. The Venetians kept it for the commodiousnesse of the hauen. They did afterwards place garrisons in Buda,* Antiuari, and Olchina, which in former times, according to Plinie, was called Colchina, founded by the Colchians, who pursuing Medea, entred into the Adriatticke sea and Ionian seas. Some Authors woorthie of credit affirme, That the Inhabitants of that place doe yet retaine the barbarous crueltie of their Ancestours, and that among all the Inhabitants of that coast, they are most vnciuill to strangers.
The Venetian Generalls went and encamped with the rest of the armie at Saint

Sergius Church in view of the Inhabitants. This place is fiue miles from Scutari, and foureteene from the Sea. The Gallies could not saile vp the Riuer beyond the Church, by reason of the shallownesse of the water. From thence the fleete gaue signes of encouragement morning and euening to the Cittie, by making fires. TheThe Turkes designe. riuer Boyano diuides it selfe into two very narrow channels beneath the Temple Eschella eight miles from the Armie. The Turkes went about to embarre those streights with yron chaines and piles, to shut in the Venetian Gallies; which would haue mightily endaungered the Venetians, had not a fugitiue giuen them notice thereof in time; whereat they being somewhat troubled, did sodainely saile in order of battell to seize vpon the mouth of the Riuer. The enemie vpon the gallies  arriuall being landed was encamped vpon the shoare in a close battallion. The fightThe venetians preuaile against the Turkes. being begunne, the Turkes did extreamely afflict the Venetians with their arrows, and they them with their ordnance, howbeit in the end the enemy was enforced to quit the place with the losse of fiue hundred of his men.
The victorious Venetians hauing left foure gallies for the defence of the place, returned to their campe neere the Temple. Many that were present at this exploit affirme that this fight against the Turkes at the entry of the riuer Boyano hapned vnder the conduct of Triadin before Mocenigo his arriuall. But whilst this was done vpon the Riuer, the Turkes did continually with the cannon batter the city walls, and ouerthrew the houses. Antonio Lauretano, a valiant gentleman commaunded  in the city, and was Prouidator in the Prouince, who, as one well aduised, was carefull of all matters, and so soone as hee saw the walls to be beaten downe, he did repaire them with a countermure.
The siege which beganne in the end of Maie, had continued many daies, when Lauretano sent a boy through the enemies campe to let the Venetian Generalls vnderstand, That though himselfe and fellowes were bold and resolute to endure a long siege, yet because the euents of warre are still vncertaine, they requested them to thinke vpon some meanes to relieue the Citty. Triadin and Mocenigo did their best to effect that which Lauretano craued, by the meanes of Leonardo Bolda, and Iohn Cernouich: who hauing leuied foot companies and prepared a strong fleet vpon  the Lake (for the enemie had Garrisons in all places) comming to stroakes with the enemies, returned without performance. And by reason that the Countrey was couered with enemies, and the Riuer bankes by which they were to passe to Scutari, were manned with Turkes, they had neede of greater forces, and especially of horse, if they intended, maugre the enemies, to come to the cittie; whereupon the Generalls hoping that the situation of the place would defend the cittie, together with the Prouidators valour, and the townesmens constancie, they gaue ouer all further attempts for that time.
Triadin in the meane time, with Bembo the Prouidator, by reason of the fennish aire fell sicke; and not they alone, but the whole fleete in a maner languished. They went to Catharra to recouer their health. Mocenigo (although hee were crazie) resolued, with Maripietro the Prouidator, to tarrie till the end of the siege.
The Turke on the other side, the cittie walls being beaten downe, attempted sometimes by menaces, and afterwards by intreaties, to induce Lauretano to yeelde. But his answere not sorting to the Turkes expectation, he caused certaine enginesThe manner of the Turkes assault. to be brought neere to the walls, with which his souldiers being protected, might with more safetie approach the rampires. Afterwards hee commaunded his Ianissaries, who were armed with swords and targets to second them. Moreouer, he caused great numbers of Archers to gall those that were on the wals. His battaillions being thus ordered, he did by day-breake march to the assault.
Those of Scutarie likewise prepared for defence, They had great store of wildfier,The Scutarians prepare for defence: which at the assault they abundantly bestowed vpon the enemies. They had besides laide store of great stones vpon the Rampiers, and did much hurt with their Murtherers. The Turks with great cries according to their manner, enuironed the

Citie, and attempted to enter at the breach. The besieged without any feare at all, did brauely repulse them with shot and wild-fier, which they could not escape, and the huge stones being throwne downe vpon them, made a great slaughter. But the Turks like brute beasts marching vpon the dead bodies, did fearelessely assaile the Rampiers. Those of Scutarie on the contrarie, did beat them thence with pikes and shot. Lauretano in the meane time went vp and downe incouraging his soldiors, furnishing them with necessaries, and planting fresh men in their steeds that were hurt and wearied. Soliman on the other side was not idle, but with an yron mace did driue his slow souldiors forward to the assault. At the last, the Turks beingThe Turks retyre from the assault. tyred and mastered by the defendants valour, retyred. Those of Scutarie being  accompanied with the soldiors of the garrison, made a furious salley vpon them in their retreat, and slew them on heaps vpon the dead bodies of their fellowes, and then being loden with the enemies spoiles, and militarie enseigns, they returned triumphant to the Citie.
Cepio, who hath curiously written the occurrents of this warr^, saith, That three thousand Turks were slaine at this assault, and the number of those that were hurt, did far exceed it: the greatest part of whom died soone after. Those of Scutarie say, That, at the assaults, and other incounters during the siege, sixteene thousand Turks were slaine and perished.
All things succeeding prosperously at Scutarie, Mocenigo thought good to prouide  for his owne health. For it was reported, that Lodouico Bembo died at Catharra, and that Triadan drew towards his end. And fearing that the like might befall himselfe, he went to Ragusa to take physicke. Ragusa is a Cittie in Dalmatia, builded in times past by the Epidaures, in a more happie seat, hauing their owne Countrie by the Goaths formerly ruined. It is a free Cittie, and adorned with goodRagusa a free Citie. lawes and customes. Whilest Mocenigo remained at Raguza, Soliman still held Scutarie straitly besieged, and was fully resolued not to haue risen from before it, till he should constraine them to yeeld either by force or famine, had not the warlike preparations of Mathias king of Hungarie enforced his dislodgement.
The Venetians from the first time of their warre with Ottoman, had made a Mathias king of Hungarie (...) great soldior. league with that martiall king, and had promised to giue him a yearely pension. Francisco Venieri was sent thither Ambassadour at the beginning, to procure him to make warre with the Turks: Giouanni Hemo followed him. During the time of his ambassage, he fought fortunately twice with Ali Bey vpon the frontiers of Hungaria: Francisco died, and Francisco Iustiniano succeeded Hemo. At the last the Senate, hauing intelligence of the siege of Scutarie, sent Sebastian Badoario to the king with a great summe of gold. At his arriuall, he obtained such interest in the King, not so much for his gold he brought with him, as for his good carriage and discretion, as procuring him presently to take Armes, he did in such sort afright Ottoman, as he presently wrote to the Eunuch to raise his siege from before Scutarie, and to returne  home. Badoario by the Senats appointment tarried with the king, and continued with him more than two yeares. During which time the Hungarian performed many notable exploits vpon the Turks: For besides sixe battails wherein he ouerthrew them, he tooke Subassa, a verie strong towne, from Ottoman, together with a thousand of his Ianisaries.
Besides, at that time when warre was denounced to Stephen the Vaiuode, andThe Italian Princes send a present to Mathias king of Hungarie. that the Turks had besieged Zuzan, a verie famous Cittie, so soone as he vnderstood that the Hungarian was comming thither, he left his ordnance and bagage behind him, and basely fled from them: whereby it came to passe, that the Commonwealth being supported by the protection of so great a Prince, did for a time receiue no losse  by the enemie. In regard whereof, certaine Princes and Commonwealths of Italie, did at the Venetians pursute, send an hundred thousand Crownes to him into Hungarie, by the Bishop of Arieta and Antonio Vitturi, who succeeded Badoario.
Soliman being called home by Ottoman, did foorthwith mount his Artillerie,

and raised his Campe, hauing besieged the Cittie almost three moneths, and marched into Macedonia. This report is more credible than that which saith, That he discamped for feare of the great preparations which were made against him in Italie. Those of Scutarie (of whom two thousand died in the siege) were reducedThe siege raised from before Scutarie. to such scarcitie of water, as the want thereof would haue enforced them to haue yeelded, if he had maintained his siege but a while longer. Whereupon so soone as the enemy was dislodged, they ran with such earnestnesse to the riuer, and dranke so excessiuely of the water, which had a long time been kept from them, as many of them surfeted, and died sodainly. Mocenigo being aduertised of the enemies dep^rture, and being not able to recouer his health at Ragusa, went to Venice. Within  a while after, Triadin the Generall of the Armie, a man of foure score yeares, died ^r Catharra* Stefano Maripietro whom Mocenigo had left with the Fleet at St. Ser^ Church, hauing after the siege commanded all the Captains of Galleis, soldiors, and marriners, who in a manner were all sicke, by reason of the fenny aire of the Boyano, to remoue to a wholsomer aire, himselfe being verie sicke also, retyred to Venice.
The report of the enemies discamping being brought to Venice before Maripietro his arriuall, they did highly reioice the whole Cittie, which whilest the siege lasted, had been greatly afflicted with care. All men extolled Laure^ano, and a decree was made, that the Commonwealth should send him presents. The Captains of  the garrisons likewise were much esteemed, but especially the loyaltie of the Inhabitants, and their constancie in defending their Cittie, and rewards were appointed for either of them: Then they went to Church to giue thanks to God, for that the Commonwealth had been freed from so dangerous a warre. Great Rewards were likewise giuen to Mocenigo, who after the death of Prince Marcello, which deceased about the beginning of Winter, was by the generall consent of the whole Senat declared Prince. Marcello gouerned one yeare and three moneths, and was honorably buried in the Chartreux.



 PIETRO MOCENIGO, the 70. Duke of Venice.





ANtonio Lauretano, who for that he had brauelie defended Scutarie, was made Generall of the Gallies, did about the Spring time of the same yeare, tooke a Geneuois Argozie betwixt Cyprus and Sicilia, loden with rich Turkish marchandize, and sunke it: sixteene Gallies had fought with her, and could not take it, till Georgio Dragone arriued

with a Venetian Argozie, and then it yeelded, her mast being struck ouerboord with a Cannon shot.
Not long after, Solyman who the yeere before had besieged Scutari, did with thirtieSolyman besiegeth Lepanto. thousand Turkes besiege the cittie of Naupactum, called at this day Lepanto, seated on the Corinthian Gulph, and in times past amongest the citties of Aetolia, next to Calidonia, verie famous, but at this day it is not much inhabited, and her walls are in a manner ruined. Towards the North on the toppe of an hill it hath a castle: This fort was valiantly defended, as well by reason of the trenches and rampires, as by the magnanimitie of those within it: For Lauretano came thither with a mighty fleet before the Turkes arriued. The enemies on all sides made a great batterie. The souldiers of the Armie and fiue hundred horse that were in the Tower, did not onely defend the Rampires, but did make daily incursions vpon the enemies as occasion was offered: this siege continued foure moneths. But the enemie being out of hope to take it, (for besides the strong garrison within it, the Venetian fleete lay in the Hauen, which did aboundantly furnish the besieged with victualls men, and munition) and tyred with that warre, raised his campe.The Turke besiegeth the ^sle of L^mnos.
This is all which the enemie attempted by land that Summer. But at Sea Ottomans fleete after it departed from Lepanto, went to the Isle of Lemnos, where, hauing besieged the cittie of Coccina, and with their ordnance beaten downe a great part of the walls, the enemie vndoubtedly would haue taken it, had not Lauretano come in time to the reliefe of the besieged, who so soone as he had intelligence that the enemie had besieged Lemnos, left the Prouidator with foure Gallies at Lepanto, and sailed with the rest of the fleete to Psara a desart Island very neere to Lemnos. He durst not on a sodaine assaile the enemie, by reason that his souldiers wereThe Turkes leaue Lemnos. in a manner all sicke. But the enemie interpreting his delay in an other sence, as though the Venetian tarried there, but till all things were in readines for the battel, did put to Sea, and sailed thence. Then did Lauretano go to the Island. The Inhabitants and souldiers of the garrison were highly commended.
It is reported, that a young Maide of the Island was presented to him that had  fought valiantly, and by whose meanes (as it was reported) the citty had beeneThe great valor of a yong maid. chiefly defended. This Maid whose name was Muralla, her father being slaine fighting valiantly at the Coccine Gate, ranne to him and tooke vp his sword and target, where alone she withstoode for a time the Turkes assault, who had almost made themselues Masters of the Gate, and then being assisted by her Countrymen, they repulsed the enemie with great slaughter to their shippes: in regard whereof the Generall gaue her double pay, and the Prouidators with all the Captaines of the Gallies gaue her crownes a peece: The Generall bid her make choice among all those braue Captaines which shee would haue to be her husband, and promised her that the common-wealth should giue her a dowry. She gaue him many thanks, and answered, That for her part she did not altogether respect the valour of a man but his wisedome and discretion, and that she would neuer marrie before shee had exactly knowne the disposition of him that should be her husband. By this Maidens discretion and vertue (if it be lawfull to iudge of the rest) I do affirme that the women of Lemnos do not at this day degenerate either in fortitude or valour from that excellent Hipsiphile of old times, and from the rest, who with her did commaund that Island, and that the common Prouerb is most true, How that the fortune of places is very often changed, but not the manners and behauiour of the Inhabitants.
This is all that was done by land and sea during that Summer; after which the Armies went to Garrison. About the Spring time of the yeere following, vpon a  rumour that was spred, how that King Ferdinand determined to inuade the Isle of Cyprus* Iohn, of the illustrious familie of the Georges was sent thither with fiue gallies, and many shippes of burthen, but this report being found to be idle, vanished. Lauretano in the meane time tooke speciall care for the defence of the sea-coasts of

Morea with the Isles neere adiacent. We do not find that the same Summer or the next that insued it, till peace was made with the Turke, which hapned foure yeres after, any memorable matter was done in the Islands. Prince Mocenigo, the second moneth of his gouernement died, and was buried in the Church of the Twinnes, where at this day his sumptuous monument is to be seene, enriched with the spoils of Asia. Andrea Vendramino was chosen in his place.







 ANDREA VENDRAMINO, the 71. Duke of Uenice.





THE Summer following, which was the third after the siege of Scutari, Croia in Albania was besieged by the Turke. Eight thousand of them besieged it at the Spring time, and continued there all that yeere and more: this city is seated on an high mountaine which the inhabitants call Croiana, and there are deeper Precipices round about it, wherby for a time all the enemies attempts were in vaine, and longer wouldThe Turke besiegeth Croia. haue beene vnprofitable, had not famine afflicted them.
The first Summer of the siege was already spent, and a great part of the Autumne, when two thousand Venetians came into the Island, to relieue the afflicted Croians: Among these were fiue hundred light-horse commaunded by Nicolas Ducan the Albanese, a man famous among his Countrymen. The Captaines of the  Italian Cauallery were Antonioatio Docia, and Lodouico Tifernato: Leon of Dalmatia, and Carlino commaunded the chiefe troups of foote. These men on the sixt of December marched in a square battallion against the Turkes, who were encamped in a plaine which the Inhabitants call Tyranna foure miles from Croya. Being come to strokes, the enemie presuming on the swiftnesse of his horse, made an attempt to disorder the Venetian Armie. The Venetian footemen on the contrary fighting at times vpon occasion forth of their ranckes, after that they had repulsed the enemie with losse, retired into the close battallion of their horsemen, fearing to be cut offThe Turkes are put to warre befor^ Croia. from their troupes. The fight had continued from the sixt houre of the day till Euening when on a sodaine the Turkes turned their backes, and betooke themselues  as vanquished to open flight. The victorious Venetians pursued them to their very campe, the which being taken, and full of riches, the Venetian fell to pillage, verie few pursuing the victory. Those of the city presently sallied forth and tooke two forts which the enimies had built not far from the city, which they presently razed.
But the ioy for this victorie continued not long: For whilest that Contareni the Prouidator, and the other Captaines were consulting, whether it were best to remaine that night in the enemies campe, or to returne backe to their quarter, the enemies returned with great cries vpon the Venetians, and presently enuironed those of the formost rankes. Then a cruell fight began. The Albanese cauallerie, so soone as it perceiued the foot troups to be enclosed, fled. The Italian cauallerie did the like. The Turks by reason it was Moonlight, chaced and slew them vp and down the plain,The venetians are defeated. and followed the execution as far as the riuer Lamissa. The enemie that day and the night following made a great slaughter, but the trechery of the Albaneses did them more hurt, who to the number of eight thousand horse stood all day long in order  of battaile and stirred not, as spectators of the fight: And when they perceiued the Venetians to haue the worst, they likewise fell vpon them in the wood, and along the riuers side, in as vile manner as the Turkes. Mare then a thousand Venetians were slaine in that flight, and among them Francisco Contareni the Prouidator with diuerse Captaines. The bickering was no lesse bloudie to the enemies: for so long as the Venetians battallion stood firme and vnbroken, they slew great numbers of them.
The newes of this losse was grieuous to the Citie, but that which they within a while after receiued in Italie, did much more afflict them. The Venetians after the first incursions of the Turkes into Italie had stopt vp with strong Rampi^es and Causies all places that were footdable betwixt the bridge Gorician and the marshes  of Aquileia (the riuer Lizonza excepted) and builded a Fort vpon the ancient bankeThe venetians fortifications against the enemies incursions. of the riuer not farre from the new channell. They had imployed thousands of Pioners in this worke, who were commanded by Citadino Fratrinas a famous Ingenere. And they did not onely make Rampiers, but likewise neere to the marshes, where the woods were verie thicke, they cut downe diuers great trees, binding them so fast together as they could not be separated, and there left them, and on the champaine they laid earthen turfes of seuen foot broad all along, and in them they did set branches of willow, and other small trees apt to take root, then vpon them they laid other rankes of turfes, so as thereby the fortification was drawne forth to the verie end towards those places, by which the enemies were wont to passe: this fortification  being made with small towers and battlements, did a farre off shew like a towne. And where the riuer might easily be forded, they built two Fortes enuironed with strong Rampiers and deepe Trenches, the one named Gradis^an, and the other Foglian, by the names of the two townes that are on either side of them. This last after the ouerthrow giuen vpon the Riuer bankes was abandoned as a desert place, but the other is till this day kept by a strong Garrison, and for the most part is enclosed with walles, and by meanes of Francisco Trono sent thither to that end is reduced into the forme of a strong towne. This worke was in length more than an hundred furlongs. But these fortifications are almost ruined, and especially where the matter was but sand, which the continuall raines haue easily washed away. There was besides, a little mount in forme of a Castle, neere to the bridge ouer the riuer hard by Goricia, and at first certaine foote companies were sent thither to guard it. Then they built two Castles within a mile of each other fortified with strong Rampiers, and in it three thousand horse, with certaine foot companies, but the infanterie was not proportionable to the horse. By these meanes the foordsand passages which before lay open to the enemie, were now stopt vp, by Rampiers which could not be forced, which being strongly garrisoned, kept out the enemie that way from entring into Italie, so as the Commonwealth thereby was freed from all danger and feare.The Turks co^e to the banks of the riuer Lizonza.
But by how much their securitie seemed great, by so much more was the Prouince  afflicted with a terrible ouerthrow. For at such time as they least doubted of the enemies arriuall, they perceiued them on a sodaine to lie encamped with great forces vpon the farther side of the riuer Lizonza. Those which were in the Armie, doe not consent about their number, for some affirme them to be tenne thousand,

others make the number greater, and other-somelesse. There was a great clamour in the two Forts when they first descried them, and presently the alarme was giuen, and had not night preuented them, the fight would haue begun on both sides. The Venetian troupes that were in the two Forts kept watch all night long, the horsemen were commanded to let their horse stand bridled, and themselues to be readie armed. Ieronimo Nouello was their Captaine, a man from his youth bred vp in the warres, and had beene employed with great command. There were likewise diuers noble persons, as Giouanni Antonio Gaudolisca, with his sonne Anastasio of Romagnia, Hercole Maluecia, Giacomo Picinino sonne to that great Captaine Picinino, Giacomo Badoario, Philippo Nefalone, Georgio Galesia, Giouanni Clericato of Vincenza, with  diuers others that held an honourable ranke in the Armie. They consulted together that night, whether it were best to fight with the enemie, or onely to defend their owne Forts. For it was likely that those Forts being defended the enemie durstThe venetian Captaines resolution more valiant than discreet. not go farre forward, for feare least all meanes of returne should be taken from him: yet at last they made a more valiant than a discreet resolution, which was to oppose themselues against the enemies which way soeuer they should passe. They diuided their Cauallerie into three troupes, and ouer euerie troupe appointed a Captaine.
But the Turke in the meane time intending to vse policie as well as force, comming to the opposite shoare did about sun-set rome vp and downe with his horse: men, and at last without any difficultie seized on the Fort neere to the bridge, someThe Turks toke the Fort neere to the bridge. of the souldiers retired to the bridge, resoluing to breake both the ends, and to defend themselues in the middest; but being on a sodaine ouerwhelmed with great showers of darts and arrowes, they were beaten into the riuer. This place was foure miles from the campe, so that they had no newes of the taking of the Fort till it was late in the night, and then they hardly beleeued it. Marbeg (for so was the Turkish Generall named) hauing taken the bridge, did send vp and downe to discouer some fit place for an ambuscado, and finding one not farre from thence, he commanded a thousand choice horse, to passe ouer the riuer about midnight at a Ford, and to lie in ambush till a signal were giuen them to breake out, then to fall on a sodaine  vpon the enemies.
So soone as it was day, the Turke caused a troupe of horse to crosse the riuer, and commanded them to goe as farre as the enemies campe, and to gallop euen to their gates to draw them forth to fight, and then to retire by little and little to the place of ambuscado. But by the way they encountred Ieronimo, and the rest of the Cauallerie which followed him in order of battaile. At first they fought valiantly on both sides, but the Turkes at last did of set purpose giue backe, the Christians pursuing them. Ieronimo his sonne a couragious young man made a fiercer pursuit than any of the rest, and was seconded by a troupe of young gallants who were as forward as himselfe. The politicke old man was displeased with their rashnesse, saying that he was certaine that the Turkes would not so easily flie, but vpon some speciall aduantage. And because they were almost come betwixt two streightes, which were much to be suspected, Nouello sounded the retreat. Then the Turks returning to charge, renewed a fierce fight. Ieronimo sent for the first squadron to come to his reskew. For from the other side of the riuer a companie of men at Armes were alreadie comming to the aide of their fellowes.
In the meane time a great squadron of Turks had gotten vp on the neerest banks of the riuer, where the fight being renewed, the Turks were repulsed as far as Graman (a little streame running a thwart the vallies Pergotanes.) But whilest the Venetians were wholly busied in the victorie the signal being giuen to the Ambuscado  from the top of the mount Licinicia which was on their left hand, the Turkish troupes brake forth, and with fearefull cries fell vpon the Venetians, who were so terrified w^th the enemies sodaine eruption, as one would not haue taken them for those Venetians that euen now fought so valiantly: Neuerthelesse, perceiuing that

the hope of their liues consisted onely in their Armes, they were inforced somewhat to giue backe, that they might fight more at large. But vpon a sodaine, the Turkes gaue them so furious a charge, as being beaten backe into a streight place, they could not haue roome. In the meane time the cruell enemy assailed them inThe venetians a^e (...) by the Turkes. front and in flanke, and made an horrible slaughter of them, so that the first band was in a moment cut in peeces by the enemies great numbers, and were all slaine, sauing a few men of note, who yeelded to the enemie.
The Captaines of the second squadron perceiuing their fellowes to be inclosed  by the enemies, gaue backe by little and little towards the Plaine, but in such amazement, as those in the rereward supposed it rather a flight than retreite. Within a while, they all beganne in disorder and without Ensignes or Captaines to flie as vanquished into the thickets of the neighbour-forrests, the Turkes still pursuing them. Some leauing their horse and armour behind them, escaped into the Mountaines. In this battell died I^ronimo Generall of the Cauallerie his sonne, Giacomo Badoario, Anastasio of Romagnia, and many other noble persons: most of the rest were taken.
The Turkes likewise bought this victorie at a deere rate: Marbeg their Generall was grieuously wounded, and great numbers of souldiers slaine, who being heaped vp all together, were by his commaundement burnt.
The news of this ouerthrow did much terrifie the whole Country, for the people  thought themselues scarce safe euen in their walled cities. The next day about noone a great smoake was seene in the aire in many places neere to Vdina, whereby they knew that the enemie was not farre off, and in an instant, all the farme houses betwixt the Riuers Lizonza and Taillement were seene to burne. It was a lamentable sight to behold so goodly a Countrey filled with cloudes of smoake; butThe Turkes burn the country of (...). most of all, when the night following the whole territorie neere adioyning was on fire. The Turkes spoiled and wasted all places the same night, and by day-breake, vniting themselues, returned merrily home to their campe beyond the riuer Lizonza loden with bootie, and store of prisoners.
The next day they marched with their Ensignes into the field, a dayes iourney  from the Riuer, making shew to depart, but with greater furie than before, they came and incamped on the banckes of Taillement, and crossing the Riuer, they set fire on all places, carrying away more prisoners, and doing more hurt to the poore inhabitants than at the former time: And vpon report that the Venetian forces were comming against them by land and Sea. Marbeg raised his campe, and left Italie. This ouerthrow at Lizonza terrified all men, and affrighted the famous Cittie of Verona. At Venice the fire of the Countrie houses which burnt by night, being seene from the highest Turrets of the Citty, did much amaze the inhabitants. Many said; That it was a great dishonor to the Seigniory, to see ^he pleasantest countrey of the Venetian Territorie, burnt and wasted before their faces by a barbarous  enemie.
This caused them presently to dispatch certaine armed vessells along the Seacoast,The venetian (...) comes too late into (...)* and certaine troupes of horse and foote through the firme land. But they arriued in Friull, when the ennemie was gone. The two Fortes were for a time without Garrison, and some were of opinion to haue them razed. The Senate sent certaine Gentlemen thither to view the state of the Prouince: Dominico Georgio, who in that iourny died at Vdina, was sent thither with Zacharia Barbaro, Giouanni Hemo, and Candian Bellano to take order for that which should be expedient for the Common-wealth, and either to raze them both, or else repaire and fortifie them. And for safe withstanding the enemies incursions it was concluded, at the least to place a  strong garrison of horsemen in one of them. Carolo Montone who the yeare before had beene cassed, was called from Tuscanie, and sent into the Prouince: he placed a strong Garrison in the Fort of Gradiscan, and fortified it with dikes and Rampires. But whilest hee continewed his workes, Prince Vendramino died, the

second yeare of his Principalitie beeing scarce expired. Hee was honourably buried in the Church of the Seruians.




 GIOVANNI MOCENIGO, the 72. Duke of Uenice.








GIouanni Mocenigo brother to Prince Pietro, a man of singular wisedome and iudgement, was by generall consent declared Prince. Such successe had the Venetian affaires in Italie, whilest in Dalmatia the siege of Croia without any intermission lasted one whole yeere.
Ottoman not satisfied heerewith did on the fifth day of Iune withCroia yeelded to the Turkes. greater forces than foure yeares before come and besiege Scutari. At his arriuall  those of Croia oppressed with famine, and terrified with the fearefull report of the Turkes arriuall yeelded. Alibeg a little before his comming had with 15000.They besiege Scutari. men beguirt Scutari: Foure daies after Solyman came thither, and incamped on the east side of it with threescore and tenne thousand men: The Gouernour of Asia followed him with a power not much inferiour, and lodged on the south side. Last of all, the great Turke himselfe came thither in person on the fifteenth day of Iune. Those which were present at this siege, say, That the enemies multitude was such, as on the Mountaines, Plaines, and on all sides of the City as farre as mans sight could discerne, there was nothing to be seene but Tents and Pauillions: The ordnance was forthwith planted to batter the walls. In the Citie there were sixeteene  hundred inhabitants, and two hundred and fiftie women. They had before the enemies arriuall rid the towne of all vnprofitable eaters. Moreouer, there were sixe hundred mercenarie souldiers in it vnder the commaund of Carlino, Antonio Cortone,Antonio Legiero Gouernour of Scutari. Francisco Sanserobar, Micaele Spalatino, and other braue Captaines; Antonio Legiero was Gouernour and Prouidator of the citie.
This small handfull of men was in Scutari when it was the second time besieged by so great a multitude. The Defendants did cheerefully receiue the enemies, for they were now better prouided of all necessaries for a siege than at first. A breach being made, the Turkes gaue two assaults. Both Christians and Turkes vsed the selfe same Armes and Engines as at the former time. But by how much the preparation  for warre was greater than at the first siege, by so much more great was the slaughter on both sides: And the assaults were much more furious by reason of the Emperours presence, than at the beginning vnder the conduct of Solyman. Those of Scutari were twice assaulted in a short space, and in both, the retreit was made with

great slaughter. The enemies shot such store of arrowes, as some worthie of credit report, That a dogge being frighted with the great noise, ranne home to his masters house with eleuen arrowes sticking in his hinder parts.
And because the Reader shall not thinke this to be a ridiculous report, all writers affirme, that for many monethes whilest the siege lasted after the great Turkes departure, the inhabitants vsed no other wood to heat their Ouens, nor to dresse them meat, but fagots made of Turkish arrowes. They write beside, that in the hottest assaults at such time as nothing was heard, but terrible reports of the Canon imitating thunder, and that a thousand sundrie kinds of death were presented to mens view, the inhabitants and souldiers of Scutari fought with such animositie and  resolution, as nothing did lesse terrifie them than the hazard of their liues: so soone as one troupe of enemies were ouerthrowne, others presently marched to the assalt on the dead bodies, and others after them. The dikes were filled with dead carkasses so were the hollow places of the mountaines, and though multitudes were slaine, others stept in their steed. Those in the Citie likewise, contemning death and wounds though they saw their fellowes torne in peeces by the Ordnance, did not for all that cease valiantly to repell and beat backe the enemies from the Rampiers.
In the end Mahomets wilfulnesse being ouercome, and diuers telling him that it was in vaine to hazard so many thousand braue men to such manifest dangers, and tha he had to do with enemies who rather resolued to die that yeeld, he al inraged sounded  the retreat, and afterwards gaue no more assaults, yet still continued his batterie.
But whilest he streightly besieged the Scutarians, he forgat not Italy. For he sent forces to those places, whither, hee thought the Venetians would send least aid, who arriued in Italie the same day as the first assault was giuen to Scutari. They encamped with great noise not farre from the Forts of Lizonza, where embattialing themselues, they sought to draw forth Carolo Montane to fight. But he, remembring the late ouerthrow, durst attempt nothing rashly, but containing his souldiers within the enclosure of his Fort, he kept the Turkes in expectation more than halfe a day. But they perceiuing that they could not draw the Venetians to fight, went from thence, and encamped within foure miles of the Fort Gradiscan, betwixt the  mount Medea and Cremona. But the next day he left Masan, and marched through the deepe bottome directly to the foote of the mountaines. They were in number 30000. who went into Germanie through the precipices of those steepie hils which are in a manner in-accssible to the inhabitants of the countrey. In passing those mountaines, they performed matters scarce credible, and among others I thought good to set downe this one. Being come to the top of those craggie hilles which were impossible to be descended by horse, they tied them with cords, and by engins and deuises which they made, did let them downe into the next bottomes, and from thence into the rest, till they were come downe into the lowest of all. What did they not to get ouer the top of the Alpes downe to the foote of the mountaine Cargna:The Turks great labour and danger, to passe the s^eepy mountain^ where hauing intelligence that the mount Lanca, ouer which they were to passe into Germanie, was guarded by the inhabitants of the Alpes, being come thither, neither that danger, nor difficultie to ascend to it, could in any sort amaze them: who leaning on their targets crept vp those steepis rockes ind despite of their enemies; wherewith they that guarded the passages being afrighted, betooke themselues to flight, and thereby goue occasion to the Turkes to commit great slaughter.
This was the last iourney which the Turks made into Italy against the Venetians. But in the meane time Mahomet still continued the siege of Scutari, battering it continually with his Ordnance: whereupon it lasted till the fifth of September, at which time the Gouernour of Asia tooke Driuaste by force, from whence he carried away fiue hundred of the inhabitants, and bringing them in view of the Scutarians did cut them all in peeces.
Foure daies after, Ottoman being wearied with so long a siege, went from thence

with the greatest part of his forces: The same day he departed from Scutarie he tooke Lissa on the banks of the riuer Drimon, with two Venetian Gallies, wherein finding two hundred rowers and marriners, he sent them to Marbeg, (who with eight thousand Turks continued the siege) to be massacred before Scutarie. This siege lasted eight moneths after, and two forts were built at the mouth of the Boyano with strong Garrisons in them, to keepe all reliefe from the Citie.
In the meane time the Venetian Secretarie began to treat with the enemie concerning peace, which was graunted and concluded about the latter end of Winter, on these conditions: That the Venetian should giue ouer Scutarie to Ottoman,Peace concluded betwixt Ottoman and the Venetians. (with libertie to the Garrison and inhabitants to depart whether they pleased) together  with Tenarus a Promontorie in Laconia, with the Isle of Lemnos; and should pay him yearely 8000. crownes; and that the Venetian Marchants might freelyThe conditions of peace. trafficke on the Pontick seas. Peace being entertained on these conditions, the soldiors, and all the inhabitants came foorth of Scutarie, and in regard of their ancient affection to the Venetians, they rather chose to be banished from their Countrie, than to vndergoe the yoake of a barbarous enemie.
The Cittie was yeelded according to the agreement vpon the fourth day of Aprill. Of 1600. men which guarded the Citie, there suruiued onely foure hundred and fiftie: and of women there remained but one hundred, who followed their husbands through the enemies Campe, and accompanied them in their  iourney.
As many of the Scutarians as came to Venice, some of them receiued yearely pensions from the publike Treasurie, others were rewarded with gouernments of Townes and Castles, according to euery mans former estate and condition, so as theThe Uenetians recompence ^hose of Scutarie. Commonwealth suffered none of them to be vnsatisfied; some write that the like was done to those which escaped from Nigrepont.
Peace being published, did not so much reioice the Venetians tyred with long warre, as it did feare and terrifie other people and Princes of Italie; and not without cause: For it was likely, that the Venetians being at rest, the Turke would make some attempts on other parts of Italie, whereto he was alreadie become too  neere a neighbour, so as from the Hauen which he had newly gotten, he might easily see it: and indeed it so fell out afterwards. But of this we will speake after the siege of Ottranto.
In the meane time, the Venetians were like to haue incurred new troubles. For the Summer after the peace, a mightie Turkish fleete sailed into the Ionian seas against the Lords of Cephalonia. This Island is opposite to Natolia: from whence the Lords being expulsed, Ottoman became master thereof. Pietro Buaillio was at Xant with fiue hundred braue horse of Morea, who not long before had taken it from the Lords of Cephalonia, and till then held it. So soone as the Turkish fleete came thither, as to an Island which belonged to the Cephalonian Princes, Loretano, who was still Generall of the Venetian nauall Armie, did presently follow them;Variance betwixt the Uenetian Generall, and the Turk^. saying, That he would neuer suffer that Island to be besieged, so long as the horsemen of Morea remained there. He did afterwards tell the Generall, that he ought not, contrarie to the treatie of peace, assaile the horsemen being Venetians. Both of them wrote to Constantinople; the Turke to his Lord and master; and Loretano to Benedetto Treuisano Ambassador at the same time at the great Lords Port. He hauing informed the great Turke of the businesse, did freely obtaine from him, That it should be lawfull for the Venetians, not onely to draw all their horsemen foorth of the Island, but as many other as would willingly depart thence. By this meanes the Venetians conueied many thousands foorth of the Island, who otherwise  would haue been made slaues; and being conducted into Morea, went freely whither they pleased to inhabite. The Turke after the taking of Xant, retired to Constantinople. These were the exploits done at Sea.
In Italie the Venetians, before the warre with Ottoman was ended, had taken

armes (as at other times) to defend the Florentines libertie. It fell out that the yeare before, Iuliano de Medicis was by a conspiracie slaine at diuine seruice in St LiberatosThe death of Iulian de Medicis. Church, and his brother Lorenzo like to haue been murthered with him, but that by his owne valour and aide of his friends, he escaped. The Florentines being affrighted with the death of so eminent a person, tooke armes, and slew many that had an hand in this murther; imprisoned P^pe Sixtus nephew, who then was at Florence, and did publikely hang Saluiato Archbishop of Pisa, authour of the conspiracie, with diuers others, who ca^e to Florence to accompanie either of them.
The Pope, incensed with the Florentines rigorous proceedings, hauing first interdicted  and excommunicated them, raised an Armie* himselfe being first combined with King Ferdinand and the Sienois. The yeare before this murther committed,The confederate Armie against the Florentine^. a mightie Armie was sent into Tuscanie. Frederick of Vrbin was made Generall, but the whole honor was attributed to Alphonso Duke of Ca^abria, sonne to Ferdinand, a sworne enemie to the Florentines, one, who from his great grandfather did mortally hate them. He was accompanied by Vrso el Conte, Roberto Vrsino, and Virginio his nephew, sonne to his brother Neapolio, Mathew of Champaine, and Roberto (...) Armini; but this last being afterwards entertained by the Florentines, was created Generall of their Armie.
The Florentines relying on their owne forces, and those of their associates, (for the Venetians, the Milanois, Hercules d'Este, and Frederick Gonzaga, were leagued  with them) did brauely entertaine the warre. But the Venetians being still busied with Ottoman, both by land and sea, euen in the verie confines of Italie; being likewise daunted with the troubles of Milan arising by Duke Galeas death (who theGalea^ Duke o^ Milan slaine in a Church. yeare befote was slaine in St Stephens Church by Giouanni Lamponiano and his complices at the time of diuine seruice) could not so soone send aide to the Florentines. But as well the one as other, striuing to doe their v^most, sent forces to them, though vnequall to the greatnesse of both Commonwealths, yet at least such as the qualitie of those times permitted. The Venetians sent Francisco Micaeli to the armie as Prouidator during that warre.
Not long before they had sent Bernardo Bembo to Florence, who for the space  of two yeares that the warre continued in Tuscanie, did good seruice to the associates: The Enemie in the meane time being backt by a mightie Armie, tooke Renze, Castelina, Rada, Broia, Cachiane, and mount Sabina in the Imbrian valley from the Florentines. And then, because Winter approached; they went to garrison in the Sienois territories. But the Venetians perceiuing some likelihood, that the enemies would the next Spring inuade the Florentines with greater furie, and hauing intelligence that Ottoman by letters and great promises from some Christian Princes was solicited to doe the like to them, they were moued by this common danger; and therefore first laboured about the end of Winter (as hath been alreadie said) to free themselues from that warre.
The Spring following they sent Carolo Montone into Tuscanie with a braue Caualerie: who falling sicke presently after his arriuall died at Cortona. He had fiue and thirtie Cornets of horse, and with them he crossed the lake Pergia, making furious incursions vpon the frontiers of the Perusins, where he took certaine Townes of small importance. Those of Perugia, who at the arriuall of the Venetian were thought to haue an intent to raise some insurrection in the Citie, in regard of the ancient controuersies betwixt themselues, being aduertised of his death, durst not rise against the Pope, notwithstanding that his sonne Bernardino el Conte reuiued his fathers practises. By this time halfe summer was spent, when as Robert with equal number of horse fought with Mattheo Campana Gouernour of Rome, and Nephew Roberto Malateste Generall of the Venetian Cauallerie. to Pope Sixtus, on mount Sperella, in a small village: where, for two houres space was a fierce fight. But the enemies first squadron being broken which came forth of the trenches, the rest terrified with the rout of their fellowes betooke them^elues to flight, and left a notable victorie to Robert, who became

Master of their horse and baggage. After this expedition he retired in safetie, fearing least Alphonso vpon newes of this defeat should with greater forces come and assaile him. Certaine lakes runne from Arezzo betwixt the Sienois and Perusin territories falling into the riuer Pales, and afterwards emptie themselues altogether into Tyber: the Tuscanes call them Chane. Two bridges crosse these waters, the one at Clusina, which the enemies made good; and the other did Malateste fortifie: these riuers ranne betwixt the two Armies. Whilest the Aragonian was comming to the bridge of Clusina, Robert and his souldiers made a safe returne, and from their quarter wasted the Sienois territories: And if the Duke came to rescue the Sienois, Malateste made incursions into the Perusins countrey: And in these idle and vnprofitable  iournies was the greatest part of Summer spent without any other memorable action.
In the end about mid-haruest, Fredericke of Vrbin, and Alphonso had intelligence that the Florentine troups at Podia Imperiale were much diminished, by meanes of a controuersie betwixt the souldiers of Aeste and Gongaza. For Hercules d'Aeste not long before in a mutinie betweene the Regiments was like to haue beene slaine, whereupon he left the Armie and returned home; the (...) went to Milan, from whence Roberto Sanseuerino was at the same time expulsed, because that he with his complicies had attempted somewhat against the state: And that this mutinie might grow to no further inconuenience: Gonzaga came from Tuscanie into Lombardie  to appease it. The enemies then full of hope marched against the Armie that wanted a Generall: By day-breake they sent a troupe of Archers vp the hill, who afterwards went downe brauely vpon the enemies: Andrea Burgensis, whose quarter was in the mid-way vpon the hill being put to rout, the light horse seconding theirThe Arragonois defeat the Florentines. foot, encouraged their owne men, and terrified the enemies: whereupon the Tuscan troupes thus disordered and put to flight, the Dukes of Calabria and Vrbin did with ease ascend the mountaine, and by gaining the Florentines campe, recompenced the losse of the Perusins. Then drawing neere to Colla, after a long and a tedious siege they tooke it. The Florentines terrified with this losse sued for peace: for the obtaining whereof Lorenzo de Medicis the noblest Citizen, who was both  enuied and esteemed by the Pope and king, went to Naples to free his countreyPeace betwixt the Florentine^ and the associates. from so dangerous a warre: whereupon, peace soone ensuing, the Venetians sent Ieronimo Marcello to call backe their forces into Lombardie, which were then commanded in Tuscanie by Antonio Donato.

The end of the tenth Booke of the third Decad.







THE FIRST BOOKE  OF THE FOVRTH DECAD OF THE HISTORIE Of Venice.

The Contents of the first Booke of the fourth Decad.



A Comparison betwixt the Romanes and Venetians. The Isle of Rhodes is in vaine besieged by the Turkes. They take Otranto in Italy; and the Venetians the Isle Coritia. The originall of the Ferrarese warre. A Councell is called, concerning warre against HERCVLES D'AESTE. Great preparation for the warre resolued. The description of Lombardie and the Riuer Po. The waies through the marshes neere to the enemie are fortified. Ficarolles is besieged. The nauall Armie saileth on the Po. The Venetians take Hadria, and the towns neere adioyning. The enemies are defeated at Policella. Ficarolles is taken in the night by Scalado. Many die in the Armie by contagion of the ayre. The whole Island of Rouiga is reduced vnder the Venetians command. ALPHONSO of Arragon wasteth all  places neere to Rome. ROBERTO of Arimini is sent to aide the Pope, and by defeating the Arragonois getteth a gallant victorie vpon the Veliternian territorie. ROBERT of Arimini dieth within a few daies after his victorie. FREDERICKE of Vrbin likewise dies not long after at Ferrara. VICTOR SOVRANZA vanquisheth SIGISMOND D'AESTE, and HVGO SANSEVERINO at Argento. SANSEVERINO hauing crossed the Po at the obscure lake, encampeth in the view of Ferrara, and doth afterwards make an inexpugnable F^rt vpon the Riuer bankes: wherein he placed a strong Garrison.

THis Historie which in diuers things resembleth that of the Romans, deserues in this place some comparison  betwixt them concerning their actions by sea andComparison betwixt the Romans and Uenetians. land; sauing in this: That the Romanes ouerthrew themselues by one onely war^e, which the Venetians haue not done. For such as at first the Hernici, Equi, and Vols^ians were to the Romanes, such haue the Dalmatians, Liburnians, and Histrians beene to the Venetians. The French was a dangerous enemy to them and left them nothing but the Capitoll; the same nation molested the Venetians, and tooke all from them but Rialto. The Cimbrians, Teutonians, and Ambrons were terrible to the Romanes  and to all Italy: the like were the Gothes, Hunnes, and Lombards to the Venetians and their neighbours. Carthage was an enemie to the Latine name, the like was Genoa to the Venetians: But Carthage shewed her greatest furie against the Romanes when she was confederate with king Philip and the Siracusans against

them: Genoa was neuer more terrible to the Venetians, than at that time when in the warre of Chioggia she was backt by Lewis king of Hungarie, and the Paduans. Pyrrhus was an enemie to the Romans, but more milde than the Carthagenians. Pipus was so to the Venetians, but much more tractable than the Genouese. The Romans had tedious warre w^th Mithridates, the Venetians with Philippo Visconte. Antiochus was great, but Ottoman greater. The Romanes maintained the confederate warre, the most dangerous that euer was in Italy: and the Venetians to resemble them in all things, did not onely in Lombardie withstand the forces of all the Princes of Italy, enuying their geatnesse, but brake and defeated them.
We will then first speake of the cause and progression of the Ferrarese warre, from  whence afterwards sprang that of the confederates, that we may the better vnderstand what ensued. But before we enter into this discourse, we must set downe somewhat which preceeded that warre, among others, two iournies of Ottoman against the Christians: which, though they may seeme impertinent to our Historie, I neuerthelesse thought good to insert, because we account all Christendome for matters of religion to be but one intire bodie.
A yeare and more after peace was concluded, Ottoman besieged Rhodes with as warlike preparation, as he had certaine yeares before iuuaded Nigrepont. RhodesThe description of the Isle of Rhodes. is the goodliest Island of the Aegean and Ionian Seas, wherin in old time were three beautifull Cities, Camia, Linda, and Lalissa: at this day there is no more but Rhodes. It is in compasse one hundred fiue and twentie thousand paces, though Isidorus say it is not so much. The Turke at this siege attempted many notable enterprises, and by frequent assaults went about to vanquish the Christians, and at times the walles being beaten downe, entred the Citie, but by the valour of the besieged, most of whom were knights of Ierusalem (for those of that order had the absolute command of the Island) they were with great slaughter driuen from the walles, and the Citie by diuine and humane aide was preserued.
The Turkes themselues did afterwards report, that two men of diuine countenanceOttoman besiegeth Rhodes. so long as the siege lasted, with torches in their hands, did euerie night walke the round vpon the walles with their swords, threatning the enemies, so as they being  terrified with this vision, retired. The common people said that they were Saint Peter and Paul. If this be true, we may then iustly affirme, that Rhodes at that time was not onely preserued by humane, but by diuine assistance. It was also accounted for a miracle, That the verie day that Ottoman a cruell enemie to Christians died, the Hauen of Rhodes stood drie. (and yet it is exceeding deepe) This happened a yeare after the siege.
The Spring following, the great Turke resoluing of some important enterprize, did by sodaine incursion take Ottranto. This Citie is in Calabria, diuided from ValonaOttoman takes Otranto. by a small Arme of Sea. Valona is an ancient Hauen. The smal space of sea which separates this place from Italy, containing 50000 paces in length, king Pirrhus first  of all attempted to passe ouer his Armie on foote, and to that end builded bridges there. After him Marcus Varro Admirall of Pompeis nauall Armie against Pirates, was desirous to doe the like: but both of them were diuerted from their enterprises by sundrie accidents. Ottranto being taken, it was to be feared that Ottoman with all his force would come and inuade Italy, which would mightily haue endangeredThe death of Ottoman. Christendome, had not Gods prouidence preserued it from that mischiefe by the Tyrants sodaine death: for this plague to mankind was cut off euen in the middest of his warlike preparations: whereupon king Ferdinand besieging Ottranto by land and sea recouered it, aud tooke all the Turkes that were in it.
The Venetians in the meane time annexed the Isle of Coritia in Dalmatia to  their dominions, which the modernes call Veglia. It was their owne in former time when they were Lords of Dalmaria, and the Islanders for a time had beene gouerned by* Venetian Magistrates. But in the daies of Prince R^iniero Zen^ it being giuen in perpetuitie to the Schi^els in those daies one of the nobless families of the Island,

they and their successors for two hundred yeeres space continued loyall to the Venetians. But in succession of time, the affection of these petty kings beganne to alter in the troubles of Dalmatia, now following the Venetians party, and then on a sodaine that of Bela, Ladislaus, Lewis, and other Hungarian kings, euen till the time of Iohn sonne to Bano the last Prince of the Coritans: Hee hauing rashly and forcibly entred certaine small townes on the firme land belonging to Prince Martin his brother, by whose will and testament after his death they were bequeathed to Mathias king of Hungarie, he did in such sort prouoke the Hungarian against him, as he was enforced to haue recourse to the Venetians.
Maerblaisius, who to that end was sent from Hungarie into Dalmatia, not satisfied  with the recouerie of those townes on the firme land, passed ouer into the Island, and had already besieged the cittie of Musella, when Giacomo Venier^ sent by Antonio Lauretano Generall of the nauall Armie from Corfu, arriued there, followed afterwards by Antonio Vinciguerra one of the Secretaries sent from the Prince and Senate; who in the Common-wealths name willed the Hungarian to desist from inuading the Coritans, who were vnder the Venetians protection: But the Hungarian was so farre off from giuing ouer his attempt, as on the contrarie, hauing taken Musella by force, hee brought his Armie to the chiefe Cittie of the Island: The Islanders standing ill affected to their Prince in regard of the grieuous subsidies hee exacted from them at the beginning of the warre, were in a manner all reuolted  from him vpon the enemies arriuall. Then the Coritan Prince hauing lost all hope, did by the perswasion of friends, quit all the claime which himselfe and predecessors had in the Island, to the Venetians, into whose hands hee resigned the Castle, and himselfe went to Venice whither already he had sent his wife and children. Not long after, foure Gallies arriued in the Island, wherewith the Hungarian being terrified, and fearing to be intercepted in his returne home, hauing first taken assurance of the Venetians, did peaceably surrender the Island vnto them.
Victor Souranza who succeeded Lauretano in the Admiralty, comming thither by chaunce, fortified it. The Senate assigned a perpetuall pension of a thousand crownes to the Coritan Prince, and foure thousand ducats for his daughters dowrie:The Coritan Prince flies into Germanie. But he accustomed to tyranny, and not being able to liue vnder Lawes in a free State, departed secretly with his houshold into Germany.
It is now time to returne to the propounded warre of Ferrara. The Princes of Ferrara had of a long time beene friends to the Venetians, so that Borsia Predecessor to Hercules, if at any time strife arose concerning their bounds, came with a small traine as a priuate person to conferre with the Prince and Senate, supposing that he could doe them no greater honour, nor better expresse his loue, than to come himselfe vnlooked for to giue them satisfaction. This Prince to his dying day had nothing in greater admiration than the Venetian Seigniory, nor accounted any thing comparable to the peace and friendship thereof. This mans deserts, and the hope  which the Senate had conceiued, that no man would more resemble Borsia in his behauiour and affection towards them than his brother Hercules, the Venetians did earnestly embrace his cause, and assisting him by land and water, seated him in the Dukedome, for which hee lately stroue with Nicolao, sonne to Lionello, fauored by his vnckle the prince of Mantua, and Galeas Visconte.
But not long after, Hercules maried Leonora daughter to king Ferdinand, by means of which new alliance growing more insolent, his loue to the Venetians waxed cold, and he did not greatly care to infringe his league with them. For contrary to theirThe cause of the warre of Ferrara. agreement hee had permitted his subiects to make salt at Comachia: Neuerthelesse to cleere himselfe thereof, hee was content at the Venetians intreatie by Benedicto Treuisano sent to him to Ferrara to that end, that a great quantity of salt made there, should be cast into the Sea. Hee did besides, lay taxes and impositions on the Venetians, notwithstanding their ancient freedome and exemption. But this was nothing: for he builded a Fort neere to Cap-Darger, as if himselfe had beene to haue

bounded his owne confines. Lastly, the Venetian Magistrate, which by couenant remained in Ferrara, being outraged, expulsed and excommunicated by the CitiesThe Duke of Ferara declares himselfe an enemie to the Venetians. Archbishop, the Duke declared himselfe an open enemy to the Venetians.
The Senate in the meane time knowing whereunto his designes intended, did sometime by Letters, then by Ambassadors, intreate him not to enforce the Venetians to become his enemies, but rather, imitating his brother Borsia and other his Predecessours to perseuer in their ancient friendship, which would both bee profitable and honourable for him. This proude man, who by reason of his new alliance promised great matters to himselfe, contemned this counsell. Neuerthelesse, the Senate made Pope Sixtus a means to containe him in their ancient friendship. But his mediation doing no good, they being prouoked, as well by new as old iniuries (which they had dissembled during the warre with Ottoman) resolued to inuade him, and by Armes to reuenge that which till then for quietnesse sake they had more kindly than honourably endured.
This determination did for certaine dayes busie the Councell. Some of the auncient Senators were of opinion not to make warre on Hercules vpon any occasion whatsoeuer; not that it was vnlawfull, but because the time permitted it not, and did often aduise thoseThe opinion of those disswading warre. that craued warre to take heed, that by desire of reuenge, they did not precipitate the Common-wealth into danger, saying, That the City and Tributary Townes were tired with long warre: That it behooued them sometimes to lay downe armes, lest by heaping one warre vpon another, the world should say that the Venetians loued nothing lesse than peace. Moreouer, though there were nothing else in it, they ought to consider that Hercules besides his owne experience in Martiall matters, was allied to two potent Kings, and that vndoubtedly he would neuer of his owne priuate motion haue so mightily prouoked them: Besides, it was certaine that diuers Italian Princes were leagued with him, which being so, they desired those that wished for warre to aduise themselues, if they had not more need of a Target than of a Sword.
At this speech most of the Senatours, (as euery man was inclined) cried out to the contrary, saying; That the allegations of cowards ought not to diuert their former resolution,Their answere that craued war and muchlesse cause them to beleeue them, that by the example of one man, other Princes their neighbours would rise against them, who would be twice aduised ere they inuaded the Venetians. That the Citie was able to vndergo the whole burthen of the warre, and being of a long time accustomed to warre, would not liue ydlely. That the State by Gods goodnesse was so wealthie, that notwithstanding the great masse of gold spent in the warre against Ottoman, her treasure was in a manner infinite, whereby warre might be mannaged to the honour of the Common-wealth: That all passages to sealay open to the Venetian Marchants, whose trafficke did daily augment their imposts and customes: That diuerse Senators present in Councell offered to aide the Common-wealth with great summes of gold, whereby they might perceiue that nothing could be wanting for the entertainement of the armie: That the King of Hungarie was in no sort to be feared: for besides his perpetuallwarre with the Emperour Fredericke, the Turkes were still on his confines and wasted his Countrey, so that hee had enough to doe, to defend his kingdome from two such potent enemies: That King Ferdinand was not to be regarded, who had not yet recouered his losses at the siege of Ottranto: That the Venetian fleete scoured the Sea coast of Apulia and Calabria, which if hee were desirous to defend, it behooued him whether he would, or no, to haue no hand in the Ferrarese warre. But admit (said hee which spake) that his forces be so great, as they may fitly be diuided into sundry places, by what way shall he come to bring aide to his sonne in lawe? His souldiers haue no wings to flie through the aire from Calabria into Lombardie. Rome belongeth to Pope Sixtus, so doth Sabinia, the Dutchy of Spoleta, la Marea, and all Italie besides, from Tibers mouth, as farre as Ancona. His Holinesse so soone as hee perceiued that hee could not preuaile with Hercules, hath not onely aduised vs to make war vpon him, but together with the Venetians hath an hand therein. The Florentines and Milanois will not take our parts; But the Genouese and Prince of Montferrat will assist vs: The Rubrians of Parma will doe the like, who as we vnderstand are ready to reuolt. And seeing

wee want neither Armes, money, nor aide, what shall hinder vs from inuading Hercules? When did euer any of your neighbours (most noble Senatours) more prouoke you? Ouer all his Territories hee hath cancelled your freedome and immunities. He hath of a long time vsurped vpon the confines of your dominions; Hee hath suffered your Magistrate to be outraged, expulsed, and excommunicated: If this wrong cannot moue you, what then is able to incite you? Will you tarry till hee inuade you first? Questionlesse hee will assaile you, and it may be sooner than you imagine. On then, follow the steppes of your Auncestours, and with fire and sword pursue this open enimy. Let your Armes quench this flame which our long sufferance hath so kindled, as but by this meanes will hardly be extinguished. Let all men see, that when neede is, the Venetians know how to draw peace from warre, and warre from peace.
Heereupon, the Senate with generall consent presently resolued to take Armes:Warre is resolued against the Duke of Ferrara. And that all requisite solemnities might be obserued therein, it was decreed, that so soone as the people were made acquainted therewith, it should be denounced to the enemy. When it was published, the people were so ioyfull, as men might easily perceiue, that neuer any warre was more pleasing to them than that. Whereupon the Senate resolued to prepare two fleetes, the one to inuade Apulia and Calabria,Two Venetian fleets. if Ferdinand should stirre; And the other to passe vp against the streame of the Riuer Po into the enemies Territories. That by sea was committed to Victor Souranza, who had beene Admirall of the Gallies; and the other to Damiano Moro, both of them valiant Captaines: But when the Senate considered, that he was not onely to be inuaded by water, but by land, it diuided the forces into sundry places. Roberto Sanseuerino (who not long before serued them for large entertainement) was appoynted to make warre vpon him on the hither side of Po, and Robert of Arimini Generall of all the troups, on the other side towards Flaminia. Many did voluntarily follow the Venetian ensignes both by land and water, not so much for hope of bootie, as for particular hatred to the Duke, whose pride they could not endure.
Diuers Vessells were already gone from Venice when Roberto Sanseuerino and Antonio Lauretano the Prouidator, marched towards Legnaga. These, hauing viewed  all places, resolued with their troupes to passe into the enemies Countrie, ouer the Lakes of the Riuer Tartar, which are betwixt the Po and the Adice. But here it is requisite (seeing all Lombardie from Hostilia a Citie of the Mantuan on this side, and beyond the Po, as farre as the Sea, is watered by diuers streames) to discourse somewhat of the situation of the Prouince, and winding of the Riuer.
Now this Prouince is inclosed by part of Flaminia, and La Marca, on euery sideThe description of Lombardie. by Mountaines, sauing on the South and East, where it is watered by the Adriatick Sea, so, as if it extended no farther to Sea-ward than towards the Appenine Hills, and Genoa, it would retaine the true forme of a Theater. And if it might be called a Theater, it might truly be said to be that of Mars, and none other, as the Greekes  termed Beotia, because there is no Countrie of Italie where Warre hath oftener begunne or lasted longer, than in Lombardie. It hath on the West the Appenine Hills, stretching themselues towards Genoa, and after that they haue coasted and left Tuscanie on the right hand, haue their extent towards Ancona. The Alpes in a manner doe the like towards the North and West. The Tuscans in times past possest the whole Countrie. The French drawne thither by the beautie and fertilitie of the Prouince, chaced them thence, and did a long time after enioy the whole Countrie on this side and beyond the Po. Some thinke that the Gaules, Lebetians, Insubres, and Cenomans, haue inhabited betwixt that Riuer and the Alpes: Some likewise affirme that the Venetians are descended from the Gaules, and others say it is not so, because they differ from them in speech, though resembling them in habit and manners. The Boyans, Egans, and Senonois dwelt beyond the Po, whereupon it was afterwards rightly termed Gaule. But they were extinct by the Romans. Lastly, by the arriuall of the Lombards (who did a long time inhabit the Prouince,

where the greatest part of their power remained, with Pauia their Royall Seate) it was called Lombardie, one sillable being taken from their name.
The goodliest and greatest Riuers of this Prouince, are the Po, Thesin, Oglio, Abdue, Mincia, and Adice. The Po which as some say the Greekes termed Eridanus, receiues her Spring in the middest of the Mount Vesula, on the confines of Liguria,The originall and spring of the Riuer Po, with ^er course. from thence falling downe into the plaine, it runnes first towards the South, then turning towards the East, it entreth by sixe Channells into the Adriatick Sea, and being augmented by thirtie Riuers falling into it, it growes so great, as some thinke it nothing inferiour to the Danubium or Nilus. The Riuers which fall into it are very famous, and with great abundance of water, issue from very excellent  Lakes. From the Lake Larica vulgarly called Coma, it takes the Abdue. From Verbana or the great Lake Thesin. From Benac, or la Garda, Mincia. From Sabina, or Isea, the Oglio. From the Lakes Epilles, whereof the one is called Pucian, and the other Ceruian, Lambroma. Besides these Riuers, snow melted in the Mountaines, doe much increase it, especially in the Dogge daies, and being once swelled, it is as dangerous to ships as to the Neighbour Territories, which causeth the Inhabitants to make great Bankes and Rampiers to restraine it, neuerthelesse in this it deales well with them, for it easily giues them againe whatsoeuer it hath taken from them.
Being thus augmented (as hath beene said) it runnes with a direct course to Ficarolles  (this Citie is a little beneath Hostilia) where being ouer-pressed and glutted by superfluitie of waters, it begins to enlarge it selfe somwhat beneath the Citie, and diuiding into two, makes the first Island which the Inhabitants call Polesina, placing (as I thinke) one sillable before an other, pronouncing Polesina for Polinessa, which is as much to say, as a long and broade Island. And because that Ferrara is not farre beneath the place where the Riuer diuideth it selfe, they commonly call it the Pollesin of Ferrara. The branch which runneth on the right hand, before it comes to the Citie recouereth her strength by succour of diuers Riuers, which in a little space fall into it, whereupon being ouer-loden with this new burthen, the Citizens looking on, as if it were troubled with some faction, it diuideth it selfe into  two, and differently pursueth her course: by that second diuision making an other Island, wherein are the Cities of Argentia and Comachia, enuironed with Lakes. The right Arme of this Riuer comming to the Argentine Territorie, on the other side neare to Faniola, receiueth the Riuer Vaterna, which the Inhabitants by corrupted speech call Sauterna, comming from Forecornelia. And there, as though it were not able to endure all her encrease, comming neare to Comachia, at a Towne called S. Alberts; it prodigallie disgorgeth as much water as it tooke in at Vaterna, the which gliding through the Lakes of Rauenna, entreth like a nauigable Riuer into the Sea: And in this manner the Hauen of Rauenna may bee termed one of the mouthes of the Po. The other part which is farre greater, from S. Alberts runnes  directly into the Sea, and the Inhabitants call her entrance Primaria, in old time named Vaterna of the Riuer which falls into it.
That branch on the left hand beneath Ferrara, runnes into the Sea with the selfe same force, as it commeth from the Citie, and the entrance thereof is called Volana. Betwixt this and Primaria, which wee lately mentioned, the Lakes of Comachia haue their mouth, or rather Hauen, which is called Magneuaca. But to speake truly these are armes of the Sea, as may easily bee perceiued by reason of salt which is made there.
Now I returne to the first diuision of the Riuer, which we said was a litle beneath Ficarolles: This is esteemed to be new, not so much by the Map of Italie, which  Robert King of Naples, and Francisco Petrarca haue made, where Blondus of Forli affirmes no mention at all to be made of this diuision, as by the authoritie of Polibius a learned Author, who saith that the Po entreth by two channels into the Adriatick Sea, by Padusa and Volana, which are properly parts of that Riuer, whereof wee euen

now discoursed. But to returne to the other part, it runs on the left hand without any diminution at all, as farre as the Confines of Hadria, and diuiding it selfe againe into two mouthes, entreth by two seuerall waies into the Sea: That which is next to Volana is called Abba, and the other Goria. The Inhabitants of the Countrie call the other bigger Channell which runnes on the left hand into the Sea, the Fornaces.
This in briefe is all wee can say of the originall of the Po, of her course and entrances into the Sea. Some thinke that it was called Paua, because that round about her spring there grow many trees called in the French tongue Pines. Plinie saithFrom whence the Po tooke her name. that the Ligurians called it Bondimaca, by the name of the Village, and for proofe  of his saying alleageth the Towne of Bondicomaca neare to the Riuer.
The Adice likewise which diuided in sundrie sorts makes diuers Pollesins, comming downe from the Mountaines of Trant runnes a thwart through the Citie of Verona, from thence being parted in two at Castagnare, beneath Legnaga, that part which enuironeth the Village, falls into the Tartar, issuing from her Lakes, and ioyned together are not long ere with a greater course they meet with the other part of the Adice at Malopra, and so all these Riuers meeting in one, doe behinde enclose the Pollesin of Rouiga. At last falling into the Lakes they loose the name of Riuers. But the Adice being diuided into two aboue the Tower Marchiana, That part which runnes directly towards Sendouare and Rouiga, before it comes to Capdarger, gently reenters into her owne streames, and thus mingled, runnes through the Lakes and Marshes vnto a place called the new Tower, where againe separating it selfe into two parts, falleth by two mouthes into the Sea, that on the right hand being called Fossiones, and the other Brandules. The Adice being there diuided (as hath beene said) makes two Polesins, the one beyond Rouiga called the old, and the other on the hether side, termed the new.
Now these diuisions of Lakes and Riuers made the Venetians iourney much more difficult, for in some places they were too deepe to bee foorded, and in others too shallow to be passed by Boat. First, Sanseuerino and the Prouidator Lauretano, were of opinion to cause diuers small Boates to bee brought through the Lakes of the Riuer Tartar to Boaria, not farre from Legnaga, and in them to transport three companies of Foote, vnder the command of Andrea de Parma, and Thomaso Himulano, first to Crocelta, and from thence to the Mellaritan Confines. By this meanes the Venetian Souldiers came on the last of Aprill before day into the Enemies Countrie. Some of the Garrison of Mellaria with Francisco Sica comming from Hostilio with troupes of Horse, sought to repell them at their first arriuall, but after some light skirmish they were glad to retire. The next night Antonio Marciano a very famous Captaine, beganne with three hundred Peasants to cut a way for the Armie through the Lakes neare to Casalon, They wrought there all that night, and the labourers stood in water and mud vp to the girdles: but so soone as it was day  and the worke not finished, Sanseuerino and Lauretano comming thither, and considering the danger which those troupes were exposed vnto, that were already in the enemies Countrie, they presently sent for all the Countrie people there abouts of euery sexe and age, to helpe to finish the worke: more then one thousand persons laboured there, who the next day after finished it, and by three of the clocke after noone of the same day the troupes came to the bankes of the Riuer Tartar: so soon as their fellowes which guarded the opposite shore saw them, they presently made a Bridge ouer the Riuer, ouer which euery man passed at his pleasure into the enemies Countrie.
This way (foure and twentie furlongs in length) cut through the Lakes, was by  reason of the great quantitie of Fagots wherewith it was made, called Fascinada. AFascinada. Fort was builded on the hither side the Tartar neare to the Bridge, and strongly fortified that men might freely passe vp and downe. The same day the forces marched into the Mellarians Territories: some that were there agree not about their

number; saying, that they were 20000. Others mention not so many. But Sanseuerino marching to besiege Mellaria on the Po, did at the first assault winne the enemies Rampier neare to the Castle: whereuppon those within it presently yeelded.
Mellaria being taken, the enemie shewed himselfe about Sunne-set on the other side of the Riuer: this gaue a sodaine alarme to the Venetian, who in armes presently ranne to the Riuer bankes: but perceiuing their small number their feare ceased. They had intelligence afterwards that it was Frederick of Vrbin, who came to crosse the Po at Hostilia, from thence to march to Milan, King Ferdinand and Hercules confederates, had made him Generall of their Armie, and sent for him to come away  speedily to Ferrata to oppose himselfe to the Venetians first attempts. The Venetian returned to the Camp, and two daies after leauing Mellaria, went and encamped at the Village Brigantino, which they had taken not long before. Then Sanseuerino had intelligence that the enemie had abandoned Trecenta, and some otherThe Ferrarois abandon Trccenta lesser Townes of no great moment. Hee thought it fit there to make a bridge, by which supplies and victualls might be brought to them from Verona. Though this was not so neare a way as that of Croselta or Fascinada, yet was it more sure than any of them, whereupon he left a strong Garrison to guard the bridge.
Within a while after, the camp marched from Brigantino towards Castelnouo, where filling a great trench which the enemie had drawne from the Po to the lakes, to stop the Venetians approch, the Armie came neare the Citie, wheresor three daies space the Ordnance playing vpon the walls, in the end after some assaults, theCastelnouo yeeldeth to the Venetians. Citie yeelded. In the meane time they made incursions into the enemies Countrie, and euery day brought great store of Cattaile and prisoners to the Camp.
The report of these incursions being bruted in the neighbour Villages, prouoked many to come to the Venetians campe vpon hope of bootie, so as in a short space the Armie consisted of 30000. able Men. From Castelnouo they went to Ficarolles,The Venetians besiege Ficarolles. where an other great trench being likewise made by the enemie, did for a time restraine the course of their victorie; but this impediment taken away, they planted the Cannon against the walls, when speedie newes was brought from Mellaria, that  Frederick of Vrbin with great forces lay at Hostilia. The Venetian Generall, fearing if the enemie should at his backe shut vp all passages, he should not be able when he would to returne, did presently raise his camp and returned to Castelnouo: There he vnderstood by spies that the forces which were at Hostilia were not sufficient to make any attempt on this side the Po: Then Sanseuerino sent word to Count Marcian presently to breake downe the cawsies and bankes of the Riuer betwixt Mellaria and Hostilia; for that once done, they needed no more to feare the enemies incursions: and himselfe returned againe to Ficarolles. But in his absence, the townesmen had fortified the trench, planted their Ordnance on the opposite shore, broken downe the camps Rampiers, and burnt the Souldiers Cabins. Vrbin comming thither  afterwards from Hostilia had strengthened the Towne with a stronger Garrison, and from thence retired to Stellata on the opposite shore, and there remained to releeue his people when neede were, with supplies, armor, and victualls: all his troupes came thither to him.
Robert in the meane time being somewhat tyred, did againe fill the trench, and encamped on either side thereof. But whilest these things were done there, Christofero Muletto a valiant Captaine, who commanded the small vessells (for Damiano Moro Generall of the fleete vpon the Po had passed on beyond the enemie) besieged and took Hadria a very ancient Citie: The souldiers of the garrison and townsmenHadria is taken. did at first brauely defend it. The situation of the place did greatly auaile  them, which is for the most part enuironed with water, not nauigable but by certaine Channels, through which very hardly vessells come neere the Cittie. Dominico Hericeo a couragious souldier was slaine at the first assault. The Venetians incensed by his death, did with greater furie assault the Citie, and without feare of danger

mounted the rampires, and neuer gaue ouer till the souldiers and mariners entred it. Then the inhabitants casting downe their Armes, cried for mercie. The Conquerors at their first entrance slew diuers, and the houses in many places were burnt and spoiled, and Hadria had that day beene wholy ruined, had not the Venetian presently commaunded the souldiers to abstaine from spoile and murther. We haue elsewhere spoken of the situation and antiquitie of this ci^tie.Comachia veeldeth to the Venetians.
Hadria taken, the whole Countrey round about was wasted. Comachia likewise at the same time yeelded to the Venetians. These Citties with others neere adioyning, some by force, and others voluntarily, beeing taken by them, and Moro sailing with the fleete vp the Riuer, all men fled on both sides the Po: for the  Inhabitants of the Countrey terrified with the losse of Hadria, ranne with their wiues and children to Ferrara and other Townes of safetie.
Hercules had fortified a place vpon the Po called Pilosella, by which the fleete was to passe, and had there builded three Castles of wood, one in the middest of the Riuer; and the other on both sides; which hee furnished with ordnaunce and other necessaries, and strong garrisons. Sigismond d'Este Hercules brother and Giouan Bentiuole of Bolognia lay there with six hundred horse, and as many foot. Moro had great numbers of vessells, to wit, gall^ots, small boates, Ganzarioles, with many other of sundry sorts to the number of two hundred well armed and readie to fight. Himselfe in his owne Gallie, sailed against the enemie, the like did the forces  by land. The Venetian beganne the fight with such animositie, as putting the Cauallerie and the rest which were on each shoare to flight, after along and dangerous bickering hee tooke the Fortes vpon the water. The victory was verie bloudy. But the ioy to haue vanquished made them forget their present losse. They sent the Castle which was builded in the middest of the water vpon a great vessel, to Venice, the others were burnt.
Moro victorious, caused his souldiers and mariners to spoile and waste all places neere to the Riuer; they being as well prouoked by reuenge, as desire of bootie, pillaged all villages, and countrie houses vpon the Riuer, and then burnt them, and so  satisfied, carried away with them great numbers of prisoners and cattell, and thus loaden with bootie, arriued at the campe before Ficarolles. These men by theyr speed, comming thither before the fleet, and being taken for enemies, did put the Campe in alarme; but when they were knowne to be friends, they did cheerefully embrace one another, and continued the siege both by land and water: then they made so fierce a battery as they ouerthrew the Citties, walles, and rampires. Fredericke of Vrbin, who was on the opposite shore, beholding the danger of his friends,Cast peeces called Bases. was not idle, but annoyed the Venetians with his ordnance from the farther side, and supplied the besieged with armour, victuall, and whatsoeuer else he knew to be necessarie for a siege. But nothing did so much hurt to the Venetian as certaine  peeces called Bases, then not vsuall. For neither armour, rampire, or fortification could withstand their fury and yron bullets, which carried away with them whatsoeuer they met with. And because that contrarie to the discipline of those times they played aswell by night as day, Sanseuerino sent him word by a Trumpet, that if hee did not cease his new kinde of warre, hee would turne his Cannons from the walles of Ficarolles vpon his Campe, whereupon they agreed together, that when Sanseuerino should assault the Citie, or batter the walls with his ordnance, the enemie might vse those peeces.
Moreouer, Sanseuerino resoluing wholy to shut vp the Riuer from the enemie, commanded certaine vessells of the fleet to bee drawne by Land vp the Riuer, beyond the enemies camp. Vrbin sent for nine Galeots from Hostilia (of those fiue  and twentie which he had brought with him from Milan) to ouer-runne those vessells. Fiue of them being come to an Island neare to the Venetians fleet, foure hundred of the Souldiers landed there to refresh themselues by reason of the great heat, and lay downe here and therein the shade vpon the grasse. The Venetians, aduertised

of their landing, and vnwilling to omit so faire an occasion, landing on the farther side of the Island to the number of 150. did sodainly assa^le the enemie halfe asleepe, who being amazed with such an vnlookt for assault, in sted of defending themSome of the enemies are defeated in an Island. selues fled towards the vessells: most of them were slaine or taken; threescore and ten being taken aliue were brought to Sanseuerino, who vnderstanding that they were Milaneses and Artificers, not comming thither of their owne accord to fight, but sent by their Princes commandement, did vse them gently, and furnishing them with clothes and money, gaue them leaue to depart.
It was not long ere the enemie had his reuenge, with greater losse to the Venetians. The Po diuides it selfe into two branches (as hath been said) fiue hundred  paces beneath Ficarolles. The Venetian Captaines determined to build a Fort at the point of the Island where this separation begins, that the right side thereof on the way from Stellata to Ferrara, might be shut vp from the enemie. Antonio Marciano was the first that propounded it, wherefore the charge thereof was committed to him. He being accompanied by Bartilmeo Falceria, Tomaso of Immola, and two Companies of foot, did on a sodaine seize on the place, and then with great numbers of peasants brought thither with him to that end, began the worke. The soldiors and marriners in the meane time desirous of bootie, straying far from the worke, made incursions as far as Ferrara, from whence returning with great bootie, they went without leaue to the Campe on the opposite shoare, leauing Marcian and  his workmen with few or no forces at all. By reason hereof the worke could not be finished in one day. Hercules, by messengers from the Duke of Feltre aduertised of the enemies deseigne, came speedilie thither to defeat them: For he was not ignorant how discommodious that Fort would be to Ferrara. At his arriuall he charged them, but Marcian in the end being oppressed by the multitude, was taken, and FalceriaThe Venetians are put to rout, and their enterprise made frustra^e. with him: Many of his soldiors were slaine, Thomaso of Imola in a little boat escaped with some few soldiors, and went ouer the Riuer. Hercules presently finished the fortification which the other had begun, and placing a strong Garrison in it, did greatly relieue Ferrara.
Sanseuerino in the meane time lying longer before Ficarolles than he expected;  the better to annoy the enemie, sent Fracasse, G^ouan Maria, and Pietro Marcello the Prouidator, with part of the troops to take the Townes of the Rhouigian Pollesin: For the enemies Countrie neer to the Adice had not yet tasted the calamities of warre. At their first arriual there they tooke Castle-Guillielmo, the tower Sandona enuironed with lakes, Rouiga, Lendenara, the Abbey, and other places of the Pollesin, but not without fight, where Ieronimo, sonne to Count Marcian a braue young man was slaine.
For the assurance of the Townes yeelded to the Venetians, Augustino Barbadico at that time Gouernour of Padua, a man of great wisedome and authoritie, did by the Senates commaund go to Rouiga, with whom they ioined Pietro Treuisano.
The Prouince being setled, Barbadico by the same commaundement returned to Padua: Treuisano falling grieuously sicke, died soone after. Roberto Venieri sonne to Francisco, succeeded Treuisano in the Prouince. This man did not alone fashion the peoples minds to obedience, but by his meeknesse confirmed them in their duties towards the Venetians.
Whilest these things were done neere to the Adice, Frederick of Vrbin falling sicke, was carried from the Campe at Stellata to Ferrara. Sanseuerino, though his sonnes had part of the forces, did not cease continually to annoy the enemie, whose wals being beaten downe by the Canon, himselfe impatient of any longer delay, resolued to giue an assault, wherein the Venetian tooke the Parapet of the Tower, and made it good; many after the retreat was founded, remayning in it. Hercules soldiors, terrified with the enemies boldnesse, did set fire on the piles that supported the Tower, and ouerthrew it. Sanseuerino thereby perceiued the inhabitants small hope, whereupon he assailed the Citie more fiercely. Vpon the 29. day of

Iune at midnight the soldiors went to the assault, and fauored by the night, made many bridges ouer the dikes and hollow places. The besieged, notwithstanding theA fearefull assault by night. darknesse of the night, did brauely defend it, so as this assault both in shew and effect was more furious than that by day. It continued till day-light: but the enemie being then vanquished, the Venetian in sundrie places entred the Citie, which taken the soldiers threw downe their Armes: some of them were cast into the riuer, othersThe Venetians take Ficarolles. murthered, verie few taken prisoners. This being done, and the Venetian master of the Citie, he did forthwith begin to repaire it.
Within a while after, Sanseuerin and Lauretano fell sicke, by reason of the vnholesome aire of the marshes: both of them were carried to Padua, but with seuerall  destinies, for the Venetian died there, and the Generall recouered. Moro likewise, Generall of the nauall Armie, called home by the Senate, died soone after his arriuall at Venice. This Summer was vnfortunate, but the Autumne after it much more: Some that haue written the Ferraresse warre, and were present there, affirme that more then 20000. men of those that were at the siege of Ficarolles by land and water,Great mortality in the Venetians campe. by some one accident or other died there, but most of all by reason of feauers occasioned by the infectious ayre of the marshes. This is all that happened in Lombardie during that Summer.
In Flaminia, Robert of Arimini did not cease to annoy the enemie by ordinarie incursions with those forces which he had receiued at the beginning of the war: he  was abundantly furnished with victuals and other warlike necessaries from Rauenna, gouerned at that time by Bernardin Bembo. Roberto in the heat of Summer was commanded by the Senate to go to Rome to relieue Pope Sixtus which was besieged.
Alphonso Duke of Calabria at the beginning of the Venetians warre sought to bring 4000. men to aide his brother Hercules. But because his way lay through the Popes territories, he marched by assistance of the Colonessi, and Sauell^ whoThe noblest houses of Rome. were open enemies to the Pope, directly towards Rome, which Citie hath diuers noble families in it, among whom the Vrsini, Colonesi, and Sauelli, hold the chiefe ranke, as well for wealth as antiquitie of descent. These men of a long time being ill affected to each other, haue often by meanes of their mortall hatred banded together, sometimes in the Citie, but oftner in the field, as in a freer place: most of the townes and villages neere to Rome are theirs. But beside these, there be diuers other noble families in the Citie, yet the Vrsini haue for many yeares excelled them all both in wealth and knowledge in martiall discipline. Foure of this house, sonnes to Carolo, haue in our time beene verie famous, Latino, Giouanni, Neapuleo, and Roberto. The two first followed Pope Eugenius to Florence, where they did winne his loue and fauour, as Latino the eldest brother was made Cardinal, and Giouanni elected Bishop of Trani, and being inriched with diuers other benefices, did much augment the greatnesse and dignitie of his house: These two did greatly illustrate their familie, but not so much as Neapuleo and Roberto, who by their experience in martiall disci The greatnesse of the Ursini. pline, purchased such honour, as at one time the first was made Generall of the kings Armie, and the other of the Popes. They did not onely by their valour keepe their paternall principalitie, but did wonderfully encrease it, so as they became Lords of all the whole countrey, from the Tyrhene sea as farre as the lake Piscino extends it selfe.
This prosperitie procured them hatred and e^uie. For at one time the Colonessi, Sauelli, and Anguilares were their enemies: and because they were all too weake to withstand the power of this one familie, they caused Pope Calixtus likewise to Arme against them, whose attempts they did not onely frustrate, but brake and defeated them, and chiefly at that time when Borsia Nephew to Calixtus, with  forces farre superiour to Vrsi^os, was by him vanquished at Varro his village.
But if Vrsinis greatnesse was enuied before, it was most of all in the daies of Pope Sixtus, when their enemies desirous wholly to ruine them, had (in their owne opinion,) found out a fitt occasion. For these foure noble men being lately dead, they

ioyntly bent all their malice vpon Virginio sonne to Neapulco, sole heire to Vrsinis principalitie. But he being young and powerfull, after the Precedent of his Ancestors, did together with Ieronimo Visconte follow the Popes partie, by whose councell he was wholly directed. In hatred to him rather than the Pope, the ColonesiAlphonso aided by the Colonessi and Sauelli besiegeth the Pope and Sauelli did vpon Alphonsos arriuall practize innouation as well in the Citie as abroad, whereupon two Cardinals of both those families, men of great authoritie, were by the Popes commandement, as guiltie of treason, imprisoned for a time in Castle Angelo. Their kinsmen incensed thereat, did by their factions trouble all Rome, aided Alphonso with victuals, and the more to annoy the Citie, gaue him free entrance into their Townes and Castles. And although the Pope at that time  was strong, many noble Gentlemen seruing him, his Armie neuerthelesse stirred not forth of the walles of Rome, fearing if they should leaue the Citie, those of the contrarie partie would make some commotion.
Alphonso laying hold on this occasion, tooke diuers townes from the Pope, spoiling and wasting the whole countrey neere to Rome. The Pope wrote to the Venetians to send Roberto Malateste to raise the siege. Though the Senate at that time was busied in the Ferrarese warre, it neuerthelesse commanded Victor Souranza to wast the Sea coasts of Apulia and Calabria with a mightie fleete: They wrote to Francisco Diede their Ambassador with the Pope at their charge to raise forces in Rome: And willed Robert of Arimini to march speedily thither with the greatest power he  could to raise the siege. They sent Pietro Diede to be his Prouidator, to raise forces from all parts: this they did, because they would not onely aide his Holinesse with a Generall, but with souldiers. Robert being commanded to goe to Rome, departed from Flaminia with many troupes of horse: but hauing intelligence by the way that Nicolao Vitelli aided by the Florentines had taken the towne of Typherna, he went thither, where ruining certaine places belonging to the Typhernians, the danger of Rome calling him thither, by great iournies he arriued there: At his comming the state of the warre was changed, and they marched against the enemie.
Alphonso hauing intelligence of the Venetians approach, encamped on the Veliternian territorie in a place called the Dead field. So soone as the Venetian Generall  discouered him, he encouraged his souldiers, and full of hope marched against him: being more confident through the number of his men, whereby he enforced the Arragonois to fight on all parts at once. Alphonso was likewise strong both in horse and foote, but chiefly in horse: he had besides foure hundred Turkes which he had brought from Ottranto: with these forces he brauely receiued Malatestes charge.A cruell fight betwixt Alphonso Duke of Calab^ia and Roberto of Arimini Genenerall to the Venetians. The fight was hot for sixe houres: The Venetian Generall did greatly annoy him. The Arragonois on the contrarie presuming on the valour of his men, resolued eyther to die or conquer: many fell on both sides, in all places the battaile was bloudie, especially where the Turkes fought. At last the Pope and Venetians multitude, with the Generals encouragement preuailing, the enemie by little and little retired. Alphonso sought to reenforce them, but perceiuing he could not, withdrew himselfe to a place of safetie, accompanied with some few horse: other braue Commanders preferring any hazard before flight were taken, in greater number than euer before in any battaile.
The conquerour within a while after entred Rome with his prisoners, representing the Romanes the forme of their ancient triumphes, and hauing by this victorieThe death of Roberto of Arimini. purchased immortall glorie, he died not long after. Some say that he was poisoned, but it is most likely that he died of asurfet taken by his great trauell in the heat of the battaile. He was honourably buried in Rome, where this Epitaph was written on his monument. Veni, vidi, vici, Laurea^ Pontifici retuli, Mors secundis rebus inuidit. In English thus, I came, saw, ouercame, brought victorie to the Pope, which death tooke from me. Some write that on one day two the greatest Captain^s of Italy died: he of whom we now spake; and Fredericke of Vrbin, that was carried away sicke to Ferrara from the campe at Stellata.
But whilest these things were done neere to Rome, Pietro Maria de Rossis following the Venetians partie in Lombardie, ceased not to annoy Sforza's troupes on the Parmesan confines: But the Venetians intention was not so much to hurt the Milanois, as by entangling him in a domesticke warre, to keepe him from aiding Hercules. Sforza's forces sodainely marched towards Parma, where Rossis being sharpely assailed, was not onely enforced to retire into his owne territories, but lost Nucetta, and the Castle Candida.
But Pietro Rossis a braue and valiant Gentleman falling sicke, died within a while after. Guidone whom he had made his heire, went with his bretheren to besiege a certaine Towne, but being abandoned by the Venetian succours, who could not  follow them by reason of the Po, though for a time they did brauely withstand all Sforzas attempts, and sometime defeated his forces, yet beeing tired with so long a warre, they were enforced to retire.
Autumne was already more than halfe spent, when Sanseuerin hauing recouerd his health returned to his desolate camp, where nothing was to be seene but weake and sicke souldiers. Luca Pisani whom the Senate had sent from Verona after Lauretanoes death, commaunded the Armie as Prouidator, till Giouan Heme called from the confines of Bressia arriued at Ficarolles. He being come, Pisani who was alreadie infected with the bad aire returned to Venice. The new Prouidator repayred the walles of Ficarolles, when Frederico Cornari, and Francisco Sanuto came to the  Campe as Prouidators. At their arriuall, the Armie made some abode there, together with the fleete, not daring to enterprize any memorable matters; for though their numbers were great, yet most of them were so weake, as they could hardly walke vp and downe. But towards the end of Haruest, the aire being purified, they beganne by litle and litle to recouer their healths: Then Sanseuerine loath to loose any longer time, sent Fraccasso his sonne with many troupes of horse, to assault the Fort which Hercules had made vpon the Riuer banckes at the obscure Lake, for it did greatly annoy the Venetian vessells going to and fro: He planted his ordnance on the opposite shoare, from whence in short space by continuall shooting hee had so beaten downe the Rampires as hee was in good hope before long to driue them  thence.
But whilest Fracasso was there busied, Victor Souranza Generall by water, comming vp the Riuer Po as farre as the Argentine territorie with one and twentie gallies, foureteene foists, and other lesser vessells, determined to assault the Towne of Ianiola, seated at the mouth of Vaterna: For if it were not taken, it was certayne that the fleete could not goe vp farther but with greater daunger. To this end Souranza landed foure hundred horse, and sixe hundred foote at a place opposite to the Citie. These hauing begunne to fortifie the Riuer banckes to defend themselues from the enemies incursions, that they might afterwards without any let batter the towne walls, Sigismundo d'Este on a sodaine with Nicolao Corregio, Hugo Sanseuerino, and other noble men comming foorth of Argento with three thousand men, assailed them, and gaue their first charge vpon Andrea Burgensis quarter, where at first the Venetians had the worst, but so soone as the alarme was giuen in the camp, euery man armed ranne fiercely to the fight. Sigismond opposed to the Venetians front foure waggons, on each of which lay foure falconets. There the battaile was very doubtfull, till three hundred Venetian light horse wheeling about to giueThe defeate of the Ferrarois. in vpon the enemies backe, did so terrifie Hercules souldiers, as Sigismond and the other Captaines betooke themselues to flight, then the Gallie called Valeresa comming with great rumor vp the water vpon their backes, the enemies changed their fight to flight. Sigismond mounting a swift horse, escaped himselfe alone to Argento. Many were drowned in the Riuer, more were slaine in the battell, but the number  of prisoners was greatest of all. Souranza that day obtained a great and notable victorie. For besides Hugo Sanseuerine, he tooke three score and tenne other Captaines whom he sent prisoners to Venice.
Roberto Sanseuerino being likewise desirous to execute some memorable enterprize,The venetian armie crosseth the Po. resolued to passe ouer into the Ferrarese Territory, and for effecting it hee commaunded a bridge to be made on galliots, and committed the worke to Bassan of Verona, which being soone finished, he left Barbadico at Ficarolles, and himselfe with Heme and Sanuto the Prouidators, went a mile beneath the enemies Fort, where hee beganne to passe ouer his troupes, and so soone as one boate had passed, it cast anker, and so the rest serued for a bridge. By this time eighteene hundred horse and foote were already gone ouer into the enemies Countrey, when they perceiued that there wanted vessells to finish the bridge, which happened by their errour who had not taken the iust breadth of the Riuer: by the meanes whereof, a  troupe of valiant souldiers remayned on the other shoare destitute of their fellowes aide: whereat Sanseuerine was moued, in great choller protesting, that if they did not before day prouide boats to finish the bridge, his brauest troupes through the carelesnesse and indiscretion of some, would vndoubtedly be cut in peeces before his face. But by the Prouidators diligence, it was preuented, and the bridge beeing wholy finished, the rest of the Armie crossed the riuer ere the enemie had anie notice thereof.
Hercules souldiers hauing discouered them, and not trusting to their Fort, threw their ordnance into the Riuer, and setting fire on their fortification, retired speedily to Ferrara. By their example others that held certaine fortified places vpon the  Riuer, did for feare abandon them: whereupon the Venetian in an instant became Master of the Riuer (one Fort excepted, standing at the head of the Polesine which the enemies had fortified.) So soone as the Venetians perceiued that neither the riuer nor any forts could resist their furie, they wasted the whole territorie, burning farmes and country houses downe to the ground.
There is a Parke within a mile of Ferrara: Borsia was the first that inclosed it withA parke neare to Ferrara. walls, but Hercules inlarging it, did much beautifie it with lakes, ponds, groues, and other places fit for chace. The Venetian first encamped neere to the walls which are close to the riuer; and in the meane time made a new bridge ouer the Po, stronger than the former. They first placed a ranke of shippes of burthen, one close to  another, from one side to the other, fastened to their ankors, by strong yron chains which could not bee cut in sunder, then they laid euen planckes vpon them so cunninglyThe venetians build a bridge vpon the Po, ^eere to Ferrara ioyned together, as it resembled a well-framed bridge of stone: This beeing done, they builded shoppes vpon it on both sides, wherein all sortes of wares were sold, which hindered Passengers from looking on the water: They made moreouer draw-bridges at both ends, which when they were drawne vp, those shoppes seemed an Island in the middest of the Riuer. And to keep the enemie from firing it by night, some two hundred paces before it they hung vp aboue water great wodden plankes fastned to ankors with yron hookes to keepe out the fire works, which might be throwne vpon it, till they were either quenched or burnt out.
The bridge finished, Sanseuerine brake downe the Parke walles, and through it marched with his armie in battell within a mile of Ferrara, where he remained for aSanseuerino in battell before Ferrata. time in the Cities view, but when he saw that the enemie did not sallie, he brought backe his troupes to the Campe: then he beganne to repaire the Fort vpon the riuer which the enemie had abandoned; hee did first enlarge it, then enuironed it with trenches of twenty foote deepe, with strong bastions, Towers, and Rauelins: This worke vndoubtedly was in a manner impregnable, and would perpetually haue terrified the Citie of Ferrara, had it not by peace beene razed. The Venetian hauing in this manner assured his Campe, galloped with his Cauallerie to the very gates of Ferrara, filling all places with feare.
The Citizens viewing the bridge so neere them, and the Fort much neerer beganneThe Ferraroi^ complaints. to lament their owne and Common-wealths estate, saying, That Hercules Principalitie was ouerthrowne, themselues in great daunger, and that the stroakes of warre had pierced their very heart, that they were out of hope euer to haue

peace with the Venetians, who had displayed their victorious Ensignes at their gates: That the Marshes, Lakes, and Riuers had not beene of force to restraine the course of their Victorie, of whom they were to receiue verie vniust conditions of peace, or submit themselues to their mercie. The Venetian in the meane time omitted nothing that might further his Victorie, he did shut vp the riuers and lakes, placing corps du guard and garrisons in all passages. In a word, he held those of Ferrara at such a bay, as Conquerours are wont to do the vanquished, when they are desirous speedily to end the Warre.



The end of the first Booke of the fourth Decad.







THE SECOND BOOKE  OF THE FOVRTH DECAD OF THE HISTORIE Of Venice.

The Contents of the second Booke of the fourth Decad.
THe Pope maketh a new league, and abandoneth the Venetians. The Duke  of Calabria comes to Ferrara. All Princes and Commonwealths of Italy band themselues against the Venetians. The Senate sends for the Duke of Lorraine into Italy, and giues him large pay. SANSEVERINO with great forces crosseth the Adda by a bridge, and encampeth at Frezzia. LODOVICO SFORZA doth easily ouerthrow the ROSSIANS. ALPHONSO taketh diuers townes from the Venetians on the Bressian and Verona territories: then crossing the Mincia, he scoures the countrey as farre as the Riuer Adice, and not long after takes Azzola. The Venetian Infanterie vpon HERCVLES arriuall at Stellata leapes into the Riuer. ALPHONSO leauing Azzola with an intent wholy to ouerthrow the Venetian forces vpon Po, being stopt by SANSEVERINO returnes without effecting it. GIACOMO MARCELLO Generall of the Venetian fleet, dies at the siege of Gallipolis, which being taken, the Venetians make farther incursions into Calabria. The enemies Armie comes to Baignols where peace in vaine before motioned at Cesenna, is determined and concluded. And lastly the triumphes, turnaments, and barriers made at Venice for ioy of this peace.

THE Venetians had alreadie mightily preuailed, and the warre with Hercules would soone haue beene ended,Pope Sixtus withdrawes himselfe from the venetians friendship. had not Pope Sixtus by his sodaine alteration not onely snatched the victorie forth of their hands, but that which worse is, thrown them headlong into  a dangerous war. For the Pope and Ieronimo Visconte by whose councell and aduise all matters were directed, ^alling by little and little from the Venetians after Malatestes death, did at last openly declare themselues friends to the Fe^arois. Francisco Diede, who at that ^ime was Ambassador with the Pope, had of a long time foreseene it, and a little before had by letters aduertized the Prince and Senate thereof, who to containe them still in league, omitted no kinde offices of good friends and confederates. It is not certainly knowne vpon what cause they did it.
The Pope hauing made a league with the enemie, did by letters goe about to cause the Venetians to lay downe Armes, to induce them no more to warre vpon the Ferrarois, and to restore vnto him whatsoeuer till then they had taken from him. The Senate moued by these letters, were vnwilling to let goe the victorie

whereof they had so sure hold, and yet desirous to answere the Pope, and to let him and all the Princes of Italy and Europe vnderstand that they were not Authors of that warre: for they would neuer haue taken armes against Hercules, had not Pope Sixtus prouoked them thereunto. They decreed that Bernardo Iustiniano a verie eloquent person should, in the Common-wealths name, answere the Pope.
The effect of those letters which he composed, and after the Senates approbationThe Venetians answere to the Pope. were sent to Rome, is this. That the Senate were so farre from entertaining this warre without his Holinesse consent, as they did it by his instigation: That as at first so now they did not onely preferre peace before warre, but before victorie, so it  were sought for in time, and not on such conditions as might make their lenitie in^erpreted in discretion: That they were confident his Holinesse actions had no priuate end, but such as imported the common good of Christendome: onely in this it was notorious to the whole world, that he dealt more subtilly than sincerely: That for twentie yeares wherein both by land and sea they had beene singled out by dreadfull Ottoman, none of the Princes of Italy afforded one drop of bloud towards the quenching of this neighbour flame, but seemed deafe to all solicitations, lame in assistance: But in this priuate cause of Ferrara those which shranke backe from the publike quarrel could all bandie together, not as if they would arbitrate, but enforce peace: That they humbly desired his Holinesse to deliberate this businesse temperately  which others did passionately, and let his owne vnderstanding aduise him whether it more concerned him to fauour the Venetians or the Ferrarois. As for them they were resolued to prosecute that warre, which by his aduise they had vndertaken, hoping the successe should be as happie, as the cause iust and honorable.
This is in summe the import of the Venetian letters: But the Pope not respectingHe excommunicateth the Venetians. his ancient league, and perceiuing the Venetians to continue their resolution, excommunicated them. He had alreadie leagued himselfe with Ferdinand and others. And whilest this businesse was pursued by letters to and f^o, Alphonso Duke of Calabria came to Ferrara with two thousand men, among whom were foure hundred Turkes which he brought from Otranto, but they within a while after ranne ouer  to the Venetian. Vpon his arriuall certaine skirmishes were made neere the Citie, himselfe stayed not long there, but leauing his troups with his brother in law, went first to Mantua, and then to Milan. But at a councell held at the sametime at CasalMaior vpon the Cremonese where the commissioners of all the confederate Princes and states met, warre was concluded against the Venetians by general consent. Fredericke Gonzaga Prince of Mantua had the title of Generall of the Armie, but Alphonso Duke of Calabria the honour. The Senate hauing intelligence of what had beene concluded in that assembly, and considering the dangerous warre they were to oppose the next Spring, (For the Genoueses excepted whom Giouanni Pascalis sent to that end had exempted, all other Princes and States of Italy had coniured their destruction) and for the strengthening of their partie, they sent into France for Renatus Duke of Lorraine, vnto whom they gaue honourable entertainment. Antonio Vinciguerra one of the Secretaries had long before solicited him from the Pope and Venetians to come into Italy against the Ferrarois, who now the Pope relinquishing the cause remained firme to the Venetians, and brought two hundred horse, and one thousand foote to their aide. Vinciguerra conducted him through the Alpes: Bartilmeo Victurini, and Nicolao Foscarini Venetian gentlemen, went as farre as Trent on the confines of Italy to meete him.
The Duke of Austria and the other Potentates of Germanie in fauour of the Pope denied passage to the Sauoyards, and other French whom Lorraine had enrolled. The Spring was alreadie come, when Pietro de Priuli, and Marco Antonio Morosini came to the Armie as Prouidators. The enemies comminations were great: but the Senate hauing intelligence that their fauorites in Milan which yet stirred not, would if Sanseuerin crossed the Adda, raise some commotion

vpon difference betwixt the widow of Galeas and Lodouico Sforza, after mature deliberation, commanded one part of the Armie to passe into Lombardie, and the other to remaine before Ferrara Deifebo A^guillare went before with a braue troope of horse, and expected Sanseuerino at Azzola vpon the Bressan Confines. Roberto soone followed him, leauing the Prince of Mirandola, Bernar dino Montone, Antoniace Dulcino, Gasparo Perussini, Alessandro surnamed the Turke, and diuers other Captaines at the siege before Ferrara. The French Generall went thither likewise with his forces: But their arriuall was more terrible to their enemie than profitable to the Venetian, the French euerie day mutining.
Sanseuerino with Marc-Antonio Morosini the Prouidator being come to the Bressan  territorie, remained for a time at the new Orges, then making a bridge ouer the Adda aboue Trezzia, and fortifying it at each end, himselfe encamped on the further side, where he contained his souldiers without executing any hostilitie vpon the Countrey, rather like a guest then enemie, which was so farre from di^inishing the malice of the Confederates, as on the contrarie it increased it, hastening not deferring this intended warre. Lodouico Sforza, with a mightie Armie was in field againstThe state of the Rossians of Parma yeeldeth to Lodowick. the Rossians of Parma, who till then had brauely defended their patrimonie, but now seeing so vnequall a power bent against them, fortified their townes, and yet not thinking themselues secure, retired with their children into the Genoueses territories. Their Tenants following not their Lords but their fortune, presently vpon their departure yeelded to Sforza. Lodouico* vpon this victorie marched vnto the territorie of Gremona where Alphonso expected him, (as some say) called in by the Milaneses vpon Sanseuerins arriuall to guard the frontiers in the absence of Lodouico. Others affirme that he came voluntarly offering his assistance against Sanseuerino.
Such was the state of the Venetian affaires, when the Commonwealth was shaken with a new feare by a transcursion of two of S^ins sonnes to the enemie.Two of Sanseuerins sonnes flie to the enemie. Hee had foure sonnes which serued in this Armie, all valiant and braue young Gentlemen, of whom Francisco and Galeas vnknowen to their father, dishonorably fled to the enemie, allured (as it seemes) by faire promises: yet their error was so  much the lesse, as it extended no further then to themselues. This, at first did greatly ^rpiex the father, who in great passion called God and men to witnesse of his sonnes treacherie, practizing not onely against their fathers honour, but life: yet herein comforting himselfe, that his fidelitie was sufficiently knowen to theSanscuerino's Apologie to the Senate, with their gracious acceptation. Venetians, and should euery day be more and more manifested: whereupon, hee sent messengers to Venice to make his owne Apologie, and excuse the temeritie of his children, which he hoped ere long to redeeme with his owne seruice and loyalty, and let the world know that he esteemed nothing so deere, as the safetie and honour of the Venetian Estate. But the Senate was so farre from imputing the errour of his sonnes to himselfe, as they did by letters comfort him.
Alphonso in the meane time hauing made a bridge ouer the riuer beyond Cassian, passed ouer his Armie with great rumor into the Gyradade, and thence, marching into the Bergamasco, tooke Colloigna and Vnguiana. Sanseuerino hauing intelligence of his comming, kept strong guard on the bridge on that side and strengthened his Rampiers, and then retired with his forces towards Bergamo: Thence, crossing the Oglio at Palaznoles, he encamped at the new Orges. The enemie hauing taken Trecian, and reenforced the Popes and Florentines troupes, passed ouer the Oglio betwixt the new Orges and Quintiano. The Senate considering how dangerous the enemies Armie would bee to their territories (for it was reported that he had an hundred companies of men at Armes) did speedily send the rest of  the Cauallerie which lay vpon the Po, to Sanseuerino, that hee might be better able to resist him.
Alphonso in the meane time, had taken all that part of the Bressan territoryAlphonsos great progression. which lieth betwixt the Riuer Mella and the new Orges, a very fruitfull soyle abounding

in townes and villages, which vpon terrour of his arriuall presently yeelded vnto him. The Venetian being inferiour to the enemie in strength, resolued not to confront but follow him, and preuent his attempts: And leauing Antonio Sc^riotto with 300 horse in garrison in the new Orges, himselfe went through bywaies first to Maclou, then to Saint Zene three miles from Bressia. Augusti^ Barbadico and Zacharia Barbaro men of great authoritie, came from Venice to the Campe. But Morosmi and Barbadico remaining with Sanseuerino in the Armie, Barbaro went to fortifie Bressia. He was sonne to that Francisco who in former time had for three yeeres space defended that Citie against all the attempts of Duke Philip, worthie indeede of such a father whose wisdome and vertue he inherited, but more famous  in being father to H^olao, the learnedest of his time in Greeke and Latin^ Alphonso crossed the Riuer Mella and seized on Baignols.
The Prince of Mantua (who till then had caried himselfe as a friend not enemie to the Venetian^) did openly shew himselfe their enemie, ioyning with Alphonso,The Mantuan goes to the Consederates A^mie. whose Armie by this addition amounted to one hundred and thirtie companies of horse, which being diuided ouer the Bressan territorie tooke all the townes on this side the Riuer Mella (Azzola excepted) from the Venetians.
Sanseuerino vpon the enemies comming to Baignols, retired to Regiana fiue miles from Bressia, but Alphonso taking all the other townes, brought his Armie to Calcina. This is all which that summer, till the beginning of Autumne was done, vpon the Bressan and Bergamasch territories.
Neer to the Po, most of the French being dead by sicknesse, their Generall hauingThe (...) of Lor rain returns into France. intelligence of King Lewis death, who by his Testament had made him Gouernor and Protector of his Realme, returned into France. The Senate being aduertized about the Spring, that King Ferdinand, assisted by the Pope and Consederates, had rigged a mightie Fleet, the better to resist the enemie at Sea, wrote to Iacomo Marcello who succeded Souranza in the Admira^tie; ^o haue a care that the State were not preiudiced about the Islands, nor in the gulfe neere to Histria and Dalmatia; and if he might safely doe it, to inuade the fro^tien of Apulia and Calabria as Souranza had done.
Marcello had not long beene Admirall, when fortie of the enemies Gallies, vnder the commaund of Frederick of Arragon, sonne to Ferdinand, a braue young Prince, came into the Hauen of Ancona. Their arriuall did trouble the Senate, for it was likelie that the enemie, by tarrying in that place, would cut off the Venetians passage on the Sea. All Venice had their hope fixed on Marcello and his Fleet, despairing of their Dominion at Sea, vnlesse the enemie could be speedily repelled; expecting when Marcello should either assaile or fire them.
But whilest he intended the supplying of the Gallies, not yet compleat with soldiers and marriners, which he could hardly effect without promise of pardon and impunitie to the Bandetti of Albania, Dalmatia, and Histria, the enemie thinking  himselfe not safe departed from Ancona three dayes before his arriuall. This omissionThe enemie (...) from (...) was hardly interpreted, especially by the vulgar, measuring things by the euent. But better vnderstandings made more fauourable construction of it, saying; He did better to absent himselfe from fight, than vnaduisedly hazard his naked Fleet, and that victorie was more easie in discourse then action. Thus was hee variously censured.
The enemie in the meane time being out at Sea vn willing to seeme idle, madeThe enemies take the Isle of Lissa. sodaine incursion vpon Lissa an Island in Dalmatia, putting all to fire and sword^ From thence he sailed to Corfou, Georgio Viare a wise and valiant Gentleman gouerned the Island. He descrying the Arragonian Nauie, encouraged the inhabitants, pr^paring all things requisite for defence: The enemies first assaults were very violent: for being many; they at one time scaled all par^s: but through the valour of the defendants, they were not onely kept from entrance, but pre^ipitated from the wals with great slaughter.
Notwithstanding this braue repulse, the assault continuing till night without intermission, and the Gouernour fearing, that the Defendants wearied, though notA subtill (...) of Vi^re. conquered, would giue way to the enemie, inuented this stratagem. Hee diu^ged that the Venetian fleete would in few houres arriue there, whereupon ^ee commaunded all the bells to be rung, acclamations of ioy to be made by the souldiers on the walles, as though supplies were already arriued. The enemie terrified with this sodaine clamour, hauing lost 500. men in this assault, put to Sea. Shortly afterThe enemie retires from Cors^ the Venetian fleete, arriued and wintered there.
Alphonso was (as hath beene said) encamped at Calcina, and it was probable, that from thence hee would goe and besiege Lonata. Morosini the Prouidator departed  from the Campe at Rezza, and went thither to fortifie the Cittie, whither hee sent for Country people, who with the inhabitants and souldiers of the Garrison, made a trench and ra^pires. Giacomo Media was likewise there, who not long before had beene sent thither with three hundred men to guard the Citie. These, together with the light horse of the Towne, did by their frequent incursions, forestall all things from the enemies forragers so long as they remained there. Moreouer, the Venetian had diuerted the ordinary current of the Riuer Seriola, that if the enemy came to encampe there, hee might want water. Neuerthelesse hee attempted to take Vidaciolla, which Sanseuerino hauing strongly fortifyed, and the enemie twice assaulting it, could not be taken. Then Alphonso being loath to loose  any longer time, determined to march directly to Verona.
Some say, that the Prince of Mantua, from thence returned home, discontentedThe Ma^ discontented lea^ the armie. with Alphonso, for refusing to besiege Lonata and Piscara, which two townes heespecially desired to take from the Venetians. The Senate had beene aduertized of the enemies desseigne, and therefore sent diuers boats, and a strong Garrison to Piscara to guard the Towne and Lake of La Garda: they had beside commaunded the Gallie which lay at Lalissa to bee armed, and brought into the Lake. The charge thereof was committed to Andrea Marcello, who had commaund of those vessells, till Pietro Diede was sent thither by the Senate.
The enemie lying still at Calcina, Thomaso of Imola, who commaunded the foot The Venetians come to Stellata forces vpon the Po, crossing the Riuer before day, gaue a sodaine assault to the suburbs of Stellata, and to the rampires next the Castle: the Sailers were mingled with the Souldiers. The suburbs were easily taken and burnt. The ordnance and other engines being taken from the enemies rampires were carried to the vessels: this being done, they gaue a fierce assault to the Fort: The Souldiers and Mariners vrged with such furie, as in a moment they became masters of part thereof: Then they which were in the highest places craued parley, first of Immola, then of Andrea Zancane, who commaunded the vessells, and of set purpose prolonged their parley, expecting some speedie aid from Ferrara, wherein they were not deceiued. So soone as newes came to the Citie, that the enemie had taken the bastions, and part of the  Fort at Stellata, and that without speedie helpe, they within it would be enforced(...) d Es^e (...) to the reliefe of S^. to yeeld; Hercules on a sodaine taking the light horse with him, and commaunding the rest of his forces to follow in order of battell, shewed himselfe vnlooked for to the Venetians, whom hee charged: the Sailers running to the vessells, left the souldiers to the slaughter, who for a while made head, but vpon the arriuall of the rest of the troups, they threw themselues into the water, trusting to their skill in swimming, hoping thereby to get into the vessells, but most of them being carried away by the violent swiftnes of the torrent, perished, those that escaped drowning were taken prisoners, among whom was Immola, who being but slightly wounded, and dying the night following, was supposed to haue beene poysoned.
Those that lay at the obscure Lake, made incursions as farre as Ferrara, where among other places they spoiled the rich and beautifull Monasterie of the Chartreux,The death of Gi^ H^. burning part thereof. Giouan He^ Prouidator in that Campe hauing intelligence that the Fort of Stellata was taken, and making himselfe readie to march to

the reliefe of his soldiers, and in ioy of that good news curuetting his horse not well managed, it threw him, of which fall hee died not long after. Giacomo surnamed Media came to the Camp as Prouidator in his sted, who by reason of the infectious aire falling sicke was carried backe to Venice, where not long after hee died. Lastly, they sent Francisco Troni thither, a discreet and braue yong man, who had no better successe than his fellowes.Alphonso taketh Carpinetta.
Whilstthe is was done on the Po, Alphonso departing from Calcina tooke Carpinetta, thence marching to Calauria, hee crossed the Mincia with part of his forces beneath Valegia, where hauing well viewed the whole Countrie, hee repassed the Riuer and came to Godia, where againe crossing the Mincia at a bridge, by the The situation of Valegia. Mantuans confines came into the Veronois. Vallegia stands vpon an high hill, and vnderneath it runnes the Mincia; the walles fortifyed with towers extend themselues as farre as the Marshes of Tartar. In this space stands Villafranca in the middest of a Plaine, strong rather by Art than Nature. The Arragonois breaking down the walls in that place, approached with his armie neere to the Citie, and battering the Castle, tooke it the third day after his arriuall.
From thence scattering his forces throughout the Veronois, he filled all placesAlphonso vpon the Ueronois. with terrour, euen to the Cittie walles: Hee likewise sent some of his Captaines to view the strong townes of the Countrey, and without difficulty became Master of Vigatia, the Isle of Escalla and Sanguineta. Then comming to the Riuer Adice, and  being discouered by the Inhabitants of the farther shoare, they terrified, fled, which terrour ranne as farre as Padua and Vincenza, the Country people flying to the citties and strong townes. In this alarme the Magistrates of both places assembledSanseuerino co^ meth to Valegia. forces to oppose the enemies passage ouer the Adice. Alphonso stayed not long at Villafranca, ere Sanseuerino comming vp the Lake of Benac encamped neere Valegia, where Marc- Antonio Morosini met him with part of the forces which were at Lonata; at his arriuall Augustino Barbadico his Colleague fell sicke, and was carried to Venice.
Alphonso perceiuing the Venetian to be encamped before him, and not able to draw him to the fight, nor yet safely to assaile him, on a sodaine rose and marched  into the Bressan, where he besieged Azzola. Some thought that the enemie did not without cause remoue and giue ouer his other dessigns for that siege, but that he had correspondence with some of the Garrison and Citizens for surrender of the towne. It is certaine, that the towne being afterwards deliuered backe to the Venetians by agreement, some by decree of Senate, who feeling themselues guiltie had remoued their habitation, were absolutely banished, whereby wee may perceiueAlphonso takes Azzola. that it was not a publike but priuate surrender. But howsoeuer, the City reputed impregnable yeelded at the first assault, the Castle following their example: Sanseuerino after Alphonsoes departure recouered all the Townes which hee had taken vpon the Veronois, and leauing Antonio Souranza for the guard of Valegia, hee  went into the Bressan, and encamped at Calcina.
While these things were done abroad, the State receiued an ill presage at home. For the Dukes pallace was in part burnt downe by night. It is thought one of thePar^ of the dukes pallace burnt. Chappell negligently leauing a candle lighted, the snuffe thereof falling downe kindled the fire, which about the second watch of the night brake forth into a flame: the mischiefe would haue extended farther, as in former time, had it not bin speedily preuented. Sanseuerino strengthned at Calcina with new supplies, was desirous to pursue the enemie, when contrary to all expectation hee vnderstood the losse of Azzola and the Castle. This newes bred generall amazement, many expostulatingDiuers expostulations vpon the yeelding of Azzola. why the Azolans euer fauoured by the Venetians should so betray them? why the Castle should so distrust it owne strength? That this yeelding proceeded  not from feare but treacherie: and that the enemie not vninuited had so confidently entred the Bressan. These rumors passed in the Venetians Campe. But Alphonso deliuering the Towne to the Mantuan, resolued by all meanes to free his brother

Hercules from the siege, from whom he daily receiued letters full of complaint, how thath e gained not by the Venetians losse; that his Victories benefited others, not secured his subiects still besieged: That the Venetian Ensignes still braued Ferrara,Hercules plaintiue Letters to Alphonso his brother. and possessed the bankes of Po: Therefore he intreated him in such extremitie not to relinquish his sister Leonora and her children parts of himselfe, and desired him to consider how that he should be able to hold out a winter siege; if the enemy should perseuer and his associates fall from him, (the onely thought whereof was terrible) were not he and his whole estate ruined? Therefore he importuned him whilest he had time and meanes, that he would doe his vtmost to remoue the enemie from the Po, and raise the siege ere Winter.
These Letters did not moue but spurre this forward Prince, who sending his infanterie before by the Po to Hostilia, himselfe about midnight followed with the horse by land. Sanseuerino hauing intelligence of the enemies departure, and assured that his haste tended to the surprisall of the Venetians on the Po, remoued likewise before day, and by great iournies came to Verona with two companies of men at armes, and sent order to the magistrates to prepare all the vessels vpon the Adice, that nothing might retard his desseigne. Francisco Diede was then Gouernor of the Citie, the yeare before Ambassador with Pope Sixtus (as hath beene said) and Francisco Marcello Prouost. These spending most part of the day in gathering the boates, and the busines not yet ended, were faine to labour all night, so that vpon  Sanseuerines arriuall, the souldiers imbarqued and sailed directly towardes the enemie.
The Venetian troupes following after the Generall being come to Piscara, they diuided themselues and tooke sundry waies. Morosini the Prouidator, and Fracasso comming to Verona with certaine companies of horse, followed Sanseuerino to aide him if neede required. Antonio Victorini who had beene Prouidator at Verona returned to the Campe at Calcina with Deifebo Anguilare, and the other part of the armie. The Venetians had the good fortune that those whom Alphonso had sent to Hostilia by the Po, were detained by a south winde. They being wind-bouud,Sanseuerins speed. Sanseuerino with a more fauourable gale arriued at Castel-Nouo as soone as Alphonso. The enemie amazed with the sodaine noise heard from the Castle, and wondering at so many confused voices, what, and whence those numbers were, at last vnderstanding Sanseuerino to be come, Alphonso brake into these words; O immortall God! doth this olde fellow flie now ^e can not goe? must the vigour of my youth bee out-stripped by his deerepitude? and, his iourney being greater than mine, must his speedeAlphonso^s ^xclamations. be so too? Then turning to his Captaines and Pilots, hee exclaimed against the windes and waters, as confederate against him; and so grinding his teeth, and bewraying much passion, returned frustrate to Hostilia.
Victorini in the meane time, Deifebo, and Rodolpho Gonzaga departing from Calcina, went to Castagnolles. There they vnderstood that Lodouico Sforza did with  great force batter Romagnia vpon the Bergamasch. The Venetian crossing the Oglio went to Pallasuoles, from whence Thomaso Primania was sent to Bergamo, and Pietro of Carthage to Martinenga to secure those Townes: But Sforza remaining before Romagnia after long siege tooke it. The Venetian Armie comming afterwards to Pontoglio, and from thence, neere to the Oglio, did in short space recouer diuers townes lost that Summer.
In the meane time, Sanseuerino and Morosini the Prouidator returning from the Po, ioyned with the Armie. All things succeeding prosperously, Pietro Marcello as Prouidator was left to winter at Valegia, and the Albanian horsemen at Villafranca vnder the commaund of Nicolao Enonio and his brother, two braue young men, and the rest in other places of the Veronois neere to the Mantuan confines, who by their frequent ^cursions, did all that winter disturbe Mantua and the Territories adiacent. Sanseuerino vnited with Victorini and Rodolpho Gonzaga, tooke Manerbia and the strong garrison in it: From thence Morosini by the Senates licence returned

to Venice, leauing Victorini in the Campe. Manerbia taken, the Venetian Generall recouered Valeriota, Scorsariola, and to conclude, all townes lost that Summer, but Azola, Quinciana, and Senica: Then, sending the troopes to Garrison, himselfe in mid winter honourably accompanied, went to Venice. Prince Moc^nigo attendedSanseuerino's magnifi^nt (...) at Venice. by the noblest Senators in the Bucentauro richly hung, went to meet him, and because he had honorably borne himselfe in his place, the State gaue him many rich gifts: they afterwards bestowed vpon him Catadella a towne on the Paduan territorie, and Montorio on the Veronois, with a delicate and pleasant place neere to the citie, with a goodly pallace in it: and that his wife might bee a sharer of his good fortune the Senate inriched her with many costly iewels. The like acknowledgement  did the Rossians of Parma receiue, who being by Sforza expulsed their Countrie, were at the same time in Venice, where they were bountifully entertainedThe Senat^ compen^th (...) Russians of Parma. by the Prince and Senate, promising neuer to forget their good seruice, and for the time present gaue them certaine summes of gold forth of the publicke treasury for the entertainement of their great familie: afterwards assigning a perpetuall annuitie of 32000. crownes to the two brethren Guido and Giacomo, and to the third, who had taken holy Orders, a very rich benefice vpon the Veronois.
Whilest these magnificent rewards were giuen at Venice, it fell out after Sanseuerines departure forth of Lombardie, Giouanni Antonio Scariotta leading fiue hundred  horse to their Garrison at Cremona, by the treacherie of his guides fell into an Ambuscado, in which he lost most of his horse, but himselfe, sonne, and one seruant, made way through the enemies and escaped. Sanseuerino toward the latter end of winter together with Nicolao Pisaura the Prouidator came to the new Orges where Fracasso lay in garison; vpon their arriuall, Antonio Vittorini by the SenatesSanseuerino comes to the new Orges. permission returned to Venice, so that Pisaura was sole Prouidator in the Armie, till the comming of Luca Pisani, who after Zacharia Barbaro had for a while commaunded Bressia. They remained still in the Armie till the end of the warre, and in the meane time wearie of Idlenesse, made a bridge ouer Oglio, and a Fort at it, which crossing, they tooke the Tower Tristania on the farther side the Riuer, and The tower Tristania taken. finding store of corne, victuall and hay, it was a great helpe to them that winter: And because the place seemed of some importance, they sodainly fortified it, placing a strong Garrison there.
The spring already approched when a rumour was spread that the Consultation of the confederate Princes which Alfonso held at Cremona had no prosperous issue, and that they dissented concerning the renouation of the warre. This did put the Venetians in some hope that peace propounded in Flaminia by the Popes Ambassadors, might vpon reasonable termes take effect, and to these ends being solicited, the Senate sent Zacharia Barbosa and Frederico Cornari to Lesenna; where after long consultation, they perceiued by the vniust conditions propounded, that this treatie  of peace was motioned onely to amuse the Venetians, and to keepe them from pursuing that which they had begunne the yeere before in France and Germanie.
The Venetians the precedent summer, carefull of the issue of that warre, and incensed against Pope Sixtus had sent Ambassadors to the French Armie and Germaine Princes to incite them to summon the Pope and all Christendome to a generall Councell, wherein it might be lawfull to complaine of the Pope, and to imploreThe Venetians c^aue a generall Councell. the aide of all Christians against him; and to this end they sent Seb^stiano Badoario to the Emperour Frederick, Antonio Lauretano to the French king, Paulo Pisani to the Duke of Austria, and Nicolao Foscarini into Flaunders to Maximillian, the Emperour Fredericks sonne.
The Pope fearing this matter, was desirous to hearken vnto peace. The Venetians in the meane time, though they intended peace, did not omit their warlike preparations against the Spring: for besides the Italian forces which by new supplies were mightily encreased by sea and land, they drew from Morea and the

Islands next adiacent to Corfou, from Albania, and Dalmatia, twelue hundredThe Uenetians receiue new supplies. horse, one part of these were quartered in the villages neere to the enemie, from whence they daily made roads into his Countrey, and the rest vpon the Bressan.
The Spring was alreadie past when Sanseuerino sent commaundement to all the Garrisons, to meet him on the 27* of May, betwixt Variola and Cortiana. But whilest this was done on the Bressan, the sailers of Diede his Galley, and foure other Gallies of Marcello's Fleet mutined. The Authours of the mutinie were secretly punished by the commaundement of Tomaso Zeno Generall of the Fleet on the Po: which the other Marriners hauing notice of, went with their Gallie to the enemies side, who lay neere to Philocina, but they were by him basely stript, spoyled  and sent away. The Senate vpon these newes proclaimed them traitors; and that they might serue as an example to others, banished them from their territories, with this addition, That if any of them were euer afterwards taken in the Venetian iurisdiction, they should be put to death as Capitall offenders.
At the same time that this Galley was lost, Captaine Porco, agreat enemy to the Venetians, made daily incursions from Hostilio euen to the trenches of Mellaria, and among other brauadoes against the Venetians, hee did by oath protest vntoThe arrogant brag of Porco. Giouanni Canalis (at that time Gouernour of the Castle) that within few dayes he would come knocke a naile into the gates of Mellaria. This bragge cost him deere; for being taken and brought before Canalis, the Venetian said to him; Thou arrogant  and vaine-glorious fellow, performe thy insolent promise: and seeing as victorious thou canst not performe this bragge, at least as a captiue; And because thou shalt not be forsworne, take this naile and hammer: (which he deliuered to him.) This being done, he presently sent him to Venice to be executed.
Marcello, Generall of the Venetian Fleet, toward the latter end of the Spring left Corfou, and went to besiege Gallipolis. This citie is like an* Island, and seated inThe Venetians besiege Gallipolis that part of Calabria aduauncing toward the Ionian sea, confining vpon it and the Adriatick. Plinie saith, That in time past it did belong to the Gaules, which is not vnlikelie to be true in regard of the name. The Nauall Armie consisted of 56. vessels, among which were 16. Gallies, and fiue shippes of burthen. The Venetian  before he would assault the Citie, summoned it to know if they would voluntarily yeeld, but seeing that labour was vaine, he drew his vessels neere the shoare, and landed part of his souldiers to assault it by land, and on the water from his Fleet annoyed the enemie so, as on both sides a cruell fight beganne. Marcello from his Admiral Galley incouraged his soldiers, willing them brauely to mount the Rampiers; the soldiers obeyed and desperately ranne through the midst of the enemies shot. Dominico Delfino, Lodouico Garzone, Constantino Lauretano, Tomaso Diede, and many other Captaines of Gallies, did brauely acquite themselues at the assault: And the Venetians had alreadie, not without great slaughter, reared ladders against the wals, on which some were mounted, when Marcello from the poope of his Admirall Galley, encouraging by name the soldiers and Captaines, approuing the valliant, and condemning cowards, executing all offices of a skilfull Captaine and Generall, being shot with a bullet, presently fell downe dead. Sagidino the Secretarie saw him fall, and couered him with a cloake, and after that he had conueyed the bodie intoThe death of Generall Marcello. his Cabin, encouraged his Countrimen to pursue the victorie, telling them that the Generall was slightly hurt, and gone to be drest, willing them, in the meane time, to let the enemie see that they could fight valliantly without a Commander, and in recompence of their valour, the Cities sacke was theirs, it being once taken.
Dominico Maripietro Captaine of the shippes of burthen, so encouraged his soldiers, as in despite of the enemie they mounted the walles. At last the victorious Gallipolis taken. Venetian entred the Citie, not yet knowing their Generall was dead. Euery street was filled with slaughter and spoile. Commaundement was giuen not to rauish women or spoile Churches. The Citizens threw downe their armes and cryed for mercie: all places ecchoed the cries and lamentations of women and children. The

noble Venetian presently grew passionate, and pitied their distresse, by sound of Trumpet commanding his Souldiers and Marriners to abstaine from spoile and slaughter. Gallipolis taken, the command of the fleet was by a Generall consent committed to Maripietro, till such time as the Senate should prouide a new Genenerall. The victorious Venetians did forth with fortifie the Citie, and made it a safe retreat for their forces.
In the meane time Nerita a Citie of the Salentines Radisca and many other neighbour townes daunted with the disaster of the Gallipolitans, voluntarily yeelded. Marcellos death reported at Venice, did somewhat sower the sweetnesse of the victorie. The Citie neuerthelesse reioyced, because that by the taking of Gallipolis, a means was offered them at their pleasures to anoy king Ferdinand their enemie, whose pride was no whit daunted, notwithstanding that he saw the Venetians make incursions into the verie bowels of his Kingdome; yet that turbulent spirit of his when it perceiued his countrey entangled in a difficult and tedious warre inclined to peace.
His sonne Alphonso who lay on the Cremonese, hauing intelligence by spies that the Venetians comming from their Garrisons, were with a mightie Armie encamped at Varioles, did with his troupes (which were farre inferiour to the Venetians) march to Quintiana, where fortifying himselfe, his Armie by supplies fromAlphonsos Armie at Quintiana. the confederates, did daily encrease. Sanseuerino in the meane time, because he would  not be idle, thought it fit, that Nicolao Pisauro the Prouidator, and his sonne Francisco should with certaine troupes of horse make incursions into the enemies countrey:The Venetians take Calice. These hauing at a bridge crossed the Oglio, did on a sodaine surprize Calce, and other townes of small importance, some of which they fortified, and razed the rest.
The enemie being not farre off, lay still and would not remoue, so as all that haruest there was no other memorable exploit done. In the end, after that Alphonso had assembled all the confederate forces consisting of sixe score companies of men at Armes, with an infanterie to their Cauallerie, he marched against the new Orges. Sanseuerino though he were inferiour to him in number of horse, yet being his superiour  in foot forces, went to the old Orges, supposing that the enemie would come thither. Nicolao Treuisano Gouernour of Bressia, accompanied Sanseuerino with a gallant troupe to the new Orges.
Alphonso in the meane time being come to Metella, enforced the townsmen toAlphonso takes Metela. yeeld, together with some other places of meane importance: From thence he went and seized on Varioles and Scosariolles, and then continued at Baignolles: But the Venetian who still followed him, seeking for a fit occasion to giue him battaile, went from Maclodia to Torbolles, and from thence not long after encamped at S. Zenes betwixt Bressia and the enemies campe. There peace was motioned with more likelihood of good successe, than before at Cesenna, and as it had a better beginning,A motion of peace. so was the end more prosperous. For the Captaines (which seldome happens) who were wont to abhorre the name of peace, became Authors and Vmpires thereof.
Sanseuerino on the one side, and Lodouico Sforza on the other, after sundrie messages from both parts vndertooke this treatie so much desired, not onely in Lombardie, where warre was hote, but ouer all Italy.
During this treatie of peace, or not long before, the Venetians receiued a great ouerthrow neere to Ferrara. Certaine foot-companies of the Garrison of the obscure lake had made incursions to the verie gates of Ferrara, seeking to draw forth the enemie into some Ambuscado: but the Ferrarois still contained themselues within their walles till the Venetians retired towards their campe: for then they sent The Venetians are put to rout. certaine troupes of horse against them, who skirmished with them as farre as the Parke corner which confrontes Cassagio, where the Venetians in disorder were put to rout, diuers were there slaine, and many wounded: but the number of prisoners was verie great, who (according to the manner of the Italian warre) being stript,

were dismissed. Troni Prouidator at that time of the obscure lake, falling sicke, and being carried to Venice, died there.
Peace (as hath beene said) being motioned by the Captaines did then take effect, onPeace concluded with the Venetians. these conditions: That the Venetians should reenter Asola Romania, and all other townes lost during that warre of Lombardie* That they should withdraw all their Garrisons on this side, and beyond the Po; raze all the Forts built vpon the riuer banks; and should surrender to Hercules whatsoeuer they had taken from him: the PollesinCondition of peace. of Rouigo excepted, which themselues retained; and should enioy the same liberties old and new as they were wont to haue in Ferrara, and places neere adioyning: That Sanseuerino should still continue in the Venetians pay, and yet should be Generall  to all the Princes and States of Italy.
Such was the end of the confederate warre of all Italy against the Venetians, the greatnesse of whose preparations may be imagined by this: That in two yeares space or little more whilest this warre lasted, they spent three millions and 600000. Ducates.How much the Venetians spent in this warre. The Venetians of a long time had not so willingly entertained peace. In all Townes and Castles ouer their dominions, bonefires were made in signe of ioy.
Besides, triumphes, turnaments, and fight at barriers, were proclaimed which should continue certaine daies. The rewards propounded to the combatants were two peeces, the one of cloth of gold, and the other of siluer. Great multitudes  of people came from all parts to behold those shewes. Hercules de Oeste, and Iulio Count of Camerin were present at them, whom the Prince and Senate went to meete. Leon, sonne to Lodouico Sforza, and Galeas Sanseuerino came from Milan to Venice. Old Sanseuerino chose rather to be a dealer in the triumphes than a spectator. The Rossians of Parma, and the Prince of Mirandula came thither likewise, with many other great Lords, some to fight, others to looke on. The market-place of S. Marke as farre as S. Geminians Church was to this end sumptuously adorned. The combatants preparations were magnificent: Three of Sanseuerines sonnes, who sundrie times made shewes a-part, caused fiue and twentie braue coursers to be richly trapt with gold and purple. The Rossians of Parmas shewes were in a manner like  this: But that of Count Camerins nephew, sonne to his brother, was accounted more sumptuous than all the rest. More than an hundred thousand persons beheld these triumphs.
Prince Mocenigo accompanied with the Senate and Citie Magistrates had a place prepared for them. These turnaments lasted certaine daies. In the end, the honour of the triumph was adiudged to Sanseuerines sonnes, as they that had best deserued it, Fracasso and Antonio Maria diuided the cloth of gold betwixt themselues, and Galeas alone had that of siluer. Count Camerins nephew, who in all mens iudgements had done brauely, refused three hundred crownes, which the State would haue giuen him. Some thought he did it in disdaine, because others were preferred before  him. Mariotto, a younger brother of the Rossians of Parma, doing more at barriers than his yeares promised, was rewarded with a horse richly barded. Many others were rcompenced according to their merit, many were likewise knighted. Iulio Count of Camerin was made Generall of the Venetian troupes, seeing Sanseuerino commanded those of all Italy.
The end of the second Booke of the fourth Decad.




THE THIRD BOOKE  OF THE FOVRTH DECAD OF THE HISTORIE Of Venice.

The Contents of the third Booke of the fourth Decad.
THE Dukes Pallace burnt during the warre, is sumptuously reedified. The Pestilence begunne in Summer doth in Autumne make diuers places in the citie desolate. A briefe Description of their Sea-trafficke. Foure Gallies trading into France are taken by Pirates on the coast of Portugall. Troubles in Friull by the sodaine arriuall of the Hungarians. ROBERTO SANSEVERINO with a braue Cauallerie goes to the warre lately begunne neere Rome. The election of MARCO BARBADICO who succeedeth MOCENIGO in the Principalitie of Venice. A briefe Declaration of the warre of Rome betwixt Pope INNOCENT and king FERDINAND Three Commissioners are appointed to prouide all things requisite to purge  the Citie from the pestilence. SANSEVERINO dispoiled of his troupes, returnes to the  Venetians. Their vsuall custome at their Princes funeralls. The cause of the warre with the Archduke of Austria, and sodaine commotions of the enemie on the very confines of Italie. The beginning and end of the Rethicke warre. The kingdome of Cyprus is ioyned to the Venetians Dominions; by a conueyance made by Queene KATHERINE in her life time. The inuention of harquebuzes, and the recompence of such as learned to shoot in them. An extreame cold frost at Venice, and ouer all the Lakes. A league betwixt the Pope, Venetians, and GALE AS SFORZA. The preparations of CHARLES the French King for the conquest of the kingdome of Naples.

THat part of the Dukes Pallace which was burnt during  the warre, was from the foundation reedifiedThe Dukes pallace is reedified this first yeere of the peace: It is an admirable peece of worke, and likely to last long. The Citie was greatly molested with the Infection the next Summer, which increasing in Autumne, did make Venice very desolate. This domesticke losse was accompaniedA great plague at Venice. toward the end of Summer with an other farre from home. But before wee enter into this Discourse, it shall not bee impertinent to mention the Venetians great industrie, and wealth, purchased by traffike at sea.
There is no place in all the Sea from Gades, betwixt Affricke and Europe, towards Syria and Egypt in the Leuant; nor from the North and West towards Bosphorus and the Fennes Meotides; nor any place so remote, which the Venetian Gallies haue not at all times frequented in trade of Marchandize. It is almost incredible

to thinke how the Venetian vessells doe ordinarily enter into the Hauens, not onely of Italie, but of Liburnia, Dalmatia, Macedonia and Grecce, as if it were in the suburbs of Venice. Wee will speake of those, who at the Common-wealths charge are yeerely sent to take in lading in the remotest places of the world.
Of these, foure great gallies bring home into Italie, Spice, Silke, Pretious stones, and Pearles from Syria and Egypt. Three others goe into Lybia, for gold, iewells, and slaues. Two saile into Fraunce and bring home wooll and Spanish silke. Others goe towards the Tana is, and Fennes Meotides, from whence they returne loden with Tapistrie and Emeraldes. And besides this number, foure direct theyr course into the French Ocean, and from the Martes there, loade themselues abundantly  with woolls, gold, tapistrie, and cloth of Flaunders.
According to this custome foure Gallies for this purpose were abroad vnder the commaund of Bartilomeo Minio, who comming into the Spanish Seas, mette with young Columbus, (nephew to Columbus the famous Mariner) who with seauen tall shippes of warre incountered them in the night neere to the sacred Promontorie, modernely termed S. Vincents Cape. But although at first hee determined to assault the Venetian Gallies, yet hee abstained that night, and resoluing to fight with them, came so neere, as the prowes of the pirates shippes were asterne the poopesThe Venetian gallies are assailed by Pirates. of the Venetian Gallies. So soone as it was day Columbus assailed the Venetians, who were inferior to him in men and vessells, but superior in courage and resolution. They fought fiercely for certaine houres space, and with such great slaughter as is seldome seene in any fight with such enemies, who rarely come to fight but vpon constraint. Diuerse that were present at the bickering say, that three hundred Venetians were slaine at that fight: others mention not so many. Among the dead were Lorenzo Michael Captaine of a Gallie, and Giouanni Delfino brother to another Captaine. The Venetians were wearied with long fight. The Gallie Delfina was taken by the enemies, whereupon the rest yeelded. Some say, that in one Gallie foure score dead bodies lay betwixt the prow and poope, which spectacle the victorious enemie lamented, saying in despite, That the Venetians by their wilfulnesse had procured that losse. The dead bodies were throwne into the Sea, and the  wounded set on shoare. Those which escaped went to Lisbone, and from thence were sent home.Lisbone a Cittie of Portugall.
Lisbone is a Citie of Portugall standing vpon the Sea, I thinke it was in old time called Olisipone. It is at this day very famous, as well for the ordinarie residence of kings, as for her great wealth. The Venetians were there very kindely entertained by the king, and those that were sicke he commaunded to be carefully looked to, the rest, according to each mans qualitie, receiued mony and cloaths, and were sent home into their countrey.
The Venetians are in ancient league with the kings of Portugall, the which beingLeague betwixt the venetians and kings of Portugall. The cause of this league. deriued from the Father to the Sonne, they inuiolably obserue. They say, that  the cause of this league and friendship proceeded from the Venetians courtesie and liberalitie. It is reported, That a king of Portugall came in time past with a small traine to Venice to see the Citie, where he remained certaine daies in disguised habite. But so great a guest could not long be concealed: For the Senate hauing intelligence, that a Noble man of royall parentage lay in the Citie, it did honourably receiue and conducted him to a goodly Pallace, where he lodged, being accompanied by certaine Senators to shew him the singularities of the Citie, and to wait vpon him whither soeuer hee went: At his departure they gaue him rich giftes, and for his greater honor appointed some to attend him as farre as the Venetians confines. This did the Venetians, not (as they thought) to a king but only to a priuate  person of blood royall. At his returne into Portugall hee acquainted his Princes with the Venetians curtesie and liberalitie; and made a Decree, That his successors should for euer acknowledge the Venetians bounty towards him. And for this cause the king of Portugall gaue such good entertainement to the distressed Venetians:

he did likewise commaund that none of his subiects should buy any part of the Venetians goods which had bene stollen from them. The newes of this losse did greatly afflict the Citie, the which exceeding (as it was reported) the summe of 20000. crownes, touched some particular persons: But the death of so many men did much augment their sorrow. The pestilence at this time did greatly infect the Cittie, in regard whereof, the Senate was of opinion at that time not to reuenge that wrong, but to deferre it to a fitter time.
At the same time there arose some troubles in Friull. Certaine light horse, sent by the King of Hungarie (as it was afterwards knowne) made sodaine incursions  vpon the very confines of Italy, to surprise Porto-nouo, a towne vpon the Riuer Lizonza. The Hungarians made a stay vpon the Thryestines territorie. But the Senate, though it certainly knew that the same King made warre still vpon Frederick, and that those troupes were expresly sent into Italy to surprize Porto-nouo and Tryeste, which Frederick yet held; yet because they were not well assured of the Kings intention, they forthwith sent certaine troopes of horse which lay in Garrison betwixt Verona and Padua, to the Carnons territories. But the Hungarians passing quietly through the territorie of Vdina, and frustrate of their hope to take the Citie, which the Bandetti had assured them of, left Italy, and returned without any farther attempt.
The better part of Haruest was alreadie spent, when Roberto Sanseuerino (who Sanseuerino aideth Pope Innocent. notwithstanding the peace in Lombardie still remained in the Venetians pay) earnestly solicited by Letters from Pope Innocent who succeeded Sixtus, went without the Senates consent or knowledge (who were then at peace by sea and land) with his sonnes Fracasso and Galeas and two and thirtie companies of horse, first into Faminia, and afterwards to Rome in the middest of winter: but hee arriued somewhat before his forces; for the Pope being pressed by Alphonso, hastened his comming.
The cause of this warre proceeded from the commotions of the Volaterrans, and rebellion of certaine Princes, who by a sodaine conspiracie, reuolted from Ferdinand, retiring to Pope Innocent, requesting his aide against that King. The Pope finding them not onely worthie to be protected by his authoritie, but likewise to be freed from all wrong by the forces of the Church of Rome, it fell out that Virgino Vrsino, who (as we haue elsewhere said) besides sundry townes which hee possest neere Rome on this side, and beyond Tiber, had likewise diuers others in the Marshes as farre as the lake Fuscino in the confines of the Realme of Naples, remained still loyall to the King. At first he resolued (as it is reported) not wholly to abandon the King, nor likewise in any sort to take Armes against the Pope, but together with Ferdinand defending the Realmes frontiers, following his Ancestors steps, to make no attempt neere Rome. In this maner, he remained, as it were, neuter amidst  these new garboiles of warre, when after Sanseuerins arriual, by the perswasion (as it was thought) of some chiefe Commanders of the contrarie faction, the Pallace of the Vrsini vpon Mount Iordano, (which is the name of some part of the Citie) was sodainly by the soldiers spoiled and burnt: whereat Virginio being incensed, did presently declare himselfe together with the other Lords of that familie, an enemy to the Pope. Alfonso strengthened by this mans power, and hauing seized on certaine bridges neere Rome, began after Sanseuerines arriuall, to waste and spoile all places round about the Citie. We onely mention this to acquaint the reader with the cause of the warre betwixt the Pope and King Ferdinand.
Now while these things were done neere Rome, Prince Mocenigo died the seuenth yeere of his Gouernment.




 MARCO BARBADICO, the 73. Duke of Uenice.








MArco Barbadico, a Senator of great wisdome and authoritie, was by a generall consent chosen Prince in his stead. This man (the Commonwealth being quiet at home and abroad) repaired the Ducall Pallace begunne a while before, with such expedition, as in a few moneths whilest he remained Prince all that part thereof towards the East was with stately Architecture almost finished. The cold weather nothing abating the furie of the Pestilence, it did greatly afflict the Citie. Therefore three Senators were appointed, who had ample commission to doe whatsoeuer they should finde necessarie, to free it from that calamitie. These men, that they might the  sooner take away the cause of the sicknesse, in an open place for the purpose caused a great quantitie of infectious apparell which the couetous graue-makers had layed vp together, to bee burned in one fire. And because great numbers of people did surcharge the Citie, they sent a great part of the vulgar to inhabit elswhere. At the same time the great Chanell, opposite to the great market-place, was clensed, the which by a decree of Senate, though it were of great extent, was in all places scoured. They sent certaine foote companies (according to their vsuall manner) into Cyprus for to guard the Island.
In the meane time, warre betwixt the Pope and the Vrsini (who as hath beene said, shewed themselues openly for Ferdinand) brake forth into great flames, after  the arriuall of Sanseuerines forces. For Pontenomentana being recouered, which they had taken, and Fracasso, sonne to old Sanseuerino almost slaine with a bullet,Sanseuerino recouereth Pontenomentana. the whole burthen of the warre fellon Paulo Vrsino, and other of Virginio's kinsmen. For Nomentana being taken by force, was sackt and ruined. Sanseuerino marched towards Monterotonda, when Cardinall Baptista Vrsino came to the Pope, and assured him that himselfe and friends would be obedient to the holie Sea, by meanes whereof there were none other attempts made neere Rome.
Virginio's troopes of horse did in the meane time waste the Roman territorie, till Alphonso's returne from Tuscanie, where according to their agreement they receiued a braue cauallery from the Florentines and Milaneses, with which they made  towards Rome: Sanseuerino with farre fewer number went to incounter him neere Flisco; there in skirmish the enemie lost certaine horse; but this notwithstanding, Alphonso presuming on his owne strength did in despight of Sanseuerino make furious incursions vpon the Romanesca.
The Pope who till then had constantly maintained this great warre, though he alreadie before resolued (as some say) to craue aide from France, hauing sent for Renatus Duke of Lorraine to come into Italy against Ferdinand; and had likewise by his Nuncio Nicolao Franco elect Bishop of Treuiso, requested the Venetians to associate him in that warre; yet because supplies from France are accounted farre off, and tedious, and that the Venetians in respect of their league sworne in Lombardie at the finishing of the Ferrarois warre, with Lodouico Sforza, Alphonso and the Florentines, would not take Armes; hauing thereby lost all hope of aide from any other place, and fearing to precipitate the State of Rome into greater dangers, he did willingly incline to peace which the enemie offered him on honourable termes. For though he was a great Protector of the papall dignitie, yet he loued peace andPeace betwixt the Pope and Ferdinand. quietnesse, in concluding whereof, he did as much as in him lay, procure the wealth and aduancement of the Church of Rome, together with that of his friends and confederates.
Sanseuerino presently after peace was made, being casheerd, and resoluing to carrie backe his troupes of horse into Lombardie, did by letters and expresse messengersSanseuerino dispo^sed of his forces. craue leaue of the Senate to retire with two thousand horse into some towne belonging to their territories: But his demand not granted, himselfe destitute of all counsell, as a man forsaken, hauing no safe place of retreate, and Alphonso still at his backe, who had followed him into Flaminia, was enforced to leaue his Cauallerie to  his enemie, and himselfe with a few followers to make a speedie retreat into the frontiers of Rauenna.
Such was the end of Sanseuerino and his sonnes renowned iourney from Lombardie to the warre of Rome, which we haue not so much mentioned for himselfe, as toThe venetians loyaltie. let the world vnderstand the Venetians great constancie and loyalty. For although an occasion was offered to ruine king Ferdinand intangled in a domesticke war, or at least mightily to endanger him if they would haue embraced those offers, promises and conditions, yet because they would in no sort violate the treatie of peace which they had once sworne to, they stopt their eares to these motions. Now whilest  these things were done neere Rome, newes was brought from France, that Maximilian sonne to the Emperour Fredericke was chosen King of the Romanes, a nameMaximilian is chosen king of the Romanes. verie hatefull to the Citie of Rome, taking it original in the daies of that Charles who ouerthrew the Lombards greatnesse in Italy. For many Historians affirme, That he did afterwards make his sonne Pipin, King of Italy, himselfe being Emperour: and by this meanes it came to passe in time, that he is not only called king of Italy, but of Romans, which enioyeth the same digintie and greatnesse like him.
Maximiliam had maried the daughter and heire of Charles Duke of Burgondie, who died in the war against the Suisses, and by this marriage purchasing great and ample Signories, being young, valiant and apt either for warre or peace, had after some  new troubles and difficult men aces of warre, inforced that stirring nation to obey his commandemment: Himselfe and Fredericke his father, acquainted the Venetians,(...). (as their great friends) with this new election. Dominico Treuisano, and Hermolao Barbaro were sent Ambassadors to them both, with commission in the States name to congratulate that royall election: They were both knighted. Another Ambassador was likewise sent into Portugall, to thanke that king from the Prince and Senate, for that not long before he had relieued and assisted the Venetians, who by Pyrates had beene robbed and spoiled and set on shore in his countrey.Ambassade into Portugall. Ieronimo Donato a verie excellent Philosopher was appointed to goe thither. Toward the Spring, the sicknesse lessened, and before Summer ended, it wholly ceassed, so as of a long time before, the Citie was not seene more  healthfull. This prosperitie was accompanied by another, proceeding from PrinceGreat prosperity of the venetia^* State. Barbadicos care and diligence, which was, great plentie and abundance of all things, for such store of corne, wine, oyle, and all sorts of meate was brought to the Citie, as in the memorie of man the like had not beene seene. This ioy was likewise seconded

by another: for the Venetians at that time had peace both by land and sea, so as the Commonwealth was neuer more happie than at that time.
The Prince was not onely busied in maintaining the State in this prosperitie, but in augmenting it, when on a sodaine to all mens griefe, death preuented him. He died in the ninth moneth of his gouernment: and therein perhaps more happie than all his predecessors: because, that besides a goodly race which he left behind him, himselfe hauing well deserued of Religion, Countrey, and Citizens, the Citie at his death was cleare from pestilence, and abounded in plentie. We may moreouer adde this to his good fortune, That vpon his death-bed an Ambassador came to him from Baiazet sonne to Mahomet Emperour of Turks, and brought him rich presents. It  is reported that drawing towards his end, he called for foure of his sonnes, whom after vertuous instructions which he gaue them, he exhorted to loue and honourThe Princes instruction to his children on his death-bed. the State, intreating them often to remember the honour it had done him, for raising him from a meane Citizen to the highest and soueraigne dignitie, the which ought to make them to render that pietie to their countrey which their father by reason of his short gouernment could not performe. The whole Citie did infinitely bewaile his death. Euerie one did publikely speake of his meeknesse towards all men. For besides other pious examples towards the poore, he did at the beginning of his gouernment, (fearing that by reason of multiplicitie of causes the poore should haue no free accesse to him) make a decree, That the names of those who  were desirous to haue audience of him should from eight to eight daies be drawne by lot: and that their names who were first drawne, should be first dispatched. This holy Decree was cause that neither ambition, briberie, nor fauour could hinder poore mens suits, nor barre them from audience. Great numbers of people followed his funerals to the Church of the Twinnes. But his bodie lies buried in the Church of the Publike charitie.
It shall not be impertinent to set downe briefly in this place, the ceremonieThe ceremonie at the Princes funerals. which is at this day vsed at the interment of the Venetian Dukes. After he is dead and bowelled, they embalme the bodie, and lay it vnder a Canopie of Gold, with his guilt sword and spurs reuersed: he is publikely kept in the Pallace for three  whole daies; then all the companies of the Citie which are as many as there bee Trades, doe with their banners, in solemne order, goe before the bodie; after them follow the Cleargie, next them the mourners who are many, in sad and sorrowfull manner: last of all come the Senate clothed in Scarlet and Purple, to demonstrate, That the Citie which is free, doth neuer in mourning habit follow the funerall of any Prince, how vertuous so euer. In this manner and habite, so soone as the bodie is brought into the Church, they sit round about it, whilest the memorie of the deceased Prince (according to the ancient manner) is recommended to the people in a funerall Oration. From thence the Senators returning to the Pallace, doe publish the first assembly for the creation of a new Duke.








AVGVSTINO BARBADICO, the 74. Duke of Venice.








AVgustino Barbadico, brother to the deceased Prince, a man of singular wisedome and grauitie, and at that time Procurator of S. Marke, succeeded his brother. This election was by so much more pleasing to the Cittie, by how much euery man thought, that they could not haue chosen a man more resembling the late Prince in all vertuous qualities, than this man. The next day after his creation he made a sweet and gentle Speech to the people, but his maiestike and reuerend presence, with a long white beard hanging downe beneath his girdle, made him more venerable. After his election  all things flourishing in peace as before, hee beganne his gouernement like to his brother, by repairing the Ducall pallace.
The next Winter, Antonio Ferriere, and within a while after Giouanni Baria were sent to Constantinople to the Turkish Emperour. Antonio Lauretano Ambassadour at Rome was called home, because the Senate supposed that hee had not faithfully discharged his place; hee was a very wise man and excellently learned: he was banished the Cittie for tenne yeeres. Sebastiano Badoario and Bernardo Bembo were sent to Rome in his stead, where Antonio Vinciguerra the Secretarie afterA league betwixt the Pope and venetians. Lauretans departure, had in the meane time by the Senates commaund treated with his Holinesse, whereupon at their arriuall, they made a league with him.
At the same time almost that this league was published, Francisco Priuli was made Admirall of the Sea. Hee at the Spring receiuing the publique ensignes in S. Marks Church from the Princes hand, departed from Venice. Certaine armed Gallies to secure the Sea-frontires, were gone before, and some others followed them. So great care had the Senate at that time for the guard of the Seas, when an vnlooked for warre from Germanie assailed them, about contending for their bounds; the beginning and progression whereof was thus. Sigismond, brother to the Emperour Fredericke, was Lord and Soueraigne Prince of the Rheticke and Noricke Common-wealths, and other Countries of Germanie neere adiacent: Hee was a meekeThe originall of the Rheticke warre. and courteous Prince, but inclining too much to flatterers: Hee had euer beene in  league with the Venetians, in which regard, the Almaine Marchants his subiects had free trafficke ouer all the Venetians territories, and the Venetian Marchants did the like in his; and especially at a famous Mart which is yearely held for a certaine time at Bolzan, a Citie vnder his obedience.
Now the Venetians comming to this Fayre after their vsuall manner, in the yeare 1487, were by Sigismunds commaundement (contrarie to the law of Nations) takenThe law of Nations violated. and imprisoned, and their goods seized to the Princes vse. His subiects had not long before driuen the Venetians from the siluer Mynes in the Alpes, bought by the Seigniorie, and because they were neere to them, they with-held them by force. When they were demaunded why they did so, their excuse was; That Sigismonds subiects inhabiting vpon the Lake of La Garda, were dispossessed of their dwellings, making this a colour to shadow their malice: for the strife of those men being referred to arbitrement, was in friendly manner debated by Commissioners from both sides.
And the better to manifest that their proiect was not new, after the imprisonment of the Venetian Marchants, they leuied forces from all parts, aswell of their own, as Swisses and Grisons to the number of ten thousand men. Then at the Spring they came into the field vnder Gaudentius Amasianus their Generall, and entred furiously vpon the Confines of Verona: and from thence running fifteene miles intoThe Almaines besiege Rouero. the Countrey, along the Riuer Adice; they drew neere to Rouero, a Castle belonging to the Venetians, seated in a streight of the Alpes vpon that Riuer, which they being not able to take as they supposed to haue done, they wasted the Countrey round about, and then made Sturma their Rendezuous.
These incursions being knowne at Venice, the Senate commaunded that their  souldiers which were in the Treuisan, Friul, and Lombardie, should speedily meet at Verona, and that beside those, new leuies of souldiers should be made. Within a while after, Pietro Diede Gouernour of Verona, and Ieronimo Marcello were madePietro Diede, and Ieronimo Marcello Prouidators. Prouidators, and the Signiorie committed vnto them the command of that warre. The Senate aftewards thought good to make Iulio Caesare Varrana Count of Cameryna Generall of their Armie, who presently came to Verona.
The Almains in the meane time being prouided of all necessaries to besiege and take that place, approching neere the walls, battred it with their ordnance, whereof they had great store: and the batterie continuing certayne dayes, they did beateRonero yeelded to the Almaines on composition* downe a great part of the wall; the Captaine of the Castle, by reason of their great  number, being hardly able to repulse them from the assault, howbeit notwithstanding all his resistance hee was at last enforced to yeelde it vpon composition. That which did most torment the besieged at the besieged at the batterie and assault, was the enemies artillerie, which was charged with yron bullets, hollow within and filled with wild fire. These bullets striking on the walls, scattered the fire vp and downe, with such vehemencie, as it burnt whatsoeuer it met with, so as no man durst come vpon the walles to the assault.
The Senate, perceiuing that the warre would continue longer than they had imagined,The Venetians intreat old Sanseuerino to be their Generall. and in some sort distrusting the speedie finishing of it by the valour and skill of one Generall, intreated Roberto Sanseuerino, (who after that Pope Innocent had cassiered him; retired to his owne house neere Padua) to accept the place of Generall of their Armie, together with Iulius Caesar Varran, and to make all haste possible to the Alpes aboue Verona, with certaine troupes of horse, together with his sonnes, two braue young men. Sanseuerino entertained the offer, and speedily went thither; At his arriuall the armie was filled with hope: he made certaine light skirmishes, whose euent was somewhat doubtfull, and made a bridge ouer the Riuer, that the souldiers might passe from one side to the other, and that by it, victualles might likewise be brought to the campe.
At the same time certaine companies of Almaines made incursions on the Territories of Vincenza, Feltre, and Friul; the feare of their comming doing more hurt  than their actions. For Ieronimo Sauorgnano issued from a noble and ancient family in Vdina, and a great friend to the Venetians, who had made him a Gentleman of Venice, so soone as he had notice of the Almaines incursions, did speedily arme the greatest forces he could, and together with many Countrey people whom hee assembled,

marching from the mountaine tops and bad waies which were not vsuallySauorgnane defeats the Almaines. passed, he came downe vnlooked for vpon the enemies, and assailing them on their backs, brake and defeated them, manie of whom perished in those deepe and fearefull precipices. The Senate in acknowledgement of this notable seruice, gaue him great thankes, and recompenced him with the commaund of three hundred foote men, which him selfe bestowed on his brother Giacomo, choosing rather to liue quietly at home, than to meddle any more in martiall matters.
The Almaines puft vp with pride, after they had taken Rouero (as hath beene said) made many incursions into the Venetians Countrey, who determined to surprise them: which they by their spies hauing notice of, laid an ambush to entrap the  Venetians, from which after a fierce fight, Roberto Sanseuerino by the valour andThe Venetians are defeated. prowesse of his sonne Antonio Maria, hardly escaped: Not long after Iulio Caesare Varrano Count of Camerina being afflicted with a feuer, went from the Campe to Verona.
The Almaines afterwards, wanting victuals and pay, were readie to mutinie; which the Captaines fearing, craued of Sanseuerino a suspension of Armes for a time, which hee refusing, they did about midnight set fire on the Castle, and with their Armes and bagage dislodged before day. The Venetians wondering in the morning that they heard no noise in the enemies Campe, could hardly beleeue that they were wholly gone, but doubted some treacherie or ambuscado: but  their spies assuring them that they were gone farre enough, they recouered the Castle.
Sanseuerino being assured of the enemies returne, and strengthened with new supplies from Rauenna, La Marca, and Vmbria, resolued boldly to passe on and besiegeSanseuerino's resolution. Trent, to let the Almaines know that the Venetians could and durst inuade them likewise in their owne Countrey. He imparted his desseigne to the Prouidators, whereupon Luca Pisani an ancient man whom the Senate had sent in Pietro Diede his place, who was gone home to Verona, answered;

That hee did not thinke that this enterprize could any way profit the State; because first,
Luca Pisani his opinion on Sanseuerino his designe.
it was not a thing likely to be true that the enemies, who of late were so many, and so gallantly

armed, were so farre gone into Germany, but at their pleasures they may returne and reunite themselues, yea and confront vs ere long, so readie is that nation to take Armes: and by that meanes, wee shall be in danger of loosing this place, so commodious for barring strangers forth of Italy: Secondly, if our men haue beene now strong enough to driue the enemies hence, wee will not say that they went away of themselues or vnconstrained, but that they haue beene enforced so to doe: But admit it were so, wee are too weake to inuade them, and to enter into their Countrey, there to maintaine a siege, if neede were: For wee must perswade our selues, that all Germany, with forces infinite, would vnite themselues and come into the field, rather then endure such disgrace: Lastly, if we should enter their Countrey and he there broken and put to rout, what place of retreate haue we, hauing the Alpes on one side

and our enemies on the other? Besides, we are to feare the passages, which are so narrow, as in time of peace they are hardly passable. And therefore it is better for the State to protract the warre, rather then on hope of vncertaine victorie to tempt Fortune. Againe, the Citie being much tyred with the Ferraresewarre, ought to make more account of peace without glorie, than of warre, though honourable, and of an assured good euent. This is mine opinion, which peraduenture, in regard of an error, common to those of many yceres, (feare) I will intreat you, if you so please, to declare your aduise, that wee may follow that which is most expedient.

Ieronimo Marcello replied in this manner. I would not doubt but that it were daungerous to enter into the enemies Countrey, and to besiege Trent, if that were true which my Colleague hath alleadged, Because that the Prouince or Citie which we should take, might animate all Germanie against vs. Yet according to his owne opinion the matter is farre otherwise, for the enemie is not gone away of his owne accord, but desperately enforced, as well through want of victuals as pay. Now, he that cannot entertaine an Armie alreadie leuied,

with victuals and money, which are the true sinewes of warre, hardly for want of these two will he raise a new. For it is much easier, to preserue things alreadie made, than to renew those which are ouerthrowne and wasted. It is not credible that all Germanie, to assist Sigismund, would take Armes against the Venetians, who haue euer beene their good friends and Confederates: For Sigismund, vnknowne to all other Germaine Princes, without beeing prouoked, hath insolently begunne warre. The Emperour Frederick his brother, approues not what he hath done, he would neither aid him with money, men or ought else, but seemeth to be highly displeased with this warre. Who will then suppose that he which is forsaken of his owne friends and countrimen, should euer be relieued by strangers? And if any man shall say that all the Princes of Germanie will not stirre in Sigismunds behalfe, but in their owne; fearing that the taking of Trent would open the Venetians a passage into their Countrey: and this alone might excite them to vnite their forces to expulse vs: This obiection is easily answered, for the Venetian Signorie hath many townes and Castles through which they may easily passe into Germanie. Feltre is not farre off, nor Belluna likewise; and least of all Ciuidalla in Friull: Besides these townes, it hath many strong Castles towards the East, as Buerna and Lodron on the Bressan, and the Fort of the lake Isea, together with the Topine valley in the Bergamasco, with all that Countrey which extends it selfe from the lake of Coma to the Grisons; And yet the Germaine Princes haue neuer attempted to driue the Venetians thence for feare of the passage. And though wee should take Trent, they would not stirre, but rather confesse and freely say, that Sigismund deserued it for vniustly prouoking the Venetian Signorie their friend and Confederate. As for the streight and narrow wayes we are to passe from hence to Trent, it is nothing; Yet we must open them, and foote by foot seise vpon whatsoeuer we shall find by the way doth belong to the Almaines, and leaue nothing at our backes which may proue our enemie: And whereas my fellow hath alleadged that the State wanting money, by reason of the Ferrarese troubles, is wearie of warre; I say we neede not care for that. For if we take Trent, all the expence of this warre shall be well recompenced with profit and vsurie, and our wrongs iustly reuenged, to the honour of our Commonwealth, which shall extend her bounds further; The which our ancestors haue so highly esteemed, as they haue neuer cared for any expence, so that they might augment their State. A faire accasion is now offered to take Trent, aswell because our valliant soldiers will enter it, the Citie being not well fortified, as also for that the townesmen fearing the sacke thereof, will yeeld vpon the first summons, and therefore our forces are sufficient to hazard the matter without expecting any further aide: If the enterprize prosper, my Lord Pisani will be the first that shall commend the Authour thereof. If the Citie shall resist, and we cannot take it, yet hauing first wasted the Countrey, burnt their Country houses and villages, and filled all places with feare and amazement, we shall bring backe our victorious Armie into these parts: And thus being reuenged, we may more easily treate of accord, than if we now retire without any further exploit. Wee must thinke that opportunitie doth not euery day offer it selfe, and therefore we are to take it when it is opportunely offered, and not let it slip, least the remembrance of not accepting it, together with repentance, torment those who haue so lost it.
Marcello's speech ended, Pisani freely alowed his opinion: The Prouidators thoghtThe siege of Trent is resolued. it fit that the Generall should execute that which he had propounded, who spedily caused all things to be made readie: But because that betwixt Rouero and Trent vpon the Riuer towards the left hand, there stands a Castle called Pietro, seated on a little hill, commanding the high way, the Generall determined to take it, from thence to bring victuals to the Campe, and because (according to Marcello's aduice) he would not leaue any enemie place behind him. This thus resolued, because that on Rouero's side they could not march to this Castle by reason of the difficult hanging of the mountaine, hee caused his Armie to crosse the Riuer at a bridge  which he made at his arriuall: then he marched vp against the streame of the Riuer, and within an houre and an halfes march, came to Caillan a small towne within a mile of Castle Pietro, where on small boates making another bridge, he repassed the Riuer, and encamped in a plaine sixe hundred paces from it, betwixt the mountaine

and the riuer, and from thence sent his light horse to make dscouerie, who were to aduertize him if they should chance to descrie any of the enemies ensignes. These light horse for getting the Generals commandement, rode vp and downe wasting and spoiling the countrey, onely intending to get bootie. Those of Trent in the meane time aduertized of the making of the bridge, and fearing their owne danger as much as their neighbours, their Armie being far off, and their Citie badly fortified and vnprouided of all necessaries, intreated George, Lord of Pietro Plana a Castle be* yond Trent, to make speedie head against the Venetian Armie, with such forces as he had, and the greatest numbers of Boores he coulde leuie, and with them to amuze the enemie, till Sigismond should come to their rescue. He presently did what  they entreated, and from Besina and other places neere adioyning had in an instant aboue one thousand men readie to march: Then with many drummes and trumpets he began to come downe from the hilles: The light horse who romed vp and downe, descrying them, and being not able to view their exact number by reason of the hill top which shadowed them, and perceiuing their file to be verie long in regard of the streight waies, supposed them to be farre moe then they were, andThe Venetians in amaze. seeing them to approach with such great rumours, turned their backes and fled, and meeting with their fellowes which followed them, caused them likewise to runne away towards the Campe, the horse and foote being pell-mell together.
The Almaines being more encouraged by the Venetians flight than their owne valour, were presently at their heeles, and so terrified their enemies campe, as euerie man fled and retired to the Generals troupes, who hauing notice of his souldiers flight was comming to backe them, where he brauely resisting the enemie, and reprehending the basenesse of his owne troupes, fought verie valiantly for a time: Many on both sides were slaine. And noble Sanseuerino perceiuing the enemies squadronThe death of old Sanseuerine the noble Venetian General. to presse in vpon him, acted wonders with his sword, till at last being beaten to the verie brinke of the Riuer, still aduancing one of his owne ensignes, and being oppressed with multitudes, wrapped himselfe in his colours, and so mortally wounded  fell into the water where he died. The rest of the Armie terrified by their Generals death, fled euerie man toward the bridge. Andrea de Burgo Colonell of the infanterie perceiuing this disorder, and that no man had any care to resist the enemies, supposing that if the bridge were broken, the runnawaies would stand to it, and be enforced to fight, ranne presently to cut the ropes which held the boates: But it fell out otherwise than he imagined: For feare doth commonly entertaine noThe Venetians are wholly put to rout. counsell; euen so those who fled, hoping to escape by crossing the riuer, when they saw the bridge broken, did headlong with their horse and Armes throw themselues into the riuer, where they all perished by the violence of the streame. Few or none escaped to the other side, so, that of the Venetians, accounting as well those that  were drowned, as they whom the Almaines slew, aboue a thousand men lay dead onA generous act of Guido Maria de Rossis. the place. Onely Guido Maria de Rossis with his troupe of horse, fighting valiantly, manifested the worth of carriage and magnanimitie in warre, who being inuironed by the victorious enemie, made way through the middest of them, and came off brauely. Other Captaines and Souldiers that could not crosse the riuer, some by vnknowne waies got vp to the tops of the mountaines, and others, but verie few,A bloudy victory to the Almanes. entred into boates and escaped to Rouero, among whom was De Rossis and his companie. There died great numbers of the Almaines, who with a bloudie victory returned home.
The Venetians spent some time in renewing their Armie, which was almost disbanded. The Almaines in the meane time did not stirre, but were glad to doe the  like, hauing receiued no lesse losse than their enemies. Neuerthelesse, there happened at the same time diuers skirmishes and incounters, with taking of townes vpon the Feltrine and Vincenzan territories, and along the lake of La Garda, with such troupes as each side could raise, putting all to fire and sword. The Venetians, among

others tooke a Castle neere to the lake, called Arques, which by the Senates decree was burnt and ruined, because it had beene the principall motiue of the warre, and had caused the strife concerning their bounds, as also because that the Lords of thatThe Castle of Arques taken and burnt. Castle were capitall enemies to the Venetians.
In the meanetime Andrea de Burgo accused before the Councell of Ten, for that he had treacherously, and of malice, broken the bridge at Caillan, was committed to prison, but vpon report of Marco Beazana Chanceller of the Senate, who had bene in that incounter, he was inlarged, and restored to his place. Pope Innocent, being displeased with this warre, at that time dispatcht the Bishop of Ozima to Sigismond, to intreat him in his name to giue an end to to that warre, and to tell him that the Turk  being so neere a neighbour, it did not befit two such potent Christian nations to contend with one another, and that if it should please him to make his Holinesse vmpier of his controuersie with the Venetians, he would doe him all right. The BishopThe Venetians refuse th^ Articles of peace. made some stay with Sigsmond, till articles of peace were drawne, which he carried with him to Venice, who imparting them to the Senate, they were reiected: In this manner without effecting his legation, he returned to Rome.
The Pope made the same motion of peace to the Venetians by Nicolao Franco Bishop of Treuiso his Nuncio, who earnestly entreated the Senate to embrace it, assuring them that his Holinesse would imploy his credit and authoritie to effect it. But all was in vaine, till Sigismond, tired with the heauie burthen and expence of  warre, being no longer able to entertaine his Armie, did himselfe sue to the Venetians for peace, whereupon after sundrie messages from both sides, peace was concluded in Nouember on these conditions: That the townes taken on either part, should be restored to the true owners: That the Venetian marchants taken at thePeace concluded betwixt Sigismond and the venetians. Faire of Bolzana, should be set at libertie, and their losses recompenced. Other matters not heere mentioned, were referred to the Pope.
Such was the end of the Rethicke warre. The Senate recompenced the Captaines and Souldiers according to their merits. Iulius Caesar Varran was casseerd, because he had behaued himselfe negligently in his place. The two sonnes of noble Sanseuerino were still retained in the Signories pay, and each of them made Captaine of  sixe hundred horse. Sebastiano Badoario, and Bernardo Bembo were sent to the Pope to accomplish this Treatie. All matters thus concluded, the Senate made decrees concerning the expences of priuate families, womens garments, and generally against all superfluities, namely, dice and cards-play, sauing a^ weddings, Innes, and vnder the two Columnes in S. Markes place, with this addition: That the summe which was plaid for should not exceed the fifth part of an ounce of gold.
There was a rumour at the same time, That Baiazet the Turkish Emperour made incursions on the Aegean Sea. The Senate hereupon commanded Francisco PriuliThe venetians send a fleet to guard Cyprus. at that time Generall of the Gallies to be in readinesse to put to Sea. And because  they supposed that the Turkes had an intent to inuade Cyprus, he was commanded to saile thither. Priuli embarking his souldiers in Aprill, went to Corfou, and from thence to Modon, accompanied by Cosmo Pascalis the Prouidator, where Nicolao Capello the other Prouidator met them, augmenting the number of their vessels; with which, being fiue and twentie Gallies, and tenne Brigandines they set saile, and the fifth day after arriued in Cyprus.
The report of this Turkish fleet consisting of many long vessels which had sailed by Cyprus through the Gulph of Aiazza, and then returned into the HellespontWhat moued the Senate to desire the Realme of Cyprus. without any exploit, bred a longing in the Senate to impatronize the Realme of Cyprus: As also because Ferdinand king of Naples went about to make it his, by means of a marriage which he secretly treated betwixt his sonne and Queene Katherine, borne in Venice, of the illustrious family of the Cornares, giuen in marriage by her father Marco Cornari to Iames of Lufignan king of Cyprus, with a dowrie of a thousand pound of gold.
This Queene a little after her husbands death, being a widow, and with child by

him, was by his last will and testament left coheire with the childe she should bring foorth, and yet committed to the protection of the Venetian Senate, who at her marriage adopted her their daughter. After the kings death she was deliuered of a sonne, who died before the yeere was expired: Then did certaine Lords of the Island goe about to raise commotions, but the Senate sent forces thither vnder the commaund of a Prouidator together with the Queenes father, who were still to attend vpon her, so as these stirres were on a sodaine appeased.
The Realme then being at quiet, the Queene vnder the Senates protection had for the space of fifteene yeeres peaceably gouerned that kingdome, when Ferdinand vnderhand by two of his familiar friends practised the said marriage: Their names  were, Riccio Marini of Naples, an inward friend with the late king, and Tristan Cybelletto of Cyprus, who had a sister attending on the Queene: these two comming thither from Ferdinand, were apprehended by the Generall of the fleete, and presently sent to Venice: but Tristan died by the way, hauing swallowed a Diamond, and druncke Sea-water after it: for hee knew that if he came to Venice, the Senate would punish him according to his deserts, because after the kings death he had raised tumults in the Realme, and slaine Andrea Cornari the Queenes vnckle.
The Councell of Tenne, moued by these practizes, fearing Ferdinands pollicies, and the Turkish preparations, together with the king of Syriaesneere neighbourhood,The Senate send George Cornari into Cyprus. commaunded Georgio Cornari the Queenes brother, to goe into Cyprus to  her, and perswade her to remit the gouernement of the kingdome to the Venetian Senate and her selfe to returne to Venice; where she might spend the remainder of her dayes merily in her owne Country among her friends and kinsfolkes, and not trust her life and meanes among strangers, in aforraine Realme.
Georgio Cornari imbarked himselfe in a small vessell to make the more haste, and in the winter time in a short space arriued in Cyprus, where hee presently acquainted his sister with the cause of his comming. The Queene wondred at his demand (as one that had beene wont to liue royally, and knew the sparing and parcimoniousThe Queene resuseth her brothers request. life of the Citizens of Venice) and boldly refused it, saying: That shee would not for the world forsake so rich and goodly a Realme; and that the Senate ought to be satisfied with enioying it after her death. He, insisting on the contrarie, intreated her not to makeCornari his replie. more account of Cyprus, than of her owne Countrey; because that worldly affaires being variable and inconstant, it might in short space come to passe that shee might bee expulsed her kingdome, it being so desired by many great and potent Lords, and her selfe envied by her owne subiects, who disdained to be gouerned by a woman. One onely meanes was left her whereby to preuent all these mischiefes, which was, seeing shee had no children to referre the gouernement of the Realme to the Venetian State, now in her life time: That the Venetian Common-wealth had beene well pleased to suffer her to gouerne the Realme, so long as the time had beene quiet and voyd of suspitions: But now when all her neighbours wait for occasions, and lay snares to surprize it, the Senate hath thought this onely remedy most expedient: But if she feared not these daungers, he besought her to consider the perill she was likely to haue fallen into the precedent Summer; had not the State of Venice reskewed her with their Gallies, the Turkish armie would haue taken her kingdome from her, and her selfe haue beene enforced to flie, or else in daunger to haue beene carried as a captiue to Constantinople. It is good to foresee that which a small accident or some errour may cause vs fall into, and to preuent it. Fortune is variable, sodaine and inconstant, and we cannot euer preuent the enemies desseignes, nor can our friends be alwayes ready to help vs when we please. There is a great distance by land, but farre greater by Sea betwixt the farthest part of the Adriatticke Gulph, and the Isle of Cyprus: This ought you (Madame) to remember and especially consider, that though nothing enforced you thereunto, yet what greater honour, or more lasting praise can you leaue behind you, than to haue giuen so flourishing a kingdome to your Countrey? and to haue it written in the Annales, That the Venetian State was honored and augmented with the kingdome of Cyprus, by a Ladie her owne Citizen. You shall still be a Queene. And if the case were mine, I should be desirous, especially hauing liued so long in Cyprus

as you haue done, to beholde my natiue countrey and place of birth, there to shew my greatnesse and magnificence, there to embrace my brethren, sisters and kinsfolke. Neuer was the arriuall of any Lord or Lady so welcome to Venice as yours will be: And if Venice were a base and abiect village; yet in you it would be a pious duety to be willing to reuiew the place where you first drew breath, and those who of a long time you haue not long seene. But it is certaine that Venice in all mens opinions, is preferred before all other citties vnder heauen, and accounted the goodliest of all Italy. What cause then is able to moue you after so long absence, especially, your country requesting you to come home, to refuse it? You are to thanke the Senate, for being Queene, and for that you haue raigned so long in peace, but it seemes you haue no desire to acknowledge it; if otherwise, you would not neglect and refuse their intreaty. In a word, I being your brother, and one who ought to haue some interest in you, if you deny me this request: all men will thinke that it is not you which haue refused to gratifie the State, but that I haue aduised you to the contrary, whereby I shall purchase my countries hatred, and blot my children with infamy. And therefore (Madame) I humbly beseech you to graunt the Senates request, and to respect me and mine. There is nothing more worthy commendation, than to know modestly how to entertaine Fortune when she smiles on vs, and not to desire to be still on the wheeles toppe. Almightie God doth sometime by aduersitie trie those whom he hath a long time fauoured, to make them remember that they are mortall. To conclude, you can offer vp to his diuine Maiesty no prayer more pleasing, nor sacrifice more acceptable, than to submit your selfe to his will, which you must be perswaded is, that you grant your Countries request.
Georgio more eloquent by Nature than Art, hauing thus discoursed with his sister, preuailed so farre with her as melting into teares, shee made him this vnwilling answer. Brother, if this be your opinion, I will yeelde vnto it, and will striue to ouer-masterThe Queenes answere. my selfe: But our Country shall thanke you for my kingdome, and not me. Their departure concluded, and order taken for all things, the Generall and Prouidators commanded a solemne Masse to be celebrated in the Cathedrall Church of Famagosta: then by the Queenes commaundement and in her presence, the Standard of the Venetian Common-wealth was e^ected in the Citties Market-place, and by this meanes was the kingdome of Cyprus* reduced to a Prouince.
The Queene and her brother did afterward embarque them selues, traine, and royall prouision in the Venetian Gallies, and in short space in the middest of winter arriued in the hauen of Venice. Shee was honourably receiued by Prince Augustino Barbadico, and by all the Senate who met her at Saint Nicholas Church with infinite multitudes of people of all sorts, who entring into their Gondolas, did with great ioy accompany her. Herselfe in the Bucentauro sitting in the middest of theThe reception of the Queene of Cyprus at Venice. Senate and illustrious Ladies of the Citie, did in that magnificence enter Venice: The like honour was neuer done to any Venetian Ladie, and her arriuall was most pleasing to the people. Not long after, the Councell of Tenne presented her with the Castle of Azzola, seated on the Treuisan hilles, and appoynted fiftie pounds  weight of gold for her yeerely expence, with many other rich presents which they gaue her.
Within a while after, the king of Tremisen in Affricke, did by his Ambassadors request the Senate to send some Venetian Gentleman to do iustice to the Venetians that liued in three of his Citties. The Senate to satisfie the king, created a new MagistrateA new magistrate sent by the Senate into Affricke. to goethither, who for his entertainement should haue the hundred part of all marchandize solde by the Venetians. Lodouico Pizamane was the first that was appointed to this office. At the same time they builded a Fort vpon an hill neere to the Lake Ider not farre from Anfer a small Towne on the Bressan, which did greatly secure the countrey.
About the same time there arose some contention betwixt Mathias the valiantContention betw^xt the Emperour Fredericke and Mathias king of Hungarie. king of Hungary, and the Emperor Fredericke: Mathias leuied two armies to inuade his enemie in two seuerall places; the one hee sent into Friull, and the other to the confines of Liburnia. The Senate being troubled with this neighbour warre, dispatched

two Ambassadors, Antonio Bolda, to the Emperour, and Dominico Bollano to Mathias, who dealt so wisely with these two enemie Princes, as they appeased them and procured truce for a certaine time.
Frederick in the meane time freed from warre, came to Trent, to knowe if the Senate would giue him leaue to passe through that part of Italie, which stretcheth along the Alpes from the lake of La Garda, as farre as Aquileia. The Senate aduertized of his comming, sent foure Gentlemen in Ambassage to him, Ieronimo Barbaro, Dominico Grimani, who was afterwards Cardinall, Paulo Treuisano, and Ieronimo Leone, who meeting him neere to Rouero, did in the States name honourably salute and receiue him, and accompanied him so long as he remained on their territories, taking order that he should want nothing in his iourney. They bringing him as farre as Portonouo, which is not farre from his owne confines, tooke leaue of him: He sent three Ambassadors to Venice, to gratifie the Senate for the honor and courteous entertainment he had receiued in their Countrey, which hee tooke as a demonstration of their loue towards him: From thence he departed home to his owne kingdome.
Now, although the Citie was peaceable, they did not for all that cease to prouideThe inuention of Harquebuses. things necessarie for warre. Harquebuses were at that time much in vse, an engin which footmen vsed in warre, deuised at first by the Almains. The State vnwilling to be without such weapons, when need should be, did by a decree of the  Councell of Tenne, send for the expertest workmen in that Arte, from all parts of Christendome, and for the skilfullest gunners to instruct and teach their youth. And because the Countrie people should not be ignorant therein, it was decreed that in euery village vnder their iurisdiction, two young men should be chosen to practizeA decree for the exercise of youth this exercize, and for recompence, should be freed from all subsidies and impositions: and that those young men at a certaine day in the yeere should meete at the next Castle or Citie to shoot at a marke, where his village that should shoot best, was for one whole yeere freed from all taxe and tribute.
The ensuing winter was so sharpe and cold by reason of snow which fell, as allAn extreame frost at Uenice. the marshes round about the Citie was frozen ouer, the Country people comming  thither on horsebacke with prouision, and the Magistrate of Mestre came in a wagon as farre as S. Secondo's in the middest of the lakes. And the horsemen for disport armed themselues, and ranne at Tilt vpon the great Chanell: so sharpe and vehement was the frost.
Not long after, Marco Barba Cardinall, and Patriarke of Aquileia died at Rome. Pope Innocent bestowed the Patriark shippe on Hermalao Barbaro the Venetian AmbassadorA law carefully obserued by the Uenetians. then at Rome. This being knowne at Venice, notwithstanding that Hermolao was a man of great desert, and had written to the Senate that the Pope had enforced him to forsake his order of Senator, and put on that of Patriarke, yet because there was an expresse law, forbidding all Venetian Gentlemen, being Ambasdors  at Rome, to receiue any Ecclesiasticall benefice from the Pope, during the time of their Ambassage: the Senate tooke the audacious infringing of this law, in bad part. And though he were very rich, well allied, and had great friends, his father being one of the noblest men in the Citie, the onely loue and reuerence to law caused the Senate to write backe vnto him, that presently without delay he should redeliuer the Patriarkeship to the Pope, and for not so doing, they threatned to takeGreat iustice of the Venetians. from his Father the Procuratorship of S. Marke, and to confiscate all his goods. His father not being able to moderate the sentence giuen by the Councell of Tenne, fell sicke with griefe, and within a while after died: The sonne likewise, hauing published certaine excellent bookes of his owne composing, did before the  yeeres end die of a Squinancie.
The same yeere Lorenzo de Medicis died at Florence, a man of a rare and excellentThe death of Lorenzo de Medicis. iudgement, gouerning his Countrie in Peace: He left three children liuing, who were afterwards expulsed the gouernment and banished. The summer following

Pope Innocent died, in whose stead by guifts and briberie, Alexander Borgia a Spaniard, borne in Valentia, was chosen. This Pope made a league offensiue and defensiue for fiue and twentie yeeres with the Venetians and Galeas Sforza Lord of Milan, who was at that time very young and ruled by Lodouico his vncle.
By this league they were tyed to defend and maintaine one anothers territories, and to destroy their enemies: And because Zemes, brother to Baiazeth the Turkish Emperour, liued at that time in Rome, there was an addition made in the treatie of the league, that if Baiazeth should make warre on the Venetians, the Pope should deliuer him vnto them that they by him might inuade his brother. This Zemes, being by his brother driuen forth of his kingdome, fled to Rhodes. The Rhodians  vnwilling to draw warre to their owne Gates, sent him to the French King; he deliuered him to Pope Innocent who had earnestly craued him. Pope Alexander at his election found him at Rome, where hee was carefully guarded, lest he should renew warre against his brother, in recompence whereof Baiazeth sent yeerely to Rome to the Pope 400. pounds of gold: Hercules de A Este Duke of Ferrara did afterwards enter into this league.
The Venetian State thus peaceable, Charles the eight French King sent a Gentleman to Venice, who being brought before the Senate, told them, That his KingCharles the eight French king, sends an Ambassadour to Venice. being resolued to come into Italy with a mightie Armie to conquere the kingdome of Naples, which by hereditarie right belonged to him, did desire therein to know  the Venetians loue towards him, and to be satisfied whether they intended to keep and obserue the same league and friendship which of old had beene betwixt them. The Senate vpon this newes, which was likely to alter the State of Italy, assembled the great Councell, namely, to debate this businesse, being loth by their answere to prouoke the King against them.
After sundry opinions, the Councell answered the Ambassador, that the Signorie had euer preferred peace before warre, and did now desire it more than euer, therefore they could wish, that his King liuing at peace, would suffer other PrincesThe Venetians answere. of Italy to doe the like: yet if hee came thither with an intent to make warre, they would in no sort stirre, nor quit his league and friendshippe.
This Gentleman with their answere left Venice and went to Rome. After him, two others in lesse than two moneths came to Venice one after another from the same King for the same businesse, who receiued the selfe same answere as the first. But Lodouico Sforza was the onely motiue that prouoked this King to the enterprize of Naples. He after the death of his brother Galeas Sforza Duke of Millan, tooke vpon him the gouernment of the State, and expulsed his widow, who would haue managed it in the behalfe of her sonne Iohn Galeas that was very young, when his father died. Then by little and little, he dismissed the ancient Officers, placing others in their roomes, and in this maner had commaunded the Dutchie aboue thirteene yeeres. And though in outward shew he seemed very carefull of his Nephew, yet in his young yeeres he had so carelesly brought him vp, as it seemed that his onely ayme was to make him incapable and vnfit for any honourable exercise, drawing him from all vertuous studies.
Alphonso, sonne to Ferdinand King of Naples, gaue his daughter Isabell in mariage to this young Iohn Galeas* yet though he were maried and had children by his wife, his vncle neuerthelesse still gouerned the State, meaning to leaue it to his owne children. Ferdinand and Alphonso taking his vsurpatio (for it was no better) in bad part, moued by the continuall and lamentable letters of their daughter, did louingly entreat Lodouick (according to equitie and reason) to surrender the gouernment of the State of Milan to his nephew, sonne to his brother, vnto whom it belonged, who was of yeeres to gouerne, maried, and had two children. They hauing often vsed these intreaties proceeded to sharpe and bitter termes, telling him, That they had made alliance with the Duke of Milan, who was his Nephew, whose State hee vsurped, and therefore he should doe well to detaine it no longer.
Lodouico fearing their power and threatning, and hauing intelligence that the FrenchLodouico Sforza sends Ambassadors into France to king Charles. Kngs laid claime to the kingdome of Naples, sent an honourable Ambassade into France, vnder colour to salute king Charles, not acquainting Pope Alexander or the Venetians with it, with whom he was in league, and commanded his Ambassador, secretly to motion the matter, and to assure the king, that if he would attempt the recouerie of that Realme, he would assist him with all his forces and meanes; and that the conquest would be easie, so that he would onely passe the Alpes, and shew himselfe in Italy. This aduertisement comming from such a person, did greatly preuaile with the king to cause him to vndertake this iourney, being besides incited thereunto from another place. Antonio Prince of Salern maligned by Ferdinand, and by that meanes enforced to forsake his countrey Italy, had retired himselfe into France. He in all his discourses with the king, spake of no other matter, tellingAntonio Prince of Salern incites king Charles to this iourney. him, That he should doe ill to let slip so faire an occasion, offered for the recouerie of his owne right: assuring him besides, that Ferdinand was generally hated for his auarice, crueltie, and treacherie; and therefore it would be an easie matter to dispossesse him, especially for a king of France, whose authoritie and credit in those countries was verie great. Besides all this, Pope Alexander was no friend to Ferdinand in regard of Virginio Vrsino that serued him, whose open enemie the Pope had declared himselfe in regard of the towne of Anguilare.
All these reasons were approued by the Lords of France that were in fauour with What moued the French Lords to perswade the king to this iourney. the king, who desired nothing more than this iourney. For some of them hoped by the Popes meanes to obtaine Ecclesiasticall dignities, others expected some honourable command in the Armie, and to be gouernours of Cities and Townes which the king should conquer, and some likewise were possest with a desire of noueltie.
King Charles lending a willing eare to this Ambassade, and tasting the Prince of Salernes proposition, a rumour was presently spred, That the French were comming into Italy, to inuade the Realme of Naples. Vpon these newes king Ferdinand began to arme by sea and land, and to inuent meanes to draw PopeLodouicos feare. Alexander to his side. Lodouico foreseeing, that if they leagued themselues together, Ferdinand might ioyne his Armie with that of the Pope, and send them both into Lombardie, before the kings arriuall, and by the same meanes expulse him from Milan, intreated the Venetians to send their horse and foot troupes to the riuer Oglio in the Bressian territorie, to diuert king Ferdinand from his designe, or else to let them crosse the riuer to defend his State. The Venetians answered, that it was needlesse: for his countrey was out of danger.
Lodouico perceiuing the French delaies, and fearing that it might breed his ruine, did againe send Ambassadors to Charles to hasten his iourney, promising to assistHe sends another Ambassade into France. him with men and money, and victuals, so soone as he should set foote in Italy. King Charles who had spent certaine moneths in the onely consultation of this businesse, and had not as yet made any certaine resolution, when this second Ambassade arriued, did by these continuate pursuites and offers of Lodouico, presently resolue vpon it.
Now because he would not in any sort be hindred in his conquest, he renewed the ancient league with the kings of Castill, and surrendred to them the countie of Rossillon, engaged to king Lewis his father for three thousand crownes by Iohn king of Arragon, father to Ferdinand, on condition that the said kings should in no sort aide the Arragonois against him in his conquest of the Realme of Naples. ThisThe death of Ferdinand king of Naples. league sworne to, the king made all things readie for his iourney. Ferdinand had intelligence heereof one day as he came from hunting* whereupon he fell sicke, and within two daies after, died of an Apoplexie. Alphonso his eldest sonne was by his Alphonsos request to the Uenetians. younger brother and all the Princes of the Realme saluted king. He intreated the Venetians by their Ambassador resident in his Court to perswade Lodouico to desist from soliciting the French king to come into Italy, and that hee would not be a

meanes of his ruine, promising no more to taxe his vsurpation of the State of Milan, which he should enioy so long as he pleased. The Senate by letters acquaintedThe Senate write to Lodouico in Alphonsos behalfe. Lodouico with Alphonsos request, and intreated him not to draw the French into Italy: But perceiuing that he made no direct answere they gaue ouer and solicited him no more.Philip de Comines, Ambassador for king Charles at Venice.
King Charles hauing resolued vpon the enterprize, sent Philip de Comines Lord of Argenton his Ambassador to Venice, who in his kings name made a proposition to the Senate, That if they would ioyne with him in this warre of Naples, they should haue a great share in the kingdome, and if they would not accept that offer, to intreat them at least to perseuer in their ancient league and friendship with the  king his Master: heereunto he added that his king had commanded him to remaine at Venice to acquaint them with all his designes and enterprises. The Senate replied, That the king was so potent and so well furnished with all warlike necessaries that he needed not their aide in that warre, and therefore they determined, according to the example of their Ancestors, not to stirre, who neuer made warre but vponThe Venetians answere to Philip de Comines. constraint, and that they would craue no part in a kingdome whereunto they had no right. For the rest, they would neuer goe from that which they had promised to the kings Ambassador; that they would euer make great account of his leage and friendship; that they had willingly heard him for his kings sake, and would still do so if he remained among them; that he might at his pleasure familiarly discourse  with them about any matter that concerned his king, as well in regard of their loue towards his father king Lewis, as to himselfe.
In the meane time Pope Alexander (who repented that he had incited the FrenchLeague betwixt Pope Alexander and Alphonso king of Naples. king to this warre) and king Alphonso by the mediation of Virginio Vrsin, comming to Viconare, a Castle of his owne, to see one another, and to discourse together of their affaires, made a league on this condition: That the Pope should take Alphonso into the protection of the Romane Church, and with all his power defend him against his enemies: and in counterchange, Alphonso promised to pay him downe in readie money a thousand pounds of gold for the arrerages of the tribute due to the Church of Rome for the Realme of Naples, and to pay him yearely afterwards, foure hundred pounds of gold. And for greater assurance of this treatie, Alphonso promised to giue one of his daughters in marriage to Guifredo sonne to Pope Alexander. This thus concluded, both of them made preparations for warre.
Alphonso had alreadie armed thirtie Gallies, and eighteene great vessels to scoure along the Riuer of Genoa, and to annoy the enemies fleet which was making readie in the Citie; and he was to make a leauie of horse and foot in Calabria to send them into Lombardie, when newes came that Baiazeth the Turkish Emperour made new preparations, whereupon the State of Venice determined likewise to arme.The Venetians fleet in Sclauonia. Antonio Grimani made Generall of the Gallies, Commanded all Gallies that were readie to be lanched, and with them sailed into Sclauonia, where commissioners  from Scardona and Clissa came to him, who receiued their oath of alleageance for the Venetian Signorie. from thence he went to Corfou.
Alphonsos fleete, whereof his brother Fredericke was Generall, entring the Riuer of Genoa, came to Portouenere, where Ob^eto de Fiesca, a man highly esteemed among his countrey men, landed with certaine souldiers, but being repulsed by the enemie, he returned to his Gallies, and presently made towards Liuorne, and from thence held his course to Naples. Alphonso hauing lost all hope by Sea, sent his Armie vnited with the Popes, into Romagnia, hauing intelligence that part of the enemies forces had alreadie crossed the Po.
Ferdinand, sonne to Alphonso, a young Prince of great hope, assisted by Nicolao Vrsin, Count Petillan, Virginio Vrsin, and Iohn Iames Triuulce the Milanese, commaunded the Arragonoise armie, consisting of two thousand fiue hundred horse, and eight thousand foote.
Whilest the Venetian fleete was at sea, Ambassadours from Florence came to

Venice, to craue the Senates aduise how they should answere king Charles, who had intreated them to giue his armie passage through their territories, and also howThe Florentines craue councell of the Veneti^s. they should behaue themselues in those occurrents; for they referred themselues wholy to them, and determined directly to follow their Councell. The Senate knowing very well, that whatsoeuer they should say to the Florentines, would be reported to king Charles and Alphonso* answered; That in so difficult a businesse, subiectThe Senates answere. to sundry accidents, they knew not what was best to be done; and though they loued the one better than the other, yet they durst not deliuer their opinion, because that Fortune is commonly Mistresse in warre, and that it vsually comes to passe, that matters done by chance and aduenture, did oftentimes prosper better than those which are premeditated, and debated with long consultation: and therefore they ought to craue councell of none but Almightie God, who onely knew what was best for men to embrace or auoide: and with this answere dismissed them.
Now the forces which king Charles and Lodouico had sent before, being come neere the enemies, neither the one or other durst come to stroakes, but marched close together, being still protected by some fort or riuer, which was euer betwixt them: yet they made sundrie light skirmishes to shew their valour. King Charles had sent the Duke of Orleans, Iulian the Cardinall nephew to Pope Sixtus, and Antonio Prince of Salerne (of whom we haue heretofore spoken) to Genoa, with braue troupes of foote, to man the Gallies which were ready rigd, with them to open a passage by Sea into the Realme of Naples, whilest himselfe did the like by Land.

The end of the third Booke of the fourth Decad.







THE FOVRTH BOOKE OF THE FOVRTH DECAD  OF THE HISTORIE Of Venice.

The Contents of the fourth Booke of the fourth Decad.
KING CHARLES departs from Vienna in Daulphine towards Italy. The King by reason of his sicknesse taries at Ast. The death of IOHN GALEAS Duke of Milan, whereupon LODOVICO his vncle vsurps the Title and Armes of Duke of Milan. The French take Fiuizana and sackeit. PIETRO DE MEDICIS grants all King CHARLES demaunds, and for his labour is driuen from Florence, and declared an enemie to the Common wealth. The King restoreth the PISANS libertie. The French take Bertinora. King GHARLES his victorious entry into Florence. The King makes an accord with Pope ALEXANDER, and kisseth his feet and cheeke. ALPHONSO in loue to his sonne FERDINAND deposeth himselfe from the Kingdome of Naples. FERDINAND retires into the Isle of Ischia. King CHARLES entreth Naples, and takes the Cities two Castles. Aleague made at Venice against the French betwixt the Pope, Emperour, King of Spaine, Venetians, and Duke of Milan. King CHARLES is crowned in Naples, and departs from thence to returne into France. The preparation of the League to stoppe King CHARLES his passage. The Duke of Orleance his incursions on the Leagues territories: he takes Nouara. The battell of Fornouo betwixt King CHARLES and the Confederates. And lastly, King CHALES his arriuall at Ast.

SOONE after the departure of the Duke of Orleance and his troopes towards Genoa, King Charles leauing Vienna in Daulphine on the 23. of AugustKing Charles departs toward Italy. 1493. iourneyed toward Ast by the mount Geneua. Galeas of S. Seuerine met him at Suza, and accompanied him to Ast: whither Lodouico Sforza came presently to him, with his wife and many faire and gallant Ladies of the Dutchy of Milan. Hercules Duke of Ferrara came thither likewise, where after consultation of sundry affaires, it was concluded that the Armie should presently march. Lodouico in theThe King by reason of his sicknesse, stayed at Ast. mean time retired to Num, a Castle on the Milanois a mile from Ast, whither those of the Councell went often to see him, whilest the King tarried at Ast sicke of the  small pocks, whereupon his Army was quartered in that towne and in other places neere adioyning: the number of it, beside the 200. Gentlemen of the Kings guardThe number of the Kings Army. (accounting the Suisses that were gone before with the Bayly of Dijon to Genoa, and those troopes in Romagnia vnder the commaund of Aubigni) amounted

to 1600 men at Armes, 6000. Suisse, and 6000. French foot-men: And for the vse of this Armie they had brought by sea to Genoa great store of Ordnance both for batterie and the field, with munition, in such abundance, as the like before was neuer seene in Italy.
The King, during his aboad at Ast, had sent for the Duke of Orleans from Genoa, willing him to attend him there. This towne belonged vnto him by his grandmother, vnto whom it was giuen in dowry by the Duke of Milan her father. Now so soone as king Charles had recouered his health, hee sent his Armie into the field, and himselfe went to Pauia, where being lodged in the Castle he went to visite IohnThe King visits Iohn Galeas Duke of Milan. Galeas Duke of Milan, his cofin german, (the king and hee were sons to two sisters, daughters to Lewis the second Duke of Sauoy) who lay daungerously sicke in the same Castle. His talke to him was generall, by reason of Lodouico's presence: he told him that he was extreamely grieued for his sicknesse, comforted him, and willed him to be of good cheere, and to vse all meanes for the recouerie of his health: But the hope thereof being small, the King and as many as beheld him did lament his estate, and perceiued that this young Prince, through his vncles treacherie, would not liue long.
This compassion was augmented by the presence of Princesse Isabell his wife, who languishing aswell for her husbands sicknesse, feare of her young sonne, as forThe Dutchesse in teares fals down at the Kings feete. the daunger whereunto her father and kinsfolke were exposed, fell downe at the  kings feet, recommending vnto him with floods of teares the perseruation of her father, and familie of Arragon, and though her youth and beautie moued the kingHis answere to the Dutchesse. to pitie her, yet so great an enterprize could not be delayed vpon so weake a ground, whereupon he told her, that warre being now begunne, he was enforced to pursue and continue it.
From Pauia the king went to Placentia, where, whilest hee remained, he receiued newes of Iohn Galeas death; whereupon, Lodouico who had followed him, returnedThe death of Iohn Galeas Duke of Milan. in post to Milan, where the chiefe of the Dukes Councell, suborned by him, prouided in open Councell, that in regard of the States greatnesse and miserie of the times, it would be a dangerous matter, to haue Francisco, sonne to the late Duke Galeas, who was but fiue yeeres old, to succeed his father: but that it behooued them to haue a Duke that was a man of wisdome and authoritie: and therefore they ought to dispence with Law, and for the generall good, enforce Lodouico to accept the Ducall dignitie. Vnder this colour, honour giuing way to ambition, he did the next morning (though he seemed to bee vnwilling) take vpon him the TitleLodouico vsurps the title and Armes of Duke of Milan. and Armes of Duke of Milan, hauing first solemnly protested that he receiued the Dutchie as belonging vnto him by the inuestiture of the king of Romans.
The King remaining certaine daies at Placentia, was in a manner willing to returne home into France, as well for want of money, as also because no Italian Potentate shewed himselfe on his partie, and besides, because this new Duke returned  no more, though at his departure he promised to come backe againe. Yet at last he determined to passe on.
The same day that the King went from Placentia Lorenzo and Giouan de Medicis stole secretly from their Countrey houses whither the Florentine Magistrate hadLorenzo and Giouan de Medicis persuade the French King to go to Florence. confined them at the pursute of Pietro de Medicis their kin^man and mortall enemy. They came to his Maiestie, and earnestly entreated him to come neere Florence, and told him that he should be honourably entertained there, as well in regard of the peoples loue to the house of France, as for their hatred towards Pietro de Medicis, who commaunded there, and held the Arragonois partie, being by marriage allied to the familie of Vrsini.
Vpon this proposition the King changed his purpose, for though at his departureThe first resolu^ changed. from France* it was concluded in his Councell, that hee should rather passe through Romagnia and La Marca, than through Tuscanie and the territorie of Rome; yet, the Pope and Florentines being declared his enemies* his Councell

thought it a matter vnworthy the greatnesse of such a King, if for feare of them he should refuse to passe through their territories: As also because it was dangerous to inuade the Realme of Naples, and to leaue Tuscany and the Churches State behinde him as enemies. Therefore it was resolued, rather to passe the Appenine^* by the hills of Parma, then by the direct way of Bolognia, and to march without delay to Florence.
The vantgard conducted by Guilbert of Burbon, Duke of Montpensier, aThe Kings vantgard at Pontrema. Prince of the bloud, went on to Pontrema, a towne feated at the foot of the Appenine vpon the Riuer Magra, the King following with the rest of the army. From Pontrema the Duke went into the country of Lunigiana, where hee ioyned  with the Swisses, who had defended Genoa, together with the ordnance which by sea was come to Specia, and drawing neere to Fiuizana belongingFinizana taken and sackt by the French. to the Florentines, which they tooke it by force and sack't it, killing all the souldiers, and many of the inhabitants, the which did merueilously amaze all Italy not accustomed to such cruell and bloudy warres.
Serezzana was not farre from thence, where the Florentines determined for to make their chiefe resistance, which they had strongly fortified, but not sufficiently to hold out so mighty an enemy, for it wanted a captaine to commandSerezzana and Serezanella two strong places. it, and men to defend it. Yet because some thought it would not bee easily taken, especially the Cittadell, and least of all, Serezanella, a strong Castle  on the hill aboue Serezzana, they councelled the King to passe on and leaue them, but the King disdayned so to doe, and thought that vnlesse hee tooke the first towne that made resistance, it would much blemish his reputation, and that they would take example to do the like.
The Florentines hauing intelligence that the King resolued for to come to Florence, and that his army had already passed the Appenine, and then the cruelty which was vsed at the taking of Fiuizana, did publikely detest the rashnesse of Pietro de Medicis, who of himselfe, without any necessity had so inconsideratelyThe Florentines in allarme. drawne vpon them the army of so potent a King, assisted by the Duke of Milan, and this rumour had like to haue raised a great tumult in  the Citty.
Pietro terrified herewith, and with the daunger which hee had before rashly contemned, and perceiuing the aide promised by the Pope and Alphonso toThe resolution of Pietro de Medicis. be but a dreame, precipirately resolued, to goe seeke that safety amongst his enemies, which hee could not hope for with his friends. And there vpon, leauing Florence, and not farre on his way from the city, hee heard say, that the troupes of horse and foo^ sent by the Florentines to enter Serezzana were defeated by the French, and all of them either slaine or taken. This caused him to tarry at Pietra Sancta for a passe-port from the King, whether the Bishop of Saint Malos, and other Lords of the Court went to him to safe conduct him to the campe, comming thither the same day that the King, with the rest of his forces, ioynedThe Articles of agreement. with his vantgard, which beeing encamped before Serezanella, battered it with the ordnance. Presenting himselfe before the King hee was entertained with more ceremony then loue* and perceiuing that the King did not much affect him* by reason of his enemies reports, hee resolued by all meanes to appease and satisfie him.
The next day beeing brought before him, he granted all the kings demands* which were excessiue: viz. that the (...) and castles of Pietra-Sanct^, Serezzana and Serezanella, which were the keyes of the Florentine State, and the forts of Pisa, and of the hauen of Liuorne should be deliuered to the king, who by a promise  signed with his owne hand, obliged himselfe to surrender them so soone as he should haue conquered the Realme of Naples: That Pietro* should cause the Florentines ^o lend the king (...)* Ducats, and that then hee should receiue them into his protection.
The consignation of the strong places was presently made: for the money, they wrote to Florence. Pietro de Medicis did hereby much assure the State of Tuscany to the King, and remooued all impediments from him on Romagnias side. The Florentines aduertized of these Articles which Pietro de Medicis had agreed to, the whole city was highly discontented with this reprochfull and dangerous wound giuen to their Commonwealth.
Pietro hauing notice of this rumor; the better to prouide for his affaires before any greater troubles did arise, tooke leaue of the King, vnder collour of going to accomplish that which hee had promised. But at his returne to Florence, hee found most of the Magistrates banded against him, and the mindes  of his deerest friends greatly troubled, and the next day as hee would haue entred into the councell chamber he was put back.
Hee returned home to his owne house, destitute of courage and councell,Pietro de Medicis flies from Florence. and presently left Florence, beeing followed by the Cardinals Iohn and I^lian his bretheren, who after their departure were declared enemies to the Commonwealth, their houses ransacked which were very ritch in moouables, and their goods confiscate. Two of them, the eldest and the younger went to Venice, theThe Medici are declared enemies to their country. second which was Cardinall Iohn staied for a time at Bolognia, and then retired himselfe to some of his kinsfolke.
The King went from Serezzana to Luca, and from thence to Pisa, where the cittizens both men and women falling at his feete, beganne to crie out liberty, liberty, infinitely complayning of the wrongs and iniuries done to them daily by the Florentines: The King at the perswasion of some of his Lords, not considering the importancy of the matter, did freely grant their request,The King giues liberty to the Pisans. wherevpon, the people presently armed themselues, and throwing downe the Florentines armes, that were set vp in the publike places, recouered their so much desired liberty, repealing all those whom the Florentine Magistrates had bannished.
In this confusion of all things the King departed from Pisa, hauing first deliuered  the Cittadell to the Pisans, keeping the new one of greater importance, for himselfe, and then went towards Florence. Beeing come to Signa, seuen miles from the city, hee staied there till the Florentines popular tumult were in some sort appeased, who had not yet laied downe armes, taken that day when Pietro de Medicis was expulsed; and also to giue Aubigni time to come and meet him, whom he had sent for.
Aubigni was in Romagnia where hee had remained euer since his commingAubigni with his troupes makes head against Ferdinand. into Italy, making head against Ferdinand Duke of Calabria Alphonsos sonne, where after sundry retreates on both sides, beeing re-enforced by the arriuall of certaine companies left behinde him, two hundred Launces, and one thousand Swisses, which the King had sent so soone as hee came to  Ast, hee remained Master of the field and enforced Ferdinand to retire into the Cerca of Faenza, which is a place betwixt the walles of that Citty, and a great trench some mile behind it, inuironing them both, which doth make it strong. Aubigni then returned into the Country of Imola, where hee tooke certaine strong townes, filling all Romagnia with feare and amazement* so that hauing taken Faenza, after the enemies departure, hee marched directly to Bertinora to passe the Appenine to ioyne with the Kings army: But BertinoraBertinora taken. refusing to giue him passage, hee assailed and tooke it by force, and in despite, sack't it.
Ferdinand perceiuing that hee could not by any meanes stoppe the French  mens passage, and thinking it dangerous to remaine betwixt Imola and Furli, retired neere vnto the walles of Cesenna, and from thence went to Rome. The Venetians hauing intelligence that King Charles had crossed the Po with a

mighty army, the more to honor him, resolued to send him Ambassadors, whomThe Venetians send Ambassadors to the King. they commanded to tarry still with him, and in the meane time armed at all aduentures. The Ambassadors were Dominico Treuisan, and Antonio Loredano, who finding the king at Florence, accompanied him whereso euer he went.
Now after sundry commings too and fro, the king with his army marched towards Florence. There was great magnificence, vsed both by the Courtiers and Citizens: The king entred the city like a conqueror, himselfe and horse armed at all points, with his Launce on his thigh. They beganne forthwith to treat of agreement, but not without great difficulties, the which at last ended by the valour of Pietro Caponi, one of the foure Commissioners appointed  to treat with the king, they accorded, and the contract lawfully past, it was with great ceremony published in the Cathedrall Church at diuine seruice,Acord sworne betwixt the ^ King and Florentines. where the king in person, and the cities Magistrates, promised by sollemne oth vpon the high Altar, in presence of the Court and people of Florence, to obserue the contents thereof.
Two daies after, the King departed from Florence, hauing tarried there tenne daies, and went to Sienna, where making short stay, hee left a Garrison, because hee suspected it to be at the Empires deuotion. Then he iourneyed towards Rome, where not long before Pope Alexander had giuen entrance to Virginio Vrsini, and Count Petillan, captaines to King Alphonso and his sonne  Ferdinand. So as it seemed he ment to haue anticipated the enemies, to fortifie the city, and to repulse them from it: But doubting King Charles intention, and fearing his forces, he had a wonderfull conflict in his minde. For now hee determined to defend Rome, and to that end suffered Ferdinand and his captaines whom he had introduced into the city, to fortifie the weake places; then supposing that hee should not bee able to defend it, hee determined to leaue Rome; and thus floating betwixt hope and feare, the French in the meane time spoiled all the country on the hither side Tiber, taking now one towne, then an other, no place beeing strong enough to hold them out, so that after diuers parlies, hee resolued, as it were by force, to grant all King Charles his demands,Ferdinand goes fourth of Rome at one gate, and the French King enters at an other. and to receiue him into Rome, from whence he caused Ferdinand and his army to depart, who went to Tiuoli, and from thence into the Realme of Naples, and whilest he went forth at Saint Sebastians Gate, the French King armed at all points, with his launce on thigh, entred with his army at the gate of Sancta Maria del Popolo.
The Pope many times determined to flie, but at last retired into Castle Saint Angelo, well prouided of ordnance, munition and victuals. When the King and his army were entred, an accord was propounded by meanes of CardinallAcord betwixt the Pope and French King. Ascanio, on very rough conditions, which neuerthelesse were effected to the Kings content, who thereby made a league with the, Pope saluted him, then kissed his feet in open Consistory, and afterwards his cheeke: and at an other time was present when the Pope said masse, and sate downe next beneath the first Cardinall Bishop, and according to the ancient custome, when the Pope celebrated masse, serued him with water to wash his hands. This done, the Pope made the Bishop of Saint Malo, and the Bishop of Mans, descended from the house of Luxembourg, Cardinals.
Whilest the King remained at Rome, which was some month or thereabout,Alphonso in ^ loue to his son Ferdinand deposeth himself. Alphonso despayring of his owne good fortune, sent for his sonne Ferdinand to Naples, and in presence of his brother Frederick tenounced, and made  ouer vnto him his Kingly title and Authority: hee did this peraduenture for to lessen his subiects loue towards the French, because this young Prince was of great hope, had neuer offended any of his subiects, and was gracious with the people.
Alphonso after this voluntary demission, hauing giuen his sonne a large

instruction to recommend himselfe to God, departed from Naples with foure light Gallies, laden with treasure and ritch stuffe, and fled into a towne in Sicily called Mazare, where before the yeere was expired he died.
Ferdinand after his fathers departure, rode in royall habit vp and downe the city, attended by his vncle Frederick and other great Lords of the Kingdome, setting open prisons, pardoning all offenders, promising to repeale those that had beene banished. Then mustering his army, hee gaue great guifts to his souldiers, and placed new Garrisons in his townes.
King Charles at the very instant of his departure from Rome receiued intelligence of Alphonsos flight, hee went to Velitra, and with him Caesar Borgia Cardinall,The King comes to Velitra Cardinall Borgia flies from the King by night. the Popes sonne, as Legat Apostolicall, or rather pawne of his fathers promises. This Cardinall fled away secretly in the night, and to take away all suspition that he did it not by his fathers consent, went not to Rome but to Spoleta. And at the same time those whom the King sent to the castles of Hostia, Ciuita-uecchia, and Terracina, to receiue them according to the accord made with the Pope, that they might keepe them so long as he remained in Italy, were repulsed by the Popes souldiers. For the fort of Hostia which Fabricio Colonna held, was recouered by Count Petillan, and re-deliuered to the Pope.
From Velitra, the vantgard marched to Monte-fortino, a very strong towne,M^nt-fortino taken by the Kings army. seated in the Churches territories, and subiect to Iacomo de Contis a Roman  Gentleman, who held for the Arragonois, which being battered by the cannon was in short space taken by the French, notwithstanding the strength thereof. Ferentino, and Monte Sancto Giouanni, seated on the Kingdomes confines, had the like fortune, where after breach made, so furious an assault was giuen to it in the Kings presence, who was come thither from Verula, as all difficulties surmounted, it was taken the same day by force, and great slaughter committed there.
From thence the King sent one of his Gentlemen to the Pope, threatning him that if he did not performe the accord which hee had sworne to, hee would come backe and make warre vpon him. The Pope vpon receit of the Kings letters  presently commanded those places to be deliuered to the Kings officers.
In this manner, and without great resistance, did King Charles conquer that noble and magnificent Kingdome, when Ferdinand, by his fathers flight, taking vpon him the title and authority royall, assembled his forces, and marched to Saint Germans, where he encamped, thinking to keepe the enemies from passingFerdinand encampeth at Saint Germains. on any farther, by reason of the fitnesse of the place, enuironed on the one side with high and steepy mountaines, and on the other with a fenny country, and in front with the Riuer Garillan, wherevpon, that place is properly called one of the keyes of the kingdome of Naples. But his army, already terrified with the only name of the French, no more shewed any signes of valour, but all his souldiers  wauering, in a manner, as much in loyalty as courage, and thinking how to saue themselues and goods, dispayring of being able to defend the kingdome, so soone as they had intelligence of the taking of Mont Saint Giouanni, and that three hundred Lances, and two thousand foot approched, did basely abandon SaintBaserctreat of Ferdinands army. Germans, and in such amazement retired to Capua, as by the way they left eight great peeces of ordnance behind them.
Ferdinand and his army were scarce come to Capua, when he receiued newes from the Queene, that since the losse of Saint Germans, the Neapolitans were risen, and that vnlesse he speedily came thither, some great tumult was likely to ensue vpon these newes, hee presently went thither with certaine troupes Ferdinandis denied entrance into Naples but with his owne family. of horse, by his presence to preuent so great a daunger, promising for to returne to Capua the next day following. The Neapolitans would not suffer him for to enter with his troupes, but onely gaue entrance to himselfe and family; where vnderstanding their resolution, which was, not to endure a

seege, for feare least their city should be sackt, caused two of the three greater ships in the hauen to bee buried; and gaue the third to Obi^to de Fiesca, bestowing three hundred braue horse that hee had in his Stables vpon certaine citizens his friends and seruants* and hauing victualled the new castle and that called Del Ouo, he returned according to his promise to prouide for Capua.
But in his absence the city of Capua, thinking hee had forsaken it, Triulcio the cities Gouernor being gonne to treat with the French King, his owne souldiers, breaking open his house and ^ansaking it, Virginio Vrsin and Count Petillan beeing likewise gonne, his whole army in a manner broken, hee was enforced to giue place to the Conqueror. Ferdinand beeing come within two miles of Capua yeelded to the French. Capua was aduertized of what had past, by certaine Lords sent to tell him that he should come on no farther: wherevpon notwithstanding his intreaties, hee was enforced to returne to Naples, where hauing made some bootlesse speech to the Nobillity, vnto whom the name of his grandfather and father were odious, he withdrew himselfe into the new castle, from whence within a while after hee departed, and embarking himselfe in the Gallies, which attended him in theFerdinand flies from Naples. hauen, with Frederick his vncle, and the old Queene and her daughter Ioane, sailed into the Isle of Isehia, thirty miles from Naples, where hee was enforced to make triall of his vertue and patience.
After his departure from Naples, all places yeelded to the victors fame, so as  two hundred French horse comming to Nola, did without any resistance takeVirginio Vrsin and Count Petillan taken by the French. Virginio Vrsin, and Count Petillan prisoners, who were come thither with foure hundred horse, they were carried to the fort of Montdragon. King Charles hauing intelligence of Ferdinands flight, drew neere Naples, and came to the city of Auersa, betwixt Capua and Naples, where the Neapolitan Ambassadors met him, and presented him with their cities keyes, vnto whom hee hauing freely granted sundry priuiledges and exemptions, the day following hee entred Naples, where with incredible ioy and contentment hee was receiued by the NobilityKing Charles receiued into Naples. and people. Hee had sent his captaines before to restraine the insolency of his souldiers: Hee was accompanied to the Cathedrall Church by multitudes  of people, and from thence (because Castelnouo held still for the enemies) he went to lodge in the Capuan castle, which was the antient abode of the Kings of Naples, hauing with an incredible course of happy fortune vanquished before he was seene.
The King, peaceable possessor of the city (though not of the castles) did by letters, and by their owne Ambassadors gratifie the Signory of Venice for that itKing Charles writes to the Uenetians. had kept promise with him and continued his friend. The report of King Charles his arriuall and successe in the Realme of Naples, was bruted so farre, as the very Turke feared him; because that the king had publikely vanted, that after the conquest of the kingdome of Naples, hee would turne his forces vpon him, so  as all the inhabitants on the sea frontiers of Sclauonia, Albania, and Macedonia, presently forsooke their dwellings, and retired into the firme land, so as if the king had crossed ouer thither, hee might easily haue conquered those Prouinces. And to speake truth, so soone as Bajazeth vnderstood that hee was come to Florence, he beganne to trim his old vessels and to build new.
About the same time, threescore ships of warre, wherein were sixe thousandA Nauall army comes from Spaine to Liuorne. foote, and three hundred horse, arriued at Liuorne, sent by the kings of Spaine for the gard of Sicily, with Lorenzo Suares, deputed by their Maiesties, for Ambassador to the Venetian Senate.

Hee told the Senate, that the cause of his arriuall with those forces, was The Spanish Ambassadors speech to the Venetians. the king his Masters feare, least after the conquest of the Realme of Naples, king Charles would make an attempt vpon Sicily, which in former time had belonged vnto the French kings: That their Maiesties knowing the pride and great power of the French, did suppose that the Venetians,

mooued with the neerenesse of the danger to see so mighty a King in Italy, would be possest with the like feare; and therefore had commanded him in their names to salute the Prince and Senate, and to assure them that if they desired ought of them, they were ready to beare a part in their fortune: for in regard of their wisdome and loyalty there was no Prince or King whatsoeuer with whom they more desired to enter into league then with them: That Pope Alexander likewise would make one, who desired nothing more then to bee vnited with Spaine and Venice; and if any thing should happen otherwise then well, their forces thus ioyned together, they might easily preuent it.

This speech of Suares did highly content the Senate, who being already iealous  of King Charls his greatnesse and good fortune, began to looke about them, and to feare other matters not yet thought of* Lodouicos distrust likewise of King Charles, as well for that Iohn Iames Triuulce, whom he had driuen forth of Milan, receiued the Kings pay, as because he had commanded the Duke of Orleance to attend him at Ast: for Lodonico complained thereof to the Venetian Ambassador, and told him, that he would gladly leaue the French parts* and make a league with the Venetians. Beside all this, Maximillians Ambassadors (whose father the Emperor Frederick died that yeere) did not cease to solicit the Senate to league it selfe with them against the French.
In the meane time, Castelnouo and that Del-Ouo two Cittadels in Naples,The two Castles of Naples yeelded to King Charles. which yet held for Ferdinand yeelded to the French. For Castelnouo, the abode of Kings, seated on the shoare, was after some small defence yeelded to King Charles, by the cowardize and basenesse of fiue hundred Lansequenets that lay there in Garrison. And the castle Del Ouo built vpon a Rock in the sea, beeing continually battered with Ordnance, was content to yeeld, if it were not releeued within eight daies. The fort likewise of Gayetta, notwithstanding that it wasThe fort of Gayetta yeelded to the King. prouided of all necessaries did after some sleight assaults, yeeld: so as in a very short space, the whole kingdome, in a manner, was with great facility reduced vnder the Kings obedience, the Isle of Ischia excepted, and certaine townes in Puglia and Calabria which still held out for the Arragonois.
King Charles did now no more entertaine the Venetian Ambassadors with such cheerefull countenance as hee was wont; but oftentimes said, That those who were not pleased with his comming into Italy, for the conquest of the Realme of Naples, should repent it.
This being reported at Venice, caused them to hasten the conclusion of a new league, to which end, Lodouico had sent new Ambassadors. Lorenzo Suares at his arriuall, told them, that his Kings pleasure was to haue him in his name to enter into the league, on any conditions pleasing to the Senate. Pope Alexander likewise did daily expect a fit time to ioyne himselfe with the Venetians and the rest, hauing openly said, that if the French returned to Rome, hee would goe to Venice, and no more behold them. At last, in the month of Aprill, the Ambassadours of these Princes did in the City of Venice make confederacy, betwixtA league made by sundry great Princes against the French. the Emperour, Kings of Spaine, Venetians, and Duke of Milan: it was onely published for the defense of one an others States, with reseruation of place for any else to enter into it that would. But all of them thinking it more then necessary, to draw the French King forth of the Realme of Naples, concluded, in their more secret capitulations, that the Spanish companies that were in Sicily should aide Ferdinand of Arragon to recouer his Kingdome, who much presuming of his peoples loue, made meanes to enter into Calabria.
In this confederacy it was concluded, that the Confederates should make account to entertaine an army of foure and thirty thousand horse, and twenty thousand foot, viz. That the Pope should furnish foure thousand horse, Maximillian 6000. the King of Spaine 8000. the Venetians the like number, and

Lodouico as many. And if any of them by reason of the long distance of place, could not so soone as need were, leuy the number of soldiers hee was rated at, in sending to his associates six hundred pounds of gold, they should for him furnish such forces.
These were the conditions of the Consederacie, the which was so speedily and secretly concluded, as Philip de Comines, Lord of Argenton, Ambassador for kingPhilip de Comines King Charles his Ambassador at Venice, daunted with the newes of the league. Charles at Venice, who went dayly to the Pallace, and conferred with the other Ambassadors, had neuer any inckling thereof: and beeing the next day after it was concluded, sent for into the Senate, and vnderstanding by the Prince and Senators what had beene done, he was in a manner like a man berest of his sences: and when the Prince told him, that they had not done it to make warre vpon any one, but onely to defend them selues; he recouered his spirits, and said, My King then shall not returne into France? The Prince answered, But hee shall, if hee will returneThe Princes answer to Comines. as our friend, and wee will willingly helpe him with whatsoeuer hee shall need. After this answer, hee went forth of the Senate so amazed, as being at the staires foote he turned towards the Chancellor, who accompanied him, and said to him, Good Sir, tell mee what the Prince said, for I haue for gotten it, which he did.
Beside, the insolency of the French, by reason of the facility of their victory was so encreased, as in respect of themselues they contemned all Italians: for which, the peoples loue towards them was already conuerted into mortall hatred: and on the contrary, their hatred towards the Arragonois into pitty and compassion to Ferdinand. Wherevpon, Naples and all the rest of the kingdome, waited but for a fit occasion to repeale him.
King Charles had in a manner resolued, before the conclusion of the league, to returne presently into France, prouoked therevnto by some occasion vnknowne to mee, notwithstanding that diuerse important businesses were not ended in Naples, his victory beeing not fully perfected, by reason that the Realme was not yet altogether conquered. But hauing intelligence that so many Princes were leagued against him, and that the Venetians had called home their Ambassadors, resident with him, his minde was much troubled, and hee consulted with his Lords what  was best to bee done in a matter of so great importance. His Councellers were of opinion to hasten his departure, fearing that by his longer stay, difficulties might increase, and the Confederates haue time to make greater preparations.King Charles his resolution. Therevpon, the King resolued to returne by land, maugre all the Confederates; seeing that hee wanted vessels to transport so great an Army by sea: for the fleete which hee had prepared at Genoa, was wrackt by tempest, vppon the shore of Plombino, the Admirall whereof, and Antonio Prince of Salerno, came to him by land.
In the meane time, King Charles perceiuing that Lodouico as well as others had deceiued him, was desirous to take the Citty of Genoa from him, and to that  e^d sent Pietro Fregosa Cardinall, thither, who had beene Duke thereof, and Obietta de Fiesca, with eleuen Galleys, the remainder of his whole fleete. Then desirousGuilbert of Bourbon Viceroy of Naples. to prosecute his owne returne, he left Guilbert of Bourbon, Duke of Montpensier, Prince of the bloud, his Lieutenant Generall in the kingdome, with the moyety of the Suisse, and part of the French footmen, eight hundred French lances, and fiue hundred Italian men at armes, which were in his pay, part of them vnder the command of the Prouost of Rome, and the rest vnder Prospero, and Fabricio Colonni, and Antonello Sauello, all three great Captaines, on whom hee had bestowed many benefits. This done, hee departed from Naples with the rest of his Armie, on the twentith of May, and marched directly towards Rome. But  before his departure hee would bee crowned King of Naples, which was performedKing Charles is crowned King of Naples with great solemnity in the Cathedral Church of Naples, where with great pompe hee receiued the honors and othes which are vsually made to new Kings. The King carried away with him eight hundred French Lances, the two hundred

Gentlemen of his gard, the Lord Triuulcio with a hundred lances, three thousand Suisse, and two thousand French footmen: and appointed Camillo Vitelli and his bretheren to meete him in Tuscany with two hundred and fifty men at armes.
In this equipage did King Charles march towards Rome: Pope Alexander, although two dayes before he came thither had promised where to attend him, did neuerthelesse after hee had left a strong garrison in Castle Angelo, retire to Oruietta, accompanied by the whole Colledge of Cardinals, two hundred men at armes, a thousand light horse, and three thousand foote, leauing the Cardinall Santo Anastasio his Legat in Rome, to entertaine and honor the King. The Venetians not long before, had for his better safety sent him fiue hundred Albanese  horse.
The King beeing come to Rome, refused to lye in the Pallace of the Vatican, which the Pope had appointed for him, and lodged in the suburbes: From thenceKing Charles sends a messenger to Uenice. he sent a Gentleman to the Venetian Senate, to tell them from him, that his King had yet neuer intreated or sued to any; but now hee was onely desirous to know of them, whether their State were his friend or enemy. The Prince answeredThe Princes answer to him. him. That wise and discreet men were wont sometime to referre them selues to the will and opinion of others, and in time of need to request their ayde: That hee spake this, onely to let him vnderstand, that it lay in his Kings power, to  make the Venetians his friends or enemies. With this answer the Gentleman departed from Venice, together with Philip de Comines the Ambassador.
The Florentines likewise, so soone as they had intelligence of this new confederacie, and that King Charles was come from Naples, to returne home into France, began to leuy soldiers, and to fortifie their townes, to stoppe the Kings passage, if hee intended to passe thorow their Citty. The King departed from Rome, and though at his approach neere Viterbo, the Pope had againe promisedThe Popes inconstancie. to conferre with him in some fit place, yet hee went from Oruietta to Perousa, meaning if the King directed his course thither, to goe to Ancona. The King neuer the lesse, though hee were highly incensed against the Pope, did re-deliuer the Castles of Ciuata-uechia and Terracina, reseruing that of Hostia to himselfe, and  passed thorow the Churches countrey as a friend, Tuscanella excepted, where the inhabitants refusing to lodge his vantgard in their towne, it entred by force and sackt it, with great slaughter.
The Venetian Senate beeing aduertised that one of their chiefe Confederates territories had beene so spoyled by the French, thought that King Charles had begunne warre against them, fearing that comming vppon theirs, or on those of the Dutchie of Milan, hee would doe the like: Wherevpon they commanded their Generall Antonio Grimani, to saile with their Fleete into Puglia. The King afterwards arriued at Sienna, where hee remained sixe dayes, notwithstanding that euery man aduised him to depart speedily: but there they  treated concerning the restitution of the Florentines fortes, promised by the King at his departure towards Naples, wherevnto all his Councellors were induced for sundry reasons, but others crossed it: wherevpon the matter was referred to his comming to Ast.
The King leauing Florence on his right hand, tooke the high way of Pisa, and from thence went to Luca. The Pope perceiuing the King was past, sent backe the Venetians and Lodouicos forces which they had lent him, and returned to Rome.
In the meane time they in Lombardy began to stirre. For the Venetians and LodouicoGreat preparations made by the Venetians and Lodouico Sforza. Sforza made great preparations to hinder the Kings returne into France, or at least, to secure the Dutchie of Miian, thorough which hee was to passe, wherevpon each of them raysed forces, and as well in common as in particular, omitted nothing that might further their deseigne. And Lodouico beeing very desirous to performe that wherevnto hee was tyed by the

Confederacy, concerning the Citty of Ast, sent Galeas of Saint Seuerine to that enterprize with 700. men at armes and three thousand foot making no other accompt but to take it.
The Duke of Orleance, who remained in it, vppon the first intelligence of theThe Duke of Orleance taketh Valfenieres. new League, had fortified Ast, and with great earnestnesse solicited new supplies from France to releeue the King. On a sodaine forces from all parts were assembled, who with great speed passed the Mounts, so that the Duke of Orleance in a short space beeing backt with a mighty power, went forth into the field, and in the Marquisate of Saluces tooke the towne and Castle of Valfenieres, held by Antonio Maria of Saint Seuerin, wherevpon Galeas with his army retired into Anon, dispairing to execute any notable matter.
The Duke returning to Ast, an occasion beeing offered to take Nouara, would not omit it, and hauing concluded with those that offered to giue him entranceThe French take the towne and Castle of Nouara. he crossed the Po by night at the bridge of Stura, and with his forces, without any resistance, was receiued into the Citty by them: from thence he sent part of his Cauallery to make incursions as farre as Vigeua. The Castle of Nouara still held out for Lodouico, but the Duke of Orleance to assure his conquest, resolued to take it; whervpon, on the fifth day after, it promised to yeeld (which it did) if it were not reieeued within 24. houres.
The Venetians hauing intelligence that Lodouico was inuaded, and that the  French made incursions into his Contrey, did freely giue their consent that he should call back some of those companies which he had sent into the Parmesan, and besides that, sent him foure hundred Stradiots. By these new forces neere to Nouara, the Duke of Orleance his farther passage was stopt, who retired with all his forces thither.
Now after some controuersie with the Florentines concerning the restitutionThe number of the Confederate Army. of their Forts, the Kings vantgard led by the Marshall of Gie went to Pontrema. In the meane time the Confederate Army was spedily assembled neere to Parma in number two thousand fiue hundred men at armes, 8000. foot and 2000. light horse called stradiots, most of whom were Albaneses, and of the neighbor  Prouinces to Grecia, brought by the Venetians into Italy. Francesco Gonzaga the young Marquis of Mantoa was Generall of the Venetian troopes, whose valour surmounted his yeares, and with him two principall Senators, Luca Pisani and Melchior Treuisan, as Prouidators The Count Gaiazza commanded Lodouicos troopes, Francisco Bernardino Viscount beeing ioyned in Commission with him.
All the Confederate Captaines consulted whether they should encampe at Fornouo, a small Village at the foot of the hill, and it was concluded because the place was very straight, and peraduenture likewise to giue the enemy meanes to descend into the plaine, that they would lodge in the Abbey of Guiaruola, three  miles from Fornouo, wherby the French Vantgard came thither sooner then the rest of the army, which conducted the ordnance, vneasie to bee brought ouer that steepy Appenine hill.
The Marshall de Gie being come thus foreward, sent a trumpet to the Confederate Army, in his Kings name to craue passage, who without offence to any man, and taking victualls at a reasonable price, was desirous to passe on and returne into France. The Confederates consulting vpon an answer for the Marshalls trumpet, the Captaines opinions were different, in the end they concluded to send to Milan, where the Duke and Confederate Ambassadors lay, to know their pleasures. But the matter being delayed, the Captaines sent back the Trumpet  without any certain resolution, determining to assaile and charge the French as they passed.
The King at last ioyning with his Vantgard, did with his whole army the nextThe King lodgeth at Fornouo. day following lodge at Fornouo. The French, who till then had marched with

great boldnesse and assurance, making no account of the Italians armes, so soone as at their going downe the hill they discouered the enemies army with infinite numbers of tents and pauilions, and considering their resolution to fight, began a little to abate their former heate, and would haue beene well pleased, so that th^ Italians would haue suffered them to passe. The King enforced to imbrace new Councell commanded the Lord of Argenton to send atrumpet to the Venetian Prouidators, to let them vnderstand that he desired to conferre with themThe two armies neere to one another. for the publique good: They accepted the parley in some fit place betwixt both Armies: but the King, altring his purpose, would not attend the issue of this parley.
The two armies were quartered within three miles of one another along the Turo, which is rather a torrent then a riuer, which running betwixt two little hills doth in a manner enuiron them. On one of those hills was the Confederate army lodged on the right hand towards the riuer bankes, they had fortefied themselues with Dikes and Rampiers well flanked with ordnance, and the French were of necessity to go that way to Ast, nothing but the riuer beeing betwixt the enemies and them.
All that night was very tedious to the French, both in regard of the Stradiots continuall alarmes, as for a suddaine shower of raine, entermingled withThe French army crosseth the Turo. fearefull thunder and lightening, Which they interpreted as a presage of some sinister  fortune. In the morning by day breake, the French army began to crosse the riuer, the ordnance going first, followed by the Vantgard, wherin were three hundred and fifty Lances, Iohn Iames Triuulcio with his company of an hundred Lances, and 3000. Suisses, to whom the King added three hundred archers andThe order of the Kings ar^. some crosbowes on horse-back of his guards whom he caused to march on foot, for hee supposed that the enemy would turne his cheese forces vppon it. The battaile followed the vantgard, in middest whereof was the Kings person, armed at all points, mounted on a gallant courser, and the Lord Tremouille neere him with his authority and Councell to gouerne that part of the army. Next followed the rereward conducted by the Earle of Foix, and behind it the  baggage.
So soone as the two armies began to mooue, the light horse on both sides skirmished, the ordnance flew from both parts, and the Italians, prepared for the battaile, extended their Squadrons on the riuer bankes. The French marched on notwithstanding, so as their Vantgard was already led to the right side of theThe Marquis of Mantu ^ his order to assaile the King. enemies Campe, when the Marquis of Mantua crossed the riuer at the back of the French rereward, with a Squadron of 600. men at armes, a great troope of Stradiots, and other light horse, and 5000. foot, hauing commanded Antonio of Montfeltre to be ready with his troopes when he should be sent for to refresh the first battaillon, and the light Cauallery to giue in in flanke vpon the enemies so  soone as the fight should bee begun, and the rest of the Stradiots to crosse the Riuer and to fall vpon the French baggage which was left alone. The Count Gaiazza on the other part crossed the Turo with 400. men at armes, to releeue him when need should be, and for the guard of the Campe, two companies of men at armes and a thousand foot were left behind.
But the King perceiuing that contrary to his expectation the whole burthen lighted on the rere-ward, turned his back to the Vantgard, and drew neere to theKing Charles his ^alour. Rere with the battaile, and came with such speed, one squadr on before another, as himselfe was at the front among those that fought brauest. And though the Marquis assault was braue and furious, the French did as brauely answer him, throwing themselues pell mell among the Squadrons. It is certaine that at first the Italians valour was very excellent, beeing encouraged by the Marquis, vvho attended by a gallant troope of braue yong Gentlemen, omitted nothing belonging to a valliant Captaine. The French did likewise valiantly repulse this first

charge, yet being pressed by multitudes, began to stagger, the King himselfe being in danger, who though hee had not many of his owne soldiers about him, did valiantly defend himselfe, the goodnesse and firecenesse of his horse dooing him better seruice then the ayde of his people, and then hee made a vow to SaintHis vow. Denis and Saint Martin, that if hee might safely passe into Piedmont, he would at his returne into France, with great gifts goe and visit their Churches, the one beeing neere Paris, and the other in the Citty of Tours. These vowes made, hee began to fight with greater courage then before, till his soldiers that were next him, beeing incited by his danger, did all of them with their owne liues, runne to saue the Kings, and repulse the Italians, whither the battaile that stayed behinde,The King rescued by the battaile. arriuing in time, and giuing in furiously vpon the enemies flanques, stayed their furie: in this charge Rodolfo Gonzaga, Vnckle to the Marquis of Mantua, a very famous Captaine, hurt in the face with a sword as he lifted vp his Beuer, and falling from his horsse, was miserably trode to death by the horse, and could not bee saued.
The battaile thus changing by sundry accidents, and no aduantage on eyther side appearing, made all men more and more to wonder vnto whom the victory would incline: The French were enflamed by the presence and danger of their King, and because they were in a place where they could hope for no safety but in victory. The Italians on the other side were incited by a couetous desire of rich  booty: so that Fortunes power beeing, (as all men know) very great in humaine actions, especially in affaires of warre, where the least error doth often times transport the victory to those that were almost vanquished, did at that time very cleerly demonstrate it. For the Stradiots, sent to assaile the French bagage, began to spoile, and to driue away the Mules, and other wagons beyond the Riuer. Their fellowes appointed to charge the French in flanke, perceiuing that others returned loden with spoile, incited by the selfe same desire of gaine, fell vpon the bagage, and by their example, others both horse and foote left their files, and went from the battaile to doe the like. By this meanes the Italians wanting their lookt for fresh supplyes, and the number of those that fought still decreasing, nothing  did so much incourage them, as the valor of the Marquis, who fighting valiantly did still abide the enemies furie, incouraging his owne soldiers, who much weakned by the departure of their fellowes that went to spoile, and their enemies on euery side pressing in vpon them, and no longer able to resist, were enforced to flye, and to attempt to repasse the riuer, which beeing swelled by the former nights raine, and by a great shower of hayle which fell during the fight, they could hardly doe. The French followed them very fiercely euen to the Riuer, killing all those that fled, taking no prisoners at all.
Whilest they fought so valiantly on that side of the Army, the French Vantgard, gainst which Count Gajazza brought part of his Cauallery, presented it The French vantgard disordereth the enemy. selfe in battaile, with such furie, as the Italians, daunted, because they were not seconded, did of themselues fall into disorder, and fled to the body of their Army which was on the farther side of the riuer, wherevpon the Marshall de Gie would not pursue them any farther, some afterwards, reputing it to wisedome and discretion, others to cowardize. The Marquis of Mantua passed the Riuer in the best and closest order he could, where he found his troopes so disordered, as euery man with his booty thought on nothing but meanes how to escape; but his presence and authority, stayed that confusion.
The King with his troopes comming to his Vantgard, which had not stird, demanded The King determineth to assaile the enemies in their Campe. his Captaines aduise, whether hee should sodainly crosse the Riuer, and assaile the enemies in their Campe, but their opinions beeing various, and also the troopes which had fought, wearied, they resolued to take vp their lodging: and for that night, they lodged on the hill, in the village called Medezana, a mile from the place where they fought.
Such was the end of the battaile betwixt the French and the Italians neere the Riuer Tarro, where of the French side dyed scarce two hundred, but of Italians more then three hundred men at armes, and as many others as amounted to three thousand men, in regard of which number of dead so disproportionable, the victorie was attributed to the French, though the Venetians challenge to themselues the glory of the day, because that their campe and baggage remained whole and entire, whereas the French on the contrary, lost much of theirs, and among others, some of the Kings rich stuffe: Wherevpon, by publick Decree, ouer all the territories vnder their obedience, and especially at Venice, bonefiers and other signes of ioy were made. The day following, the King remained in the same village, and by means of the Lord of Argenton, who parlied with the enemies, truce was granted till night.
The next morning before day, the King with his Army dislodged, sounding neither d^um nor trumpet, the better to conceale his departure; and all that day he was not pursued by the Confederate Army, by reason that the Taro was exceedingly swelled, and could not that day be foorded. Sanseuerine whose selfe and soldiers had not fought in that battaile, made an offer to the Marquis and Prouidators, that if they would giue him a troope of light horse to cut off theSanseuerin his offers. taile of the Kings army, hee by his incursions would amuze the French, so long, till their Army might ouer-take them. His demand granted, hee departed from the Campe with two thousand fiue hundred horse, and by reason of the swelling of the Riuer, tooke a longer way, so as that day hee did not ouer-take the KingsThe small effect thereof. troopes: but so soone as hee drew neere them, hee serued rather for a guide to conduct them to Ast, then a disturber of their iourney: so, as it seemed that his request to the Marquis and Prouidators, was onely to accompany and safe conduct the King. His intent was afterwards knowne to bee such, by Lodouicos commandement, who when Bernardo Contaren would haue giuen in vpon the Kings reregard, could not bee suffered so to doe.
So soone as the waters were downe, the Marquis pursued the Kings Army, which hee not beeing able to ouer-take, sent sixe hundred horse after it, to cut off the taile and to keepe it in continuall alarum, who returned to him loden with booty. The French at last comming neere to Alexandria, tooke the higher way towards the mounts, where the Riuer Tanare is most shallow, and in eight dayesThe King arr^neth at Ast. march, without losse of men or other encombrances, came before the wals of Ast, where after the King was entred hee caused his Armie to bee lodged in the field.
The Campe of the league which had followed him into the Tortonois, beeing no more able to annoy him, ioyned with Lodouicos Sforzas forces before Nouara. The Kings retreat beeing knowne at Venice, the Senate commanded generall Precessions, and publick prayers to bee made, to giue God thankes for that by his  retreat the Citty was freed from the danger which threatned it.
The end of the fourth Booke of the fourth Decade.





The Contents of the fifth Booke of  the fourth Decad.
THe Venetians at Genoa arme by Sea against the French, and take Rapalla in the Realme of Naples. Lodouico and the Confederates besiege Nouara. Peace concluded betwixt King Charles and the Confederates, the King returnes into France. The Neapolitans reuolt from the French, and bring Ferdinand into Naples. A Generall rebellion ouer the whole kingdome  against the French. The Pisans giue themselues to the Venetians. The Venetians ayde Ferdinand, hee giuing them three Citties in Puglia. The Venetians resoluing to defend Pisa against the Florentines, send ayde thether. King Charles determineth to returne into Italy, and makes great preparation for it. The Duke of Montpensier, besieged in Attella, is through want of victuals enforced to Capitulate, and quit the Realme of Naples. The death of Duke Montpensier and other great Captaines. King Ferdinands death. The pursutes of Lodouico and the other Confederates to haue Pisa restored  to the Florentines. The death of Charles the eight French King. Lewis Duke of Orleans, French King. Coruin, sonne to the King of Hungarie, made a Gentleman of Venice. Caesar Borgia, sonne to Pope Alexander, quitts his Cardinalls Hatte, and is made by King Lewis Duke of Valentinois. Lodouico procureth the Turkish fleete to inuade the Venetians. League betwixt Lewis the French King and the Venetians. The French King sends an Army into Italy, vnder the command of Iohn Iames Triuulce. And lastly, the taking of Caruagio by the Venetians.

The fifth Booke of the fourth Decade,of the History of Uenice.
THE Venetians, aduertised that King Charles at his departure from Naples, had sent diuerse vessels to make incursions intoThe Venetians arme certaine vessels at Genoa against the French. the riuer of Genoa (as hath beene said) sent one of their Cittizens to Genoa with money to rigge certaine great Argozies. Lodouica Sforza had likewise giuen order to arme a certaine number of Galleys, so as together they prepared a fleete, the which departing from Genoa, did by night land  seauen hundred footmen, which without any difficulty tooke the towne and castle of Rapalla, seazed on by the French at their arriuall: Then meeting at seaThe Venetian flette takes Rapalla. with the French fleet, it assailed and defeated it, the Admirall thereof being taken, and foure French Ensignes, which the Geneuois sent to Lodouico Sforza, who presently gaue two of them to the Venetian Ambassador, resident with him, saying that he did present them to the honor and merit of the Venetian commonwealth.The French nauall army is defeated. The Marquis of Mantua in the meane time beeing at Clastegia, following King Charles his Army, requested by Lodouico, and commanded by the Senates decree, sent two thousand foote in Garrison to Tortona and Alexandria. Then he intreated the Senate to send two Senators, who as Prouidators should manage the warre with him: wherevpon Luca Zeno, and Andrea Venieri were appointed, who comming to the Army, went all together to the siege of Nouarra, which Lodouico with a mighty Army did streightly besiege. The Venetians sent so great aide, as scarce any enterprize can be remembred, wherein they spent more money, so that in a short space, there were three thousand men at armes, threeThe number of the Army before Nauara. thousand Almaine horse, fiue thousand Italian foot, and ten thousand Lancequenets, in the confederate campe.
The Venetian Senate was not onely carefull to send forces to this siege, but the more to incourage their soldiers, had from Lieutenant of the Army made the Marquis of Mantua Captaine Generall thereof, the better to honor his courage and valour manifested at the battaile of Fornouo: and with a very gracious example, had not only augmented their pay who had valiantly behaued them-selues, but giuen pensions and sundry recompences to the children of those that were slaine in the battaile, and dowries to their daughters.
The seege still continuing before Nouara, those of the towne were in great want of victualls, by reason of the great number of soldiers and Contrey people that were in it, nor could the King, who lay at Ast, releeue it, for want of men: and though the Duke of Orleance, when hee was made acquainted with the dearth, did put forth all vnprofitable eaters, yet this remedy was to no purpose: The French made many attempts by night to victuall it, but beeing still discouered, they were enforced to retire without effecting it, and often times with great losse of their men.
The King then, out of hope to raise the siege in any time, and dayly importunedThe King resolues to hearken vnto peace. by the Duke of Orleans, who was in great want, determined to hearken vnto peace. But the difficulty to obtaine it was very great, in regard of the iealozie

and distrust betwixt the King and Duke of Milan: yet it was motioned by an vnexpected meanes. For the Lady Marques of Mont-ferate beeing dead, the King wishing well to that State, sent the Lord of Argenton to Cassall, to consult with her subiects concerning the profit and commodity of a young sonne shee hadA motion of peace made at Casall. left behind hir. The Marquis of Mantuas Steward came thither likewise in his Maisters name to bewaile her death. They two entred so farre into discourse of peace, as the Lord of Argenton, by the perswasion of this Steward, did write therof to the Venetian Prouidators, who inclining therevnto, acquainted the Duke of Milans Captaines with it, who with one consent, sent to intreate the King which lay at Ver^eill, to appoint some of his officers to meete them in some fit place  where they might conferre together. The King allowing it, the Commissioners on both sides met betwixt Bolgare and Camarian, where after sundry difficulties alleadged on both parts, peace at last was concluded and signed by the King, which was no sooner sworne to by the Duke of Milan, but the King made hast to returne into France. And in this manner about the end of October 1495. hee repassed the mounts.
The Venetians were displeased with Lodouico, for that without the aduise and consent of all the Confederates hee had made peace with King Charles, seeingThe Venetians are displeased with Lodouico. that they hauing beene often intreated by the King, and him, to hearken therevnto, had euer answered, that they would doe nothing but by the consent of all  the Confederates: so that now they perceiued it was a dangerous matter to trust him, and therefore they would no longer bee in league with so perfidious a man.
Lodouico was much troubled with these newes, and perceiuing that the Venetians were no more his friends, gaue secret commandement to all his Garrisons, by which the Venetian Campe was to passe, to guard the passages, and especially the Riuers, and to shutte vp all the boates, to stay their departure against his will. This beeing knowne to the Prouidators, they were much amazed, in regard they were to passe many great riuers: and conferring heerevpon with Bernardo Contaren,A bold enterprise of Bernardo Contaren. not knowing what to resolue on, hee offered to poinard Lodouico in open  counsell, saying, That hee once dead, no man would stirre. The Councell of Ten at Venice, beeing acquainted with this proposition, wrote back, that by no meanes hee should doe so, for it would much blemish the Venetians reputation; but onely temporize with him till they were forth of his territories, which they did, whervpon, Nouarra surrendred, they ledde their army which in a maner they cassed to Crema, and from thence went to Mantua, and so to Venice.
But to returne to that which was done at the same time in the Realme of Naples, where warre was managed as well as in Lombardy. So soone as Ferdinand had intelligence of King Charles his departure from Naples, (beeing then in Sicill) attended by the Spaniards who were come thither by Sea, he landed in Calabria, to whom many Contrey people presently ranne, and within a while after the Citty of Regium yeelded to him, the Castle hauing still held out for him. At the same time likewise the Venetian fleete was descried not farre from the shore of Puglia, whereof Antonio Grimani, a man of great authority in the State, was Generall, who comming neere to Monopoli a Citty in Puglia, landed the StradiotsThe Venetians take Monopoli. and certaine foot companies, then by land and sea, gaue an assault to the Citty, which was taken by force, wherevpon the Castle soone yeelded: This fleete likewise tooke the Citty of Pulignana by composition.
Ferdinand in the meane time with many vessels, but few soldiers, leauing Sicily, hauing besides the loue and fauour of the people of the Realme of Naples, who longed for him, came to the flattes of Salerno: and on a sodaine, Salerno, Melphi and la Caua erected his banners. Afterwards hee houered two whole dayes before the Citty of Naples, expecting some popular commotion

in the Citty (which had been promised) but it was in vaine, for the French tooke good order there for that time, so that the third day after Ferdinand dispayring of any good successe, made to Sea, determining to returne to Ischia.
The Cittizens of Naples, who had resolued to deliuer the towne to Ferdinand, (their plot being halfe discouered), determined to make a vertue of necessity, and to win or loose all, according to this resolution secretly sent a small boate to call back Ferdinand, intreating him to land all, or part of his forces to giue incouragement to those that intended to rise in his behalfe. Vpon this aduertizement, FerdinandTee Neapolitans re^ult i^ fauour of Ferdinand. returned againe before Naples, and then landed, a mile from the Citty; which the Duke Montpensier perceiuing sallied forth of Naples with all his  forces to hinder his landing. The Neopolitans then taking hold on occasion, presently tooke armes, and at the first ringing of the Toxin or larum bell, made good the gates, and began euery where to cry Ferdinand, Ferdinand. The French amazed at this suddaine tumult, thinking it dangerous to abide betwixt the rebellious Citty and the enemies, determined to returne to Naples, but they were enforced to fetch a great compasse, to come to the Gate neere Castelnouo, for that through which they came forth was seazed on by the Neopolitans. Ferdinand in the meane time entred the Citty on horseback, where, to the peoples incredible ioy, he rode vp and downe. The French entring at the Gate next the Castle, did their best to get into the heart of the Citty, but their attempts were  vayne, for at euery streetes end they found resistance, and night approaching they retired into the Castle, to gether with the Duke of Montpensier, Yues of Alegre a famous Captaine, Antonio Prince of Salerne, and many other FrenchA Generall reuolt made oaer the whole Kingdome and Italian Captaines of note. Those of Capua, Auersa, the Fort Montdragon, and other townes neere adioyning, and the greatest part of the Kingdome did the like. Those of Gayetta going about to follow their example were with great slaughter preuented by the French Garrison, who in heate of blood sackt the Citty. The Venetian Senate hauing intelligence that Ferdinand had recouered the Citty of Naples, wrote to Antonio Grimani that he should no more assault any towne of the Kingdome in the Venetians name, but to remaine at Monopoli to  know their farther pleasure. The Pope vnderstanding that the Venetian fleet was idle, intreated the Senate that it might saile to Naples to aid Ferdinand: this was granted, and Antonio Grimani leauing 100. light horse and two Gallies for the gard of Monopoli, went to Tarentum which held out against Ferdinand. But Grimani being there aflicted with a flix, sent twenty Gallies to Ferdinand, vnder the command of Contaren the Prouidator, and himselfe, with the rest of the fleet (for he had in the meane time receiued new supplies) directed his course to Corfou. At the same time, the Florentines being desirous by all meanes to recouer Pisa, and the Pisans being to weake to resist, sent secret messengers to the VenetianThe Pisans commit themselues to the Veneti^ns Senate, to intreat them to receiue their Citty into their protection, and to  hold it for a member of their state. At first the Senate found the matter to be of such importance, as they made no great hast either to refuse or accept it: yet at last some Senators beganne to tast this offer, and to harken vnto it, as they who with the deseignes and hopes embraced the entire Monarchie of Italy, for obtaining whereof, they supposed that the Signory of Pisa would greatly auaile them, in regard that their antient vnion with other Potentates was broken, and most of those who were wont to resist them, weakened: as also, because that Citty would giue them sure footing in Tuscany, and extend their bounds as farre as the lower sea: and therefore concluded to accept it as an offer sent from God. This opinion being approued by the greatest part of the Senate, the businesse  was consulted on by the councell of Tenne, that the resolution of it might bee kept more secret, whose opinions being various, the matter was put off till some other time.
Lodouico likewise was greedy to impatronize this Citty, and therevpon seemed

very ready vnder-hand to aid the (...) against the Florentines, whom he entertained with sundry practises.
The Pope mooued by Ferdinands intreaties, wrote at the same time to the Venetians, to send part of their Army returned from the seege of Nouara, to aid Ferdinand to driue the French forth of the Realme of Naples, promising that Ferdinand should engage certaine sea townes to them, till they were satisfied for their expence in that warre. The Senate not fully resolued to send the Army to the King, commanded Bernarao Contaren to go before to Rauenna, with 600. light horse, to the end that if they should determine to send it, he might be so farre onwards on his way. This beeing vnderstood at Rome, the businesse was prolonged, for Cardinall Ascanio, brother to Lodouico, made a proposition that the Venetians should assist the King in that warre, and yet haue no townes engaged to them.
Ferdinands Ambassadors, that came to Venice to make an accord, following the Cardinalls aduice; demanded the army, but offered no pawne. The Senate knowing that this was Lodouicoes practise, who enuied their greatnesse, did on a sudaine dismisse the Ambassadors, not suffering them to remain a moment in the Citty. The Ambassadors spent many dayes to pacifie the Senate, and notwithstanding that they promised that Ferdinand should deliuer three of his best Citties,The Uenetians (...) an ac (...) with Fer^ Ambassadors. with their territories, vnto them, namely Trani, Brundusium and O^ranto, they would hardly agree to it, had not the Confederate Ambassadors, there present, interceded for them, whereuppon a new league was made, by which the Venetians, hauing first receiued the three townes, were obliged, speedily to send 600. men at armes and 3000. foot to Ferdinand: and the Treasorer to the State did deliuer to Ferdinands Ambassadors. 150. pounds of gold by way of loane, with diuers other conditions, which the Pope approoued and ratified, as one hauing interest in the Realme of Naples.
The League thus made, Commissioners were sent to Ferdinand to receiue theThe Venetians send aid to Ferdinand. three townes, and messengers to the Marquis of Mantoua* to will him without delay to lead his troopes into the Realme of Naples. These things thus concluded  and diuulged, caused diuers townes in the Kingdome, which the French held, presently to yeeld to Ferdinand; the like did the two Castles in Naples. King Charles after his returne into France sent the Lord of Argenton to Venice to tell the Senate, that hee accounted their State to be comprehended in the accord madeKing Charles sends an Ambassador to Uenice. with Lodouico, because their Generals and Prouidators were present at it, in which regard, he intreated the Senate to surrender Monopoli to him which their Army had taken from his subiects, and that they would no more assist Ferdinand: The Venetians sent him back without satisfying his Kings demands. Charles raised a new army, determining to send it by Sea to the releefe of Caietta, vnder the Conduct of the Duke of Orleans, who crauing to be excused from that iourney, the army was dissolued, and the determination to releeue those in the Kingdome of Naples, vanished into ayre.
Lodouico, hauing intelligence of what-soeuer was done in France, and now no more fearing the French, was aduertised by letters from his frends of the Pisans request made to the Venetians, whervppon hee intreated the Senate to receiue him as an associate in the defense and protection of Pisa, because that the Florentines were leagued with King Charles, and him-selfe had taken their Ambassador in his owne Dominions which was going into France.
This businesse, sundry times debated in the Senate, it was at last concludedThe resolution for the defence of Pisa. by the generall consent of the Ambassadors, that Pisa should bee defended at the common charge of the Pope, Venetians, and Duke of Milan, and that two thousand foot should bee leuyed at Genoa by the Venetians, to bee sent to Pisa.
Herevpon the Florentines raised 6000. foot, and with the ordnance sent them to Pisa before the enemies forces were assembled, hoping to take the cittie. But comming neere to the gates, those within the towne made a salley, and after a furious charge vpon the enemy, defeated and put them to route, and tooke their ordnance. Not long after, Paulo Vitelli the Romane, a valiant and braue Captaine, forsooke the Pisans, and went to Florence, where beeing honorably entertained and made Generall of their Army, hee marched with 10000. foote against the Pisans, and at his arriuall lodged in the Citties suburbes, from whence the townesmen did beate and repulse him: but the Florentines winning them againe, were enforced to quit them, and to giue ouer the siege, to defend their owne confines  against Pietro de Medicis, who was said to be comming with great forces against the citty of Florence, accompanied by this kinsmen the Vrsini.
The Venetians in the meane time leuied fiue hundred foote at Genoa, whomThe Venetians and Lodouico send ayde to Pisa. they sent to Pisa, the like did Lodouico: The Florentines hauing vsed all their cunning to take the Cittadell of Pisa, as well by meanes of the King, as money; the gouernour thereof, prouoked by his owne inclination to the French, that were in Pisa, or by secret Commissions from the Lord of Ligni, whose Lieutenant hee was, or else beeing enamored on a young maiden of Pisa (for it is not likely that money alone would haue preuailed with him, seeing hee might haue receiued a greater summe of the Florentines) was very loath to yeeld vp the Castle, but  in the end beeing enforced by the Kings frequent commandements and threatnings, hee surrendred it to the Pisans, hauing first receiued twenty thousand Ducats of them, whereof twelue thousand fell to his owne share, and eight thousand for the soldiors that were in it.
The Pisans running in heapes to the Cittadell, razed it downe to the ground:The Pisans raze their Cittadell. But because they found themselues too weake to resist the Florentines, they sent to craue ayde at one time of the Pope, Emperor, Venetians, Duke of Milan, Geneuois, Seinoi^, and Lukeses: but they were most earnest with the Venetians and Duke of Milan, on whom they relyed more then on any other, because hee had prouoked them to rebell, and had speedily releeued them. But the Duke,And craue aid of sundry Princes. though hee extreamly desired it, did neuerthelesse doubt whither hee should accept it or no, fearing least the other confederates should take it ill, by whose councell the treaty of the State of Pisa had bin begun, as a matter common to them all, and standing in need of them, hee durst not openly declare himselfe vntill the King were wholy forth of Italy: But the Pisans then grew cold, hoping to bee releeued by the Venetians, who without sparing for any cost did bountifully supply them with all things: wherevpon they betooke themselues to theirThe Venetians protect the Pisans. protection, and were receiued by the Senate, after long cont^station among the Senators.
The Venetians at the same time had taken Astor, Lord of Faenza into their  pay, and accepted the protection of his state, which was very fit for to bridle the Florentines, Bologneses, and all the rest of Romagnia. To these particular aides of the Venetians other supplies from the Confederates were ioyned, for the Pope, Venetians, and Duke of Milan sent certaine companies of men at armes, paid in common, to the ayde of Ferdinand. In the meane time Antonio Grimani beeing enforced by his indisposition of body to retire from Corfou to Venice, Melchior Treuisan was in his steed sent as Generall to the fleet, who going to Corfou with certaine Galleys, did presently saile into Puglia, and from thence into Calabria, where hee vnited himselfe with the rest of the Venetian vessels, and with them enforced diuerse townes to yeeld to Ferdinand.
Whilest the whole kingdome of Naples was filled with warre and troubles, King Charles hauing vnderstood the losse of the two Castles in Naples, through want of supplies, began a new to bend his thoughts on the affaires of Italy, and to determine to goe thither againe in person: This desire dayly increasing in him,

wherevnto diuers great Lords both French and strangers prouoked him. Therefore his councell concluded, that Triuu^cio, who not long before was come forth of Italy to his Court, should returne in post to Ast, as Lieutenant to the King, and with him eight hundred Launces, two thousand Swisses, and two thousand French foot; that the Duke of Orleance should ere long follow himResolution of the Kings councell or his iourney into Italy. with greater forces, and the King last of all with all prouisions: moreouer, that thirty ships in the hauens of Prouence, where thirty Gallies and Gallions were to be armed, should saile through the Ocean with supplies of men, victualls, munition and money into the Realme of Naples, and that in the meane time, whilest the fleet was making ready, certaine vessels well manned and victualled should bee  sent thither.
The rumor of these preparations in France diuulged in Italy, did much troubleLodouico send^ euery where to get force^ to secure himselfe from the French. the Confederates, especially Lodouico Sforza, who was the first to be exposed to the enemies fury, but most of all when hee vnderstood that the King had dismissed his Agents with sharpe and bitter speeches. He sent Ambassadors to the Emperor, to draw him into Italy, and others to Venice to request the Venetians to contribute towards this expence, to preuent this common danger, and to send certaine troupes to Alexandria to make head against the French. The Venetians freely offered to send forces to Alexandria; but they were not so willing to giue their consent for the Emperors passage, who was no great friend to their State, yet fearing least Lodouico, whom they knew to bee fearefull and timorous, should fully reconcile himselfe to the French King, they agreed to send Ambassadors to the Emperor to the same end. And standing in doubt of the Florentines, theyThe Uenetian^ ioyne with Lodouico. sent word to Giouan Bentiuole to make warre vpon them with such forces as the Confederates should furnish him on the frontier towards the Bolognese; promising him that they should bee at the same time inuaded by the (...), and Pisans: yet though Bentiuole promised so to doe, his meaning was cleane contrary. But the French affaires beeing prolonged by the Cardinall of Saint Malo, who, besides the superintendency of the treasure, managed all matters, did so delay the execution of things, already resolued vpon, as one accident more happened, which had almost wholly diuerted them. For when euery man thought that theThe King tak^s his (...) of the Saints* Denis and Martin. King would haue gonne into Italy, he determined a iourney to Paris (according to the custome of ancient Kings) before his departure forth of France to take his leaue of Saint Denis, and likewise of Saint Martin, passing by Tours, promising within a month to returne to Lions to pursue his iourney into Italy. The aduise of his Lords, nor vrgent intreaties and teares of the Italians, could not alter this determination. The Duke of Orleance, Cardinall of Saint Malo, and the whole councell remained at Lyons to hasten the prouisions, and the King went to Tours, where the Queene lay.
The affaires of Naples were in the meane time brought to great extremity, where the fortune of the French began openly to decline, being at one time assailed with infinite difficulties* want of money, victuals, the peoples hatred, captains discord, and souldiers disobedience, many of whom forsooke the campe, some willingly, others on necessity. On the contrary, Ferdinands army, re-enforced with men, victuals and money, did still attend the French, and were continually at their backes. But that which did most ruine them, was the Lord D' Aubignis sicknesse, which caused diuers to forsake him, and to goe to the Duke Mo^tpensier his army: Calabria by that meanes being vnfurnished of men, so as Gonsaluo that was come thither, tooke diuers townes in that Prouince, and obtained a  gallant victory there, whereby his forces beeing augmented, hee determined to ioyne with Ferdinands campe before Atella, where Duke Montpensier lay with diuers other Barons and great Lords, both French and Italians, which followedFerdinand doth streightly beseege At^lla. the French Kings party.
By Gonsaluos comming to the campe, the beseeged were more streightly

inclosed, the towne being wholly enuironed, both by the Arragoneses, Venetians and Spaniards, so as no victuals could enter into it, especially in regard of the Stradiots and Venetians who scoured the country: neither could they goe forth to forrage as they were wont, so that beeing depriued of all commodities, they were brought to such extremity, as they could not get water from the Riuer, either for themselues or horse.
Beeing then oppressed with so many miseries, they craued a safe-conduct,At^lla enforced to capitulate. which was granted them, wherevpon, the Lord of Persi, Barthelmeo Aluiana and a Swisse captaine were sent to capitulate with Ferdinand, with whom they thus agreed. That there should be truce for thirty daies: That in the meane time the  said accord should bee shewed to King Charles. That none of the beseeged should goe forth of Atella, and that the Arragonois should daily giue them competent victuals. If they were not releeued in that time, hee should leaue Atella, and whatsoeuer else was vnder his command in the Realme of Naples, together with all the ordnance. That the souldiers might depart with their liues and baggage, with permission to returne home into France either by sea or land. That the Vrsini and other Italian souldiers might with their companies depart forth of the Realme whither soeuer they pleased. The truce expired Duke Montpensier came forth, with all the French, Swisse, and the Vrsini, and was conducted by the Marquis of Mantua and his light horse in safety to Baja, where  finding no vessels ready to imbarke themselues they quartered betwixt Baja, and Pozzuolo, where by reason of the bad aire and other discommodities, they grew sicke, and the Duke Montpensier and great numbers of his people died, soMontpensier his death. that of fiue thousand, fiue hundred hardly returned into France.
After the taking of Atella, Ferdinand diuided his army into sundry parts, for the recouery of the rest of the kingdome. Hee sent Don Frederico of Arragon his vncle, and Prospero Colonna before Caietta: Fabricio Colonna into Abruzzo, and himselfe went and encamped before Salerno, where he made an accord with the Princes of Besignano and Salerno. (...) returned into Calabria, which for the most part was held by the French, where although the Lord AubigniAubigni is enforced to leaue Calabria to returne into France. made some resistance, yet at last being coopt vp in Gropoli, hauing lost Manfredonia and certaine other townes, and despayring of all aide, he consented to leaue Calabria, and was suffered to returne by land into France.
Thus, no other townes holding out in the whole Kingdome but Tarentum and Caietta, it seemed that Ferdinand had attained the height of his desires, when comming to Somma a towne seated at the foote of Mount Vesuua, to visit the Queene his wife, he fell grieuously sicke, and was carried to Naples where within a while after he died: but before his death, he commanded the Bishop ofA great desire of reuenge. Theanas head, whom he kept in prison, to be cut off, and fearing that they would not obey him by reason of his sicknesse, he caused the head to bee brought into  his Chamber and with beholding it was satisfied. His vncle Frederick comming in hast from Caietta to Naples with Melchior Tre^isan, was by the Princes of the Realme saluted King, his Nephew dying without children. This Prince beloued of all men for his meekenesse labored to reconcile to himselfe all those who in any sort had fauored the French, and freely restored their castles to them. In this manner winning the peoples hearts, the warre against the FrenchTarentum and Cai^tia yeeld to Frederick. in the Realme of Naples was almost ended, for the city of Tarentum, oppressed with famine, did with her castles yeeld to the Venetians, which beseeged it by sea, who presently deliuered it to Frederick. Those of Caietta within a while after, did the like; and by this meanes the French lost the Realme of Naples. But this notwithstanding, warre was not ended in Italy by reason of Pisa, in whichThe Venetians hold Pisa. the Venetians had placed foure hundred men at armes, seuen hundred light horse, and two thousand foot, against the Florentines. They went moreouer with the Emperour Maximillian to beseege Liuorne, where their enterprise

succeeding badly, they were enforced to discampe, and from thence, the Emperor returned with speed into Germany, with small honour to the Imperiall dignity, wherevpon he was contemned ouer all Italy.King Charles resolueth to afsaile Genoa.
King Charles likewise being dispited with his losse and infamy, determined to assaile Genoa, presuming vpon Baptist a Fregosa his party. The Pope on the other side, desirous to possesse the Vrsins States, the chiefe of that family beeing imprisoned at Naples, did in open consistory declare Virginio and the rest traytors, and confiscated their lands. This did no whit please the Venetians, who were very desirous to winne the loue of that family, and draw them to their seruice: yet not daring to contradict the Pope, they were vnwilling at that time  to allienate him from them: for notwithstanding Lodouicos flatteries, hee could not but with griefe endure to let Pisa, which hee had pursued with such labour, fall to their share; wherevpon hee caused the Pope, and the Ambassadors to the Kings of Spaine (who were iealous of the Venetians greatnesse) to propound the drawing of the Florentines into the league by restoring Pisa vntoLodouicos pra^ against the Venetians. them, seeing by other meanes they could not bee induced to it. The Venetian Ambassador with great earnestnesse oppugning this proposition, the motion was dasht, for feare of loosing the Venetians friendship.
But the hope of King Charles his returne into Italy beeing wholly lost, and most of the Italians that held his party otherwise imployed, Lodouico hereby  encouraged, did daily more and more discouer his hatred towards the VenetiansLodouicos practises against the Venetians. concerning Pisa, inciting the Pope, and Kings of Spaine with greater efficacy to reuiue the motion of the restitution thereof: Herevnto he drew the Florentines, who to that end sent their Ambassadors to Rome.
This treaty was continued there many daies where the Pope and Ambassadours of the King of Spaine, Duke of Milan, and King of Naples, did openly vrge the Venetian Ambassadour to this restitution, thereby to ioyne the Florentines to their party against the French, to the end that all seeds of discord being rooted out, no man might againe haue any cause to call the French into Italy.
But the Senate contradicting all this, and sufficiently perceiuing from whom this earnest motion proceeded, answered by the same Ambassadour, that itThe Senates answer to this motion. was a very daungerous matter to deliuer that City to the Florentines, whose mindes were strictly vnited with the French, and that the surrendring of Pisa would not diuert their inclination: and also that thereby the fidelity of all the Confederates would be called in question, who had taken vpon them to protect the Pisans, especially the Venetians, who when others did shut their pursses had freely opened theirs, and to defend them had spared for no cost or labour, wherevpon it would bee great dishonour to them to leaue them then and to falsifie their promise. Now whilest this businesse was treated betwixt the Confederates, a sodaine accident happened in France, begetting sundry and differentThe death of Charles the eight, French King. effects in mens mindes. It was the death of King Charles, who on the seuenth day of Aprill died at Amboise, of an Apoplexie as hee stood looking on some of his Courtiers that plaied at tennis; and because hee died without children, the crowne of France descended to Lewis Duke of Orleance, the next Prince of the bloud, as heire male. Italy by King Charles his death was somewhat freed from feare: for no man supposed that King Lewis the twelfth comming newlyLewis Duke of Orleance French King. to the crowne, would at the beginning of his reigne make warre in Italy: But the same right to the Realme of Naples (hee being French King) belonged as well to him as to his Predecessor, and beside that, the Dutchy of Milan which  was his owne by succession from his Grandmother Valentine.
After his Coronation, hee desired nothing so much, as to conquer that Dutchy: and though from his infancy hee had euer carried that minde, yet his successe at Nouara had much inkindled him, together with his hatred to

Lodouico Sforza, by reason of his insolent carriage towards him when hee was at Ast. And for an introduction to his deseigne, he did not onely intitle himselfe King of France, Naples, Ierusalem, both the Sicilies, but likewise Duke of Milan: This was as a summons to Frederick and Lodouico. Hee wrote letters full of friendly congratulation to the Pope, Venetians and Florentines concerning his comming to the crowne.
These three seemed to bee highly pleased with those letters, being desirous to aduance and reuenge themselues: Lodouico neuerthelesse, though he knew that he had to doe with a rougher enemy, feeding himselfe with hope, as Frederick of Arragon likewise did, that the new King would not so intend the affaires  of Italy, did still oppose himselfe against the Venetians concerning Pisa, his hatred to them making him forget his owne future danger.
The Venetians notwithstanding his opposition chose three AmbassadorsThe Uenetians send Ambassadors to the French King. to goe and congratulate the King for his comming to the crowne, and by way of excuse to tell him, that the onely suspition (and not without cause) which they had of King Charles, least after the conquest of the Realme of Naples, he should haue attempted that of all Italy, had enforced them to take armes against him: The Pope for the same purpose sent a Nuncio into France, beeing desirous to inuest his sonne Caesar, then Cardinall, with temporall greatnesse. The Florentines likewise, according vnto their antient custome to the crowne  of France, sent Ambassadours thither: Wherevnto they were earnestly solicited by Lodouico, who by their meanes thought to frustrate the Venetians practizes for Pisa, and also to mediate some accord betwixt himselfe and the King.
The King did very louingly entertaine all these Ambassadours, and gaue them audience, concluding nothing till hee had first secured the Realme of France by new leagues with the Princes his neighbours. The Florentines in the meane time still pursuing their deseigne against the Pisans, their forcesIncounter betwixt the Florentines and Pisans. which lay Pontadera, hauing intelligence that certaine troupes gonne forth of Pisa, returned home-wards with great booty, went to intercept them, and  meeting them, did put them to rout: but fifty men at armes of the Pisans comming on a sodaine to reskew their fellowes, the Florentines were put to flight, many of their footmen slaine, many captaines taken prisoners, with the greatest part of their cauallery.
During these troubles in Tuscany, the Venetians reputation was euery where so augmented, as Coruin, sonne to Mathias King of Hungary, se^t an Ambassadour to the Senate to certifie it that hee was very desirous to make a perpetuall league of friendship with them, and to bee receiued into the number of the Venetian Gentlemen: This, propounded to the great Councell, was freely graunted.
Lodouico in the meane time fearing that the Venetians by reason of that defeate of the Florentines, would grow so great as it would bee an hard matter to repulse them forth of Tuscany, offered to releeue the Florentines: and to the same end was desirous to know what prouisions were necessary, not onely for defense, but to execute the enterprize of Pisa. For though at first hee did not determine openly for to releeue the Florentines, but onely to aide and succor them secretly with money; yet, beeing transported with chollerLodouico o^ declares himselfe for the Florentines. and disdaine, vsing insolent and threatning speeches against the Venetians; hee resolued openly for to declare himselfe their friend: And therefore hauing first denied passage to their people, which went to Pisa, and enforced  them to goe through the Duke of Ferrara's country, hee caused the Emperour to declare himselfe their enemy, and procured the Pope to promise theHis practi^es against the Venetians. Florentines to send them an hundred men at armes, and three Gallies, vnder the commaund of Captaine Villamarini, who should keepe all victualls

from entring into Pisa by sea, yet afterwards delaying to send them he did at last openly refuse it, fearing by fauoring them, to offend the Venetians, with whom he was desirous to ioyne.
Moreouer, Lodouico did draw Giouan Bentiuole with the State of Bolognia to his part, and caused the Florentines to take his sonne Alessandro into their pay, together with Octaniano de Riare Lord of Imola and Furli, with an hundred and fifty men at armes. He did in like manner cause the Lukeses to promise, neuer more to fauour the Pisans.
The Florentines hauing in vaine attempted to draw the Geneuois and Sienois to their side, went into the field vnder the command of Paulo Vitelli their  General. The Pisans vnderstanding that the Florentines were abroad, raised their campe from before Ponte di Succo, and went to Cascina: where Vitelli placing an Ambuscado, assailed them, and slew many Stradiots, and tooke Franco their captaine prisoner with an hundred horse: In this manner did the Florentines annoy the city of Pisa, hauing taken diuers townes round about it, when they receiued some likely aduertizement from the Duke of Ferrara and others, that the Venetians would be content to harken vnto peace, prouided that they would proceed in the treaty, not as with their equals, but superiors. They then sent Ambassadors to Venice, to sound their meaning. Guido Antonio Vespuc^, and Bernardo Rucelli two of the honorablest Citizens went thither, who after kinde  entertainment, beeing introduced to the Senate, after long disputation, concerning meanes to satisfie both parties, neither the Venetians for Florentine Ambassadors would propound any, referring themselues to the Spanish Ambassador, who incited them to this accord: But the Venetians distasting his opinion, the Florentines returned back without any satisfaction.
This treaty broken, the Venetians on the one side, and Florentines on the other,New treatie: on both sides. beganne to strengthen their party with new leagues and treaties, the one with the Sienois, and the other with Pietro de Medicis and the Lord of Faonza, Lodouico still shewing himselfe very much affected to the Florentines.
The Venetians hope from Syen^a and Perousa being by this meanes frustrate, did by the assistance of Pietro de Medicis attempt to releeue Pisa, on RomagniasThe Florentines take Li^. side, but in vaine. In the meane time Paulo Vitelli, Generall to the Florentines, tooke the towne and castle of Librafa^ta: whereat the Venetians being incensed, sought againe to draw the Marquis of Mantua to their pay, whom not long before they had dismissed (he leauing them by meanes of Al^iana) the Florentines army being turned from Pisa, but so, as the whole burthen of warre fell vpon the Venetians, who wisely procured meanes of agreement: For although the Florentine Ambassadors departed from Venice, hopelesse of any accord, yet at Ferrara a new treaty of composition was made, propounded by the Duke, at the Venetians intreaty.
During these troubles in Italy by reason of Pisa the new French King made preparations against the next yeere to inuade the Dutchy of Milan, where he hoped to haue the Venetians on his side, who mortally hating Lodouico, did particularly negociate with him; so did the Pope, who sent his sonne (which hadCaesar B^rgla the Popes son is made Duke (...) Valencia by the French King. cast of his Cardinals hat) into France, in secular habit, to carry a dispensation to the King to repudiate his wife Ioan^, and to marry his Predecessors widdow. Caesar Borgia came to the French Court in great pompe, where the King very honorably entertained him, giuing him a company of an hundred men at armes, a yeerely pention of 20000. French pounds, and made him Duke of Valence in Daulphine. Then desirous to pursue his iourney into Italy, hee made peace  with all Princes his neighbours, and especially with the Kings of Spaine, who presently called home not only all their Ambassadors from Italy (hee with the Pope excepted) but Gonsaluo with all his forces: The King likewise made an agreement with the Emperor, vnto whom, for his sonne the (...) sake hee

promised to surrender the townes in Artois. Hee did moreouer confirme the peace made by his predecessor with the King of England.
Whilest the Senate was busied in prouiding for the releefe of Pisa, newes came to Venice that the Turke prepared a great fleet, which caused them to send an Ambassador to him: for they were afraide that hee was offended with them because that toward the end of the precedent summer, Nicolo Priuli, Prouidator of their fleet had on the Aegean Sea sunke a great ship belonging to one of his Bashas which first assailed the Prouidator. Zancani, whom the Senate sent, being come to Constantinople, had notice of the great numbers of vessels which the Turke had caused to be armed: The great Lord curteously entertained  him shewing no signe of discontent: He determined to assaile the VenetiansLodouico incites the Turke against the Uene^ians. whilest they should be busied in Lombardy with making head against Lodouicos forces, who had promised to inuade them in those parts.
Zancani intreating him to renew the league with the Signory, hee the better to deceiue him, granted it, giuing him the Articles of the league written in Latin. Now their law saith, that they are not bound to performe any thing vnlesse it be written in their owne language. Zancani aduertized thereof by Andre Gritti, a Venetian Gentleman, skilfull in the Turkish lawes and customes, and for his bounty and other good parts beloued of that nation, hauing dwelt a long time at Constantinople, was by him in some sort put in hope to haue them written  in the Turkish tongue, but not obtayning his desire, Zancani returned with the Articles in Latin, concealing what Gritti had told him, because his iourney should not be thought vaine.
Now the French King so soone as he had made peace with his neighbour Princes, and in his absence secured his Realme, made a Confederacy with the Venetians (not mentioning Pisa as he^ had done at the beginning) wherein itLeague betwixt the French and Venetians. was concluded that at the same time as he with a mighty army should inuade the Dutchy of Milan, they on the other side from their frontiers should doe the like, and the Dutchy being wor^* (...) with the country of Gyradade should remaine to the Venetians, on this condition, that after this conquest they should Capitulation of the league. be bound to defend the King for a certaine time, with certaine number of horse and foot, the King being bound to do the like for Cremona and what soeuer they possessed in Lombardy. This contract was so secretly made, as Lodouico, nor yet the Pope who was very inward with the King, could (but very late) haue any certaine knowledge thereof.
The King, not mentioning Pisa, did afterwards propound conditions to the Florentines farre different from the former; wherevpon they resolued to rely on the Duke of Milan, by whose assistance their affaires prospered in the Casentine territory, where they were Lords, their enemies hauing beene inforced to abandon the townes by reason of great difficulties.
Lodouico who neuer imagined that the Venetians would haue leagued themselues with the French King, who was greater nad more potent then they, and least of all change his neighbourhood for that of the French, was wonderfully danted when he vnderstood that the league betwixt the King and Venetians was resolued, hee not knowing the particularities thereof. Hee was then ready to send Francesco of Sanseuerine with great forces to aide the Florentines, but hee detained them, vpon intelligence that Triuulcio leauied souldiers neere Ast. HeeLodouico amazed at the league, goes about to diuert the Venetians from it. likewise thought that if the accord betwixt the Venetians and Florentines should take effect, they would peraduenture moderate their indignation conceiued against him, and forsake the French King. Herein hee imployed Hercules D'Aeste Duke of Ferrara his father in law, and by forcible reasons enforced the Florentines in some sort to condescend to the Venetians desire, sending them word that if they did not agree, he should be constrained for feare of the French King, to call home those forces he had sent to aide them.
Hercules the better to effect it came in person to Venice, whither Lodouico sent his Agents, and from the Florentins Giou^n Baptista R^dolfi, and Pa^ic Antonio Soderini, two of the wisest and chiefest Citizens came thither: all which, after long disputation concerning the meanes to be obserued in that accord, made an absolute compromise for eigh^ daies, in the person of Hercules Duke of Ferrara, who hauing well considered the matter, did on the sixth of Aprill prouounce his sentence. But the Venetians, not satisfied therewith, in regard of the small consideration had of their expences in warre; nor yet the Pisans, who obtained nothing but a seruile kind of liberty, contrary to the intention of most of the Venetian nobility; nor the Florentines, who thought themselues ouer burthened, for  that they were to repay part of their expenses who had vniustly molested them, it tooke none effect, notwithstanding that the Venetians and Florentines had signed and ratified it, because that the Pisans determined to endure all extremity rather then to returne vnder the Florentines command; being there vnto secretly incited by the Geneaois, Lukeses, and by Pandolfo Petrucci. And so soone as they vnderstood the tenure of the sentence, being wonderfully incensed against the Venetians, they tooke the gard of the Cities fortes, and gates, from their souldiers, and would not longer suffer them to lodge in the City. The Florentines, despayring by this accord to obtaine Pisa, resolued to win it by force. King Lewis inThe Florentines resolution conce^ning Pisa. the meane time commanded his forces to march into Italy, his army consisted  of 1600. Launces, 5000. Swisses, 4000. Gascons, and 4000. out of the other parts of France, whereof Giouan Iacomo Triuulcio was made Generall: This army comming before the fort of Arazza, seated on the riuer Tana^e, took it in a short space, notwithstanding that there were fiue hundred footmen in it: from thence it went to Anon, a little towne betwixt Ast and Alexandria vpon the same Riuer,The French Kings army (...) into Italy vnder Triuulcio his command. which beeing battered in foure seuerall places, was in two daies taken by force, notwithstanding that the Duke of Milan some few monthes before had well fortified it, and placed seuen hundred men in Garrison there. The King came after as farre as Lyons, intending to passe the mounts, from whence he sent an Ambassador to Venice, for to accompany the Venetian army whether soeuer  it marched; to which so soone as it was ready, Melch^or Treu^san, and Marc Antonio Morosini were sent as Prouidators: And the Senate presented this French Ambassador, with a gallant horse ritchly caparisond, a pauillon for the field, and two pounds of gold.
The Venetians hauing intelligence of Triuulcio his good successe, caused theirThe number of the Venetian army. army to march, consisting of seuen thousand horse, and as many foot, which vnder the command of Aluiana, hauing crossed the Oglio, and entred the enemy country, did in a short space take diuers townes and castles; and comming before Carauagia, the chiefe City of the country, tooke it by force, with other townes neere the Riuer Adda.
The end of the fifth Booke of the fourth Decade.




The Contents of the sixth Booke of the  fourth Decade.
LOdouico is troubled with the newes of the league betwixt the French King and Venetians against him. Alexandria is taken by the French. The Milaneses reuolt, and Triuulcio entreth Milan for the King. The Venetians take Cremona. King Lewis comes to Milan. The Venetians fleet against Bajazeth. It sustaines great hurt by fire. The Turke takes Lepanto. Lodouico is receiued into Milan by the disloyalty of the Inhabitants. Lodouico, going forth of Nouara, is taken by the French and sent prisoner into France. The Venetians great warre with Bajazeth. The Venetians through want of winde at sea lose the battaile. The Turke takes Modon. Coron and the fort of Iunca are yeelded to the Turke on composition. Naples in Morea, beseeged by the Turke, is brauely defended. The Isle of Samothrace yeeldeth to the Venetians. They take the City  of Cephalonia. Confederacy betwixt Ladislaus King of Hungary and the Venetians against the Turke: Peace betwixt the Venetians and Turke: The Portugals traffick to Calicut for spices: The castles of Moua and Faenza are re-deliuered to the Venetians: The Pope complaines against the Venetians in regard of the Cities of Romagnia: And lastly, are set downe the Venetians Ambassadors inuectiue to the Emperour Maximillian and French King against the Pope.




The sixth Booke of the fourth Decade,of the History of Uenice.
THese newes did greatly afflict Lodouico Sforza, putting him in feare of his State: who lost (as it often happeneth in sodaine Aduersities) both courage and councell, flying to bootlesse and vnprofitable remedies.
He sent an Ambassador to Venice to vse some meanes to  pacifie the Senate. This Ambassador comming first to Ferrara, Duke Hercules sent one of his Gentlemen before to the Senate with Lodouicos letters, intreating them to suffer his Ambassador to come thither: The contentsThe Venetians refuse to giue auaience to Lodouicos Ambassador. of his letters were, that himselfe and his brother Ascanio sent an Ambassador to them on great and important affaires, requesting them to giue him audience. The Senate hauing read both their letters, commanded the Ferrarois presently to leaue the City, and gaue Lodouicos letters to the French Ambassador.
At the same time Frederick King of Naples did by his Ambassador acquaint the Senate with his desire to send fiue hundred horse to Lodouicos aide. The Senate told the Ambassador, that hee should make his King this answer; That the Cauallery he intended to send to the Duke of Milan would doe him small good, he hauing need of farre greater forces; and that if he should send him any, they would take it as a wrong done to themselues: adding, that there was no man liuing who had receiued more fauors and benefits of them, then hee; which he had requited with ingratefull iniuries: That the time was now come when God was his enemy, whom hee had so often offended by his disloyalty and periury, and that therefore his King should doe much better to leaue him to him selfe.
In the end, Lodouico, frustrate of all hope, made meanes to the people of Milan, who extreamely hated him for his great exactions: and hauing assembled them, he did acquit and release part of his imposts to them, and therevnto added very  earnest speeches to winne their loues, which were heard with more attention then profit: that done, hee enroled all those in the City that were able to beare armes.
The Venetian army in the meane time still preuailed, and after the taking of the towne and ^astle of Carauagia, crossed the Riuer Adda, on a bridge of boats, and made incursions as farre as Lodi. The French army on the other side beseeged Alexandria, where Galleas, Lodouicos sonne in law, lay with twelue hundred men at armes, twelue hundred light horse and three thousand foot, who the third night after the seege, acquainting none of his captains with his intent, but only Maluezza, did secretly flie from Alexandria to Milan, with certaine lighthorse. His departure knowne in the city, as many as tarried behind beganne, in tumultuous manner, some to flie, others to hide themselues: wherevpon the French army entring it by day breake, did not only ransacke the souldiers, but sack't the whole city.
The taking of Alexandria caused those of Placentia to send their Commissioners to Triuulcio with their Cities keyes; the like did those of Pauia, and all other townes round about. There was the like confusion at Milan as in other places, where the foot companies demanding pay, Lodouico sent them to his cheefe Treasurer, who giuing them no satisfaction was by them wounded and left for dead.
This accident did so terrifie Lodouico, as he sent his children to Coma, togetherLodouico determineth to flie into Germany. his with mistris, (for his wife was dead) Cardinall Ascanio his brother, and Cardinal Sanseuerine brother to Galeas, and from thence into Germany, himselfe resoluing ere long to goe thither. The Milaneses perceiuing Lodouico to destrust  his owne forces, made an assembly in their towne-house, where they appointed foure of the chiefe among them to take order for their affaires. These comming to Lodouico told him that they were resolued to yeeld to the French King seeing that in distrust he had sent his children and family forth of the City: So soone as he heard this, he caused pay to be giuen to fiue hundred light-horse and with teares in his eyes, departed with them and Galeas of Sanseuerin his sonne in law towards Germany. He was scarce gonne forth of the castle, when Count Gayazza came to him, and the better to collour his disloyalty told him, that heCount Gayazza takes the Kings part. now thought himselfe freed from the martiall oth which he had made him, seeing that he abandoned his State, and that he was now at liberty to goe whether  it pleased him; and at the very instant not tarrying for an answer, went his way to serue the French King, with the same company which he had leauied and entertained at Lodouicos cost. Before his departure from Milan, hee left Bernardin de Corte of Pauia, whom he had brought vp of a child, to gard the castle, whereof he was then Gouernor, with three thousand footmen, vnder captaines whom he greatly trusted, with prouision of victuals, munition, and money sufficient to defend it for a long time, preferring this man before his brother Ascanio, who had offered to take that charge vpon him.
Foure daies after his departure Triuulcio, sent for by the Milaneses, entred theMillan receiues Triu^lcio for the King. City, where he was receiued with great ioy, reseruing the capitulations till the  Kings comming; all other townes of the Dutchy which yet held out, yeelded on a sodaine. The Venetians comming nere Cremona, the townesmen sent to entreate them to grant them some respit to consider vpon their yeelding. This granted, they sent to Triuulcio, to request him to receiue them for the King, for they abhorted the Venetians gouernment but answered, that by agreement made betwixt the King and them, that city was theirs, the chiefest Citizens, with the Bishop and Clergy, went to the Gates and there receiuing the Prouidators, placed them vnder a Canopy, and in this manner accompanied them throughCremona ye^ldeth to the Venetians. the City to their lodging, where they intreated the Venetians to free them from the taxes and impositions where with Lodouico had opprest them, the which was  presently granted.
There is in that City, a very strong castle which being well furnished with all necessaries, it was a hard matter to take it. Antonio Battaglione was Gouernor there, vnto whom Lodouico had committed the guard of that place. The next day the Prouidators sent to him, willing him to yeeld vp the castle to the Venetian State: at first he made refusall, but after sundry messages too and fro, theThe castle of Cremona yeeldeth to the Uenetians, vpon recompence. Prouidators^ntred it by meanes of an hundred and fifty pounds of gold, which they paied him, some in hand, and the rest by promise, with letters of a Venetian Gentlemans place, and an house in Venice, and an other in the country neere to Padua with diuers other lands.
The same day that the Venetians entred the castle of Cremona, Triuulcio didThe castle of Milan doth the like to Triuulcio for money. the like into that of Milan, which was yeelded vnto him by Berdardino de Corte, with al Lodouicos and Galleas ritch mouables in recompence of a certaine summe of money, a company of an hundred Launces, and a perpetuall pension.
Cremona obeying the Venetians, the Senate sent two Presidents thither to gouerne it, and to doe iustice, Dominico Treuisan, and Nicola Foscarin^ were sent thither: and beside these, two Ambassadors were chosen, and all foure of them appointed to goe to Milan to receiue the King, and in the States name to congratulate his new conquest; so soone as he should ariue there.
The King receiuing newes at Lyons of such fortunate successe his expectatioon, rode presently in post to Milan, where receiued with in credible ioy, heeKing Lewis comes in post to Milan. granted to the people, vnreasonable in their demands, exemption from diuers t^xes, but not from all, as they vainely presumed, and gaue great rewards to many Milanese Gentlemen, and among others to Triuulcio, vnto whom he gaue  Vigeua and other townes, in acknowledgement of his desert. All the Potentates of Italy went thither to him (King Frederick excepted) some personally andAll the Princes of Italy come to him to Milan. some by Ambassadors, some to congratulate his happy successe, and others to cleere themselues from imputation of inclyning to Lodouico Sforza more then to him, and others likewise to secure their owne euer after. The King gently receiued them all, and compounded with them all, but after different manner, according to the diuersity of the conditions, and greatnesse of the profit he expected from them. But whilest these things were done in Lombardy, the Senate hauing intelligence that Bajazeth armed by sea and land, made Antonio Grimany Generall of their Naual army, commanding him speedily to depart.
He vnwilling to prolong his iourney for want of money, their treasure beeingThe Venetians send a fleet against the Turkes. much wasted by continuall warre, lent the State foure score pounds of gold to pay the marriners and other officers of the fleet, and promised to carry as much with him to Corfou and other places to supply the fleets want when need should be.
Those of Corfou vpon intelligence that the Turkish fleet was vnder saile, and that the State was not able in a short space to set forth a Nauy able to resist it offered men and money to arme three score vessels, prouided that the Senate would furnish them with bread and ordnance. The Senate willingly accepted this offer, and command a florin of gold to be giuen to euery man which should  enter into those vessels.
The Gouernor of Zara aduertized the Senate that two thousand Turkish horseThe Turke on the z^ratin (...)* were entred on their confines, and had taken great numbers of the country people, still continuing their incusions. The arriuall of the Turkish cauallery on the Zaratin made the Venetians thinke that they would not at that time beseege Rhodes. Wherevpon, they forthwith made two Prouidators, namely, Francesco Cicogna for Morea and Romania, and Andrea Loredano for Corfou: and beside these, Andres Zancani was with forces sent into Frioull, because they had intelligence that the Turke determined to come thither.
In the meane time, the Turkish fleet came forth of the Streight, consisting of  more then two hundred three score and tenne saile, and beeing come neere Negrepont, directed it course towards Romagnia, the great Lord being there in person, who before his departure from Andrinople, commanded all the Venetians which were in Constantinople to bee imprisoned, and amongst others Andre Gritti (before mentioned) who was more streighty looked to then any other, for that in loue to his Country, he had by letters written in caractery aduertized the Gouernor of Lepanto of al the Turks proceedings against his country,A^drea Gritti imp^isoned. The number of the (...) fleet. which had like to haue cost him his life. Grimani hauing speedily assembled all the vessels which were in the Islands neere adioyning, made vp the number of forty six Gallies, seuenteene great marchant ships, and forty other lesser ones, with as many brigantines and light vessels, and anchoring at Modon, had an eye on euery side vpon the Turke.
Hauing intelligence that the enemy was comming to seeke him, hee sailed

with all his nauy towards the Isle of Sapienza opposite to Modon: and thereThe two fleets nere together. embarrailed his fleete, and hauing giuen order for all matters necessary for fight himselfe went somewhat forward with foure Gallies, the Turkish fleet being not farre from thence, which with the winde hee might haue assailed at his pleasure: yet he deferred the fight and returned backe to Modon: where after that the Turke had in a few daies made two or three seuerall brauadoes, Grimani ordered his fleete, resoluing to fight with him, when at the very instant Andrea Loretano with eleauen Brigantines and foure great ships arriued; hee came to Grimani and told him that hee was come to doe seruice to the State, intre^ting him to commaund what hee would haue him doe. Hee was a valliant  Gentleman, and skilfull marriner, and at his arriuall the whole fleete made great signes of ioy. The Generall placed him in one of the great ships.
Albano Armerico commanded an other great shippe, who in open Councell was enioyned by the Generall to assaile the enemies biggest ship, which he performed, and Loretan an other, who grapled with it to fight more conueniently:The Venetian fl^et hurt by fire. and in the bickering wild fire was throwne into the enemies ship which beeing on fire, was by the winde carried amongst the Venetians and fiered them: This accident did more hurt to the Venetians then Turkes, because that they did easily saue their men with other small vessels, but our men  could not bee reskewed in time, so that they all perrished, some few excepted with Tomaso Duodo recouered in his long boate, Albano was saued by the Turkes.
Grimani wonderfully troubled with this losse, sounded the retreate, and without any farther fight retired to the Isle of Podroma: the Turkish fleet for a time remained in the selfe same place where it had fought. Albano, brought to Constantinople was solicited by Bajazeth to turne Turke, which he boldly refusingTurkish cruelty. to doe, was sawed a sunder in the middle and so constantly died.
The French King, solicited by the great Master of Rhodes (whether it was reported the Turke would come) to releeue him, dispatched two and twenty Gallies, which beeing rigged in Prouence sailed towards Rhodes. But that Island  needing no supplies as then, they did by the Kings command ioyne with the Venetian fleet. The Venetians and French comming to Zant, resolued to assaile the Turkish fleet which lay at Tornes: but drawing neere it, perceiuing that the enemies vessels lay with their poopes to land ward, and their prowes towards the sea, filled sixe small vnseruiceable vessels with reedes and other combustible matter mingled with wilde fire, and sent them before the winde vpon the enemies fleet, but it succeeded not according to their hope. AndG^imani los^th his place of Generall. Grimani in the meane time omitted a second opportunity to fight with, and vanquish the enemy, wherevpon, an other being sent into his place, and himselfe cited to Venice, he was committed to the examination of the Councell de  Pregati. The Turkish fleet went forward to Lepanto, whither the Emperour was already come, and by the arriuall of his vessels hauing beguirt the towne by sea and land, those within it despayring of releefe, and wanting all necessaries,Lepanto yeeldeth to the Turke. yeelded. These newes did greatly trouble the Venetians, and augmented their hatred toward Grimani, euery man saying, if he had done his duty, the enemies fleet would haue beene defeated.
The Turkish Cauallery on the other side, scouring the confines of Zara, entred Frioull to spoile and wast, and finding the country not defended, spoiled and burned all places as farre as Liuenza, where they tooke many prisoners: vpon these newes Zancani with great forces was sent to the frontiers.
Seuen thousand of the enemies horse came in troupes through very badde waies into Histria, and then crossing the Riuer Liuenza, came and encamped nere vnto Gradisca, where Zancani lay, determining if hee came into the field to

fight with him. But the enemies Generall perceiuing that he meant not to come forth, sent two thousand horse to wast and spoile the Cuntry, whom hee commanded to make no long stay.
These disperfing themselues ouer that goodly Contrey, tooke many prisoners burning and wasting many Contrey houses, both on the Treuisan and Paduan territories. Three hundred Albanese horse fallied forth of Vdina, and defeated some hundred of the Turkes, if Zancani with his forces had done the like, the Turke would haue receiued a great ouerthrow, but he would not suffer any oneZancani confined ^o Padu^ to goe forth of the Towne: whereof, accused at Venice, hee was sent for thither  as a prisoner, and by a Decree of Senate confind for foure yeares to Padua.
On such termes stood the Venetian State at home and abroad, when Cesar Borgia with the King and Senates forces, went into Romagnia to beseege certaine townes which of right did belong to the Church, and being conquered Pope Alexander gaue them to his sonne.
This Borgia, was a Cardinall (as hath beene sayd) and casting off his robe and Hatte of Cardinall, married a wife in France. Hee comming before Imola and Furli, after some assaults enforced the inhabitants to yeeld; but the Castles which were very strong held out longer, especially that of Furli, for the other yeelded sooner.
The Senate in the meane time to secure their owne territories during the warre in Romagnia, sent three thousand foot, and two thousand horse to Rauenna, vnder Aluianaes command, to distribute them through the territories of the Confederates neere adioyning, with two prouidators, Francesco Capello and Christophoro Moro, the one for Arimini, and the other for Faenza: So soone as Borgia had taken the Castle of Furli, Gionan Sforza Lord of Pessa^e, knowing that Borgia hated him, fearing least he would come and assaile him, was desirous to commit himselfe and State to the Venetians protection. The Senate answered that they would neuer defend one that had been so great an enemy to them: for he had concealed the Ambassador which Lodouico sent to the Turke against the State of Venice, and furthered his passage: The like had hee done by the  Turkes messenger sent to Lodouico, whom he entertained in his house, and caused him secretly to be conducted to Milan, himselfe likewise hauing often acquainted the Turke with the occurrents in Venice.
Borgia deferred his punishment till some other time, because Triuulcio was inforced to call back those troopes which hee had lent him, by reason of some tumultsLodouico re^urnes with forces out of Gema^y. feared in Milan, in regard of Lodouicos arriual, who had brought some smal aid forth of Germany, with which, and by their assistance who distasted the French, he hoped to recouer what he had lost. The Senate presently commanded their forces, both horse and foot, to passe into the Cremonese, leuied three thousand Suisses, and appointed Pietro Marsello and Christophoro Moro prouidators in  that warre.
Lodouico comming at the same time to Coma, tooke it without strokes: forLodouico recouereth* (...) the French within it fearing to be shut in betwixt the Inhabitants, and Lodouicos troopes, went their way. Hee sent his brother Ascanio before to Milan, from whence the King, not long before, was gone home into France; hauing left a strong Garrison in the Citty, and Triuulcio his Gouernour Generall in the Dutchy: but the Lombards not so well rewa^ded by the King as they had expected, prooued false to him and refused to obey Triuulcio, who was cheefe of the Guelph faction, for the Gibeline party was very strong in the Citty: wherevpon, the most  of the Nobllity and people, desirous of innouation, wisht for Lodouicos returne, and openly proclaimed his name, and so soone as they heard of the losse of Coma, and that Ascanio was not farre from Milan, the people rose, and the cheefe of the Gibelline faction, began to tumult: so as Triuulcio was glad to retire to the Castle: and the night following from thence to Nouara.
The morrow after Cardinall Ascanio entred Milan, Lodouico followed him, who by this meanes recouered it as easily as it was lost; Pauia and Parma presentlyLodouico entreth Milan by the disloially of the Inhabitants. ecchoed his name: Lodi and Placentia would haue done the like, had not the Venetian companies by their arriuall preuented it. The Senate aduertised of this reuolt, determined to send a man of worth to command the Castle of Cremona. Lodouico in the meane time, desirous to haue the Senate his friend, made sute that Ascanio his brother might send the Bishop of Cremona to Venice, to offer them his seruice: but it was in vaine, for the Senate resolued not to quitte the French Kings confederacy. The Genois refused to obey him, and the Florentines contemned him.
The King in the meane time hauing intelligence of the rebellion of Milan, vsed great speed and sent the Lord Trimouille into Italy with six hundred lances,The King sends an army to recouer Milan. leuied great numbers of Suisses, and appoynted the Cardinall of Ambois his Lieuetenant Generall beyond the mounts, who comming to Ast, had in short space assembled one thousand fiue hundred lances, ten thousand Suisse, and 6000. French vnder the command of the Lords Trimouille, Trivulcio and Ligni.
Lodouico before these supplies came from France, went and beseeged Nouara, which hee tooke* but not the Castle. The French Army assembled at Mortara drew neere him, and did cut off his victualls: then both sides falling to blowes, Lodouico was enforced to retire into the Citty; where the Suisses mutined for want of pay; hee being not able to pacifie them. They told him that they wouldLodouico is taken prisoner by the French and sent aw^y into France. sodenly depart home into their country; wherevpon hee earnestly entreated them to safe-conduct him to some secure place, which they denying did at last consent that hee should march amongst them disguised like one of their footmen, and in this maner marching amiddest their troopes was by them discouered to those that sought after him, who presently apprehended him as the Kings prisoner and sent him into France to the tower of Loches,
His brother Ascanio followed him, who taken by the Venetians and carried to Venice was deliuered to the King and sent into France, where hee was more honorably and with greater curtesie entertayned then his brother, for hee was sent  prisoner to the great tower of Bourges, where the same King had beene imprisoned two whole yeares: yet afterwards hee was enlarged, but this brother dyed in prison.
Now to returne to the Turks. After the taking of Lepanto, the Senate despatcht Lodouico Manenti, Secretary to the Councell of ten, to Bajazeth, to complaine for that hee had without cause inuaded them by sea, and had contrary to the treatyLodouico Manenti sent to the great Turk of peace made not long before with him in the Signories name by Andrew Zancani their Ambassador, and to entreate him to enlarge the Venetian Marchants, which by his commandement at the beginning of the warre had beene imprisoned. That it might likewise please him to surrender Lepanto vnto them, which hee vniustly had taken from them. And lastly if hee would grant none of these, yet at least to renue the League with them.
Two things moued the Senate to send this Ambassage; the one, because some that were very inward with the great Lord, had written to them, that if they sentThe cause which mooued the Venetians to send Manenti. an Ambassador to Constantinople, they might be reconciled to his fauour: the second, for that they considered how chargeable it would bee for them, if they should bee enforced to set forth a new Army against him, their treasure both publick and particular beeing exhausted. Whereby all their attempts would proue vaine and vnprofitable against so mighty an enemy.
Manenti ariuing at Constantinople, all his demandes were crost: for the  Turke answered, that if the Venetians were desirous of peace with him,The Turke answer to Manenti. they should deliuer vnto him, Modon, Coron, and Naples, three Citties which they held in Morea, and pay vnto him as his tributaries an hundred pound in gould yearely: otherwise hee protested to make warre vppon them.

with this answer Manenti returned. But because at Manenti his departure from Venice, there was a report, that great numbers of Turkish horse were come into Albania: the Senate fearing least the desire to spoile the Country of Frioul, might draw them thither, as the precedent yeare, appointed Pietro Doria, and Angelo Barozzi Prouidators, who taking along with them the Gouernor of Vdina and others of the Country should consult together about repairing and fortifying the townes and wayes necessary and fit to repulse the enemy; giuing themThe Venetians take order for the defence of Frioul. for assistants Aluiana with his light horse, and Gurlin of Rauenna with two thousand foote. Pietro Marcello likewise one of the Prouidators of the Army in Lombardy, was commanded to carry forces into Frioul, but the Turkes came not thither  at that time, because their Emperour called home their Generall to Constantinople.
This report againe reuiued about Midsommer, that the Turkish army was in field to waste the Venetians confines, Count Petillan with a great part of the forces, and Giouan Baptista Caracciola Colonell of the States Fantery, did by the Senates command march into Frioull, where all the inhabitants of the plaines retired with their goods to the Castles and strong Townes: yet the enemies came not thither, eyther for that they had intelligence* that the townes were fortified, or else beeing imployed by their Emperor in the warre of Peloponessus.
Manenti was newly returned to Venice, when the Senate fearing to loose the  Isle of Corfou, sent Angelo Quirini and Lodouico Canalis, with a hundred footeSupplies sent to Corfou. to gard the two fortes of the Island which are seated on two Promontaries neere one another, and not farre from the Citty, beeing so small, as they needed no greater forces to defend them. Newes was afterwards brought that the Turkish fleete which had wintered at Lepanto much increased, determined to saile into Morea (their Emperor beeing with them in person) to take those townes whichThe deseigne of the Turkish fleete. hee had demanded of Manenti.
Herevpon the Senate commanded ten great Galleys, and foure great ships to bee made ready vnder the command of Iacomo Venieri, with a particular Captaine to euery vessell, whose pay was augmented, the better to incite them to goe  the voyage. Rowers were sent for from the firme land, and money giuen to pay the fleete, diuerse Brigantines and other lesser vessels apt for warre, were rig'd to attend vpon the fleete. Melchior Treuisan which lay not farre from Cephalonia, to keepe out all Turkish ayde, beeing assured of the enemies deseigne, made speedy meanes to send men, victuals and ordnance from Candy to Naples, because all men thought that the Turke would make his first attempt there: hee likewise sent victuals to Modon.
The Modonois hauing wasted the countrey round about their Citty, and burntThose of Modon fortifie against the Turke. the houses, because the enemy should not make vse of them, builded a Forte neere to the Hauen, to keepe the enemies vessels from the walls, leauing but a  little space at the entrie of the hauen, for one ship to come in at once. Melchior Treuisan beeing come to Zant, sent for the whole fleete thither, consisting of seuenty vessels, both Galleys and ships of burthen: but that of the Turke in number more then two hundred, comming to the confines of Naples, had sent part of the cauallery before by land to scoure as far as the city. The horse within the town to the number of one thousand fiue hundred, made a sally vpon the enemies, and in a manner defeated them all. Therevpon, the enemy leauing Naples went to Modon, from whence hee sent forces to besiege Iunca, which is a Castle seated on a hill with a hauen beneath it some ten mile from Modon. Those within it hauing beene newly supplyed with men and victuals by Ieronimo Contaren the  Prouidator did brauely repulse the enemies, so as despairing to take it, they returned to their fleet. In the meane time Melchior Treuisan fell sick and dyed neereMelchior Treuisan his death. to Cephalonia, wherevpon by a Generall consent, Contaren the Prouidator was chosen to command the Army, till the Senate had otherwise prouided.
The Turke came and assailed the Burrow of Modon, and with his Canon did beat downe a great part of the wall, those within it being out of hope to defend the breach carried away all their goods into the Citty, and abandoned it. The enemy entred it, and hoping ere long to become Lord of all, did without intermission batter the walles of the Citty.
Whilest this siege lasted, Contaren left Zant, determining if it were possible to releeue Modon, or at least to annoy the enemies fleete, whose great ships lay neere Sapienza, and the Galleys and other lesser vessels in the Hauen of Iunca: So soone as the Venetian descried them, hee resolued to fight with them, and ordering his fleete, did brauely set forward. The Turke seeing them to come on, receiued them with an hundred Galleys, the fight was sharpe and cruell, victory inclining to the Venetians, so as the Turkes were once ready to make towards the shore and flie. But the misfortune was, that whilest they fought the winde slackned, whereby the shippes of burthen could neither goe backward nor forward, and part of the Galleys durst not come vp to them: the Turkes seeing this, tooke courage and renued the fight for three houres space, till night, one great Venetian Galley was sunke, and an other taken, but all her men slaine, who alone had fought all night with the enemy. Contarens Galley beeing shotte thorow both sides, and a great leake in her, himselfe leapt into an other and retired to Zant, to trim his vessels which were much bruzed.Pesare Generall of the Venetian fleet.
The Senate hauing notice of Treuisans sicknesse and death, chose Benedetto Pesare to succeed him, who receiuing money to pay the Army, departed from Venice three dayes after his election. Contaren hauing trim'd his Galleys, resolued to releeue Modon, fearing least the besieged dispairing of helpe should yeeld to the enemy: Hee chose fiue Galleys out of the whole fleete, which hee loded with all necessaries: yet before their departure, hee thought good to aduertise the besieged thereof, that they might bee ready to receiue supplies. To this end hee sent a valiant and couragious fellow in a Frigate with tenne Oares: Hee at noone dayes passed thorow the enemies fleete, euen in their view, and entred Modon, dooing his message.
The next day Contaren with the whole fleete, sayled towards Modon,Supplies enter into Modon. and beeing in sight of the enemy, hee called for the Captaines of those fiue Galleys, intreating them valiantly to releeue the besieged, foure of them with great difficulty passing thorow the middest of the enemies, entred the Hauen; the fifth, slower then the rest, perceiuing diuerse of the enemy Galleys to come vp towards her, returned to the fleet.
The Modonois greatly cheered, ranne presently to the Hauen to receiue those supplies and to carry them into the Citty, and they were so earnest in it, as those on the other side of the Citty which were on the walls forsooke their guard, and ranne thither likewise, so as the walls were bared of defence; which  the enemy perceiuing, and loth to let slippe so faire an occasion, reared Ladders, and entred the Citty, killing some few that resisted. This being knowne,The Turke takes Modon. the Townesmen and Soldiers ranne vppon them, and fought valiantly with them a long time in the middest of the Citty, killing great numbers of them. But the multitude of enemies still increasing, and all the streetes stopt, the Christians were in a manner all cut in peeces. Those which escaped the slaughter, fired the Citty, and with it burnt themselues and goods.
In this manner was the Citty of Modon taken: The Venetian Magistrate beeing tyed in chaines, was by the Turkes command carried to Iunca, to beeThe Castle of Iunca yeelded to the Turk^. seene of the Captaine of the Castle, and all those within it, who thervpon yeelded, their liues and goods saued. As the Venetian fleet returned towards Zant, an horrible tempest arose, which dispersed them into sundry farre Islands, euen to Candie, their masts, rudders and tacklings beeing all broken in peices. Modon

taken, the Turke sent one of his Baschas and part of his fleet to Coron, who told them that if vppon honorable composition the would yeeld before he beseeged them, he would vse them curreously, otherwise, if they stayed till the Canon were planted, he would put them all to the sword. They terrified with the desasterCoron yeelds to the Turke on composition. of the Modonois, without respect to the Magistrates or Captaines, who had prepared all thinges for defence, did vpon very profitable conditions receiue the Bascha into their walls.
The Turke supposing to take Naples in the same manner, and as soone as hee had done Coron, sent part of his army to their Confines, and sent thither with  his Captaines, euen to the Citty gates, Paul Contaren a Venetian Gentleman that was married in Coron, and well knowne in those Cuntryes, who after CoronA braue and bold deed of Paul Contaren was taken, the Turke tooke along with him to this end, to perswade the Neapolitans to yeeld. He conferring with those in the Citty concerning their yeelding, and standing vppon the edge of the Dike right ouer against the Gate, did on a suddaine and vnperceiued spur his horse, and leaping into the Dike presently entred the Citty. The Neapolitans both by his aduice, and being willing of themselues,The Turkish army before Naples. did very valiantly repulse all the enemies attempts; and did moreouer as occasion was offerred, make very fortunate sallies. And the Turke sending for his whole army thither, thereby thinking to terrifie them, they despised all his threatenings, and brauely defended themselues.
In the meane time, Pesare comming to Corfou, and from thence to Zant, tarried there, till the fleet, dispersed by tempest, was revnited. The Vessells trimmed and made ready, there were 18. great Gallies and 25. lesser ones, and 20. shipps well rigde and armed; with these hee determined to seeke the enemies fleet andThe Turke discampeth from before Naples. fight with it. But the Tuke hauing intelligence of his comming to Zant commanded his Baschas to raise the Seege, and to carry back the fleet to Constantinople, and himselfe, with his whole army departed from thence the next day. Pesare at theThe Uenetians take the Isle of Legina. same time sent a Fregate to Naples to view the enemy fleet: but perceiuing they were gon, he sailed to Legina, which the Turke had taken during the seege of Naples, where landing his soldiers, hee tooke the Fort, and slew all the Turkes within  it, reseruing the Captaine for his prisoner, and restored the Island to the VenetianThey recouer Mitelyn. State. From thence he went to Mittilyn, where he did the like, giuing the spoile to his soldiers and marriners. The next day he sailed to Tenedos which he burnt downe to the ground. And finding the enemies fleet, which fled at the mouth ofPesare assails the enemy fleet the Straight, he gaue in vppon their taile, and tooke diuers vessells and many prisoners, whom, vpon Gibets set vp on the two shores that diuide the confines of Europe and Asia he hanged; and afterwards spoiled and wasted the Contrey with fire and sword.
From thence he directed his course to the Isle of Samothrace, where vnderstanding that the Islanders obeyed the Turke on constraint, he sent Lodouico Canalis to them, to know if they would yeeld to the Venetians: they willingly accepted the offer, and he promised to giue them a Venetian Gentleman for Gouernour, vnto whom for his entertainment they offered to giue the tenth part of their reuenues.
Then after that he had taken and sackt Carista, hee returned with his fleet to Naples loden with spoile: and hauing there made a reuiew of his forces, hee didSamothrace yeelded to the Venetians. by his bounty highly please and content his soldiers. And vpon intelligence that the King of Spaines fleet, commanded by Gonsaluo Ferdinandes, came to aid the Venetians and was at Zant, hee sailed thitherward, and passing along by Iunca, he caused Charles Contarens head to be cut off vpon the Prow of his Galley, who  commanding that Castle for the Signory, which was exceeding strong, both byCharles Contaren beheaded* nature and art, had yeelded it to the enemy vppon the first summons, not beeing enforced by a seege.
Beeing come to Zante, hee there found Gonsaluo, with whom and the Spanish Captaines that were with him, hauing consulted vpon the affaires of warre, by their aduise and consent of the Prouidators, hee determined to goe and besiegeCoron yeelds to the Turke on composition. Modon: But because they wanted store of vessels, they sent all their workemen to Cephalonia (which a bounds in woods and Forrests,) to cut downcitees.
Whilest some were busied in cutting of wood, because they would not loose time, they resolued to besiege the towne of Cephalonia, because the Turkes should not say that two fleetes vnited, durst not assaile them. This thus resolued, Pesare and Gonsaluo, caused Ordnance to bee brought from the shippes  to batter the walls; and giuing euery man his charge, they were desirous to make tryall of the valour of those within the tower, who were in number three hundred.
The same day as they would haue begun the battery, there fell such store of raine, as they were enforced to deferre it till some other time. The weather at last beeing faire, the Ordnance was planted against the walls, where after a breach made, an assault was giuen; but the enemies did with all sorts of weapons so valiantly desend themselues, as the towne could not bee taken, so as our men were enforced to retire, and great numbers of them hurt. The Generalls thus repulsed, raised a mount higher then the enemies fortifications, from  which they might easily see whatsoeuer was done in the citty: and then gaue an other furious assault, where the Venetians and Spaniards so brauely behauedCephalonia yeelds to Gonsaluo. themselues, as they constrained the Turkes to retire into the Forte, who within a while after yeelded to Gonsaluo, fearing the Venetians indignation whom they had so often deluded and offended.
During the siege of Cephalonia, the Castle of Iunca returned to the Venetians, by meanes of one called Demetrius of Modon, who practised it with anIunca returnes to the Venetians. Albanese, a friend of his, which was of the garde of the Castle: where killing fiftie Turkes that lay there in garrison, and enforcing the rest to leape ouer the walles, they became Maisters of the place, whether Pesare presently sent  Ieronimo Pisani, the Prouidator with forces, and after him Siluestro Troni for Iudge. In this manner in a short space they tooke Cephalonia and Iunca. Gonsaluo who had already made warre at sea many moneths, perceiuing that Pesare deferred the siege of Modon till some other fitte time, and that the enemies had strongly fortified it since the recouery of Iunca, returned into Sicely. Pesare presented him with fiue hundred peeces of Malmsey, and seuenty thousand weight of sweet meates of all sorts, which the Senate had sent him from Venice.
Pesare, aduertised that the enemy had made certaine Galleys at Preueze, and that some of them were already lanched, sayled thether with foureteene  well armed Galleys, and drew them thence, notwithstanding all the enemies resistance, and directed his course to Corfou, there to trimme his vessels, and to review his fleete. The Senate in the meane time recompenced those who had well deserued in that warre, as well those that were liuing, as their heires that were dead. The Precedent yeare, the state had sent an AmbassadorLeague betwixt the Venetians and King of Hungary against the Turke. to Ladislaus King of Hungary, to mooue him to warre vpon the Turke, who after a long discourse, did in the Senates name make a league and confederacie with him, by which the King was bound, to make warre on the Turke with his whole force, and the Venetians to giue the King yearely, at three distinct times, three thousand pounds of gold. The Pope would needs make one in this  treatie of peace, and sent a Cardinall thither for his Legate, promising for three yeares space, to giue foure hundred pounds of gold yearely to the same King. Pesare hauing repaired his fleete, determined to burne the Turkish

Galleis at the mouth of the riuer Bojan: but this enterprize tooke none effect because that the Turkes had inteligence of it, who fearing the like danger as at Pre^ese, with-drew their vessels fourteene miles vp the riuer from sea. The Turke at the same time recouered the Castle of Iunca.The (...) (...)* (...) ^unca.
Pesari returning to Corfou had inteligence that the enemies Galleis vppon the riuer Bojan would shortly come forth, hee sent certaine of his Galleis thither to keepe them in; himselfe in the meane time with the rest of the fleet consisting of fiue and twenty Gallies returned into Morea, where from the confines of Coron, hee laded his Gallies with great numbers of men, women and young children, carrying them into Cephalonia desolute of inhabitants. From thence  hee returned to Corfou, expecting the French King, and King of Portugalls fleet.
Whilest these things were done abroade, Prince Augustino Barbadico dyed at home, hauiuing gouerned the Common-wealth fifteene yeare: and in his place, according to the vsuall manner, Leonardo Loredano, a man wise and noble, was chosen.



LEONARDO LOREDANO the 75. Duke.





AT the first great Councell held after he was made Prince, Benedetto Pesare, Captaine General of the fleet, was made  Procurator of Saint Marke in steed of Philippo Troni, who was newly dead. In his time the French Fleet went to ayde the Venetians against the Turke, the like did that of Portugall, according to both those Kings promises, but they came not both at one time, nor to one place, for that of Portugall went to Corfou, and the French toThe French and Portugal fleets aid the Venetians against the Turke. Zant, and yet neither the one or other did any great seruice to the State, which hauing long time mainetained warre against the Turke, alone of it selfe, and in the company of the King of Hungary, did at last make peace when it least thought thereof.
For those beeing redeemed, who at the beginning of the warre were imprisoned at Constantinople, Andre Gritti was one of the number* who returning to Venice, was by his Contrey-men kindly welcomed home. He brought letters to the Senate from Achmet, one of Baziazets cheefe Captaines, which contained,

that if they were desirous to end the warre they should send one to Constantinople to treat of the conditions of peace, and that hee would bee their freind.
The Senate vppon these letters sent word to Pesare to dissolue the fleet, twenty Gallies excepted which he should keepe with him, and wrote to Ladislaus King of Hungary, (sending him Achmets letters) that they determined to send an Agent to Constantinople, intreating him to doe the like, to the end peace might be made with more honor. Ladislaus vnderstanding the Senates determination did highly commend it, and promised to grant what they demanded: But the King prolonged the matter, because if the Senate made peace with the Turke, vnles there were som new agreement betwixt them, he should be depriued of theA new agreement with the King of Hungary. yearly sum which the Signory gaue him: wherevpon the Venetian Ambassadors that were in Hungary fearing to prolong the treaty with the Turke, granted that the three thousand pounds of gold which they paid him yearely towards the war, should (if peace were made) be reduced to three hundred pounds of gold so long as Baiazet liued.
In the mean time Baiazeth made peace with the Sophi, and therby finding himselfe more fit to continue warre against the Venetians, grew haughty, and told Achmet that he would not haue peace with the Venetians, except they would redeliuer the Isle of Saint Maur which not long before they had taken from him. The Peace betwixt the Venetians and Turke. Senate aduertized thereof by Achmets letters written to Gritti, and sent by an expresse messenger, vnwilling any longer to consume them selues in expence by continuing the warre, quitted that Island to Baiazeth, and made peace with him, reseruing the Isle of Cephalonia to them selues, in old time called Leucadia.
The Venetians were much troubled for that the King of Portugall forestalling their traffick, had appropriated vnto himselfe the trade for spices, which their vessels and Marchants bringing from Alexandria, did with meruailous profit ventThe Portugals trade for spice. into all places of Christendome: For the Portugalls going by Sea into those remote partes, and in the Indian Sea insinuating themselues into the friendship of  the Kings of Calicut, and other lands their neighbors, haue gotten to themselues the Commerce for spices which the Alexandrian Marchants before were wont to haue: and bringing them home into Portugall, send them by sea into those places whether the Venetians vsed to trade.
But to returne to the Peace, the Senate commanded thankes to bee giuen to God: and three pounds of gold to be distributed to the Preists. Baiazeth sent an ambassador vnto whom the Prince should sweare to obserue the peace, as he had done to the Venetian Ambassador.
At the same time Lewis the French King, sent Iohn Lascaris of Constantinople his Ambassador to the Venetians to request them to renew the league and  Confederacy betwixt them: for he being inforced to make warre vppon GonsaluoThe Venetians refuse to reew the league with King Lewis. Lieftenant Generall to the King of Spaine, who had defeated his Army in Calabria, was desirous to haue the Venetians take armes in his behalfe: and to induce them therevnto propounded many faire conditions, but they refused to renew the Confederacy and also his offers, saying that they were satisfied with the old one. Pope Alexander in the meane time supping in a Garden neere to the Vatican with the Duke Valentinois his sonne, was on a sodaine carried thence for dead to his Pallace, whither his sonne was likewise carried sick like the father, and the day following, the Pope dyed, black and swelled and very vgly: very euident signes of poyson, but the Duke his sonne, by reason of his youth, and presently  taking diuers counterpoisons escaped, but was aflicted with a long andThe death of Pope Alexander. greeuous disease. At the same time, Benedeto Pesare Generall of the Venetian fleet, beeing ready to returne from Corfou to Venice fell sick of a Quotidian and there dyed.
In the place of the deceassed Pope, Cardinall Picolhuomini of Syena was chosen, a man Noble and for his other qualities not vnworthy such a dignity, who toPius Terti^ Pope dies* reuiue the memory of his Vnckle Pius Secundus, intituled him selfe Pius the third: But the 26 day after his election he died, wherevpon the Cardinall of Saint Peter ad Vincula, mighty in reputation and wealth was chosen in his stead, and was called Iulius Secundus; this did highly please the venetians: They presently appointedIulius Secundus Pope. eight Senators to go as Ambassadors to him to congratulate his election, Antonio Iustiniano being one of them. At their arriuall in Rome, being brought to the Popes presence, hee louingly entertained, and embraced them, saying; that he was much bound to the state of Venice, and that he would deny  them nothing in his power: Then entring into discourse concerning Duke Valentinois,The Venetian^ send Ambassa* dors to Pope Iulius. Iustinian told him, all men thought that his Holinesse would aide and assist him: that he was desirous to haue the Townes and Castles which he held in Romagnia to bee taken from him.
This saying of his did highly content the Venetian Senate, which aspired to the peaceable possession of the whole dominion of Romagnia, and had presently after Pope Alexanders death sent forces to Rauenna, with which the Citty of Cesenna was on a sodaine in a night assaulted: but the people valliantly defending it, they were enforced to retire to Rauenna, being come thither without ordnance: yet this could not discourage them, but they espied all occasions to get footing in that Prouince; not long after a faire occasion was offered, by meanes of a controuersie betwixt Dyonisius the noble, and the Fauentines, who were desirous to repeale the Manfredi: This did Dyonisius contradict, and in despite sent for the Venetians, vnto whome hee gaue the Castle of Val de Lamone which hee kept, in which the Venetians placed a strong Garrison, they did the like in the castle of Faenza, which the Captaine, corrupted with mony, deliuered vnto them.The Castles of Valdelamona and Faenza, yeelded to the Venetians.
They did like wise hold Forlimpopolj and Rimini by the peoples consent, recompencing Pandolfo Malateste in an other Prouince: then they went and beseeged Faenza, because that the Fauentines, nothing terrified with the losse of their Castle, which, seated in a low place, they had diuided from the Citty by a  deepe ditch, made valliant resistance, as well for their loue towards the Manfredi, as prouoked there* vnto by the Florentines, who feared nothing more, then to sufferThe Pope against the Ve* netians* Faenza to be the Venetians: And to these ends imployed the aid and credit of Cardinall Francisco Sonderini their country*man, to make the new Pope grow iealous of the Venetians, who one day talking with his Holinesse told him that the Venetians did already possesse the Castle of Faenza, and all places neere the Citty, the which they shortly hoped to winne; not so much to take from the Valentinois that which he vniustly possessed by vsurpation, as to appropriate it to them selues. And that their custome was, neuer to restore any thing they held: That Faenza being a territory belonging to the Church, the Pope could doe  no lesse then to take it into his owne Protection.The Popes answer to the Venetian (...)* bassad^.
The Venetians being aduertized of this discourse of the Cardinall, Iustinian went to the Pope to excuse the state, and to entreat him not to giue credit to their enemies tales: and after a long discourse there-vpon made, the Pope replied, that hee had neuer beleeued any thing against them, being well assured of their loue and friendship toward him, as they of his: But for that which concerned Valentinois state, he could haue wished that what-so-euer did belong to the Church might haue first beene surrendred vp, with this answer the Ambassador tooke his leaue.
The Venetians notwithstanding all this continued the seege of Faenza, and Faenza yeelded. beginning their battery, the beseeged, dispairing of all aid, yeelded, the venetians hauing agreed to giue Astor a small pention to liue by. They could as easily haue taken Imo^a and Furli: but they determined as then to passe on no farther, because they would not incense the Pope: where vpon they sent their forces to Garrison,

hauing beside Faenza and Rimini taken diuers townes in Romagnia. At the same time Andre Gritti returned from his Ambassade of Constantinople, where hee had confirmed certaine Articles of Peace with the Turke, to the profit of the Signory. Not long after, Iustinian acquainted the Senate that the Pope had giuen the Valentinois leaue to goe and recouer his State. These newes caused them to write to the Prouidators that were in Romagnia, to vse meanes to take whatsoeuer might be for the profit of the State, from Duke Valentinois: by meanes wherofTossig^rua and Meldola yeelded. Tossignans and Meldola two strong townes, did vpon the first summons yeeld to the Venetians.
The Pope much incensed against them for this manner of proceeding, sent The Pope re^kes the Vene^ians. Angelo Bishop of Tiuolito Venice, to reprehend them for that they had taken Faenza and Rimini which belonged to the Church, which he craued to haue surrendred to him, intreating them likewise to aid him to recouer the rest, he being resolued to leaue the Valentinois nothing, yet he would haue whatsoeuer should bee taken, to bee restored to the right owners. The Senate, displeased with the Popes demands, answered. that they did neuer expect this from him, in regardTheir answer of their long friendship confirmed by many reciprocall good offices, especially, because they knew he had no interest therein: that they had imbraced the offered occasion to seaze on Faenza and the rest, those townes being not possest by the Church, which in open Consistory had disclaimed all her right therein and transferred  it to Duke Valentinois: As also, for that the precedent Popes did neuer possesse those terrritories, but from time to time, had giuen them to new Tenants without any other acknowledgement of superiority then the rent, which they offered presently to pay. Lastly they besought him, that being Pope he would continew towards the Venetian Signory the same friendship which he had euer born them being Cardinall, and that in so doing he might make vse of their men, force and meanes as themselues.
Such was the Senates answer to the Bishop of Triuoli the Popes Nuncio. But the Pope continuing his resolution, and knowing his owne forces to weake to inuade them, sayd, that he would craue the aid and assistance of forraine Princes. Iustinian did put him in mind that the Signory of Venice had done nothing but by his councell and aduice being Cardinall; wherevnto he replied, let them first surrender Tossignan which belongs to the territory of Imola to me, and then afterwards I may chance to do somewhat concerning Faenza and Rimini; heereof Iustinian aduertised the Senate, who whilst they were assembled to determineThe Bisoap of Tiuoli comes againe to Venice from the Popei thereof the Bishop of Triuoli arriued with letters from the Pope, whereby hee tooke from them all hope of agreement with him, vnlesse they did deliuer vnto him those Townes they had taken, saying, that to those ends, hee would implore the aid of God and men, threatening, if they did it not; to doe his worst against them.
The Senators were greatly troubled and incensed with these letters, but moreThe Uenetians send Ambassadors to the Emperor Miximillan and the French King. against the Bishop then Pope, whom they thought had incensed his Holinesse against them. This discontent was accompanied by an other: for the Pope had sent an Ambassador to the French King by whom complaining of the Venetians, he craued aid and assistance against them, requesting him to enter into league and Confederacy with himselfe, and Maximilian, called to be a third man) against them. This being knowne at Venice, the Senate presently sent Ambassadors to those two Princes, to let them vnderstand that the Signory had taken nothing from the Pope, but only Faenza and Rimini from a wicked man, fearing least the Florentines, their enemies by reason of Pisa, should seaze on them as they had  determined, hauing already sent forces thither: That they had recompenced those that kept them, giuing them other Townes in exchange. That those two Citties with their dependances were wont to bee giuen to new Tenants, before Valentinois had them; and the Senate demanding them in that nature, the

Church could lay no claime to them, so as they payed the vsuall Rent, but on the contrary ought to bee content there-with, because they could not fall into the hands of any, that were better able to defend and keepe them then the Venetians: That the Pope had beene the Author and motiue of the Signories taking of Romagnia from Valentinois, and now changing his opinion did causelesse seeke all meanes to expulse them thence. And therefore the State of Venice did earnestly intreat King Lewis, nor for that regard to infringe the league made with them; and Maximilian in like manner, that he would rather aide and assist the Signory, as a good friend and neighbour, in so iust and reasonable a matter, then the Pope who craued a thing wholy vnreasonable.
These remonstrances being kindly entertained by both these Princes, they promised to debate the matter with his Holinesse. This answer did in some sort satisfie the Senat. Count Petellan at the same time, being on great promises entreated by diuers Kings and Princes to serue them, would neuer for-sake the Signory. In acknowledgement whereof, the state of Venice made him Generall of their Army for three yeares, with a yearely annuity of fiue hundred pounds of gold.




The end of the sixth Booke of the fourth Decade of the History of Uenice.
FINIS.






THE SECOND VOLVME OF THE GENERALL HISTORY OF VENICE.




The Contents of the seuenth Booke of the fourth Decade.
THe Emperor entreateth the Venetians to deliuer the Cities of Faenza and Riminy to the Pope. Lewis the French King maketh the same request to them. The Emperor craues leaue of the Venetians to passe in armes thorow their state to Rome to his Cornonation, which they deny. Iohn Paul Baillon restoreth Perugia with her territory to the Pope. Bolognia is yeelded in the same manner to the Pope by the Bentiuolies. The King comes into Italy, by reason of the reuolt of Genoa. The Pope doth greatly suspect and distrust the French King. Enteruiew of the Kings of France and Arragon at Sauona. The Emperour performeth bad offices in Germany toward the French King. How the report of the Emperours comming downe into Italy did trouble the Venetians. The Emperour commeth into Italy, and returneth sodainely into Germany. The Almains are defeated in the vale of Cadora. The Venetians take the town of Goritia. The conclusion of the truce betwixt the Emperor and the Venetians did breed some discontent betwixt the King and them. Confederacy sworne at Cambray against the Venetians, by the Pope, the Emperor Maximillian, and the Kings of France and Arragon. The Venetians make great warlike preparations against this confederacy. The Pope casteth aterrible excommunication on the Venetians. The Kings army and that of the Venetians very neere together. The Venetians are defeated by the French in the Countrey of Giradade. The great progression of the French army ouer Italy after the Battaile. All Romagnia in a manner is yeelded to the Pope. Lastly the Venetians resoluing to quit the firme land, doe leaue Padua, Verona, and all the other, Cities appointed to the Emperor.

The seuenth Booke of the fourth Decad of the History of Uenice.
MAXIMILLIAN, forgetting the promise which he first madeThe Emperor Maximillians Ambassador come to Venice in the Popes behalfe. to the Venetians to debate their cause before the Pope, sent two Ambassadors to Venice to entreate them to yeeld Faenza and Ryminy to him. That it belonged to him to make that request, as Protector of Holy Church and of whatsoeuer apperteined therevnto. If they thought it an vnreasonable matter, they should referre it to arbitrement: That he would labour to cause the Pope to condescend  therevnto; and that if they would choose him for their vmpier, he would willingly accept thereof, and would giue sentence according to equity. TheThe Senates answer to the Ambassadors. Senats answer with that of the Great Cou^cel to these Ambassadors was, (hauing reiterated all that which their Ambassadors had first of all declared to the Emperor from the Senate) that their right to those lands being so plaine and euident, they would not put it to compromise. Vpon this answere one of the Ambassadors departed from Venice to Rome, the other stayed there, whose expences were defraied by the State.A league betwixt the Emperor Maximillian and Lewis the French King.
In the meane time a league and confederacy was made betweene the Emperor Maximillian and the French King, after long strife and disputation of their Ambassadors. This league being concluded, King Lewis sent againe Iohn Lascaris of Constantinople his Ambassador to Venice, to entreate them to seeke all possible meanes of agreement with the Pope: for that being done, they were determined to ioyne altogether against the Turke. He added that his King had swornKing Lewis his Ambassador at Venice. league and friendship with Maximillian, not to hurt any man, but only for the safety and preseruation of each others State.
The Senate, who had already decreed that the Ambassadour should haue aThe Senates answer to the Ambassador. pound weight of gold giuen him euery month towards his expences, made answere, that they had omitted nothing, either by entreaty or promises to giue the Pope satisfaction, hauing not long before made him this offer, that al-be-it Pope  Alexander had giuen Faenza and the other lands to the Valentinois free from all conditions, they were content neuerthelesse to hold Faenza and Riminy of the Church, on what conditions and rent it pleased, promising to make true payment euery yeere, but this would not be accepted of: That they were exceeding glad that two such great Princes, had conuerted their hatred and contention into a sound and firme league and friendship. But because it was specified in the contract betwixt King Lewis and them, that neither of them two might make alliance with any other Prince whatsoeuer, without the consent of his fellow, they did willingly desire to know, why his King had not first aduertized them thereof.
At this demand the Ambassador made some little pawse, then he answered that  he knew nothing of it: yet neuerthelesse it was mentioned in the treaty, that each of them might within foure months space name a fellow whom he would, wherevpon it was lawfull for his King to name the Signory of Venice.
The Ambassadors answere did not greatly content the Senate, and could not

hinder them from suspecting this league contracted without their knowledge.The Venetians resolution. Wherevpon they thought it most expedient to trie if they could appease the Pope, vnto whom, certaine months before, they had offered to deliuer vnto him Riminy, and withall that which they had possessed in Romagnia since Pope Alexander his death, prouided that he would be content, that they might still retaine Faenza with her Territory. This was for feare of the French King, and likewise because the Emperour, at the Popes request, had sent an Ambassadour vnto them, to will them to make restitution of the lands belonging to the Church, as hath beene said.
But the Pope hauing giuen them this resolute answere, that he would not in The Popes answer to the Venetians offers. any sort consent to the with-holding of one onely towre: and threatning them to recouer yet before he died Rauenna, and Ceruia, which they possessed as wrongfully as they did Faenza, they passed on no farther at that time. But their feare being encreased, by reason, of this new confederacy betwixt the Emperour and the French King, they offered by the meanes of the Duke of Vrbin, a friend to both sides, to deliuer vp all that which they possessed (the appurtenances of Faenza and Riminy excepted) if the Pope would giue admittance to their Ambassadors to come and make the oth of obedience, wherevnto in time before he would not consent. The Pope inclined to this proposition made by the Duke of VrbinAgreement betwixt the Pope and the Venetians. (though vnwillingly) in regard he had so highly threatned them, for hee perceiued  the affaires betwixt the Emperor and the French King to be drawne out at length, and that in the meane time those of Furli, Imola, and Cesenna, did indure many discommodities.
Vpon this consent, that which they had offered being re-deliuered, the Senate sent their Ambassadors, who after they had protested obedience with the accustomed ceremonies, they brought home with them to Venice no signe whereby it might be perceiued that he was become any whit the milder. In the meane space the Pope perceiuing well enough that without the French Kings aide he could not hurt the Venetians, and that he could not as yet induce him to make warre vpon them, to the end his Popedome should not be spent vnproffitably or  without honour, he turned his thoughts else-where, and entreated the French King to helpe him to reduce vnder the Churches obedience the Cities of BologniaThe Popes request to the French King. and Perugia, the which in all ages did belong to the Sea of Rome, and were possessed, the one by Iohn Paul Baillon, and the other by Iohn Bentiuogle whose predecessors hauing vsurped them, were become absolute Lords thereof.
The Popes request was very pleasing to the King, because thereby hee might finde meanes to keepe his friendship, from which he was in some sort estranged, in regard of the Kings alliance with the Venetians, which did much trouble him. Wherevpon because he would not disapoint him, he offered him all aide and succour: and the Pope on the other side gaue him the breefes of Cardinalship  for the Bishops of Achy, and Bayeux, with authority to dispose of the benifices of the Dutchy of Milan. The execution of this enterprise was delaied, by reason of the iourney which Maximillian desired to make into Italy with hisThe Emperors request to the Venetians. army, to receiue his Imperiall crowne at Rome, wherein he being desirous not to be hindred by the Venetians, hee sent foure Ambassadors to acquaint them with his intent, and to intreate them to grant a passage for him and his army likewise, assuring them that he would passe thorough their territories without disturbing them in any sort, being desirous likewise to vnite himselfe with them.
The Venetians hauing a long time consulted therevpon, made him a pleasantThe Venetians answer to the Emperor. answere: for after they had giuen him to vnderstand how much they desired to  conforme themselues to his will, they councelled him to come into Italy without armes, especially comming for so peaceable a matter which was pleasing to all men, where on the contrary comming in armes, Italy desparing for so many calamities which it had susteined, would rise, determining to take armes, and not to

lay open a way to new troubles: and that the French King might doe the like for assurance of the state of Millan.
The determination of Maximillian caused the Pope to defetre his enterprize till an other time, being perswaded therevnto by the King, who was vrged of his promise about that businesse, least they by reason of that accident of Italy should rise in armes: as also because he feared to prouoke the Venetians, who had sent him word, that they would take armes for the defence of Bolognia, if the Pope did not first giue ouer to them the rights to Faenza which did belong to the Church.
But the Pope being by nature sodaine and impatient, would not temporize, but sought all meanes to effect his purpose after a furious manner. And without  staying for any other resolution, he departed from Rome with fiue hundred men at armes, where fortune did so fauour him, as Iohn Paul Baillon, by the Duke ofIohn Paul Baillon, yeeldeth vp Porugia and her territory to the Pope. Vrbins perswasion, went to him to Oruietta, where he was receiued into fauour, hauing wholly referred himselfe to the Popes discretion and deliuered into his hands the castles of Perugia and the territory therevnto belonging, into which he afterwards entred. Then marching towards Bolognia, being attended on by six hundred French Launces, and three thousand footmen of the Kings forces, he went by the way of the mountaine, because he would not come vpon the territoryThe Pope threatncth th^ Bentiuo^es of Riminy which the Venerians held, and being come to Cesenna, he commanded Bentiuoli to depart from Bolognia on paine of most greeuous censures  both spirituall and temporall.
The Bentiuoles had made great preparations for their owne defence, but all their hope was turned to dispaire, so soone as they heard of the French-mens arriuall in the Popes army, and much more when the Lord of Chaumont, who conducted them, did tell them the same day that he arriued at Castel-nouo on the Bolognians territory, that the King being willing to obserue whatsoeuer he was tied vnto, by the capitulations of the protection, did meane to continue him in the possession of his goods, so that he would leaue the Gouernment of the City to the Church. At these words Bentiuoli and his children, who before, with great threatnings had published euery where that they would defend themselues, being wholy The Bentiuoles being discouraged, submit to the Pope.* discouraged made answere that they would altogether referre themselues to his arbitrement, beseeching him by all meanes to mediate tollerable conditions. Vpon this answere the Lord of Chaumont being come within three miles nere to Bolognia, delt so with the Pope, as he gaue him leaue safely to depart from Bolognia with his wife and children, and to dwelin what place of the Dutchy of Milan he pleased, permitting him to sell and carry away with him all his mouables, and to enioy the immouables which he possessed with iust title.
The Bentiuoles being departed, the people of Bolognia sent their AmbassadorsBolognia yeelded to the Pope. to the Pope for to giue him the entire gouernment of their City. At the same time the King of Arragon being imbarked at Barcelona came along by the  coast of Prouence to Genoa; and from thence keeping close by the land continuing his iourney he entred into the Hauen of Gayetta. Then being conducted to Naples, he was receiued with great magnificence. Ambassadors from all places ofThe King of Arragon commeth into the Realme of Naples. Italy came thither with speed, and among others from Venice, whither George Pisani and Marc Dandulo were sent to congratulate and honour so great a Prince.
The Pope likewise, notwithstanding that he was displeased for that he had not* sent to offer his obedience as the manner was, sent a Nuntio to him to incite him against the Venetians, thinking that for the recouery of the Hauens of Apuglia, which the Venetians held, he had wished their ouerthrow: And the Venetians on the contrary did still study to keepe his friendship.
Soone after King Lewis came into Italy, by reason of the rebellion of Genoa,Lewis the French King commeth in^ Italy. the Venetians sent Dominico Trenisano, and Paul Pisa^i their Ambassadors to him to congratulate his arriuall, who came to Milan, whether the king came so soone as he had recouered Genoa.
The Pope being at Bolognia, had solicited the King to come into Italy that theyThe great hatred which the Pope did beare to the Venetians. might conferre together, wherevnto the King did incline, albeit the Popes intents were against the Venetians, whom he hated in regard of the Cities of Romagnia which they possessed. But when he vnderstood that the King determined to take armes in fauour of the Gentlemen against the people of Genoa (because the strife betwixt the Gentlemen and the Commons had beene cause of the rebellion) he was much discontented thereat* because he had euer fauored the people against the Nobility, and he perswaded the King as much as in him lay to absteine from armes, alleaging that it might kindle some fire in Italy, which would hinder the warre which they had decreed against the Venetians. To the which, perceiuing  the King would not agree, being transported with choller, he gaue out on a sodaine at the beginning of the yeere 1507. contrary to al mens expectation, that1507. he would returne to Rome, saying that the a^e of Bolognia did not agree with his health^ wherevpon the King was troubled, not knowing what to thinke, becauseA strang suspition of the Pope concerning the King. he interrupted that which himselfe had ^raued, and did all he could to alter his determination. But the Kings earnest instance to change his minde did encrease the Popes suspition, which hee had conceiued that the King would keepe him still there, where they might meet together at one selfe same place, which did so much the more confirme him in his determination, wherein being obstinate, he departed from Bolognia about the latter end of February, being not able to dissemble  the disdaine which he had conceiued of the King.
By this wrath, the hatred which he did beare to the Venetians being in some sort mittigated, hee determined to passe by the City of Faenza, new quarrels arising euery houre betwixt the King and him, in regard of the Bentinoles, whom he would haue the King to expell from the Dutchy of Milan, albeit by his owne consent they were permitted to abide there, in such sort as nothing could appease him, complayning greeuously of the King: and being thereby prouoked, he didThe false reports which the Pope threw abroad against the king. by his Nu^tios and by a Breefe, giue the Emperour, and the Electors to the Empire, to vnderstand, that the French Kings preparations for his passage into Italy, with a mighty army, vnder pretence to appease the sedition of Genoa, was in effect  to oppresse the state of the Church, and to vsurpe the Imperiall dignity.
The Venetians likewise fearing the Kings comming into Italy with so great an army, did giue the like aduertizement? Maximillian being desirous of nouelty, hauing receiued these aduertizements, held an Imperiall Diet in the City of Constance where all the Barons, Princes and Common-wealths of Germany being assembled, he did in such sort agrauate the matter against the French King by his oration, as the mindes of all those that were there present, were merueilously mooued, where he exhibited the Popes and Venetians letters of aduertizement.
The French King hauing intelligence of the whole matter, did on a sodaine  cassier his army, to take away the cause of such a suspition, and would himselfe haue repassed the mounts, had not the desire which he had to speake with the King of Arragon staied him, who was preparing for his returne into Spaine, andEnteruiew of king of France and Arragon at Sauona. leauing Naples came directly to Sauona, where he had appointed to conferre with the French King, who for that cause was come from Millan to attend him there: where Fernand with the Queene his wife being arriued, all distrusts being laied aside on both parts, with infinite numbers of reciprocall embrasings they had diuers long and secret conferences betwixt themselues, and by that which fell out afterward, it was apparent, that they promised a perpetuall league of friendship one with the other, and that Ferdinand should vse meanes to reconcile the  Emperour and the French King, to the end that all of them being vnited together, they might afterward shew themselues open enemies to the Venetians.
The two Kings departed from Sauona the fourth day after their arriuall, with the same shewes of loue and friendship. The one went by sea to Barcelona, and

the other by land returned into France, leauing the other affaires of Italy at the same stay. King Lewis in the meane time perceiuing that the Diet of ConstanceAduertizements to the Princes of Germany to cleere the suspition of the French King. continued, where Maximillian had so highly animated all the German Princes against him, he sent vnder-hand certaine men of purpose to Constance, who should not be publikely knowne, but dealing secretly, should worke meanes* by the hidden fauour of the Princes his friends, to appease the mindes of the rest, excusing those slanders which were imposed vpon him, by the euidence of the effects, seeing that after the reduction of Genoa to his obedience, he had on a sodaine cassie^ed his army, and returned with all possible speed into France, to take away all suspition that he would attempt nothing against the Church, nor against the  title of the sacred Empire* and with these iustifications they wrought meanes to appease the Germans armes, by the force of gold which they so highly loue.
These things did greatly trouble the French Kings minde, who was altogether vncertaine of the Venetians meanings, who would not openly discouer themseluesVVhat was concluded in the Dyet at Constance. but had euer held matters in suspense. The Dyet of Constance beeing ended it was there concluded, after sundry disputations, that Maximillian should haue for his passage into Italy eight thousand horse, and two and twenty thousand footmen; paled by the Country for sixe monthes, and sixe score thousand Florins of the Rhyne for the expence of the Artillery, and other ordinary charges. Vpon the report of these newes the Venetians were greatly perplexed in their  mindes as well as others, because they knew not whereon to resolue, in regard ofThe Venetians greatly perplexed. the great meanes which euery one of them vsed to winne them to his side. The Emperour at the beginning sent three Ambassadors of great place to them* to intreat them to giue him passage thorow their territories, and to make a more strict alliance with him, wherein should be mentioned, that they should be participants of the reward of the victory. The French King on the other side, did not cease by his Ambassadors, and by that of Venice, which was resident with him, to doe all he might to induce them to oppose themselues by armes against the Emperors comming, as hurtfull to either of them, offering them for this purpose all his forces, and to continue for euer their confederate.
The Venetians, who could haue beene well contented to haue liued at quiet as Newters, perceiued themselues to be in such sort pressed by the Emperor, as they were of necessity either to refuse it, or to grant him passage. For they feared, that by their refusall they should be troubled first, and by granting it, they should ensring their confederacy with the King: And yet neuerthelesse, each of the Senators did affirme that it was necessary openly to adhere to one of the sides, but they knew not to which, and after great diuersity of opinions, the remembrance at last of the Emperors continuall inclination, to recouer the Cities which they possessed, which he pretended to belong to the Empire, or to the house of Austria did most preuaile.
They made answere then to the Ambassadors, that their determination was toThe Venetians resolute answer to the Emperors ambassadors. grant him passage comming without an army, and to stop it if he came in armes; saying that necessity enforced them so to doe, in regard of their confederacy with the French King, by which they were bound to assist him in the defence of the Dutchy of Millan, with a certaine number of men specified therein.
Maximillian being frustrate of his hope to haue the Venetians on his side, was incombred with other doubts which did wholy delay the effect of his deseignes. For first of all; That foundation whereon he chiefly builded, that the Cities and Potentates of Italy, fearing his name and army, would come to composition, andThe Emperor finde to himselfe frustrate of his hopes. would furnish him with sufficient summes of money, did daily decay: Then the  conclusions of the Diet of Constance vanished into ayre; when they perceiued the great preparations of the French King, and the new resolution of the Venetians.
The Pope likewise, who would not shew himselfe more affectionate to the one

side then the other, did refuse the demand he made that it might be lawfull for himThe Pope refuseth the Emperors request. to take a hundred thousand ducats which were leauied in Germany for the warre against the Turkes and were kept in the same Prouince, and were not to be conuerted to any other vse without the leaue of the Sea of Rome: Yet neuerthelesse in the middest of all these difficulties, he forgate nothing which might nourish the report of his comming downe, in such sort as all those who stood in awe of him made mighty prouisions in diuers places, but they were vncertaine, with what forces, at what time, and from whence he would come.
The French King had prouided for the Dutchy of Milan, and for the frontiers ofThe great preparations of King Lewis and the Venetians to stop the Emperors passage. Burgondy: And had besides sent Iohn Iames Triuncle with foure hundred French  Launces, and foure thousand footmen to Verona to the Venetians aide, who had sent the Earle of Petillan to Rouero, with foure hundred men at armes, and store of foot-forces, to the end there to keepe backe those which should come by Trent, and Bartholmew Aluiana into the Friul with eight hundred men at armes.
The Emperour at the beginning of the yeere 1508. was desirous to put in execution the reports which had beene spred abroad of his comming downe, andThe Emperor summons those of Verona to g^ue him passag. sent an Herald to Verona to summon the inhabitants to prouide lodging for himselfe, and for foure thousand horse which he brought with him, going to Rome to take the Imperiall crowne. The Gouernor of the City, by the aduice of the Senate, with whom the matter was communicated at Venice, made him answere, that for his coronation which he mentioned he needed not so many men at armes and such store of Artillery.
Maximillian vpon this answer being already come to Trent departed thence in a morning before day with fifteene hundred horse, and foure thousand footmen, not of those which had beene graunted him at Constance, but of those of hisThe Emperor commeth towards Vincenza and on a sodaine returneth into Germany. Court, and of his owne state, and tooke the way of the mountaines towards Vincenza. And the Marquis of Brandenbourge marched at the same time towards Rouero with fiue hundred horse and two thousand foot-men, but he returned the next day, not being able to obtaine any passage. The Emperour by the way of the mountaines being come within twelue miles of Vincenza, and hauing taken  the territory of the seuen Commons, did on a sodaine returne towards Bolsane which is a towne farther of from the confines of Italy then Trent, whereat all men did greatly wonder.
This did awake the Venetians courage, did incite them to leauy diuers foot-troupes,The Venetians great preparations. and to make great preparations, vrging the French King to doe the like. They chose two Prouidatori, Andre Griti and George Cornare, one of whom went towards the Rheticke, and the other into Friull. Aluiana was commanded speedily into Friul where George Cornare the Prouidator already was, because foure hundred of Maximillians horse and fiue thousand of his footmen being come thither and entred into the vale of Cadora, had taken the Burrough and  the Castle.
Aluiana hauing passed the mountaines full of snow, came in two daies neere to Cadora, where tarrying for his footmen that came after him; hee seized on a passage, which was not kept by the Germans, by which men enter into that valley. The comming of Aluiana did encourage those of the Country who did affect the Venetians, who sodainely did possesse the other passages of the valey, by which the enemies were to retire. The Germans perceiuing themselues to bee shutte in, and that no hope of safety was left them but in their armes, they came with great furie to assaile Aluiana, whoThe Almains defeated in the vale of Cadora. did brauely receiue them, the fight lasted certaine houres with great feruency, but at the last the Germans, being not able to resist the numbers nor prowesse of their enemies, were defeated, and aboue a thousand of them laie dead on the place, with diuers of them taken prisoners: of the Venetians verie few died.
Before this exploite of warre, the Emperor had sent Luke de Renaldis his AmbassadorThe Emperor reiteraeteth his Am^assadio the Venetians for passage. to Venice, to entreat the Senators to grant him passage thorow their territories, as hee had often-times before requested them, that hee might goe to Rome, saying that his King would come armed for feare of his enemies* Neuerthelesse hee did assure the Signory of Venice, that hee and his would passe without dooing wrong to any of their subiects, or else that hee would passe without Armes, prouided that the common-wealth would giue him hostages for the assurance of his passage. To that, Prince Loredano answered, that Maximillian was not ignorant, how that the Common-wealth had euer beene a friend to him and to his father the Emperor Frederick, and that it was not well done of him in counterchange, to vse all hostile actions against them, as to rauage and spoile their countrey, to take their townes and castles by force, whereof they had iust cause to complaine, and to call God to witnesse, whether they had deserued it at his hands: neuerthelesse hee would propound the demand to the Senate, and according to the same, he would giue him answer.
And because Cornare had written to the Senate, that Aluiana was in great hope, and would, in a manner, bee bound, that the enemies should in short space recompence the wrongs and spoiles which they had committed, the Senate wasThe Senates answer to the Emperors Ambassador. of opinion to deferre the answering of Maximillians Ambassadors, till such time as they had newes from Friul. And so soone as they heard from thence, they  answered the Ambassador as they had done in times before, without making any mention of the defeate of the Almains, and caused him to bee accompanied thorow the Rhetike countrey, to the end he should receiue no out-rage.
Aluiana after the taking of the castle of Cadora would not stand still in so faireAluiana his exploits in Friul. away, but pursuing his good fortune, recouered Portonanoue, then Cremousa seated on a high hill, and from thence went and encamped before Gorithia, which is at the foote of the Alpes, strong by situation, and well fortified, and which hath a castle of difficult accesse. But hauing planted his Artillery before the towne, hee tooke it the fourth day after by composition, by reason that they within wanted Armor, water, and victuals. The Captaine of the castle yeelded vp the place in  few dayes after, receiuing foure thousand Ducats. The Venetians made diuerse fortifications there, to serue in time to come against the Turkes, to stop their passage ouer the riuer Lisona.
Aluiana after the taking of Gorithia, went to besiege Thryeste, and tooke it with the Castle likewise, which being seated on the Gulphe of Venice, was very commodious to them for their traffick: wherevpon the Venetians beeing puffed vp with their prosperous successe, determined to follow the course of the victory* and to make warre on Maximillian, by entring farther into his countrey: But DominicoAn old man's speech to the Senate. Morosino, Procurator of Saint Marke, a man of foure-score and ten yeares of age, wise and aduised, began to speake and to entreate the Senate, not to suffer  any farther attempts to bee made, saying That Germany was not pleased that Maximillian made warre on the common-wealth, when as hee might freely liue at peace: that it was also to bee feared, that the same Germany would take it in euill part, and would resent it, if any farther roads were made into their countrey, for they would not suffer their Imperiall dignity to be so abased and contemned. That the offence which he had committed against the common-wealth was not great, for which neuerthelesse thorow the goodnesse of God, he had made a worthy satisfaction, all his souldiers hauing beene cut in peeces in Friul, Cadora, and Portonanoue beeing recouered, and wee haue lost nothing on the Verona territory, nor receiued any disgrace. And heerewith beeing satisfied without  passing on any farther, we shall receiue great profit by our cessation from Armes, and especially the friendship and good-will of the whole German Nation, of whom wee receiue infinite commodities, as well for the trade of merchandize, whereby our customes are encreased, as for all other matters concerning prouision

of victuals. That it was indeed a glorious matter to vanquish a mans enemies in warre, and to augment their owne bounds and confines: But that it was more glorious to ^ame and vanquish a mans owne passions and himselfe* that the euents of warre depended commonly on fortune, who is variable and inconstant: But Councells proceeding from mature deliberation and from wisdome are firme and stable and do proffit much more then those which issue from furious rashnesse.
The good old man hauing vttered this speech, the heate of those who craued warre was in some sort cooled, and therfore they concluded nothing for that present, but said only they would consider of it at more leisure. But Maximilian continuing  the warre in the confines beneath Verona, and raising forces in diuers places of the Friull against them, heerby abusing their loue, warre was resoluedwarrs resolued against Maximilian. against him on the fourth of Aprill. This resolution of the Senate was on a sodain sent not only to Gr^tle and Cornare Prouidatory, but likewise to Ieronimo Contaren who was Prouidator in Histria with certaine Galleis, to the end that each of them should enuade whatsoeuer they found to belong to Maximilian, either on the firme land or at Sea. According to this commandement Cornare, and Aluiana, pursuing their victory tooke Protonoue, then Fume which is a Citty of Sclauonia, which they burnt: and passing ouet the Alpes they tooke Possonia seated on the marches of Hungary* This was done in the Friul, whilst not farre from Trent  the Germaine Army which was come to Calliana did assaile three thousand VenetianFlight of the Venetian Garrison footmen, who beeing well fortefied on the hill of Bretonic fled thence neuerthelesse so soone as they descried the enemies, whervppon the Germans deriding their cowardize, did raze the fortifications which they had made on the hill, burning the houses and then went back to Calliana*
But this great army of Maximilian, within a short space came to nothing, byMaximilians Army desolued for a small occasion. reason of a contention of small importance which arose about the paiment of the Grisons, who mutining therefore did spoile the victualls of the Campe: by meanes whereof all things being in disorder, and all the Grisons being departed, the residue of the Army, who were about seuen thousand men, were enforced to  retire. The Venetians then made incursions on the neighbor Villages, and came and assailed La Pietra, six miles from Trent: but those of Trent comming to theirThe Castle of Creste yeelded to the Venetians. reskew the Venetian companies retired, and went to ass^ile the Fort of Creste, which is a place of importance, which yeelded before the supplies from Trent ariued, which caused the Almaines to re-assemble their foot forces, and to returne with a thousand horses and six thousand Lansquenets to Calliana which is distant from La Pietra a crosbow shotte.
The Venetians returned to beseege this Castle of La Pietra with foure thousand horse and sixteene thousand foote, determining to batter it with sixteene pieces of Ordinance: The two armies were within a mile one of another, each of  them hauing the Castle before them. But the Venetians hauing lost diuers ofThe Venetians retire from before the Fort of la Pietra. their men there, with two peices of ordinance which the Almaines tooke from them in a salley, thinking it lost time to tarry there any longer, seeing they could not enforce the enemies to fight they went to Rouero, and the Almains to Trent, the most parte of whom within a while after disbanded.
Mazimilian, who during these warlike exploits had runne vp and downe from place to place to be releiued with men and money, perceiuing all men to forsake him, after the defeat of his forces at Cadora, sent a Gentleman of his to Venice to craue truce for three monethes: but the Senate contemned it, and would not grant any for lesse then a whole yeare, not without the knowledge and consent The Venetians refuse to grant Maximilian truce for three yeares* of the French King: Maximilian being the more danted for the losse of Tryeste, and other places of the Sea-coast, did solicite the Bishop of Trent to inuite (as of himselfe) the Venetians to truce, thinking by that meanes the sooner to purchase Peace. The Venetians made answer; That it lay not in their power: but that he

ought to mooue the French King.
For this purpose Commissioners were appointed to meet and conferre together, for Maximilians part, the Bishop or Trent, and Serentano the Emperors Secretary: for the French King, Triuulce, and Iacomo Galfredo President of Millan,Iarring betwixt the Com missioners assembled about the truce* and for the Venetians, Zacharie Contarene, a particular Ambassador deputed for that businesse. Conferring together they easily condiscended to all conditions sauing that the Frenchmen would haue a generall truce, and that all the confederates of either of them, as well out of Italy as within should be therein comprized, and especially the Duke of Guelders, wherevnto Maximilians Agents would not consent, because their maister had determined to ruine that Duke, saying  that in the treaty there was nothing mentioned but the warres of Italy, and that nothing ought to be entermingled therewith but that which concerned Italy. TheTruce betwixt the Emperour and the Venetians. Venetians did all they might to content the French King, but perceiuing the Almaines to be obstinate in that businesse they resolued for their part to accept of truce in the same manner as they had concluded it, beeing desirous to free themselues from such a warre, which lighted wholly on their dominions; and notwithstanding the protestation of the French Kings Commissioners, that a mutuall enterprise ought not to be finished but in common, the Venetians went on, and concluded the truce on the twentith of Aprill, the which was speedily ratified by the Emperour and the Venetians, by meanes whereof the warrs ceased betwixt them, and diuers did hope that Italy thereby should for a time enioye Peace and quiet.
Armes beeing layd a side, Aluiana and Cornare returned to Venice where they were receiued with great pompe, and in a manner triumphall: The French KingThe French King complaineth of the truce. hauing intelligence that the truce was concluded and signed, shewed signes of discontent, and complained to Antonio Condelmerio Ambassador for the Venetians in his Court, saying that he had not deserued of the Seigneiury of Venice that without staying for his answer and consent they had granted truce to Maximilian: That he did not greatly care if the confederates of Italy were comprized therein, prouided that the Duke of Guelders might be assured in his state, whom he much affected, and yet neuerthelesse the Signory had made his desire frustrate, wherein he did hope to be assisted and furthered: And yet he had an hundred thousand crownes ready to employ in his ayde, and that he would not endure that any wrong should be done to him by the fault of his confederates.
The King hauing vttered these words in choller did repent him of it, and feining to forget all matters, he beganne to entertaine him with more pleasing discourse; namely when the Ambassador had excused the common-wealth, and told him that the Senate euer had a principall regard to maintaine him in the Dutchy of Millan, to the end that whilest the truce lasted hee might not be molested inThe French King (...) bleth. that State. The King gaue him then some hope that he would ratifie the truce, but in himselfe he beganne to thinke on all meanes how to be reuenged.
The Emperor on the other side not digesting the brauadoes which the Venetians had offered him, and being desirous to resent the wrongs which he had receiued, because he had no hope to draw any more aid from the Germaine Princes, made shew that he had a will to vnite himselfe with the French King against the Venetians, as the only remedy to recouer his honor and lost states. The Pope likewise prouoked the King against them, because, besides the old hatred which he did beare to them, he thought that the Bandetti of Furli, who dwelt at Faenza, had by their meanes made some attempt on that Citty.
The King calling to minde (besides his new displeasure for the truce) all theWhat was practised vnder hand again ct the Venetians. wronges which he thought they had done him in his warres of Naples, and beeing  desirous to snatch forth of their handes Cremona and other townes which had beene a long time possessed by the Dukes of Millan; had the same inclination like to the Emperor. wherefore the better to bring it to passe, they began betwixt the^selues to ha^ken to the contentio^ betwixt the Arch-duke, and the D. of Geldres,

and for that purpose they chose the Citty of Cambray for their place of conference. Whether from the Emperor came the Lady Marguerit his daughter, Regent of the Low Countreys, and Mathew Langy the Secretary, and for the FrenchConfederacy of the Pope, Emperor, French King, and King of Arragon, against the Uenetians. King the Cardinall of Amboise, who vnder coulour of treating a peace betwixt the Arch-duke and the Duke of Guelders (as they gaue it forth) to the end that the true cause might not be knowne to the Venetians, they concluded a perpetuall peace and confederacy, betwixt the Pope, the Emperor, the French King, and the King of Arragon, against the Venetians, each of them to recouer those things which they held from them.
The new confederacie beeing thus concluded, the Cardinall of Amboise departed The Confederacy ratified by the Emperor and the two Kings. from Cambray, the Bishop of Paris, and the Count of Carpy went to the Emperor from the French King, for the ratification of the peace, who did soone ratifie and confirme it by oath, the like did the French King, and when it was afterwards brought to the King of Arragon, albeit he had some doubt in his mind, yet neuerthelesse he did forth with ratifie it with the same solemnities: But theThe difficulty which the Pope made to ratifie the consederacie. Pope made more difficulty in the matter, beeing on the one side swayed by a desire to recouer the citties of Romagnia, and with his hatred to the Venetians, and on the other side, his feare of the French Kings forces did greatly mooue him: As also for that he thought it a dangerous matter for himselfe, if the Emperour by recouering from the Venetians the places which they held, and which  did belong to the Empire, should grow too great in Italy. To preuent this inconuenience, hee thought it more commodious to seeke to recouer his townes by a more gentle way then by warre.
To this purpose then hee laboured by all meanes to induce the Venetians to yeeld vp Riminy and Faenza to him, declaring to them that the great dangers which threatned them by the combination of so many Princes, would bee much greater if hee vnited himselfe with them in this confederacy, For hee could notThe Popes secret menaces to the Venetians. choose but pursue them both with spirituall and temporall Armes; Hee caused in secret this remonstrance to bee made by a Greeke called Constantine Comniato to Iohn Badoario Ambassador for the Signiory of Venice to the Sea Apostolick, for  this confederacie was not yet diuulged. The Ambassador gaue speedy notice thereof to the Senate, who had an ynkling of it from else-where, and were determined by no meanes to quit those townes, as they aduertised the Ambassador according to the discourse made to him by Constantine.
Now it was told them that they might easily cause Maximillian to change his minde, and distract him from the alliance with the French King, in regard of theThe Venetians secret practises with Maximilian. antient enmity betwixt them: they secretly sent Iohn Peter Stella, Secretary to the Senate, to Maximillian, who had often-times beene with him, and was very well knowne to the Emperour, to the end hee might finde meanes to reconcile him to the Senate. This man beeing too hasty in the execution of his desseigne, and not  hauing well considered on the meanes, and discouering himselfe to the Emperors domestick seruants, King Lewis his Ambassadors, who were with Maximillian, had knowledge of his comming, whereby hee did no good to the commonwealth. George Pisan likewise comming to Rome, by the Senates commandement, to treate with the Pope, his iourney was to no purpose.
The Senate despairing of peace, made leuies of men and horse, and decreed to enrole the greatest number of men at armes and light horse that they could raise, among whom were diuerse Stradiots, and a great number of footmen, they commanded likewise for resistance at Sea, if King Lewis should come to assaile them, fifteene Galleis to bee armed. They likewise dispatched Andre Badoario to  the King of England to purchase him for their friend.
In the meane time Lascaris King Lewis Ambassador at Venice was dismissed,The Venetians great preparations for their defence. the like was done to Condelmare, who was their Ambassador in France, vnto whom from the King was presented a chaine of gold, the which he refused, saying;

That he would not receiue any present from a King, that was their enemie and so departed. Carsode, in like manner who was Agent at Milan departed thence: within a while after supplies came to the Senate, of a thousand light horse, and fiue thousand strangers foote-men, a thousand Archers from Candy, and another thousand armed at all sortes from the Country of Albania. They did after-wards with speed fortifie the Castle of Cremona, and furnisht it withall things necessary for a long seege: As also all there Townes, and Castles neere thervnto, of which fortificationsAmbuscado (...) surprise the Count Petillan the Count Petillan had expresse charge, who comming one day meanely accompanied to Bergamo, to see what was done there, those of Milan hauing notice thereof by their spies, two hundred horse sallied forth of Milan, in the night, euery horse man hauing a huquebusier behind him, who hauing crost the riuer Adda, hid themselues in the wood, to surprize him, which they might easily haue done, he not mistrusting it. But the Gouernor of Bergamo, being aduertized by peasants of the country of the Ambuscado, sent sodainly after the Earle who was already departed, and so saued him from that danger. The Senate hauing notice of the French-mens Ambuscado to surprize the Earle, accounted the warre to be denounced, where-vpon they chose Andrew Gritti and George Cornare for Brouidators, who in the time of the Rhetick war, had the same command. The Pope who had deferred to ratifie the confederacy, till the very last day assigned for theThe Pope ratifieth the treaty of Ca^bray. ratification* did confirme it, but with expresse declaration that hee would  not execute any hostile act against the Venetians, till the French King did begin the warre. This was about the latter end of the yeare 1508. When as the league beeing ratified, by all the confederates, the French King beegan to make very great preparations, and beeing come to Lyons, hee caused his companies to march towards the Mounts; and sixe thousand Swisses, whome hee had in a readinesse, prepared them-selues to come downe at the same-time into Italy.
The Venetians on the other side with great courage made preparations (as hathThe Venetians attempt in vaine to be reconciled to the Pope, and the Emperor. beene said:) but considering afterward how all Christendome in a manner were in armes against them, they desirous to trie by all meanes possible if they could  dissolue that Vnion, repenting for that they had not separated the Pope from the other, the which they might haue done by the onely yeelding vp of Faenza vnto him. They would haue renewed their former treaties, both with the Emperour, and the King of Spaine: but it was in vaine with all three of them: for the Pope could no more accept of that he had desired: the Catholike King had no meanes to diuert the rest, and the Emperor did so abhorre them, as he would not vouchsafe to looke vpon their Ambassador: wherevpon they conuerted all their thoughts to defence, and to wage (as hath beene said) great numbers of horse and foote, and to arme diuers vessells as well to keepe the sea, as the Lake of La Garde, the riuer Po, and other Neighbour places.The Venetians are astonished at sondry bad presages*
Sondry prodegies which did happen did greatly terrifie them: First they lost a barke within the which were ten thousand Ducats, sent by the Senate to Rauenna, which was drownd: then lightning fell on the Castle of Bressia: after that, the place where the Charters of the Common-wealth were kept, fell wholy downe to the ground, and fier tooke either by chance, or by the secret malice of some in their Arcenall in the same place where their salt peeter lay, where it burnt twelue Galleis, and a very great quantity of Munition which did much amaze them, because it presaged nothing but mishap. They made preparations then cheefely on that side, whereby the French King was to come, which was towards the Giradade, crossing the riuer Adda, neere to Cassiana, and therefore they assembled  their army at Pontuico, on the riuer Oglio: the Earle of Petillan was made Generall thereof, Bartilmeo Aluiana was Gouernor, and George Cornare and Andre Gritt^ aboue named were prouidatory.
These men being assembled to determine after what manner the warre should

be managed, the opinions were different betwixt the generall and the gouernor: This man was of opinion to make the seate of the war in the enemies country, ratherThe Venetians army on the entry of the country of Giradade. then in their owne, and to goe and assaill the Dutchy of Milan, before the French King should passe the Mounts: The other, who for his long experience, would not heare tell of tempting fortune, was of a contrary opinion, and counselled, that contemning the losse of the countrey of Gyradade, they should encampe neere to the Citty of Orci, as in times past other great Captaines hadSondry opinions of the Venetian Captaines. done in the warres betwixt the Venetians and the Milanois. The Senate reiected both these counsells; that of Aluiana as to bold, and that of the Generall as ouer fearefull: wherevpon they determined, that the army should draw neare to the  riuer Adda, because they would not leaue the Gyradad in prey to the enemies, with the Senates expresse commandement, not to fight with the enemy but vpon great hope or vrgent necessity.
The French King hauing passed the Mounts with an intent to fight, sent his Herald to Venice, to denounce warre; and in passing by Cremona to doe the like to the Venetian Magistrates. The Lord of Chaumont beganne the first motion of the warre on the fifteenth of Aprill, crossing by a foord the riuer Adda, neereThe Lord of Chaumont General of the Kings army. to Calciana, with three thousand horse; and passed ouer by boate six thousand footemen and the Artillery after-wards, marching directly to the towne of Treui, which being beseeged and battered, yeelded: wherevpon Iustinian Morosin, Viteli de citto de Castello, and Vincenzo de Nalde, who were within it, and with them anThe French take Treui. hundred light horse, and about a thousand footemen remained prisoners, the Sradiots saued them-selues by flight. Vpon report of the taking of this place, diuers neighbour-townes did like-wise yeeld. The Lord of Chaumont did soone after with all his forces repasse the riuer Adda. The Marquis of Mantua came with his forcas to Casal-Major, which forthwith yeelded. Rocalatin like-wiseCasal-Maior yeelded. hauing on a bridge of boates passed the riuer Adda, where it entreth into the Po, came and made incursions on the Cremonois, with an 150. Lances and 3000. footemen, the like also did they of the Garrison of Loda. The peasants likewise of the Mountainy of Brianca made incursions as farre as Bergamo. After these first  attempts of warre, the Pope for his part began by spirituall armes, for hee publishedThe Popes terrible monitory against the Venetians, a terrible Bull, in forme of a Monitory against them, specyfing al the vsurpations made by the Venetians on the Churches lands, and the authority which they attributed to them-selues to the preiudice thereof: whereby he admonished them to yeeld vp within foure and twenty daies next following the Churches townes which they possessed, with the reuenew receiued by them euer since they enioyed them, vpon paine, in case of disobedience of incurring censures, and interdictions, not onely for the Citty of Venice, but likewise for all the townes vnder their obedience: declaring all those to be exco^municate, who should in any sort detaine them, guing power to all men in all places, to seaze on their goods and to make  slaues of their persons. The Senate kept this Monitory close from the people, for feare least they should haue mutined, and threw in an appeall to the next General councel, which was carried and fixed on the Churches of Rome, by vnknownThe Duke of Venice his answere to the French Kings Herald. persons. At the very same time, in a manner, King Lewis his Herald came to Venice, who in his Kings name in open Senate did denounce the warre already begunne for diuers occasions which he declared in their presence. The Duke by the aduice of the Senate, answered, seeing that the French King did denounce warre, contrary to their aliance with him, the which they had neuer violated, they would with their forces, and with the iustice of their cause seeke to defend them-selues*
After this answer, they gaue order to their army, the which being assembled  at Pontuico, to the number of two thousand men at armes, three thousand light horse and stradiots, fifteene thousand footemen chosen forth of all Italy, and fifteene thousand other choice footemen of their own teritories, with great quantity of Artillery, (...) came to Fontanella, which is within sixe miles of Loda, a place

very commodious for the reliefe of Cremona, Crema, Carauagia and Bergamo,The Venetians Armie at Foutane lla. Citties vnder their obedience. And because they had a fit time to recouer Treui, by reason that the Kings Armie was not yet assembled, the Senate was of opinion to assaile it. The ordnance beeing planted, which made great execution, thoseThe Venetians recouer Treui. within it did yeeld the next day following, on condition that the souldiers liues should bee saued, who were disarmed, the Captaines to bee prisoners, and the towne to be vsed at their discretion.
The King was at Milan, who departed thence* so soone as hee vnderstood that that towne was battered, for to releeue it, and came and passed ouer the riuer of Adda on three bridges made of boates, neere to Cassiana, with his whole Armie, the enemie (...) stopping him, who hauing entred Treui, busied themselues in pillaging the towne, from whence the Captaines could not with-draw their souldiers, neither by entreaties nor threatnings, vntill that Aluiana in a ^age caused the towne to be set on fire, to make them to depart thence. But it was too late* for the French were wholy come ouer the riuer.The Kings Armie (...) very neer to that of the Venetians.
The King so soone as hee had passed ouer the Riuer, came and lodged within little more then a mile of the Venetians campe, who beeing encamped in a place strong both by sit^ and arte, the King could not assaile them but with great disaduantage. The matter was debated, where some of the Kings councell were of opinion to draw out the warre in length, expecting the Emperors comming downe,Sundry opinions in the Kings Armie. for then the Venetians should bee enforced to come to a battle, not being able to looke to so many places at once. But the King was of a contrary opinion, as well for feare least the Emperour would come too late, as for the desire which hee had, being there in person with all the forces of his kingdome, that he might without an others helpe finish that warre by a glorious victory. The armies in the meane time did not stirre, but remained incamped, the one before the other, for the space of a day, with sundry skirmishes betwixt the light horse on either side. The next day the King marched towards Riuolta, to prouoke the enemies to come thether, that hee might fight with them, but they did not sti^re, shewing thereby that they had no meaning to fight; The Artillery being brought before  Riuolta, the Fort within a few houres was taken by assault, wherein the King with his whole armie lodged the same night.
The King wondering at the enemies proceedings, the which to himselfe he neuerthelesseThe Kings resolution to enforce the enemies to fight. commended, resolued to depart thence, and to come into a place where he might cut off their victuals which came to them from Cremona and Crema, thinking that the want of victuals would breake their determination: wherefore hauing staid one day at Riuolta he dislodged and burnt it, and tooke the way of Vailla and Paudina, the very next night, because that either of these places were in the way by which victuals came to the enemy.
The Venetians did very well perceiue the Kings meaning, and how they were  of necessity to remooue: but the Count Petillan would haue them to tarry till the next day, and Aluiana would haue them instantly to depart* to the end to preuent them; the which was done. There were two waies to go to the places aboue mentioned, the one lower, and farther neer to the riuer, with crooked turnings, by whichThe number of the Kings Armie. the kings armie marched, which was said to consist of more then two thousand lances, six thousand Swisses, and twelue thousand foot, as well French as Italians, with great store of Artillery, and Pioners: the other farther off from the riuer, andThe number of the Venetians Army. the shorter way, the which led directly for the passage of the Venetia^ army, wherin were 2000. men at armes, more then 20000. foot, and great numbers of light horse, some Italians, and some Albaneses: there beeing nothing betwixt the two  armies but bushes and shrubs, which hindred either army from seeing one another.
The two armies marching in this manner, the French vantgard conducted by Charles of Amboise, and the Venetians rereward conducted by Aluiana, encountred one another. Aluiana not thinking to fight that day, did not march in good order.

But perceiuing himselfe to bee so neere the enemy, and in such a place as hee was enforced to fight, aduertised the Count Petillan, who went with the Vantgard, of his necessity, crauing his ayde. The Earle sent him word to march on still and to eschew the fight, according to the Senates determination. Aluiana in the meane time placed his footmen with sixe peeces of Ordinance on a little rising: and then assailed the enemies with such force and fury, as hee enforced them to giue back: but the Armies battaile, wherein the Kings person was, comming forward:The Kings Armie and that of the Venetians, fight suriously one with an other. the chance of the Dice soone turned, albeit Aluiana for his luckie beginning had promised to him-selfe the victory: who running vp and downe, now heere, now there, encouraged his soldiers: They fought on all sides with great fury. The  French were on fire by their Kings presence, who not sparing himselfe, was exposed to all dangers, and did not cease where need was to command and encourage his souldiors. The Venetians on the other side full of valour, by reason of their first good successe, did fight brauely: But at the last, after long fight, and the Venetians loosing rather their strength then their courage, not turning their backs toThe Venetians lose the battle of Gyradade. the enemies, they fell downe in a manner all dead vppon the place, and chiefly the footemen, some of whom affirmed that there were eight thousand of them slaine there. Barthelmew Aluiana was taken prisoner, who beeing hurt in the eye, with his face all bloudy, was brought to the Kings Pauillion.
Such end had the battaile of Gyradade, which was fought on the fourteenth  of May, in the yeere 1509. The King in memory heereof caused a chappell to bee builded on the place of battaile, which hee called Saint Maries of the Victory: then because hee would not loose his opportunity, hee came toThe King take to Carauagia. Carauagia, which yeelded vpon composition, and foure and twenty-houres after, the Castle, on no condition, hauing beene beaten with the Artillery. Bergamo did the like the next day, and the Castle a day after. From thence hee marched towards Bressia, which by the councell of the Gambares, did cast off the Venetian yoake, and yeelded to the King; and the Castle two dayes after did the like, on condition that all that were within it might depart, (the Venetian GentlemenBressia yeeldeth to the king. excepted) because the King would not haue them comprized in the composition  of townes, not for hatred that he did beare to them, but in hope to draw great summes of money from them.
The newes of the battailes losse, and of the kings progression after that, did afflictHow the Venetians were daunted at the report of the battails losse. Venice with such griefe and vniuersall feare, as it is scarce credible, so great it was. For from all parts of the citty, people ranne to the publick Pallace with great cryes and pittifull lamentations, where the Senators knew not on what to resolue, their Councell beeing dulled by dispaire; so weake were their remedies. At the last taking courage, they determined to vse meanes to bee reconciled in any sort whatsoeuer with the Emperor and the Catholick King, not mentioning the French King, because they did as much distrust his hatred, as they were  fearefull of his Armes.
The Senate then did write to Dominico Grimani, and to Marco Cornare, sonne to the Prouidator, both of them beeing Cardinalls at Rome, to promise andThe Venetians offer to the Pope. offer to the Pope, in the Senates name, that the Citties which hee demanded in Romagnia should bee yeelded vnto him, by meanes whereof they besought him not to abandon the common-wealth to the pleasure and dispose of barbarous people, such as the French-men were, who if they should once become maisters of all Lombardy, the Popes them-selues should not bee safe in Rome.
They likewise decreed, that Antonio Iustiniano (who being chosen Prouidator forThe Venetians seeke to be reconciled to the Emperor. Cremona, was ready to go thither) should directly go to the Emperor Maximillian, and conclude a peace with him, if it were possible on any terms whatsoeuer. That the Senate was ready to deliuer to him Thryeste, Portonoue, and the other lands which they had taken from him the yeare before, and that the Signory would acknowledge to hold of him whatsoeuer it possessed in Frioul, in Lombardy, and in

the country called old Venice. So weake and vncertaine were their remedies, as if one of these two did not helpe to repulse the audatiousnesse of the French, they had not any sure meanes left to stay them.
Neuerthelesse, makeing a vertue of necessity, they consulted for their defence how to prouide mony to wage new companies, for those which remaind aliue after the defeate were bereft of strength and courage. They determined likewise to augment their army by sea, whereof Andre Treuisan was Generall with (...) Gallies to oppose against that of the enemies which was preparing at Genoa. But the French Kings sodaine speed did preuent al their Councells, vnto whom, since the reduction of Bressia, Cremona was yeelded (the Castle expected The great progression of the French army. which the Venetians yet held). Pisquetona did the like: then hee marched towards Piscara to take the Castle, for the towne was yeelded: And as they began to batter it, the Swisses and Gascons made a furious entry by small ouctru^es in the walls, and slew all those that were within it, except the Captaine and his sonne who were Venetian Gentlemen, who were both by the Kings commandement hanged on the Castles battlements, to the end by that example to moue those of the Castle of Cremona, not obstynately to make defence, nor to hold out till the very last.
The King in this manner, in lesse then fifteene dayes after the victory, had recouered  (the Castle of Cremona excepted) all that which did belong to him, according to the diuision which had beene made at Cambray. The Pope had enuaded the Citties of Romagnia, with foure hundred men at armes, foure hundred light horse, and eight thousand foote-men, and with the Duke of Ferrara his ordnance, vnder the command of Francisco Maria de la Rouera his Nephew, Sonne to his brother Iohn, who with that army scoured from Cesenna to Ceruia, then tooke the towne of Sauarolla, betwixt Imola and Faenza, and that of Bre siquella with the Castle, and all the other townes of the Faentyne territory.Al Romagnia ye^ldeth to the Pope vpon the same onely of the Kings victory.
The Burrow of Russi, strong both by nature and art, after the Kings victory did yeeld to the Pope on composition, the like did the Citty of Faenza, which being  vnfurnished of Venetian soldiars, and at her owne command, did promise to acknowledge the Pope for her Lord, if it were not releeued within fifteene daies, which was not done. Rauenna did the like, so soone as the army of the Church drew neare (the Castle excepted.) In such sort as the Pope conquered more by the fame of the French Kings victory, then by his owne army, the Venetians possessing no more in Romagnia but the Castle of Rauenna, new enemies shewing them-selues dayly against them, euer since the defeate of their army.The Duke of Terrara declares him*selfe against the Uenetians. The Marquis of Mantua doth the like. The Emperors army vnder the Duke of Brunswic.
The Duke of Ferrara on a sodayne shewed him-selfe, who till then had abstained, and hauing expelled the Visdoma from Ferrara (a magistrate which the Venetians kept there) hee did forcibly without any let at all recouer the Pollesin of Rouigo. The townes of Azole and Lunate yeelded to the Marquis of Mantua, which the Venetians had in former time taken from Iohn Francisco Gonzaga his great Grand-father. Christofero Frangipane held Pisinia and Diuinia in Histria. The Duke of Brunswic with his forces, ent^ing Friull by the Emperors command, tooke Feltre and Bellone Thryeste likewise and the other townes vpon his arriuall did returne to the Emperors obedience. The Earles of Sodron seazed on certaine Castles and Villages which lay neere them: the like did the Bishop of Trent who tooke Riua di Trente, and Agresta.The Venetians quit Padua Verona, and ther places of the firme land.
The Venetians being brought to all extremity determined to quit the Signory  of the firme land, to the end to auoide so many enemies, hoping that good fortune one day returning, they might easily recouer it. Beeing contented then onely to retaine the salt waters, all their care was to fortyfie their Citty with men, victualls, and munition, and they sent Mandates

to the Magistrates and Officers of Padua, Verona, and other Citties allotted to Maximillian, that they should sodenly depart thence, leauing them to the power of the people.
During these atchiuements, Antonio Iustinian who had beene sent to the Emperor, beeing admitted to his presence in publike audience, did speake with very great submission, but it was in vaine, for hee would doe nothing without the French King. The Venetian Cardinalls likewise, who besought the Pope to absolueThe Venetians obtaine nothing of the Pope nor Emperor. solue the Monitorie, seeing they had offered to make restitution of the townes within the space of foure and twenty dayes, could obteine nothing: For the Pope answered, That they had not obeyed, because they did offer it with limited  conditions, not mentioning the profits which they had receiued by them. The Senate sent likewise into Puglia to yeeld vp the hauens to the King of Arragon, who being certaine to obtaine them with ease, had sent a small fleete from Spain, the which had already taken possession of diuerse places belonging to those Citties, and Sea hauens.
In this manner were the affaires of the Venetian common-wealth throwne head-long downe all hopes failing them. Those of Verona would yeeld to the King, seeing the Venetians had forsaken them, but hee would not receiue them, meaning faithfully and wholy to obserue the capitulations made with the Emperor, seeing hee had conquered all that which did belong to himselfe, and he commanded  the Ambassadors of the Veronois to present the Keyes of their Cittie to the Emperours Ambassadors, who were in his Army, the like did they of Padua and Vincenza.
This determination of the French King, not to passe with his Atmie beyond his limits, gaue some beginning of hope and safety to the Venetians, concerning whom the mindes of all Italians were diuersly mooued: Some were highly pleasedHope giuen to the Venetians. with their misery and calamity, and said, That with great ambition they had sought to subiect all Italy to themselues, by meanes whereof they had made their name very odious. Others considering more iudiciously, how vnseemly a thing it would be for all Italy to be brought vnder the bondage of strangers, did infinitely lament  the disaster of that Citty, the antient seat of liberty, and which more then any other had vpheld the common glory and renowne of all Italy.
This compassion began to touch the Popes heart, who fearing the power ofThe Pope being mooued with pitty, takes compassion on the Venetians. the Emperor and the French Kinge desired to diuert their thoughtes from any more oppressinge it by intangling them in affaires. Therfore he resolued (but secretly) to hinder as much as hee could, that the miseries of that Signory should goe on no farther, and did willingly receiue the letters with Denis Loredan wrote vnto him, requesting that it might please him, to receiue sixe Ambassadors which the Signory would send vnto him of the principall Senators, most humbly to entreare him to pardon and absolue them. The letters were read in open consistory, where their petition beeing propounded, the Pope consented to admit them, notwithstanding that the Ambassadors of the Emperour, and the French King sought to hinder it, alledging that by the league of Cambray, he was bound to pursue them with spirituall and temporall Armes, vntill that each of the confederates had recouered that which did belong to him, and that the Emperour had not yet recouered all. Hee answered them, That the ancient custome of the Church was not to shew it selfe obdurate to those, who repenting of their faults did craue pardon, but that hee would not absolue them, before they had giuen satisfaction to euery one.
This reception of the Pope did encrease their hope, with the newes they Treuiso co^tinueth obedient to the Venetians. heard from Treuiso, which beeing forsaken by the magistrates, and by the Venetian companies, as others were, Leonardo of Dressina banished from Vincenza, beeing come thither without forces to take possession thereof for the Emperor, they in the city mutined, and began with a generall voyce to cry S. Marke: protesting

that they would acknowledge none other Lord, and a fellow that was a shomaker named Marke beeing their leader, he carried with great shoutes and concourse of people the Venetians banners into the market place, and hauing driuen thence Dressina, they placed souldiers in their City, and speedily fortified it with victuals, and all other necessaries, the hors-men which were within it scouring the country round about.
The end of the seuenth Booke of the fourth Decade.





The Contents of the eight Booke of the fourth Decade.
WHat mooued the Venetians to hope to raise them selues. An enteruiew resolued on betwixt the Emperour Maximillian. and Lewis the French King broken on a sodaine by the Emperor. The Venetians recouer Padua, whereby they become masters of the Champaine Country. The Marquis of Mantua is taken by the Venetians. The Emperors proposition to goe and beseege the City of Venice. Frangipane maketh warre in Histria. The Venetian Ambassadours come to Rome by night. The Emperors seege before Padua. The King of Hungary  refuseth to make warre on the Venetians during their aduersity. The Venetians recouer Vincenza and beseege Verona. The Venetians nauall army on the Po, scoureth as farre as Fiquerolla. The Venetians conquer the Pollesin of Rouigo. The Duke of Ferrara defeateth the Venetians nauall army on the Po. The Emperor holdeth a Dyet at Inspruch. The Pope absolueth the Venetians, notwithstanding the oppositions of the Ambassadors of the Emperour and the French King. The Popes displeasure against the French King. The French Kings greeuous displeasure conceiued against the Swisses. The Pope in hatred  to the French King Assaileth Ferrara. The Vincentines are enforced to craue pardon of the Prince of Anhalt. The French take Legnaga. The Emperor engageth Verona to the French King. Monselesia taken by the French. The

Popes deseignes and propositions against the French King broken and come to nothing. The King of Hungary summons the Venetians Ambassador. Lastly the French King resolueth to make warre on the Venetians and the Pope.


The eighth Booke of the fourth Decade of the Historie of Uenice.
THe Commotion of Treuiso and the Emperors carelesnesseThe Venetians take courage. gaue hope to the Venetians to retaine some part of their  Signory, and to execute diuers great exploits, which afterward they did. For in all this great course of victories there was nothing heard of but the Emperors name only, albeit by meanes of the French army, and for feare of it, diuers townes had beene yeelded to him. He had runne to diuers places since the confederacy of Cambray to get money by way of loane of the Flemmings and other his subiects, the which hee quickly spent prodigally after his vsuall manner, beside a hundred thousand crownes which he had receiued of the French King, for the inuestiture of the Dutchy of Milan. Forthwith after the newes of the battaile of Gyradade, he sent the Duke of  Brunswick to recouer the Country of Friul, but for himselfe he did not mooue at all, for want of money, al-be-it the Pope did greatly solicite him therevnto, being afraid of the French forces, and to cause him to make hast, had sent him fifty thousand Duca^s.
At the last hee came to Trent, from whence by letters hee thanked the FrenchAn enteruiew resolued on betwixt the Emperor and the French King. King, for hauing by his meanes recouered his due. The Cardinall of Amboise beeing come thither from the King to talke with him, they concluded betwixt themselues that he and the King should see one an other and talke together in open field, neere to the towne of La Garde, on the marches of eithers Countrey. The King set forward to be there at the day appointed. But the Emperor being  come as farre as Riua di Trente for the same purpose, hauing tar^ied there two houres, returned on a sodaine to Trent, sending the King word that, by reason ofThe Emperour on a sodaine breaketh the enteruiew. certaine accidents newly hapned in Friul, he was enforced to returne backe againe, requesting him to defe^re their meeting till an other time, and in the meane space to tarry at Cremona.
This alteration of the Emperour, together with his tedious negligence in not prouiding sufficient garrisons to defend Padua and the other Cities, were causes, that the Venetians did help themselues by this opportunity offered them to recouer Padua, which they knew to be badly man'd with souldiers, and the which they had by ouer-hasty counsell too soone giuen away. They concluded then  that Andrew Gritti, one of the Prouidators, should goe to Nouale on the Paduan territory, and that there he should take part of the footmen (who being followed by diuers of the Country were sent to the village of Mirana) and should march towards Padua, to assault the Gate of Codalonga, and Christofero de Mora the other

Prouidator, should follow him at the heeles with the residue of the army: This deseigne being thus decreed fell out better then they thought for: for being early in a morning come to the Gate, they found it halfe open, by reason of certaine carts laden with hay, which were a little before entred. So as possessing it without any difficulty, they tarried there without any noise till their fellowes were arriued who were not farre of, then they marched to the market-place, before any one had descried them.
But Dressina, who was Gouernor of the City for Maximillian being lodged in the Cittadell, hauing heard the noise, came forth with three hundred Lancequenets which he had only for the gard thereof, with Brunaldo of Saregia with fifty The Venetians take Padua. horse, who perceiuing the townsmen to forsake them, and no man to offer them any helpe made great hast to enter into their fort, the which being not well fortified they were constrained to yeeld certaine houres after. The Venetians by this meanes being masters of the City, commanded no hurt to be done to it, and that the Iewes houses only, with certaine Paduans who had shewed themselues their enemies, should be spoiled.
The French King, who not long before had by composition taken the CastleThe French Kings resolution. of Cremona, knowing the Emperours answere, and not staying to doe his bidding, went towards Milan, resoluing to cassier his army, for to free himselfe from so great expenses and to returne into France. But the departure of the Kings  person and his army did much diminish the reputation of the Emperors affaires. For after the Venetians had recouered Padua, they soone became masters of all the Countrey round about, because the Cities and the champaine countrey didThe Venetians masters of the Champaine country. fauour them. Vincenza of it selfe had done the like, if Constantine of Macedonia, who by chance was not farre off, had not speedily entred it with certaine forces. They recouered neuerthelesse the towne and castle of Legnaga, a very commodious place to indomage the countries of Verona, Padua, and Vincenza.
It was supposed that the taking of Padua would delay the Kings returne into France: but that, notwithstanding, he determined to passe forward so soone asNew agreements betwixt the Pope and the King. hee had made new agreements with the Popes Legat in the City of Biagrassa  whereby the Pope and the King did bind themselues to protect each other. He left on the frontiers of the Veronois the Lord de la Palisse with seuen hundred Launces, to doe whatsoeuer should please the Emperor. But before his departureThe Marquis of Mantua taken prisoner and brought to Venice. an other happy euent befell the Venetians, which was, the taking of the Marquis of Mantua, with the defeat of all his souldiers, who were surprized halfe a sleepe in the Island of Escalla: who being brought from thence to Padua, and then to Venice, was imprisoned in the little tower of the publike pallace to the great contentment and wonderfull ioy of the whole City.
The Emperour till now had not hindred nor did hinder the Venetians proceedings, as well because he had not suffi^ient forces, as also for that he was kept backe  by the peasants in the mountaine, and in the planes likewise by other companies of peasants, who waited for him at a very strong passage, where he was in danger. But surmounting all these difficulties, and hauing not as yet forces strong enough, he busied himself in meane enterprises, beseeging now one village, and then an other, scouring and spoyling the country. The Prince of Anhalt did the like, who by the Emperours command hauing entred Friul with ten thousand men attemptedCadora taken and sackt by the Imperials. in vaine to take Monfalcone, but he gaue a furious assault on the towne and castle of Cadora where he committed great slaughter on those that were within it.
The Venetians in the meane time tooke the towne of Valdesera by force, and The Emperour propoundeth to assault Venice, Bellona by composition. The Emperour perceiuing that his forces were not worthy the name of Imperiall, propounded to the confederates the vniting of all their forces in one to assaile the city of Venice, and to that intent to vse the helpe of the sea armies and Galleis of the French King and the Pope. The French King

would willingly haue consented therevnto if he had seene any likelihood of the matter. But the Pope and the Catholike King gainesaid it, as a thing most vniust and dishonorable. The Duke of Brunswicke on the other side being sent by the Emperor could not take Vdina the Capitall city of Friul nor Ciuital-D'Austria, which he likewise beseeged. Christoforo Frangipane did the like in Histria whereFrangipane makes warre in Histria. nere to the village of Verme he defeated the Venetian officers, and did greatly burne and spoile the whole country.
During these temporall accidents of armes in diuers places, they disputed at Rome on spirituall armes, whither before the recouery of Padua the sixe Ambassadors from the Senate were arriued; namely Dominico Treuisan, Leonardo Moceniga, Paulo Pisani, Ieronimo Donato* Paulo Capello, and Lodouico Maripietro: whoThe Venetian Ambassadors come by might into Rome. entring by night in poore and wretched habite, because the Pope would haue it so, who did not see them, they went to the pallace of the Cardinall of Naples to conferre with him and the other Commissioners: Great were the practises of the Ambassadors of the Emperour, French King, and the King of Spaine to hinder them from obtayning absolution: and on the contrary the Archbishop of Yorke solicited for them in the behalfe of Henry King of England.
The Emperor in the meane time hauing assembled all the forces he was able toThe Emperor determines to beseege Padua. make, as well of his owne as of others that assisted him, determined with a mighty army to goe and beseege Padua.
The Venetians weighing how much the preseruation of that city did import them did not forget to furnish it with all necessaries for defence. Wherevnto Prince Loredan did greatly incite them in an Oration full of mighty perswasions by whose counsell two hundred young Gentlemen departed from Venice to goe to the releefe of that city, where they were receiued with incredible ioy of al men. They receiued letters at Venice at the same time from Andre Foscole Ambassador at Constantinople for the Common-wealth neere to the great Turke: whereby he assured the Senate that the Turke was mightily dipleased when he vnderstood of the defeate of their army at Gyradade and for that they had not acquaintedThe great Turkes offer to the Venetian Senate. him with their enterprizes and requested his aide, and that now he freely offered  them all aide and fauour, it being his pleasure that Prince Loredan should bee speedily aduertized of this offer. The Senate by their Ambassador did highly thanke him, but would not accept the offer, because it was neither seemely nor proffitable.
But to returne to the Emperours preparations, who whilest he tarried for forcesThe Emperors progression nere to Padua. which came to him from all parts, he came to the bridge of Brente three miles of from Padua where hauing taken Rimini by force, and turned aside the current of the water, he marched towards the Pollesin of Rouigo keeping aloofe off from Padua to open the passage to his victuals, staying for his Artillery which was to come forth of Germany, and tooke the village of Este by assault which he  sack't, and next he tooke Monselecia and the castle, with the town of Montagnane by composition. From thence returning towards Padua, he encamped nere to the bridge of Bassonella nere to the city, where he attempted, but in vaine, to turne backe the course of the Riuer Brento.
To this place came the artillery and the munition which he expected, with theThe Empero^ beseeged Padua. residue of his army, wherewith he went forward and encamped nere to the Suburbes of Saint Crosse, determining to giue an assault in that place: but when he vnderstood that it was the strongest part of the city, he changed his purpose, and remooued towards the little Gate on the way to Venice, as well for that it was the weakest part of the city as also to cut off supplies that might come thither by  land or water: wherein hauing spent much time vnproffitably and giuen leisure to the enemies to fortifie and furnish themselues with victuals, He approched neere to the wals with his army, which besides the French Kings seuen hundred Launces, vnder the command of the Lord de la Palisse, consisted of one thousand

Italian men at armes, eighteene thousand Lansquenets, sixe thousand Spaniards,The number of the Emperours army. six thousand boot-halers of sundry nations, and two thousand Italian^. After these followed a great traine of all sorts of peeces of battery, with wonderfull store of munition: so as neuer any seege in Italy was of the like expectation as well for the importance of the place, whereon depended the good or bad successe of the Venetians, as in regard of the greatnesse and authority of such a leader, which caused the number of the army daily to encrease, al-be-it the souldiers were not paied, who fed themselues neuerthelesse with hope of the Cities spoile. On the other side the army which the Venetians had in Padua for the defence thereof, wasThe number of the army in Padua. little inferior, to the Emperors. For there were sixe hundred men at armes, fifteene  hundred light horse, fifteene hundred famous and well experienced Stradiots: and besides the Cauallery, there was twelue thousand footmen of the best souldiers of Italy, and tenne thousand other footmen, as well Sclauonians, as Greeks, and Albanezes drawne from their Galleis, and besides all these, all the Venetian young Gallants were there with their followers, whose example did much encourage the rest. Moreouer it did not want great aboundance of all necessary prouisions, nor great store of artillery, with a merueilous quantity of all kinde of victuals, and a multitude almost numberlesse of peasants, who without intermission laboured in the Cities fortifications: so as within a short space, it was fortified with bastions, ram piers, casemates, parapets, and necessary trenches. And to the end that the courage of al those within it might be answerable to thoseThe Count Petillan hath the command in Padua. preparations, the Count Petillan, who was General, caused them all to be assembled in Saint Anthonies market-place, where hauing encouraged them by graue and valorous speeches, he first bound himselfe by sollemne oth, and then the captaines; the whole army and the townesmen in like manner, faithfully to employ themselues in the defence thereof euen to the death.
In the meane time, the Pope, the Emperor, and the French King, did earnestlyThe King of Hungary will by no meanes make warre on the Venetians, being solicited therevnto. solicite the King of Hungary to make warre on the Venetians, telling him how easily he might recouer all the lands which they held in Histria and Selauonia, now when as they had in a manner lost all their forces, and were assailed on euery  side. But the King of Hungary would neuer giue eare therevnto, but continued still their friend. Whereof the Senate being aduertized by Vincentio Guidocho their Secretary and Agent in Hungary: sent Petro Pascalio their Ambassadors to the same King, to entreate him to continue in the alliance which he had sworne of a long time with them, the which he promised to doe.
Now the Emperor hauing made his approches neere to the wals of Padua, towards the little Gate, where his army was extended round about the city three miles in length, he beganne to plant his peeces of battery, which could not be done in a long time, by reason of the number of them, some of them being of a merueilous greatnesse. Being planted, they would needs see how the enemies  could defend themselues, and therefore the French and the Lansequenets gaueAssault giuen to a Rauelin of the city. an assault on that side where the Lord de la Palisse had command at a Rauelin of a Gate, but it being valliantly defended, they returned to their quarter. The next day the artillery plaied with great fury, and did beate downe a great part of the wall: the shot from the city likewise did greatly hurt the whole army and those within the town made many sallies, especially the Stradiots and the light-horse.
The artillery hauing plaied nine daies together, and made so large a breach as all men thought was more then needfull, the whole army made preparation the next day to giue an assault: But when they perceiued how that the same night they within had filled the dike with water, the Emperour sent backe his souldiers  to their quarters. They beganne afterwards to batter the Bastion which was neere to the Gate of Codalonga, the Emperor determining to doe his vttermostAssault giuen to the breach of the Bastion of Codolonga^ to force it, and hauing ouerthrowne a part thereof with the ordnance, he caused the Spaniards and Lansquenets two daies after to giue it an assault, who fighting

furiously did mount it, and placed two Enseignes thereon. But the valour of theThese that came to the assault retire. defendants was such, and the aboundance of defensiue engines so great, as they were enforced to leape downe in heapes, and many of them were slaine and hurt: By meanes whereof those who were already prepared to giue an assault to the wal, thinking that the Bastion was taken, retired and disarmed themselues, without attempting any farther
Maximillian by this attempt did wholy loose the hope of victory, whereforeThere Emperor raiseth his campe from before Padua. resoluing to dislodge, hauing first sent away his artillery to a place of safety, he raised his campe, and came with his whole army to Limini the seuenteenth day of the seege, from thence he went to Verona, all men generally blaming him for  that by his owne fault he had lost Padua, and had not taken Treuiso. And he on the contrary imputing it to other men, complained of the Pope and the French King: of the one, for suffering the Venetian Ambassadors to goe to Rome, and of the other, because he had delaide to send supplies of men. But these complaints did no whit better his condition: for the Pope cared not greatly for him, and the King was glad to haue his faults and changings knowne. Hauing receiued the oth of fidelity of those of Verona, he departed thence towards Germany, determining (as he said) to returne the next spring with greater forces to make warre in Italy, leauing the Marquis of Brandenbourg for the gard of Verona.
The Emperours returne into Germany left all that which he possessed in greatThe Emperor re^rneth into Germany. hazard, and all Italy in doubt, in regard of some contention, arising betwixt the Pope and the French King, which being soone after appeased there remained neuerthelesse some discontent in the Popes minde, wherevpon he wished thatContention betwixt the Pope and the King. VVhat the Popes meaning was. the King might loose whatsoeuer he held in Italy, and was willing to imploy himselfe to effect it: And al-be-it he propounded so great a designe to himselfe, yet neuerthelesse he would not enter into league with any one, but trusting wholy to himselfe and to the authority which the Papall Sea had ouer all Princes, hee shewed both by deed and words that he did not greatly account of any one, and waxing strange to all others he enclined only to the Venetians side, whom for  the safety of all Italy, and for the preseruation of his greatnesse, he thought fit to absolue, and to assist with all his power.
The Emperors and French Kings Ambassadors opposed it, the like did the Ambassador for the King of Arragon, alleadging the confederacy made at Cambray, by which they were not yet fully satisfied. The Pope made answer therevnto,The Popes answer to those who hindered the Venetians absolution. that it was not the office of Christs Vicar to pursue with spirituall armes, to the preiudice of the saluation of so many soules, those who repenting had with great humility craued absolution: espetially the cause for which they were censured ceassing. That it was an other matter to pursue them with temporall armes, and therein he was determined to perseuer, and made offer to consent with the rest  to obserue the league of Cambray. Being in these termes with the Ambassadors, he would willingly haue absolued them, if the Venetians would haue giuen place and consented to two conditions. The one, to leaue the nauigation of the Adriatrick Sea free to the subiects of the Church; the other, that they should keepe no more a Magistrate called Visdomo in Ferrara, which was a City depending on the Church.
The Venetians in the meane time, vpon this different meaning of Princes,The Venetians recouer Vincenza. not greatly esteeming the Emperour, sent forces vnder the conduct of Andre Gritti the Prouidator to Vincenza, on assurance that they were wished for by the people, who at his arriuall tooke the suburbes of Posterla, then being brought  into the city by the townesmen, the Prince of Anhalt and Fracasso retired into the castle, which was yeelded foure daies after. It was verily thought that he might haue taken Verona likewise, if he had gone thither on a sodaine: but whilest he tarried for the reduction of the castle of Vincenza, new companies of the

Emperors entred into it, and three hundred Launces of the French Kings, commanded by the Lord D' Aubigns, so, as there being in it fiue hundred Launces, andThe Imperials succor Verona with men and victuals. fiue thousand footmen as well Spaniards as Lansquenets, it was a hard matter to take it. The Venetian army neuerthelesse came thither soone after, vpon hope, that at their arriuall, they in the city would rise: but because it being diuided into two parts, did not shew it selfe before the wals at one time, the businesse fell not out according to their proiect.
The Venetians at their departure thence tooke Basciana, then Feltre and Ciuitall, with the fort of Escalla. At the same time Antonio and Ieronimo Sauorgniane, gentlemen of the country followinge the Venetians party in Friull, tooke The Venetians nauall army scoureth the Po as farre as Fiquerolles. Castel-nouo beyond the riuer of Tailemont, no newes being heard of Maximillian. The Venetian army for the recouery of the Pollesin of Rouigo, marched towards Monselecia and Montagnane, to the end from thence to enter on the territory of Ferrara. Hauing moreouer, sent their nauall army, conducted by Angelo Treuisano, to make warre on the Duke of Ferrara, which entring the Po at the mouth of Fornaces, burnt Corbolo and other villages neere to the Po, not sparing the whole country as farre as the Lake of Scarra, from whence the light horse which kept way with it by land scoured as farre as Fiquerolles.
The incredible hatred which they had conceiued against the Duke of FerraraThe cause of the Venetians hatred to the Duke of Ferrara. did mooue them to doe so, who not being content with that which he said did  belong vnto him, did detaine that which was none of his owne, hauing receiued of the Emperour for money the village of Este in Fee, and that of Montagnane by ingagement, he hauing no title to those places, which from time to time belonged to the Venetians.
The Duke of Ferrara was much amazed at the comming of this army, and at the report that their land-army followed it: for he had no meanes to defend himselfe, till the supplies which he expected from the Pope and the French King were arriued, but only with his artillery planted on the bankes of the Riuer to stop the enemies farther passage, which was the cause that Treuisan lay at Ankor in the middest of the Riuer behind a little Island, tarrying for the land forces, without  which he knew he could not goe forward: And to remaine there at more safetyThe Venetian General builds two Bastions on the two banks of Po. til their arriual, he caused two Bastions to bee made on the Riuer Po, the one on Ferraras side, and the other on the opposite shore with a bridge of boats, to the end he might be able to releeue the Bastions, chiefly that on Ferrara side.
The Duke determined to hinder the finishing of that worke, whereupon hauing assembled the greatest forces he could, as wel of the City as of strangers, he sent them before to assaile the Bastion, and he himselfe followed after with store of horse.
But those of the Bastion being releeued by their owne fellowes out of the vesselsThe Venetians driue the Ferrarois from the Bastions* did with such fury charge the Ferrarois as they put them to rout, so as the  Duke, who followed them at the heeles with his cauallery, meeting with them, turned them backe and encouraged them, but it lasted not long. For the enemies fury was such, together with the safety of the place well fortified with small peeces of Ordnance, as at the last he himselfe was constrained to retire with great losse of his people, who were slaine and hurt. This mooued the Lord of Chaumont to send a hundred and fifty French Launces for the gard of Ferrara: and the Pope being incensed against the Venetians, for that without respect to him they had assailed the Duke, sent thither likewise the two hundred men at armes which hee had alotted for the Emperor.
But this aide would haue come to late, if the Venetians had not beene enforced The Venetians recouer the Pollesin. to call backe their army, the which hauing conquered all the Pollesin, was in readinesse to goe to the reliefe of their nauall army: for it was enforced to returne backe, hauing left foure hundred light horse, and as many footmen for the defence of the Pollesin, and for the helpe of their vessels: because the Lord of

Chaumont hauing entred Verona with great forces, had lent eight thousand Ducats to the Emperour who had engaged to the King for the same sum, and for others to be paied afterward the towne of Valeggia, sixe miles from Bressia, and a passage of the Riuer Mincia of great importance: and made preparations beside (as it was said) to goe and beseege Vincenza.
The Venetians diuided their army into three parts which they placed in Legnaga, Suaua, and Vincenza: then being desirous to conserue Vincenza, they beganneThe Venetians prouide for Legnaga, Suaua, and Vincenza. to fortifie it with strong rampiers, and with deepe ditches full of water, they like they did afterwards to Suaua and Legnaga; and in this manner standing on their guarde, they assured the whole country, especially for that winter. Ferrara by this meanes was in some sort eased, but not altogether freed from feare and daunger: For those in the vessels, seconded by the cauallery that was left with them, did daylie scoure euen to the Cittie Gates, and other Venetian vessels comming by an other way to assaile the Ferrarois, had taken Comachia. But by the arriuall of the Popes, and French Kings forces, the Duke and the Cardinall of Este beganne to take courage, and for to make diuerse attempts to draw the enemies to fight, they which they refused til the return of their army.
The Duke and the Cardinall perceiuing that the ouer-throw of the vessels would gaine the victory, and that it might easily be effected if meanes were made  for the safe planting of the artillery on the banke of the Riuer, the Cardinal came and assailed the Bastion once againe, and hauing beaten backe the enemies, who were come forth to skirmish, hee did take and fortifie the nerest part of the causey, vnknowne to the enemies: then in the night hee brought the artillery to the shoare opposite to the enemy and planting it with great silence, it began in the morning to discharge very furiously. The vessels would haue escaped by flight, but not being able to make way by reason of the shot, they were in a manner all sunke or taken. The General leaping into a Skiffe saued himselfe by flight with theThe Duke of Ferraradeseateth the Venetians naual army. chiefe standard of the common-wealth, fifteene Gallies fell into the Dukes power, certaine great ships, diuers Fusts, with other small boates, almost numberlesse, two thousand men died there, as well by the shot as by fire and water, and threescore banners were taken. Many that came on shoare were saued by the Venetian light horse men.
The Duke after this defeate, sent forces of horse and foote to doe the like toThe Duke of Ferrara takes Loretta. those who had taken Comachia, who recouered Loretta which the Venetians had fortified, and they had defeated the army which was there if it had not retired to Bebies knowing the danger.
Such vnfortunate end had the seege of Ferrara which lasted about one month. Their affaires prospered better on the Paduan territorie: for the Emperour beeing on the Vincentin with foure thousand footmen, the Venetians, by the aide of the country peasants, almost vnder his nose and before his face, tooke the Paces of Escalla, Cogola, and Basciana: whereof the Emperour complayning said, That the departure of the Lord of La Palisse had bred diuers disorders:The Emperour goeth to bold a Dyet at Inspruch. and therevpon hee went to Bolsane, and from thence to Inspruch to hold the Dyet which hee had appointed, and the Lord of Chaumont following his example retired to Milan, leauing strong garrisons in all places on the frontiers, and especiallie in Verona, which the Emperour could not haue defended alone.
During this cessation of armes, Maximillian sought to take truce withA treaty of trnce, motioned betwixt the Imperor and the Venctians, broken. the Venetians: the Bishop of Pescera the Popes Nuntio, practized it by  his Masters commandement; the Ambassadors were at Hospitaletto, a little aboue Escalla, and conferred with Iohn Cornare and Lodouico Mocenigo the Venetian commissioners: But the Emperours excessiue demands brake off this

treaty without any conclusion, to the Popes great griefe, who wished that the Venetians might be freed from this warre, that he might ioyne them to himselfe against the French King, whom he more and more hated, thereby to lay foundations of great importance, and to this purpose had secretly sent a meslenger to the King of England.
The Venetian army in the meane time beeing quartered at Saint Boniface on the Veronois, held Verona in a manner beseeged, al-be-it deeds of armes were coldly performed on either part, according to the season which was cold. The Princes mindes neuerthelesse were greatly troubled, aud especially the Emperour, who inuenting all meanes to get the vpper-hand of the Venetians, drew his  affaires still out at length, and did publish an other Dyet at Ausbourg, where the Electors of the Empire hauing made instance to treate of peace with the Venetians, before they mentioned any prouisions for the warre: he thought that the Bishop of Pescera the Popes Nuntio had solicited the matter, wherevpon hee sent him away.
And considering that the resolutions of Dyets were long and vncertaine, he resoluedThe Emperors proposition to the French King. with himselfe to induce the French King to condescend to take Padua, Vincenza and Treuiso with his owne forces, and to accept of a sufficient recompence for it. This offer being propounded in the Kings Counsell, was much debated on all sides, and the King almost consented by the councell of diuers, to accept  it, and to returne againe in person into Italy with a mighty at my: But vpon the difficulties which were made to the contrary, hee delayed the answere and resolued aboue all things, to vse meanes to appease the Pope and to make him his friend if it were possible, at least-wise that hee should not bee his enemy: and for this purpose sent post to Rome Albert Count of Carpi, a man of excellent wit and iudgement, vnto whom were giuen very ample instructions, and commission likewise to diswade the Pope from absoluing the Venetians: but as hee arriued, the Pope had already concluded and promised it: the Venetians hauing after long disputations for certaine monthes space consented to those conditions, whereon the difficulty lay: because they saw none other remedy for their safety, but to be ioyned with him.
The Ceremonies of the absolution beeing ended, the Ambassadors returnedThe Pope absolutly the Venetian. to Venice, leauing at Rome, neere to the Pope, Ieronimo Donato a very learned man, one of their owne number, and very pleasing to his Holinesse, who did great good seruice to his countrey in matters which he afterwards treated with him. Maximillian and the French King were displeased for that the PopeMaximillian and the French King are displeased with the Pope for absoluing the Venetians. had absolued the Venetians; the one because hee had not yet recouered his owne according to the treaty of Cambray, and the other because he desired for his owne particular profit that the Venetians might no more recouer themselues: But neither of them did in any sort perceiue the Popes meaning, especially the  French King whom the Pope fed with vaine hopes.
For after the absolution, contrary to Kings meaning, hee gaue leaue to the Feudataries and Tennants of the Church, to receiue the Venetians pay, and to Iohn Paul Baillon to bee Generall of their army in Count Petillans stead, whoThe Popes bad meaning to the French King. was newlie dead: Then hee vsed meanes to reconcile the Venetians with the Emperour, to the end that they three beeing ioyned together might make warre on the French King. But they could not agree, for the Emperour would absolutely haue Verona for his share, and the Venetians stoutly craued it for themselues.
Moreouer, the Pope did secretly solicite the King of England to make warre  on the French King, putting him in minde of the antient quarrelles betwixt those two Kingdomes, and the faire occasion which offered it selfe with fortunate successe.
He did besides continue his practizes begunne with the Swisses by means of the

Bishop of Syon whose authority was great amongst that Nation, which fell out in the end as hee desired.
For they growing proud that all men sought their friendship, the King soliciting them to renue the league which was almost expired, with great boldnesse and presumption they craued the augmentation of their pentions which were threescore thousand pounds a yeere, besides the secret pentions which were giuen to priuate persons: At which insolency the King being mooued, he reiected themThe Kings anger against the Swisses. with haughty speeches, making shew that he did not esteeme them, and flatly denied to augment their pentions, hauing made alliance with the Valesians, and the Lords of the Grisons.
The Pope being glad of this disunion, made new confederacy with them, andVVherevnto the Popes actions tended. thought he had done much for the execution of that which he intended, and first of all he assailed the Duke of Ferrara, for spight that hauing receiued so many benifits at his hands, he depended more on the French King then on him.
And he imperiously forbad him to cause any more salt to be made at Comachia. Duke Alphonso complayning for that he went about to hinder him from receiuing the profit of his owne reuenues, would not obey this commandement, wherevpon he threatned him with greeuous censures if he did not desist, his thoughts and actions wholly tending to defend and raise the Venetians.
The Emperour and the French King, who desired nothing so much as their  downefall, beeing displeased with the Popes proceedings, did more strictly vnite themselues together, and resolued to assaile the Venetians that Summer with great forces, and summoned the Pope to ioyne with them according to the purport of the confederacy of Cambray; but he answered that he was no more tied to that confederacy, which was accomplished, it being Maximillians fault that hee had not Treuiso, or recompence in money for it: In the meane time Verona had like to haue beene taken by the Venetian Garrison which lay at Saint Boniface, who beeing sent for by the townesmen, came by night neere to the Cittie, to scale the Castle of Saint Peter, but in settingThe enterprize vpon Verona discouered. vppe their Ladders, which were to short, they were discouered, wherevpon  they returned to their Garrison, and diuers of the conspiracy in the city were punished.
About the same the Pope hauing notice that peace was newlie concluded betwixt the Kings of France and England, and perceiuing on the other side the brauado which Maximillian vsed in his behalfe, in demanding of him the loane of two hundred thousand Ducats, threating him if hee refused it to vnite himselfe with the French King against him, hee was desirous to reunite himselfe with the King, and beganne to deale with the Earle of Carpi who was still at Rome.
But on a sodaine hee changed his minde, so soone as hee had notice of the  small aide which the commissioners in the assembly of Ausbourg had offered the Emperour, and that the King of England had not made him such an answere as hee expected: By meanes whereof taking courage, he beganne a new to assaile the Duke of Ferrara, because the said Duke had raised some new impositions on marchandize which was brought to Venice by the Riuer Po,The Pope in batred to the King doth assaile the Duke of Ferrara a new. saying, That by the law, the vassall could not do it without the leaue of the chiefe Lord, and that the same did preiudice those of Bolognia his subiects, threatning him, if he did not take away those imposts to make war vpon him.
The King heereby found himselfe greatly perplexed, for on the one side it greeued him to make warre on the Pope, and on the other hee would not forsake The French King greatly perplexed. his friend the Duke of Ferrara, beeing obliged to maintai^ and defend him: and the more the Pope did vrge him to forsake him, the more constant he was in his defence. After diuers reasons alleaged on either side, that the King had propounded conditions, whereby, for the most part, he should bee satisfied, for

those losses which hee should pretend to haue sustained by the Duke, hee was moreouer content to bee bound, (according to the Popes request made vnto him) that his army should not passe ouer the Riuer Po, vnlesse it were to protect the Florentines, and to molest Pandolpho Petrucci, and Iohn Paul Baillon.
During all these differences the Lord of Chaumont had taken without anyThe Lord of Chaumont taketh the Pollesin of Rouigo. impediment with fifteene hundred Launces, and tenne thousand footmen with great store of Ordnance, followed by three thousand Pioners, the Pollesin of Rouigo which the Venetians had abandoned, and the tower Marquisana, the Duke of Ferrara beeing ioyned with him with two hundred men at armes, fiue hundred  light horse and two thousand footmen. Then he came to Castelbaldo, and from thence to Montagnane and Este, which he tooke at the first summons, and gaue them to the Duke.
The Prince of Anhalt, the Emperours Lieutenant, came forth of Verona, with three hundred French Launces, two hundred men at armes, and three thousand Lansquenets, and following the Lord of Chaumont, they came both together towards the Vincentine territory, where the whole country did forthwith yeeld vnto them, the Venetian army being retired into a place of safety: by meanes whereof the Vincentines perceiuing themselues to be wholy forsaken, hauing of themselues no meanes of defence, had none other hope left but only in the victors  mercy the which they did hope to obtaine by the meanes of the Lord of Chaumont, of whom hauing gotten passe-port, they came to the Campe in wretched habit, where one of their number hauing with great humillity declared to the Prince of Anhalt the infinite and intollerable losses that they had susteined,The Vincentine commissioners craue pardon of the Prince of Anbalt. and the misery and calamity whereto they were brought, to the end to mooue him to some compassion, and to appease his wrath, they receiued but a very vnpleasing and vngentle answere, which in effect was to haue their liues, goods and honours, at his owne discretion. The Vincentines being daunted with so cruell an answere, remained for a certaine space like men without any motion or feeling, and not knowing what to answere or thinke, they at last, by the Lord  of Chaumonts councell, fell downe prostrate on the earth, and did absolutelyThe Vincentines yeeld themselues to the victors mercy. referre themselues and their city into the conquerors hands. But the Lord of Chaumont making intercession for them, with diuers others, the matter was so handled as the Prince of Anhalt was content to promise them, that their persons should haue no harme, but the disposing of their goods should be absolutely referred to his will and pleasure.
After the taking of Vincenza, al be-it the Emperour did in no sort stirre against the Venetians, as hee had promised hee would, but on the contrary, his companies decreasing dayly for want of pay, the Lord of Chaumont neuerthelesse perceiuing that whatsoeuer had beene done till then, was to The French beseege Legnaga. no purpose, vnlesse Legnaga were taken, hee determined to goe and encampe before it, where hauing ouercome the difficulties of the waters, which the Venetians had in such sort let forth, as the whole country was drowned therewith, he wanne Porto, which is a part of Legnaga, and hauing caused foure thousand French foot, and sixe peeces of ordnance to crosse ouer to the farther side of the Riuer Adice, hee beganne to batter the Bastion on both sides the Riuer, part whereof being beaten downe, the Prouidator who was within it, al-be-it his souldiers did what they could to rampire it vp againe, being dan^ed with feare, retired on a sodaine the night following into the castle with certaine Venetian Gentlemen.
This retreat beeing knowne by daie breake, the captaine of the footmenLegnaga taken. which were in the Bastion, did yeeld on condition of safetie of liues and goods. The Towne was forth-with sackt, and they who kept the other Bastion

fled thorow the Marshes: The castle yeelded soone after, on this condition, that the Venetian Gentlemen should remaine prisoners, and the souldiers should depart with white wands in their hands. There did the Lord of Chaumontreceiue newes of the death of the Cardinall of Amboise his vncle, whereat theThe death of the Cardinal of Amboyse. Pope made great shew of contentation, thinking that so long as he liued he shold euer haue an enemy: And so much he told the Venetian Ambassador, discoursing with him concerning other occurrents.
The Lord of Chaumont hauing left for the gard of Legnaga an hundred Launces with a thousand footmen, determined to returne into the Dutchy of Milan, according to the Kings command, but by the Emperours entreaty he  was countermanded till the month of Iune were ended, by which time the Emperour promised to come into Italy: and to the end his comming downe mightThe Lord of Chaumont takes diuers places which stopped the Emperors comming into Italy. bee more easie, the Almaines desiring to recouer Marostic, Ciuitella, Basciana, and other places neere about, the Lord of Chaumont came and encamped with his army at Longare, to keepe the Venetians troupes from entring into Vincenza, wher was a weak Garrison: but the Venetian army was retired to Padua.
The Almaines who were ioyned with the Lord of Chaumont went to Torricelles, then to Ciuitella, which soone yeelded; the like did Marostic, Basciana and other places not farre from thence, which were abandoned by the Venetians. From thence they marched towards Escalla which the Almaines did much desire  to take, because it was a commodious passage for those companies which were to come forth of Germany, but they could not passe forward: for the peasants wonderfully affecting the Venetians, had possessed diuers places in the mountaine: so that hauing taken Castel-noua by composition, which is likewise a passage in that mountaine, they returned to the Brente, where they had formerly beene quartered.
From thence the Prince of Anhalt did by an other way send diuers foot-companies towards Escalla, who passing by Feltre did spoile and burne it: then being come to the place of Escalla, they found it wholly abandoned, and Couola likewise. The Country of Friul was no lesse ruined and assaulted on euery side, now  by the Venetians, and then by the Almaines, now defended by some, then spoiled by others: There was nothing to be seene euery where, but dead bodies, and burnt and sackt places. The time drawing neere that the French army was to depart, the Emperour and the French King made new couenants together, That the army should remaine there the next whole moneth following, and that the King should lend him fiftie thousand crownes, to defray extraordinarie expences, and for the payment of the foote-men that moneth, and theVerona and her territory pawned to the King for a hundred thousand crownes. King should receiue in pawne Verona, with her whole territory, as well for these fiftie thousand crownes, as for the other fifty thousand which had beene lent him before.
In regard of this agreement, the King sent to command the Lord of Chaumont to remaine there, who soone resolued to assaile Monselesia, to pluck forth that thorne from his foote, for which he made preparation so soone as foure hundred Spanish Launces were arriued, sent by the Catholike King to the Emperours aide. Hauing then together crossed the Riuer Brente, and that of Baquillon at the village of Purle, they came to Monselesia, which is a towne seated on the plaine at the foote of the hill which is very high, on the toppe whereof is a castle; and on the backe thereof, which as it goeth on waxeth more narrow, there are three enclosures of walles: The towne was on a sodaine abandoned, and the French men being quartered in it beganne to batter the first wall, wherein  hauing made a reasonable breach in diuers places, the French and Spaniards being come to the assault, those within it after a slight defence beganne to retire in such disorder, as the French and Spaniards hauing already entred the

first wall, did in skirmishing enter pell-mell with them, into the other two, andMonselesia with her Castle taken and ruyned then euen to the Castle, where the most part of them being slaine, the others retired into the Dongeon, where yeelding vpon discretion they were massacred by the Almans, who hauing not men to keepe that place, did race the Castle and burne the Towne.
This exploit being executed, the armies retired, albeit the Almains did incite the Lord of Chaumont to goe and beseege Treuiso, but he answered them, that if the Emperor had come against the Venetians, with his promised forces, it had beene an easie matter to haue done it, but that those who were ioyned with him, were brought to a small number, and not sufficient for such an enterprise, seeing  that within Treuiso, there were store of souldiors, and besides, the Venetians had greatly fortified it, and last of all, that there was no more victualls to be found, in the country.
During these exploits, a new commandement came to the Lord ofThe Lord of Chaumont with his forces returneth to the Dutchy of Milan. Chaumont, from France, to retire speedily with his army, into the Dutchy of Milan, leauing foure hundred Lances, and fifteene hundred Spanish foote-men, paid by the King to accompany the Almains, the which hee did, vnder command of the Lord of Perfi, and him-selfe speedily marched whether hee was sent for: For the Pope would neuer haue absolued the Venetians from the censures, nor practized the Swisses alliance, but onely to bring to passe, that which he had determined  in his minde, not onely to reintegrate diuers states to the Church, which hee sayd did belong vnto it, but like-wise to driue the French King forth of Italy; who not desiring to make warre on the Church, and wishing by all meanes to auoid the hatred thereof, did agree to make new conuentions with him. But the moreThe Popes discontent against the King. that the King drew neere to the Popes demandes, the farther of was the Pope from comming to any agreement, and seemed to bee displeased with nothing, but for that the King had taken the Duke of Ferrara into his protection, whome hee extreamely hated: where-vpon the King propounded diuers Articles to giue him content, but hee would not accept of any one. At the last he craued that he would absolutely quit the Dukes protection. The King replying, That in  so doing he should incurre great dishonor, he answered, That seing the King refused it, he would neither bee his friend, nor his enemy.
These were the outward behauiors of the Pope, but hee beganne secretly to treat of greater matters then against the Duke of Ferrara, seeing that hee had the Swisses on his side, and that the Venetians were on foote againe, and also becauseThe Popes secret practises. the King of Arragon was not sincerely conioyned with the French King; That the Emperors forces were weake, and for that hee was not out of hope to cause the King of England to stirre. The Pope then working very secretly, would haue Genoa to bee beseeged at one time, by sea and land; that twelue thousand Swisses should come downe into the Dutchy of Milan; that the Venetians  with all their forces should come into the field, to recouer the Citties held by the Emperor; and that his owne army should enter the Ferrarois, meaning afterward to cause it to march into the Dutchy of Milan, vpon the good successe of the Swisses enterprise.
In the meane time hee caused it cunningly to bee giuen forth, that the Swisses preparations and his owne, were but onely to assaile Ferrara on the sodaine.Genoa assured for the King. But the comming of Lodouico Fiesca to Genoa, for the King, with eight hundred men of the country, did assure the Citty, and brake all the Popes deseignes, with those of the Bandetti. On the other side the Popes army had entred Romagnia, vnder the command of the Duke of Vrbin, who hauing taken the townes of  Lugo, Bagnacauallo, and diuers other places on the hither side the Po, did encampe before the Castle of Lugo: but beeing aduertised that the Duke of Ferrara was comming thither with great forces, he on a sodaine raised his seege and

retired to Imola, leauing beehind them three peeces of ordnance for a prey to the enemy.
Alphonso then recouered all that which had bin taken from him in Romagnia, but he did not long hold it: for the Popes army being increased, it recouered with ease, the aboue named place, and the Castle of Lugo likewise, and soone after theThe Popes army taketh Modena. Citty of Modena, for which Duke Alphonso could not prouide: but the losse of the same towne was the cause, that hee speedily prouided for Regio, fearing the like mishap as had fortuned to Modena.
The Swisses on the other side, (the confederacy betwixt the French King, and them being expired, certaine Monthes before,) beeing vexed that the King had  denied their demands, had determined in an assembly held at Lucerna to rise against him. The Lord of Chaumont hauing notice of their determination, and being vncertaine which way they would enter, placed strong Gardes on Coma's side, tooke all boates forth of the lake, he brought victualls into strong places, and tooke away the Mil-stones from Mills. Besides, fearing least by Saint Bernards Mount, they might passe into Piedmont, hee had procured the Duke of Sauoy to deny them passage, and by the same Dukes consent, hee sent fiue hundred Lances to Yuree for that purpose. The Swisses being animated (as hath beene said) against the King, and paid by the Pope, sixe thousand of them without Artillery came by the way of Bellinsona, and hauing taken the bridge of Trese, which was forsaken by sixe hundred French foote-men, they came and encamped at Varesa, waiting for (as they said) the Bishop of Syon, with newSix thousand Swisses come to Varese against the king companies.
The Swisses comming did greatly trouble the French, because a great part of their forces was distributed for the gard of the strong towne of the Dutchy, and an other part thereof was ioyned with the Almains army against the Venetians: Yet neuerthelesse, the Lord of Chaumont hauing assembled, all the power hee could, came with fiue hundred Lances, and foure thousand foot-men into the plaine of Chastillon two Miles from Varesa. Foure thousand Swisses more came, and ioyned in that place with the former six thousand, and all of them together  sent to the Lord of Chaumont, to demand passage, saying that they were going for the Churches seruice, but it being refused them the fourth day after their arriuall, they all marched towards Chastillon, and in their march they Valliantly defended them*selues against the French army, who was still at their side, and skirmished with them in front, and in flanke, and they answered them in like manner, no disorder being seene among them.
After they had in this manner passed along, into diuors places, the Lord ofThe six thousand Swisses returne home into their contry for want of victualls and mony. Chaumont still attending on them, they came at last to the bridge of Trese, and from thence in troopes retired home into their country, being brought to the extremity of hunger, and want of mony, which inforced them to retire. If the  Popes deseigne had taken effect, which was to haue assailed the French, in diuers and sundry places at once, their affaires would haue succeeded badly, but the enterprise of Genoa, was long before the Swisses comming.
The Venetians also tarried longer, then they thought to haue done, who comming from Padua, recouered without any difficulty, Este, Monselesia, Montagnana,The Venetians recouer all the places neere to Padua which had bin taken by the French. Marostia, and Basciana, and passing forward, they entred the Vincentine Territory, the Almains being retired to Verona: So as in a very short space they recouered whatsoeuer they had lost the yeare before (Legnaga excepted,) and not satisfied here-with, they came and beseeged Verona, where lay three hundred Spanish Lances, a hundred as well Almains as Italians, and more then  foure hundred French Lances, fiue hundred foote-men and foure thousand Almains, vnder the command of the Prince of Anhalt, who not long before dyed*
The people of Verona not affecting the Almains, had taken armes, and thereinVerona besieged. consisted the Venetians chiefest hope, expecting when they within the citty would rise in their behalfe. The Venetian Army was of eight hundred men at Armes, three thousand light horse, the most of whom were Stradiots, and ten thousandThe number of the Venenetian Army. foot, with great numbers of husbandmen. They began with great fury to batter the citties walls, (notwithstanding that the townes artillery did greatly hurt them) and they did beat downe a great part of the wall, euen to the scarpe: yet neuerthelesse, it was more valiantly defended then assailed, wherevpon the Venetian Captaines being discouraged, perceiuing likewise that the people were quiet in the citty, they determined to raise their Campe, and made hast so to doe, vpon intelligence, that the Lord of Chaumont, (who after the Suisses departure, hauing notice of the danger wherein Verona was) marched thether to their reliefe.
The Venetians being retired to Saint Martins, fiue miles from Verona, marchedThe Venetians raise their Campe from before Verons. to Boniface, in regard of the Lord of Chaumonts comming. In the meane time, Vdislaus King of Hungary, beeing solicited by Maximillian and the French King, did at the same time call Petro Pascalic, Ambassador for the Signory in Hungary into his councell chamber, and told him that his meaning was to make warre vponThe King of Hungary summoneth the Venetian Ambassador. them, vnlesse they yeelded vp Slauonia vnto him, which did in times past belong vnto his crowne, and that he was resolued to haue it: That if the commonwealth would freely re-deliuer it, hee would for euer remaine their friend and confederate, otherwise hee would let them know how much better it were to yeeld vp in friendship, that which they could not keepe by force. The Ambassador vpon this demand beginning to excuse the Senate, was not suffered to speake, and all the fauour hee could get was, To say that hee would aduertise the Senate thereof, crauing time that hee might receiue an answer: But at the comming forth of the Councell, certaine of those who had beene there present, did in secret bid the Ambassador not to bee discouraged, and told him, that their King for want of meanes could not make warre vpon them, but that those threatnings were onely to content the French King and the Emperor, who requested it, and some Hungarian Lords, who for their owne particular ambition, incited him therevnto, the  which the successe of that businesse prooued afterward to be true.
Now to returne to the Venetian Armie which was retired to Saint Boniface,The Venetians take Azola. those of Treuiso tooke the towne of Azola by composition, whilest in the Frioull they proceeded with the vsuall cruelties and variations, in destroying buildings, and spoiling the countrey. The Marquis of Mantua was at the same time deliuered from his imprisonment by the Popes meanes, who did greatly affect him, meaning to make vse of him and his Estate in his warre against the FrenchThe Marquis of Mantua is set at liberty. King. Others say, that it was by the meanes of Bajazet Emperor of Turkes, who was a great friend to the Marquis, who caused the Bayliffe of the Venetian Marchants, trading at Pera, to promise that the Senate should* set him at liberty, the  which was speedily done, because they would not incense so mighty a Prince against them.
The Pope was againe desirous to make an attempt on the Citty of Genoa, promising to him selfe more then euer the alteration of that State: Wherevpon the Venetians, rather of necessity, then for any liking to his furious motions, did augmentEnterprise vpon Genoa. their sea Armie which lay at Ciuita*vecchia, with foure great ships, the like did the Pope, adding one Galeasse, with certaine other vessels to his owne. This fleet departing thence, wherein were fifteene light Galleys, three great Galleys, one Galeasse, and three ships of Biscay, went and shewed themselues before the hauen of Genoa. But the Citty being kept in such manner, as not any of the contrary  faction durst stirre, and the Ordnance of the tower of Codifa playing continually vpon them, they were constrained to retire: and beeing come to Portouenere, dispairing likewise of dooing any good there, it returned to Ciuita-vecchia, from whence the Venetian vessells departing home-wards by the Popes

consent, were assailed by a terible tempest, in which fiue Galleis were cast away,The Venetian fle^ sh^'t by a tempest. the residew being driuen vpon the coast of Barbary, did in the end come into the Venetians hauens much broken.
In this manner nothing fell out luckily for the Pope of all that he had enterprized against the French King: for no commotion arose in Genoa as hee had confidently promised to him-selfe; the Venetians also attempted in vaine to take Verona, and the Swisses, who had rather shewed then brandished their armes, returned, and went on no farther: and in Ferrara, by reason of the speedy aid of the French who were come thither ther was no likelihood of any danger Modena only taken by stealth, remained to him.
Yetneuerthelesse the Venetians alone tooke his part, because his enterprizes proceeded not from any particular interest, but from a sole and sincere desire of the liberty of Italy, but he could not hope much from them, by reason their treasure was exhausted, and them-selues oppressed with sondry difficulties. The French King beeing by so many experiences assured of the Popes bad meaning towards him, determined to strengthen him-selfe as much as he might with the Emperors friendship, and to passe in person the spring following into Italy, to make warre on the Venetians, or on the Pope, according as the state of his affaires should petmit.



The end of the eight Booke of the fourth Decade.




The Contents of the ninth Booke of the  fourth Decade.
WIth what boldnesse and resolution Pope Iulius marched against the Duke of Ferrara, and beeing not able to ouercome  him by temporall armes, he vsed spirituall; A Generall Councell published at Lions. A new Confederacy, as well offensiue as defensiue, betwixt the Emperor and the FrenchKing. How greatly the marche of the French Army toward Bolognia, did afright the Pope and all his Cardinals. The Lord of Chaumonts retreate into the Dutchy of Milan. The Duke of Ferrara defeateth the Venetians nauall Army. The Popes Army taketh the Citty of Concorda. Mirandolo taken by the Confederates. The King doth wholy resolue to make warre on the Pope. The  Death of the Lord of Chaumont, where vpon Triuulcio is made Generall of the Army. A great Earthquake at Venice, and in the Countrey neere adioyning. The Popes Army is defeated before the Bastida Geniuola. The French Kings discontent for that the Emperor consenteth to a peace with the Venetians. The King of Arragons secret practises against the French King. The Cardinall of Pauia flyes from Bolognia at the arriuall of the French. The flight of the Duke of Vrbin, Generall of the Popes Army. Death of the Cardinall of Pauia, slaine by the Duke of Vrbin. The French King greatly desireth  to bee at peace with the Pope. How the Venetians did still maintaine their forces and greatnesse. A new confederacy betwixt the Pope, the King of Arragon, and the Venetians. The Swisses come downe into the Dutchie of Milan. The Army of the Confederates before Bolognia, the which is releeued by Gaston of Foix. And lastly how the Confederates Army dislodgeth from before Bolognia.




The ninth Booke of the fourth Decade of the Historie of Uenice.
THe Pope continuing his displeasure against the Duke of Ferrara, omitted all other designes onely to pursue this: and to this end hee came to Bolognia, at the later end ofThe Popes great resolution against the Duke of Ferrara. September, by his presence to hasten matters, and to giue the greater authority to his affaires, resoluing to assaill Ferrara both by land and water, with all his owne forces, and those of the Venetians, who at his  request sent two armed fleetes against Ferrara, which being entred into the Po by the Fornaces, and by the hauen of Primara made great spoile on the Ferrara territory: the like did the Popes forces at the same time, and yet they came not neere to Ferrara, where besides the Dukes forces, were two hundred and fifty French lances, and the Popes army was not suffitient to assayle the Citty by land. For allbeit the Pope gaue pay for eight hundred men at Armes, six hundred light horse, and six thousand foote; the complete number of so many was greately wanting: as also for that by his command Marke Anthony Colonna, and Iohn Vittelli were gone with two hundred men at armes, and three hundred foote, for the gard of Modena. In regard whereof he requested, (seeing that the Venetians had in a manner recouered the country of Friull,) that part of their army might be brought on the Ferrarois. He did more-ouer expectThe Popes preparations against the citty of Ferrara. three hundred lances, which the King of Arragon was bound to send him, according to the articles of the inuestiture of the realme of Naples, making account vpon the arriuall of all these forces to assaile Ferrara for his part, and that the Venetians should doe the like for theirs; hee perswaded him-selfe that the people of the Citty would forth-with take armes in his behalfe against the Duke, and hee would not harken to those who told him, That it would not so fall out, in regard of the garrison within it, which was sufficient to defend the Citty, and to hinder the people (if they were so bent) from reuolting.
About the same time an intelligence, which the Venetians had on the CittyThe Venetians intelligence vpon Bressia discouered. of Bressia was discouered, the Author whereof Earle Iohn Maria of Martinenga was beheaded there.
Now the Pope perseuering in his hope, did promise to him-selfe though all his other forces should faile, to be able to take Ferrara with his owne, and the Venetian fleets, notwithstanding al the reasons giuen by his Captaines to the contrary; but he found himselfe to be deceiued, For the Duke comming forth of Ferrara, did assaill the Venetians fleete, which was entred by Primaria, and comming to Hadria with two Galleis, two Fusts, and with diuers small boates, hee did easily defeate it: then hee went to meet with the other, the which consisting onely of The Ferrarois defeateth two ^cetes of the Venetians. fustes, and other small vessells had entred by the fornaces, and was come to Puliselsa; which attempting to retire into the riuer Adice, by a chanell neere at hand, it could not by reason of the shallownesse of the water: where-vpon being assailed, and beaten with the enemies ordnance, those of the fleet not beeing able

to defend it were enforced to forsake it; and to vse meanes to saue them-sel^es and their ordnance. The Pope perceauing that his temporal armes, were not of force to execute his deseignes, made vse of spirituall, and did publickly excommunicate Alfonso of Este* and all those who were or should come to his aid, andThe Pope ex^ Alfonso of Este and all his adherents. namely the Lord of Chaumont, and all the cheefe persons of the French army.
The French King, who already vpon the Popes behauiour determined to call a generall councell against him, and had caused all the prelates of his Kingdome, to meete at Orleans and afterwards at Tours, hauing notice of his Ecclesiasticall censure, executed so rashly vpon his subiects, was of opinion in this assembly where he was present diuers times, that before hee would free him-selfe from his A Generall councel published at Lyons. obedience to send Ambassadors to him, to aduertise him of the articles concluded on by the French Clergy, against which if hee thought to except, he should be cited to the generall councell, which all Christian Princes had determined should bee assembled by a certaine day. According to this resolution, the Councell was published at Lyons, against the first day of March next ensuing.
Within a while after, the Bishop of Gurcia, sent from the Emperor arriued atThe Bishop of Gurcia commeth into France from the Emperor. Tours where his entertainment was sumptuous, which shewed how greatly his comming was desired: with whome the King continuing, to treat of matters which had already beene handled, at the first they seemed to bee very casie, but they were afterwards drawne forth at length, as well by reason that the  Emperors answers were very slow, as for the doubt they made of the King of Arragon: The Emperor and the French King thought it fit to bee assured of his intent, as well in regard of the continuation of the League of Cambray, as for that which was to be done with the Pope, if hee perseuered in the Venetians frindship, and in his couetuousnesse to purchace immediately the demaine of Ferrara to the Church. The Catholike King, hauing answered all these demandes, and his intent being fully knowne: the Bishop of Gurcia on the one side, in the name of theNew confederacy betwixt the Emperor and the French King* Emperor, and the French king on the other, did passe a new confederacy together, reseruing place for the Pope to enter into it, within two moneths after, and for the Catholike King, and the King of Hungary within foure. The King promised  to giue the Emperor a hundred thousand crownes, the one halfe to bee paid presently, and the other halfe at a time prefixed: and the Emperor promised to passe into Italy against the Venetians, at the spring time, with three thousand horse and ten thousand foote: and that then the King should send him, at his owne charge, twelue hundred horse, and eight thousand foote, with store of artillery, and certaine shipes by sea.
But during these treaties in France with the Bishoppe of Gurcia, the Lord of Chaumont hauing recouered Carpi, determined by the soliciting of the Bentiuoles, on a sodaine to assaile the citty of Bolognia, wherein the Pope and his whole Court lay, in regard of the faire occasion which was presented, there being  in the Citty but a few strange souldiours. In this determination hee set forward, and hauing taken Spilimberta, and Castelfranco hee came and lodged at Crespolana, ten miles from Bolognia, meaning the next day to shew himselfe before the gates. His comming being diuulged through the Citty, and that the BentiuolesThe French army marcheth toward Bolognia where the Pope lay. were with him, it was filled with confusion and tumult. The Cardinalls and Prelats not accustomed to the dangers of warre, came to the Pope, complayning for that hee had exposed the sea Apostolike and themselues to so greate danger, beseeching him to vse meanes to appease matters, by the mildest composition hee could. The Ambassadors of the Emperor, the Catholike King, and the King of England made the like request. Him-selfe alone in so great confusion and disorder, vncertaine of the peoples fidelity, and discontented for that the Venetians aid was so slow, did obstinately resist all their importunities. But beeing at last ouer-come by the prayers and entreaties of so many, he did consent to haue a messenger sent to the Lord of Chaumont to know of him whether

Iohn Francisco Pico Earle of Mirandola, might safely come vnto him from the Pope. The Lord of Chaumont being assured of the King his Maisters minde, who desired nothing more then to be at peace with the Pope, did freely condescend to the Earle of Mirandolas comming to him, who being arriued he gently heard, and sent him backe the same day to Bolognia, to signifie to the Pope the conditions, whereon he was contented to make an accord, who soone returned with an answere. The Pope hauing, contrary to his custome, patiently heard the articles propounded by the Lord of Chaumont, together with the entreaties of the CardinallsThe Earle of Mirandole sent from the Pope to the Lord of Chaumont. who besought him with incredible affection to compound howsoeuer, did greatly complaine, for that they propounded ouer hard conditions to him, and seeming greatly to doubt, hee spent that day without declaring, what his intent was. But the arriuall of Chiapin vitelli at Bolognia with six hundred light horse of the Venetians, with a squadron of Turkes whome they kept in pay, did encrease his hope.
The Lord of Chaumont came the day following with his whole army and quartered it at the bridge of Rene, three miles from Bolognia, whether the Ambassadors of the Emperor, and the Kings of England, and Arragon, came to see him, who returned diuers times the same day (and with them Albert Pico) towardThe Pope takes courage, at the comming of supplies. the Pope and the Lord of Chaumont. But the disposition of either of them was much changed: For the Pope had taken courage, perceiuing the people of  Bolognia freely to shew themselues in the Churches behalfe, and that besides these companies that were arriued, he expected the same day two hundred StradiotsThe Lord of Chaumont distrusts the victory. from the Venetians, Fabricio Colonna with two hundred light horse, and certaine Spanish men at Armes. On the contrary, the Lord of Chaumont beganne to distrust the getting of the victory, perceauing that the people did not rise in fauour of the Bentiuoles, as they had promised him, and that he began to wantThe Lord of Chaumont retireth from Bolognia. victualls, the which was likely to grow greater euery day: The Pope by meanes here of beginning againe his vsuall braues, answered, vpon new conditions of peace which were propounded, That there was no meanes to come to an agreement, vnlesse the French Kinge would be bound wholy to giue ouer the defence of Ferrara; where-vpon the whole businesse remaining imperfect, the Lord of Chaumont departed thence, as wel by reason of the want of victualls which were greatly diminished, as because he dispaired of doing any good, either by armes or by treaties of peace, and returned to Castel-Franco, and the next day to Rubiero, making shew that hee did it to giue the Pope time to thinke on what he had propounded, and for him selfe to vnderstand the Kings pleasure. The Pope being extreamely incensed against the king, so soone as the Lord of Chaumont was departed, complained of the king, and told the Ambassadors, that he would no more giueThe Pope returneth to his former wr^h. eare to peace, vnlesse Ferrara were first of all yeelded to him, where-vpon he leuied  new forces, and incited the Venetians to send part of their forces to Modena, to ioyne with his, and to molest Ferrara with the other part, promising to himselfe in a short space to take Regio, Rubiera and Ferrara. If the forces of the Pope, the Venetians, and the Spanish lances vnited together had forth with marched against the French, it was cerrenly thought that the Lord of Chaumont would haue forsaken Regio, but their delay encoraged him, and caused him to leuie new companies of foote in sted of those whome hee had cassed at his discamping from before Bolognia. Whilest the Popes army, and that of his associates did temporiseThe Duke of Ferrara assaileth the Uenetians naual Army. neere to Modena, the Duke of Ferrara with the French companies, which were commanded by the Lord Castillon, encamped on the Po, iust opposite to the Venetian  companies who lay on the farther side of the riuer; they making a retreate, were assailed by diuers boates of Ferrara and by the Dukes ordnance, which sanke eight of their vessells, and the residew hardly escaped. On the other side, the PopesThe Popes army taketh Sa^suala. army, commanded by Fabricio Colonna in the absence of the Marquis of Mantua, did beseege Sassuola the which being beaten with the artillery was taken by assault

and the Castle within a while after. Sassuola beeing taken, the Pope would haue Montechia, a very strong place, to be beseeged, but Fabricio Collonna would not do it, saying; that his King had expresly forbidden him to meddle with any thing that did belong to the Empire.
The Lord of Chaumont, according to the meaning of the King his maister, hauing placed a strong garrison in Rhegio, went to Parma resoluing to temporise till the spring. The Pope beeing impatient to see his deseignes not executed, notwithstandingThe Popes proposition to the Captains of his Army. the sharpnesse of the season, fent for all his Captaines to Bolognia, and propounded to them the seege of Ferrara, and notwithstanding their generall dislike of the matter (the Venetians excepted) they at last resolued, (to  please him) first to assaile Mirandola, thereby to take from the French al means of hindering the seege of Ferara afterward, and the releeuing thereof: and by the same meanes to beseege as they went along, the Citty of Concorda, which heldConcorda taken by the Popes Amy. for the King. This being determined was likewise executed: for beeing come before Concorda, they forthwith tooke it by force, and the castle by composition: then they drew neere to Mirandola, whether the Pope came in person, thinking that his soldiers went slowly to worke, and that his presence would aduance the businesse, preferring the fury and heate of his spirit before all other respects: albeit the Cardinalls did earnestly entreat him not to go thither, and that the Venetians  who were his greatest fauorits, did blame him for it. In regard of his presence, complaints, promises and threatenings, all thinges were sett foreward more then otherwise they would haue beene; and yet neuerthelesse the sharpnes of the weather, and many other difficulties oppugning it, no great matter was performed.The Cause of the Kings loosing of Mirandola.
Those within Mirandola did brauely defend it (who were commanded by Alexander Triuuicio seconded by foure hundred stranger footmen) vpon hope that they should be releeued, but the contention betwixt the Lord of Chaumont, and Iohn Iacamo Triuulcio was cause of the losse of the place: for the Lord of Chaumont preferring his owne passion before the Kings proffit, was glad that the Nephewes of Triuulcio might be depriued of Mirandola: and therefore he excused  his sending of releefe by reason of the difficulty to bring ordnance thither in so cold a season, by so bad waies, and through such deep snow as the like had not beene seene of a long time before, which were things greatly to be considered.
The Pope on the contrary omitted nothing for the obtaining of the victory* wherby those within the towne beeing out of hope to be releeued, and fearing that they should not be able to resist the first assault, in regard of the great breachThose of Mirandola yeeld, vpon s^fety of their liues and goods. which the enemies ordnance had made, sent messengers to the Pope, to certefie him that they would yeeld, so their liues and goods might be spared: albeit the Pope would not at first tye himselfe to saue the soldiers liues, yet neuerthelesse he did at last agree to it at the earnest entreatie of his followers and the inhabitants  that redeemed the sack of their towne which had been promised to the soldiers the Castle in like manner yeelded. The Pope by the taking of Mirandola, hoping as sodenly to get Ferrara, would no more giue eare to any talke of peace, vnlesse first of all Ferrara were yeelded to him. The French King on the other side, hauing notice of the losse of Mirandola, and considering how greatly it did blemish his reputation, perceiuing likewise that the Pope continued in his displeasure against him, resolued to assaile him: therefore he sent word to the Lord of Chaumont not only to defend Fertara, but to offend the Churches lands vpon the first occasion that should be offered: For which, the Lord of Chaumont making  preparation, and hauing assembled his whole army, he made the Pope to alter his minde, who by the aduice of his Captaines went back to Bolognia, and from thence within a while after to Rauenna.
The French Army being ready to march, the Captaines consulted on what place to make their first attempt: some were of opinion to goe directly,

to assaile the enemies in their trenches, hoping by force of armes and by the sury of the artillery, easily to enforce them to retire, and by that meanes to free Ferrara from all danger. Others were of a contrary opinion, and the cheefe of those was Triuulcio, who was newely come from France, who hauing declared the dangerThe different opinions of the French Captaines. of assailing the enemies army in their fortification, councelled them to march towards Modena, or Bolognia, hoping if the enemies did remooue, for feare of losing any of those townes, to fight with them, and to obtaine the victory: and if they did not remooue, they might then with ease take the one or other of them.
This was Triuulcio his opinion, but it was not followed, the better thereby  to diminish his authority, in regard of the hatred wich the Lord of Chaumont did beare him: as also because that Alfonso of Este, did vrge them to follow the former opinion, for feare that if the French should goe farre from thence, the enemies might enter into the Pollesin of Ferrara, a matter which would greatly haue augmented the Citties disease. But the Lord of Chaumont hauing vnderstood by the way, the great difficulty which was made to come to Finall where the enemies were encamped, by reason of the waters which ouer-flowed the country neere adioyning, he beganne greatly to doubt, for the cleering whereof, notwithstanding that Alphonso did perswade him to the contrary, he assembled the councell, where Triuulcio being entreated openly to deliuer what he thought thereof, spake in this manner.
I Did yesterday hold my peace, because I haue often-times knowne by experience,Triuulcio his oration in defence of his opinion. that my councell hath beene lighlty esteemed, the which if it had beene followed at the beginning, wee should not at this present be where wee are, nor haue lost so many daies vainely, which might haue beene spent with more profit, and I should now continew in the same opinion to bee silent, if I were not spur'de forward by the impotance of the matter, in regard wee now stand on termes, to commit to the most vncertaine hazard of one day, this army, the state of the Duke of Ferrara, and the Dutchy of Milan, which is to great a cast except wee reserue some-what to play afterwards. Besides, that which prouoketh mee to  speake, is, for that as I imagine, the Lord of Chaumont desireth that I should bee the first to councell that which he already beginneth to tast and thinke well of: Which is no new thing with me, because I haue heretofore knowne my councels to be lesse contemned, when it is needfull to retract some-what which peraduenture hath not beene maturely determined, then when the first determinations are to bee made. We treat of going to fight with the enemy, and I haue alwaies obserued that great Captaines, haue held for a firme ground, (the which I haue like-wise knowne by experience,) that a man neuer ought to hazard the fortune of a battaill, vnlesse he be inuited therevnto by some great aduantage, or enforced by vrgent necessity: for it is according to the reason of warre, that it belongeth  to the enemies who are the assaillants, and who are in the field for the conquest of Ferrara, to seeke to assaill vs; and our Captaines whose part is to defend, ought not to attempt to assaill them, contrary to all rules of Martiall discipline. But let vs consider what aduantage wee haue, or what necessity inforceth vs to it. It seemeth vnto me, and I doe not altogeter deceiue my selfe, that it is a matter very apparent, that wee cannot do what the Duke of Ferrara propoundeth, but with our great disaduantage, because we cannot goe to that place, but by a causey and by a very narrow and bad way, where all our forces cannot display them-selues, and where the enemies may very well with small forces resist a greater number. Wee must march vpon the causie  one horse after another, and wee must bring the artillery, carriage, wagons and bridges ouer this narrow causie. And who is it that knowes not that in a straight and foule way euery peece of ordnance, euery waggon that shall sticke fast

in the mire, will for a large houres space cause the whole army to make a stand? And that being pestred with so many incombrances euery contrary accident, will easily disorder vs? The enemies are driely lodged, furnished with victuals and forage; we shal in a manner encampe in the open ayre, forrage is to be brought after vs, and we shall not be able but with great labour, to bring the one halfe of that we shall need: We must not referre our selues to that which ingeners saie, and to husbandmen which know the Countrey, Because warres are managed by soldiers armes, and by Captaines Councels: They are made by fighting in the field, and not by proiects which those that are ignorant of warres do figure forth in paper, or describe with their fingers, or with a stick in the dust. As for my selfe  I doe not presuppose that the enemies areso weake, no^ their affaires in such disorder; nor that in their lodging and fortification they haue had so smal skill as not to helpe themselues by the opportunity of the waters, and sytuations, as I can promise to my selfe, that so soone as we shal be com to the place whether we make account to go, (their we could with ease ariue ther) that it lyeth in our power to assaile them, Sundry difficulties may enforce vs to tary ther two or thre daies, and if there were none other let, the snow and rayne falling in so bad a season, will stay vs* And besides, how should we prouide victuals and forage, if it should fall out that we were to carry there? And though it were in our power to assaile them, who is he that can so easily promise to himselfe the victory? Who is it which considereth  not how dangerous a matter it is to deale with enemies that are strongly encamped, and to haue to doe at one time with them, and with the discomodities of the contries situation. Vnlesse we can be able on a sodaine to to enforce them thence, we our selues shall be constrained to returne back. And how hard a matter will it be, in a country which is wholly our enemie, and where euery small mishap will prooue very great. Besides, I see small reason, to put the Kings whole state in such precipitate danger, seeing we are chiefly in action for no other matter but for to releeue the Citty of Ferrara, of which, if we furnish it with a stronger garrison we may be assured (yea although we should breake vp out army); for it is thought to be so much consumed, as if the enemies waight on ita  little longer, it is impossible but it wil shortly fall of it selfe. Is it not yet in our power to turne back, a most mighty remedy in warre, whereby without hazarding any one horse, we will enforce them to depart from before Ferrara? I haue euer councelled, and now councell more then euer, to turne towards Modena or Bolognia keeping the broad way, and to fortefie Ferrara for a few dayes, (for it will not be long) with all thinges necessary. Now in mine opinion it is best to go forthwith to Modena, wherevnto the Cardinall of Este doth prouoke vs, who is a personage of great state, in which Towne he doth assure vs to haue intelligence, and that we may easily take it, For by winning a place of so great importance, the enemies shal be enforced to retire on a sodaine towards Bolognia. And although  we should not take Modena, yet the feare which would possesse the enemies, as wel for that as for the state of Bolognia, will constrayne them to doe the like, as without al doubt they would long ere this haue done, if at the first this oppinion had beene followed. The great reasons of this wise Captaine was approoued by al men, by meanes wherof the Lord of Chaumont hauing strongly man'dThe French Army marcheth towards Modena. Ferrara with soldiers for her safety, held on his way towards Carpy, from thence to march to Modena.
But the Pope by the king of Arragons councell hauing restored it to the Emperour, to auoid so many discontents and to quiet his mind which was displeased for that the Pope had seased on it, it being euer accounted a Citty of the iurisdiction  of the Empire, was cause that the Lord of Chaumont being certefied of this restauration, desisted from his enterprise: who within a while after falling sick was brought to Corregia, where fifteene dayes after he dyed, hauing before his death very deuoutly adknowledged the faults which he had committed against

the Church, and besought the Pope to giue him absolution, the which hee freely graunted.
By his death Iohn Iames Triuulce, gouerned the Army because hee was one of the foure Marshalls of France, vnto whome (the Generall of the Army beeing dead,) the gouernment belongeth, by the customes of France, vntill the King hath other-wised disposed thereof.
There happened at the same time a great Earth-quake in Venice, wherebyA great earthquake at Venice. part of the walls of the Ducall pallace fel downe, with the Marble statues in Saint Markes Church, which had beene set vp for the beautifing of the building, the st^ples of Churches were shaken, and the Bells range of them-selues: The waters  of the canal^ did swell, diuers houses and chimneis fell downe, wherewith infinite numbers of people were slaine, sundry women with child dyed; But Gods pleasure was that it lasted not long, wherevpon the Patriarks commanded prayers to be made ouer all the Citty, with fasting for three daies space, with bread and water. The like Earth-quake happened soone after at Padua, Treuiso, Vdina, and in other places and territories belonging to the common wealth.
Now Tri^ulcio commanding the Army, returned with all his forces to S^rmidi, to goe to releeue the Bastid Geniuola, which the Popes Army beseeged,The Popes forces defeated before the Bastid Geniuola. and whether the Venetian fleete was going. But he went on no farther, hauing notice in that place, that the Duke of Ferrara, with the Lord Chastillon, and the French forces, were gone forth with great numbers of soldiours, and had defeated the enemies, whome they found in disorder, and taken their enseignes and Artillery.
During these warlike exploits, the deseignes of the Princes were sundry, and vncertaine, especially those of the Emperor, who being by nature variable, andThe EmperorMaximillian inclineth to peace. inconstant, and solicited by the Kings of Arragon, an enemy to the French name, and iealous of the French Kings greatnesse, determined to listen to peace, notwithstanding that he had concluded before with the French King, by meanes of the Bishoppe of Gurcia, to make warre withall his might on the Venetians, at the spring: and to this end wrot at one time to the Pope, and the French King, that he was resolued to send the Bishop of Gurcia to Mantua, to treate of an vniuersall peace, requesting them to send their Ambassadors thether likewise with full and ample power: hee wrot nothing to the Venetians, knowing that they would doe what-so-euer pleased the Pope, whose authority they were enforced to follow.
This aduice pleased the Pope, vpon hope to reconcile the Venetians to him, and to disunite them from the French King, whereat he cheefely aimed. But the KingThe King displeased with this new deter mination. was not contented with such an vnhoped for determination, as well for feare of the determination of matters concluded with him: as also for the doubt he had, that the Pope thorow faire promises to aide him in the conquest of the Dutchy of Milan, and to giue a Cardialls Hat to the Bishoppe of Gurcia, might separare him from his party: He was well assured, that it was the practises of the King ofThe practises of the King of Arragons Abassador. Arragon, and kn^w very well that his Ambassador with the Emperor had labored, and did openly labour, for the agreement betwixt the Emperor and the Venetians; and did vse diuers other practizes to contradict his deseignes, and among others, did hotly oppose him-selfe against the conuocation of a generall councell vnder collour of curtesie, and caused the King his Maister to bee earnest with him to make peace with the Pope, making in a manner a silent protestation to take Armes in the Popes behalfe if hee did not agree  with him.
The French King dissembling all these dealings, because hee would giue the Emperour no cause of discontent, resolued to send the Bishoppe ofThe King sendeth the Bishop of Paris to Mant^. Paris to Mant^; and in the meane time aduertised Iohn Iames Tri^lce,

that his pleasure was to haue him to command the army, but that he should not assaile the Churches state, till the Bishop of Gurcia were arriued. Triuulcio vpon this command turned his forces against the Venetians, and came to Stellata; then passing on farther, he surprized certaine Venetian cauallery, and sentGaston of Foix his incursions. Gaston of Foix son to a sister of the kings, being yet very yong, with a hundred men at armes, foure hundred light horse, and fiue hundred foot to scoure euen to the enemies barriers: who did put those that kept them to flight and made them to retire to a strong place beyond the channel.
In the meane space the Bishop of Gurcia came to Mantua, but later then hee was expected, where within a while after the Bishop of Paris arriued. The Pope  entreated the Bishop of Gurcia to come and visit him, hoping by his presence, and authority, and by faire promises to winne him. The Bishop after diuers difficulties propounded and wel debated on, being solicited by the king of Arragons Ambassadors, consented therevnto, on condition that the Bishop of Paris should stay at Parma, and expect what would fall out by his iourney.
The Bishop of Gurcia arriuing at Bolognia, whether the Pope was of purposeThe Popes great entertainment giuen to the Bishop of Gurcia at Bolognia. come to receiue him, there was so great honour done vnto him, as a King could not be entertained with greater magnificence: the Venetians Ambassador neere to the Pope, went to the city gates to meet him, vsing signes of very great submission: but the Bishop turning from him with merueilous pride and disdaine shewed  great discontent, because that ^epresenting the enemies of the Emperour his master* he had beene so bould as to come before him. That being done, he went with great pompe to the Consistory, where the Pope, accompanied by all the Cardinals, staied for him; And hauing breefly declared the causes of his comming into Italy he returned to his lodging. The next day with great arrogancy, he conferred of diuers matters with the Pope, and especially, that if the Venetians did mean to haue peace with the Emperor, it behooued them in any case to restore whatsoeuer they deteined which did belong to the Empire.
Yet neuerthelesse they beganne after to treat of agreement betwixt the EmperourSpeech of agreement betwixt the Emperor and the Venetians. and the Venetians, where at the first diuers difficulties were made on both  sides: at the last after long disputation, each party cutting off some peeces of the hard conditions propounded by them, it was thought that by the mediation of the King of Arragons Ambassadors, they would come to an agreement. But so soone as they beganne to speake of reconciling the Pope to the French King, betwixt whom appeared none other contention but concerning the Duke ofThe Pope breakes off the treaty. Ferrara, and that the Bishop of Gurcia went to the Pope to make an end thereof, (because without that, the Emperour would conclude nothing) the Pope did sodainely interrupt him, requesting him to hold on with the Venetians, and not to talke of the affaires of Ferrara, being in a manner desirous to incite the Emperor  against the French: whereupon the Bishop of Gurcia tooke his leaue, and without effecting any thing returned from whence he came.
Triuulcio perceiuing the departure of the Bishop of Gurcia and by that meanes(...) ^keth Concordia* all hope of peace being lost, came into the field, and beseeged Concordia which he tooke the same day, and then marched towards Bomport a village seated on the Riuer Panare, that he might be nere the enemies, to the end that by cutting off their victuals he might enforce them to dislodge, or to fight forth of their campe. Entring into the country of Modena, he vnderstood that Iohn Paul Manfron was with three hundred light horse of the Venetians at Massa nere to Finall; he sent Gaston de Foix thither with three hundred foot and fiue hundred horse, who found Iohn Paul Manfron at a bridge in order of battaile, to stoppe his passage, but being Iohn Paul Manfron taken prisoner by Gaston of Foix. forsaken by his owne souldiers hee was taken prisoner by the French, with some others.
Triuulcio found meanes to passe the Channell to assaile the enemies who durst not tarry his comming. The Channell being passed, he foorded Panare without,

impediment in a very broad place, and where the water is not deepe, and marched towards Plumacia, three miles off from the enemies army, which was the cause that Castel-franco yeelded to him. He was there in great doubt what to doe: for on the one side he would willingly haue assailed Bolognia, if he had beene certaine that the people would haue taken armes in the Bentiuoles behalfe: on theTriuulcio draweth neere to Bolognia. other side he feared, if he should come thither, vpon hope only of a popular commotion, to be enforced forth-with to depart thence as the Lord of Chaumont had done to his great disgrace. At the last he determined to tempt Fortune, and to try by drawing neere to Bolognia, if the particular intelligences of the Bentiuoles might stand him in any stead, and came and incamped at the bridge of Laina, fiue  miles from Bolognia.
The Pope so soone as the Bishop of Gurcia was departed, and that he vnderstood that Triuulcio marched with his army, left Bolonia, determining to goe to his owne army, by his presence to induce the captaines to fight, wherevnto he could not dispose them neither by letters nor messages, but being halfe way on his iourney, he came backe againe the day following, resoluing to goe to Rauenna. Yet neuerthelesse before his departure, he was desirous to make some small exhortation to the Bologneses, whom he sent for to come and speake with him: andThe Popes exhortation to the Bolognois. after he had declared vnto them how that by the benefit of the Sea Apostolike, and by his means they were freed fro^ greeuous tirany, he requested them with greater  seruensie then eloquence to continue faithfull vnto him, and to shew their generousnesse by valliantly defending themselues, and by that meanes to oblige to themselues and the Sea Apostolike, both himselfe, and all the Popes which should succeed him.
To this exhortation they answered: that they were not ignorant how much theThe answer of the Balognois to the Pope. city was bound vnto him in particular for hauing driuen thence the tyrants, and therefore they were resolued to spend all their goo^s, to hazard the honour and safety of their wiues and children, and to lose their owne liues, before they would quit his party or that of the Sea Apostolike.
The Pope on this assurance departed from Bolognia, leauing the Cardinall of Pauia there, and went to Rauenna: but so soone as he was on his way and that Triuulcio was come to the bridge of Laina, the Bolognois were troubled withSundry thoughts of the Bolognois. sundry thoughts: some of them desired the returne of the Bentiuoles, others on the contrary, who shewed themselues their enemies, did fauour the Churches signory: so as all the people were in armes, some for one side and some for an other. The Cardinall being amazed thereat, did attempt for his owne assurance to draw captaine Ramassotta into the city with a thousand foot (for in all that great and populous city there were but two hundred light horse, and two thousand foot)The flight of the Cardinal of Pauia. but the people would not suffer it: wherevpon the Cardinall in despaire forsooke  the palace by stealth in the night, in disguised habit, and came to the Citadell and from thence attended by a hundred horse, he tooke his way towards Imola.
The Legats flight being knowne, the whole city begunne to rise, which the faction of the Bentiuoles perceiuing, they would not loose so faire an occasion, but ranne forthwith to the gates which were most commodious for the FrenchThe Bentiuolcs with the French, are in Bolognia. campe, and brake them open, then they sent for the Bentiuoles, who came forthwith with a troupe of French horse. The Duke of Vrbin, Generall of the Churches army, hauing had some inckling of the Legats flight, did in great hast dislodgeThe flight of the Duke of Vrbin. with his whole army, which was neere him: whereof Triuulcio hauing notice, came to follow the run-awaies, and meeting with Raphael de Passi, who for a while  made head, he fought with him and tooke him prisoner.
The Venetians companies with those of Ramassotta beeing lodged on the mou^t, hauing intelligence of the Duke of Vrbins flight did escape by the way of the mountaines into Romagnia, not without great losse. The French wonne in this victory, obtained without fight, fifteene peeces of great ordnance, with diuers

small ones as well of the Popes as of the Venetians, with a great part of the Churches bagage, and in a manner all that of the Venetians, and more then a hundred and fifty of their men at armes were stripped. There was not any one slaine in Bolognia, nor no violence offered, diuers only of the Cardinals followers were takenIniury offered to the opes statue in Bolognia. in the palace, from whom he had concealed his departure, and the Popes statue was dragged by the people in great derision thorow the market-place. Triuulcio after the taking of Bolognia came to the Borrough of Saint Peter, to attend there before he went on any further the French Kings pleasure.
The Senate hauing notice of this rout sent word to the Prouidator Gritti, who determined to goe and assaile Legnaga with his army, to desist from his enterprize,In what manner the Uenetians prouided for their Cities of the firme land. seeing their affaires had so bad successe at Bolognia, and that he should haue a care to bring the artillery from the bankes of the Riuer Po, and to send it to Padua, and if that the French made preparation to execute any enterprise, that he should also retire for feare of being surprized.
The officers of Padua and Treuiso were likewise commanded to hasten the fortifications already begunne in their cities. And not satisfied there with, they chose Cristofero Mora for superintendent of those fortifications, who speedily went thither and brought with him as many foot-men as could be gathered together in Venice, for feare least the French waxing proud for this victory should crosse the Po, and make incursions on the Paduans confines, to the end that if they did  surprize any place, they might speedily recouer it againe. They wrot likewise to Donato, their Ambassadour with the Pope, what the Senate had determined, and commanded him to entreat the Pope from them not to trouble himselfe for the losse of his army, for the common-wealth would neuer faile him, but ranne the same fortune which he did. Wherevnto the Pope answering, said, that hee did greatly ioy to see the Venetians magnanimous constancy, and that it alone had much more encreased his courage against the French, and had infinitely comforted him.
In this meane time the Cardinall of Pauia arriued at Rauenna, who fled from Bolognia (as hath beene said) and hauing obtained audience of the Pope to purge The Cardinall of Pauia performeth bad offices in the duke of Vrbins be^alse. himselfe of accusations made against him, laid the whole blame of the losse of Bolognia on the Duke of Vrbin, as on a young man insufficient and small experienced in martiall matters. The Duke hauing notice of the bad offices which the Cardinall performed in his behalfe to the Pope his vncle, was desirous to come and kisse his feete, and to cleere himselfe of those imputations. But being come into the Popes presence, he found him so transported with choller, as he would not suffer him to speake, but sent him away with sharpe and iniurious speeches. The Duke perceiuing himselfe to be disgraced by the Cardinals meanes, resolued on reuenge. And therevpon going towards his house to speake with him hauing no great traine, he met him in the street riding on his Mule being attended The Cardinall of Pauia slaiue by the Duke of Vrbin. on by the horsemen of his guard, with Guido Vaino his brother in law, riding to the Popes palace, the Duke drew nere vnto him, all men giuing him place in signe of reuerence, where with his owne hand hee slew him with a poinard, which being done he went to his owne lodging, leapt on horse-backe, and retired himself to Vrbin.
The Pope vpon the brute of the Cardinals death, beganne extreamely to greeue and lament, as well for that he had lost a Cardinall whom he loued decrely, as also because so high a dignity had beene violated in a manner before his face and by his owne Nephew, wherevpon he determined to stay no longer there, but to returne to Rome. Being departed from Rauenna he vnderstood by the way  that sundry libels had beene set vp on the publike places of Modena and Bolognia,Libels set vp in diuers places against the Pope. by which notice was giuen him of the conuocation of the Generall Councell in the city of Pisa, whether hee was cited to appeare in person, because hee was accounted vnfit to gouerne the Papacy, being Author of all the warres. The Pope

being come to Rome, did forthwith excommunicate the Bolognois, vnlesse they did returne to the obedience of the Sea Apostolike.
Within a while after, there happened a great tempest, with haile of such vnmeasurable bignesse, as the like had neuer beene seene at Bolognia, which did spoile and beate downe the fruites of the territory neere adioyning, the common people thought that it was a diuine punishment, by reason of the Popes censure. Now al be-it it was in the French Kings power, after this victory to haue takenThe French King^ great desire to bee at peace with the Pope. Rome, the Popes forces being greatly weakened and dispersed, and those of the Venetians much more, he neuerthelesse commanded Triuulcio, that leauing Bolognia to the gard of the Bentiuoles, he should with his army returne speedily into the  Dutchy of Milan; thinking that the Pope being freed from the suspition which he had causelesse conceiued of him, would be drawne to desire peace, the treaty whereof, had neuer yet beene wholy broken off.
But so soone as the Pope perceiued the army to be re-called into the Dutchy of Milan, he tooke courage, and propounded by the Scottish Ambassador whom for that purpose he had sent to the French King at his departure from Bolognia very hard and greeuous conditions of peace, the which neuerthelesse the King, for the great desire he had to be at peace with him, was content to accept of, if the Pope vpon his returne to Rome had not changed his minde thorow the perswasion of the King of Arragon. For then he made answere that he would haue  no peace, vnlesse the Venetians would make an accord with the Emperor, adding diuers other excessiue demands, which did so greatly mooue the Kings spirit, as he determined to hinder his recouery of Bolognia, the which he tooke into his owne protection with the Bentiuoles likewise, and sent foure hundred Launces thither. Then because he would still continue in his alliance with the Emperor, he commanded that the number of souldiers granted to the bishop of Gurcia should goe from the Dutchy of Milan to the succour of the Emperors lands vnder the command of the Lord de la Palisse.
The Emperour had a great desire to make warre on the Venetians, but considering the great preparations which he was to make, especially for the taking of  Padua, without which he knew he could doe no great matter, he was in a mannerThe Emperors su^dry thoughts. ready to agree with them, so as being tossed vp and downe by diuers thoughts he spent the time in vaine, without executing any enterprize, promising from day to day to come in person into Italy, or to send his forces thither.
The Venetians in the meane time finding themselues to weake to take Verona, and being encamped betwixt Soaua, and Loniga, they burnt in a night a great part of the Veronois. But hauing intelligence of the comming of the Lord of La Palisse with twelue hundred Launces and eight thousand foot, they retired into a stronge place towards Legnaga and Vincenza, from whence likewise they dislodged,The Venetian army retireth to Padua and Treuiso. and put themselues into Padua and Treuiso, for the defence of which  cities, diuers Venetian yong gentlemen came thether from Venice.
The French army tarried diuers daies at the bridge of Barbarana, expecting the Emperours comming or his resolution, who being come betwixt Trent and Rouero, being irresolute, after his wonted manner, what to doe, after he had giuen audience to the Venetian Ambassadours, with whom he daily conferred, he solicited the Lord of La Palisse to goe and take the Pace of Castel-nouo which is beneath Escalla towards the Friul, to make his comming downe more easie on that side. The which the Lord La Palisse did brauely execute, and then retired to Escalla. But the Emperor hauing altered his determinatio^ in stead of enuading what the Venetians held on the firme land, and going to beseege Rome, retired The Emperour changing his minde goeth back to Trent. to Trent, determining to go no more to the army, and commanded the Asmains to enter into the Friul, where they took Vdina with the whole Prouince, the^ they returned to ioyne with the Lord of La Palisse, who lay within fiue miles of Treuiso, the which the Emperor would haue to be assaulted, but being well sortified on

euery side, they found it most expedient speedily to retire the which they did. Wherevpon the Lord of La Palisse did soone after returne into the Dutchy ofThe Kings forces in the Dutchy of Milan. Milan by his Kings command, in regard of the Swisses new stirres and confederacies which did dayly encrease. The Venetian Stradio^s did follow him at the heeles, hoping to endamage him at his passage ouer the Brente and the Adissa, but he found meanes safely to crosse them. His departure was cause that Iohn Paul Baillon, Generall to the Venetians, by the death of Luke Malueze did recouer all that they had lost the same Summet, as well nere to Vincenza, as in Friul (Gradisca excepted.)
In these kindes of warlike exploits was that Summer spent, to the Emperours  great disgrace, and to the encrease of the Venetians reputation, who notwithstandingThe Venetians do^ stil maintaine their (...) and greatnesse. the Emperours and the French Kings armies against them for the space of two yeeres, did in the end still retaine their owne forces and signories, and al-be-it that it was directly against the Emperour, it was neuerthelesse much more hurtfull to the French King. For the Emperour, by reason he wanted aide, perceiuing himselfe to weake to obtaine the desired victory, did willingly harken to those who perswaded him to be friends with the Venetians, so as already men beganne to perceiue, that new deseignes were begotten in his minde.
The Pope in the meane time hauing made shew that he would come to an agreementConfederacy betwixt the Pope, the king of Arragon, and the Venetians. with the French King, did at last declare himselfe openly against him, and made a confederacy with the Catholike King and the Venetians to preserue (as he said) the vnion of the Church, to root out the Conuenticle (for so he termed it) of Pisa, and to recouer the city of Bolognia, with all the other townes which mediately or immediatly did belong to the Church, therein comprehending the city of Ferrara* that they would attempt with a mighty army to driue all those out of Italy who should oppugne it; leauing place to the Emperor to enter if he pleased into this confederacy, being desirous to disunite him from the French King.
Don Raymond de Cardona borne in Cattalognia and at that time viceroy ofThe number of the confederates army. Naples was made Generall of their army, who by their agreement was to haue  two thousand foure hundred men at armes, two thousand fiue hundred light horse, and foure and twenty thousand foote, namely for the Popes part foure hundred men at armes, fiue hundred light*horse, and sixe thousand foot, from the Senate of Venice, eight hundred men at armes, a thousand light horse, and eight thousand foot, and from the King of Arragon, twelue hundred men at armes, a thousand light* horse and tenne thousand foot. This confederacy was made vnder collour to free Italy from the Barbarians; a very speciall title which all men interpreted according to their iudgement and passion.
Gaston of Foix was made viceroy in the Dutchy of Milan and in the army, whoGaston of Foix Lieutenant general for the King in the Dutchy of Milan. hauing intelligence of the Swisses preparations for their comming downe, by  meanes of the Pope and his confederates into the Dutchy of Milan, caused all the victuals of the Dutchy to be shut vp in the fortes and castles, and placed strong Garrison in the neighbour cities, hoping that the men at armes would be able to make head against them in the plaines, and by that meanes soone enforce them to returne, if they should come into the field. The Swisses neuerthelesse were not daunted with these difficulties. But being come downe to Varesa, their number did daily increase, bringing with them seuen field peeces, and diuers great Harquebuzes carried on horse-backe, with some prouision of victuals.The Swisses defie Gaston of Foix. They sent a trumpet from Varesa to defie the Kings Lieutenant, who only to keepe victuals from them, was come to Assaron, a place thirteene miles distant from  Milan. From Varesa they came to Galera, being tenne thousand in number, and Gaston of Foix did put himselfe into Legnana, foure miles from Galera.The Swisses come down into the Dutchy of Milan.
Then being increased to the number of sixteene thousand, they came to Busti, where a hundred French men at armes lay in Garrison, who hardly escaped from

them, loosing their baggage and some of their horses: by meanes whereof the French, which still retired as the Swisses aduanced, came and quartered themselues in the suburbes of Milan, within two miles whereof the Swisses were come* but wondering that they heard no newes from the Pope nor from the Venetian army (as it was knowne by letters intercepted which they sent to their Lords) certaineThe Swisses retu^ne home (...). daies after they retired towards Coma, and from thence returned home into their countrey.
Whilest they were retiring two posts arriued from the Pope and the Venetians: wherevpon it was thought of a certaine that if they had come sooner, the Swisses had not returned. But they being gone (as hath beene said) the Spaniards  and the Popes forces entred into Romagnia, whereall that which the Duke of Ferrara possessed did forthwith yeeld vnto them (the Bastion of La Fossa, and the foord of Geniuola excepted.)
Petro of Nauarre, Colonel of the Spanish Infantery, till such time as all theirThe Bastide taken by the Spaniards. companies were come together, came and beseeged the Bastide, and hauing battered it with three peeces of ordnance, and giuen it an assault, he tooke it the third day after his arriuall, where al the footmen that were in it were slain with Vest^tello their captaine. Pedro of Nauarte leauing two hundred foot there, returned to the vicerois army: but the Duke of Ferrara going thither afterwards with nine great peeces of ordnance, did so suriously assaile it as he recouered it the very  same day: where all those who were within it with their captaine were slaine, in reuenge of the death of his souldiers.
The confederates army: namely that of the Pope, and the King of Arragon, toThe (...) army marcheth towards Bolognia. the number of eighteene hundred men at armes, eight hundred Genets, eight hundred light horse, and sixteene thousand foot, as well Spaniards as Italians, aboundantly furnished with munition, the most of them being come forth of the Realme of Naples, determined to encampe before Bolognia. The Venetian army on the other side being come vpon the Marches of Verona, seemed to threaten the city of Bres^ia.
Now the viceroy, Generall to the Pope and the Spaniards, caused his army to march, and came and incamped betwixt the Riuer Adice and Bolognia, where hauing giuen order for matters necessary to beseege it, he drew nere to the walles, quartering and extending the most part of his army betwixt the hill, and the high way which goeth from Bolognia into Romagnia, in regard of the commodity of victuals which came from thence, and seized on Saint Michels Monastery which is very nere to the city, seated on an high place, and which doth in a manner command the towne.
Within the city, beside the people which did beare armes and certaine companiesThe forces that were i^ Bolognia. of horse and foot, paied by the Bentiuoles, Gaston of Foix had sent thither  two thousand Lansequenets, and two hundred Launces, commanded by Odet of Foix Lord of Lautrect, and ^ues of Alegre, two famous captaines, and with them were the captaines Fayete, and Vincent surnamed the great Diuell, who vpon the assurance made to them by Gaston of Foix to releeue them, did freely enter it, inThe confederates smal progression before Bolognia. regard of the Cities large circuit. Yet neuerthelesse they began to be bold, when they perceiued the enemies small progression, who were nine daies before the walles, and enterprized nothing but onely made certaine idle Coluerine shot from Saint Michels Monastery into the city: but they sodainely abstained, perceiuing very well that they spent their munition vnproffitably. They were diuers daies determining on what side to batter the city, especially to keepe releefe  from it: and after diuers and sundry opinions, they resolued to assaile it on that side nere to Saint Stephens Gate, by which men goe to Florence, and the artillery was planted within thirty fadom of the walles.
Pedro of Nauarre on the other side made a mine, drawing towards the gate of Chastillon, in a place where within was a little chappel called Baracane. The

Artillery hauing begunne to play, did in foure and twenty houres space beateA breach made at Bolognia. downe an hundred fathom of the wall, with the tower of the gate, the which was abandoned, by reason it could be no longer defended so as the assault might be easily giuen on that side, and in the meane time they c^used bridges of wood to be made, and filled the dike with fagots to come with more ease to the assault. The miue being finished they gaue fire to it, which with merucilous force did in such sort blow vp the wall and the chappell, as in that space, those without the towne did plainely discerne those within the city, with the souldiers who stood ready for defence, but the whole wall falling downe againe on a sodaine, did light in the very selfe same place, from whence the violence of the fire had forced it,A strang miracle in the mine. and was in such sort (...) to the selfe same foundations, as one would haue thought that it had neuer stir'd ^rom thence, which was accounted by all the people for a strange miracle.
The captaines within the towne perceiuing the enemies preparations, before the mine was fired, fearing least the people through scare might be wonne, did speedily send to demand aide of Gaston of Foix, who the selfe same day sent thitherAide sent to the b^seeged. a thousand foot, and the morrow after, a hundred and foure score Launces and then resolued to goe thither in person with the whole army, not-with-standing that in councell all the captaines contradicted it. Therefore hee came forth of Finall, late in the euening, and the next morning he marched towards Bolognia  with the whole army in battaile, notwithstanding the snowes and sharpe windesGaston of Foix comes to the aide of Bolognia. and entred it by Saint Felix gate, hauing in his company thirteene hundred Lances, six thousand Lansequenets, and eight thousand foot both French and Italians.
The enemies had no knowledge of his comming till a day after, that a Stadiot, of the number of those who were come forth among others to skirmish, was taken, who being questioned what was done in Bolognia, answered, That he could not say much, because he came thither but the day before with the French army: whereat the enemies wondering did more exactly examine him in what manner and what numbers had entred, and finding him constant in his answeres, they beleeued him, and resolued to raise their campe, in regard it was dangerous to tarry The consederates army dislodgeth from before Bolognia. there, as wel in respect of the cold season which did greatly afflict the souldiers, as also for the neighbour-hood of the City, so great an army being within it. Wherfore the next night following which was the nineteenth day of the seege, after they had with great dilligence and stilnesse, retired their ordnance, they dislodged early in the morning.
It was thought of a certaine that if the French army had sal^ied forth the next morning after their arriuall, as Gaston of Foix had propounded it, they had surprized the confederats campe, who in no sort doubted that he was come thither (as hath beene said) but ^ues of Alegre councelled to let the companies rest one day, who were weary with their iourney and the bad way, thinking that the enemy  had knowne of their comming, as it was to be presumed, entring at broad day light, and by the high-way of Rome.
The end of the ninth Booke of the fourth Decad.





The Contents of the tenth Booke of the  fourth Decade.



THe City of Bressia taken by the Venetians is rescued by Gaston of Foix, by meanes of the Castle which held out still for the French. Bergamo by the example of Bressia expelleth the French. The defeate of Iohn Paul Baillon and Meleager of Furli by Gaston of Foix. The imprisonment of Andrew Gritti and Antonio Iustiniano. Truce betwixt the Emperour  and the Venetians by meanes of the Pope. Rauenna beseeged by Gaston of Foix. The Battaile of Rauenna wherein the French were victors. The death of Gaston of Foix slaine by the Spaniards, after the battaile was wonne. In what perplexity the Pope was after the French mens victory. The Swisses come downe into the territory of Verona, with their great hate to King Lewis, and vpon what occasion. The Champaine Country of Milan is forsaken, for to keepe the Cities from the Swisses. Milan, with all the Cities, almost, of the Dutchy, is redeliuered to the confederates. The City  of Genoa reuolteth from the King. League and confederacie betwixt the Pope, and the Emperour. Maximillian Sforza is restored to the Dutchy of Milan. The death of Pope Iulius the Second. A league concluded betwixt King Lewis and the Venetians. The Election of Pope Leo the Tenth of the family of Medicis. King Lewis his great preparations for the warre of Italy. The Venetians take Cremona. The whole Dutchy of Milan in trouble and tumult in the behalfe of the French. The French make re-entry into all the state of Milan, two townes excepted. The  Swisses resolution to make warre on King Lewis. They come downe to Nouara.
The Swisses comming forth of Nouara in the night obtaine the victory against the French. The French are driuen forth of the whole Dutchy of Milan. And lastly the taking and dismantling of Legnaga by the Venetians.


The tenth Booke of the fourth Decad of the History of Venice.
THe army being dislodged from before Bolognia, Gaston of Foix hauing left there three hundred Launces, and foure thousand foot for the garde thereof, came with great speed to the reliefeGaston of Foix releeues the Castle of Bressia. of the Castle of Bressia, for the Venetians tooke the City the same day that hee entred into Bolognia. For Count Lodouico Auogare a Bressian Gentleman, being wearied with the arrogancy and indiscretion of the French, hauing written to the councell of the Tenne, That if they would send their army to Bressia, he would finde meanes  to raise some tumult there, during which hee would by night open a gate for them, by which their forces might easily enter, and seize vpon the city. This matter was for certaine daies debated in the councell of Tenne, and then by them referred to the great councell, to the end it might be maturely determined, whether Count Lodowickes offer ought to be entertained or refused. After diuers and sundry opinions it was concluded to accept it, the matter being commanded to be kept secret: then they acquainted the Prouidator Gritti therewith, enioyning him to march speedily with his troupes towards Bressia, and to march at the very houre, and to the gate which Count Lodowick should send him instructions for.
Gritti vpon this commandment crossed the Riuer Adice at Albera, then that of Mincia, at the mill of La Volta, and comming to Monteclaro with three hundred men at armes, thirteene hundred light-horse; and three thousand foote; he encamped that night at Castagnetta, fiue miles from Bressia, from whence he on a sodaine sent his light-horse to scoure euen to the gates. But the enterprise being discouered by a wife of one of the complices, who aduertized the Gouerthereof, of whom she was enamored; and by that meanes the towne being carefully guarded, Gritti thought it not fit to passe on any farther, wherevpon Count Lodowicke not being staied by the French, came with his sonne forth of the City. Andre Gritti being returned neere to Montagnane, from whence he first came,Andre Griul re^ireth. left a sufficient gard for the bridge which hee had made ouer the Riuer Adice, to the end to assure the passage, if he should happen to returne againe, as it afterwards fell out. For within a while after being recalled, he crossed the Riuer with two Cannons and foure falconets, and returned to his quarter at Castagnetta.
Count Lodowick on the other side being accompanied with very great numbers of the people of the valeys of Eutropia and Sabina, who^ he had caused to rise, was come within a mile of Bressia. And al-be-it they within the City did not yetThe Venetians returning to the assault of Bressia, enter the City. make shew of fauouring the enterprise, yet neuerthelesse Gritti perceiuing, that he had greater forces then at the former time, he resolued to haue it by force: And beeing come with all those peasants, he assailed it in three seuerall places, two of which had good successe, namely at the Gate of Piles where Auogare fought, and at the gate of La Garzulo, where the souldiers entred at the iron grate, by which the riuer of the same name entreth into the city, notwithstanding all the attempts and resistance of the French, who perceiuing the enemies  to bee entred, and that the Bressans did rise in their behalfe, they retired to the Castle, with the Lord of Luda their Gouernour, loosing their horse and baggage.
Bressia being taken all the townes along the Lake of La Garde, did driue awayBergamo expelleth the Frinch. the French, and yeelded to the Venetians: Bergamo did the like soone after (the two castles excepted) the one of which standeth in the middest of the city, and the other halfe a mile off. It was thought that if at Venice (where the ioy was incredible) they had forth*with prouided that which Andre Gritti did sodainely write for, namely to send souldiers, and artillery which he had need of to win the castle of Bressia, they had made greater progression, or at least the victory  would haue beene more assured.
But during these exploits, Gaston of Foix being aduertized of what had passedThe speed of Gaston of Foix. at Bressia, did speedily march thither, who hauing passed the Po at Stellata, did so one crosse the riuer Mincia at the bridge of Molino, then he came and lodged at Nogera on the Veronois, and the day following at Pontpesara, and at Treuilla, where hauing intelligence that Iohn Paul Baillon was come with three hundred men at armes, foure hundred light horse, and twelue hundred foote to lodge at the Island of Escalla, hee ranne speedily thither with three hundredIohn Paul Baillon is broken and defcated by Gaston of Foi^. Launces and seuen hundred Archers, the residue of the army, who could  not march so speedily, comming after, and finding him to bee gone, they followed him hastily and ouertooke him, as he was at the point of the passing a foord of the riuer Adice.
Iohn Paul Baillon hauing descried him a farre off, thinking it to be nothing else but part of the forces of Verona, did embattaile his souldiers and tarried for him. Both fides ioyning, fought valiantly for more then an houres space: but the Venetians fortune beganne to decline by the arriuall of the residue of the army which came in file, and notwithstanding that they disordered them, they neuerthelesse rallied themselues diuers times, vntill being no longer able to resist the greatnumbers, they betooke themselues to flight; wherevpon Iohn Paul passed  the riuer safely, but diuers of his people were drowned.
The morrow after, Gaston of Foix did likewise put Meleager of Furli to rout,Gaston of Foix defeateth Meleager of Furli. whom he incountred as he conducted certaine Venetian light horse, then hee came and encamped in the suburbes of Bressia, and without any delay at all hee sent to assaile the Monastery of Saint Fridiana, which stood halfe way off from the hill vnder which he was lodged, and hauing assaulted it, hee draue thence those which garded it, and turned with his army to the other side of the towne, that hee might be the nearer to the castle. The next morning by day breake, hauing chosenGaston of Foix bauing entred the Castle of Bressia marcheth to the res^ue of the (...). out of the whole army, foure hundred men at armes well armed, and six thousand foot, and going vp on that side nere to the Gate of Pises, he entred without  any resistance into the first wall of the castle, where after he had for a while caused his souldiers to test and refresh themselues, he did incourage them with faire speeches, and promises of an inestimable booty. That being said, he marched foreward. But at the comming forth of the Castle he found certaine footmen, who with the Artillery thought to haue staied him, but their attempt was

in vaine, for hauing put them to flight, he came downe furiously vpon the voide place where captaine Burlettes palace stood, where the Venetian forces being close ioyned together, did attend him with great boldnesse: and there ioyning, they fought furiously on either side for a long time, the one fighting for their owne safety, and the others for glory, and for desire of the spoile and sack of so rich a City.
The Venetians at the last, hauing brauely defended themselues were driuenThe French after a long fight became masters of the City. from the place. For the French being victors, did by force driue their enemies before them in all places, not going to pillage* vntill they were wholy become Masters of the city, following the command of Gaston of Foix who had so enioyned  them before their comming downe. Of the French side there died manyAndre Gritti and Antonio Iustiniano taken prisoners. Count Lodowick Auogare beheaded. foot, and some number of men at armes, but more then eight thousand of the enemies were slaine, and great numbers of them taken prisoners, amongst whom were Andre Gritti and Antonio Iustiniano with many others. Count Lodowicke Auogare and a sonne of his being taken among the rest were beheaded in the publike place of execution.
Gaston of Foix preserued the honour of the Nuns, but their goods were pillaged, and those who had retired into their Couents and other Churches, were the captaines booties. In this manner fel the City of Bressia into extreame misery, which in dignity and nobility did not giue place to any other of Lombardy, and The losse of Bressia troubleth the Venetians. which did for wealth surpasse all the rest, (excepted Milan). It was sackt seuen whole daies together. The newes of this reprisal being come to Venice did greatly trouble the whole City, who thought they should be no more able to enterprise any thing, condemning chiefly the small speed that was made to send necessary forces and munition to the Prouidator Gritti, the which was cause of that losse. The Senate forthwith consulted about the repairing of their army, sent to leauy two thousand foot in Candy, and a great number of Stradiots in Albania. Two hundred pound weight of gold was sent to the viceroy of Naples, as had beene promised. The foot which were not at Bressia, and the horse-men which escaped, together with those who were stript and disarmed came to Vincenza. Instinian and Gritti were sent prisoners to Milan.
The Pope vnderstanding that the French had recouered Bressia, councelled and perswaded, euen with threats, that they should accord with the Emperour. And certaine commissioners beeing assembled for that purpose, perceiuing the great difficulties which were made in the treaty of peace, it was propounded to make truce for a while in the meane time, during which they might with more ease deliberate on the Articles of peace and other reasonable conditions.
According to this aduice, truce was concluded at Rome in the Popes presenceTruce agreed on betwixt the Emperor and the Venetian^ betwixt the commissioners, on condition that the Senate should at two paiments giue foure hundred pound of gold to Maximillian, to the which were  one hundred pound more added, to cause the Emperor to ratifie this agreement, the whole amounting to fiue hundred pounds of gold.
Gaston of Foix after the recouery of Bressia, hauing giuen order for his affaires, (for Bergamo which had rebelled, and all the other townes neere adioyning had recalled the French) and refreshed his army which was wearied with so great and long trauaill, determined to goe and incounter with the confederates army, according to the commandement which hee had receiued from the King, which did expresly import, that with the greatest speed hee could, hee should march against them, whom h^e heard to bee verie weake, and therefore he promised himselfe the victory, and being victorious, he should beseege  Rome and the Pope without any respect, to the end to free himself of so many dangers which did threaten him: and for the diminution of his enuy, and encrease of his owne iustifications, he would haue that enterprise to be made in the name

of the councel of Pisa, which should depute a Legate to goe to the army.
Gaston of Foix departed from Bressia, and came to Finall, there for to gather together all the companies which were in Italy (those excepted who remained for the gard of the Cities) and from thence he went to Saint Georges on the Bolognois, where there came to him three thousand Gascons, a thousand Pioners, and a thousand Picards which were newly sent him, being al choice soldiers. These being arriued, he found that he had with him fiue thousand Lanfequenets, fiue thousand Gascons, and eight thousand, as well Italians as French, with one thousandThe number of Gaston of Foix his army. sixe hundred launces. The Duke of Ferrara was to ioyne with him, with a hundred men at armes, two hundred light horse and a great quantity of excellent  munition, because the Generall had left his at Finall, in regard of the bad waies. The Cardinall of Saint Seuerine being deputed Legate by the councell came likewise to the army.
Gaston of Foix marching in this equipage did burne with desire to meete theGaston of Foix his great desire to fight. enemy and to fight with him, as well to satisfie the King as for his owne valour and prowesse: his meaning neuerthelesse was not to assaile him rashly, but only to trie if by approching nere to him he would cheerefully come to the battaile, in any place where the quallity of the sytuation might make them equall.
The enemies had an other intent, who thought it not safe for them to fight in an equall place, at least wise before the six thousand Swisses whom they  expected were arriued: as also for that the King of Arragon had commanded them to abstaine as much as they could from fight, for diuers considerations by him alleaged.
The two armies did often change places, marching continually nere together in good order, the artillery going before and their faces turned towards the enemies, as if euery houre they were to beginne the fight. Gaston receiued a new commandment from the King to hasten the battaile. Wherevnto his King was incited so soone as he vnderstood the truce made betwixt the Emperour and the Venetians. But Gaston perceiuing that hee did winne nothing by coasting the enemies in this manner, in regard of the commodiousnesse of the  Cities of Romagnia, whether they still retired, determined to beseege RauennaGaston of Foix beseegeth Rauenna. wherein Marke Antony Colonna lay for the Pope with fifteene hundred foot, and fiue hundred horse, thinking that the enemies would not suffer such a city to be lost before their faces, and by that meanes occasion might be offered to fight with them in an equall place. He came and lodged betwixt Contignola, and Grana^olla, then at Rassi, hauing driuen them thence who kept it, and from thence the day following he came and encamped nere to the walles of Rauenna betwixt the two Riuers; namely, Ronca, and Mo^tona betwixt which the towne is seated. He possessed the space which is betwixt the one and other riuer.
The next day he caused his ordnance to be planted, and by all meanes hasted  the battery, that he might come to the assault before the enemies (whom he knew were remooued) should arriue, as well for to get the towne, as in regard of his great want of victuals, by reason of the Venetian vessels which lay at Fiquerolles, and at the mouth of the Channel which falleth into the Po, which stopped those that came both from Lombardy and Ferrara.
This was the reason why he resolued to giue the assault the same day, al-beit he knew that there was no reasonable breach made, and that he could not enter but by ladders: those likewise which were sent thither, being out of hope to force the Citty: and perceiuing themselues to be greatly hindred by a Culueryne, hauing fought for the space of three houres, retired with the losse of  three hundred foote, and of certaine men (...) armes, and as many in a manner were hurt. But the retreat was no soon^ made, but they descried the confederates armie co^ming to the relee^e of the Towne, the which marched along the riuers side.
So soone as the French had discouered them, they arose in armes and placed themselues vnder their enseignes, hauing in great hast with drawne their ordinance from before their walles, the which they turned towards the enemies: who imagining onely by the shew of their army, that Ramenna was suffi^iently releeued, thinking that the French durst not assaile it they being so neere, they encamped within three miles of Rauenna, at a place called Moulinachia, which they forth-with fortified, with as deepe a trench as the shortnesse of the time would permit them. The French were long in councell, to know what was to bee done, either to assaill the Citty, or the enemies. In the end after diuers and sundry opinions, they resolued to goe and assaile the enemy, so soone as it was day. Which The reso^ue to assaile the enemy and not the Citty. Gaston of Foix gladly approuing, hee caused the same night a bridge to bee cast ouer the Ronca, and to li^ell the causeis on all sides, to make the waies easie. There by day breake, being Easter day, hee prepared to march against the enemies; and hauing encouraged his soldiors, with a more eloqu^, then Martiall oration hee enforced the enemies by the shot of his ordnance, to come forth of their trenches,The French are victors in the battaile of Rauenna. and to ioyne fight with him, where the con^ederates were so delt with, for the space of six (...), ^hat the fight lasted, as not being able to make any more resistance, they turned their backes, and among others the Viceroy and Caranagio were the formost, carrying away with them, a squadron in a manner whole and vnbroken: so as the French remained masters of the field.
But because the Spanish Infantery made a soft retreate, and in god order, GastonGoston of Foix is slaine by the Spaniards. of Foix was desirous to breake them, and going furiously to assaill them with a squadron of horse, hee was on a sodaine enuironed by the enemies, and being beaten from his horse, was slaine by the push of a pi^e, thrust into his flanke. The Lord of Lau^rec lay by him, in a manner dead, being wounded in twenty places, but being brought to Ferrara, he was there healed.
The Generalls death caused the Spaniards to escape without any empediment, the residew of their army being dispersed and put to flight, and their bagage, enseignes and artillery taken. The prisoners were the Popet Legat, Fabricio Colo^, Pedro of Naua^e, the Marquis of Palu, Bito^o, and (...)* with many  other Barrons, and great Lords. The brute was that there died on both sides, eighteene thousand men, one third part French, and the two thirds of the confederats. But the losse of the victorious was greater, without comparison, by reason of the death of the Generall, of ^s of Alegre, ^ters French Gentlemen and Almaine Captaines, to whose valour the victory was partly ascribed.
The victors beeing returned to their Campe, those of the Citty sent word that they would yeeld, but whilest they c^pitulated, the Lan^equentes, and Gascons perceiuing the walls to be carelessely kept, did enter it at the breach which wasRauenna taken and spoiled by the French. made before the bataile, and ^ade cruell spoyle, for despight of the losse which  they had sustayned in the battaile: but they could not take the Castle, whether Marke Antony C^llonna was ^tyled, which hee afterward yeelded, vpon condition ^o haue their goods and liues saued.
The Venetians hauing newes of this losse, sent word to (...) (...) whome they kept in pay with a thousand foote in Flamin^, to gard, and defend the lands of the Church. The Vi^y neuer ^aid till hee came to A^coha, where hee vsed meanes to renew his army, promis^g to him selfe, that beeing ioyned with the Swisses, hee would easily driue the French forth of ^taly, so as euery one would employ him-selfe in that busienesse. The Venet^ns beeing aduertised of his inten^, sent to comfort him for his losse and to offer him al  ayde and releefe by Anto^ (...), who brought him a good summe of mony from the Senate, the li^e also did King (...) A^ssador which lay at Venice.
The French Army being daunted with the death of their Generall, remained within 4. miles of Rauenna, attempting nothing, expecting the kings pleasure. In the meane space newes being brought to Rone, of the losse of the battaile, all the Cardinalls came forth-with to the Pope, earnestly entreating him to acceptVVhat astonish nent the losse of the bata^le brought to Rome. of peace with the French King, the which they assured him hee might obtaine, on honest conditions, they seeing no other remedy for all these daungers, but peace onely. The Ambassadors of the King of Arragon, and the Signury of Venice insisted on the contrary, giuing him to vnderstand that matters were not so desperate, nor the army so much decayed, but that it might easily bee restored in short space, without any greate expence, with many other very pertinent reasons,The Popes perplexity. to induce the Pope to their opinion. But he continewed in very great doubt; for on the one side, hatred and disdaine against the French did possesse him, and on the other, feare, and danger. Wherevpon hee answered the Cardinalls that he would make peace with the French King, and yet it was not with that resolution, which might giue any certaine hope: and last of all when as Iulius of Medicis a Knight of Malta, who was after-wards pope, came to him from the Cardinall of Medicis, and had fully informed him, how greatly the French were weakened, by their Generalls death, and of diuers other particularities of the French army,The Pope will by no meanes haue peace with the French. which did much recomfort him; And bringing him into the Consistory, he caused him to rehearse the selfe same things to the Cardinalls, who neuerthelesse  did perseuer in their desire of peace, the which though in words hee made shew (to please them) to accept of, hee had neuerthelesse resolued not to graunt, but vpon the last extremity, and rather to leaue Rome, hoping that his cause would bee maintayned by the armes of Christian Princes.
But so soone as hee vnderstood that the Lord of La Palisse, who commanded the French army, after the death of Gaston of Foix, was called into the Dutchy of Milan by the Generall of Normandy, for feare of the Swisses comming, and that he was with the army departed out of Ro^gina, he found him-selfe freed of the doubt and feare which hee was in, concerning the affaires of Rome, whereby hee was more then before confirmed in his obstinacy, albeit the Legate of  the councell ^arried still in Romagnia, with three hundred lances, three hundred light horse, six thousand foote, and eight peeces of ordnance.
Now the Pope beeing greatly confirmed by that which hath beene already said, and by the great hopes which the King of Arragon gaue him, so soone as bee had intelligence of the losse of the battaile of Rauenna, promising to send him Gonsaluo the great Captaine into Italy with new supplies and likewise by the commission which the King of England had sent to the Cardinall of Yorke,The Cardinall of Medicis prisoner at Milan. to enter into the league, hee did openly reiect peace, and pronounced in open Consistory a Monitory, against the French King, if hee did not release the Cardinall of Medicis, whome hee kept prisoner in Milan, where hee was  honorably vsed.
The Swisses in the meane time, who stood badly affected to the French King, and did wonderfully hate him, beeing assembled at Coire, a city of the Grisons there antient confederats, marched from thence to Trent, (the Emperour to collour the matter with the King, saying that hee could not stoppe their passage, in regard of the antient confederacy which he had with them.)
From Trent they came vpon the Verona Territory, where the Venetians army expected them, who together with the Pope did contribute for their pay, They were in number more then sixe thousand, though no more were demaunded: For the hatred which they did heare to the French King was The Swisses ^atred to the French King. so greate, as contrary to their custome, they did p^tiently endure al difficulties, and namely, they ca^ from home hauing receiued only one florin of Ryne a peece: wheras in time before they would not march for the Kings seruice, vnlesse they

had beene promised many paies and their Captains presented with sondry guifts.
La Palisse comming first of all with the Army to Pontoglio to stop their passage, thinking that they would come that way into Italy, perceiuing afterward their meaning to be otherwise, came and incamped at Chastillon of the stirrop, not being assured whether they would come downe into the Dutchy of Millan or els march towards Ferrara. It was certainely thought that they would haue held on the way towards Ferrara according to the Popes directions, had not a letter which the Lord of La Palisse sent to the General of Normandy, been in^ercepted by mishap, the which fell into the hands of the Venetian Stradiots; by which he sent him word how his affaires stood and that it would be a hard matter to resist The Suisses take the way towards the Dutchy of Milan. them, if they should turne towards the Dutchy of Millan. This letter made them change their determination, and caused the Cardinall of Syon, the chiefe motiue of this warre, with the Captaines, to resolue to enterprise that which their enemies most feared (as was perceiued by that letter). Therefore they came to Villafranca to ioyne with the Venetian army, vnder the command of Iohn Paul Bailon, which was of foure hundred men at armes, eight hundred light horse, and sixe thousand foote with peeces of Ordnance, as well for battery, as for the field.
La Palisse, who in all had not aboue seauen thousand foote and a thousand lances, did with the Captaines determine wholy to forsake the field, and to looke La Palisse forsaketh the field, and gardeth the towns to the defence of the townes of most importance, till such time as those great nombers of Suisses should be wasted, or else some fresh supplies might come to them from France to make head against them. Wherevpon he did put into Bressia two thousand foote, one hundred and fiftie lances and a hundred men at armes of the Florentines: into Crema fiftie lances and a thousand foote, and into Bergamo, a thousand foote, and a hundred Florentine men at armes; heThe Lancequenets forsake the French King. brought the residew of the army to Pontuico, which consisted of six hundred lances, two thousand French foot, and foure thousand Lansquenets. But the next day letters came from the Emperour, who commanded the Lansquenets forthwith to abandon the French Kings seruice: they not daring to disobey, departed  the very same day, because they were all his subiects.
La Palisse despayring (by reason of the Lansquenets departure) of beeing able any longer to defend the Dutchy of Milan, did in great hast retire to Pisquetona. The Venetians in the meane time hauing already taken Valegia and Piscara, did still with that Army winne the Contrey as they went along. Those of CremonaThe Venetians great progression in the company of the Suisses. being wholly forsaken did yeeld to the Cardinall of Syon and gaue him a good somme of money, to the end that the Suisses should not enter into their Citty. The like did Carauagio and Soncino, wherein the Cardinall of Syon placed his owne people in Garrison, in steed of deliuering it to the Venetians, as it was mentioned in the treaty of the League. All other townes neere to the riuer Adda did  yeeld to the Venetians, the like did Bergamo with her territory, by reason that La Palisse, had recalled his companies which lay there to ioyne them to the army.
La Palisse forsooke Pisquetona, and went and crossed the Riuer Adda, hoping to keepe the enemies from passing the riuer if the footmen which they made account to leauy had arriued* But through want of money to pay them, none wereTriuultio comming to the Army is of opinion to abandon the Dutchy of Milan. raised, wherevpon he retired to Saint Angello, and the day following to Pauia, determining to stay there. But after that Triuulcio came thither to him, and had shewed him the vanity of his opinion, and how that it was impossible to hould back so great a ruine, seeing there were no footmen in the Army, nor meanes to wage new, as well for the shortnesse of the time, as for that there was no money  to pay them, he went and made a bridge ouer the Po, at a place where it is most narrow, to the end that the companies might more commodiously passe holding on their way towards Ast.
So soone as the French had passed the Riuer Adda, Loda yeelded to the confederates

who being come to Pauia, beganne to batter the Castle. The French like-wise did soone abandon it, and came to the stone bridge, which is ouer the riuer Thesin, fearing least it should be surprised, hauing but that place alone, whereby to escape from Pauia. All the French men, with certaine Lancequenets, who were not departed with the rest, being come forth of Pauia, the Citt^ promised to pay a great summe of mony to auoyde the sack thereof, Milan had already done the like, compounding for a great summe, and all other townes, (Bi essia and Coma excepted) did with great desire doe the same.
All matters were gouerned in the name of the holy league (for so all men called it,) and all the profit fell to the Swisses, which caused many more of that nation  to come downe into Lombardy, and to vnite them-selues with the first. InGenoa reuolteth from the King. this change, Parma and Placentia were giuen to the Pope. The Swisses ^eazed on Lucarna and the Grisons on Voltolina and Chiauenna, Iano Fregossa, by the Venetians aide, in whose army he serued, went to Genoa, and so handled the matter, as the French gouernor being expelled, it reuolted and created him Duke.
In the like manner all the townes and Castles of Romagnia did returne to the Pope. Bolognia like-wise yeelded to his officers, after the Bentiuoles being depriued of all hope, had forsaken it. The Cardinall of Medicis had already before then escaped, by meanes of some stirre which hapned of purpose, as hee entred into a boate at the passage of the Po, wherevpon hee was taken from the French  who kept him, who intended flight rather then resistance. The Senate in the meane time, being desirous to recouer Bressia and Coma, solicited the Cardinall of Syon to come with his troupes and their army to beseege those townes, who making no hast, beeing loth to encrease the Venetians greatnesse, came in the end and encamped before Bressia, neere to Saint Iohns gate, battering at one time both the towne and Castle, whether the Viceroy came to them with the Spanish army. The Lord of Aubigni who was within it, perceiuing that in the end he could not choose but deliuer it, thought it best to yeeld it, together with the Castle, rather to the Viceroy then to the Venetians, compounding with him, that all Legnaga yeelded. the souldiors within should depart with liues and goods. The French that were at Legnaga followed the same councell. Crema did other-wise which was beseeged by Ranze de la Cere, with a part of the Venetians forces, vnto whome, Benedict Cribario (being corrupted by guifts, and vpon promise to be made a gentleman of Venice) did yeeld the towne by the consent of the Lord De Duras gouernor of the Castle, the which he would not doe to Octanian Sforza, Bishop of Lodi; for and in the name of the future Duke Maximilian Sforza, being come thither for that purpose, with foure thousand Swisses In these interims, the Bishop of Gurcia as Lieutenant to the Emperor went to Rome, who being receiued with all honor they beganne to treat of the establishment of the common businesse, and how to  root out particular strife and contentions, to the end that Italy being vnited togetherThe treaty betwixt the Emperor and the Venetians handled. might resist the French King: and the hardest matter of all this was, the agreement so often treated of betwixt the Emperor and the Venetians: For the Bishoppe of Gurcia demanded to haue Verona and Vincenza, to remaine to the Emperor, and the other townes to the Venetians, for which they should presently pay to Maximilian two hundred thousand florins of the Rhyne, and thirty thou sand for euer after, yearely, in manner of rent. The Venetians would not pay rent for those townes, which they had enioyed for so many yeares, as belonging vntoDifficulties concerning the agreement. them, nor consent to giue mony, and much lesse to deliuer Vincenza, for diuers reasons by them alleadged. The Pope did what he could to attone them, now inciting  the Venetians, then entreating them, and sometimes threatning. The King of Arragons Ambassadors did all they could; the like also did the Swisses. In the end the Bishop of Gurcia persisting in his demand, and the Venetians in their refusall, as well of Vincenza as of the summe of mony, the Pope forsooke them, protesting to their Ambassadors that he should be enforced to pursue their Republick

with spirituall and temporall armes, and made a league with the Emperor, to the end that he might alow of the Councell of Lateran, and disallow the Conuenticle of Pisa. The Spanish Ambassador would not enter into that League, saying; that he had no commission so to doe from his King.
The consederacy being contracted, the Bishop of Gurcia at the next Session ofLeague betwixt the Pope and the Emperor. the councell of Lareran, did in the Emperours name adhere to the Councel, where he affirmed in the presence of all men, that the Emperour had neuer consented to the Conuenticle of Pisa, reiecting all those who had vsed his name. This being doone, the Bishop of Gurcia tooke his leaue, that he might be with MaximilianMaximillian Sforza in possession of the Dutchy of Milan. Sforza at such time as he should take possession of the Dutchy of Millan  the which he did After his entry, the Viceroy went and beseeged the fort of Tresa vpon the riuer Adda, which was yeelded vnto him vpon condition that they within it might depart with their goods.
The confederacy made at Rome, had not wholly broken off the hope of agreement betweene the Emperour and the Venetians, and therfore the Pope sent Iacomo Stafilea Auditor of the Rote to Venice, to entreat the Senate to agree with Maximilian, and to enter into the league, saying; That to his great gree^e he had forsaken them, the which, many taking in bad part, Said that they were assured that it would cause them to enter into League with the French, and by that meanes to recall them a new into Italy; but that he for his part did so much presume on The death o^ Pope Iulius the second. them, as he knew they would neuer do it: and in regard of these matters beeing troubled with sondry thoughtes, he fell sick, and his health dayly empairing, not being able to eate or sleepe, he deceassed the two and twentith day of February in the yeare 1513.
Now the Venetians hauing determined before the Popes death to contractA motion of agreem^t betwixt the French King and the Uenetians. League and alliance with the French, according to the motion made by King Lewis to Andrew Gritti, prisoner at that time in France, they resolued (the matter hauing a long time been debated in councell) to send one of purpose into France to treat of this businesse with the King: and to this end they named Lodouico Pietro Secretary of the Councell of Tenne.
Hee beeing departed from Venice, and onward on his way, they had newes of the Popes death: but for all that they did not call him back, not knowing whoThe league concluded betwixt the King and the Venetians. should be his successor, and least of all what his affection towards them might be.
The Secretary beeing come into France, the King did enlarge Andre Gritti, and did forthwith conclude the league with him on condition that Cremona and the contrey of Giradade should belong to the state of Milan, and that the Venetians should haue Bressia, Bergamo and Crema, (the King making ouer all his right to them, which he could pretend to those Citties:) That they should be bound to aide one another; and to hazard together one selfe same fortune, vntill the KingThe Articles of the League. should recouer the whole state of Milan: and that likewise the Republicke should  be restored to the entier possession of whatsoeuer it did enioy on the firme land: And lastly that al prisoners on either side should be set at liberty, and the fugitiues restored to their goods and contrey.
In the meane time, after the Popes death, the Cardinalls entred quietly into theThe election of Pope Leo the tenth. Conclaue, and did the seauenth day following with a generall consent choose for Pope, Iohn, Cardinall of the title of Saint Mary in Dominica, of the most illustrious family of Medicis, of seauen and thirty years of age, which was a strange matter, and contrary to the custome: He tooke vpon him the name of Leo the tenth. This election was pleasing to all men, and cheefely to the Venetians, who did euer greatly affect that family: by reason whereof, the Senate did hope easily  to draw him with them into this league, confederacy and alliance. But Leo hauing obtained the Pontificall dignity, found himselfe to bee assailed with sondry thoughts, reuoluing in his minde diuers matters, as well belonging to warre as to peace.
His antient habit and manner of life from his youth, did excite him to embrace peace and quietnesse, especially now when he saw him-selfe established in the supreame dignity: so as the n^e of warre, in regard of dangers past was displeasing and odious to him: And on the other side, hee found no great safety in peace, in the middest of armes, and confusion of all things, as also, because the memory of his predecessor, who by armes had much encreased the de^aines of the Church, did prouoke him to warre. But by taking armes, hee knew not to which side heeThe new Pope is t^ssed with sondry thoughts should rather incline: For the returne of the French into Italy did not like him, in regard of the wrongs and greeuances which he in particular had receiued by them, and his predecessor like-wise, and which did still threaten him, in regard of  the councell of Pisa, which was transferred to Lyons. On the other side, the French; confederate with the Venetians, did in such sort daily encrease, in strength and reputation, as hee knew not by what meanes* to oppose himselfe against such warlike attempts.
Leo then being thus troubled with sundry thoughts, did oftentimes change his determination. At the beginning of his papacy, he sent a breefe to all Christian Princes, exhorting them to peace, and vnity: and the more easily to induce them there vnto, hee determined not to shew him-selfe more affected to one side then to another. Yet neuerthelesse, perceiuing at the same-time that there was no greate hope of peace, he beganne to prouoke the Venetians, against the  French, vsing meanes to perswade them to league them-selues with him selfe, the Florentines, the Swisses, and the Duke of Milan, for the liberty of Italy. The Venetians would not consent to his proposition, thinking it to bee against reason to abandon for vaine hopes, an alliance already made with theThe Venetians constancy in mai^tayning their* alliance. French; and also for that considering matters more iudiciously, they perceaued that at the first hee promised some apparent liberty: but that dangers did still encrease, and that they went about to throw all Italy head-long into perpetuall bondage.
With these discourses did the Venetians maintayne their opinion, soliciting the French King in the meane time to make the greatest hast hee could with  his army into Italy, to surprise the townes, before they were man'd with garrisons, putting him in mind, that the victory of an enterprise, dependeth cheefely on speed. The French King beeing moued by these remonstrances, did wholyThe King prepareth ^or his returne into Italy. bend his actions to this warre, and to cut off all lets that might hinder him therein, he made truce for one whole yeare with Fernand, King of Arragon, onely for that which concerned matters forth of Italy.
And as for the English, whome hee vnderstood were making great preparations for their comming into France, hee made no great reckoning thereof, hoping in short space to driue Sforza from the state of Milan, and to returne victorious with his Army into France, time enough to resist their  attempts.
Now the Rendezuous for all the Kings troupes was at Suza, from thence to march with ease into Italy, vnder the conduct of the Lord of La Tremouille, albeit the warre was managed by Iohn Iames*Trivulce, a man of great repute, for his excellent skill in martiall discipline. The reportThe number of the French Army. was that there were twenty thousand soldiours in the Kings Army. The Venetians had for their parts eight thousand foot-men, twelue hundred men at armes, and fiue hundred light horse, with greate store of munition and ordnance: Dominico Contaren, and Andre Loredan were prouidators of the armyThe number of the Ventian Army. and Bartilmeo Aluiana Generall in the Count Pettillans sted, who was  deceased.
Hee beeing come to the Army, which lay on the bankes of Adice, sent to the Senate to know if hee should passe on farther whilst the enemies were vnprouided of all aide and succour, and their townes without garrisons.

The Senate beeing assembled therevpon, after ^undry opinions, decreed, that their Armie should not passe the Po, nor Adda, referring the rest to the pleasure and discretion of their General, according as he should think it fit. For the Senate had as yet receiued no certaine newes, whether the French Armie had passed the Alpes, wherevpon they thought it not discretion to abandon their state to the enemies mercy, or to send their Army into any place, from whence, (if matters should fall out vnfortunately) they should not bee able to withdraw it.
But Aluiana beeing full of courage, and desirous to exploite some gallant  enterprise, if occasion should fitly serue, resolued without delay t^ passe ouer, and first of all tooke his way directly towards Verona, hoping for to winne it. Pandolfo Malateste commanded for the Emperour in one of the Fortes of the Citty: Hee with certaine of the Townsmen, had practised to giue himThe enterprise on Uerona discouered. entrance: But the next day, fiue hundred Lansquenets entred Verona by the Riuer Adice, and the matter beeing discouered, Aluiana perceiuing that the Citty could not bee easily forced, and that it would aske much time to besiege it, did on a sodaine march towards Cremona, and by the way made him-selfe maister of Valegia, and of the Forte of Piscara two strong and commodiousThe Venetians take Valegia and P^scara. places for the Venetians, in respect of their situation.
Vpon report of Aluiana his comming, a great tumult was raised in Cremona: those which were of the contrary faction, forsooke the towne, and the others without contradiction did receiue Aluiana into the citty, who being entred, he did sodainly disarme Caesar Fieramosca, who lay there in garrison with three hundred horse, and fiue hundred foot of the Duke of Milans. Hee needed not to spend anyThe Venetians take Cre^a. time for the recouery of the castle, by reason it was euer held for the French King: Wherevpon hee forth with erected the French Kings banner, saying; That hee did receiue the Citty, for, and in the name of the French King, for whom Theodore Triuulce his Ambassador was there present in the Venetian Armie. Hee went afterwards to Pisquetona, Sonzino, Lodi, and other places neere  adioyning, hauing already, by the change of Cremona, erected the French Kings Banners.
But on the Verona and Vincentine territories, the Venetians affaires were differently managed. For so soone as Aluiana was departed with his Armie, Rocandolphe Captaine of the Lansquenets, and Frederick Gonsaluo of Bossola comming forth of Verona with sixe hundred horse, and two thousand foote, went to Saint Boniface, where Aluiana had left vnder the command of Sigismond Cauallo, and Iohn Fortino, three hundred light horse, and six hundred foote: who beeing scattered heere and there, vpon newes of the enemies comming, fled toThe (...) descate some of the Uenetian ^orces. Colognia, and were so neerely pursued by the Lansquenets, who entered the towne by force, as they were all taken prisoners, and the towne beeing sacked and  burnt, they returned to Verona laden with spoile.
The enemies for this exploit waxing more prowd and insolent, foure thousand foote, and fiue hundred horse, sallied forth of Verona for to assaile Vincenza: whereof Iohn Paull Manfron, the Citties Gouernour, hauing intelligence, heeThe Lansque^ets enterprise vpon Vincenza broken. caused great numbers of peasants on a sodaine to enter into the Citty, and did so carefully prouide for the rest, as the enemies hope beeing frustrate, hauing spoyled the countrey round about, they were enforced to returne to Verona.
But during these exploites on the Veronois and Vincentine territories, the  whole Dutchie of Milan was in vprore and Armes: There was no Towne, Village, not Castle, but did rise and take armes vpon the comming of the VenetianAll the Dutch^ of Milan i^ ^proare. Armie, vpon the report that was spredde, that the French had passed the Alpes: for albeit that the people of Milan, wearied with the French gouernment;

had desired the returne of the Sforzas their antient Lords: yet neuer^helesse, hauing not by their returne obtained the liberty and freedome which they hoped for, but on the contrary all discommodities and charges, they changed their mindes, and desired the returne of the French. Many likewise, enemies to the quiet of other poore banished men, or mooued by the diuersity of factions, did fauour the French. In regarde whereof the Earle of Man^oc, sonne to Iohn Iames Triuulce, riding vp and downe the Champaine countrey of the Dutchy of Milan, to stirre them vp to commotions, found it no hard matter to make them to reuolt and to take armes.
Maximillian Sforza beeing daunted thereat, not knowing whereon to resolue,Maximillian Sfoorza retireth to Nouara perceiuing all things to tend to his ruine, thought it most expedient for his safety and escape, and for the tryall of his latest fortune, to retire with certaine horse to Nouara, where he vnderstood some Suisses were arriued, resoluing there to tarry for the rest, who in great numbers were comming down for the defence of his state.
Those of Milan, seeing them-selues to bee without garrison, and without a Captaine, that their well fortified Castle held for the French, and that the Venetians Army did approach, some of them beeing stirred vp with hope o^ better fortune, others with feare and distrust; thought it fit to yeeld to the French, and to that end, to send an Ambassador to the Venetian Generall; who hauing  made a bridge ouer the Adda, threatned that hee would shortly bee with them. The French on the other side, (with whom Andre Gritti was in quality of Ambassador for the Signory) entred Italy tooke diuerse townes and castles, some by assault, and others by a voluntary redition: so as the state of Milan beeing enuadedMilan reduced to the French gouernment by two mighty armies, French and Venetian, was in short space reduced vnder the French gouernment: Two Citties onely held out for Maximillian, Nouara, and Coma.
The Venetians, for these so fortunate attempts, did promise to them-selues a glorious end of this warre: for their armie had gotten such reputation by the the taking of Cremona, as Ranze de Cera going with a troope of Soldiers to recouer  Bressia, it was yeelded vnto him vpon the first summons; by reason that the Spanish Soldiers, who lay there in garrison, beeing frighted at his comming,Br^ssia yeelded. retired into the Castle. There was but one onely thing which could cut off the hope which all men had conceiued of the victory, and that was the commingThe Suisses Protectors of of the State of Milan. downe of the Suisses. For the common report was, that the Suisses had with such affection entertained the protection and safegard of Duke Maximilians state, as it was certainly thought that they would omit nothing which might further the conseruation thereof.
This Nation was at the same time very famous for their exact obseruation of martiall discipline, and they could by no meanes swallow the contempt and disgrace The Suisses discontent make warre on the French king. wherein King Lewis held them, at such time as hee sent to renew the league with them (as hath beene said) hauing more esteemed a little ouer-plus of money, then their friendship; as also because the desire of gaine did prouoke them therevnto, hauing seene their fellowes to returne home from other warres victors and loden with wealth.
Now these Suisses hauing assembled their generall Councell, did all with one consent resolue to make warre on the French, and they proceeded therein with such earnestnesse, as the most of them, contrary to their custome, enrolled themselues for very small pay, diuerse also without any pay at all, and in a short time after, they leuyed a great Army, both of horse and foote, which beganne to come downe into the Dutchie of Milan, one company after an other.
The newes of their comming downe, did at the first amaze the French,

in regard of the recent remembrance of matters brauely executed by them: But when they considered that they brought no cauallery with them, nor victualls, artillery, nor ought else fit for such an enterprise, they thought it best not to enforce such enemies, who came rather to steale then to fight, being so vnprouided of all warlike necessaries, as they assured themselues that their Army would shortly dissolue it selfe, as it had done at other times, and would returne home againe, by reason of the want of all things.
The French therefore contemning them in this manner, hauing left a strong garrison in Alexandria, came and encamped before Nouara. Their intent was to trye if they could winne those Suisses by money, rather then by force, and to  practise with them for money to deliuer Maxmillian Sforza into their hands, as the same nation had done by his Father Lodouico Sforza in the same place. And if this should not fall out, they thought it no hard matter to take that Towne, the winning whereof, as they thought, would bee the ending of the warre.
But the wise and well experienced Captaines did deride these designes and vaine imaginations, and did blame the French, who insteed of assailing the Spanish Armie, and breaking it, which they might easily haue done, did busie themselues in besieging Nouara, and employing all their forces there, which was directly against Gritti his aduise, who did many times put the French Captaines in  minde of the fault which they committed, in not first of all assailing the Spaniniards, who seemed to bee the enemies chiefe prop. In regarde whereof the Senate thinking it fitte to bee done, had commanded their Generall to make a bridge ouer Adda, causing it to bee giuen forth, that hee would presently with the whole Army passe ouer and ioyne with the French, to the end that the Spaniards, beeing mooued by this report, might not alone abstaine from ayding the Suisses, but thinking how to escape, might bee enforced to returne to Naples.The French besiege Nouara in vaine. But the French trifling the time vainely before Nouara, brake all these sound determinations, and found them-selues to bee entangled with many difficulties: because the rumor dayly encreased, that of a certaine great ayde was comming to the besieged, the which did make their enterprise more difficult: And as their  discamping from thence, would greatly blemish their reputation, and encrease the enemies boldnesse, euen so their long stay there was dangerous and vnprofitable. And therefore diuerse Captaines were of opinion to retire from those boggy places, and to goe into the Champaigne countrey, where their cauallery, wherein their chiefe hope consisted, might bee employed and shew their valour, councelling to goe and meete the enemies, promising vnto them-selues to obtaine the victory with ease, they comming so vnfurnished of all warlike preparations.
But the authority and opinion of Triuulcio did most preuaile, who thought it not fit to hazard the whole, on the vncertaine euent of a battaile, but by altering  their forme of warre, to retire two miles off from the Citty, neere to the Riuer Mora, to the end that being safely encamped, they might cut off the enemies victuals,The French retire from before Nouara. and enforce them thereby to yeeld. The Campe being gone thus farre from the citty, certaine troopes of Suisses entred it without any empediment, where they were receiued with great ioy: and not loosing one minute of time, Captaine Motir, one of the chiefe of the bands, called them all into the market place of Nouara, where after he had encouraged them with most vehement speeches, heeThe resolution of the Suisses. resolued with them by a generall consent, to depart about midnight, and on a sodaine, by the fauour of the night, to goe and assaile the French Campe, wherevpon hee commanded them to goe to rest, and to refresh their bodies, and to bee ready when the drumme should call them.
This nation did neuer make a more bold and braue attempt, being a few against many, without horse and Artillery, against an Armie excellently well prouided of all necessaries. About midnight then they sallied with great fury forth

of Nouara, on the sixt day of Iune, in the yeare 1513. They were about ten^ thousand men, who were disposed and ordered in such manner, as seauen thousandThe Suisses sa^ly fo^to to fight with the French. were appointed to assaile the ordnance, about which the Lansquenets were lodged, and the residue should march with their long pikes against the men at armes.
The French being come into that place, hauing continued the remainder of the day, and a part of the night in armes, betooke themselues heere and there to sleep (according to the report of the spies at Nouara) not doubting that any such accident would so soone befall them, hauing in no sort fortified their Campe. TheThe French Campe in feare and confusion at the Suisses (...). tumult and confusion was very great vpon the Sentinels report of the enemies  comming. The Artillery began to play with great fury vpon those who came to assayle it, and did greatly hurt them. Triuulcio was lodged in the middest of the battaile, because Trimouille sought in the right wing, and Robert de la Marche on the left, each of them exhorting the Souldiers to doe well. The men at Armes did readily put them-selues in battaile, and the Lansquenets, who were followed by the other footmen, did on a sodaine place themselues in order. The Suisses notwithstanding that many of their fellowes fell downe dead round about them, did neuerthelesse, with marueilous boldnesse, marche forward vpon the ordnance, not ^esteeming present death, nor were danted at the death ofThe Suisses great boldnesse those that fel downe at their feete, vntill that comming vnto the Artillerie, the Lansquenets and they did charge one another with incredible fury, fighting with great rage, and yet neuer brake their order. All in generall did fight with great courage (the men at armes excepted) who stood still and did nothing, no perswasions, commandements, nor entreaties of the Lords, Triuulce and Trimouille beeing able to preuaile with them: beeing so affrighted, as they had no courage to charge the enemie, who stood before them, and the Suisses were well pleased with their standing still, and for that they came not on to the ayde of the footmen.
At the l^st, the great boldnesse and valour of the Suisses, carryed it away, whoThe Suisses victory at No^. hauing brauely wonne the ordnance, did turne it vpon the French whom they put to rout, the footmen as well as the men at armes doing nothing worthy of  prase. This is the famous battaile of Nouara, where they fought for the space of two houres, with great losse on both sides, but most of all on the French, which did afterward bring great calamity on the Venetians.
By this defeate of the French a great alteration followed in Italy, chiefly in those matters which concerned the Venetians. Gritti who was in the French army was likewise one that accompanied them in the flight, who beeing by no reason able to perswade them to tarry at Alexandria or in Piedmont and not blot their reputation with so base and shamefull a flight, perceiuing their Armie to bee wholy broken, and knowing that hee could in so sort aduance the seruice of the Common-wealth, went to Sauona, and from thence to Genoa, then to  Luca, and so at last he came to Venice.
This victory caused Milan, with other townes which had openly shewed them-selues for the French, to send to begge pardon, which was grantedThe whole Dut^hy of Millan yeeldeth to (...). them, on condition to paye the Suisses, vnto whom by right was due, not onely the profit, but the glory of the victory, purchased by their valour and bloud.
The Viceroy, who till then had still kept the Spaniards in their garrisons, and not shewed himselfe against the French nor Venetians, following the victors fortune, did on a sodaine crosse the Po, and marched towards Cremona (where  he knew the Venetian army lay) to assaile it. Wherof Aluiana hauing intelligence and how that in other places the people began to rise against them and the French, in Maximillians behalfe, attempting to cut off victuals and passage from them,

determined to leaue those confines, and to draw his Armie in safety from thence; the which the Senate vpon the report of the battailes losse, had commanded him to doe: but yet neuerthelesse, to retire in such manner, as his retreat might not sauor of a manifest flight, least it should discourage his owne soldiers, and cause the enemies to become more audacious.
Aluiana being departed, and Cremona left naked of Souldiers, the Spaniard did forth*with seaze on it, and wholy sackt it, because it had giuen entrance to theCremona taken and sack^ by the Spaniards. Venetian Army. Then sending ayde to Maximillian Sforza to Nouara, and to Octauian Fregosa at Genoa, against the Adorni, he brought the residue of his Army towards the Venetians confines, hauing crossed the riuer Adda, where without  any difficulty hee tooke the Citties of Bressia and Bergamo. These Citties were taken in the Emperors name, and rated at certaine great summes of money, which being rigourously leuied, were destributed among the Spanish Soldiers.
Aluiana in the meane time, with all his forces remaining on the Veronois, being much discontented to see the great deseignes which hee had proiected to bee snacht forth of his hands, resolued on a great and difficult enterprise: for hauing wonne the towne of Legnaga, he left Iohn Paul Baillon at the siege of the Castle, with twelue hundred foot, and himselfe went speedily with the residue of the Armie to assaile Verona, to trye if hee could take it on the sodaine. Baillon hauing  made a breach in the forte of Legnaga, gaue a furious assault to it, and notwithstanding the Spaniards resistance, it was taken by force, for which hee was greatly esteemed by the Senate.
This place beeing taken, was not able to beekept without a strong garrison,Legnaga taken and dismantmantled by the Venetians. wherefore they resolued to dismantle and forsake it. Aluiana on the other side, being come before Verona, did assaile it on the weakest side neere to Saint Maxims gate, where hauing planted his ordnance, hee did with great fury batter the Tower of the gate, and the wall thereto adioyning, expecting in the meane time when any tumult would be raised in the Citty; and hauing beaten downe to theThe Venetians besiege and (...) Verona. ground forty fathome of the wall, with the tower which fell downe likewise, hee gaue it a fierce assault. But three hundred horse, and three thousand Lansquenets  beeing in Verona, it was valiantly defended, by reason that the breach was very high on the townes side, which made the descent very vneasie. Which Aluiana perceiuing, and that the Veronois did in no sort stirre, contrary to his hope, he did with great speed retire his footmen and artillery from before the walls, as wholy despairing of the Victory, and returned the very same day to his quarter, from whence he came in the morning, hauing in that assault lost aboue two hundred of his soldiers.
In this exploit there was nothing worthy of praise, but his great speed, becauseAluiana raising his siege, spoileth the Countrey. he had done that in one day, which other Captains were scarce accustomed to doe in three or foure. After that, hee spoiled the Countrey, trying whether for  feare thereof he could enforce the Veronois to come to any agreement.
The end of the tenth Booke of the fourth Decade.






The Contents of the first Booke of the fifth Decade.
THE Spaniards take the Castle of Legnaga. Pope Leo reuiueth the treaty of peace betwixt the Emperor and the Venetians. Offers made to the French King by the Venetians. Lewis the French King submitteth himselfe to the Pope. The Venetians lose the towne and Castle of Pescara, Padua besieged by the enemies; they soone quit it. The enemies make great spoile beeing come within fight of Venice. Aluiana comming forth of Padua with his Army, opposeth him-selfe against the enemies passage. The enemies are greatly perplexed, by reason they could not could not come to any place of safety. The enemies doe defeate, and put the Venetians to rout neere to Vincenza. The admirable constancy of the Venetian Senate after the losse of the battle. Prospero Colonna doth secretly fauour the Venetians, by diuerting the siege from Treuiso. The Pope in person makes a Compromise, concerning the strife betwixt the ^mperor and the Venetians, which takes none effect. Selim King of Turkes, his warre against Acchomat his Brother. The difficulties which held back the Pope from procuring peace betwixt Christian Princes. The Countreys of Padua and Friul wholy ruined. Frangipan taketh Maran, by the treachery of a Priest. The Venetians are defeated before Maran. A great fire in the Citty of Venice. A new compromise made in the Popes person, concerning the same differences. Feltre taken and spoiled by the Almains, is opportunely releeued by the Venetians: The difficulties which were found a new in the accord betwixt the Emperor and the Venetians, with the Popes arbitratiue sentence. The Venetians defeate the Almaines in the Countrey of Friul. And lastly, the meanes which the Venetians vsed to recouer money for the entertainment of their Armie.

The First Booke of the fifth Decade of the Historie of Uenice.
WHilest the Venetians spoyled the Countrey about Verona to enforce the Veronois to some agreement, the Spanish army came forward, the Viceroy fearing, least thorough the bad disposition of those of Legnaga, Verona would open her gates to the Venetians, and therefore hee determined without delay toThe Castle of Legnaga taken by the Spaniards. giue ayde to the Emperors affaires: which made him to crosse the Po at Stradella, and to encampe before the castle of Legnaga, which was guarded  by two hundred and fifty foot, the which (notwithstanding the common opinion that it might well haue held out for certaine dayes longer) he tooke by force, the Venetian Prouidator being taken prisoner, with all the footmen which were not slaine at the assault. Aluiana hauing intelligence of the Spaniards approach,The Venetian Armie retireth to Padua and Treuiso. retired to Albera, on the farther side of the riuer Adice, where he vsed all the means hee could to repaire his armie, the which hee afterward diuided for the gard of Treuiso, and Padua, sending Iohn Paul Baillon, Malatesta Sogliana, and the Knight de la Volpe to Treuiso, with two hundred men at armes, three hundred light horse, and two thousand ^oote, and himselfe went with the residue of the Armie to Padua.
During all these warlike exploits, and different practises, because the treaties of The Pope reuiueth the agreement betwixt the Emperor and the Venetians. the accord betwixt the Emperor and the Venetians were not wholy broken off, Pope Leo would haue them to be reuiued, thinking it an easie matter to obtaine of either of them that which hee pretended. For he supposed that the Emperor, beeing inuited by his occasions beyond the Mounts, would bee content to hearken therevnto, that hee might with more ease recouer Burgondie for his sonnes sonne: and the Venetians much more, as well because they were daunted with the defeat of the French, as for that they knew that the French King (many dangers threatning his kingdome) could not for that yeare thinke on the affaires of Italy: and besides, he saw the Spanish Army at their doores, with which the companies that were in Verona went to vnite themselues: They were more ouer drawne  dry of money, vnprouided of Soldiers, and namely of footmen: and they were to make resistance alone, no sparke of light appearing, nor no ayde neere.
The Senate neuerthelesse made a most constant answer, That it would notThe Venetian^ constancie. hearken to any agreement, vnlesse Vincenza and Verona were yeelded to them. And on the otherside they solicited the French King, by their Ambassador Dandulo, resident with him, to renue his army, and not to make shew of being danted for one onely losse hapned at Nouara: not to suffer those mountainer Suisses to boast for that they had driuen so mighty a king from his state, and rob'd him of the fruite of the purchased victory: That hee should boldly make choyce ofThe Venetians offers to the French King. counsell worthy his greatnesse, that the Venetians would not faile him in  any thing: That hee should make vse for his seruice, of their Armes, Soldiers, and meanes: that so long as life should remaine in their bodies, they would bee ready to vnder-goe all paine and danger, for the greatnesse of the Realme of France, and for the defence of their common cause.
King Lewis thanked the Venetians for their offers, and with faire words gaueThe French Kings an^wer (...) Venetians. them good hope, manifesting his desire to bee reuenged on his enemies, and to continue his friendship and confederacie with them: that the Frenck Kings custome was not to be chargeable: but to bring all aide, profit, and comfort to their friends and confederates. But because it was certainly thought, that the Realme of France, beeing assailed in sundry places: namely, by the King of England at Calais, and by the Emperor, and the Suisses in another place; it would bee hard for King Lewis, to intend for that whole yeare the affaires of Italy. The Venetians in the meane time did exhort him to free himselfe from all those difficulties whichThe Venetians (...) the French King. might in time to come hinder him from the conquest, of that which did belong  vnto him in Italy, and to purchase friends in the Countrey, especially the Pope.
The King, who desired nothing more then the vniting of his Realme with the Church, the which was earnestly craued by all his Court and subiects, did willingly hearken to the Venetians intreaties and remonstrances, and resolued for the same purpose to send the Bishop of Marseilles his Ambassador to Rome, and perceiuing that hee could neuer hope for any alliance with the Pope in temporall matters, vnlesse he first of all did compose spirituall dissentions, hee gaue his Ambassador in charge to assure the Pope, that hee had broken and reuoked the Councell which hee had caused first to bee assembled at Lyons, and afterwards atThe Kings Submission to the Pope* Pisa: and that hee would not allow of any other Councell then that of Lateran, which was then to be held in Rome: that he would euer (like to his Predecessors) greatly honor and reuerence the Popes name, and the sea Apostolick, and would be ready with his whole power to defend the Church of Rome.
The Venetians at the same time, sent ten Ambassadors to the Pope; for age and dignity, the chiefest of the Citty, for to giue him sufficient testimony of the good will and affection which they did beare to him: and had besides (the better to please him) enioyned Francisco Foscare their Ambassador resident with him to be present at euery S^ssion of the Councell, in the name of the Republick, so soone as it should be begun at Saint Iohns of Lateran. But they found afterward that the Pope did not so greatly affect them as they imagined, because that beeing wholy  (since the rout at Nouara) freed from the feare of the French, insteed of dissembling (which before hee had done) he began to discouer himselfe openly. He did aloud rebuke the Venetians and greatly taxe them, for recalling the French intoThe Popes reproachful speeches of the Venetians. Italy: and that they who ought to haue had most care of the liberty and quiet of the Prouince, were those who had stirred vp more troubles in it, and had reduced it vnder the seruitude of Barbarians. And to make them more odious, hee did accuse them to haue had a desire, if matters had fallen out prosperously, to recouer the Citties and Townes of Romagnia, which they had enioyed. The Pope did often vse these reproachfull speeches.
The Emperour in the meane time did solicite him to send him the aide promised  in the treaty passed with Iulius his Predecessor, and ratified by himselfe against the Venetians, in which demand the Emperour still persisting with great obstinacy; albeit it was i^ksome vnto him (fearing least the French King would be displeased therewith) hee sent vnto him, (being not able to delay it any longer), vnder the conduct of Troilo Sauello, Achilles Tourella, Mutio Colonna, the nomber ofThe Pope sendeth forces to the Emperor against the Uenetians. soldiers which he craued, because he would not (by refusall) giue any signe, that he was not desirous to perseuer in the confederacy contracted with the late Pope, as also because it seemed vnto him that he had no correspondence with the Venetians, who, besides, that their Army had after a sort behaued it selfe in hostile man: ner on the Parmesan and Placentine territories, at such time as Aluiana laye  neere to Cremona, had not chosen any Ambassador to make the oath of obedience to him, after the ancient custome, vntill the French, beeing vanquished, were gone forth of Italy.
Nothing did so much astonish the Venetians, as because the Pope had declared himselfe their enemie. Yet neuerthelesse they hauing in his behalfe neuer failed in the reuerence and affection which they were bound to, (as himselfe did confesse it) they were perswaded that they might yet be receiued into his fauour, and make vse heereafter of his grace and frendship. Neuerthelesse, they did not alter their former determinations, but resolued to resist fortune as much as they might, and seeing themselues to be our of hope of peace, and that the nomber of their enemies encreased, they speedily beganne to prouide all thinges necessary to resist so many dangers. They made great leuyes of footmen as wel in Romaignia as else where, they armed a great nomber of vessells, called home all those Prouisions made by the Venetians. which they had in Candy and other places, and with the same speed, they made great prouisions of victualls, munition and money.
Some of the Senate were of opinion to haue their nauall army to saile into Puglia, to assaile the sea townes, or at least to seeme to resent the many wronges which King Ferdinand without cause had done them. But hauing maturely considered how important a matter it was to prouoke so mighty a King, they reiected this proposition, as more couragious then discreet, as well in resp^ct of his power, as for that he had alwaies made shew to councell the Emperour to peace. The Venetian Generall in the meane time being encamped on the banks of Adice,The (...) Army on the bankes of Adiss^. his espies aduertised him that the Spaniards had taken the way of Vincenza, determining  to marche towards Padua, and that Cardona, with whom the Popes forces were vnited, came directly towards him with all his forces, he then thought fit to crosse the Riuer; as well to free himselfe from danger, as for to assure the Citties of Padua and Treuiso, and came and stayed at Montagnane. But so soone as hee had crossed rhe Riuer with his forces, the Venetians affaires, who by reason of some prosperous and good successe, had begunne to bee re-established, did a new fall into decadence: For the Pollesin of Rouigo, did forth-with yeeld to the enemy, and the other people of the countrey did likewise sodainly rise, because those of the Venetian iurisdiction, perceiuing that the enemies did waxe strong, and did greatly molest  them, and that the Venetians on the contrary grew weake, and could not releeueThe (...) of Rance de Cere, (...) (...) of Crema. them, all men in heapes ranne to the enemies. Rance de Cere alone deserued great commendation, who remaining euer constant in the Venetian seruice, did at times sally forth of Crema, where he lay in garrison, and made incursions on the enemies Countrey, spoiling and burning whatsoeuer he met with.
The towne of Pescara, after a small resistance, with the Castle likewise, albeit it was well fortified, fell into the enemies hands, thorough the strife and discentionThe (...) loose (...). of those within it, Lodouico Contaren the Prouidator, and all the Captaines with the most part of the soldiers were taken prisoners, the rest escaped by flight.
The Bishop of Gurcia, as Lieutenant to the Emperor in Italy, comming to the  Armie, was of opinion to goe and besiege Padua, saying; That he had so great hope in the Lansquenets and Spaniards valour against the Italians, as in the end they would surmount all difficulties. That it was a matter of small labour to take Treuiso, but that the reward of the victory was different, because that toOf (...) (...) portance the taking of (...) du^ (...). winne Treuiso onely, did not import much for the conclusion of the warre, but by the taking of Padua, they should altogether assure the Citties of the Emperors obedience, from the dangers of warre, and depriue the Venetians of all hope, of euer beeing able to recouer those places that they had lost. It is certaine, that the Bishop of Gurcia did obstinately maintaine this proposition against the aduise of all the Captaines, who were of a contrary opinion, iudging it rather an impossible then hard matter to take Padua by force, in regard of hi^ fortifications almost incredible: It is not knowne whether the Bishop of Gurcia propounded it by the Emperors commandement, or else of his own motion,

hoping thereby of greater praise, as for an high and difficult enterprise.
At the last, notwithstanding all the Viceroyes reasons, and those of the contrary opinion, the Bishop of Gurcia his will was followed, by meanes whereof the Imperiall Armie approching neere to Padua, went and lodged at Bassanella, on the right side of the channell, a mile and a halfe from the citty, in which place being much molested by certaine double Canons, planted vpon one of the citties bastions, it crossed the channell, and lodged a little farther of.
Aluiana, who had already sent his Artillery and baggage to Padua, to bee the lighter to take what way should be most expedient, hauing notice of their resolution, determined to march towards the citty, to keepe and defend it against the The Imperials resolution to (...) Padua. enemies, Baillon beeing already in Treuiso (as hath beene said) with sufficient forces to defend it, whether the Senate sent Andre, Mari-pietro for Prouidator. And although that Padua seemed to bee well furnished with men, and all other necessaries, the Senate neuerthelesse would haue certaine leuies of foot companies to bee made, as well of Venetians as Histrians, who speedily marched thither, with all the husbandmen neere about, which were come to Venice for refuge, to the end to vse those men for necessary reparations, in steed of Pioners. Diuerse young Venetian Gentlemen likewise went to the defence of the citty: So great was their care and diligence to keepe these two citties, as well for the commodity of their situation, as for the fertillity of the soyle, hauing made the  countrey plaine round about, cut downe the trees which were there, and raced allPadua furnished of all things necessary to susteine a siege. the farmes and houses of pleasure, so as there was nothing within a mile of the citty, which lay not open to the mercy of the Canon.
The enemies encamping round about padua, sent the footmen to S. Anthonies Church, which is within halfe a mile of the towne where they beganne, (that they might approach with lesse danger) to make trenches neere to Saint Antonies gate. But the work being great, and the want of Pioners greater, it went foreward slowly and with danger, because the soldiers on the sodaine making many sallies, as well in the day time as by night, did greatly hinder them that wrought.
On the other side the nomber of the enemies was to smal for such an enterprise, for they were not aboue eight thousand foot and a thousand horse of all sortes, so as a smal quantity of the towne beeing enuironed by the enemies, the StradiotsThe number of the enemies before Padua. sallied forth at other places and did freely scoure the whole contrey, intercepting whatsoeuer was brought to the Camp, the like did certai^e armed boates which the Venetians had placed for that purpose on the Riuer Adice so as victuals beginning to faile them, they wee euery day to seeke new.
They had worthy Captaines in their Campe, but their skill and experience was to no purpose in that businesse, in regard of the authority and obstinacy of the Bishop of Gurcia. That which did most trouble them, was, the bringing of their ordnance neere to the walls, and how to bring the souldiers afterward to the assault, the which they could not doe without a broad and large trench, to auoid the shot of the ordnance which incessantly plaid from the towne, and they wanted Pioners to continue it. These difficulties being propounded by the Viceroy in the enemies councell, with the sicknesse where-with the soldiers were afflicted, by reason of the bad aire, the campe being seated in a low place, and subiect to the ouer flowing of waters, all men were of opinion, that it would be lesse disgrace to correct the determination vnwisely made, by discamping, then by perseuering in that error to be cause of some great losse that might happen, the which would bee followed with greater disgrace.
The Viceroy acquainting the Bishoppe of Gurcia with this determination, hee made answer in the presence of diuers Captaines, that martiall discipline being none of his vocation, he was not a shamed to confesse, That hee had no vnderstanding in martiall matters, and if he had councelled to besiege Padua, it was by the Viceroys aduise, who by letters and expresse messages had

councelled the Emperour that it might be so, and giuen him great hope to be ableThe Imperials raise their siege from before Padua. to take it: and therefore he gaue consent, (difficulties still continuing) to raise the seege, the which was done on the sixteenth day of August, after they had encamped twenty dayes before the walls of Padua.
The enemy marched directly to Vincenza, the which beeing found, for the most part, empty of inhabitants, and abandoned by the Venetian Magistrates was foorth with seized by them, and made a prey to the enemies,The enemies spoile and ruin^ Uincenza* where they commited cruell and foule actions, not spoyling alone cittizens houses, but Churches and sacred places, not for hatred they did beare to that wretched citty, but because their army was altogether maintained by theft and  robbery.
The Bishop of Gurcia and the Viceroy remained certaine dayes at vincenza with bad intertainment, as well in regard of the continuall molestation of the stradiots who scoured the contrey day and night, as scarcity and want of victuals, in the Citty. This enforced them to dislodge: The Bishop of Gurcia with his Almans went towards Verona, and the Viceroy encamped at Albera on the Adice, where he tarried certaine dayes, as well to giue meanes to the veronois to gather in their haruest vintage, and to sow their grounds, as for to make a bridge ouer the riuer, hauing an intent to bring his troopes to winter on the Bressan and Bergamasc territories. But Aluiana perceiuing that the viceroy made no hast  to depart thence, was of opinion to sally forth of Padua and Treuiso with their forces and to assaile the enemies, who without any suspition thereof, being disperced heere and there about pillage, gaue occasion of an assured victory: shewing, that that Army being defeated, the warre was for a time ended.
The Senate iudging otherwise of the matter, said that it was not necessaryThe Senates opinion on Aluianas desire to fight with the enemy. to hazard, on the vncertaine euent of a battaile, that army, wherein consisted the chiefe hope of the preseruation of their State: thinking it likewise no discretion to vnfurnish, in so dangerous a time, the Citties of Padua and Treuiso of their garrisons: Neuer-the lesse, concealing their intents, they caused it to bee giuen out, That their Army should shortly come forth into the field, to the end, that the enemies beeing troubled with this newes, should abstaine from making any more incursions, and dislodge foorth of their confines.
But the Viceroy making no great account of these rumors, in regarde hee saw no likelyhood thereof, propounded to him-selfe greater designes, and changing his former determination, to place his armie in garrison on the Bressail and Bergamase Countrey, hauing no other meanes to feede his Armie, but by boot-haling, hee sent for the Almaines, and went to Montagnane and Este, and to the village of Bouolente, from whence bringing away great store of  Cattle, the Souldiers burned diuerse goodly houses neere adioyning: Then being prouoked by the desire of spoyle, and emboldened because the Venetian troopes were distributed for the garde of Padua, and Treuiso, they determined to draw neere to Venice (contrary to the opinion of Prospero Colonna) and hauingThe incursions of the Imperial Army. crossed the Riuer Baquillon, and spoiled Pieua di Sac, which is a great Burrow, they went to Mestre and Marguera, seated on the salt waters, where the Viceroy commanded his Artillery to stay, and seeing the Citty of Venice before him, hee caused tenne peeces of great ordnance to bee discharged vpon it, the bullets whereof fell on the Monastery of Saint Secundus, and at the same time, his souldiers rob'd and spoyled the whole countrey, making warre most vniustly  on the very walles, for beeing not satisfied with their booty, they cruelly burnt Mestre, Marguera, and Lissafusina, together with other townes and villages.
Now the Viceroy beginning to perceiue his error, and therefore beeing desirous to make hast to gette from thence, could not keepe back his soldiers from pillaging, neither by his authority nor by shewing them the danger they were in if they stayed any longer there, in regard of the ouer-much liberty which they had taken to spoile.
Aluiana being with his army shut vp in Padua, was extreamly greeued to seeAluiana his great grie^e that he might not come ^orth his reputation so soiled, and that before his face the enemies passing along neere to so strong a Citty, should so vnluckily giue spoile to so great a Contrey. Therfore he aduertised the Senate that his intent was to sally foorth of the Cittty with his forces and to come and meet with the enemies, to stop their passage at their  returne, saying that being laden with spoile as they were, they could not choose but march in disorder and by that meanes they might easily be broaken and defeated,Aluiana his earnestnesse to the Senate that he might fight with the enemies. That certainly their Republicke was fallen into a wretched condition, farre vnworthy their antient glory, the which they could not shake off, but by some valiant and generous exploite* But the Senate enclining to the contrary, thought that the same did not proceed from a base and abiect mind, but rather from a generous constancy, carefully to prouide for al inconueniences that might happen, and that it was no great wisdome to hazard all on the euent of a battaile, which for the most part is doubtfull and vncertaine: therefore their opinion was, that he should assaile the enemies with the Cauallery only, and leaue the foote-forces  for the gard of the citty.
But Aluiana being carried away with an extreme desire to obtaine the victory, by which oftentimes he was spurd foreward by vaine glory, as by a certaine dazeling, so as hee did not fore-see dangers, and contemned all councell how wise and proffitable soeuer, did euery day make greater instance, that he might with the Army come forth into the field, the Prouidatory made the same request, being induced as they said by the great affection which they perceiued in the Captaines in the Republicks behalfe.The Senate permits Aluiana to come forth with his Army.
The Senate at these intreaties, gaue ouer their former opinion, and referred all to Aluianas discretion, if he thought that his comming forth of Padua with the army  might turne to the proffit and vtillity of the common wealth; and that to those ends he should assemble all his soldiers, and cause all the peasants, as well of the champaine as hilly countrey to rise, to stoppe if it were possible the enemies returne (as Aluiana promised to him selfe to do) who were so rashly gonne forward, being come betwixt Venice, Treuiso and Padua.
The Viceroy (as hath beene said) hauing acknowledged his error made all the hast he could to march away, and beeing come to Ciuitella, he could not take it, by reason that it was well mand with soldiers. For Aluiana according to the Senates permission being with all his forces come forth of Padua leauing a garrison in Ciuitella, came to Cotincella, where the Riuer Brente  might bee so orded. The enemies failed not to come thither, for they could notAluiana (...) eth himselfe at the enemies passage. enter Ciuitella: But perceiuing Aluiana to bee lodged on the other side with the Artillery, they durst not passe ouer: and making shew that they would passe a little beneath, Aluiana turned all his forces thither, wherevpon they passed the night following, without any let, at the passage called the new Crosse,The Imperiall Army by night passeth the riuer Brente. three miles aboue Ciuitella, taking afterwards with great speed, the way towards Vincenza.
Aluiana hauing notice of their passage, resolued to stoppe them at the Riuer Baquillon: Andre Gritti, and Iohn Paul Baillon, comming forth of Treuiso, ioyned with him, with two hundred and fiftie men at armes, and two thousand  foot, determining not to fight with displayed Ensignes, but onely to garde the strong passages and commodious places to stoppe their way, on what side so euer they should turne, as well on Monteseas side, as on that of Barberana,

hauing sent forces thither for that purpose, and caused the country peasants to posesse all the passages leading into Germany, and to fortifie them with dikes and trenches, Aluiana hauing left Theodore (...) in Vincenza, with sufficient garrison, came with the residew of the Army, and encamped at Olma, whichAluiana encampeth at Olma, determining their to tarry for the enemy. is a place two miles distant from Vincenza, on the high way of Verona, which was so stopped with ditches and trenches, with artillery planted on the waies, as it was almost impossible to passe. Aluiana chose this place as most safe and commodious, wher he determined to stay for the enemies, (according to the Senates aduise) hauing in aboundance all things necessary for a campe, and the enemies on the contrary wanted all.
The Viceroy in the meane time holding on his way was come within foure miles of the Venetian Campe, and stayed at a place called by those of the country La Motta, where hee was much troubled in his minde, together with his other Captaines, what way hee were best to take, all their opinions were different: For they could not passe along by the sides of the mountaines, by reason of the marrish countrey which was full of water, nor yet by the streight-waies of the mountaine, which was garded by diuers armed men. So as beeing in a manner enuironed on euery side by the enemies, in front, on their backs, and in flanke, and continually followed by great multitudes of light-horse, they could not determine on any thing which was not hard and dangerous. Wherevpon after long  consultation, they resolued at the last to open their way by armes, thinking it fit and well beseeming to shew in greate dangers a singular and vnusuall valour. Therefore the viceroy, perceiuing the difficulties that did present them selues could no longer bee concealed from the soldiours, hee thought good withoutThe Emperialls braue resolution. dissembling any thing, to let them vnderstand how their (...) stood, and by some remonstrance to exhorte them to doe wel, and to open their way with their swords points, putting them in mind, how much hee had euer relied on their valour and prowesse, the which alone had made them to enter so farre into the enemies country, hoping that they would altogether striue to free them-selues from danger, if any should bee offered, as then was: for hauing on the one side, sharpe and hight mountaines, possessed by the enemies, and on the other side the Venetian Army stopping their returne, they were resolued them-selues by fighting to endure sondry discommodities to winne way, which would neuerthelesse be great disgrace to them, who had neuer beene vanquished: And therefore hee thought it much better to come at the first to handy-stroakes with the enemies, and to passe thorow the middest of their campe, continuing their iourny: for want of victuall enforced them to depart thence*
The souldiers being greatly encouraged by this remonstrance, promised the Generall to behaue themselues brauely in the fight, and in this resolution they  marched the next day by day-breake to Bassan, turning their backes to the enemies, marching alwaies in order, with small hope neuerthelesse of escape.
Aluiana by reason of a thicke mist, did not very soone perceiue that they were dislodged, which was done without drummes or trumpets: but hauing notice thereof, hee speedily followed them with his forces: so that their difficulty in marching, passing thorow narrow waies, full of ditches, did still increase their danger, and hauing gonne about two miles in such way, not without great trauaile, Aluiana not being able to contein^ himselfe, did assaile, not disorderly, but with his army ordered for the fight, and with the artilery the enemies ^ereward, conducted by Prospero Colonna, who hauing brauely receiued them, sent speedily for the viceroy, who led the battaile; and the Spanish foot-men commanded by  the Marquis of Pescara, marching at the same time on the one side, and the Lans^quenets on the other: The Venetian souldiers beeing with great fury charged vpon, not being able to susteine the enemies force, did basely on (...) betake them selues to flight, flinging their pikes from them vpon the ground.
The foot-men of Romagnia were authors of this flight: the residew of their army did forth-with follow them, so as none in a manner did fight. Aluiana himselfe was so amazed at so sodaine a rout, as without fight hee left the victory to the enemies with all his bagage and artillery, the foot-men dispersed them-selues in diuers places, and as for the men at armes, part of them fled towards the hill, and the other saued themselues in Padua and Treuiso, whether Aluiana and Gritti did like-wise retire: Many Captaines were slaine there, and many were taken prisoners,The Prouidator Loredan, slaine. but the Prouidator Loredan made proofe of them both, by reason that two soldiers striuing who should haue him, the one of the two did most inhumainely kill him. And in this manner at this battaile, as well dead as taken prisoners, foure  hundred men at armes, and foure thousand Venetian foot were found by reason the marshes which hindred the escape of many.The constancy of the Venetian Senate.
But notwithstanding that the Senate was aflicted with so many miseries, and amased at an accident contrary to their hope, yet neuerthelesse, the same day thatThe tenor of the Senates letters sent to Aluiana. they receaued these lamentable newes, they determined to write to Aluiana, That they could not deny, but that they were in some sort troubled at the report of so strange an accident, but not danred or wholy discouraged, wherevpon they were rather to awake them-selues in such aduersiy, then to lose one iot of their vsuall constancy, Therfore they did with great affection entreate him to take courrage, and not to yeeld to fortune: That they were very carefull of his health, in regard  of the great hope they had in his valour, and that they did still hope, if hee recouered his strength and magnanimity, to breake the course of aduerse fortune, to calme her too much rigor, by bringing backe in the end victory from the enemies, albeit they were now victorious: They willed him then speedily to prouide for the defence of Padua and Treuiso, that the Senate would soone furnish him with soldiours, armor, victualls, and mony, and generally with what-soeuer they knew to be necessary for the safety and preseruation of those Citties.
These letters being written, the Senate made prouision of all things needfull. Prince Loredan by a graue remonstrance inciting euery one to employ him-selfe Prince Loredan his remonstrance. therein, said, That it behoued them*selues to releeue their state, and not to hope for aide from elsewhere, and that each man ought to aide the common-wealth with what hee knew was in his ability. As for him-selfe hee was determined to spare nothing that he knew might serue the Republike* and how for that purpose hee resolued to send his two Sonnes, Lodouico and Bernardo; the one to Treuiso, and the other to Padua, for to expose them to all dangers which should happen, consecrating them to his country.
The Princes speech did greatly moue; but his example much more, by which diuers young Gentlemen of the cheefest families of the Citty, and of great hopeDi^ers Venetian young gentlmen are sent to Padua and Treuiso. being incited did like-wise depart for the gard of those townes; diuers of the  common people were like-wise enroled to bee sent to Treuiso, whether the report was, that the enemies would first come. The which vndoubtedly had beene done, had not Prospero (...) by deferring from day to day, the resolution of that businesse hindred the execution thereof.
Hee, as it was after-wards knowne, did sufficiently fauour the Venetians affaires, for the conseruation and defence of the common liberty of Italy: so as after many and sondry determinations, hee caused the councell at last to condescend to deferre the matter till the Bishop of Gurcias comming, saying ThatThe seege of Treuiso is deferd till another time by Prospero (...). there was nothing which did so much wrong their reputation, as to attempt an (...), and then to be enforced to giue ouer, without effecting it, as they had  done at Padua. And thus the Viceroy, and Prospero concluded together to leaue part of the Army at Vincenza, and to leade the residew to Verona, staying for the Bishop of Gurcia: where hauing delayed the time twenty daies, Colonna tooke vpon him the place of Captaine Generall of Maximilian Sforzas army, and forsooke the Spaniards.
The Viceroy being desirous to renew his Army: sent for all the Captaines with their Companies which lay on the Bressan and Bergamask, assuring them that vppon their arriuall, he would forthwith goe and beseege Treuiso: Gritti was within it, with the Knight La Volpe, Hug^ de Pepoli, Iohn Paul Manfrou, with diuers other worthy Captaines, great numbers of horse and foot, and store of victuall. The Viceroy being aduertized thereof, and it being winter, he deferred the matter till some other time, and sent his army to winter on the Paduan territory, some to Este, and the rest to Montagnane and Moncelesia.
In the meane time matters were changed from Armes to consultations of peace, which were treated of in the Popes Court, whether the Bishop of Gurcia Compromise made by the Pope. was gone; at whose comming a compromise was made by him and the Venetian Ambassadors in the Popes person, concerning all the strife which was betwixt the Emperour and their common-wealth: but it was a compromise in name and shew rather then in effect and substance: the Pope likewise left the matter imperfect, albeit hee had declared by a Breefe, that there should bee a surcease of armes on both sides: for this was not well obserued, neither by the Viceroy, whose soldiers since the victory did nothing but robbe and spoile euery where, nor by the Germaines, who by meanes of a Preest did by stealth take Maran which is a Sea towne in the Country of Friul, then they tooke Montfalcon;  In the recouery of which townes, Fortune shewing her selfe no more fauourable to the Venetians, then in other places, they were on both sides much endamaged.
At the same time as these affaires were thus managed in Italy, there were great stirrs in Asia. Selim sonne to Baziazet, his father yet liuing, did vsurpe the OttomanTroubles in Asia. Empire, and hauing in sondry battailes vanquished Achomat his brother, who likewise laid claime therevnto, had enforced him for releefe, to haue recourse to his neighbor Kings, and cheefely to Hismaell Sophi, King of Persia. And albeitSelims cruelty that Selim in his victories gaue sufficient testimony of his vile and cruell nature, and the desire he had, (being freed from this warre) to assaile the Christians; The Venetians neuerthelesse beeing else where molested, and hauing no meanes to  resist his greatnesse, resolued to purchase his frendship, and to fit themselues to theA (...) Ambassador sent to Selim^ time. Therefore they were of opinion to send an Ambassador to him, and they appointed for this purpose Antonio Iustiniano, in the Republicks name to congratulate his comming to the Empire, and to reioyce with him, and to confirme a new the ancient frendship and alliance which they had with the Ottoman family.
This Ambassador was honorably receiued by Selim in the citty of Andrinopolis, where he then was with his army, who gaue him great entertainment, knowing very well that without peace he could not assure his affaires of Europe, then when he was to passe with a great Army into Asia against his brother Achomat, who being backt by the Sophies forces, had already recouered certaine places in Cappadocia, and approached to assaile him, whilest he as yet was not strong enough to resist him; wherevpon Selim (perceiuing that which he had cheefely wished for to be freely offered) did willingly imbrace the Venetians frendship, promising for euer to obserue it inuiolably: And in this manner the alliance was renewed betwixt them on the same conditions as they had beene before treated of with Baziazet.
This treaty being concluded and effected, Iustinian returned to Venice, with whom Selim sent Alimbei his Ambassador, to cause the Prince and Senate to ratefie the present treaty, vnto whom he likewise wrote, exhorting them to entertaine  his frendship: And that he for his part would neuer faile them. The Turkish Ambassador being come to Venice, and brought into the Senate, Prince Loredan, swore and ratefied, as well in his owne name as in the Common wealthes, all that which Iustinian, their Ambassador, had agreed to,

and signed. Selim by this meanes being out of feare of the warrs on Europes side, hauing likewise renewed the truce with the Kings of Poland, and Hungary, hee marched courrageously against Achomat, whome hauing broken and defeated, hee commanded to be slaine, to the end that by his death hee might without contradictionAchomat brother to ^elim vanqu sh^d and slaine. become absolute Lord of Asia the lesse, thereby promising to himselfe, that nothing should bee able to resist him: whereby hee became so proude as hee thought hee was able to conquer the whole world, and cheefely Italy, on which hee began to fixe his thoughts, imagining that he could with ease subiugate it, being weake and molested by the forepassed warres.
He was moreouer incited thervnto by the Emperor Maximilian, who thought The Emperor Maximilian pro^oketh Selim against the Venetians. on nothing more then how to ruinate the Venetians. It is certaine that he sent an Ambassador to Constantinople to aduertise Selim of the great opportunity then offered, to enuade the sea coasts of the Venetians state, whilest hee with his army would assaille them by land: but it was not certainly knowne, on what place he ment first to attempt
Selim being thus solicited, caused that winter diuers Vessels to bee armed, and new to be made, and to new builde those that were broken. But at the springAmurath Son to Achomat in armes against Selim. newes was brought to Constantinople, how that Amurath, Sonne to his brother Achomat, (who being not at the battaile where his Father fought, with such bad successe, had escaped into Persia) had on a sodaine entred Cappadocia with  great numbers of horse and foote, where afrighting the whole country with great wast, hee was become maister of diuers places of that Prouince.
Selim being greatly daunted at these newes, and considering that the Sophi aloneSelim march^th (...) Asi^ with the army which he had prepared for Europe. was cause, as well of those present troubles, as of those which Achomat his brother had in time before raised, resolued to take reuenge: and to this end determined to send all that great army, as well by land as sea into Asia, the which was leuied for Europe. This Asian warre fell out opportunely for the Christian Princes, whome this most mighty and cruell enemy would haue wholy ruined, and afterward would haue gone on in dispite of all their resistance.
This being considered by Pope Leo, with the great good which this warre of The (...) on peace. Persia had done, thought it his duty to meditate a firme peace among Christian Princes, to the end that being vnited together, they might with more ease oppose them selues against that Barbarous enemy. The Cardinalls solicited him therevnto, in setting on foot the treaty of peace, and not to leaue till it had taken effect according to their desire. But albeit the Pope did very well know that thisThe difficulty which held backe the Pope from procuring a generall peace. was more then reasonable, yet neuer: the-lesse hee reuolued in his minde, which was troubled with diuers maters, that as the successe of that wholesome councell, did promise a very great and certaine commendations, euen so the diuers respects of warre and peace, and the difficulties which he met with in this treatie did affright him and wholy draw him backe from that enterprise. For his feare least  the French should returne againe into Italy, and make head against the Spaniards and Almans, did extreamely trouble him: thinking verily that the same would happen, if the realme of France were not enuaded in some place or other, knowing that King Lewis, by nature, was altogether an enemy to quiet, and that so soone as hee had made peace with the English, hee would turne his thoughts vpon Italy, for the recouery of the Dutchy of Milan, in regard hee had euer reiected all motions of peace wherein was propounded that hee should quit his claime to the state of Milan.
The Venetians affaires were almost at the same stay, the Pope being not desirous to haue them recouer their former greatnesse, no^ yet to be to much deiected  in regard of the common reputation of Italy. Whilest the Pope was in this sort afflicted with sundry thoughts, and that at one time hee would fauour the Venetians, and at another shewe them an angry and froward countenance,

the warre did still continew, notwithstanding the sharpnesse of the Winter, for Prospero Collonna with the Duke of Millans forces marching to Crema, ioyned himselfe to the Spannish army, the which did re-enforce the Citties seege,The Paduan territory with the Frioul (...) ruined by the enemies incursions. and the Paduan territory was daily scoured and spoiled by the enemies incursions, the like was done in the Contrey of Friul, where there was no towne or castle so strong, either by art or nature, which was not enforced to obey that partie who was strongest in the field; so as the inhabitants of that poore contrey, were wholly stript of all.
And for to dispatch them at once, Bernardino Frangipan hauing forsaken theFrangipan taketh Maran by trechery. Venetians, did by treachery seaze on the Fort of Maran (as hath beene said) by  meanes of a Preest called Bartholomeo, who being a familiar frend to Alessandro Marcello Prouidator of the place, got leaue of him on a morning, before day, to haue the Castle gates opened for him, vnder co^ller that he went forth to hunt, so as Frangipan, according as it was concluded betwixt himselfe and the Preist, did on a sodaine seaze on the gate, with certaine Almaine foot, and some horse, vntill his troopes were arriued, whereby hee became maister of the place. But the traytor within a while after was paied his desert; for being taken by Nicolo PisareThe traitor punished. who commaunded in Gruare, hee was sent to Venice, where beeing hung vp by one foote, hee was by the people stoned to death.
This place beeing very commodious for the Venetians, the Senate was of opinion  to haue it speedily beseeged, the better afterwards to assayle Goritia, which Frangipan had taken in the same manner, and held it in the Emperors name. The land Army marched thither vnder the conduct of Balthasar Scipione of Luca, and the nauall army, commanded by Bartholomeo de Must a man well experienced in marine matters. These two Armies being come before Maran, an Herrald was sent to the inhabitants of the towne, and to the Almaines that were within it, toThe Venetians bese^ged Maran. summon them in the name of the common wealth to yeeld vp that place to the Venetians, aduising them not to delay till it were taken by force.
Those within it made shewes wholy contrary to the summons, and vsed many  iniurious speeches to the Herrald, whereat those of the Camp being incensed, determined to giue an assault, not tarrying for certaine galleyes which were to ariue, but at the first shot of ordnance which the beseeged made vpon the armed boates, which did disorder them, and slew some, the sailers and soldiers were so danted, as on a sodaine they retired as far off as they could from the shot of the Cannon, whereas at the beginning they craued to be led to the assault, so as afterward they durst in no sort stirre, vntill that foure armed gallcies arriued to their aid.
The towne-walls next to the Hauen were in some sort lower then other places, where the small towers likewise had beene beaten downe by the Canon; the Venetians  made account to enter there with ease; and to make the matter lesse difficult, to assaile it on a sodaine in sondry places, as well on the land side, as on the Hauens, to the end that the beseeged beeing busied in so many places, might be the weaker in all. According then to this resolution they went to the assault, butThe assault resolued on Maran in diuers places at once. on a sodaine there fell such a shower ofrayne, as those on the land side were enforced to retire, not only from the walls, but a great way from the towne, the whole plaine being couered with water, by reason of the Marshes neere adioyning, by meanes where-of the beseeged being assured on that side, turned all their forces towards the Hauen, from whence with ease they draue the assaylants, who already beganne to mount the walles.
At the same time as this happened, the soldiers whom Scipio had sent to gardeThose that garded the mountaines, forsak^ the passages. the passages of the mountaines, to stoppe all ayd from the beseeged sent intelligence to the Campe, that Frangipan approached with great nombers of soldiers, requesting to haue supplies sent vnto them, otherwise they

should bee enforced to abandon those places, beeing to weake to resist them, Sauorgnane who was in the army, being out of hope to take the towne, vpon these news turned his forces towards the Mounts, but he had not marched a mile, ere he met with those that sent for more aide, who being afrighted at the great numbers of those who were said to be comming, to releeue the towne, had not the courage to attend them, and Sauorgnane vniting them with his forces, went to the horsemens quarter, who were lodged on a little rising hill, not farre from the campe, and did earnestly entreate them (hauing acquainted them how their affaires stood) to approch neare to Maran, to ioyne them-selues with the residew of the army, and to keepe backe the aid, that was comming to the towne: they were not ashamed  to refuse it, where-vpon those of the Campe being affrighted, at the reportThe Campe before Maran disband^th. of the enemies great numbers, did in a manner all disband, vnder collour that they had not their pay.
Frangipan in the meane time, beeing come with his succors, did without anyFrangipan entreth Maran with his succor^. difficulty enter the towne, finding no where any resistance, where he tooke without delay part of the Almaines, who lay there in garrison, and ioyning them with his soldiers they made a good troope, with which hee went on a sodaine, and assayled the remnant of the Venetians campe, who little expected it, so as with ease hee did put them to rout, who thinking on nothing but how to escape, forsooke their campe and their ordnance, whereby the greatest part of them were The Venetians (...) defeated before Maran. either taken or cut in peeces.
Francisco Tron Captaine of a Gally, did winne that day great reputation; who remembring the Venetian glory, did neuer forsake the place which hee had seased on with a few soldiers, vntill he saw the most part of them slayne, or greeuously hurt. Frangipan following the course of his victory, went on a sodaine to StrasodaStrasoda and Montfalcon taken by Frangipan. and Montfalcone, townes of the Friul, which hee finding vnfurnished of garisons, did easily take, and committed most lamentable spoyle.
During this vnfortunate successe of the Venetians warre, and the small hope they had that the French King would that yeare send an army into Italy a greeuous  fire hapned in Venice in the night, in the beginning of the yeare, 1514. on the bridge of the Rialto, which being driuen forward by the North-windes did soA great fier in Venice. runne on, as no dilligence or humaine labour could for a long time quench it: it burned the most inhabited and welthiest part of the Citty.
The Pope at the same time, being desirous to attone the Emperor and the Venetians, did in his owne person cause a new compromise to bee made, with ample and vnlimited power, whervpon by a breefe he commanded both parties to surceaseA n^w compromise in the Popes person concerning the strise betwixt the Emperor and the Venetians. their armes, which was not very wel obserued by the Spaniards and Almans, because the Spaniards in the meane time did spoyle the whole country neere to Este, and the Viceroy sent to take Vincenza, because hee would be found to bee  possessed thereof at such time as the sentence should bee giuen. Frangipan on the otherside, hauing done great harme in the Friull (as hath beene said) began to scoure the whole country, the like did the Almans vnder the command of the Captaines Rissan, and Calepine: who seperating them-selues, Calapine came afterwards to Feltre, which he tooke by assault, where staying three daies, hee was expulsed by Iohn Brandolino, who marching to the recouery thereof by the commandmentThe Almans take Feltre. of Ieromino Pisare the prouidator, with strong troopes gathered together from Valmarino, and with his light cauallery, enforced the enemies, who were daunted at his sodaine arriuall, to abandon the C^tty, and to seeke meanes to escape by flight.
Calepine with the greatest part of his soldiers retired to Bassan, where not standing on his grade he was assailed a new by Francio Duoda, Gouernor of the country for the Venetians, hauing called to his aide Bernardino Antignole with his light horse, and Calepine being surprized in that place was taken prisoner, and three hundred of his foot were slaine. But (...) with eight hundred foot and

three hundred horse, hauing taken the way of Goritia, met with Frangipan as he returned, and hauing vnited their forces together, and by that meanes beeing to the number of fiue thousand foot, and a thousand horse, they resolued to assaile Vdina. The Senate hauing intelligence thereof, sent Malateste Sogliane and Iohn (...) thither, the one to co^mand the army, and the other to be Prouidator, with sixe hundred horse and two thousand foot: Ieronimo Sauorgnane was there already with two thousand men of the country, where after long consultation, whether it were best to tarry there for the enemy, or by crossing the Riuer Liuensa to goe vnto some safer place: at the last it was concluded vpon the aduice of the inhabitants concerning the commodities and discommodities of that place, to quit The (...) ^dina abandoned to the (...). and abandon it, and to retire else*where beyond the Riuer: the which was speedily done, for feare least the enemies preuenting them, their passage might be stopt: Sauorgnane retired to Osof, a place of his owne, to keepe and defend it from the enemies.
Vdina being thus abandoned did yeeld at the enemies first summons their liues and goods being saued, on condition to pay a thousand crownes to the army to auoide the sack of their City: The like did Ciuid^le Port Gruera, and some others. But the enemy finding no victuals in that Prouince whe^ewith to feed the army, after they had wasted and spoiled it, were desirous to march towards Treuiso, to ioyne with the Spanish Infantery, which lay on the Paduan and Vincentyne  territories, to the end that being vnited, they might execute some notable enterprise. But one only matter delayed their deseigne; which was, not to leaue the fort of Osof behind them, the which was able to stop their victuals, and aide, comming forth of Germany. Therefore they resolued to assaile it before they went on any farther; and that which induced Frangipan to doe so, was the hope hee had to take it, as he had done the castle of Chiuse, strong by sytuation, the which the souldiers that kept it, had yeelded vpon the only sight of the enemies, without feare of reproach, so as Osof being taken, there was nothing that could stop their victuals or reliefe from Germany, or hinder them from conquering the whole country of Friul.
But Sauorgnane trusting to the sytuation of the place, and to the valour and courage of his soldiers, al-be-it he had but an hundred foot, and foure score crosbowes on horse-backe, with some few peasants, did hope to keepe and defend it in despight of all the enemies attempts.Osof beseeged by the Almain^
The Almains then comming to encampe before Osof, seated on the top of a steepe mountaine, did batter it with their ordnance, and gaue diuers assaults to it in vaine, which made them resolue to winne it by a long seege, hauing intelligence that they within it wanted water; but God prouided for them, for at the sametime there fell great store of raine, wherewith they were aboundantly releeued. In regard whereof the enemies renued the assault, but all in vaine, so as  despayring to take it, either by assault or by long seege, they raised their campe.The enemies discamp^ from before Osof.
Whilest these things were done in the Friull, the Venetians affaires, although they were not very peaceable in Lombardy, did neuerthelesse su^ceed more prosperously, where Rance de Cera commanding Crema for the Venetians, did performe sundry notable exploits, notwithstanding that the SpaniardsRance de Cer^ his bra^e exploits. and Sforzas forces were encamped before the towne. These things did greatly displease the Pope, who as a deputed arbitrator sought to bring them to accord, but he could find no meanes of agreement, which might content both parties, by reason that by the frequent alteration of matters, hopes changing according to the successe thereof, it happened that when the Emperour had giuen his consent Difficulties in the agreement b^twixt the Emperor and the Venetian^* to quit Vincenza, reseruing Verona for himselfe, the Venetians refused it, vnlesse they might be repossessed of Verona: and then when the Venetians being deiected, were satisfied onely with Vincenza, the Emperour would haue both or none.
The Pope being wearied with these difficulties, al-be-it he doubted that his declaration would not be accepted, was desirous neuerthelesse (to shew that it was not his fault) to pronounce his sentence, after this manner: That the Emperour should commit Vincenza into his hands in deposito, and all that which the SpaniardsThe Popes arbitratiue s^ntence. and himselfe did possesse on the Paduan and Treuisan territories: That the Venetians should doe the like by Crema. That as for other matters, each partie should hold those possessions they enioyed, till the declaration which he pretended to make within a yeere, of the conditions of the peace, but that in the meane time, armes should bee laied downe on both sides: That each of them within a month should ratifie that sentence, and that the Venetians in ratifying it, should  pay vnto the Emperor fiue and twenty thousand Ducats, and within three months after, other fiue and twenty thousand: And if each of them did not ratifie it, the sentence should be of no validity.
After this maner he gaue iudgement, because he would not discontent any of theThe Venetians refuse to ratifie it. parties: but this sentence came to nothing, by reason that the Venetians would not ratifie it: for their desire was to haue had the conditions of peace pronounced at the same time. Therefore they returned to armes, and determined to recouer the Friull, wherevpon they sent Aluiana thither for that purpose, with two hundred men at armes, foure*hundred light*horse, and seuen hundred foot, who marching on the high way of Portonone, where part of the Almains lay, his  light horse which scoured before, met with captaine Rissan, the Almain, without the towne (of whom wee haue heretofore spoken) with two hundred men at armes and three hundred light horse, and comming to handy-stroakes with them,The A^mains defeated by the Venetians. they had beene repulsed, had not Aluiana arriued with the rest of his forces, wherevpon beganne a furious fight, the issue whereof was at the beginning doubtfull, vntill that captaine Rissan being hurt in the face, was taken by Malateste Sogliane: for then his forces being broken, escaped into Portonone, and despayring of being able to hold it, did speedily forsake it, and betooke themselues to flight, wherby the City was wholy spoiled, and diuers people of the country were slaine.
Aluiana at his departure thence, tooke the way of Osof, which Frangipan had againe beseeged with the other part of the Almaines, who hauing intelligence of Aluianas approach, did soone dislodge, hauing raced the fortes which he had built there abouts, taking his iourney towards Germany, but the Venetian light horse charging him on the taile, he lost his baggage and artillery: By meanes whereof the whole country in a manner returning to the Venetians obedience, Aluiana hauing attempted in vaine to take Goritia, returned forthwith to Padua with his forces.
Frangipan said that the same disorder was no fault of his, but that being ill disposed of his person, by reason of a blow on the head with a stone which hee had  receiued at Osof, he could not prouide for that which was necessary for the safe retreate of his army: But being afterwards healed, and running vp and downe theFrangipan is taken by the Venetians. neighbour mountaines to stirre vp new troubles, and to leauy new forces, he fell into an Ambuscado, laied for him by Iohn Vitturi, where he was taken and brought to Venice: A man indeed very haughty and cruell, and a great enemy to the Venetians, and who by his ordinary incursions had for a long time greatly molested the country of Friull. In regard of this fortunate successe, whereinThe Senate recompenceth Sauorgnane. Sauorgnanes aide did greatly preuaile, his fame and reputation was much encreased, wherevpon the Senate for his deserts, created him Earle of Belgrado and Osof, for himselfe and his heires, to the end that the memory of his valour might  be knowne to posterity, with foure hundred Ducats of yeerely reuenue forth of the publike treasury.
Now to returne to Aluiana, the number of the Almains being encreased by his departure, they tooke againe Cremona and Montfalcon, and enforced the Venetians to remoue their seege from before Ma^an, for the Venetians hauing intelligence

that supplies arriued, dislodged thence and retired in great hast. Such alterations often happened in the country of F^iull, in regard of the Almains neighbour*hood, who after they had robbed and spoiled, so soone as they had any notice of the comming on of the Venetians forces (with whom diuers of the country ioyned) they forth with retired home, and then returned, as occasion was offered.
The Venetians in the meane time, perceiuing that all hope of agreement wasThe meanes which the Senate vsed to get money. taken from them, and that the wa^re was to be continued, beganne to thinke on meanes how to get money, their treasure being wholy exhausted. All the magistrates were assembled to this end, to consult in what manner they might raise  money for the expences of the warre. Diuers meanes were propounded in the Senate, and debated with sundry opinions. At the last they resolued to make a generall taxation, whereof the highest should not amount to aboue three hundred crownes: and to this end, three persons were chosen to make this rate, according to the abillity and authority of euery man, prouided that it did not exceed (as hath beene said) the summe of three hundred crownes for one house. By meanes whereof in short space great summes of money were raised to pay the army: For the goods of those men that refused to pay what they were rated at, were iudged to be confiscate to the publike treasury.
The end of the first Booke of the fifth Decade.




The Contents of the second Booke of the  fifth Decade.
THe Venetians beseege Maran, and forth-with raise their campe. The defeate and taking of Vitturi the Prouidator. Bergamo is taken by Rance de Cera, and soone recouered by the Spaniards. The Venetians take Frangipan. The Venetians recouer Vincenza. The victory of Selim against Ismael. Soliman entreth Hungary. The Croisado published in Hungary against the Turkes* Pope Leo his meanes to ioyne the Venetians with the Emperour and the Spaniards, and to disunite them from France. The Venetians send Ambassadors to the French King, and to the King of England. The death of King Lewis the twelfth. Francis the first, Duke of Angoulesme, succeedeth him. The new King confirmeth the league with the Venetians. The Venetians send Ambassadors to the Pope to draw him to their side. What the Pope did against the Venetians. A league contracted betwixt the Emperour, the King of Arragon, the Duke of Milan, and the Swisses against the French King. The viceroy of Naples his enterprize on Vincenza, and the aide which Aluiana brought thither. The Swisses great gard at the foot of the Alpes against the French. The French passe into Piedmont by the hill of Argentire. Prospero Colonna is taken by the French. Agreement betwixt the  King and the Swisses contracted and broken all in one day. The battaile betwixt the King and them at Marignan. The Swisses soft retreate towards Milan.


The Second Booke of the fifth Decade of the Historie of Uenice.
ALVIAN A being returned from Friul (as hath beene said) the Venetians were of opinion by the soliciting of Sauorgnano, to renue their enterprize vpon Maran, the whole charge thereof was committed vnto him. He according to his commission hauing leauied two thousand men of the country, and foure hundred of the best souldiers from Vdina, went with his forces and  encamped before Maran. Iohn Vitturi Generall of the light horse, and Iohn Paul M^nfron captaine of the men at armes, did by the Senates appointment meeteThe Venetians beseege Maran. him there with their Cauallery, to the end that the enterprise might be executed with more assurance and reputation. Sauorgnane at his arriuall seized on a strong place not farre from the walles of the City, and there encamped, causing great trenches to bee made, to the end the souldiers beeing the better defended, might in more safety march to the walles. And because the sytuation of the place was not commodious for them, by reason the ground was very low* and boggy, he by his industry and dilligence ouercame the discommodity of the place, by making plat formes and bulwarkes of sundry substances* for two purposes, the one  for that they should serue for a safe retreate to his souldiers, if so be the enemy should make any sodaine sally; and the other, that his souldiers comming to the assault, should be as high mounted as the enemies on their walles.
All things being in a readinesse for the assault, and some souldiers being already marched thither, certaine captaines, who at the first were not of opinion to giue an assault made a stand, by reason of some encomberance of water which they found some-what high, which caused them for that time to deferre that which had beene determined: In the meane time letters came from the Senate to Sauorgnane and to the chiefe of the army, which imported, that the SenatesThe Senates intent is not to giue an assault* meaning was, to haue them vse meanes to take that towne rather by a long seege, then by assault, because the Senators feared (as the experience of what had formerly happened in the selfe same enterpri^e had made them wi^e) that beeing deceiued through the hope of the Authors of the seege, the enemies comming on a sodaine to passe thorow then campe, the army might receiue some notable losse: As also, for that to assaile that towne so often in vaine did greatly diminish their reputation. Herevpon, they resolued, according to the Senates direction, to encampe only before it, and not to assaile it, setting vp diuers tents and lodging places, to shut in the towne more straightly, and to keepe all victuals from being brought vnto it.
But whilest they spent the time thus vnproffitably, they gaue the enemy leisure  to assemble his troupes, and to re-enforce themselues for the relie^e of the beseeged. Those of the campe hauing notice that the (...) had for this purpose gathered together great numbers of horse and foot, and that diuers peasants of the neighbour villages were gonne to Gradisca to come speedily to assaile

them, they resolued presently to raise their seege, and to retire to Vdina and Ciuitella.
The enemies so soone as the Venetians had raised their campe, did supply Maran with victuals and souldiers: by meanes whereof those within it being growne stronger and more audacious scoured the country round about. The Senate being much discontented with these incu^sions, and fearing if it were not speedily remedied some greater harme might ensue thereby, commanded the Knight La Volpe, Generall of the light horsemen, to goe with two hundred horse into Friul to restraine the enemies courses: Petro Marcello was commanded to doe the like who had beene sent Prouidator to the campe: But before they could arriue there, the poore country men had endured much misery.
Vitturi the Prouidator retiring with a hundred Albanese horse-men to a place of weake defence, was assailed by the enemies, where after he had valiantly defendedVitturi the Prouidator is defeated and taken. himselfe, being hurt, and his souldiers forsaking him, he was taken prisoner, all his souldiers were either taken or cut in peeces. At the same time Rance de Cera, who lay in Crema, dispayring almost of being able to keepe the towne, in regard of the great want of victuals in it, and of the terrible plague, as also forRance de Cera (...) Si^uio (...) to r^ut. that the souldier^ wanted diuers monthes pay, did (vnlooked for) assaile Siluio Sauella, as he came from Milan, who had with him two hundred men at armes, a hundred light horse, and fifteene hundred foot, whom hee did forth-with put to  rout, so as Sauello fled to Lodi with fifty men at armes only; whervpon, the Venetians did re-victual Crema the second time, and Count Nicolo Scoto manned it with fifteene hundred foot.
Rance being encouraged by these supplies, did within a while after enter intoBergamo taken and soone lo^t. Bergamo, whither those of the City had sent for him, and the Spaniards that lay there fled to La Chappella. The viceroy and Prospero Colonna being awakened with the losse of Bergamo, assembled the Spanish companies, with those of the Duke of Milan, and went to encampe before it with fiue thousand foot ioyned to the Spanish and the Duke of Milans forces, where hauing planted the artillery against Saint Catherins gate, and made a breach, Rance who was in the city perceiuing  that it was impossible to keepe it, left it to their discretion, and capi^ulated for himselfe and his souldiers, that they might depart thence with their liues and goods, without sound of drum or trumpet, and their enseignes ^oulded vp.
Whilest these things were done at Crema and Bergamo, Aluiana hauing much importuned the Senate, that he might come forth of Padua with his forces, was permitted to doe so, to the end he might restraine the Spaniards, who although peace was treated of, did not cease to waste and spoile euery where: wherevpon at his comming forth, hee made a very notable enterprize, full of wonderfull speed and industry vpon the City of Rouigo, where lay aboue two hundred Spanish men at armes, who thought themselues safe there, because the Riuer Adi^e  was betwixt them and the Venetian companies: for at such time as they thought not of him, he cast a bridge neere to the towne of Anguilare, and with one company without baggage, he crost the Riuer, and being come to the towne, whereof one of the gates was seized by a hundred foot, clothed like peasants, whom he had sent before vnder collour that it was market-day, he entred it, and tooke all theAluiana tak^th (...). men at armes prisoners whom he found there.
This exploit caused all the other Spaniards that were lodged in the Pollessin, to abandon it, and Legnaga likewise and to retire to Ferrara. Aluiana after the taking of Rouigo being come to Oppian neere to Legnaga, meaning to haue gon to Verona, hauing intelligence that the Spanish army had recouered Bergamo, and was returning towards Verona, he resolued not to tarry there, and therefore he sent the companies of men at armes by land to Padua, and he went thi^her by night by the Riuer Adice, with the Infantery, the baggage, and the ordnance, to(...) (...) to (...). auoide the great wet and mire, and not without feare of beeing assailed by the

enemies, who were kept backe by the waters which were risen very high; then comming on shoare he speedily went into Padua whether the men at armes were come two daies before. The Senate vpon the report of this braue exploite vpon Rouigo, did receiue great contentation, hoping still for better fortune hereafter, and wrote letters to Aluiana full of congratulation, saying that he had truly manifested his valour and martiall experience, together with the good will which he did beare to the Republike.
The same yeere, the country of Friul was in more quiet then of a long timeThe country * Friul at quiet by meanes of the taking of Frangipan. before, by reason of the taking of captaine Frangipan, who had molested it mo^e then any other: wherevpon, the Venetians knowing how much it did import  them still to detaine him, refused to exchange him for Iohn Paul Baillon. At the same time likewise Rance de Cera being returned to Crema, and finding there great want of all things, did of his owne authority without communicating it to the Senate, make truce with the enemy for sixe monthes: then, leauing Giouan Antonio Visin in the City, with fiue hundred foot, and as many horse for the gard thereof, he went with the residue of his forces to Padua, and from thence himselfe went to Venice, to giue them an account of what had past at Bergamo and Crema, and also to consult with them of what was needfull to bee done.The Uenetians giue great e^tertaiment to Rance de Cera. Hee was honourably entertained: and because hee had in former time re^used the place of Generall of their army, no greater honour beeing at that present  vacant, the Senate gaue him the towne and castle of Martinenga with all the reuenue thereof.
The viceroy and Prospero Colonno being crossed in their deseignes, by reason of Aluiana his retreat to Padua, hauing sent their forces into Garrison in the Pollesin of Rouigo, they went to Ispruch, to consult with the Emperour what was to be done.
Whilest fortune shewed her selfe so variable and inconstant to the Venetians, the City of Vincenza, which was reduced vnder their gouernment, was kept with a small garrison, notwithstanding that diuers of the enemies troupes lay round about it: for it continued still in the fidelity and deuotion of the common-wealth, chiefly by the meanes and dilligence of certaine Citizens, who hauing gathered together great numbers of people of the territory neere adioyning, did keepe it alwaies well furnished and prouided of all necessaries: so as Nicolo Pascalic the Citties Magistrate, resoluing in regard of the small number of defendants which was in it at the beginning, to abandon it, did take new courage, and did so well exhort all the inhabitants to the defense thereof, as the enemies durst neuer come againe to beseege it.
In these petty exploits of warre, and with an vncertaine hope of peace, the Sommer of that yeere was spent for the affaires of Italy. But Asia produced greater enterprizes; for *Selim marching into Persia (as hath beene said) and meeting Selims victory against Ismael. with Ismaels army, fought with him, of whom he gate a glorious victory, chiefly by meanes of his artillery, the vse whereof was then vnknowne to the Persians. In regard wherof the great dangers were plainly discerned which threatned other Realmes and Prouinces, by reason of Selims fierce and haughty courage, who for this fortunate successe was become more proud and insolent. And that which did most manifest it, was, that at the same time that hee made warre in Persia, Soliman his sonne entring Hungary, did spoile the country with greatSoliman entreth Hungary. numbers of horse, and had already taken diuers townes.
The Pope was desirous to remedy it, and caused great leauies of souldiers to be made in Hungary, who tooke for their badge a red crosse, calling themselues  the Crossed, taking armes for the defence of Christian religion against the Infidels. But this leauy of souldiers, which were thought would haue aided andA Croizado i^ Hungary ag^inst the Turkes. releeued the King of Hungary, did in a manner ruyne him: for, weapons beeing

put into the hands of the peasants of that country, who are deadly enemies to theThe great harme with the Croizade did to Hungary. Nobility, they committed infinite riots, and threw the Realme head-long into greater dangers: wherewith the Pope beeing troubled, turned all his thoughts to the peace of Italy, and for that purpose, he sent to Venice Petro Bembo, his Secretary, a Venetian Gentleman, who beeing come thither, spake to the Senate in this manner.

That Pope Leo his affection towards the Republike had euer beene sound:The Oration of the Popes Nunci^ to the Senate That he was still greeued by their losses and afflictions, as the care which he hath had of them, might largely witnesse: Besides there was nothing more sure, then that his whole deseignes and ayme did euer tend to peace, and if hee had at any  time taken armes, it was of necessity and by constraint. That hee had euer embraced their common-wealth with a fatherly loue, and had neuer ceassed to exhort, admonish and entreat them to fit themselues to the time: by which offices he thought that he had sufficiently discharged his duty, and perceiuing that all which he had done was to no purpose, he had determined to giue ouer the businesse, and no more to talke of peace, wherein hee had so often laboured in vaine. Yet neuerthelesse hauing of late changed his minde, and compared the time present, with the antient affection which he had borne to the Republike, he had now sent him to them, to exhort them in his name, to respect their owne liberty and the safety of all Italy, and to embrace the best and wholesommest councell: They  should doe well to consider the manner of the French proceedings, their great desire to command, and their immeasurable cruelty towards the vanquished. That King Lewis his great desire to recouer the Dutchy of Milan, was only afterward to make himselfe Master of all Italy. For, hauing once ouercome Maximillian Sforza, and wholy expulsed him from his fathers state, hee beleeued that the way would bee easily opened to him for the attayning therevnto, and for abusing, by meanes of other Italians, the Venetians liberty: whereas they had in time past made alliance with the French, enforced therevnto by great necessity, they had done well, in respect of those times: But now to bee allied with them was most dangerous, in regard, that thinking to assure themselues, it was to  be feared, that they would precipitate their common-wealth into ruine, by the friendship of the French, which is not wont to last long, and therefore it were better to haue them farre off then nere at hand: That diuers recent examples might teach them the fidelity and constancy of that Nation, who had forsaken the King of Nauarre, being driuen forth of his Realme for their seruice, and because hee would not abandon their friendship, with many others likewise who had well deserued of the Realme of France, towards whom they haue vsed the like ingratitude: and therefore they were not to hope, since they had beene forgetfull of their neighbours, that they would prooue more louing to the Venetians, who are strangers: and namely that the French had sworne the totall ruine of their Republike, at such time chiefly as they had receiued infinite benefits of the Venetians, and had beene in no sort offended by them, and that they might with honour haue compounded with the Emperor. They should doe well then to resolue, to keepe the French armies farre from Italy: That it was against reason to beleeue, that the French hauing conquered the state of Milan, would conteine themselues within their bounds, and not fly out vpon other mens confines. That the Venetians being wearied with so many wars, ought henceforth to embrace peace, and quiet, to which their was nothing more contrary, the^ the comming of the French into Italy, by which it was sure to susteine a cruell war: where, on the contrary, if the commonwealth would agree with the Almains and Spaniards, and with al the Potentats  of Italy, to expel the French; the only report of that alliance would be sufficient to make them to lay down their armes, and to change their present purpose to repasse the mounts and to come into Italy, which by that meanes might become quiet and peaceable. But if yee shall contemne this councell, the Pope will take God

and men to witnesse, that he hath in no sort beene wanting to the common good of Christendome, and to the particular proffit of the Venetian common-wealth. That they were besides to beleeue, that he could ere then haue embraced those parties which doe now presently offer themselues to his aduantage, and perhaps he would accept them, by allying himselfe with the Emperour and Spaniards, to their hinderance, of whom so often he hath had great care, and yet to no purpose. They had no need to craue any greater assurance of him; for the interest of the Sea Apostolike, and that of their Republike was all one, so as both of them ranne one selfe same fortune, being in a manner, both the one and other subiect to like  accidents. That they were likewise to remember that men oftentimes are ruled by their owne particular passions rather then by reason, as then, when to be reuenged on Lewis Sforza, they threw themselues headlong into manifest danger, by associating for their fellow in armes, a forraine King, most mighty, who was to be a neighbour to their state, in stead of a weake Prince, and their countryman. Therefore they should doe well to aduise themselues how to reape some fruit by the Popes fauor and good will, the which til then they had with great care sought to entertaine.

With these or such like speeches Bembo executed the tenor of his commission: but the Senate, (the matter hauing beene determined) thought it neither easieThe Senates resolution on Bembo his demand. nor safe to allie themselues with the Emperor and Spaniards; wherevpon  with a generall consent it was concluded, to continue in the friendship and alliance of the French, and to make this answere to the Popes Ambassador.

That his Ambassador was greatly pleasing to the Senate as well in respect ofThe Prince his answere to the Popes Nunch. himselfe, whose vertue and particular affection towards their country was suffitienly knowne to all men, as likewise in regard of the Prince that sent him, seeing they had euer borne great honour and reuerence to the soueraigne Bishops of Rome, and were particularly inclined to Pope Leo. That the Senate had euer highly esteemed his good and wholesome councell: but the mischiefe was, that by how much, they, aboue all others, had desired his friendship and alliance, in that vncertainty of all things, by so much more were they continually kept from  it. And al-be-it their loue was neuer disioyned from him, yet their forces were euer diuided. As then they did humbly thanke the Pope, and confessed themselues much bound vnto him, in that hee had beene euer ready by diuers good offices to embrace and fauour their cause, euen so likewise they were extreamely grieued that they could not follow his councell, their antient custome not permitting to leaue an old alliance for a new, especially not being prouoked therevnto by some wrong, their antient fathers thinking that alone to bee profitable, which was most honest: and that therefore they could not, without great blemish to their reputation, breake and abandon the alliance  which they had already contracted with the French. And if the Pope would call to minde the antient benifits of the French Kings, not onely to the Venetian common-wealth, but likewise to the Church: and to consider the wealth and power of that Kingdome, hee would not onely excuse, but commend the Venetians councell, and bee desirous himselfe to follow it, because that beeing backed by the French forces and those of the Venetians, there was likelihood that he should be able to lay surer foundations, as well for the state of the Church, as for the greatnesse and aduancement of his owne house.

This speech beeing pronounced by Prince Lauretan, they made priuate remonstrance to Bembo, how the Senate did greatly suspect, that vnder that The Senates suspition priuately declared to Bembo. treaty of peace some deceit might lurke, in regard it was practized by the Emperor and by Ferdinand, being assured that vnder collour of agreement, they wold, as at diuers other times, practize some dangerous warre on the Venetians: because that at the same time as the Spanish Ambassadour delt with the French King co^cerning the affaires of Italy, Ferdinand had reuiued this treaty of peace, to none

other end but to cause the French King to suspect the Venetians friendship, and thereby to separate himselfe from them, the better afterwards to enforce them to agree with him, to his owne great aduantage: and that the same comming toTo what intent the Spaniard spake to the Venetians of peace. passe, the Venetians being so diuided from the French, what should hinder Ferdinand to make himselfe master, and quiet possessor of all Italy, as long time before then, he had aspired thereunto.
Bembo being returned to Rome, reported all this to the Pope: but before he left Venice, he assured the Venetians, that the Pope would neuer suffer any man to attempt against their State, knowing very well that on them depended the liberty of Italy, and that he was to rely on them for the greatnesse and maintenance  of the house of Medicis. The Venetians made declarations that they did not greatly care for that agreement, for thereby they should be depriued of the richest and goodliest city belonging to their state, which was Verona: andThe Venetians hope on the French King. that which maintained them therein was, the hope which they had that the French King would shortly come into Italy. For King Lewis being prouoked with a desire to recouer the Dutchy of Milan, had made peace with Henry King of England, and made preparations to repasse the mounts, and to come into Lombardy with a mighty army, wherevnto the Venetians being ioyned, they hoped with ease to chace their enemies from their bounds and confines.
This hope caused them to send Ambassadors to the French King, and to the The Venetians send Ambassadors to the French King and the King of England. King of England their friends, for to continue them still in their affection towards them, and to this end were appointed Francisco Donato, and Petro Paschalic, but in Donato his stead, who fell sicke, Sebastian Iustinian was sent thither.
Their chiefe commission was to congratulate both of them for the peace and alliance contracted betwixt them (King Lewis hauing married King Henries sister) and to thanke them, for that in the treaty of agreement made betwixt them, they had therein comprehended the Venetians, by name, as their friends and confederates.
That they should moreouer assure the French King that the Senate did beare the same loue-towards him as it had done in times past, determining to preferre  his friendship before any others, resoluing to renue the warre, if he so pleased, and that to that end they should councell him to returne speedily into Italy, where he should find the Venetian forces ready to ioyne with his. Now whilest these Ambassadors were on their way, King Lewis, died: for as hee ouer ardently tooke his pleasure on the excellent beauty of his new wife, who was not aboue eighteeneThe death of Lewis the 12. French King. yeeres old, not remembring his age nor the weakenesse of his complexion, he was taken with a feuer, beside which, being troubled with a continuall flixe, hee soone departed out of this present life, and made the first day of the yeere 1515. famous by his death. It was thought that his death would haue bread great alterations. Yet for all that they did not call backe the Ambassadours, but commanding  them to goe forward on their iourney, they were enioyned to stay at a certaine place, to expect a new commission from the Senate. King Lewis was a lust Prince, and welbeloued of his subiects; who neither before that hee was King, nor afterward did euer finde either bad or good fortune firme and constant to him.
The ioy which they had of King Lewis his death, who desired not the returneFrancis Duke of Angoulesme French King. of the French into Italy, lasted not long. For Francis Duke of Angoulesme succeeded Lewis the twelfth, as the next in ligne Masculine of the Royal bloud, and of the very race of the Dukes of Orleance, whose vertues and magnanimity was admired of all men, who with the title of French King did likewise take that  of Duke of Milan, as belonging vnto him, not only by the antient claime of the Dukes of Orleance, but as being comprized in the inuestiture which the Emperour made, according to the treaty of Cambray: and besides, he had the same desire to recouer it, as his predecessor had: The which he neuerthelesse dissembled

for the present, seeking first of all to practize the friendship of other Princes, diuers of whose Ambassadors came forth-with to him, whom hee graciously receiued, and among others, those of the Venetians hauing had new commissions sent vnto them to Lyons where they staied: with whom he confirmed the league in the same forme as it had beene made with his predecessor, and he caused the Bishop of Ast to doe the like in his name, who being sent to Venice by King Lewis, tarried still there.
The Venetians, who already did make great account of the friendship of theKing Francis confirmeth the league with the Venetians. French, and had enioyned Marco Dandulo their Ambassador to sound what the  new Kings minde was concerning their alliance and confederacy, were exceeding glad when they receiued his letters, and had seene the Bishop of Ast his commission, praising his gentlenesse, beeing desirous to shew how highly they esteemed his friendship, and therefore they commanded their Ambassadors to giue him great thankes, for the loue which he seemed to beare to their Republike, and his desire to aide and succour them, promising him to employ themselues with like affection in ought that should concerne his seruice, and would vse meanes that the French might againe hold some dignity in Italy, to the enemies feare and terror, and to the maintenance and stay of the Republike their friend and confederate: They should likewise perswade him to hasten his iourney, and  assure him that the chiefe point of victory consisted in speed, and not to giue the enemies leisure, who were now weake, to strengthen themselues; as also for feare least the City of Crema, which did import much for the recouery of the State of Milan, should incurre some danger, in regard it had of a long time endured many discommodities of warre, so as it was reduced to the last extremity, being out of hope of hauing any longer truce with the enemies, it being almost expired, expecting euery day when Prospero Colonna with new forces would come againe to beseege it. They should likewise assure him, that the Senate would neuer faile of their duty, hauing already made new prouision of souldiers for the land army, of armour and munition, and giuen order to arme certaine Gallies  to amuze the enemy as well by sea as land, and that the King should for his part doe the like.
The Venetian Ambassadors hauing executed their commission with the KingThe Venetian Ambassadors in England. in the City of Paris, went into England to finish the remainder of their Ambassage, where being curteously enterteined, they declared at their first audience the great sorrow and griefe that the Venetians had for the death of King Lewis his brother in law, a very mighty Prince and a great friend to the Republike, then they gaue him many thankes for the great correspondence betwixt them, for thatThe Ambassadors request to the King of England. in the conclusions of peace, as well with King Lewis, as since then with King Francis, he was euer desirous that their common-wealth, as his good friend, should be  especially named and comprized. And afterward the Ambassadours being in priuate with the King, did earnestly entreate him, that it might please him by his authority to perswade the French King, according to the desire he had to harken to the affaires of Italy, to giue aide and succour to the Venetians, and incite him to put in practize his said desire. That in the meane time the peace and alliance betwixt them might continue firme and inuiolable, from which would proceed nothing but good to both partes, and bee very commodious for all Christendome.
After both the Ambassadors had in this sort accomplished their charge, Iustinian remained in England with King Henry, and Paschalic returned into France (...) sent to the Archduke. to doe the like there, who beeing come to Paris receiued letters from the Senate, whereby he was commanded to goe with speed into the Low countries to the Arch-duke to congratulate him for his marriage and for the peace, whereof the common-wealth was very glad, which they would haue to be signified to him by their Ambassador.
After this manner did the Venetians striue to entertaine the friendship and alliance of fortaine Princes, fitting themselues to the time. But their greatestThe Venetians d^firous to draw the Pope to their party. care was how to find meanes to draw the Pope to their side, and to ioyne him with the French, whereof they had some hope by reason that Iuliano de Medicis the Popes brother, who could doe much with his Holinesse, had married Philiberta sister to the Duke of Sauoy, and a very neere kinsewoman to the French King, by which they supposed that hee would fauour the French: and that the Pope in time to come, would more encline to them then he had hither vnto done, perceiuing that the Realme of France beeing strengthened both by kindred and confederacy with England, and the Arch-duke, nothing was able to hinder King  Francis from growing great in Italy, and from being feared there. Yet for all that the Pope being tossed to and fro with his accustomed doubts and difficulties, had no firme or certaine resolution, for now he tooke part with one, and anon with an other: sometimes being vanquished with feare he inclined to the friendship of the French, but he did oftner and more willingly discourse with the Ambassadors of the Emperour and King Fernand, and made answere to the Venetians, who spake to him about it, that they might draw some thing from him, that hee would bee a looker on, and see what the issue of the warre would bee, intending to ioyne with the Conquerour. But hee did not imagin in his heart that the French King would euer passe into Italy, so as if King Francis had already passed  the mounts with his army, yet he would not beleeue it.
The Venetians beeing acquainted with his humour, sent Marin Georgio their Ambassador to Rome, with expresse commission to tell him, That he was of necessityThe Venetians send an Ambassador to the Pope. to shew himselfe otherwise then hithervnto hee had done, and to doe his best to alter his former opinion, and to that end he should make the French Kings forces to bee very great, and giue him to vnderstand how that seeing his Realme was out of daunger of forraine warres, he might without contradiction and on a sodaine turne towards Italy, wherevnto he was much enclined in regard of his desire to conquer the State of Milan, that there was nothing so hardThe Ambassadors remonstran ^e to the Pope. or difficult that was able to diuert him from this deseigne: That the Venetians  had the same will to renue the warre, and to ioyne themselues with the French: That they euer desired as well in peace as warre, to be vnited to the Sea Apostolike, to runne the selfe same fortune with it, and had greatly laboured to haue it so. But not being able to obtaine it of his Holinesse, and perceiuing the hope of the victory to be very great on the French side, the Venetians were resolued not to abandon their friendship and aliance, thinking that by so doing, they had discree^ly prouided for their affaires: The which he likewise ought to doe, hauing first maturely considered whatsoeuer might hinder or delay the Kings intent; and finding none at all, to preserue by so doing the papall authority and Maiesty, together with the possessions of the Church: That there was but onely one remedy  left in all this, which was, that the Pope would vnite himselfe with the French and Venetians, because that the Swisses being forsaken by his Holinesse, and by his succors, would of a certaine giue ouer the defence of Maximilian Sforza, and lay downe their armes which they had taken against the French, so as the confederates being depriued of that aide, should be enforced to change their mindes: the Emperour would no more thinke on the affaires of Italy, and Fernand would satisfie himselfe with his kingdome of Naples; wherevpon, others might recouer what belonged vnto them, namely the French, the State of Milan, and the Venetians those Cities which had beene wrongfully taken from them, and thereby a firme and sure peace might be established.
All these goodly discourses could smally preuaile with the Pope to make himThe Popes determination against the Venetians alter his opinion: but on the contrary, continuing firme in his first determination, he thought in himselfe that he might easily induce the Venetians to doe what he pleased. But perceiuing that to deale with them by faire and gentle meanes,

hee should neuer obtaine his desire, hee resolued to vse seuerity and rigor. Hee caused to be published ouer all the Churches territories, that no subiects or Vassals belonging to the holy sea, should vpon paine of most greeuous censures, beare arms vnder the Venetians pay; commanding al Captaines as wel of foot asThe Popes publication against the Uenetians. horse, to come with al speed to the Spanish campe, with their soldiors and horses, going about by that meanes in such sort to diminish the Venetians forces and reputations, as being encompassed with so many mischeefes they should be at last enforced to haue recourse vnto him, and to doe his pleasure: but the Venetians on the contrary continued firme, and constant in their alliance, hoping by that meanes of the French, to be able to maintaine and defend their owne state.
King Francis in the meane time beganne very carefully to gather together very great summes of mony, and to encrease the ordenance of his men at armes,King Francis his dissimulation. to the number of foure thousand, publishing abroad that his meaning was not to make warre on any one, for that yeare, but onely to make head against the Swisses, who threatened to assaill Burgondy or Daulphine, if so bee hee should refuse to fullfill the conuentions made at Dijon in the name of the late King.
Many beleeued it, inregard of the example of some late kings, who would neuer incomber them selues with new wars the first yeare of their reignes: But the Emperor  and the King of Arragon were of another opinion, in regard of the Kings youth, and the greate preparations of warre which King Lewis had left behinde; where-vpon because they would not be taken vnprouided, they made meanes to confederate themselues with the Pope and the Swisses.
The Pope delayed it as much as he could: The Swisses on the contrary, whose heate against the French did not onely continue still, but dayly more and moreLeague betwixt the Emperor, the king of Arragon, the Duke of Milan and the Swisses. encrease, did ally them-selues with the Emperor, the King of Arragon, and the Duke of Milan for the defence of Italy, reseruing place for the Pope to enter; wherein was concluded that the Swisses should enuade, either Burgondy or Dauphine, and the Catholike King with a mighty army should come in by Fontaraby  or Perpignan, to the end that the French King beeing assayled at one time, in diuers and sundry places, might not bee able though hee would to trouble the Dutchy of Milan, but should bee enforced to defend his owne country.
The French Kings intent was for a time kept close, vntill the greatnesse of hisThe French Kings great preparation. preparations could by no meanes bee any longer concealed, in regard of his huge prouisions of mony, with which hee waged very great numbers of Lancequenets; hee caused store of Artillery to bee carried towards Lyons, and had a while before sent Pedro of Nauarre, who was newly come to his seruice into Guyen to leuy ten thousand foot on the marches of Nauarre.
It being then apparant to all men, that warre was prepared for the Dutchy of  Milan, and that the King determined to goe thether in person, he openly craued to haue the Pope to ioyne with him, as well by the meanes of Iuliano his brother who was (as hath beene already said) allied to the King, as by his Ambassadors, to the end to be assured of his entent.
But the King soone beganne to bee out of hope, as well because the Pope had graunted to the King of Arragon the Croizads of Spaine for two yeares, whereby it was thought that hee would raise aboue a Million of gold, as by the faire and goodly promises, which hee made to those who pleaded for him, and yet without any resolution at all; besides it was wholy in vayne, for hee had alreadyVVhat shifts the Pope vsed to declare himselfe openly against the king before made a very secret conuention with the others for the defence of the  stta^e of Milan, the which neuerthelesse hee would not haue yet to be knowne, till such time as he had found out some more apparant pre^ence, whereby he might say that hee had beene enforced therevnto, because the King would not graunt him what hee demanded, but the King condescended to all his

requests, and notwithstanding all this hee made diuers doubtfull and irresolute answers.
The King not tarying any longer for his replies, being come to Lyons, accompanied with all the French nobillity, made Charles of Burbon Constable of(...) of Burbon Constable of France. France his Liuetenant Generall to command in the warre, if him-selfe went not thither in person, whereof hee yet doubted, promising to him-selfe the certainety of the victory by reason of his great forces, for hee had in his Army two thousand Lancequenets, conducted by the Duke of Guelders, ten thousand Basques or Gascons, eight thousand French, and three thousand Castadours. For of allThe number of the Kings army. the enemies army there was none to bee feared but the Swisses, who continually  came downe into the Dutchy of Milan, so as already more then twenty thousand of them were there arriued, tenne thousand of whome, being come neere to the mountaines, did vndertake to gard the streight passages of those valies against the French.
This determination of the Swisses did greately trouble the Kings mind, becauseThe Swisses determination in the streights of the mountaines. it was an hard matter, in regard of the valour of that nation, to driue them from those strong and narrow passages. The rest of the confederates hauing left sufficient garrison for the defence of those townes which they had snatcht from the Venetians, were not able to leuy the one halfe of a stronge Army.
Whilest France made these preparations, vpon the report of the Kings  comming into Italy, the Viceroy of Naples, who for a time had beene at truce with the Venetians in the Vincentine territory, made shew to bring backe his army to Verona, (as hee said) to the ayd of the Duke of Milan, but it was to seaze on Vincenza, in regard of the fit season that then was to make silke, wherewith the country doth greatly abound, hoping from thence easily to drawThe Viceroy his enterprize on Vincenza. meanes to pay his army. But Aluiana being aduertized of this deseigne, left Padua, where hee then lay, and passing speedily on the Vincentine Territory, leading along with him sufficient troupes to gard the Citty, and to breake the enemies enterprise, whereby the inhabitants had leasure to gather their silkes, and to transport them to a place of safety.Alu^ana releeueth Vincenza.
That done, Aluiana, retyred towards Padua, (the Spanish forces dayly encreasing,) and encamped with Rance de Cera at Brentelles, two miles distant from Padua, where hee taried many dayes, because the Senate had willed him not to stirre from thence with the army before hee were certaine of the enemies purpose, to the end not to goe into any place, where hee might bee enforced to come to handy stroakes, and to tempt fortune, fearing if hee should receaue any losse, it might happen to keepe backe King Francis, who affirmed that the cheefe hope of his designes depended on the Venetians, and therefore discoursing with their Ambassador resident with him, hee did councell him that his country-men should not hazard ought, before his arriuall in Italy it beeing indiscretion to hazard the  successe of that warre on a small part of those forces which hee hoped wouldThe Venetians incursion on the enemies. be great, being vnited together, Yet notwithstanding, the Venetian soldiors made often incursions, cheefely the light horse, vnder the command of the Captains Mercurio Buono, and Giouan de Nalda, who did greatly molest the enemies, taking great Booties from them, as well from Rouigo, as on the Veronois.
In this sort did the two Armies, Venetian and Spanish, behaue them-selues for a certaine time, without any other attempts, still expecting newes of the French army, who leauing the realme freed from the feare of warre, were readyThe passages of Suza, Pegner^lles, and Sal^sles garded by the Swisses. to passe the mounts.
For neither the Spaniards nor Swisses, did euer goe according to their treaty of Confederacy, the one to enuade Burgondy, and the other the confines neere to Spaine, but the Swisses went and encamped at Suze, Pigneroll and Salusses, to stop the entry of the French into Piedmont, and the Spaniards

kept himselfe in Lombardy with the Popes troopes, of whom Iuliano de medicis, his brother, was Generall.
The French then marched forewards on the fifteenth day of Iuly towards the Alpes, and being come to Grenoble they were enforced to make some stay there to resolue vpon their way they were to hold, for all the waies were so difficult, as well in regard of the nature of the places, as for the gard in them, that it was impossible to possible to passe without danger if they would goe the ordinary high way which leadeth into Italy by Piedmont, the Suisses keeping the narrow passages of the mountaines, but there was another way betwixt the sea and Coctian Alpes, descending towards the Marquisate of Salusses, by which they might carry their ordnance  beyond the mounts, not without wonderfull difficulty, because they could not do it but by the strength of men and engins.
The King resoluing wholly to passe on howsoeuer, would needs goe directly ouer the Alpes, whereby the French in three dayes came to the hill of Argentire,The French passe into Pied mont by Argentire. where taking the way on the left hand, and ouercomming all the bad wayes, they came on the fourth day vpon the confines of the Marquisate of Salusses, without any stop at all, because no man would euer haue thought that it had beene possible to bring the Artillery ouer such steepe and sharpe mountaines, and the Suisses being lodged at Suza were ready to gard the waies by which they must passe which commeth downe by mount Senis, or mont Geneura, or the hills neere  thereunto. But they hauing intelligence that the French had passed by an other way, being amazed thereat, forsooke those passages and retired to Nouara: which gaue hope to the French to be soone able to end that warre, and without anyThe Suisses r^tire to Nouara. great bloodshed to conquer the State of Milan, knowing that the Suisses are by nature light-headed, seditious, mutenous, and desirous of nouelty, and aboue all thinges, very couetous to get money: by which meanes the King thought sodainly to winne them.
Great promises of sommes of money were made to diuers of the cheefest of them if they would preferre the certaine offer that was made them before their first heate of warre, and not hazard the vncertainty of a Battaile. Wherevpon they were desirous to returne home, and in a brauery demanding their pay, they forsooke their Ensignes, and refused to obey the commandements of their Generall and other their Captaines, alledging for excuse of their alteration, that the affaires of the French at their entry into Italy, had prosperously succeeded: and how on the contrary, whatsoeuer the Suisses had vndertaken, had redounded to their shame and losse, and therefore they were minded to depart, and no longer to draw out the warre at length.
The French in the meane time hauing passed the mounts, the Lord La Palisse came speedily with foure Cornets of light horse, beeing lead by people of the  Countrey to Villa Franca, (a towne seauen miles distant from Salusses, where Prospero Colonna with his company was lodged, not doubting any thing, by reason of the great distance of the enemies,) from whence some said, that he wouldProspero Colona taken prisoner by the lord La Palisse. depart the same day, to ioyne with the Suisses. It is neuerthelesse certaine that he sate at meate, and dined at such time as La Palisse his souldiers arriued, who were not descryed by any before they came neere the house, because those of the towne, with whom La Palisse had intelligence, concerning that great booty, had already secretly agreed to keepe them-selues very quiet, and had seazed on the scoutes and Sentinels. Prospero Colonna that famous Captaine was thus taken prisoner, and Petro Margare the Romaine with him, others at the first noyce saued themselues and escaped by flight.
The passage of the French, and the taking of Prospero Colonna, did change allThe Pope amazed at the Kings passage and the taking of Prospero Colonna. mens mindes, and altogether the whole state of the affaires, causing new alteration in the mindes of the Pope, the viceroy of Naples and the Suisses. For the Pope perceiuing that the King had passed contrary to his hope, and that Prospero

Colonna was taken prisoner, in whome hee cheefely trusted, hee commanded his Nephew Lorenzo, Generall to the Florentines in sted of his brother Iulian, who lay sicke at Florence, to proceed slowly: then hee secretly dispatcht Cintio his familliar friend to the French King, to excuse him for what had passed, and to begin to treate with him, if so bee it should fall out badly for the Dutchy of Milan.
The Viceroy of Naples likewise carried him-selfe other-wise then he had done. For remayning still at Verona, expecting meanes to cause his soldiours to march, and new companies promised by the Emperor to leaue in Verona and Bressia, he with these excuses began to deferre his departure, because he would first see what would become of the Dutchy of Milan.
The Swisses in like manner beeing amazed at the Kings passage came on a sodaine to Pignarol and from thence to Nouara (as hath beene said) where they beganne to treate of agreement with the King. In the meane time all the FrenchThe Swisses begin to treate of agreement with the King. troopes being reunited at Thurin, the King went to Verceill, where he stayed many daies, expecting what would become of the treaty with the Swisses, who shewed them-selues full of variety and confusion. For they beganne to mutine in Nouara, where they lay, because they had not yet receaued the mony which the King of Arragon had promised them, and they did perforce take the mony from the commissaries which the Pope had sent them. And in this fury they departed from Nouara to returne home into their country, the which many of them did greatly  desire to doe: but they were scarce gon from Nouara, ere the King of Arragons mony was brought thither, wherevpon being better aduised, they redeliuered the Popes mony, that they might receaue both the one, and the other, according to the vsuall manner, by the hands of the commissaries. The King perceiuing his hope of agreement with the Swisses to decay, by meanes of these Variations, and by the comming of other new companies forth of Swisserland, departed from Verceill intending to goe and beseege Milan, leauing at Verceill with the Duke of Sauoy, the Dukes bastard brother, the Lord of Lautrec, and the General of Milan to continew the treaty begun with the Swisses. Diuers armies were in the field, as well for defence as to assail, but in such manner, as they were seperated in soundry  places, not being able to ioyne together, because the enemies lay betweeneAgreement contracted with the Swisses, and broken the same day. them and home: by meanes whereof the King being desirous to ioyne with Aluiana, departed from Bufalore, and being come with his army to Biagrassa, whilest hee stayed there the Duke of Sauoy, with the other commissioners, whome the King had left at Verceill, had made peace with the Swisses in the Kings name. But this peace was almost in one day concluded and broken, by the arriuall of new Swisses, who being proud for their forepassed victories, hoping to carry home with them as great wealth, as they saw their fellowes laden with, they would not heare tell of peace, refusing to yeeld vp the valleis mentioned in the agreement: so as by this breach of peace, matters returned to their former difficulties, and to  much greater, in regard of the Swisses new forces, as also of those of the Viceroy and Lorenzo de Medicis who approched Milan. Aluiana in the meane time sent word to the French King, that he would so amuse the Spanish army, as it should haue no meanes to hurt him: and therefore so soone as hee vnderstood that theThe number of the Venetian army conducted by Aluiana. Viceroy was gone from Verona, he left the Pollesin of Rouigo, and hauing crossed the Adice, he speedily came along the riuer Po, with nine hundred men at armes, foureteene hundred light horse, and nine thousand foot, with greate store of artillery neere to the walls of Cremona. The King according to Aluianas letters, came to Marignan, to giue him more easie meanes to ioyne with the royall army, and to stop the companies of the Church, and Spaniards, from doing the like with the The King com^th to Marignan. enemies. For it did greately import the king to haue the enemies force diuided in sundry places.
The King being come to Marignan stayed there, and wrot to the Venetian Senate, giuing them notice of his arriuall in Italy, and of the fortunate successe

of his affaires till then, together with the hope hee had that his deseignes would prosper, in regard that both their affaires were managed by one selfe-same Vnion and concord.
But in these interims, Rance de Cera who had well demeaned him-selfe against the enemies, being mooued with iealozy against Aluiana, for that hee would not bee enforced to obey him as Generall if the armies should come to ioyne together,Rance de Cera leauet the Venetian party. craued leaue of the Venetians to depart, who being not able to make them friends, did freely graunt it. Hee was a braue Captaine, and could not abide any superior, and Aluiana could not endure an equall, by meanes whereof they could  not agree together, wherevpon, hauing taken his leaue hee put him selfe into the Popes pay with two hundred men at armes, and two hundred light horse.
Marke Antonio Colonna in the meane time, who remayned for the gard of Verona,Marke Antonio Colonna gardeth Verona. made a sodaine sally with three thousand foot-men and about seauen hundred horse of all sorts, and went and scoured the Vincentine Territory, spoyling and wasting what-so-euer he met with. Albeit this did trouble the Venetians, yet could it not diuert them from their former determination, which was that Aluiana should ioyne with the French army, knowing well that if the French Kings affaires did prosper, this could not doe amisse.Foure armies at one time in ^vly.
Foure armies were at one time in one country, very neere to one another. The  French army was of forty thousand men, among whome were fiue hundred men at armes, chosen out of the French Nobillity, excellently well armed and mounted, who after they had seazed on Nouara and Paula, were come to Marignan, not farre from them lay the Venetian army, of twelue thousand foot and three thousand horse, which stayed at Lodi, both armies being well stored with artillery. Against these two were two other armies of the enemies, who for the same reasons were enforced to remaine deuided one from another. That of the Pope and the Florentines ioyned with the Spaniards, was more esteemed for the old soldiers then for the great number, and it was lodged neere to the Citty of Placentia, on the banke of the riuer Po. The other was of Swisses which was said The number of Swisses. to bee forty thousand men who at the pursute and perswasion of the Cardinall of Syon, kept the Citty of Milan, which was well furnished with all necessaries.
This Cardinall returning from Placentia, whither he was fled, wondering that his country-men practized with the French king, relying on great numbers of soldiers newly come, which did fauor his party, he came among them who were al in a manner diuided, some of them not enduring to heare tell of war, and others not of peace. And causing them al to come together on a day, he beganne with a veryThe Cardinal of Syons oration to the Swisses. vehement and affectionate speech to incite them, without any more delay to go forth the same day and assaill the French King, and not to set so much before their  eyes the number the enemies horse and artillery, as to let it make them to forget the valour of the Swisses, and the victories obtained by them against the French. That it was not the artillery which gaue the victory, but onely the prowesse and valour of the soldier. And that besides the giuing of the victory, which he assured them of, they should consider the great wealth they were to get, as well by the spoyle of the French army, as by that of the whole state of Milan. And therefore hee willed them to aduance their pikes, with their vsuall courage, and sound their drums, and without delaying one houre of time to goe and vse their armes effectually, and to glut them-selues with the bloud of those, who by their pride would molest the whole world, and by their basenesse doe euer become a prey to all men.
The Swisses beeing incited by these or such like speeches did furiously on a sodaine put on their armes, and going forth of the Citty did put themselues How greatly the Swisses were incited by this speech. in order of battaile, and albeit it was neere night, they marched

towards the French Army with such courage, as if they had already obtayned the victory, notwithstanding that diuerse of their Captaines thought it great rashnesse and a very dangerous matter to assaile the enemy in his camp, who wasThe Cardinal makes vse of false rumors. resolued for battaile. But the Cardinall of Sion fearing least delay might produce somthing contrary to his deseignes, and that as the desire of fight had easily enflamed their courages, it might as easily be quenched by the remonstrance of their Captaines of the contrary part, he gaue forth a false rumor among them that the French gathered togeather their baggage and prepared for their departure, and that their vantgard was already forth of their Camp, to goe and ioyne with the Venetian army, to retire afterwards to beseege Milan, wherevpon he  exhorted them to make hast to surprize the enemy in disorder who little doubted thereof. This exhortation was seconded by diuers Captaines of his faction who did greatly* praise his councell, and incited them to battaile, going vp and downe the rankes, making the like remonstrances, wherewith the soldiers being encouraged marched on with a speedy pace towards the enemies.
Now the French being aduertized of the Suisses comming towards them, albeit they were at the first greatly amazed, (as it happeneth in matters not foreseene nor premeditated) they did neuerthelesse forthwith put on their Armor, made ready their horses and all other things needfull for a battaile, then hauing taken courage, they placed themselues vnder their enseignes and opened them-selues  more at large. Their whole Army was deuided into three parts.
The Duke of Bourbon lead the Vant-gard, accompanied by the Lord of Talamont,The order of the French army in battaile. sonne to Trimouille, Iohn Iacomo Triuulcio, Pedro of Nauarre, and other famous Captaines, with all the Almaines, Gascons, and French. In the battaile was the King, about whom were the greatest part of the men at armes, and a choyce troope of Almaine souldiers, with the Dukes of Lorraine and Albany, the Lord Trimouille, Francis of Bourbon Count of Saint Paul, Odet of Foix, Lord of Lautrech, and diuerse others. The Duke of Alancon conducted the rere-ward, with the Lords La Palisse, and Aubigni, and the residue of the Cauallery.
The Suisses in the meane time hauing left certaine companies of Soldiers vponFight betwixt the French and Suisses. the rere-ward, had made of their whole Army but one body, which was very strong, and beeing well closed together, they went on furiously (that they might the better seaze on the Artillery) and gaue in vpon the Lansqnenets, who were at the front of the French Armie. These men suspecting that the French, according to the common report, were agreed with the Suisses, and that they came onlyThe Lancequenets open their rankes. to assaile them, in regard of the deadly hatred betwixt these two Nations, opened them-selues, and suffered the first charge of the Suisses, who came furioufly vpon them to passe on, where-vpon, they went directly towards the Artillery, which beeing perceiued by Pedro of Nauarre, hee on a sodaine called  vp his troopes, and caused them to keepe the place appointed to the Lansque nets, whereby the enemies passage was soone closed.
The Cauallery on the other side, and the King himselfe who was enuironed with a valiant troope of Gentlemen, comming against them, their great fury was inThe battaile continueth till foure howers within night. some sort cooled, and a very cruell battaile beganne, the which with diuers euents continewed till fower howers within night, certaine French Captaines being already slaine, and the King himselfe stricken with diuers pushes of Pikes: at the last both sides being so weary as they were able to doe no more did seperate themselues and retired forth of the throng, without any commandement or sound of drumme or trompet. The Suisses lodged in the very same place expecting  day, and they suffered one an other, on both sides, to rest that night, as if they had taken truce.How the King ordai^eth his Army that night.
The King in the meane time did not spend the remainder of the night vnproffitably, but assembled his councell to determine what was to be done the day following,

hee caused the Artillery to be drawne backe, and planted in more commodious places, hee did reordaine the battaillons of the Lancequenets, who promisedThe bataillis r^neued by breake of day. to amend their former daies fault, and to giue sufficient proofe of their faith and loyalty: and sent word to Aluiana, speedily to come and bring his forces to the battaill. So soone as it was day the Swisses went and assailed the French with the selfe same fury of the day before, who valliantly receuied them, but with more discretion and better order, where vpon the Swisses were beaten, partlyAluiana cometh opportunly to the battail with the artillery, and partly with the Gascon Crosbowes, and by the horsemen, so as they were beaten in Front and in Flanke, at such time as Aluiana who was sent for (as hath beene sayd) arriued with his light horse and with part of  his army in the greatest hast he could.
Hee arriued at such time as the battaile was most closed and most fierce, and when matters were in greatest hazard and danger. Hee gaue in with great fury vpon the Swisses backes, who neuer-the-lesse did still fight valliantly.
But at last dispairing of the victory, as well in regard of the great resistance made against them, as by the arriuall of the Venetian army, they soundedThe Swisses retire with soft pace towards Milan. the retreat, and retired with a soft pace towards Milan, keeping still their vsuall order, with such an amazement to the French army, as there was neither horse nor foote-troupes that had the courage to follow them, by reason  they were much tyred in the battayle, hauing fought without intermission from day-breake till none.
The end of the second Booke of the fifth Decade.




The Contents of the third Booke of the  fifth Decade.
COntention among the Swisses, being retired to Milan after the battaill. Milan, and the whole Dutchy is reduced vnder the French obedience. The French Kings entry into Milan. Aluiana his enterprise on the Citty of Bressia, with the Venetian army alone. The death of Aluiana, and the establishment  of Iohn Iames Triuulce in his place. The Venetians take Pescara. The French are present at the seege of Bressia. The Pope maketh motion of peace. Parma and Placencia are by the Pope yeelded vp to the French King. The enteruiew of the Pope and the French King at Bolognia. The Campe dislodgeth from before Bressia. Triuulcio giues ouer his charge. The Duke of Bourbon Viceroy in the Dutchy of Milan. The Lord of Lautrec with the Venetian army comes againe before Bressia. The Popes practises to breake the seege of Bressia. The Emperor, the King of England and the Pope band themselues  against the French King. Manfron and de Bue are defeated by the Imperialls. The Lancequenets are defeated by Fregosa at the Castle of Ansa. The Emperor commeth with great forces into Italy, and beseegeth Asola. The French and Venetian armies retyre to Milan. The arriuall of the Swisses at Milan for the King. The Emperors shamefull retreate into Almaine, and the abandoning of his army. King Francis his complaints against the Pope. The Lord of Lautrec Gouernor of the Dutchy of Milan beseegeth Bressia the third time. Bressiayeeldeth vpon composition, Verona after diuers determinations  being beseeged in two seuerall places is by the Almains freed from the seege. The contents of the treaty of Noyon. Verona by the same treaty is yeelded to the Venetians. The great ioy of the Venetians, together with the Veronois for that redition.




The Contents of the third Booke of the  fifth Decade.
THE Swisses after the bataill being retired to Mylan, a very Dissention among the Swiss^s in Mila^ after the Battaill. great contention arose amongst them, some of them being desirous to make an agreement with the French King, and others to continue still for the defence of Milan. Those who demanded the acord, making another pretence, craued mony of Maximilian Sforza, the which they very well knew hee had no meanes to pay; but it was onely by that refusall to take an occasion to leaue him, the which they did by perswasion of Rost their Colonell, leauing fifteene hundred of their countrymen, with fiue hundred Italians, for the ga^d of the Castle, promising Maximillian neuerthelesse to returne to the aide of their fellowes, whome they left behind. Vpon which promise Maximillian Sforza, accompanied by Iohn of Gonzaga, and Ieronimo Morone, and by other Gentlemen of Milan, shut himselfe vp in the Castle.
The French after the Victory remaining maisters of the field, did with ease reduce vnder their power all the townes of the Dutchy of Milan. The Viceroy of Naples who all this while had not stird forth of the Placentyne Territory, beingThe Viceroy retireth to Naples. out of hope to bee able any longer to gard and defend the state of Milan, and fearing besides that the Pope had abandoned the league, hee retired into Romagnia, and from thence soone after brought backe his army into the realme of Naples. The Cardinall of Syon perceiuing him-selfe to bee disgraced among his country-men, for the bad successe of the battaill, went to the Emperour  to solicite aide, the like did Francis Duke of Barri brother to Maximillian Sforza.
The Citty of Milan being thus abandoned, gaue itselfe to the French King;Milan ye^ldeth to the French King. with entreaties that hee would forget what was past, promising to bee euer after more loyall and obedient, graunting to pay vnto him a very great summe of mony. The King refused to enter into it so long as the enemies held the Castle: but the Duke of Burbon came thither to receiue the Citty, in the Kings name, and gaue speedy charge to Pedro of Nauarre to attempt the taking of the Castle, who promised, contrary to the opinion of all-men, to winne it within a moneth, where-vpon hee beganne to batter it with the Canon certaine daies together; then according to the vsuall manner, hee made mines, wherebyVpon what Articl^s Sforza yeelde^d the Castle of Milan. hee blew vp the walls and towers which were of a wonderfull height.
Sforza being daunted when hee saw a Case-mate and a part of the wall flying  in the aire, and being besides ill disposed of his person, making vse of the councell of some of his trustiest seruants, hee determined to receiue into the

Castle Antonio Bratan Doctor of the lawes, to make a draught of the agreement and redition of that place, which he was resolued to yeeld vp to the French King, which imported, that Maximilian Sforza should presently consigne to the French King, the Castles of Milan and Cremona. That he should giue ouer vnto him all his claime to that state, and should receiue of the King a certaine somme of money for the paiment of his debts; and that he should goe into France where the King should giue him a yeerely pension of thirty thousand Ducats, or else should cause him to be made a Cardinall with the like reuenew. There were besides, diuers Suisses that were in the Castle, who were all of them well satisfied and pleased.
These Articles being accomplished, the King entred in great magnificence intoThe French Kings entry into Milan. the Citty of Milan, enuironed with the greatest part of his cauallery. Foure Ambassadors of the chiefest Senators of Venice came thither to him, namely Vntonio Gr^mani, Dominico Treuisan, George Cornare, and Andrew Gritti, as well to congratulate him for his victory, as to entreat him, as hee was tyed by the capitulations of the confederacy, to helpe them to recouer their Citties.
The King after that he had gratiously receiued and entertained them, commanded speedily the bastard of Sauoy and Theodore Triuulcio to aid them withThe King promiseth a^d to the Venetians. six dundred lances and seauen thousand Lancequenets: But because they delayed  their departure, vntill they had seene what would become of the Castle of Milan, or else because the King would send the same companies, before that of Cremona. Aluiana (whom the Venetians would not suffer to follow the viceroy)Aluiana his enterprise vpon Bressia. marched with his army towards Bressia, to trie if he could take it by force, according to the Senates direction, who desired (that all matters being laid aside) he should seeke to recouer Bressia and Verona: in regard whereof Aluiana hauing passed ouer the riuer Adda, marched directly to Bressia, the Citty of Bergamo beeing yeelded vnto him presently after the rout of the Suisses.
Now in the Venetians Campe there was diuersity of opinions among the  Captaines, some of them thinking it much better to goe first and beseege Verona for diuerse important reasons, and cheefely because that beeing taken, all the Townes and Castles of the Veronois would soone yeeld, the whichThe Seege of Bressia resolued on. would not so fall out by the taking of Bressia. The Senate at first was of this opinion, but because they would not spend the time vainely in that determination, they referred that businesse to Aluiana his discretion, who because Bressia was neerer to the French Campe, hee marched thither, hoping to take it with ease; for hee thought that Bressia had not so strong a garrison as Verona.
But Icaro the Spanish Captaine beeing wise and subtill, who commanded  Bressia, hauing intelligence of Aluiana his deseigne, had speedily caused aNew succors enter into Bressia vnknowne to Aluiana. thousand footmen to come thither from Verona, with store of victualls and other necessaries to sustaine a seege; and had handled it so cunningly, as Aluiana had no knowledge thereof, who made account so soone as hee should approach the walles to giue an assault in diuers and sundry places: But by the sodaine and vnexpected arriuall of the new ayde, hee found more resistance there then hee look't for, and hauing greatly laboured in his approaches,Aluianas death. a greeuous feeuer seazed on him, which enforced him to leaue the Campe, and to retire to Gueda, in the Bressan Countrey, where hee departed out of this world about the beginning of October, in the yeare of our Lord, one thousand, fiue hundred, and fifteene, not beeing fully three score yeares of age; wherewith the Venetians were greatly greeued, but the souldiours much more, who kept his body fiue and twenty dayes togeather in the

Army, carrying it with them when they marched in very great solemnity, then it was brought to Venice, where by a publique decree, it was very honorably buried in Saint Steeuens Church, where at this day his toombe is to be seene: And because he had euer made more esteeme of honor and reputation then of wealth, hauing left his wife and children poore, the Senate in acknowledgementThe Senates recompence to the widdow and children of aluiana. of his good seruice, decreed, that euery moneth three score Ducats should be paid to his widdow, and as much to a sonne of his foorth of the publicke treasury so long as they should liue, hauing giuen them a goodly house in the Citty, with exemption from all taxes, and impositions, and that to euery of his three daughters should be giuen the somme of three thousand Ducats for their Dowry when  time should serue.Iohn Iames Triuulce Generall of the Venetian army.
After Aluiana his death, George Eme the prouidator did for a while command the army. The Venetians in the meane time entreated the King to giue them Iohn Iames Triuulce to be Generall of their forces, as well in regard of his experience, as for his renowne in martiall discipline, as also because for the common inclination towards the Guelphe faction, there had euer beene good wil and frendship betwixt them and the same Republick. Whilest he prepared for his going toPescara taken by the Venetians. the army, the Venetian companies tooke Pescara hauing not*long before defeated certaine troopes of horse and three hundred Spanish footmen that went to releeue it; then they recouered Asola and Lona which the Marquis of Mantua Asola and Lona taken by the Venetians. had abandoned.
Triuulce being arriued at the Venetian Army receiued letters from the Senate full of congratulations and entreaties that he would carry himselfe in that place, so as he had euer doone in all imployments: he did likewise receiue the army at the hands of George Eme the Prouidator, where he beganne to beare himselfe with great wisdome, and discretion and according to the Senates desire he beseeged Bressia, albeit it seemed very hard vnto him to take it without the FrenchBressia beseeged by the Venetians. army, by reason that the Citty was strong, and that there were within it two thousand foot as wel Lancequenets as Spaniards, as also because winter aproached, and the weather was much disposed to raine, as the euent did not deceaue his Those of Bress^make a sally on the Venetians Campe. iudgement. For as they battered it with the Artillery which was planted vppon the very brinke of the dike, those within made a sally with fifteene hundred as wel Spaniards as Laucequenets, who giuing in vpon the guard of the Artilery which were a hundred men at armes and six hundred foot, they easily put them to rout. albeit that Iohn Paul Manfron did in some sort stay their fury with thirty men at armes.
They slew about two hundred foot, burnt the pouders and drew tenne peices of ordinance into Bressia; so as the Venetians were like that day to haue receiued a far greater losse, had not Triuulce come speedily thither with certaine foot companies and Cauallery, who enforced the enemies to retire, and recouered  from them certaine peeces of ordnance which they were carrying away beside.
This disorder caused Triuulce to with-draw his armie, and to lodge it more atThe retreat of the Venetian army. large, euen as farre at Coccai, ten miles distant from Bressia, expecting the comming of the French, at whose arriuall, so soone as Triuulce had made new prouisions of artillery and munition, hee returned againe, and encamped before it: The French supplyes beeing conducted by the Bastard of Sauoy, which consisted of fiue thousand Lansquenets, eight hundred men at armes, and certaineBressia againe beseeged by the French. peeces of ordnance, with all manner of prouision in aboundance, beeing ioyned with the Venetians, the Citty was by a generall consent beseeged, hoping with those forces, and by the Soldiers diligence, casily to finish their enterprise.
Yet neuerthelesse it fell out otherwise then they thought, for the Lanquenets

refused to march against the citties of the Emperors obedience, where-vpon beeing dismissed the Venetians craued Pedro of Nauar of the King, who cameThe Eancequenets refusal. thither in their sted, with fiue thousand Gascons and French: These being encamped on the one side of the towne, and Triuulce on the other with the Venetian soldiers, the battery beganne in diuers places, the cheefe command of all matters, remayning in a manner to Triuulce, by reason that the bastard of Sauoy being sicke, was gone from the army.
After a long battery, no assault was giuen, because those within had made diuers rampiers, and very carefully prouided for all things necessary for defence, so as Pedro of Nauarre had recourse to his ordinary remedies, whereof hee had  not as yet made vse in that seege, by reason it was very painefull and laborious, and for that he likewise feared, least by meanes of the continuall rayne that had fallen of a long time, his deseigne might not fall out as hee desired. He begannePedro of Nauarre makes vse of the mine at the seege of Bressia. then to mine and sap the walls, but those within the towne suspecting the matter, because those of the Campe had giuen ouer their battery, hauing dilligently searched all ouer the Citty, if they could heare any noice of the miners, at last it was discouered, wherevpon they made a counter-mine, which being filled with powder and fired, they ouerthrew all that Pedro of Nauarre had done, and slew his people that wrought in it, so as in a moment all that was lost which had beene set forward in many daies.Pedro of Nauar his mine blo^ne vp.
The Venetians neuer-the-lesse did not dispaire of taking the Citty, but by streightly shutting them vp to stop alsuccors from comming to them, they hoped to win it, hauing had intelligence of the great want of all necessaries where-with the beseeged were aflicted, which at last would enforce them to yeeld, especially the Almaines, who are impatient of long suffering: as also for that they had notGreat dearth in Bressia. receiued any pay of a long time from the Emperor, by meanes whereof they refused all military obseruation, and prepared them-selues to mutiny and rebellion. This being reported to Triuulce, he supposed that a faire occasion was offered to conquer the citty, where-vpon hee resolued not to stirre from thenoe, notwithstanding the sharpnesse of the winter, the deepe snowes, and the long time  that hee had layne before it, knowing how much it concerned his reputation, if that which hee had begunne should not succede fortunately.
Hee beganne then straightly to shutte it vp on euery side, to the end that no victualls might enter it, nor no soldier of the towne might come forth, and for this purpose hee still entertayned them with light skirmishes. And because those of Verona did in the meane space scoure the Bressan Territory, and molest the Venetian Army, hee placed strong Garrisons in Pescara and Valegia to stoppe their incursions, and to shutte them more streightly vppe.
At the same time that Bressia was beseeged, there was some motion of peace, the Pope seeking to accord the Emperor and the Venetians, hoping afterwardsThe Pope motioneth a peace to bee better able to conclude peace with the French. But the Venetians being so often beaten with hope of those matters, without giuing any trust to the Popes words, did not assure their State on many, but onely on the friendship and alliance with the French, and to the end that their intent might bee knowne to all men, they refused all conditions propounded to them, whereof they were desirous to aduertize the French Ambassador resident at Venice, and that in like case, their Ambassadors which were at the court, should acquaint his Maiesty with the whole businesse, that hee might see how they accounted onely of his friendshippe, as the King did the like by their^ The which hee  made shew of to the Emperors Ambassadors, who came to him to talke of agreement from their Maister, whome hauing dismissed without any resolution, he did speedily aduer^ize the Venetians thereof.
As concerning the Pope, the King had sundry thoughts. For al be-it his Holinesse had forsaken him, at such time as hee thought him one of his greatestThe King desirous of the Popes friendsh^p. friends, he neuerthelesse did greatly desire his friendship, the which he had not left but by constraint. Therefore the Pope hauing sent his Nuntio to the King, vnknowne to the other confederates, he was curteously entertained by him, the King manifesting his hearty desire to enter into his Holinesse fauour: Yet neuerthelesseThe Pope yeelded Parma and Placentia to the King. resoluing not to buy that at a deere rate which was offered, the Nuntio could obtaine nothing of his Maiesty, till the Pope had quitted and yeelded vnto him Parma and Placentia which he held.
The Pope could hardly be induced to quit those two Cities. At last, fearing  that by delaying the matter, some mischiefe might arise, he satisfied the Kings desire, referring the accomplishing of the rest till their enteruiew, which by their mutuall consent was concluded to bee at Bolognia. The Pope for that purpose departed from Rome, and the King from the City of Milan, the Venetians Ambassadors did accompany his Maiesty, all Italy receiued great contentation by that assembly, hoping that it would produce an assured peace to the whole Prouince. A legat was sent to the Emperour to treat of agreement betwixt him and the Venetians, and to haue him to remit Bressia and Verona to them for a pecuniary recompence.
The Pope likewise sent a briefe to the Venetians, exhorting them vnto peace.Enteruiew betwixt the Pope and French King at Bolognia. The Pope and the King being come to Bolognia, they couenanted together, That the King should take vpon him the protection of the Popes person, and the Churches State, of Iuliano and Lorenzo de Medicis, and the State of Florence. That the Pope should cause his forces to leaue Verona, and countermand those companies sent to the Emperors aide against the Venetians. Diuers other ArticlesThe Articles concluded betwixt the Pope and King. were concluded, concerning onely the proffit of either of them: In the which treaty hauing continued sixe daies together, both of them departed from Bolognia: the King thinking that he had done a great matter, to haue drawne the Pope to his side, and to haue disioyned him from his enemies.
The King being come to Milan, beganne to thinke on his returne to France, hauing nothing to detaine him but the desire he had to see the Venetians re-established in their Cities. Therefore he commanded to re-enforce the Venetians army which lay before Bressia, and had reduced the beseeged to that extremity, as all men thought that they would soone yeeld; for the Almaines and Spaniards that lay within it, had resolued together, that if within twenty daies they were not releeued, they would yeeld vp the City to the Venetians, on these conditions neuerthelesse, to depart with displayed Enseignes, the drumme beating, with the artillery and all their baggage, which was the selfe same compositionThe composition of those of Biessia. which they had concluded with the Venetians Generall. But the Almain succors came and entred the towne before the time agreed vpon was expired.
The report of the comming of this aide had caused sundry opinions in the army, some of the being of opinion to continue the seege; others, to lead the army elsewhere, but the report of the number of the Almaines being greater then the effect, and for that they had notice by their spies that Marke Antonio Colonna, who wasThe arriuall of succors to Bressia, causeth the Venetians to raise their campe. come forth of Verona, and entred the Mantua^ territory, made preparations to come and assaile them, caused the Venetian captaines, who feared that by staying there, the enemies might come and enclose them, to determine wholy to dislodge, and to bring the artillery to Crema and Cremona, and the rest of the army to Castlenedulla six miles off from Bressia.
These newes being brought to Venice did greatly amaze the whole City, because  they expected rather to haue heard of the taking of the City, then of any thing else. The Generall and the Prouidatory had written, that there was suchThe raising of the campe amazeth the City of Venice. strong Garrison at all passages, as it was impossible that any aide could enter into it, which might keepe them backe from obseruing the agreement which they

had made, and that which caused them most to beleeue it, was that the French supplies which were to come to the campe, being three thousand Almains and 400* horse, were departed from Milan and were on their way towards their campe.
This did much blemish Triuulcio his reputation, whereof he hauing notice,Triuulce leaueth his charge. craued leaue of the Signory, That he might depart, saying that the affaires of his owne house called him thence, and that he could tarry no longer in their army. But the Senate knowing that this mans experience was much important for their affaires, vsed meanes to appease him by letters, and did entreate the King to cause him to take that charge vpon him, but he would by no meanes consent therevnto, but returned to Milan. Theodore Triuulcio tooke charge of the Venetian army, and of the whole mannaging of the warre, holding the same authority in the army as Iohn Iames Triuulcio had done, al-be-it he had not the name nor degree of captaine Generall.
The King in the meane time hauing giuen order for his returne into France, left the Duke of Burbon for viceroy in the Dutchy of Milan, and before his departureThe Duke of Bourbon viceroy in the Dutchy of Milan. he commanded Odet of Foix Lord of Lautrec, to carry speedily greater aide to the Venetians, and generally to doe all matters for them, as if it were for his owne seruice, shewing thereby his great affection to the Republike, as in all other his speeches and discourses, not letting to say, that if the Venetians were not wholy restored to their Cities he would returne into Italy with greater forces The Kings affection towards the Venetians. then before.
The King being gonne forth of Italy, and the Duke of Bourbon tarrying there to command the Dutchy of Milan, the Venetians still kept an Ambassador nere to him, to sollicite whatsoeuer was needfull for their affaires, Andrew Treuisan was sent thither, who being come to Milan, Andre Gritti who had remained there after the Kings departure to hasten the supplies, went to the army to be ProuidatorThe Lord of Lautrec commeth to the Uenetian army before Bressia. there, in stead of Dominico Contaren, that fell sicke, and was brought home to Venice. At the very same time, the Lord of Lautrec came to the army with great forces which did much encrease it, so as it seemed that there was no doubt but that Bressia would be taken.
Now the Pope supposing that this successe did greatly crosse his deseignes, sought all meanes to hinder it. He propounded truce to draw the matter forth at length, hoping to cause the Venetians to condescend to some agreement, though it were to their disaduantage, by reason of the difficulty to take that City.The Popes practises to breake the seege. And because he knew that himselfe could doe no good in that businesse, for the small credit which the Venetians did giue to his words, he determined to make vse of the King of Polands authority, whose Ambassador (hauing intelligences likewise at Venice) he perswaded to reuiue the treaty of peace, and to propound to the Venetians, that if they would disioyne themselues from the French, and allie themselues to the Emperor, they might add two goodly Cities to their State, Lodi, and Cremona, because that with the Popes armes, the Emperours and their owne, being vnited together, they might easily expell the French, and afterwards by the King of Polands authority obtaine them of the Emperour in guift, so as being thus separated from the State of Milan, they might for euer after be incorporated to the Venetians demaines.
Besides this proposition the Pope, hoping that by the Generals absence the seege of Bressia might be prolonged, wrote to King Francis that it might please him to command the Lord of Lautrec to goe to Rome, being desirous to confer with such a man about diuers matters concerning the affaires of Naples, to which he knew the King enclined, wherevpon he exhorted him to make hast to beginne  the warre on that side, seeing that the King of Arragon was dead, and that Charles Duke of Burgondy hauing taken vpon him the name of Prince of Castile, made himselfe terrible to all those who held any States in Italy, and chiefly to himselfe.
But the Popes cunning being already knowne of a long time, caused no great

regard to be giuen to his speech. The Venetians thus continuing the seege ofThe Venetians resolue to continue the seege. Bressia without harkening to any truce resolued not to stirre from thence till it was either yeelded vp, or taken by force. The Emperour, who had made warre but slowly the yeere before by his Lieutenants, determined to goe thither in person, sought all meanes to make new stirres in Italy, assembled diuers Diets, craued aide, made great leauies of soulders, and aboue all, prouoked the Swisses to take armes to reuenge the death of so many braue men their companions, offering to be their captaine and not to abandon them in any trauaile or danger whatsoeuer. The King of England made the same request, being iealous of the glory  and reputation of the French, and for that the French King also had taken vponThe practises of the Emperor, king of England, and the Pope against the French. him the protection of the King of Scots. The Pope did no lesse, but in more secret manner. And all three of them promised good pay to those Swisses that would come, shewing them moreouer that the profit which would redound to them by that warre of Italy and by their alliance, would bee much greater then their hire.
The Venetian captaines in the meane time, after the arriuall of the Lord ofSundry opinions in the Venetians campe. Lautrec, did often sit in councel, where their opinions were very different, saying, That there was no great garrison within the towne, and that it was besides destitute of all prouision, making but small doubt of the seege. But this opinion was  not receiued, by reason of the vnfitnesse of the time, which was in the middest of winter when it is not good to discampe and to lead the souldiers to a new faction: As also because they thought it meere follie to quit a certenty, such as was the taking of Bressia, for the vncertaine successe of that which would happen before Verona. For they certainely knew that there was in Bressia such want of money, corne and al other kind of victuals, as it was of necessity soone to be theirs, either by agreement or by force, and this being verified by diuers, it was concluded by a generall consent not to stirre from thence, and that the City should be more streightlly looked to. In the campe there was plenty of all things, for the Senate was carefull to furnish it with all necessaries, notwithstanding all the impediments  which the enemies vsed against the purueyors which prooued vaine and to none effect. Marke Antonio Colonna, was the man, who being lodged at Verona, vsed all meanes to cut off victuals from the army, and to that end kept great numbers of Spaniards and horse-men at Legnaga, which they then possessed, so as by little and little, the enemies waxed so bold, as they came and scoured as farre as the Venetians campe whilest they were busied at their seege.
The Generall and the Prouidatori, thinking if they should endure that indignity, it would greatly blemish their reputation, sent Iohn Paul Manfron and MarkeManfron, and de Bue, are defeated by the Imperials. Antonio Bue with foure hundred men at armes, and foure hundred light horse to surprize them, but the designe succeeded badly: for Colonna being by his spies aduertized of their comming, came forth of Verona with six hundred horse and fiue  hundred foot, and went speedily towards Valegia and met them in the field, and comming to handy-stroakes, he defeated them. At this incounter Iulio, son to Iohn Paul Manfron his horse being slaine vnder him in the fight was taken, and his father fled to Gueda. A more prosperous issue had the enterprise of Iano Fregosa, and IohnThe Lansequenets defeated at Ante by Fregosa. Corardo Visin, marching with certaine companies as well of the one as other army to the castle of Anse to stoppe the passage of 3000. Lansequenets: for they slue 800. of them, and the residew escaped with the mony which they carried into Lodron. All these exploits were great; but not of any great consequence in comrison of the totall of the warre, and of that which happened on report of the Emperors comming into Italy which dayly encreased, whereby both the assallantsThe Emperors comming into Italy. and the beseeged were shaken with diuers hopes and feare. The Emperor hauing assembled diuers foot and horse companies, and prouoked great numbers of Swisses  to take armes, was on his way to come into Italy, intending to enter by the mountaines of Trent, and to goe directly towards Verona, then to Bressia, and

leauing strong garrison in both those Cities, to passe on into the Dutchy of Milan to expell the French.
The Pope hauing notice of the Emperours entry into Italy, the better to honour him, and to acquaint him particularly with his loue towards him, created Bernardo de Bibiena Cardinall of Saint Mary in Porticu, Legat, and sent him toThe Pope sendeth the Cardinall Bibiena Legat to the Emperor. him, for that he was euer wont to shew himselfe on the Popes behalfe against the French, and to hinder their proceedings. But the Venetians, beleeuing verily that the Emperour would come into Italy, exhorted the French King to prouide for their common affaires, and not to suffer the Emperour and the Swisses, whoThe Venetians exhort the French King. enuyed his glory and greatnesse, to enioy the fruit of his labour and trauaile; and  that therefore he should either in person returne againe into Italy with a mighty army, or else augment that which he had here already, according to the worthinesse of the cause, promising for their parts to spare nothing that might auaile him.
The King knowing that what they said was most true, tooke great care, not only for the danger wherein he saw the Dutchy of Milan, but because he should be enforced to put off his enterprize of Naples till some other time, wherevnto he greatly inclined. Resoluing neuerthelesse first of all to defend his owne Estates and those of his allies, he propounded to the Venetians to wage, at their common charge eight thousand Swisses: because that he hauing at the same time  very opportunely renued his alliance with them, it was expresly agreed vpon that it should bee lawfull for the King to draw what number of souldiers he pleased forth of their country.
The Venetians soone agreed to giue pay to two thousand foot of that Nation,The Venetians offer to the King. and readily to furnish money necessary for other expences of warre. And notwithstanding that the publike treasury was much exhausted, and the whole City greatly afflicted with so long a warre, Yet neuerthelesse there was no want seene in any prouision for the army, nor in ought else that concerned the continuance of the warre. They made a leauy of foure thousand Italian foot, they did encrease their garrisons in the Cities, and created two Prouidatori, Paul Gradonico and Lodouico Barbaro. In the Venetians campe were foure thousand GasconsThe number of the French and Italian forces. and fiue hundred men at armes, commanded by French captaines: but amongst those souldiers, who were particularly vnder the command of Triuulce, were seuen thousand foot, and about fiue and twenty hundred horse, as well men at armes as light horse-men, and there staied with the Duke of Bourbon after the Kings departure foure thousand Gascon and Italian foot-men, and seuen hundred men at armes.
Now all these forces being vnited together, with the Swisses who were already said to be arriued at Iuree to the number of sixe thousand, seemed to be sufficient to defend the State of Milan, and to make all the Emperours attempts vaine and  vnprofitable, al-be-it the report was that his army consisted of fiue and twenty thousand, which were no great good souldiers, especially the Almaine foot whoThe number of the Imperiall ^rmy. had beene leauied forth of his countries in hast, and his Cauallery was well worse, so as his best forces were Swisses, whom the Emperour did well not to trust ouer much, as well in regard of the Nature of that Nation, which is variable and inconstant, as for the small loue they beare to the house of Austria: so as the Emperours forces being such, the common opinion was to march against them as they approched, neuerthelesse they resolued on the contrary, and the whole armyThe Swisses nature. departing from the Bressan Territory, came vpon that of Cremona, whither the Duke of Bourbon a while before was come with all his Cauallery and foot, intending  there to stay for the Swisses, who were not yet arriued, and likewise to stop the enemies from passing on any farther.
The Emperour being come by Trent to Verona, went and encamped before Asola, which was garded by an hundred men at armes, and foure hundred

Venetian foot-men, where hauing spent diuers daies to no purpose, he was enforced to depart thence and crossed the Riuer Oglio at Orcinouo, wherevpon the French and Venetians determined to raise their campe, and hauing left three hundred Launces and three thousand foot-men in Cremona, they retired on the farther side of the Riuer Adice, resoluing to stop his passage. But the French andThe whole country betwixt Oglio, Po and Adda yeeld to the Emperor. Venetians were scarce gonne from thence, but the whole country, which lieth betwixt the Riuers, Oglio, Po, and Adda, were at the Emperours deuotion (Cremona and Crema excepted) the one garded by French, and the other by Venetians.
After that the Emperour had crossed Oglio, he drew nere to the riuer Adda to  passe it at Pisquetona, and finding the passage there to be very difficult, he came to Riuolta, the French lying at Cassiana on the other side of the Riuer: who by reason that the Swisses were not yet arriued, and that the Adda might be foordedThe French and Uenetian army retire to Milan. in many places, they marched away the next day to Milan, whereby the Lord of Lautrec purchaced small honour, who had published and written to the King, that he would with ease stop the Emperors passage ouer that Riuer.
Maximillian being mooued at this retreat crossed the Adda, then he pursued his iourney, and being come within sixe miles nere to Milan, he sent an Herald to summon those of the City, threatning the Milanois, that if within three daies, theyThe Emperor summoneth the City of Milan. did not chace thence the French army, he would handle them in worse manner, then Frederike Barbarossa his predecessor had done, saying that he was come into Italy, to receiue, according to the custome of his Ancestors, one of the markes of the Empire in the City of Milan, and to driue thence, and forth of all the confines of that State, the French, as vniust and vnlawfull possessors thereof. They answered the Herald according to the pleasure of the French. That the State of Milan being in times past a member of the Empire, was by the consent of Emperors cut off from it, for a summe of money giuen vnto them; in regard whereof Emperors, could no more lay any claime to it, the which was lawfully possessed by Francis the French King, as well for that it was his owne inheritance, as being likewise wonne by right of armes: and therefore that the Milanois would keepe  that City for their lawfull Lord, vnto whom they had sworne homage and fealty.
Notwithstanding this braue answere the whole City was filled with great amazement, and their determinations were different. Some were of opinion toThe diuersity of opinions in the City. abandon the City, despayring of being able to resist the enemies, others on the contrary reiecting that councell as too base, would not depart, but perswaded to tarry still and defend the City, and the better to doe it, they resolued to retaine all the foot-men in Milan, with eight hundred Launces, and to distribute the residue for the gard of the neighbour townes.
Neuerthelesse the first councell had beene followed, had not Andre Gritti and Andre Treuisan, the Prouidators, disswaded it, who by meanes of their authority  procured them not to make so much haste: so that as they were ready to depart, certaine newes arriued, that the day following Albert Peter would be at Milan,The arriuall of the Swisses at Milan for the Kings seruice. with ten thousand Swisses and Grisons. These newes did encourage the Citizens and souldiers. The Emperour in the meane time came and encamped at Lambre two miles from Milan, whether he was no sooner come but the Swisses arriued at the City. This comming gaue spirit to the French, but greater terror to the Emperor. For, seeing the City to be strengthened with such a garrison, he doubted not but that the seege would be long and painefull: whereunto he himselfe had no meanes to tarry there long, for want of money, victuals, and all otherThe Emperor distrusteth the Swisses. necessaries for a seege: as also, for that he did greatly suspect the fidelity of  that Nation, by reason of matters past, and for that the French might easily winne them, for some great summe of money, the which himselfe could not doe in regard of his pouerty: calling to minde beside, what had befalne Lodouico Sforza at Nouara, there hauing beene Swisses in his army, and in that of the French his

enemies, he feared least they should play him the selfe same tricke as they had don to Sforza, because he could not pay them. The Emperour beeing troubled with these and other such like cogitations, feare hauing mightily possessed him, determined to leaue his army, and to returne into Germany, hauing caused it to be giuen forth that his departure was only to prouide money to pay his souldiers, and that he would soone returne againe. And in this resolution, he went on his way with two hundred horse onely.
Now the souldiers of the campe, perceiuing themselues to be forsaken of their captaine, beganne to take a new party, as their particular profit vrged them. The Swisses went to Lodi, which had yeelded to the Emperour when hee crossed the  Adda, where hauing wasted the country round about, they spoiled the towne, and had continued their rauaging, had not the other Swisses that lay in Milan protested against them, that if they did not abstaine from so doing, that they, with the French and Venetians would come and assaile them. Vpon these threatnings they ceassed from spoyling, and hauing remained peaceably there for certaine daies, they returned home into their country, (some excepted) who with Marke Setio their captaine went to gard Verona, the like did Marke Antonio Colonna with his cauallery, and Spanish and Almaine foot.
Soone after the Emperours departure the Marquis of Brandenbourg came toThe Marquis of Brandenbourg commeth to the Emperours army. the campe with certaine summes of money, who although he vsed all meanes to  stay the souldiers, who were already disbanded, all things being in confusion, and the money likewise not being sufficient for the payment of the whole army, hee lost but his labour.
Amidest these troubles, the small loue and affection betwixt the Pope and the French King, began to shew it selfe, the which till then lay hidden. The King complained for that the Pope being mooued with a bad intent, had made so long delayThe French Kings complaints against the Pope. to send that aide to the campe which he was tied to by their agreement; That he had secretly stirred vp the Swisses against him, and had in diuers other matters manifested his small affection towards him. The Pope on the other side alleadged diuers causes which had mooued him to suspect the Kings friendship. The Venetians  did all they might at sundry times to accord these Princes, and to take away al suspition from them, knowing very well how important a matter it was, for the Pope, the French King, and their Republike to be vnited together.
Whilest this agreement was handled by Ambassadors, all the enemies deseignes turned into smoake. For besides the Swisses, who were gonne home intoThe Emperors deseignes come to nothing. their country (as hath beene said) three thousand Spanish and Almain foot, came to the French and Venetian campes, who hauing crossed the Riuer Adda, had for certaine daies mightily molested the enemies, by diuers and sundry accidents, the French now hauing the worse, and anon the enemies.
The Duke of Burbon being at the same time departed forth of Italy, the Lord  Lautrec remained Gouernor for the King in the Dutchy of Milan, who marched speedily with all the French and Venetian forces on the Bressan territory, where with the ordnance he began to batter Bressia in foure seuerall places, to the end the beseeged might not be able to make resistance in so many places at once, whoLautrec beseegeth Bressia. held out so long as they had any hope of aide, which they expected out of the country of Tirol, it being promised them, but it came to nothing, by reason that the Venetians did shut vp the castle of Anse and other passages, so as the townesmen being not willing to endure an assault, because of the great breach that was made, couenanted to leaue the city and castle (their gods and liues being saued) if they were not releeued within three daies, on condition that the souldiers might Bressia yeeldeth on composition. goe any whether sauing to Verona. Icaro, the Cities captaine, came forth of the towne, and the Lord Lautrec with the Venetian Prouidators entred it at the same time, where they were ioyfully receiued by all the inhabitants, who by their cries and salutations did manifest their great content, for that the City was reduced

vnder the power of the common-wealth. Lautrec at his entry, tooke possession of the towne, and afterwards redeliuered it to the Venetian Prouidators, whoLautrec beeing (...) of (...) doth (...) (...) it to the Venetians. soone erected the Republikes standard. In this manner did this famous City, after many thwarts and accidents of fortune, returne to the obedience of her lawfull Lords.
The newes of the reddition of Bressia being brought to Venice, did greatly reioyce the whole City, all men hoping that this happy successe would be followed with more fortunate euents which would giue end to the warres. The Senate did particularly thanke the French King, for that by meanes of his aide  they had preuailed: They likewise wrote to the Lord of Lautrec, infinitely commending his speed and loyalty, exhorting him not to let slip the occasion which offered it selfe of other most fortunate exploits, as was that of Verona, if without delay the army might be brought before it, by the taking of which City, the warre with wonderfull speed would be ended.
Lautrec being mooued by these words resolued sodainely to discampe, andLaut^ec marcheth to beseege Uero^a. with Triuulcio to march towards Verona. But being come to Pescara he had intelligence that those fiue Cantons of Swisses with whom the King was not in league made preparations to come and assaile the Dutchy of Milan, Hee then told the Prouidators that in regard of his Kings seruice he could not be absent so farre from the State of Milan.
This businesse beeing debated in councell, all men were of opinion to remaine in the same place where they were, and there to expect more certaine newes of those stirres, the report whereof was yet vncertaine. But the rumor of the Swisses comming, still encreasing, Lautrec was desirous to bring backe his armySundry opinons in Lautrecs campe. into the Dutchy of Milan, notwithstanding that all the other captaines were of a contrary opinion, shewing how the sytuation of the place was very strong and most commodious, where they might resolue on whatsoeuer should bee needfull, and prouide for all things necessary to stoppe the enemies passage, of whose comming they were yet vncertaine. Hee on the contrary remayning firme in his resolution to discampe, propounded that he would goe and encampe  on the Bressan territory neere to Asola, alleadging for his reasons, that Verona being well manned with souldiers as well Swisses as Almaines who had retired thither after the rout of the Emperours army, that it would bee labour lost to beseege it, so as to attempt a difficult enterprize without great hope to effect it, would hinder their other affaires, and confound all order of warre.
Besides, hee made vse of other excuses, namely, how that the Venetians hadExcuses aleadged by Lautrec, tha^ be might discampe. conferred with the King of Polands Ambassador who spake to them of peace, and that the money promised to pay the Almaines, was not yet sent to the campe. Gritti the Prouidator opposing himselfe to what Lautrec had spoken, said, That he knew of a certaine, that there was great scarcity of all things in Verona, and  chiefly of corne, whereby the souldiers that were come thither, did more hurtGritti the Prouidator, his answer to Lautrec. then good to the city, that they ought not to giue them time to make prouision, least that afterwards the enterprize would prooue more difficult: That hee had intelligence by the souldiers that were come to their campe, that the townesmen and souldiers were at dissension among themselues* that all things were in confusion, by meanes whereof the affaires of warre was managed more slowly, and with great suspition: so as if the army were but before it, the people beeing partly prouoked by their owne interest, and partly likewise by their loue which they did beare to the Venetians, might raise some tumult, and giue them meanes for to enter the City: As for the Ambassassador  of Poland, that the Senate had not treated with him of peace without the knowledge of the French King, whom they did so honour and reuerence, as they had refused sundry and honest conditions of agreement, because that they would not disunite themselues from him: As for the payment of

the Almaines, the money was ready long before, and should be brought to the campe so soone as any safe meanes of sending it should be presented. But when I consider that you meane to depart hence, to goe and encampe on the Bressan country, I am greatly troubled thereat, as are all those of our city, because the people of that country, who are very louing and loyall to our Republike, and by warre haue endured infinite miseries, should be againe tormented by the arriuall of the army, now when they beganne to recouer themselues and to breath, so as by this meanes, we shall charge and oppresse our friends, to ease our enemies.
Gritti hauing vttered this speech, added, that if Lautrec would not follow them,The Venetians resolution. he was resolued to passe with the Venetian army vpon the Verona territory, where vnto the Generall and all the Venetian captaines gaue their consent. But hauing afterwards, maturely considered the mischiefe which that diuiding of the army might procure to the Common-wealth, they did solicite and entreat Lautrec, to passe on, but he would by no meanes harken therevnto, and all that they could obtaine of him, was, that he would a while longer stay in that place, and expect (as he said) money from France, and that the Venetians in the meane time should make greater prouisions of money, artillery and munition; but the chiefeThe cause which moo^ad Lautrec to stay still where he was. cause of his abode there was, to heare what end the treaty of Noyon would come to betwixt his King, and the King of Spaine: employing in the meane  space his armes vpon the poore country men. For Lautrec hauing made a bridge at the village of Monzarban, was ready to reape downe all the corne of the Veronois, and to waste the champian country by his light horse, hauing to these ends sent part of his army to lodge on the Mantuan territory, where it grieuously spoiled and wasted that country.
The Lord of Lautrec being afterwards mooued by the Venetians great com plaints, crossed the Adice, at Gothalonga, where after that his souldiers had taken great booties, he drew neere to Verona, but it was after that the Venetians had protested not to giue him the money which was come to the campe for to pay the Almaines, vnlesse he would march to Verona. Lautrec with his army  hauing crossed (as hath beene said) the Adice, his captaines did first of all seize on all the streight passages of the mountaines, thorow which the Almaines were wont to come forth of Germany to Verona, to the end that they being shut vp and stopt, no succor might come to the City. The Swisses on the other side hauing all of them in a manner left Verona, detesting the seege, were gon home into their country.
The Venetians army, with the French aide, consisted of eight thousand ItalianThe number of the Venetians army. foot and of sixe thousand Almaines paied by King Francis, of a thousand men at armes, and two thousand light horse, with diuers great captaines well experienced in the art military. These forces being come before Verona, they  were diuided into two campes, to batter the City at one time in two seuerall places, thereby the more to molest the beseeged, who were already reduced to a very small number.
The French comming to execute what had beene determined, the LansequenetsThe Lansquenets refuse to beseege a City belonging to the Emperour. although they had receiued three monthes pay of the Venetian Prouidators, either of their owne proper motion, or else being suborned by the Emperour, protested that they would not come to the seege of a City which was belonging to the Emperours possessions, to which the French King had no particular claime, and so by no meanes would passe on any further: wherevpon Lautrec repassing the Adice, lay a mile off from the walles of Verona, and the The army dislodgeth by reason of the Lansquenets refusall. Venetian army where the Lansquenets remained (fiue hundred men at armes, fiue hundred light horse and foure thousand foot beeing gonne away) not thinking it a safe matter to remaine beyond the Riuer, went and ioyned with him.
In the meane time the Cities forces did dayly decrease, by reason that diuers

Almaine companies returned home into their country, and others went to the Venetians campe, where they resolued to entertaine no more of them, by reason that they did some-what distrust them. Wee must thinke that the number of those who at the beginning were in Verona, was very great, for albeit many of them were gone from thence, it was neuer-the-lesse sufficiently well mand with soldiers: in regard wherof the Lord Lautrec, meaning not to hazard any thing, but vpon a certaine hope of good successe, demanded greater aide of the Venetians, if they would haue the army to march before Verona. The Venetians albeit they found it very difficult, in respect of the quality of the matter and the time, yet neuerthelesse because they would not foreslow an enterprize, which did  so much import them, hauing speedily gathered together foure thousand footThe Uenetians send supplies to the army. out of their owne state, they sent them to the campe, with greate store of artillery, pouder, and victualls, by the riuer Adice, to the end that the campe should want nothing.
Within Verona, which was strong by sytuation and art, and wel furnished withVVhat forces were in Uerona. all kinds of artillery, were, besides the cauallery, sixe thousand foot, as well Spaniards and Almans, as Suisses, commanded by Mark Antonio Colonna their General, who was no more in the Popes pay but in the Emperors, a man excellently experienced in martiall matters.
This man had diligently prouided for whatsoener was necessary for the Citties  defence.
Lautrec approching the walls, diuided his army into two parts, He went and encamped with his infantery and cauallery on that side which looketh towards Mantua: And Triuulcio hauing crossed the Adice with the Venetian forces, seated his campe against the wals towards Vincenza. The battery began at one time in both those places, but with sundry intents, because that Lautrec did batter it furiouslyVerona beseeged in two seuerall places. in one only place, to open away into the City, and to take from the enemies the meanes to repaire it: But Triuulcio being encamped more at large did batter a great space of the wall, hoping that it being beaten to the ground, he might with more aduantage come to the assault.
Lautrec hauing espied a place neere to the gate Calcina, which was not veryAssault giuen to Verona. strong being rampierd only with a weake old tower, he planted his ordnance against it, which being throwne downe, he commanded the souldiers to goe to the assault, who vpon hope of the sacke of that ritch City, went to it valliantly, and came without feare of the ordnance or Harquebuze shot vpon the breach; fighting with the enemies hand to hand, where the French did brauely behaue themselues:The assailants re^ire with losse. but the enemies hauing brought certaine peeces of ordnance to play in flanke vpon the breach, the French were enforced with great losse of their people to retire to the campe. But Triuulce notwithstanding that the breach was very great, did neuerthelesse delay to giue the assault, knowing very well that the  beseeged, hauing well fortified the place where the first assault was giuen, were gonne to the other breach to the aide of their fellowes, whereof ha^ing acquainted Lautrec, entreated him to send him more aide, that he might the safelier goe to the assault.
Now al-be-it Lautrec had meanes to doe it, for the commodiousnesse of going from one army to an other, vpon a very strong bridge ouer the Adice, and that heLautrec deli^eth. did often promise to do it, did neuerthelesse delay the matter. And the campe had already laine fifteene daies before the towne, the enemies were reduced to extremity, the cannon had beaten downe a great space of the wall, the souldiers within  the City were wearied with continuall factions, they wanted powder, the captains and the townesmen did not agree together, and yet for all that, none of these matters could mooue him to make hast to force the City.
Newes in the meane time came to the campe, how that great numbers of Almaine foot-men were comming to releeue the beseeged. These newes did

amaze Lautrec more then there was cause, and distasted him of continuing the seege, so as hee thought on nothing more then how to retire his army into some place of safety. The Venetian Prouidators being aduertized of this sodaine resolution,The Venetians remonstrance to Lautrec. came vnto him, where after diuers remonstrances of the great blemish he should doe to his honour and reputation to raise his campe, they infinitely entreated him with great earnestnesse to temporize for a while longer, and not to depart till the enemies were arriued, that they might see what they were: But all their entreaties could not diuert him from his first resolution. Whereupon he commanded on a sodaine to discampe, so as all his troupes went to Albareda, PaulThe Venetians stay to gard the bridge. Gradonic the Prouidator, and Iohn Paul Manfron remained for the gard of the  bridge, with eight hundred horse, as well men at armes as light horse-men, and two thousand foot, fearing if the same were broken their army might want victuals but they tarried not long there, for they forth-with went on to Villa Franca, where they fortified their campe.
In the meane time Rocandolf Colonel of the Almaine foot (the French and VenetianRocandof the Alma^n victuall th Verona. army being retired) entred Verona without any empediment, and hauing releeued it with victuals and new souldiers in their stead that were hurt, returned into Germany* wherevpon the Prouidators, did againe solicite the Lord of Lautrecto returne to the seege of Verona, and not to spend time so vnprofitably. But Lautrec comforting them vsed diuers excuses for his slownesse, assuring them that  the City of Verona should shortly be reduced vnder the Venetians power.
The Prouidator hauing seriously ruminated these words in his minde, beganne to doubt of some treaty which did not appeare; and namely because that at the same time as the campe dislodged from before Verona, the report was that a messenger came from France to Lautrec, who had secret conference with him, and entreated him to keepe close his comming. Therefore the Prouidators did earnestly entreat Lautrec to discouer vnto them what hee knew thereof, to the endThe Prouidators and Venetian Senate in great care. they might be no longer enforced to entertaine so great an army, which charged the Republike with a merueilous expence: the Senate likewise being aduertized by the Prouidators of what had past, had the same thoughts, at such time as they  had newes from their Ambassador in the French Kings Court of that which had passed at Noyon: Because that King Francis beeing desirous that the VenetiansFor what cause the French king would haue the Venetians to be aduertized of the treaty. should haue time to consult of their affaires, would forthwith haue them to be acquainted with the treaty of Noyon betwixt him and the Arch-duke Charles, to the end that the Commissioners of both Princes comming to Brussels, should find all difficulties to be taken away and resolued on.
The summe of the treaty concluded at Noyon, was thus: That there shouldThe sum of the treaty of Noyon. be a perpetuall peace betwixt the French King and the King of Spaine, and a confederacy for the defence of their States against all men, in the which were comprehended all other Princes, friends or allies, of either of them. That King Francis should giue the Lady Rene, daughter to the late King Lewis, in marriage to the King of Spaine. That the said King should within a certaine time re-deliuer the Kingdome of Nauarre to her antient King. That the Emperour might within two monthes enter into that peace, and though he should enter into the league, the French King might helpe the Venetians to recouer Verona: the which if the Emperour would within sixe weekes commit to the King of Spaine, with power to giue it freely to the French King, to dispose thereof as hee should thinke fit, the King should pay vnto him a hundred thousand crownes, and the Venetians an other hundred thousand, part whereof should bee paied at the consignation thereof, and the rest within sixe monthes after, and that he should likewise be acquitted  of three hundred thousand crownes which he had receiued of King Lewis whilest they were confederates.
The Venetians doubting whether the Emperour would accept of peace on these conditions, did not cease to solicite the Lord of Lautrec to beseege Verona;

and also in regard of the summe of money they were to pay, which they desired rather to recouer by armes. But peace was more agreeable to the French King then force, being desirous of accord with the Emperour: yet neuerthelesse Lautrec not knowing how to excuse himselfe to the Venetians, who had made what prouisions soeuer hee craued, as also because the Lansequenets did no more refuse toVerona againe beseeged. goe to the seege, he condescended to their request and went againe and encamped before Verona.
Now whilest the French on the one side, and the Venetians on the other were busied in the battery, nine thousand Lansquenets arriued, who were sent by the  Emperour to releeue it. For the Emperor, being solicited by the Cardinall of Syon, and by the King of England, would not harken to a peace, so as his commissioners were ready to depart from Bruxels, without any conclusion, when the Emperour vnderstood that the French King had made a league with all the Swisses by meanes of a great summe of money: for then he seemed to be very desirous of peace with the French and Venetians, al-be-it that at the arriuall of these nine thousand Lansquenets, the campe did rise from before Verona, and was retired toThe Emperor wholy enclineth peace. Villa-franca.
The matter then was concluded at Bruxels as well with the King of Spaine as with the Emperor, in the manner aboue said, the which going slowly on, was hastned  by King Francis, on condition that there should be truce with the Venetians. The whole businesse being thus ended, the Bishop of Trent was sent to the Lord of Lautrec, to consigne the City of Verona, in the King of Spaines name, to the French King within the space of sixe weekes, according to the contents of the Capitulation, the which was done on the fifteenth day of Ianuary 1517. after the Venetians had paied the first fifty thousand crownes, and fifteene thousand toUerona consigned to the Lord Lautrec for the French King, is presently deliuered to the Venetians. the foot-men that were in the City: wherevpon at the very instant the Lord of Lautrec, in the name of the said King, gaue it to the Senate of Venice, and for the said Senate, to Andre Gritti and Iohn Paul Gradonic the Prouidators, to the great contentment of the Nobility, and the whole people of Venice, who did highly reioyce, for that after infinite expences and labors, they had made a fortunate end of so long and dangerous a warre.
But if they reioyced in Venice, they did no lesse in Verona, and in all the townsThe great ioy of the Veronoi^ for that they were reduced vnder the subiection of the Venetians. round about, hoping that by meanes of that peace they should be freed from all those troubles and miseries which they had so long a time endured. After all these demonstrations of ioy, the Senate acknowledging the Lord of Lautrec for a wise and valliant captaine, after they had presented him with great guifts, they commanded the Prouidator Gritti, to accompany him to Milan. But being comeThe Senates acknowledgement to the Lord Lautrec. as farre as Lodi, he found Iohn Iames Triuulce there, who came to meet and to bring him from the King the order of Saint Michel. Gritti hauing orderly performed  his commission, tooke his leaue of him, and returned, according as the Senate had commanded him, to the country newly reconquered.
The end of the third Booke of the fifth Decade.





The Contents of the fourth Booke of the  fifth Decade.
THe Impositions and taxes laied vpon the people during the warre, are in time of peace reuoked. The vniuersity  of Padua, re-established. The Senate send two Ambassadors to Selim Emperor of Turkes. The great victories obtained by Selim. He granteth the Venetians demands. The Venetians send an Ambassade to Charles King of Spaine concerning trafficke. Truce prolonged betwixt the Emperour Maximillian and the Venetians, The Emperonr Maximillians death. The French and Spanish Kings aspire to the Empire. Charles King of Spaine is chosen Emperour. Soliman, by the death of Selim, his father, obteineth the Empire of the Turkes. Lewis King of Hungary hath recourse to the Princes of Christendome. The Venetians in league with Soliman. The French King distrusteth the new chosen Emperor. The Emperor elect seeketh the friendship of the Venetians. The comming of Soliman into the Realme of Hungary enforceth King Lewis to implore the Venetians aide, who lend him thirty thousand Ducats. The Turke taketh Belgrade, the chiefe City of Hungary. The King of England is chosen vmpire and mediator for the strife betwixt the Emperour and the French King. The French King and  the King of England talke together. Why the league that was determined betwixt the Pope, the French King, and the Venetians, was not concluded and signed. A secret agreement made betwixt the Pope and the Emperour. The Imperialls practizes on the Dutchy of Milan. The Pope inuenteth matter of discontent, that hee might leaue the French King. The secret intelligences that the Pope and Emperour had with the Bandetti of Milan. The Venetians refuse to giue passage to the Emperours army thorow their territory. In what manner the Venetians did releeue the State of Milan. Parma beseeged by the Imperialls, and sodainely recouered by the Lord of Lautrec. The army of the league passeth the Adda, and commeth to Milan.

The Swisses forsake the French for want of pay. Prospero by the aduerticement of a Traytor marcheth directly to Milan. The suburbs of Milan and the Roman gate taken by the league. The Lord of Lautrec with his Cauallery retireth to Coma. Milan is taken and sackt. The Imperialls take Coma, with diuers other townes. The sodaine death of Pope Leo. Lastly the resolution and preparations of the Lord of Lautrec and the Venetians to beseege Milan.

The Fourth Booke of the fifth Decade of the  Historie of Uenice.
ARmes being laid a side by the meanes aboue said betwixt the Emperor and the Venetians, the Republike was three yeares at peace, which began at the entring of the yeare, 1517. Wherevpon all the citties of the firme land, which were by the last agreement reduced vnder the Venetians gouernment, sent their deputies to Venice to reioyce  with the Senate, for that to their honor, armes being laid downe, they had recouered al their state, and to offer likewise all their meanes and forces to the common-wealth.
The Senates cheefe care was to discharge the citty of Venice and all other townes and Villages of the firme land from diuers taxes andThe Senate disburdeneth the commonwealth in time of peace. impositions laid vpon them during the warre, by reason of the small meanes of the publike treasury: to the end that particular men, encreasing their meanes by peace, if afterward any need should be, they might bee more ready to releeue the publike with their wealth. It was decreed like-wise that all those who serued the common wealth in any place whatsoeuer, should euer after bee wholy paid their  wages, which had not bin done during the warre. In a word they omitted nothing which they knew to bee commodious or honorable for the Signory.
They did like-wise re-establish the Vniuersity of Padua, which had beene vnfrequented for the space of eight yeares. Then because they would no more fall intoThe Vniuersity of Padua reestablished by th. Senate. those inconueniences, as they had done for want of prouiding fortifications necessary for their Citties, they began to fortifie them, and cheefely the two famous citties, Padua and Verona, the two cheefest of their state on the firme land: and for that purpose Andre Gritte, and George Cornare were appointed, who going to those places should resolue by the aduice and councell of Triuulcio, and the other experienced Captaines of the Venetian army, on that which was to be done, By which meanes, diuers places being ruined in time of warre, were by them re-established, and many others newly built.The Venetians send two Ambassadors t^ the great Turk^.
But because the friendship of the Ottomans was very necessary for them, as well  for the conseruation of peace, as for the citties trafficke, they decreed to send two Ambassadors to Selim Emperor of Turkes: Lodouico Monce^igo, and Bartholomeo

Contaren were chosen for that purpose to goe and congratulate him in the name of the Republike, for all the goodly victories that hee had obtayned. For Selim in an incounter hauing vanquished his brother Achomat, and put him publikely to death, did like-wise ouer-come the Adulians, who are a very valiant people ofSelims victories. the mountaines: then going into Persia against the Sophi, hee defeated him in set battaille, and tooke the citty of Tauris, the cheefe seate of that Empire, with the greatest part of Persia, the which he was enforced to abandon, for want of victuallls, because that yeare had beene very scarce. Returning aftetwards to Constantinople, hauing refreshed and re-enforced his army, hee turned his forces vpon the Soldan of Suria and Aegypt, who was a Prince alwaies highly esteemed by  those of that Religion, and like-wise very potent, as well for the extent of his dominions, as for the eperience and military discipline of the Mamalukes, for by their armes they had possessed the same Empire, with great reputatio^ for the spaceThe Mamal^kes vanquished by Selim* of 300. yeares. Selim then being come with his army against this kinde of people, defeated them soundry times in field, so as the Soldan was slaine, and an other Soldan his successor was taken in battaill, whome ignominiously he put to death openly: hee made beside, a great slaughter of those Mamaluks, and thereby in a manner did wholy root out their name: hee tooke Cairo, which is a populousSelim takes (...) Cairo. citty, and the Soldans ordinary residence, and in a short-time seased on all Suria  and Aegypt. Al these great victories and encreases of his Empire, had not without cause giuen occasion to all Christian Princes to stand in awe of him, and cheefel^ the Venetians, of whome hee pretended to demand a yeerely tribute, of 8000. Ducats, which the Kings of Cyprus were wont to pay to the Soldans of Aegipt in times before. Now the Venetian Ambassadors being embarked at Venice, did first touch at Cyprus, and from thence they went to Damasco, where Selim returningSelim granteth the Venetians demands. from his victories had wintered with al his army. The Senate had expresly enioyned them to procure, that the Venetian marchants who dwelt at Tripoli, Alexandria, Barath, Damasco, and other marchant places of those Prouinces, might be maintayned there in the selfe same priuiledges, which they were wont to enioy in  former times, graunted vnto them by the former Kings of Suria and Aegypt: That it might like-wise bee lawfull for the Signory, to haue their Magistrates in those places with the same authority they were wont to haue, to doe iustice to their Cittizens in their strife about marchandize, and other such like businesse. Selim ayming at other ends did easily graunt it, as wel for the desire he had to entertaine the Venetians friendship, as to restore trafick to his new conquered Prouinces,The Venetians send Ambassadors to Charles King of Spaine concerning tra^fick. whereby great profit and commodity might redound to him. At the same time for the same purpose an Ambassador was appointed to goe to Charles King of Spaine, to the end that it might be lawfull for the Venetians to traffick thorow all the lands and signories newly fallen to him, as they were wont to doe in the life  time of King Fernand in Spaine, because that his officers did seeme to make some difficulty in it, in regard of the trade with Africke, whereof it shall not not be impertinent to say some thing by the way. The antient founders of the citty had speciall care, that the cittizens of their new citty should exercize them-selues in voyages and sea-traffick, to bee able by their vertuous industry to encrease their domesticke meanes and faculties, and make themselues knowne to forraine nations. The situation of their citty inuited them there-vnto because the Inhabitants had not they any inherita^ces wheron to busie themselues. Whervpon they decreed diuers ships should traficke into sondry places of Christendome, and of the Infidells, in which they sent diuers gentlemen, to learne them nauigation, and other matters belonging to the sea: some of whome remained for a time among those forraine  nations, and cheefely wher there was greatest trading, negotiating for themselues and others, whereby, besides the greate wealth which they purchased, they made themselues fit by experience for great maters, so as returning afterwards to Venice they readyly executed all matters, committed to them.
Now the places whether these vessels, (which were commonly called shippes of traffick) vsed to goe at their departure from Venice, was first into Sicily to theThe vsuall trade of the Venetian vessels. Citty of Saragossa, from thence to Tripoli in Barbary, and hauing coasted the Iland of Gerbes, they passed on to Tunis: from thence they directed their course to the realme of Tremisen, staying cheefely at Tusen and at Mega, two excellent Marchant townes, called at this day Ona and Orana. Then they went to diuers places of the Kingdome of Marocco, and touching at all the hauens of Barbery, which were antiently comprized vnder the Prouinces of Mauritania and Numidia, they sailed into Spaine.
But their traffick was very different, for at their departure from Venice, they  carried to the Affrican Moores sondry kindes of mettalls, and woollen cloathes which they sould there: then comming into Spaine they bought sondry kinds of merchandize as silk, wool, graine, and other things which they found in the contrey, with which being laden they returned to Venice. This traffick then being interrupted by the difficulties which the agents of the new King of Spaine did set abroach, and by reason of other accidents that did happen is wholly lost.
But to returne to our discourse, the Venetians perceiuing that a great part of the time of truce betwixt the Emperour and them was spent, they thought it necessary to come to some new agreement with him; the which the Pope desired, and that it might be by his meanes at Rome. But the Venetians trusting more to the most Christian King, referred the whole matter to him, and made means that the Emperour should to that end send his Ambassadors into France, whoTruce ^ed betwixt the Emperor and the Venetians. comming thither, and concluding no peace the truce by the Kings meanes was prolonged betwixt them for fiue yeares, on condition that for euery of the fiue yeares they should pay twenty thousand crownes to the Emperour. The occasion of this truce, was, because that the Pope being mooued by the Turkes fortunate successe, beganne to thinke on other milder matters; he sent Breefs to allThe Pope exhorteth christian Princes to take armes against the Turkes. Christian Princes putting them in mind of the danger which threatened them, requesting them that all discords and contentions being layd aside, they would  speedily prouide for the defence of Christian religion, and for their common safety, the which was exposed to very great dangers, vnlesse that they being vnited together did transport the warre into Turky, in regard of the encrease of Selims Empire, and his great desire of rule and soueraignty, which would prouoke him at last to oppresse all other Princes, as he had done by the Souldan of Egipt and the Mamalucks.
These things being by the Pope represented to the Venetians as well as to other Christian Princes, were cause that the Venetians consented to the truce (as hath beene said) made by the French King betwixt the Emperour and them, seeing that peace could be hardly concluded on: to the end they would not seeme  by their refusall to turne away so great a good from all Christendome. But asThe Venetians answere ^o the Popes exhortation. for the popes proposition, made particularly vnto them to take Armes against Selim, they answered that when they should see matters set foreward, and ernestly pursued, the Venetian Senate would be more ready for that enterprize then any else, and would neuer faile of their duty, knowing very well how much it did import them, not only in regard of the common interest of all Christendome, and for the Popes entreaties and exhortation, as because their Sea-state did border vpon that mighty enemy, the which he would in a moment assaile, and molest with all outrages, before the Confederates Army would be ready to enter into his Contrey.
Soone after this treaty of truce the Emperour Maximilian fell sick and dyedThe Emperor Maximilian* death. at Lynx in the be^inning of the yeare. 1519. which is a towne seated on the marches of Austria, his death being knowne to the soldiers that lay in Garrison at Gradisca and Maran, they sallied foorth vppon the lands belonging to the

Common-wealth, robbing and spoyling the Venetians subiects, executing diuers other hostile actions. The Senate wrote to the Lieutenants of the Empire, saying That for their partes they would keepe, and obserue the truce, and not make any innouation because of the Emperors death: but that they like-wise should doe well, to containe, their soldiers in peaceable manner, and keepe them from making any more incursions vpon their Territories: The Lieutenants thinking this to bee iust and resonable, the truce was inuiolably obserued euery where.
In the meane time, preparation was made for the election of a new Emperor: The French King and the King of Spaine, two great and excellent Princes, began openly to aspire therevnto: And albeit the practize was of great importance betwixt The French and Spanish King aspire to the Emperor. two such mighty Princes, yet neuer*the-lesse they handled the matter on both sides very modestly, without any iniurious speeches or warlik menaces, each of them seeking by his owne authority, and meanes, to draw the Electors on his side: But the Italians did stand in awe of either of their powers, fearing that which of them two should attaine that dignity, would by the aide of the Almains enuade all Italy, and ioyne it to the Empire, as it had beene in times before: so that either of their elections could not but bee very much distastfull, and greeuous to the Italians: and yet for al that they inclined more to the French King, then to the Catholik Maiesty, for diuers causes, and cheefely because the French, as a stranger should not beare such authority in Germany as the King of Spaine, who was  descended from thence, and by that meanes might turne them at his pleasure: So as the Pope and the Venetians did rather fauour the French Kings party then the Spaniards, and the French sending his Ambassador for the same purpose to Rome and Venice, they were honorably entertayned, and freely audienced.
Now besides these Ambassadors the French King sent the Lord of Teligni to Venice, as well for this purpose as for diuers and sundry other negotiations, andThe French Kings request to the Venetians. among others to entreate them to lend him some good store of mony, to supply his great expence hee was to make, if hee should bee chosen Emperor, and also that they would send forces into Germanie, to assist the Electors, to the end  they might not be enforced in their election, and to aske them what they would haue him to doe if Charles should enter with an army into Italy, to enforce the Pope to free him from the oath made to Pope Iulius the second, concerning the inuestiture of the Realme of Naples.
The Senate made answer to the Ambassadors demands, That in regard of their great obligation to the French King, albeit their treasour was much exhaustedThe Venetians answer to the French King. by the late warres, they would neuer-the-lesse striue to ayde him with an hundred thousand Ducats: But for to send forces into Germany, it would smalely avayle the King, and greatly hurt them, Besides, the Almains would neuer suffer their soldiers to passe, the passages being very streight and wel garded. As for Charles his passage, if without being prouoked there vnto he would enter armed into Italy against the most Holy Father of Rome, that the Venetians would no lesse shew them-selues defenders, and protectors of the liberty and dignity Ecclesiasticall, then their Ancestors had done, preferring the greatnesse therof before that of the Empire.
During these treaties of King Francis by his Ambassadors, Charles King of Spaine, being more apt to leuy solders with mony, then to giue it to the Electors, sent an army into the field, vnder collour of keeping the election from beeing forced, the which drawing neere to Franckfort, did encourrage those Electors that fauored his cause, and made those which wandred to encline to him, so as  Charles of Austria, King of Spaine, was chosen Emperor the eight and twentithCharles king of Spaine chosen Emperor. day of Iune, which was at the very selfe same time that Soliman the sonne of Selim did peaceably obtaine, without any contradiction, the O^taman Empire by

the death of his father Selim: There was but one onely Captaine named Agazzell Gouernor of Suria, that did oppose it and make him-selfe maister of the Prouinces of his gouernment, who taking armes for that purpose, his rebellion was soone appeased, and all the other Prouinces reduced vnder Solymans obedience, remained peaceable.
He was noted to be of a haughty courage, and fit for high enterprizes, and a great enemy to Christendome: yet notwithstanding Christian Princes, not considering the perills and dangers which followed them at the heeles, suffered this young Prince, their naturall enemy, to grow great, whilst they had time to abate his power, by busying him in the defence of his owne lands and Seignories, and Lewis King of Hungary prepar^th for defence against the Turke. meanes to keepe him from enuading those of their neighbors.
Lewis King of Hungary alone, leuied soldiers, and made great preparations of warre, imploying all mens ayde and succor, as one that feared this barbarous enemy, by reason that Solyman would not renew the truce which this King had made with his father Selim, wherevpon he sent his Ambassadors to the Christian Princes, and cheefely to Rome and Venice, entreating, exhorting, and admonishing them of other mens ruine and losse by the example of his owne neere at hand.
The Venetians answered him that the power and greatnesse of the Ottomans was so mightely encreased, as all Princes and Potentates stood in awe thereof, and cheefely themselues, by reason their State was to neere a neighbor to them: that they had neuer refused such offers, but that they on the contrary had solicited other Princes, to oppose themselues against the mightinesse of their Empire, which they saw did daily encrease: but that they of them-selues alone and withThe alliance is renewed betwixt Soliman and the Venetians. their owne forces could doe no great matter. Not long after, they sent Marco Minio their Ambassador to Constantinople, who with their vsuall presents was to procure the articles of peace to be confirmed in the same manner as some few yeares before Antonio Instiniano had done with Selim, and with the same authority, immunity and franchize.
Soliman shewed himselfe very ready to graunt their demands, as beeing desirous of their frendship and aliance, and for a demonstration of his good will towards them, at the same time as Minio departed from Venice, Acmat Ferrat set foreward from the Port of the great Turke towards Venice, to giue them notice from him of his succession in the Orientall Empires, and to renew their alliance begun with his father Selim. Besides he was desirous, (for that the Venetians trafficke into his Contries might be more free and safe,) with his owne forces to chase the Pirats that scoured the Leuant Seas, entreating the Venetians for their part to doe the like, to the end the nauigation might be assured.
This renewing of their league with the Turke, did greatly proffit them, in regard their state in Italy was not very firme, and by reason that the alarmes and The Uenetians arme against the Pirats. suspitions which they had conceiued at the beginning of the yeare, because it was reported that the Turke armed, was by that meanes cleered: so as one part of the nauall Army that they had prepared vpon that rumor, sailed into Barbary against the Pirats, of whom, many being taken, the passages were freed from danger. In this manner did the Venetians temporise with the Turke, vsing all means to keepe his friendship, despayring of being able to hurt him, so long as the Christian Princes carelesse of the common danger, were at strife among themselues.
Now the most Christian King being som-what troubled with this election, andVVhy the French King did distrust the Elect Emperor. fearing least Charles of Austria, would turne his deseignes vpon Italy to expulse  him from the state of Milan, acquainted the Pope and the Venetians with the great danger that threatned them if they suffred the elected Emperor to passe with an army into Italy, and therefore he councelled them to enter into a threefold

league together, against those that would attempt to inuade any of their states, and specially to oppose themselues against the Emperors passage comming in armes to goe to Rome (as he said) to receiue the Imperiall Crowne, because he could not enter in that manner but to the great danger of all those who possessedAfter what manner (...) Pope would consent to ^he King^ preposition. any states in Italy-
The Venetians soone consented to the French Kings proposition for the safety of their states. But the Pope being resolued what to doe, and ruminating sundry matters fed the King and the Venetians with faire hope: but when it came to the conclusion, he would not consent to haue any thing set downe in writing, saying, That in such a case the onely words of Princes did suffice, with their true meaning  to execute what had beene concluded. In this manner the businesse being delayed, the French Kings hea^e in time beganne to coole.The Venetians suspect the French King.
The Venetians had some suspition, that the King did seacretly treat with the Emperor, and that the same might bee the canse why the Pope doutbed, and prolonged the affaires that were concluded on. And that which did increase their suspition, was, for that they had certaine notice, that Artur Gouffiar Lord of Boyssy, great maister of France, and the Lord de Cheures, met at Montpellier; the one from the elect Emperor, and the other from the King, to consult of a finall peace betwixt both their Maiesties, and to decide all controuersies betwixt them and their allies. The Venetians neuer-the-lesse still continuing their former resolution  and firme desire, not to separate them-selues in any sort from the alliance of the French, made no shew that they suspected the King, (albeit his Maiesty wasThe Emperor seeketh the Venetians friendship. sufficiently aduertised of their suspition;) but held it for certaine, that if the King were desirous of agreement with the Emperor, they especially should be named and comprised therin, and all their contention with the Emperor should be wholy composed. Charles so soone as hee was chosen Emperor hauing turned his deseignes vpon Italy, knowing how much it did import him to haue the Venetians friendship, did shew him-selfe desirous to compose all the differences, which had beene betwixt the Emperor Maximilian his predecessor and them: and to effect  this good desire, hee sent his commissioners to Verona, according as it was concluded in Maximillians life time, with ample power and authority, to concludeThe com^ssoners of the Emperor and the Venetians me^t at Verona and decide, not onely the businesse of the truce for fiue yeares, but like-wise to end all other matters, which were yet vndecided two yeares before betwixt them. Francisco P^sare a long time before chosen by the Senate, for that purpose went to Verona, whither for the Emperors part came foure of the cheefe of the councell of Inspruch, who had ample power to negociate that busin^sse. Iohn Pin, the French Ambassador, came thither in his Kings name, who at the last truce was chosen Vmpier and Iudge of all their controuersies.The dem^ds of the Venetian commissioners.
The Venetians craued possession of all the places taken from them in the last  warre, and that all thing should remaine as they were before the warre, saying, That it was the surest meanes to end all their controuersies, and to establish a firme and assured peace. But the Imperialls alleadging now one thing, and then an other, did still d^lay the businesse, and would conclude on nothing, so as hauing spent certaine monthes there in vaine, and being recalled by the councel of In spruch, they returned home.
Yet neuerthelesse the Venetians hauing at the same time their Ambassadours in the Emperours Court, they were put in hope of a prosperous end of that businesse,The assembly is broken of without any conclusion, and the Uenetians are put in hope of ^ prosper^s ^d. and that the Emperour would speedily appoint Commissioners to intend it, beeing very desirous by meanes of a sure peace to become their good neighbour and perpetuall friend, his officers thereby shewing how much hee desired the Venetians friendship, who for their partes did in like manner declare, how they desired nothing more then peace: but that they could not (their faith kept inuiolate) doe any thing contrary to their alliance with the French King.
After this manner did these two Princes at one time pursue the Venetians friendship and alliance, but by different waies, each of them seeking to make vse of them in their enterprize of Italy: so as in these practizes and negotiations all that yeare passed on without any certaine resolution. The yeare following whichAn. 1520. was 1520. Italy did still continue peaceable, but Christendome was threatened by Soliman, who perceauing his Empire to be at quiet, and all things to fall out as hee wished, would not bee idle, but following rather the generousnesse of hisSoliman resolueth to enuade the Realme of Hungary* Ancestors, hee determined to take armes, and to warre vpon the Christians.
This was a long time before foreseene of many, but remedied by none. Following then this determination hee resolued to enuade the realme of Hungary;  hoping to reape great glory thereby, by reason that the Hungarians were reputed valliant and great soldiers. Therefore so soone as all things were ready hee departed from Constantinople, about the beginning of the yeare 1521. with aAn. 1521. mighty army, and marched into Hungary.
King Lewes being amazed at the comming of so mighty an army, and distrusting his owne forces, did againe send new Ambassadors, to solicite and entreate Christian Princes to aid him, it being the common cause of all Christendome, Philippo Moro Bishop of Agria was sent to the Venetians, who being brought into the Senate, spake in this manner. My King, (most excellent Prince, and yeeThe oration of the Hungarian Ambassador. most noble Lords) hath such confidence in yourselues, in your fidelity, curtezie, and power, in respect of the strict alliance which of a long time hath beene betwixt this Republike, and the crowne of Hungary, of the Common interest of both your states, of the iustice of his cause, and your owne antient custome, with that of your ancestors, who euer fauored iust and resonable actions, and releeued those that stood in need, as hee is desirous in this eminent perill of the Turkish warre, cheefely to haue recourse vnto you, my Lords, and vnto you to communicate his deseins and necessity, hoping to finde from you, not onely a speedy ayde, as much as in you lieth for the defence of his Kingdome, but like-wise all fauour and furtherance to forraine Princes, thereby the more easily to obtaine of them some succor and releefe. It seemeth indeed, and not  without cause, that the first addresse belongeth to this Republike, when any question is of opposing the Ottamans greatnesse, because that as well in regard of your power at sea, as for your neere neighbour-hood to them, yee haue excellent meanes to molest that enemy, and to hinder him from growing great at other mens costs. Therefore, my Lords, yee shall purchase great glory, and shall establish a greater safety, to your state, if yee will be Authors to moue other Princes to protect and defend the realme of Hungary, against this new furious enemy to Christians. Consider, my Lords, to what greatnesse the ^ttaman family hath in short space attayned, and wholy (if I may so say) by the carelesenesse of Christian Princes, that haue not opposed them-selues against  it. Hee marcheth forward with a swift pace to a soueraigne Monarchy: If the cries, prayers and protestations of Constantine, had beene heard, when the warlike and cruell Mahomet did assaile Constantinople the Greekes Empire should not now bee ruyned, not that of the Mamalukes bee wholy extinct. For both the one and other gaue such counterpoyse to the Turkish forces, as if they now weare in force, they might with ease assure* not onely the Kingdome of Hungary, but like-wise all the residue of Christendome. Who-soeuer shall consider the progression of the antient Monarchies, will find that their difficulty was not great to attayne to a soueraigne degree, when there was none of power sufficient to oppose their greatnesse, and to counterpoise  their pride, whereby the conquests which after-wards ensued proued very easie. The Romaines spent much time in subduing Italy, but beeing once Maisters thereof, and by that meanes most mighty, they in few yeares subiected vnder their power and dominion many forraine Kings and Prouinces.

Therefore it is certaine that by how much we shall delay to cut off the greatnesse of this cruel enemy, by so much more wil dangers encrease, and remedies become more difficult. I will not say that to take armes for the defence of the Kingdome of Hungary, is a matter onely honorable for Christian Princes, as well in respect of the duty of their religion, as for their profession, nor also that it is profitable for them, for any particular interest, but I will say, that of a certaine it is most necessary for the conseruation of their states. For that Kingdome being lost, which hath already of a long time opposed it selfe against the Turkes attempts, and hath interrupted the course of their victories: who is it that is able to hinder him, from entring into Austria, from molesting Germany, and from making  incursions on the very confines of your state? This same Kingdome, which still hath beene the Bullwarke to stoppe his progressions, being ruined, (which God forbid) and taken by the enemy, who doubteth but that it wilbee very commodious for him, to subdue other nations, to enuade other Kingdomes, and generally to execute all his enterprizes? But as this defense is sayd to bee necessary, wee must not like-wise iudge it impossible, and least of all difficult, prouided that Princes will no more want will and desire, then they doe meanes and power. Our Hungarian nation hath beene war-like, and our Kings haue purchaced great glory by warre. Our King at this day, my Lords, and his subiects, doe not degenerate from their Ancestors, they want not  courrage nor ought else that men are to haue for their defence. But what can one Kingdome alone doe aga^st such numbers of enemies, gathered to gether out of so many Prouinces? against the war-like preparation of the richest and mightiest enemy in the world? And yet, this our Kingdome is not very great or rich, to furnish store of soldiers, armor, mony, munition and so many other necessaries for any long continuance against such war-like enterprizes: but if it bee aided by other Princes, her forces will not onely encrease, but like-wise her reputation and valour, so as wee doe not doubt but to make all the enemies attempts, and designes vnproffitable: and if occasion serue, wee will not refuse to fight wi^h him in the field, to assure for a long time, at  our owne perills, and by the hazard of our owne fortune (if God doe fauour, as wee are to hope, our holy and valorous ^enterprizes) with our owne country, other Kingdomes and Prouinces of Christendome. But I see that perhaps I haue passed my bounds by my long oration. The summe of all is, Our Kingdome is the Bulwarke and defense of all Christendome against the fury of the Turkish armes: now the common defence ought to bee mannaged by common forces, your wisdome and piety makes yee to fore-see and esteeme of dangers, and your authority and power giues yee meanes of speedy remedy.
The Ambassador was heard with great attention, and as they were before alreadyVVhat the Senate concluded after the Ambassadors oration. well disposed to this businesse, hee like-wise left a very great impression in  their mindes. Therefore they concluded to solicite other Christian Princes, by their Ambassadors that were resident with them, to the end that they might with a mutuall consent releeue the Realme of Hungary, and prouide for future dangers: where-vnto they freely offered all the meanes of the Common-wealth. But this negotiation had no better issue then the former: where-vpon, daungers dayly encreasing, and King Lewis supposing that to free Belgrade from the seege, which was a very strong Citty, and of great impotance, and which had euer beene the Rampier of the whole Kingdome, that hee must fight with the Turke, did after that send Iohn Statilius his Ambassador to Venice, to obtaine ofAnother Ambassador from the King of Hungary at Ve^ice. the Senate certaine summes of mony, thereby to encrease his forces, to the end  that being strengthened with meanes hee might at tempt, on hope of happy successe, the hazard of a battaill.
The Republike had often in times past ayded with mony, and other meanes the Kings of Hungary against the power of the Turkes, but it thought it selfe at

that time more bound then euer before to doe it, as well in respect of the strict aliance and friendship with King Lewis, as for their feare of the Ottaman greatnesse,The Venetians send the King of Hungary thirty thousand Duca^s who dayly grew more potent and redoubted, by reason wherof the Venetians sent the King thirty thousand Ducats, with promise of greater offers, and for a testimony of their friendship to King Lewis, they sent word to Lorenzo Doria, their Ambassador resident with his Maiesty, that he should ordinarily folow the Kings army.
But the Kings deseigns and enterprises had a disastrous successe, for BelgradeBelgrade taken (...) the Turkes. was lost, all the other Citties of the Kingdome continuing still fearefull of the force and violence of the Turkes, who after the taking of this towne, returned to  Constantinople, hauing left his Artillery and munition in Hungary, intending to returne thither againe at the spring, as him-selfe aduertized the Senate of Venice by one of his seruants, acquainting them with what hee had done in Hungary.
About the same time, Prince Loretan deceased, to the great greefe of the whole Citty, who with singular wisdome had fortunately gouerned the Republike the space of twenty yeares, hauing still retayned to the very last gaspe his vsuall quicknesse of wit, where-with hee was adorned, hee was buried in the Church of the Twi^s.



ANTONIO GRIMANI the 76. Duke.











ANtonio Grimani, Father to Cardinall Dominico, was chosen in his sted, a man very famous, as well for his great wealth, as for the noble offices which hee had borne in the Common-wealth, hauing often times tasted prosperous and aduerse fortune, and who not long before was called home from a tedious banishment to which hee was condemned, because hee being Generall of the Galleis had let slippe the occasion of fighting with and vanquishing the Turkish army neere to Lepanto.
He then entring into the gouernment of the Common wealth, found it in peace (as hath beene said) but in so many different rumors of discontent betwixt Princes, as it was to be feared that the Republick would therby be drawne into new troubles, and into a necessity of taking armes, because that the Emperour, (who being already come into Germany, had receiued his first Imperiall Coronation at Aix La Chappelle) had a great desire to come into Italy, in regard whereof, he sought by al good offices and faire promises to draw the Venetians to his side, thinking that their frendship might much auaile him for the execution of his deseignes: wherevpon, among other matters he promised to giue them in authenticallThe Emperors promises to the Venetians. manner the inuestiture of all the Citties and places which they then possessed  to which the Empire might pretend any title or claime.
These offers were the cause that the Senate delayed to send (according to their vsuall manner) to congratulate the Emperor for his new dignity: For hauing determined to send Francesco Contaren to succeed Gasparo Contaren their ordinary Ambassador resident with his Imperiall Maiesty, whose time of stay there, apointed by the Lawes, was already expired, they did put off his dispatch from day to day because they would giue the French noe occasion to suspect that they intended to enter into any league or treaty with the new Emperor.
Charles by this meanes beeing out of hope to draw the Venetians from the  friendship of the French, changed his purpose, and resolued to send PhillibertoVVhat moo^d the Emperor to send his Ambassador to the French King. his Ambassador to the French King, as well for that he would haue men thinke that he was desirous to treat with him about the affaires of Italy, without mentioning the Venetians, as for to induce them to haue recourse to himselfe, for feare of some agreement betwixt their two Maiesties, wherein they should not be comprehended, they hauing already made proofe of very many mischeefes which theThe King of England, is chosen Vmpier and mediator betwixt mighty Princes. alliance of such like Princes had procured to their common wealth: he did beside write to his Ambassador, resident with the King of England, to complaine vnto that King, (whose authority at that time was so great, as he was chosen for Vmpier and mediator of al the important strife betwixt the Emperor and the French King) of the Venetians, who not beeing contented to accomplish the agreement  betwixt Maximilian and them, did moreouer refuse his alliance and frendship (being therevnto inuited) but there was no great regard giuen to his complaints, because that the Emperor making shew to be desirous of Peace, intelligence was giuen, that he prepared all things fit for warre. These pollicies being knowne to King Francis, after that he had freely communicated to the Senate all the Emperors practises and deseignes, would not giue eare to the offers of his Ambassador,The French King and the King of England talke together and standing vpon his gard, he sought by all meanes to entertaine his frends and Confederates, and to that purpose he had mutuall conference with the King of England neere to Ardres in Picardy, who for that end came to Calais, that he might more amply confirme the peace and frendship sworne betwixt them, where hauing seene one another and conferred together with their Councells of their perticular affaires, with all manner of sports and delightes in the middest of the plaine betwixt Guynes and Ardres, the French King returned to Boloign and the King of England to Calais.
About this time, a daughter being borne to the French King, he entreatedThe Uenetian comon wealth, doe ^sten a d^ghter of the French Kings. the Republick of Venice to witnesse for it at the Font, shewing therby that he was desi^ous in all thinges to gi^e them content, in regard of his speciall loue tow^ (...).
^VVhy the King delayed to conclude the league.
^The Popes new (...) (...) the (...) of the (...).
Vpon these new propositions of the (...) and the French King, the Vene^The (...) (...) (...) the (...) (...) (...)* likewise were desirous to looke to themselues, and they grew ^ore (...) (...) the conclusion of the league, no^ breaking the fiue yea^ tr^ce alre^dy (...) by the Elect Emperor, nor would they likewise displease the King of England, who  by sondry good offices had shewed hims^lfe their great friend, whom they knew would be ^ighly displeased with that league, in regard of the alliance and frendship betwixt him and the Emperor.
Whilst th^ vpon these occasions ^he treaty of the league remained doubtfull* they had intelligence of that which they neuer expected* how that the Pope hadThe Pope and the E^peror make (...) (...) against the French King. secretly agreed with the Emperor to en^ade, at their common cost, the Dutchy of Milan; This did wonderfully amaze al ^en, and especially the Venetian^, because the Pope by driuing the ^rench, forth of Italy with his forces and (...) (...), was desirous to in^hronize and encrease the Emperors power there, whom (...) long before, himselfe did grea^ly ^pect, and held dangerous for the Churches state  and for all the Princes of Italy.
The Popes deseigne was accompanied with diuers and ^ondry practises ofVVhat the Popes and Emperos deseignes were. the Imperialls, (the Bande^i of Milan who were in great no^ber and the (...) of the Citty being ioyned to them) to the end that by their (...) (...) on^ (...) same time some sodaine (...) might be raised in the Citty, and (...) (...) (...) places of the Duchy, to expell the French who dremp^ on (...) (...) (...), and whose nomber was already much decreased by reason of the Lord (...) absence, who not long before was gone into France.
But the Lord of Le^cut, his brother and his Lie^tenant General in (...) (...), hauing discouered this (...) befo^e it was executed, did forth^ith (...) (...)The Lord of (...) (...) (...) ^prise of the ^andetti of Mi^an. nombers of Soldiers, as he made himselfe assured (...) of all (...) (...), and frustrated their practises (...) deseignes, driuing all the (...) (...) of the Dutchy, where they had by degrees (...) themselues, whom he (...) euen to the gates of Rhegio, whither they escaped by means of him that (...) (...)

For the Pope, who (as hath beene said) was a Partaker of their deseigne. Herevpon the Pope tooke matter of discontent, for that without any respect to his dignity and power, or to the friendship and alliance betwext him and the most Christian King, the French had come and vsed violence in his townes and Castles,The Pope is is (...) with the Lord L'^scut his pursute. making his complaints to the Venetians; whereas indeed, the King had most cause to complaine, because that by the agreement made betwixt them, it was expresly mentioned, that the Pope should not receiue the bande^i of the Dutchy of Milan into his Territories, nor the king those of the Dominion of the Church into his. The Venetians being desirous, as much as in them lay, to appease this discontent, (for the Popes resolution and the treaty made, and sworne by him  with the Emperor, was no^ as yet manifestly knowne) sought to blot out of theThe Venetians seeke to appease the Popes indignation against the French. Popes mind the suspition which he seemed to haue, by remembring him of the good offices which the King had euer performed to the Sea Apostolike, earnestly entreating him, not for a trifle to breake the holy alliance, so long time sworne betwixt them, seeing that by the breach thereof nothing but mischeefe could ensue. But all these remonstrances and entreaties were bootelesse with the Pope, who had already contracted with the Emperor, on condition, that the French being expelled forth of the Dutchy of Milan, Parma, and Placentia, should bee ioyned to the Churches Patrimony, and all the residew of the state should beeThe conditions of the agreement betwixt the Pope and the Emperor. restored to Francis Sforza; and that the Pope in the meane time should dispense  with Charles for the oath which hee had taken in the inuestiture of the Kingdome of Naples, to the end hee might with more iust title still retayne the Empire.
The Venetians, being wholy hope-lesse of making any attonement betwixt the Pope and the French King, resolued not to faile in their duty wherein they were tyed to the King, for the conseruation of the Dutchy of Milan. The report was that diuers soldiers were already leuied by the Pope and the Emperors command,The Popes and ^emperors for^s need^ to march, if their secret intelligences should faile. and if their secret practizes could not preuaile, they would on a sodaine fall to open warre; for which cause, the Pope, (albeit it was vnder an other collour) had leuied sixe thousand Swisses, and Prospero Colonna being declared cheefe of the enterprise comming to Bolognia, did from all parts leuy soldiers, whilest the Viceroy of Naples, with the Cauallery of that Kingdome, and the Marquis of Pescara with the Spanish Infantery, were on the bankes of the Riuer Trante, speedily to passe ouer on the first occasion. This caused the Venetians, for their part, speedily to enrole sixe thousand Italian foot, and to assemble all their Cauallery on the Bressan Territory, commiting their whole army to Theodore Triuulcio their Generall, commanding him to encampe on the banks of the riuer Adda, that hee might speedily passe ouer, if the affaires of the French should require it. They commanded moreouer Paulo Nany, Gouernor at that time of Bergamo, to follow the Army with the Generall in quallity of Prouidator.
In the meane time vpon the rumor that was spred abroad in France of these The Venetian army redy to march. stirres in Lombardy, the King forth-with sent the Lord Lautrec to Milan, and being comme thither, perceiuing that his forces were not sufficient to defend that state, if it should be enuaded with a mighty army, he thought it fit to keepe backe the new aide which the enemies expected from comming to ioyne with them, who already had a thousand men at armes and about eight thousand foot. The Pope had but three thousand Swisses, for of sixe thousand that he had leauied, there remayned with him but the one halfe. And at the same time, Fernand the Emperors brother being come to villac, to assemble sixe thousand foot-men, to passe afterwards with them into Italy, to the releefe of the imperiall army; for whichThe Emperor (...) passage for his soldiers forces the Emperor hauing craued passage of the Venetians, they answered that  they could no^ doe it, in regard of their alliance with the French King, whome if they failed at his need they should be taxed with shame and infamy. Vpon this answer, because they would haue their passages to bee enforced, they sent strong garrisons thither, yet neuerthelesse after diuers propositions for the stopping of

Almaines passage, the matter being found to be difficult, they left it by the consent of the Lord of Lautree to the inhabitants of the country, and sent all their forces on the Cremonois, there for to ioyne them with the French, according to Lautrecs direction, who beeing desirous to haue neere him some Venetian Gentlemen of authority and experience, to conferre withall on the affaires of the war, and about the defence of the State of Milan, the Senate sent Andre Gritti to him, Paulo N^i notwithstanding remayning still in the campe as Prouidator.
They choose likewise Ieronimo Pesare for Prouidator Generall, who was carefullyIeronimo Pesare Prouidator of all the forts on the firme land. to prouide for all their fortes on the firme land, wherein were placed two thousand foot-men newly leauied, and certaine companies of men at armes, who  on all occasions should defend them from trouble and dangers. They determined moreouer at Lautrecs perswasition to haue other three thousand foot; namely fifteene hundred Gascons, and as many Valesians, and likewise to contribute to the expence of certaine horse and foot companies with whom the Duke of Ferrara promised to come into the field in the behalfe of the French, to the end thatIn what manner the Venetians did releeue the Start of Milan. the King and all men else should know, that they had in no ^ort failed for the speedy reliefe of the State of Milan, according to the couenants made betwixt them.
The French in the meane time were readier to solicite the Venetians to doe that wherevnto they were obliged by the treaty of confederacy, then they were of  themselues to make necessary prouisions, proceeding therein very slowly, whichThe Lord of Lautrec hopeth for aide. vndoubtedly is a very dangerous matter in warre: and al-be-it the Lord of Lautrec did warrant, that the Lord of Saint Vallier should speedily passe the mounts with six thousand French, and that tenne thousand Swisses, leauied for the King, should forthwith march: yet for all that none ca^e: and on the other side the enemies being growne strong and mighty, by being ioyned with the Almain foot hauing safely passed thorow the Mantuan, and from thence thorow the State of Milan, knowing how greatly speed might import them in that enterprize, wereThe Imperials beseege Parma. come to beseege Parma, supposing that the taking of that City would purchase them great safety and reputation.
Now the Lord Lautrec hauing intelligence of their march, suspecting their deseigne, sent his brother the Lord of Escut with a strong garrison for the gard of that city: yet neuerthelesse that did not stay their enterprize, hoping easily to achiue it, as well for that the place was not very strong, as because their army wasThe Lord of Lautrec succoreth Parmai Prospero Colonna raiseth his campe from before Parma. great and wel stored with all necessaries, as in deed it would haue come to passe, if Lautrec, who had receiued new supplies of Swisses, had not approched the enemies, by whose comming, and likewise for that the Duke of Ferrara with great numbers of foot-men marched to assaile Modena, and Regio, Prospero Colonna was enforced (as he afterwards said) to discampe from before Parma, to the great griefe and discontent of the Pope, who by his confederacy with the Emperor did  chiefly harken after the taking thereof.
The euent of this first enterprize hauing such bad successe was cause that theThe Pope suspecteth the Imperials. Pope complayning of the Emperours captaines entred into summe suspition of them, as if they had drawne forth the seege of Parma at length, vntill that necessity had enforced them to discampe, perceiuing that his great desire to obtaine that City made him freely to contribute to all the charges and expences of the warres.
The Emperour on the other side hauing discouered the Popes suspition, feared,The Emperor (...) destasted with the Popes suspition. that if he should obtaine that which he pretended to haue by the treaty of agreement betwixt them, he would then giue ouer the remainder of the enterprize  as easily as he had forsaken the French Kings alliance, excusing himselfe either vpon the cost or danger of the warres: wherevpon for the better assurance of his deseignes, he resolued if it were possible to draw the Venetians to his party, and ioyne them to the league, and to that end he determined to send Alp^so Saus

to Venice to remaine there as Ambassador for the Imp^ Maiesty, and whom he caused with great cunning and vehemency to (...) againe to the Senate,The Emperour by his Ambassador seeketh to draw the Venetians to his side. that to ioyne with him and the Pope was the true meanes to obtaine peace no lesse by him desired then by themselues, and for a testimony of his speech hee aleadged, That although the Emperour might obtaine the Dutchy of Milan, by iust title, yet neuerthelesse he would inuest Francis Sforza Duke of Ba^ therein, thereby to reduce the affaires of Italy to a quiet and peace able State.
^
At the last Prospero Colonna beganne to march first, bending towards the RiuerThe army of the league marcheth directly to Milan. Adda to passe i^, and afterwards to march directly to Milan, which was the whole ayme of the warre. Lautrec beeing aduertized hereof did soone dislodge  from the Cremona territory, where hee had for a certaine time remained, and marched towards Cassan, to stoppe the enemies passage of the Riuer, who neuerthelesseThe enemies passe ouer the riuer Adda without any impediment. by their speedy comming thither before the French, did crosse it betwixt Riua and Cassan: and then went on their way towards Milan*
Lautrec being preuented of his hope did in great hast follow the (...), being desirous, if occasion serued, to offer them battaile. But Prospero Colonna, not meaning to hazard any thing, proceeded in such manner as hee looke away all meanes of comming to a battaile, which Lautrec perceiuing, did at last retire withThe Swisses leaue the French campe for want of pay. his army, which did dayly decrease, especially the Swisses, who went their (...) without leaue vnder collour that they wanted their pay, and came to Milan, leauing  the Venetian Prouidator with the artillery at Lodi, because that their Generall Triuulcio, hauing followed Lautrec had entred with him into Milan.
Now Lautrec beeing come to Milan perceiuing his owne army to be diminished,Leutrec fortifieth Milan. and that of the enemies to be mightily encreased, he caused the Bastions and rampiers to bee razed, which the Duke of Bourbon had before then caused to bee made, resoluing not to stirre from thence, and there to expect aide from France. Prospero hauing crossed the Adda, and hauing intelligence that Lautrec was retired to Milan, fortifying it in all hast, determined to follow him, and cameProspero Colonna is within foure miles of Milan. and lodged in an Abbey with in foure miles off Milan, called Cherauall, where being vncertaine what he were best to doe, in regard of the great numbers of men  that were within the City, a husbandman was brought before him that had beene taken comming from Milan, who told him in the presence of all the captaines,The traitors in milan giue aduertizement to Prospero Colonna. that hee was sent by some of the Imperiall faction that were within the City to Ieronimo Moron, to let them know that if they would march directly to Milan, they were certaine that hee might enter it, but if they should delay the matter and giue the French men leisure to fortifie themselues it would not then bee in their power to expell them. Vpon this aduertisement it was concluded by the chiefe captaines that the Marquis of Pescara with the Spanish bands, whom he then commanded, should march directly to the Roman gate, to be there at sunne set. Theodore Triuulcio, Generall of the Venetian army, had the gard of  that gate and the suburb, where the Marquis of Pescara being come, taking twelueThe enemies being come to Milan win the Roman Gate ^d the suburb. hundred men for that seruice hee gaue directly in vpon a bastion that was new begunne, and not yet defensible, wherevpon those of the gard were so amazed as without fight they were put to rout, forsaking their gard and fortifications.
Theodore Triuu^ Commander of those troupes being sicke in his bead, did on a sodaine arise and marched against the enemies with such few souldiers as hee could gather together, to susteine that attempt, thinking that they would follow him, but Night not blushing, and beeing vnaccompanied, he was beaten downeTriuulcio taken prisoner by the Imperials. and taken prisoner with Iulio of Saint Seuerin, the Marquis of Vigeua, Mercurio Buono, captaine of the Venetian light horse, Lodouico Marin Secretary to the common-wealth, with diuers others.
Lautrec hauing notice that the Venetian army being surprized had abandoned the suburbes without any fight, came with the residue of the army before the place of the castle. But perceiuing that there was no meanes to keepe the City the said Lautrec vetireth with his Cauallery to Coma. suburbe being lost, determined to retire, and tooke the direct way towards Coma, with all his men at armes to be nere the Swisses, expecting the succor that was to come from France, hauing before his departure left captaine Masearon a Gascon to command the castle with fifty men at armes and six hundred French foot.Moscaron captaine of the castle of Milan.
The enemies being masters of the city, made an inestimable spoile there, without any exception of persons, for the sacke lasted tenne whole daies, no commandement being of force to cause the souldiers to giue ouer. The Venetian horsmenMilan is sack^ ten whole daies together. departed from Laude and were comming towards Milan, but hauing intelligence by the way of the Cities losse and Lautrecs retreat, they escaped to Bergamo.
Lautrec being come to Coma, the foure thousand Swisses that remained in the French campe, did the morrow after retire home towards their country, their captainesThe Swisses retire home into their country. not being able to hold them backe. Lautrec departing afterwards from Coma with the residue of his troupes, went to Lec, where hauing crossed the Riuer, hee placed all his men at armes in garrison in the Venetian country, but so soone as he was gonne from Coma, the enemies came thither, who hauing batteredComa taken. it ten or twelue daies, tooke it by composition.
Vpon report of these conquests of the enemies, Lauda, Pauia, Parma and Placentia yeelded vnto them without any difficulty, Cremona within a while after did the like, but Lautrec comming thither on a sodaine with his forces did forthwith  recouer it by meanes of the castle which held out yet for the French.
In this sort did the French lose, without being defeated or fighting any one Battaile, that goodly and ritch State, which they had purchased at so high a price, and with so much effusion of blood. Prospero Colonna in the meane time, to make vse of his good fortune, pursued Lautrec, seeking wholly to defeat him, who (as hath beene said) departing from Coma and beeing come to the Giradade, had passed the Bressan territory, and from thence was come to Cremona, which hauing recouered, he remained there three or foure dayes, and then returned into the Venetians Contrey. Now in this meane time Prospero Colonna hauing intelligence that Alexandria was left to the Gard of the Cittizens, he went thither  and became maister thereof. At the last, because winter was well foreward, the Senate permitted Lautrec to winter in their territories, whereof the Emperours Ambassador, resident at Venice, complayning to the Senate, they answered that in so great a disaster enemies were to be releeued, and that it was against reason to refuse their friends and confederates, and that in regard of the conuentions and treaties passed betwixt them, common ciuility did tie them to releeue the French in their aduersity, and to giue them all helpe and aide, as wel for the desense as recouery of the State of Milan: yet neuerthelesse somwhat to content him, it was decreed that the French and Venetians should remaine quiet whilest the French should continue in the Venetians territories, least that the enemies being enforced to defend themselues, should make any incursions vpon their State.
But Bartlemew of Villa-claro hauing transgressed that decree, and crossing theThe Imperials breake the Decree. Adda, making incursio^s on the Bergamask, the Prouidator Gritti permitted al me^ to defend themselues against the Imperials, whervpon certain companies of light horse with certaine gentlemen banished from Milan going forth of Cremona, and hauing crossed the Adda did on a sodaine assaile certaine numbers of the enemies

men at armes, and hauing disarmed them, brought them away as prisoners.
Lautrec in the meane time was desirous to march into the field with these forcesLautrecs determination. that he had, and to goe to Cremona, determining to make a bridge ouer the Po at Pontuico, nere to Casalmajor, to become master of the country on this side and beyond the Riuer, that hee might freely ioyne with the Duke of Ferrara, who was in the field with great forces to trie if hee could take Modena and Reggio. As also because that place was thought to bee very commodious for the assailing of the Mantuan territory, and especially Viadana, a ritch place and abounding with all things, from whence they might draw great quantity of victuals for the nourishment of the army, and enforce the Marquis of Mantua (who  as Gonfaloniero, or captaine Generall of the Church, was in the army of the league) to come and defend his owne country. But the Venetians not beeingThe Venetians disswade Lautrec from his resolution. of opinion to enterprize any thing till their forces were strong and well confirmed, nor in time of aduersity to purchase new enemies, disswaded Lautrec from that determination.
The affaires of Lumbardy standing at this stay, Pope Leo, vpon the newes that the French had lost the City of Milan, receiued such high content, and was so ouerioyedPope Leo his sodaine death. as a Catharre and a continuall feuer killed him in three daies space. His death did greatly preiudice the army of the league, as well in regard of the Swisses, who no sooner vnderstood it but they departed sodainely from the campe  and forth of the whole state of Milan and returned home into their country, asThe Cardinall of Medicis after the Popes death retireth to Rome. also for the departure of the Cardinall of Medicis, Legat in the Churches army, who vpon the report of the Pope his cosins death, hauing discharged the army retired himselfe to Rome.
A new occasion did then present it selfe for the recouery of the State of Milan as easily as it was lost, the townes not beeing furnished with sufficient garrisons, nor the army of the league strong enough in the field for to releeue them. Beside, there was great confusion and disorder in Milan, the people beeing incensed against the Imperialls, for the losses which they had susteined by the Spanish  foot-men, Swisses and Almaines, for which they hated them as much and more then they had in time before done the French, and next, by the departure of the Cardinals of Medicis and Syon, who were gone to the creation of the new Pope, the authority of the league was much diminished.
For these causes the Venetians beganne to leauy forces from all parts, andThe Venetians leauy forces to march into the Dutchy of Milan. commanded the greatest part of their garrisons which were dispersed here and there to march into the field: and that which did most of all confirme them, was, that the Swisses hauing published a generall assembly at Lucerna, they there decreed with a generall consent, to take vpon them the protection of the French, and to helpe them to recouer the Dutchy of Milan, wherevpon, they speedily sent to the Venetians, wishing them still to continue their alliance with the French, for they were resolued to take armes for them and their allies. These newes did put fresh courage into Lautrec, and al-be-it it was in the depth of winter, hee neuerthelesse determined to march into the field, and to enter the State of Milan.
Prospero Colonna in the meane time did his best to fortifie the City of Milan,Colonna fortifieth Milan. hauing strenthened the Spanish garrison there with certain number of Lanse quenets whom he sent for thither, and made all preparations for the susteyning of a long seege if need should be.
The French on the other side and the Venetians sitting in councell to determine what they should first attempt, after diuers and sundry opinions, they resolued  that Frederico Bozole should crosse the Po, with a good troupe of choice souldiers, and should goe to the confines of Parma, to listen what was done there, not carrying any artillery with him, to the end that if his designe prospered not hee might freely and without danger make his retreat, and that the residue of the army, as

well French as Venetians should meet on the Cremonois. But Bozole beeingThe French and Venetian army on the Cremonois. come neere to Parma and Placentia, not daring to attempt any thing, returned to Lautrecs campe at Cremona, as wise as hee went, and no other enterprize was made in this yeere 1527. These two great Princes neuerthelesse, the Emperour Charles and the French King continuing much incensed the one against the other, whereby it was foreseene, that Italy and diuers other Prouinces were to endure greeuous warres, as it came to passe the yeeres ensuing.




The end of the fourth Booke of the fifth Decade.





The Contents of the fifth Booke of the  fifth Decade.
THe French and Venetian campe lie before Maran. Francis  Sforza commeth to Pauia with sixe thousand Lansequenets. Nouara is taken by the French. Sforza commeth to Milan with his troupes. Lautrec beseegeth Pauia and forthwith raiseth his campe. The battaile of Bicoq. The Swisses retire into their country. Lauda and Cremona yeelded to the enemies. The Emperour seeketh the Venetians friendship. The Emperor and the King of England conferre together, with the league made betwixt them. The Isle of Rhodes is taken by Soliman. The creation of Pope Adrian the sixth. League betwixt the Pope, the Emperour, the Venetians, the Duke of Milan and the Florentines. Alliance made betwixt the Emperour and the Venetians against the French King. The Duke of Vrbin Generall to the Venetians. The Duke of Bourbon leaueth the French Kings party. The French army in Italy vnder the Admirall Boniuet. Nouara and Vigeua are taken by the French. The French come before Milan, and soone dislodge thence. Monce taken  by the French. Motion of peace betwixt the Emperour and the King. The death of Pope Adrian. The creation of Pope Clement the seuenth. The French retire in disorder. The cause of the Kings discontent with the Emperour and the Venetians. The King commeth into Italy and taketh the City of Milan. The Duke of Albany is appointed to goe and enuade the Kingdome of Naples. The King beseegeth Pauia. The Venetians are sought to by both parties. A secret league made betwixt the Pope, the King, and the Venetians. The Marquis of Pescara keepeth the viceroy of Naples from  dislodging forth of Lumbardy. The Imperialls come into the field and assaile the King. The King is taken prisoner by the Imperials and the French

army is put to rout. The Popes resolution after the defeate of the French. The Venetians resoluing to defend Italy, are diuerted from it by the Pope. And lastly the wordes and gesture of the Emperour at the newes of the victory.




The Fifth Booke of the fifth Decade of the Historie of Uenice.



THe French army being much encreased in the beginning of theGreat numbers of Swisses in the French campe. yeere 1522. by the arriuall of the Swisses, who in great numbers came to their campe, and by the Venetians forces ioyned to them, which were six thousand foot, sixe hundred men at armes, and eight hundred light-horse. Lautrec by the aduise of all the captaines resolued to march directly towards Milan, which was the principall motiue and aime of the warre. According to this resolution they passed the Adda on the first day of march, and the campe was lodged within twoThe French campe before Milan. miles of the castle. The third day after the French were encamped, they marched  in order, making shew that they would assault the Rampire, the which they did not, either because that at the first it was not Lautrecs meaning, or else for that inVVhat hindred the Lord of Lautrec from assailing Milan. regard of the great numbers of souldiers that were within it, the disposition of the people, and the readinesse which was seene in the defendants, hee was diuerted from it, for the manifest difficulty of such an enterprize.
It is certaine that the Lord of Lautrec had no hope to take Milan by assault, but thought to effect it by length of time, because that by reason of the multitude of his horse and great number of the bandetti which followed him who scoured the whole country, hee did cut off all victuals from it: as also because he had broken downe all the mils, and turned away the waters forth of their Channels, which  brought great commodities to the Milanois, and he did besides, hope, that the pay which the Milanois did giue the souldiers would soone be wasted: for the Emperor sent little or none at all.
But the Citizens of Milans hatred towards the French was wonderful, and theirVVith what seruensie the people of Milan endured the discommodity of the seege. desire merueilous to haue Francis Sforza their new Duke againe, in regard wherof, enduring paciently all discommodities, they did not onely, not change their mindes for all those miseries, but the young men of the City did put on armes, and made captaines in euery parrish: in such sort as the gardes which speedily ranne to the remotest places of the army, did greatly releeue the souldiers; prouiding beside, in stead of the mils that were broken downe, hand mils; for all their  meale was spent.
The Duke of Milan in the meane space, who had a long time remained at Trent, expecting some fit occasion to passe forward, went on his way with six thousand Lansequenets, and seized on the Fort of Croare which did belong to the

Venetians, to the end to open his passage. From thence he came thorow the Veronois and Mantuan territories with ease to Casal-major, because thatThe Duke of Milan commeth to Pauia with six thousand Lansequenets. the Venetian army was ioyned with the Lord Lautrec, and there crossing the Po, hee came to Placentia, beeing afterwards aided by the Marquis of Mantua hee marched to Pauia, where he remained waiting for some fit occasion to goe to Milan, where his arriuall was extreamely wished for.
So soone as the Lord of Lautrec, had intelligence of his comming to Placentia, he raised his campe, and went and lodged at Cassin fiue miles from Milan on the high way towards Pauia, and the Venetians at Binasca which lieth on the same road way, to hinder his comming to Milan, where in the meane time hee  tooke Saint Angelo, and Saint Colombane. But being aduertized that the Lord of Escut his brother, was come from France with money and certaine companies of foot-men, and came by the way of Genoa, he sent thither for his conuoy Frederico de Bozzole, with foure hundred Lances and seuen thousand foot, Swisses and Italians, against whom the Marquis of Mantua going forth of Pauia, came backe thither on a sodaine, standing in feare of them, by reason they were more in number then had beene reported vnto him. Bozzole hauing ioyned his forces with the Lord of Escut, both of them together tooke the way towards Nouara, and comming to the castle, which held out yet for them, they tooke the ordnance that was within it, and battered the City, the which they tooke by The French take Nouara. force at the third assault, sacking it wholly and putting all those within it to the sword, Count Philip Tournielo the Gouernor excepted, and some few others with him who were made prisoners; from thence they went to Vigeua, which they likewise tooke, opening the way by the taking of those townes to the supplies which they expected from France.
But in the meane time, Francis Sforza departing secretly in a night from Pauia, went thorow by-waies, and ioyned himselfe with Prospero Colonna neere to Landriana, a few souldiers remayning in Pauia with the Marquis of Mantua, who would not passe on any farther, because he would not be farre off from the Churches territories.
By reason whereof the Lord of Lautrec supposing his stay at Cassin to bee to no purpose, seeing that Francis Sforza was escaped, as also because it had beene no discretion for them to encampe before Milan, they determined for to turne the army towardes Pauia, hoping to take it; wherevpon soSforza arriueth at Milan. soone as hee had re-assembled his army, hee went and encamped there, where at his arriuall a furious battery was made in two seuerall places, as well by the French, as the Venetians, so that the breach was iudged reasonable for an assault:Pauia beseeged by Lautrec. And yet the beseeged resolued valiantly to defend themselues, and to hinder the enemies from taking it, not sparing their liues and meanes.
Prospero in the meane time perceiuing the manifest daunger wherein the City  was, did speedily send thither a thousand Corsicans, and as many Spaniards, who in the night passed along very neere to the campe, not beeing descried before they were in a manner all past, and then the French watch which was still on horse*backe, did charge them on their backes, and defeated some few of them, but not very many, by reason they were to late descried. Now the breach being thought to be reasonable, the Swisses, who by nature are impatient, requested the Generall of the army that they might march to the assault, but it was put off till an other time, the better to assure the businesse, staying till Pedro of Nauarres mine had plaied, which was made vnder a great Bastion, to the end that the ruines thereof might helpe the souldiers in their going to the  assault.
And in this sort the arriuall of new supplies at Pauia, and their hope in theThe campe dislodgeth from before Pauia. mine, were the causes that the assault was delayed and the campe raised. For Prospero Colonna perceiuing himselfe to be re-enforced with sixe thousand Lansequenets

and others which Francis Sforza had brought, did with his whole army come into the field, that he might be neere to Pauia, and he went and encamped at the Chartreux within three miles off the French and Venetians, to hinder them from giuing an assault to the City, for it had beene against reason to haue suffered it to be don, so great a power as his being so nere the enemies. Then was the Lord of Lautrec out of hope to take Pauia, wherevpon he dislodged and retired his campe to Ladriana, and from thence to Monce, that he might be releeued with victuals as well from Laudesan and from the territory of Cremona as from the Venetians country, receiuing in his discamping no other discommodity then a  few light skirmishes.
The Imperials perceiuing the French army to march towards Monce, thinkingThe Emperors campe lodgeth at Bicoca. that they would haue gonne to Milan, went and lodged at Bicoca three miles off from Milan, on the high way to Laude, which is a very spacious house belonging to a Gentleman, enuironed with goodly gardens and enclosed with deepe ditches, the fields round about beeing full of fountaines and streames brought by conduit-pipes, according to the manner of Lombardy, to water the meddowes: being come to that place, they did speedily raise all the dikes, and flanked them with great plat-formes well stored with ordnance.
The Swisses being, according to their manner, impatient, sent their captaines  to the Lord of Lautrec, to let him vnderstand that their fellowes were wearied with lying in campe, and that of three things they craued one, ready money, leaue to depart, or that he would speedily, without any to more temporizing, lead them to a battaile. The Lord of Lautrec considering how dangerous a matter it would haue beene to haue gonne and assailed the enemies in their campe, vsed meanes to moderate their fury, and told them that if money were long in comming, it was not thorow the Kings fault, but in regard of the danger of the waies, and yet neuerthelesse it would very shortly arriue, therefore he entreated them, (as did all the other Lords of the army likewise) that they would bee patient for a while longer, seeing they did hope to vanquish the enemies without fight, or  at least wise to fight with them with greater aduantage. But the captaines of the French army, not being able to winne or retaine them, neither by their authority, entreaties, promises, nor reasons, knowing that the chiefe strength of their army consisted of that nation, of whom being abandoned they should remaine a prey to the enemies, they concluded to fight rather then to flie, seeing that vnlesse the Swisses were lead to the battaile, they were determined to depart thence.Lautrec sendeth to discouer the enemies campe.
Now according to this resolution, the Lord of Lautrec did by the Swisses consent send the Lord of Pontdormy to discouer the enemies campe, who marched thither with foure hundred men at armes and sixe thousand Swisses, who hauing discouered it they found small likelihood of beeing able to assaile it, yet neuerthelesse  that did not change their opinion: wherevpon the Lord of Lautrec comming forth of Monce, did with his army march towards that place, hauing appointedIn what order the French did assaile the enemies. the Swisses with the artillery to goe and assaile the front of their campe and the enemies artillery, which was guarded by the Lansequenets: That the Lord of Escut with three hundred Lances, and a squadron of French and Italian foot should march on the left hand vpon the way that leadeth to Milan, and should goe to the bridge by which they might enter into the enemies campe: As for himselfe he would vse meanes to enter it with a squadron of horsemen,Pollicy of the Lord of Lautrec. hoping rather to preuaile by cunning then by open force; for the better to deceiue them, hee commanded that all his souldiers should weare red crosses on their cazakes, which was the badge of the Imperiall army, in stead of a white crosse  which was the deuice of the French army: Francisco Maria Duke of Vrbin, with the army of the Signory of Venice lead the rereward.
Now the Swisses being come nere to the enemies cample, al-be-it that in regard of the depth of the trenches, which were deeper the^ they imagined, they could not

according to their first hope assaile the ordnance, their courage neuerthelesse not diminishing, they assailed the trench, striuing with great boldnesse to get ouer it, but in the meane time the ordnance and the enemies small shot, wherewith theThe Swisses boldnesse in ass^yling their enemies. rampier was stuffed, did greatly hurt them, so as the greatest part of the captaines and chiefe souldiers died there. For as soone as Prospero Colonna had notice of their comming, he embattailed his troupes, then he appointed euery man his place, accounting the victory for his owne, in regard of the strength of the place, so as the Lord of Escut being gonne on the other side, as hee was commanded, directly to the bridge, finding, contrary to his expectation, a strong guard there, was enforcedThe battaile of Bicoca. to retire, so that the whole burthen of the battaile fell vpon the Swisses*, who, as  well in respect of the vantage of the place, as for the defendants valor, did labor in vaine, and did receiue a very great ouerthrow, so as being well rewarded for their rashnesse, by the death of many of their fellowes, they were enforced to retire.
The Lord of Lautrec, with the other Lords of the army, perceiuing all things in disorder, would haue perswaded the Swisses to encampe vpon the same place, offering them the next day to set the greatest part of the men at armes on foot to march in the forefront, but it was impossible to cause them to condescend therevnto,The Swisses retire to Monce. so as they would needs returne to Monce, whether marching in good order with the French and the artillery, they receiued no hurt in their retreat, al be-it  that the Marquis of Pescara and the other Imperiall captaines did importune Prospero to follow them, but he would not doe it, beleeuing, as it was very likely, that the French army made their retreat in good order, the men at armes remayning on the tayle of the army to repulse the enemies if they should follow them.
The army being come to Monce, the Lord of Lautrec vsed all meanes to detaine the Swisses, and to that end did giue great presents to their captaines, and among others to Albert Peter, a man of great authority amongst them, who hauing declared vnto them in an open assembly the wrong which they did to their reputation, if they should depart, then when they were in greater hope then euer to vanquish the enemies by reason of the French Kings comming, who was  dayly expected, could not for all that stoppe their retreate: wherevpon, the morrow after their arriuall at Monce, they returned thorow the Bergamask home into their mountaines, their number being much decreased, for that, three thousand of their fellowes, and two and twenty captaines were slaine at the trenches. The French and Venetian army did soone dislodge from Monce, and crossed theThe Swisses returne home into their country. Adda at Tressa, and there the two armies being parted the Lord Lautrec went to Cremona, to giue order for the defense of the City, and afterwards for his going into France (which he did) leauing his brother the Lord of Escut for the guard of Cremona, with the companies of men at armes, and the Lord of Boneuall in Laude and Frederick of Bozole with six companies of men at armes, and a  sufficient number of foot-men.
The Venetian army retired to the Bressan territory, hauing left a sufficient garrisonThe enemies surprize Lauda. for the gard of Tressa. But forthwith after the Lord of Lautrecs departure, the towne of Lauda was surprized and sacked by the Marquis of Pescara, and soone after the Lord of Escut yeelded Cremona on composition to Prospero, inCremona is yeelded to the enemies. regard he had no other hope to be able to hold out the seege, but by such succors as he expected from France, of which he heard no newes.
The fortune of the French being in this sort altered, and their reputation greatly diminished, by being in so short a time driuen forth of the Dutchy of Milan, by forces no greater then their owne, it was thought that the Venetians (who had already casiered their army, dismissed the greatest part of their Cauallery, and giuen  leaue to Andrew Gritti their Prouidator in the army to goe home to his owne house, hauing well acquitted themselues (though to small purpose) of whatsoeuer their confederacy and alliance with the French King had bound them to) would at last follow the prosperous fortune of the Emperour

Charles, who made shew (as hee had often times before then done) to desire theirThe Emperor sicketh the friendship and alliance of the Uenetians. friendship, and much more then, then before, in regard of the great hope which he had conceiued in his minde, that the route of the French would incite them so to doe, promising to him-selfe thereby to disioyne them, and so to draw them to his party, for the opinion hee had that this new confederacy and aide of the Venetians would chiefly auaile him for the conseruation of the State of Milan, and for the obtaining of a prosperous issue of the warre.
The Emperor then, resoluing to doe it, and not beeing satisfied with opening the way to Gaspar Contaren, Ambassador to the Seignory in his Court, and to haue told him how much it did import their Republick, to make the same alliance The Emperor and the King of England talke together. with him, as they had done before with the French King, did likwise communicate the same to the King of England, hauing talked with him at his returne from Spaine, the capitulations whereof beeing drawne by the Chancelor of the Empire, were giuen to Contaren, who finding them too rough, promise was made to him, that they should in such sort bee moderated as the Senate should finde them reasonable. But because by the distance of places, the matter was drawne forthA league betwixt the Emperor and the King of England. at length, there was in the meane time a league and confederacie concluded betwixt the Emperor Charles and Henry the eight King of England, reseruing place for the Venetians to enter into it within three moneths, which time was giuen them to aduise thereon. This beeing communicated to the Senate, there was nothing  resolued on for that present, but onely to make a generall answer to the offers and signes of friendship of those two Princes, which was, That they were very desirous of peace, and of their alliance.
But the report dayly encreasing of the French Kings great preparations of warre for his passage into Italy, which held the Venetians from making any certaine resolution, the Emperour and the King of England, fearing that the Venetians would still continue in their friendship and alliance with the French, determined, the better to hast the conclusion of the new league, to send Ambassadors to Venice.
The King of Englands Ambassador came first to Venice, and being brought The Ambassadors of the Emperor and the King of England come to Venice. into the Senate house, hee entreated the Senators to deale plainely, and to declare what they intended to doe, if the French King should returne with his Armie into Italy, to seaze on the Dutchy of Milan. The same request did the Emperors Ambassador make, who came thither presently after him, who going on farther, entreated, that if the most Christian King should passe the mounts, that the Republick would take armes and ioyne it selfe with the Imperiall forces to resist him. The Venetians in this treaty dealt very considerately, well weighing the inconueniences that might happen on either side, resoluing neuerthelesse not to enterThe Venetians great discretion in their resolution. into any new alliance but vpon necessity, meaning not altogether to seperate themselues from the friendship of the French, nor yet wholy to reiect that of the  Emperor, wherevpon they answered the Emperour and King of Englands Ambassador in generall termes.
About the end of the yeare 1522. Soliman Ottoman, to the great infamy ofAn. 1522. Christian Princes, tooke the Isle of Rhodes, defended by the Knights ofRhodes taken by Soliman. Rhodes, who before then were called, the Knights of Saint Iohn of Ierusalem, whither the great Turke came in person, who hauing reduced those of the Island and Towne to the extreamest point of necessity, enforced them to capitulate, namely, that the great Maister should deliuer him the towne: that as well himselfe as all the Knights of that order should depart in saftie, and carry away with them as much wealth as they could, and for to haue some assurance thereof, the Turke  should retire his nauall armie from thence, and with-draw his land forces fiue miles from the Citty. By meanes of this capitulation Rhodes remained to the Turke, and the Christians, (promise beeing kept with them) departed into Sicily, and from thence into Italy. Now to returne to the Emperor and King of

Englands pursutes to the Venetians, for the conclusion of the aboue mentioned league, the Venetian Ambassadors resident with those Princes, were often dealt with; but, the better to hasten the businesse, and to preuent the delaies caused by reason of the farre distance of places, Ieronimo Adorni Councellor and ordinary Chamberlaine to the Emperor, came to Venice, beeing sent by his Maister to treate of and conclude that businesse: who beeing brought into the Senate, went about to perswade them to forsake the French Kings alliance, and to embrace that of the Emperor and the King of England. But the Senate beeing mooued by sundry reasons, did still answer as they were wonte, not breaking either with the one or other.
In the meane time, after Pope Leos death, Pope Adrian, Cardinall, Bishop ofThe Creation of Pope Adrian the sixt. Bertheusa, and a Dutchman by Nation, who had beene Schoole-maister to the Emperor Charles, and by his meanes made a Cardinall by Pope Leo, was at the time of his Election in Spaine, and hauing receiued newes thereof (would be called Adrian the sixt, taking none other name vpon him then his owne) did embarke himselfe, and came to Nice: and from thence went to Rome, whither all the Prelates speedily came, and all Princes sent their Ambassadors to present their accustomed obedience: wherein, because the Venetians among others would not faile, they deputed sixe of the chiefe of the Citty: namely, Marco Dandulo, Lodouico Mocenigo, Vincentio Capel, Antonio Iustiniano, Petro Pesare, and  Marco Foscare: who being come to Bolognia, and vnderstanding that the plagueThe Venetians Ambassage to the Pope. was very great in Rome, they remained there for certaine dayes: but beeing aduertized that the Pope was enforced to leaue the Citty, and to retire else-where, they returned to Venice.
The new Pope was noted to bee of a generous disposition, and very much addicted to quiet, beeing very zealous for the common good of Christendom. For so soone as hee was installed in the supreame dignity, his greatest care was, to vse meanes to vnite all Christian Princes together, and to end all their controuersies, writing briefs to them all for that purpose, with great affection, causing hisThe Pope is zealous of an vniuersall peace. Nuncios to present Monitories to those Princes with whom they resided, threatning  to excommunicate them, if within three moneths they did not agree together, or make a generall truce, in which meane space all their strifes might be composed and ended. He did likewise write particularly to the Venetians, entreating and exhorting them, not onely to hearken vnto peace, but to procure all other Christian Princes to vnite themselues together, and to oppose themselues againstLeague betwixt the Pope, the Emperor, the Venetians, the Duke of Milan, and the Florentines. the greatnesse of the Ottoman Empire. But perceiuing the execution of this enterprise to bee very difficult, hee was desirous in the meane time to conclude a league betwixt himselfe, the Emperor, the Venetians, the Duke of Milan, and the Florentines, for the defence and quiet of Italy. The Senate did at the first entertaine his proposition with great affection, esteeming it to bee very good and profitable, but hauing considered in what maner the Pope did practise it, how that the end was to haue them to take armes against the Turke, they would not enter too farre into it, nor incurre the displeasure of so mighty a Monarke: wherein wholy to satisfie him, they on a sodaine sent the aboue-named Ambassadors, that were appointed to present their obedience to him, (the plague beeing ceased in Rome) who beeing arriued, were honorably receiued and enterteined by his Holynesse, who promised them to deale in such sort as they should be fully satisfied.
The treaty of agreement in the meane time with the Emperor was not interrupted, for all these goings and commings, the Senate hauing appointed three of their number, namely, Ledouico Mocenigo, Georgio Cornare, and Marc-Antonio Veniere to conferre with Ieronimo Adorni the Emperors Commissioner, that they might determine of it afterwards, vpon their report, in the Councell of the Pregays, and make some resolution therevpon.
This conference beeing ended, and the whole businesse beeing sent back toDifferent opinions in the Senate concerning their alliance with the Emperor. the Councell to bee debated, their opinions were very different, some saying that it was best to continue their alliance with the French King, and others to make a new one with the Emperor; the two chiefe of these contrary opinions, were Andre Gritti, and Georgio Cornare. The first, beeing highly esteemed for the great offices which hee had borne, and for his great authority in the commonwealth, spake first, with great vehemencie in the behalfe of the French King: The other beeing of like authority, and accounted as wise a man as any in the Councell, spake to the contrary, and said, that the Dutchy of Milan did by right appertaine  to Francis Sforza, and that therefore by consequent they were to make alliance with the Emperor.
Both of them by their great and apparent reasons, did rather possesse the Senators mindes with doubts then with any certaine resolution, so that the Senate delayed the determination thereof as much as they could, their vsuall manner inducing them therevnto, which was not to doe any thing rashly, the importance of the matter, and their desire to see more preparations of the French Kings, who prouiding for warre had sent the Bishop of Bayeux, to entreate them to put off their determination for a moneth longer, assuring them that before that time were expired, hee would come  downe with a greater army then had euer beene seene in Italy in the memory of man.
But because the King did dayly send new messengers to the Senate with veryThe protestation of the Emperor and King of Englands Ambassadors in Senate. great offers, and for that they were aduertized that Anna of Montmorency and Frederick de Bozzolo were comming to Venice for the same cause; The Emperor and the King of Englands Ambassadors, who did very much suspect those delayes, did protest in open Senate, that within three dayes next they would depart thence, leauing all matters imperfected. In regarde whereof, the Senate being enforced to end that businesse, and the trust which they reposed in the French Kings promises beginning to faile, by reason that hee had for diuers  monethes fed them with vaine hope, and especially, because their Ambassador with the same King did assure them of the contrary, they resolued to embrace the Emperors frendship, with whom they made agreement on these conditions.
That there should be a perpetuall peace and confederacy betwixt the EmperorThe articles of the alliance made betwixt the Emperor, Francis Sforza and the Venetians. Ferdinand Archduke of Austria, and Francis Sforza Duke of Milan, on the one side; and the Senate of Venice on the other. That the Senate should send, when need should bee, for the defence of the Dutchy of Milan, sixe hundred men at armes, sixe hundred light horse, and sixe thousand foot. That it should doe the like for the defence of the kingdome of Naples, if any Christians should enuade it (the Venetians beeing vnwilling to oblige themselues against the  Turke, because they would not incense Soliman against them): That the Emperor should bee bound to defend against all men, with like number of Souldiors, whatsoeuer the Venetians possessed in Italy.
That the Venetians should in eight yeares pay to the Archduke, the summe of two hundred thousand Ducats, in regarde of their antient strifes, and for the agreement made at Wormes. That the Venetians should possesse their Citties, townes and places of their demaines, with the same preheminence and iurisdiction as they then enioyed them: That all those who had beene bannished by the Senate, and their goods confiscate for taking the Emperours part, should returne into their owne Countrey, bee restored againe to  their goods, and should during their life haue a yeerely pension of fiue thousand Ducats.
These things beeing thus concluded, the Kings of Poland, Hungary and

Portugall, as friends to both parties, the Duke of Sauoy likewise, the Florentines, the family of Medicis, Antonio Adorni Duke of Genoa, and the Marquis of Montferrat were ioyned in this league; as for the Pope and the King of England they were named Gardians and conseruers of this conuention.
This accord beeing thus established and confirmed, the Senate elected twoThe Venetians send Ambassadors to the Emperor to reioyce with him for the new league. Ambassadors to send to the Emperor, namely, Lorenzo Prieuli, and Andre Nouagiero: and to the Archduke his brother Carlo Contaren, to reioyce with them for the new league, and for to giue them ample testimony of their affection towards the house of Austria. And because that Triuulcio, Generall for the Venetians, did greatly affect the French, the Senate in that regard, did honorably dismisse him, seeming to be very well pleased with his former seruice, by offering him a yeerly pention of three thousand crownes if he would continew with them as a priuate Cittizen, till such time as a better opportunity and occasion should present it selfe; but refusing their offer, he went into France: And in his place they chose Francisco Maria Duke of Vrbin Generall of their forces, with the same conditions, taking vpon them the protection of his State against all men.The Duke of Vrbin General to the Venetians.
In Italy all men thought, that seeing the Venetians were contrary to the French King, who in time before had fauoured him, that hee would forbeare to come into Italy to enuade the Dutchy of Milan, but when they vnderstood how that hee did not onely continue his preparations, but that his army began already to  march: those who feared his victory, did forthwith make a new confederacie to resist him, and perswaded the Pope to bee the chiefe thereof. In very deed it was a thing to be wondered at, that so soone as the French King had certaine newes that the league betwixt the Emperor and the Venetians was concluded and finished, hee made greater preparations then before to marche into the field, where as in times past, beeing solicited by the Venetians, hee proceeded therein more slowly, and that which is more, hee bent his thoughts on the Dutchy of Milan, at such time as hee had most reason to looke to his owne kingdome, in regarde ofThe Duke of Bourbon forsaketh the French Kings party. the Duke of Bourbons practises with the Emperor, the which beeing discouered, hee forsooke the Realme, and retired himselfe to the sayd Emperor, according to  his former proiect: by meanes whereof, the King determined for that time not to pursue his iourney into Italy: and yet neuerthelesse keeping at home with him, part of those forces prepared for the new warre, hee sent the Lord of Boniuet Admirall of France thither, with eighteene hundred Lances, sixe thousand Suisses, two thousand Grisons, two thousand Valesians, sixe thousand Lansquenets, two thousand French-men, and three thousand Italians: who hauing passed the Mounts with that Armie, and beeing come to the borders of the Dutchy of Milan,Nouara and Uigeua yeeld to the French. marched directly towards Nouara, the which beeing not well fortified, neither with Soldiers nor Rampiers, did soone yeeld, (the Castle excepted) the like did Vigeua and all the rest of the Countrey on the hether side of the riuer Thesin.
Prospero Colonna (who could not bee perswaded that the French King wouldVVhat Prospero Colonna did, vpon report of the arriuall of the French. perseuer in his determination to assaile the Dutchy of Milan for that yeare, as well because that the Venetians were confederated against him, as for the Duke of Bourbons rebellion, had not so soone as need required assembled his soldiers who were lodged in sundry places, nor made necessary prouisions for so great a motion) solicited all men to vnite themselues together, to hinder the French from passing ouer the Thesin.
The Venetians on the other side beeing aduertised of the Frenchmens arriuall, did sodainly command all their men at armes to meete vpon the bankes of the Riuer Olio, determining at the same time to make a leuy of sixe thousand  foote, and foure hundred light horse, to send them according to the treaty ofThe Venetians preparations against the French. the Confederacie for the defence of the Dutchie of Milan, and three thousand other footemen to lye in garrison in their Citties and strong Townes:

they made Leonardo Eme their Prouid ator generall, and sent a speedy messenger to the Duke of Vrbin, to will him to march forth-with into Lombardy, for the execution of his charge there. And hauing notice of the Lord of Boniuets progression, they commauded their Prouidator to leade their forces into the Country of Giradade, to assure the Citties of Bergamo and Crema, and like-wise to releeue speedily the Citty of Milan, whither the French did bend all their deseignes.
The French being come to Vigeua, finding the waters of the riuer to bee shallower then Prospero supposed, part of them beganne to passe ouer at a ford, and others  in boates, within foure miles of the Imperialls Campe, and made a bridgeThe French passe the Thesin without any let. for the artillery at a place where they found no gard, nor resistance: whereof Prospero being aduertized, did speedily send a hundred men at armes, and three thousand foot for the gard of Pauia; and him-selfe with the residue of the army went into Milan, where by the aduice of all the Captaines, hee beganne to repaire the bastions and rampiers of the suburbes, which had beene neglected since the last warre: so as if the French had directly come to Milan, the Imperialls wouldThe error of the French. haue forsaken the Citty, and would haue gone either to Pauia or Coma, for it was so resolued in their Councell; but hauing stayed longer then they should neere to the riuer Thefin, to vnite them-selues together, they came afterwards  to Saint Christophers within a mile of Milan, and then comming betwixt the gate of Thesin, and the Roman, they planted their ordnance in the vantgard, making shew as if they would asalt the Citty: but after they had encamped there certaineThe French lying before M^ lan do ^on a sodoine raise their Camp. daies, without assailing it at all, in regard of the great forces that were within it, they went to Monce, which they tooke with ease: from thence Captaine Bayard, and Frederic of Bossola, marched towards Lauda, on which, (being altogether abandoned,) they likewise seazed. Then determining to releeue the CastleThey take Monce. of Cremona, they marched on the Cremonois, and being without any difficulty come neere to the Castle, they did refresh it with victualls, and other necessaries, and resolued to assaile the Citty.
The Ambassadors of the Emperor and the Duke of Milan, which lay at Venice, being moued by these dangers, did solicite the Senate to send their forces ouer the riuer Oglio, to the end that they might goe and encampe in some stronge, and safe place on the Cremonois, to diuert the French from the seege of Cremona, albeit their whole enterprizes, were onely for the taking of Milan, for which part of their forces were at Carauagia, and at Monce, to stop the Venetian army from passing on any farther.
The Imperialls perceiuing the enemies intent did solicite the Venetians to ioyne with them, not considering the perills and difficulties that did present themselues: by meanes whereof the Senate knowing that the same businesse did depend  on the sytuation of places, and on sundry accidents which happened, did referre the whole matter to the iudgement and discretion of the Duke their Generall, who after hee had heedefully viewed all the passages determined to encampe beyond the riuer Oglio, betwixt Romano, and Martinenga: whereat the Imperialls beeing discontented, made a new entreaty that they might come and encampe more neere to Tressa.
In the meane time other succors came from elsewhere, into the Dutchy of Milan, as well of Lancequenets by the way of Trent, as from the Vicery of Naples; and besides, they dayly expected the Duke of Bourbon, who was comming into Italy as Lieutenant generall to the Emperor.
Now in the midest of all these armes, the motion of peace betwixt the Emperor  and the French King was not altogether interrupted, for the Archbishop of Barri, who for a time had beene his Holinesse Nuncio in France, was for that purpose gone into Spaine to treate of the conditions of peace, the which

in respect of an vniuersall quiet like was like-wise very pleasing to the Venetians, not without suspition neuer-the-lesse, that it would come to passe as it had at other times happened, that those Princes shold afterwards agree together to ouerrunneThe Uenetians suspect the motion of peace betwixt the Emperor and the ^rench King. them: yet not-with-standing, they would not without some other greater occasion faile in ought where-vnto they were tyed by their last confederacy: and therefore they sent to their Prouidator, (vpon the report that the Imperialls would march into the field) willing him to crosse the Adda, and to ioyne with the Viceroy of Naples, leauing strong garrisons in their frontier townes, and to take care to lodge euer in safe and strong places, and especially to auoide, as much as he could, from being enforced to enter into Milan.
The Duke of Vrbin neuer-the-lesse made some difficulty to execute that commandement, and to passe the Adda, thinking no safety to bee therein till the Lancequenets were first of all come into the field with the Marquis of MantuasThe Duke of Vrbins difficulty to execute the Senates command. forces; as also for that hee had intelligence, that great numbers of Swisses were come to the French Campe, who were thought to bee ten thousand: in regard whereof, being entreated by the Imperialls, to ioyne with them at Beauregard, he refused to doe so, because that Quarter was but foure miles off from the French campe, whereby it was to be feared, that approaching so neere the enemies, they might be enforced against their wil and to their disaduantage to come to a battail: as also for that two thousand Swisses were lately come to Laude, and it was  to bee doubted that they would come and assaile the Territory of Crema, or the Bergamask, whither it was like-wise reported that sixe thousand Grysons were comming, sent by the French King, who had at the same time dismissed the Venetian Ambassador resident in his Court.
But the Imperialls still soliciting the Duke of Vrbin to ioyne with them, the Senate, to take away all suspition of bad dealing, commanded their Generall toThe Venetians make new leuies of horse and ^oot. doe it, hauing in the meane time leuied three thousand Italian foot, and foure hundred light horse which were stradiots, for the gard and defence of their towns; the command of whome was giuen to Iohn Mora, who was elected gouernor of  Crema, with title of Prouidator Generall of the Bressan Teritory. At the sametime Petro Pesare was sent Prouidator to the army insted of Heme who fell sicke, and was retyred to Venice.
The Venetian Army being come to Tressa, and the Marquis of Mantua being gone to Pauia, the French army was in great want of victualls, all passages being stopped whereby they were wont to be brought to them, wherein the Venetian army purchaced great praise, especially the Venetian Stradiots, so as the Admirall fearing him-selfe to fall into the same want of victualls wherevnto hee thought to haue reduced the Citty of Milan, resolued to discampe, and to retire some twelue miles from the Citty.
At this stay stood their affaires, when Pope Adrian dyed on the foureteenth day of September, to the great losse and discommodity of the confederates, toPope Adrian his death. whome by his death the Pontificall authority was not onely wanting, but likewise the pecuniary contribution, wherevnto hee was tyed by the Capitulations of the confederacy. So soone in a manner as the Admirall was departed from before Milan, the Cardinalls, who had already beene fifty daies in the conclaue, createdThe creation of Pope Clement the se^enth. a new Pope, which was, Iulius of Medicis, who tooke vpon him the name of Clement the seauenth.
This election certainly was very pleasing to all men, for the great opinion that the whole world had conceiued of him, because hee was a man of great authority and worth, and reputed to bee graue and constant in his determinations. The Senate being desirous to let him know how highly they loued and honoredThe Venetians send Ambassadors to the new Pope. him, appointed eight Ambassadors to goe and congratulate him for his new promotion: and to present him with their vsuall obedience: the Ambassadors

were Marco Dandulo, Ieronimo Pesaure, Dominico Veniero, Vincentio Capel, Thomaso Contaren, Lorenzo Bragadino, Nicolo Tepula, and Lodouico Bono.
Within a while after Prince Grimani dyed, after hee had gouerned one yeare and tenne moneths, hee was with great pompe carried to Saint Anthonies Church.



ANDRE GRITTI  the 77. Duke.








ANDRE GRITTI, Procurator of Saint Marke, a man very famous for his rare and singular vertues, was chosen in his place, who had already in time before managed  abroad and at home, the most important affaires of the Common wealth.
After this manner was the yeare 1523. ended. AtAn. 1523. the beginning of the next following, the French mens difficulties, did inuite the Emperors Captaines to thinke on meanes how to finish the warres: for this purpose They sent for the Duke of Vrbin to Milan, with PetroThe Imperials determine to (...) the (...). Pesare the Prouidator of the Army, to consult how they should proceed in the warres, where all men were of opinion, that so sone as the sixe thousand Lancequenets, which the Viceroy had sent to leuy, should be arriued at Milan, the Emperors army togither with that of the Venetians should assaill the enemies, and either by force or famine driue them forth of the Dutchy of Milan, who beeing already reduced to extreame want of victualls, and mony, did dayly disband at the head of their Armie, the which the Admirall

perceiuing, did still by little and little retire forth of the State of Milan. This retreat of the French caused the Venetian army to aduance foreward, the which being come to Binasca, did ioyne with the Viceroy and the Marquis of Mantua, who hauing left a sufficient garrison in Milan, were come into the field, and finding themselues to be strong, they came within fiue miles of the French Camp, thereby keeping them not only from scouring the Contrey, but from victuals which were wont to come vnto them. And the Imperials and the VenetiansThe Imperials pursued the French. growing afterwards more bold, did crosse the Thesin neere to Pauia, to make themselues masters of the contrey, and to take from the enemies those commodities which they vsed to receiue from thence.
The French wondring at the enemies boldnesse were likewise enforced to passe the same riuer to oppose themselues against their deseignes, the Duke of Vrbin hauing passed Thesin beganne to scoure the Contrey, and hauing on euery side beaten the plaines, he went and encamped before Garlas, a towne strongly fenced with dikes and Rampiers, wherein were foure hundred Italian footmen, to which after he had made a breach, he gaue an assault the very same day, and tooke it byThe Imperials take Garlas. force, with great slaughter of those that were within it. The taking of this towne caused diuers others to yeeld vnto him.
The Admirals hope beeing grounded vpon two points, both of them failed him: The one was that Rante de Cera comming downe with eight thousand Grisons  into the Venetians territories, would constraine them to call back their forces to defend their owne Contrey: aud the other was, that the ayd of Suisses which the King sent to him would speedily arriue, and fill vp his army which was much diminished; but both those hopes prooued vaine. For the Grisons would not depart from their houses, when they vnderstood that they should find resistance and no aide, and the Suisses being come to the bankes of the riuer Stesia,VVhy the Grisons would not leaue their houses. tarried there still, beeing not able to passe it by reason of the great encrease of the waters: wherevpon the Admirall being pressed by the Enemies and the nomber of his forces daily decreasing, being desirous to ioyne with them, commanded a bridge to be made ouer that riuer, and the day following he caused all his soldiers  to passe ouer to the Suisses, the enemies being lodged within two miles of them.
Now the Imperialls perceiuing in what disorder the French were retired, who left diuers peices of Ordnance, with other munition behind them, intreated the Duke of Vrbin to pursue them in their company, wherevnto the Duke of Vrbin seemed to consent: But the Prouidator refusing so to doe, the Venetians would not passe ouer the riuer, thinking that they had already passed farther then they were tyed to by the bonds of the Confederacy, by which they were bound to nothing elce but for the defence of the Dutchy of Milan, and they had entred into the lands of the Duke of Sauoy: for which refusall the Duke of Vrbin was greatly  commended, and the Senate being desirous to acknowledge it, albeit he had not serued them long, did neuerthelesse honour him with the Title of Generall of all their forces, as well horsse as foot, with a present recompence.
Now whilst the Venetians were busied in this war, sondry cares and dangers troubled them from elsewhere, for they had intelligence that Soliman practized some high attempt, and was desirous to execute it, by reason that he made great preparations of Soldiers and armor, the which did much amaze them, and caused themThe Venetians stand in feare of Soliman. to keepe strong garrisons in all their sea townes, and cheefly in the Ile of Ciprus, whereunto they knew the Turke aspired; and to furnish that expence, imposed a loane, as well on their perticular cit^izens, as on al their citties and subiects, which  speedily furnished them with ready money.
In this meane time the French King, notwithstanding the bad successe of his army, had neither lost his courage, nor his desire to returne into Italy, being the more prouoked thereunto by the disdaine which he had conceiued of the

Emperor, who not beeing satisfied with taking vpon him the defence of the stateCause of the French King^ discontent with the Emperour. of Milan did moreouer trouble him in his owne Realme, by stirring, vp the King of England against him wherevpon, he made great warlike preparations to returne himselfe in person into Italy the which he hoped to doe with more ease and speed, because his Army was safely returned into France.
These newes did greatly trouble the Senators, not only in regard of the huge expence they were to be at, by reason of their alliance with the Emperor for the defence of the state of Milan, but likewise for the feare they were in of their owneVVhy the French King was displeased with the Venetians. state, the French King beeing mightely incensed against them, not so much for that which they had done in their last encounters, as for that they being since then sollicited to returne to his alliance and to quit the Emperors, they had wholy  refused it.
The Venetians being then aduertised that the French army passed the mounts, did cause all their forces, which lay in sondry places in Garrison, to meet on the Verona territory, whether they sent word to the Duke of Vrbin to come, and willed Pessare their Prouidator to goe thither with all speed, to waite what should be commanded him. The Pope in the meane time being shaken with feare, and sondry suspitions, told the Venetians, that it was well done to be vnited with himselfe and the Emperor and to proceed matu^ely in all matters, for the liberty of Italy, andThe Popes remonstrances to the Venetians for the defe^ce of the stare of Milan that they possibly could: but if they should not  find themselues strong enough to resist the mighty army of the French, it were better to seeke in time to reconcile themselues to the most Christian King, then to delay it till he should fiercely march against them, thereby to auoyd those insolencies, which doe vsually follow victories: He willed them to consider that the power of the French was very great and of force to ouerturne the whole state of Italy: and (...) they should doe well to send ample power and authority to Marco Eoscare their Ambassador at Rome, to treat of that which the French had already offered them.
Though the Pope propounded all this by way of Councell, yet neuerthelesseVVhervnto the Pope ^ded. it was perceiued thereby, that his meaning tended to a new confederacy with the  French the better to assure the state of the Church, and that of Florence: For which the Senate did not yet perceiue any reason, so soone, and without cause to quit the Emperors alliance, to returne to that of the French King, seeing it would (...) argued ouermuch lightnesse and inconstancy, and small discretion to make the Emperor their en^my, before they were certaine of the French Kings will: and therefore they had determined that their army should enter into the state of Milan, to be employed in the Emperors seruice, but the Duke of Vrbin before he would execu^e their determination sent them word how dangerous a matter it were for the Common-wealth, to send their army abroad at that time, because that if they with their forces should assure the state of Milan, it was to be feared that the enemy would turne his deseignes somewhere elce, and perhaps against  their (...) and therefore he said that it were best to tarry till the French army had passed the riuer Sila, before that they did put their resolution in practise. ButThe French come to (...). the French making great hast, were sooner in the Dutchy of Milan then they were lookt for, and from (...) (...) directly to the Citty, they came to the sub^ of the gate of Thesin, before it could be sufficiently rampierd and prouided (...) (...) herevpon all the Captaines were of opinion to forsake it: therfore the Duke (...) (...), the Viceroy and Sforza retired to Soncina with all theThe Imperiall retire to Soncina and Lauda. troopes (...) within it; and the Marquis of Pescara to Lauda; but they gaue (...) order, that (...) might be well fortefied and stored with soldiers and all other necessary prouisions, into the which A^tonia de (...) entred with  three hundred (...) (...) (...) and fiue thousand foot, partly Spaniards and Almaines (...) all of them old soldiers. In this sort did the French recouer the Citty of Milan, into the which the King would not haue the army enter least they

should sack it. At the same time Iohn Stuard Duke of Albanie, appointed by theThe Duke of (...) enuades Naples. King to goe and enuade the Realme of Naples, with two hundred Lances, seauen hundred light horse, and foure thousand Suisses, craued passage of the Pope thorow the Churches territories, and thorow Tuscany, to march to that enterprise, which was resolued on to draw the Imperiall forces thither, to the end that the defence of the state of Milan might bee weakned, where dayly sundry townes yeelded without any great difficulty.
All the cheefe exploits of warre were neere vnto Pauia, whither the KingPauia besieged by the French King. with his whole army was come to besiege it, resoluing not to stirre from thence till hee had taken it, thinking that it would greatly diminish his reputation, if  hauing so goodly an armie, hee should leaue such a Citty behinde him, so well stored with Soldiors and victuals, as that was. The King had (according to the common report) not reckoning those who stayed at Milan, two thousand Lances, eight thousand Lansquenets, sixe thousand Suisses, sixe thousand Pioners, and foure thousand Italians: the number of whom did afterwards very much encrease, with great prouision of Artillery, and the flower of all the French Nobility.
The Imperials on the other side placed their chiefe hope in the conseruation of that Citty, and therefore all men were desirous to see, what the euent of that siege would bee, especially the Pope and the Venetians, fearing on the one side, the French Kings armes who was displeased with them, if hee should prooue the The Venetians feare. victor, and on the other, those of the Imperialls, if chasing thence the French, they should become maisters of Italy.
Amidst these sundry thoughts, they shewed themselues in a manner newters, neither sending their forces to the ayde of the Imperialls, nor agreeing in any sort with the French, expecting with good deuotion the successe of Pauia, which beeing reduced to a siege, did seeme would bee very long. The Pope neuerthelesse thinking it to bee a part of his duty, to procure peace betwixt these Princes, sentThe Pope (...) a mediator betwixt the Emperor and the French. King. his Datarie to the Kings Campe to treate of an agreement, wherevnto the King seemed to condiscend, the Viceroy was soone aduertised thereof by his Holynesse, to the end hee might testifie that his desire was conformable to the duty  wherevnto hee was obliged by the place and degree that hee held, to vnite the Emperor and the most Christian king in a firme peace and friendship, that all of them together might afterwards arme against the power of Soliman, who was already in the field with a mighty Armie.
The conditions of the treaty of peace propounded by the Pope, were, ThatConditions of peace propounded by the Pope the Emperor should enioy the kingdome of Naples, and the French king the Duchy of Milan, with particular promise not to passe on any farther into Italy, without the Popes knowledge and consent. This treaty hauing continued for certaine daies, no effect thereof succeeded, but onely iealousies betwixt the FrenchThe Venetians sought to, by both sides and Spaniards: wherevpon the Venetians were againe solicited by both parties  to fauour their sides. The Count of Carpi came to Venice from the French to solicite the Senate to renue their alliance with the most Christian king, or at leastwise, that they would not bee against him: The Viceroy on the other side, sent Charles of Arragon thither, to require them to send those forces which they were bound to by the capitulations of the league: They answered the French Ambassador in generall termes, how that they had referred all that businesse to the Pope: but to him the Viceroy sent, albeit they did not refuse his demand, yet neuerthelesse they answered coldely, as those who knew very well how to fit their councels to the euent of things, and this irresolution of theirs continued till such time as the Pope had very secretly concluded with the French king, both for himself  and them, wherevpon, when they came to resolution in the Senate, their opinions were different, either because in many of them the memory of their ancient ^lliance with the French King was renewed, or else for that they supposed hee

would prooue victorious, in regarde of the great forces that hee had ready inVVhat moued the Senate toally themselues with the French. Italy, against enemies that were wholy vnready and very ill prouided of all necessaries: which caused them rather to encline to the French, then to the Imperials.
According then to this resolution, a peace, and league betwixt the Pope, the King, and the Venetians was determined and concluded at Rome with the Ambassadors,An. 1525. in the beginning of Ianuary, the yeare 1525. and confirmed afterwards by the Senate at Venice. This treaty beeing handled very secretly, the Senate beeing most importunately vrged by the Emperors Ambassadors, to ioyne their troopes with the Imperiall Armie, after sundry excuses, answered that  they would not contradict the Popes command, and least of all at that time when they were vpon a treaty of peace which his Holynesse pursued by the Emperors consent, and that therefore they would not interrupt it, nor bee a a meanes to prolong the warre.
The league beeing thus concluded, the French King sent the Bailiffe of (...) to Venice, to congratulate them, and to assure them of his loue to the Commonwealth, from which hee promised neuer to diuide himselfe. Hee did afterwards require that the same accord, which was secretly concluded, might be published abroad, wherevnto the Venetians did freely condescend: thinking it to bee the The Senates answer to the Imperialls. best, thereby to cause the Imperials, who expected their ayde, to hope no longer for it, and that they beeing destitute of their helpe, dispairing of beeing able to keepe the State of Milan, might retire some-where else, or incline to peace.
The Pope was of a contrary opinion, saying, That the treaty ought not to beSundry opinions on the publication of the league. published, the better to reduce the Imperials to greater necessity and danger, which would happen so soone as the French should passe the Po, which they said they would doe, promising to repasse it at the Popes pleasure: but time and necessity pressing him to discouer himselfe, in regard hee was to grant passage to the Duke of Albany thorow the Churches territories, for his iourney into the Realme of Naples: the Pope made shew, as if the Duke of Albany would passe  by force and violence with his troopes thorow the lands of the Church and the Florentines, and that for himselfe hee would remaine neutrall in that warre, and seeke to procure an vniuersall peace and concord, protesting against those twoThe Pope protesteth against the Emperor and the King, if they agree not. Princes, and admonishing them both to throw downe Armes, to come to an agreement, and to lay in deposito in the hand of a third person not suspected, whatsoeuer did yet hold out in the Dutchy of Milan, for the Emperor, and Duke: Hee gaue notice thereof to the Viceroy by Paul Vettori, Captaine of his Galleys, as also how he could not stop the Duke of Albanies passage, but that it behooued him to bee assured of him by new conuentions, hee likewise sent him diuerse other articles, which hee hoped to insert in the peace.
These propositions caused the Imperialls to suspect that the Pope had agreedThe Imperialls suspect the Pope. with the French King, (as in effect hee had done) for perceiuing themselues enforced at one time, with great want of money to maintaine the warre in Lombardie, and to haue an eye to the kingdome of Naples, they could neuer bee ayded eyther by the Pope or the Florentines, and were besides very well assured that the Venetians would forsake them, who entertaining the Imperiall Captaines with hope that they would obserue the league, did deferre the execution thereof with sundry excuses, so as the Viceroy was euen at the point to returne with his Army into the Realme of Naples for the safety thereof.
But in the Councell held for that purpose, the opinion of the Marquis of Pescara The (...) of Pescara causeth the Imperiall arm^ to tarry in Lumbardy. did wholy pr^uaile, who shewing himselfe no lesse couragious then discreet, sayd, That it was most necessary to continue the warre of Lumbardy, and that on the victory thereof, all other matters did depend.
The Emperor at the same time according to his alliance made with the King

of England, did so handle the matter, that the said king should the yeare following come to Calais with a mighty army to make war on France, who to that end sent a Knight to the Emperors Campe, which caused the Imperials to hold out more boldly, as being assured that the Christian King assailed in his own Realme, would be enforced to raise his camp, and to hast thither for the defence thereof, the agreement made betwixt the Pope, himself, and the Venetians, being not as yet diuulged.
The newes then of the King of Englands great warlike preparations for his comming downe into France, beeing blazed abroad, caused the Venetians not to hasten the publication of the agreement, fearing least the King, vpon that report, might bee enforced to lead his forces else where. But the successe of the  enterprise of Lombardy, and of all other deseignes, depended at the last on the siege of Pauia, which held out longer then all men expected: the which the Pope and the Venetians did very much distaste, not altogether so much for the length thereof, as fearing least the French Captaines, impatient of so longThe Pope and the Venetians feare least the King should come to hatsaile. stay, should perswade the King to goe and charge the enemies, and by that meanes commit to the hazard of fortune, not oney his Armie, but likewise their states, and the liberty of Italy, which (hauing none other meanes to withstand the Imperialls, if they should become victorious) would prooue their prey.
In the meane time the siege of Pauia still continued, notwithstanding that for want of munition, the battery did in some sort cease, which was forth-with remedied  by the Duke of Ferrara, who caused great store to bee brought to the Campe thorow the Pa^mesan and Placentine tenitorics, by the carriages and beasts of husbandmen. But the Imperiall forces beeing augmented by the succours which were newly arriued, and the Viceroy hauing notice of the decay of the Kings Armie, by reason of the long winter that they had continued inVVhat caused the Imperials to come into the field. field, as also that the King had diuiden his Army (namely those whom the Duke of Albany led, and fiue thousand men that the Marquis of Saluces had with him at Sauona, and the places neerc (...), besides great numbers of others, who remained as well at Milan as in other places, for the safety of Victuals) determined, till the Duke of Bourbon with the Lansquenets should arriue, to marche into  the field for the reliefe of (...). But the Duke of Bourbon arriued in the meane time, with fiue hundred Bourgonian men at armes, and six thousand Lansquenets whom the Archduke paide: wherevpon pursuing their iourney, not determining to giue the King battaile vnlesse it were vpon great aduantage, but onely to trye if they could put fresh succours and victuals into the Citty, they came and lodged without the Parke, on the side of the Chartreuse, with in Cannon shot of the Kings Campe, who beeing perswaded by all his followers to discampe, and to retire either to Binasca or to Milan, and that therby without bloud or danger hee might forthwith obtaine the victory, because that the enemies Army beeing without money, could not long hold out, but would bee enforced to The King would by (...) (...) discamp from before Pauia. dissolue it self, or to be scartered vp and down heere and there about the countrey: Hee would not for all that giue ouer the fiege of Pauia, thinking that it would highly shame and disgrace him, if that Army wherein hee was in person, should see me to be afraide, and giue place at the enemies comming.
The Imperialls then hauing made two squadrons of horse, and foure of foot, they came thorow she Parke wall, of which they had beaten downe three scoreThe Imperials assaile the kings Camp. ^athom, some of them directly to Mirabel, and the residue to the kings camp, where after ^ so (...) fight o^ ^ither side, the king being with great numbers of me^ at armes in the midst of the battaile, fighting valiant^y, his horse was slaine vnder him, and The King is taken by the (...), and the ^rmy is (...) (...). falling to the ground, being (...) in the face and in the hand, was taken by fiue soldiore (...) knew him not: but the Viceroy (...), hee made himselfe knowne to him, who with great reuerence kissed his hands, and receiued him prisoner for the Emperor. All the French Army was forthwith put to rout, and the greatest part of the (...) were disarmed, the rereward of (...) excepted, conducted by the duke of Alancon. This so great and famous a victory obteined by the Imperials ouer the

French; did greatly afflict the Venetians with care, fore-seeing the great burthen they were to vndergoe, the counterpoize of the French forces failing them, and all the other Princes of Italy beeing too weake to make resistance: and wereThe Venetians discourse on the Kings taking. greatly affrighted with that successe, they alone beeing to defend the liberty of Italy, against such a mighty enemy, growne great in strength and reputation: beeing yet doubtfull whether hee would conteine himselfe within the limits of the Dutchy of Milan, or else beeing puffed vp with that fortunate successe, passe on farther and follow the course of his victory.
Their whole forces were but a thousand men at armes, sixe hundred light horse, and tenne thousand foot, and resoluing to leuy more, they exhorted all  the other potentats of Italy to do the like according to their strength and means: but they cheefely laboured to vnite themselues with the Pope, supposing that all other Italian Princes would depend on his authority: vnto whom after they had declared all the eminent dangers that threatened them, and that he had attentiuely heard them, they would not for all that, induce him to make any braue resolution, nor hinder him from thinking on an accord, determining to accept such an one as it should please the conqueror to offer him, rather then with his owne forces, and those of his friends and confederates, oppose himselfe against the violenceThe Popes resolution after the defeate of the French. that might bee offered him: and hee had already begun to treate with  the Viceroy, fearing least the Imperiall forces beeing destitute of all meanes, should come and fall vppon the Church territories, and on those of the Florentines.
The Viceroy gaue a willing eare to the agreement which the Pope craued, knowing of what importance it was for the confirmation of the victory, and for the drawing of himselfe and the Armie forth of many necessities where-with they were oppressed, supposing likewise that by his example all the other Princes of Italy dooing the like, it was no more to bee feared that the French would euer afterwards come and raise any tumults in Italy.
The Venetians hauing discouered this treaty, and knowing how many inconueniences the Popes safety would bring vpon them, they not beeing able to diuert  him from his intent, proceeded slowly in their determinations, without breaking off altogether with the Imperialls, nor likewise contracting any other alliance with them, but they sought to perswade the Pope, that for their last refugeThe Venetians seeke to alter the Popes opinion. (because they would not bee found vnfurnished, if the accord which hee sought to make show of, haue no good successe,) to leuy ten thousand Suisses, and at the same instant to dispatch a Nuncio to the King of England, to entreate him to succour Italy in such an vrgent necessity: that they likewise would send an Ambassador to the same King, to make the like request, whereby they hoped to obtaine some speedy ayde of him: such great enuies and distrusts had that victory procured vnto Charles.
But the Venetians perceiuing that the Popes intent did wholy tend to an agreement with the Imperialls, they likewise resolued to follow him therein, seeing they could not doe otherwise. Therefore the Viceroy hauing sent Iohn Sarmiento to Venice, to aduertise them of the victory, they courteously enterteined him, with great demonstration of loue towards the Emperor: andThe Uenetians send Ambassadors to the Emperor. they sent word to Lorenzo Prieuli and Andre Nouagero, (who beeing already gone in Ambassage towards Charles, did tarry at Genoa) that they should prosecute their iourney into Spaine, to reioyce with him in the Senates behalfe for his gotten victory, and to excuse their delay for not sending their Forces to the Imperiall Campe.
Now the Emperor beeing aduertised of this fortunate successe, (albeit in hisThe Emperors speech and gesture vpon the newes of the victory. heart hee was pricked forward with a desire of glory and greatnesse, which made him very ioyfull, yet neuerthelesse shewing by his speech and outward

gesture, a wonderfull modestie, hee assured all men that hee would vse it, as it beseemed that speciall fauour which God had done him, and for the good and quiet of all Christendome: Wherevpon hee forth-with sent the Duke of Sessa to the Pope to offer him peace, and to assure him that hee was wholy disposedThe Emperor sendeth an Ambassador to the Pope. to the peace and quiet of all Italy. Hee caused the same speech to hee deliuered to the Venetian Senate by Alonzo Sanchez his Ambassador, and by the Prothonotarie Carracciola, who remained at that time in Venice.
But by how much the Imperialls seemed to desire peace and alliance with the Potentates of Italy, at such time when as they should rather haue beene sought to, then haue solicited others, by so much more they gaue suspition, that they  practised high and secret enterprises, hurtfull to the liberty of Italy, which caused the Venetians to temporize, without concluding or reiecting those treaties which the Emperor motioned.

The end of the fifth Booke of the fifth  Decade.




The Contents of the sixth Booke of the  fifth Decade.
THE sorrow which did afflict all France for  the Kings imprisonment, and the Councels resolution. The Venetians answer to the French Commissioner. Accord betwixt the Pope and the Emperor. The Marquis of Pescara demandeth the Castles of Milan, and Cremona of Sforza. Accord betwixt the Pope and the Venetians. The curtezie which the King of England vsed towards  the French King. Agreement betwixt the Emperor and French King. The King complaineth of the Emperor. A league concluded at Coignac, betwixt the Pope, the French King, the Venetians, and Francis Sforza. The King of England is entreated to enter into the league, with his answer. Lauda is taken by the Confederates. The Duke of Bourbon commeth to Milan. The Armie of the league retireth from before Milan. The offer of the Pope and the Venetians to the King, concerning the enterprise of the kingdome of Naples. Genoa is besieged by the Confederats. Francis  Sforza deliuereth the Castle of Milan to the Emperor. The Citty of Cremona is deliuered to the Confederates. Rome is surprised by the Colonnesi, and the Pope maketh an agreement with them. The King of England giueth a great summe of money to the Pope. The Emperors preparations both by land and Sea. The Confederates prouisions to resist the Emperor. The great leuy of Lanfquenets made by George Frondsperg in the Emperors behalfe. The Marquis of Saluffes crosseth the Po with his forces. Foscare exhorteth the Florentines to continue firme in their league. The Spanish Nauall Army flieth  from the Confederates. The Pope seeketh an accord with the Viceroy. Frossolona is in vaine besieged by the Viceroy. The Confederates Army in the kingdome of Naples. Aquileia in Abruzzo taken. The Confederates take the

Burrow of Sea. The Confederates summon the Citty of Naples to yeeld. Great disorder in the Armie of the league for want of pay. The Duke of Bourbon commeth into the field to beseege Rome. Accord betwixt the Pope and the Viceroy. Cottignola is taken by Bourbon. Great troubles in Florence. Bourbon beeing come neere to Rome craues passage of the Pope to goe into Naples. The Duke of Bourbon assaileth Rome. His death. Rome is taken by the Imperialls. And lastly, the great cruelties which they there committed.




The Sixth Booke of the fifth Decade of the Historie of Uenice.
THe newes of the battailes losse, with the Kings taking, beeingThe sorrow of all France for the Kings captiuity and the Councels resolution. brought into France, the sorrow and griefe which afflicted the Lady Regent his mother, and all the subiects cannot bee imagined: yet neuerthelesse like a discreet and vertuous Lady, shee determined by all meanes possible to redresse it, and for that purpose hauing sent for all the Princes and Lords which were in France, to come speedily to Lyons, where shee then lay, to determine and prouide for matters concerning the Kings liberty, and the Realmes safety; It was there resolued to send to forraine Princes to vse meanes for the Kings deliuery, and among others to the Venetians, and Gaspar Sorman beeing to that end sent to Venice from the Lady Regent, hee declared vnto them in her name, that albeit the Realme of France did not feare the enuasions of any, but was strong and mighty enough to defend it selfe, and willing to employ all her power for her Kings deliuery; yet neuerthelesse shee entreated the Signory to assist her in so iust a cause, and so profitable for them and all Italy, by ioyning themselues with the Lords of France, to enforme the Emperor Charles to set the King her sonne at liberty, vpon honorable conditions.
The Senate, vpon these entreaties, did manifest their great griefe for the KingsThe Senates (...) to the French Commissioner. disastrous fortune, with that of the kingdome, declaring the great affection which it did beare to the crowne of France, and for that present made none other answer but this, That because the businesse was of great importance, it deserued to haue the Councell assembled to determine thereof. But during these practises,Accord betwixt the Pope and (...)* the Pope, who had sent the Archbishop of Capua into Spaine to make an agreement with the Emperor, did ra^ifie the accord, concluded and determined before with the Viceroy, by which the Venetians were excluded from it, if within

twenty dayes after the signifying thereof, they did not ratifie it, by meanes whereof the Senate was enforced to renew their treaties with the Emperours Ambassadors, and to send, (in regarde of the difficulties of importance which were offered) Petro Pesare to Milan, to treate with the Viceroy.
The French in the meane time did not giue ouer their former pursutes, beeing not yet out of hope to ioyne the Venetians to themselues, (albeit the Popes authoritie might then haue drawne them to a contrary resolution): wherevponFrench Agents sent to Venice to treat o^ an agreement. the Bishop of Bayeux, and Ambrose of Florence came to Venice, to make in the name of the said Lady Regent, and in that of the whole Kingdome, more certaine and resolute propositions then at the former time, concerning the league and the Kings freedome. For this cause, as also for that apparent  signes were dayly discouered of the Emperours great ambition, by reason of the deseignes of his Officers and Agents, which tended onely to make him absolute Lord of the State of Milan, and of all Italy; these French Ambassadors were attentiuely heard in the Senate, and their cause consulted on.
The Marquis of Pescara at the same time entring Milan with three thousand foote, two hundred men at armes, and with great numbers of light horse, required the Duke to deliuer into his hands the Castle of Milan, with that of Cremona, speaking plainely, That hee was come to take possession of  the Cittie of Milan, beeing sent thither by the Emperour for the same purpose, (in whose name all Proclamations and other Mandates were already published) and although the Pope sought to procure the Emperour to accomplish the Articles of the confederacie, by consigning the State of MilanThe Marquis of Pescara his audations demand to Duke (...) (...) into the hands of Duke Francis Sforza, all his pursutes were in vaine, for, delaying the matter from day to day, hee made now one excuse, and then an other, imputing to the Duke diuerse faults committed by him, and among others, That hee had treated with the Venetians, to deliuer the Castle of Milan vnto them; a matter which was neuer thought of by eyther of them.
These things with diuerse others, did greatly with-draw the Venetians Accord betwixt the Pope and the Venetians. affection from the Emperour, and caused them to giue no more credit to all his promises; nor the Pope likewise, who speedily to preuent those perills, which threatned them dayly, resolued to ioyne in league, in regarde there was some difficulty, and more trouble and ^ediousnesse to call the French into it.
The Pope then renouncing the accord formerly made with the Emperour, contracted a new one, aswell in his owne name as in the Florentines, forThe articles of the agreement. the which hee strengthened himselfe with the Duke and Senate of Venice, in which agreement it was mentioned, that they should ioyne together, to preuent those dangers which the experience of things past had taught them  might happen, and so assure the peace and quiet of Italy, and their owne states in perticular, each of them taking vppon them the protection of one anothers states and persons, running altogether one selfe-same fortune, not bee^ g^wfull for eyther of them to treate with any other Prince, to the pre^ of that accord; and to succour one an other with foure thousand foote-men, foure hundred men at armes, three hundred light horse, and with gre^er numbers if (...) were. And it was more-ouer added therevnto, that the Venetians should bee bound to defend and maintaine the greatnesse and power of the house of Medicis, to stoppe and preuent all tumult and commotions which any s^ditious mutins should practise against it, and  to (...) and assist him, who soe^ hee were, that the Pope should place a^ cheefe Gouern^ in the Citty of Florence. These things beeing thus

concluded and sworne to, the Pope the better to begin for his part to prepare that which was concluded on, commanded the Marquis of Mantua to visit the Parmesan with his men at armes, taking order besides to hasten the Grisons and Suisse footmen, where they had begun to leuy, but very slowly. The Venetians on the other side determined to encrease their Armie to the number of ten thousand foote, to make a leuy in Greece of other three hundred light horse, and generally to prouide for all matters belonging to their safety* And that which did greatly incite them therevnto, was, the curtezie which the King of England vsed towards the French, who beeing iealous of the Emperors power and greatnesse, fearing that if hee should grow too mighty, hee might afterwards chance to tread The king of Englands courtezie towards the French King. him vnder foote, conuerted his ill will towards the King into friendship; so as he treated with the Lady Regent, and the Councell of France, promising them all ayde and succour possible, as well of men as money to set the King at liberty, and to free Italy from all oppression.
This treaty beeing passed betwixt the Pope and the Venetians, gaue hope that they should bee vnited with the Realme of France, but they proceeded therein after an vnusuall manner, because that the Pope, supposing that by the confederacie which hee had already made, hee had time enough to preuent dangers, and to bee able in the meane time to obtaine more reasonable conditions of the Emperor, hee proceeded very slowly in his agreement with the French, and  cheefely since the Duke of Sessas comming to Rome, who was sent from the Emperor to his Holynesse* to signifie vnto him the great desire hee had to peace, and to restore Francis Sforza vnto the Dutchy of Milan, beeing found innocent of those crimes imposed vpon him, or if hee were guilty, to inuest his brother Maximillian in it. But the Venetians not relying on his promises, made earnest sute to agree with the French, meaning not to trust to his offers, which onely tended to breake the league, and to delay the prouisions of warre, they likewise fearingThe Venetians (...). least the French should enter into league with the Emperour, as they were desirous to doe for the recouery of their King, and all their practises should by that meanes prooue vaine.
That hapned which they had foreseene, in the beginning of the yeare 1526.An. 1526. when the newes yet vnhoped for arriued at Venice, of the attonement betwixt the Emperor and the most Christian King, by which the King was not onely set at liberty, but likewise a firme peace established betwixt them, by meanes of the Kings mariage with the Lady Eleonor the Emperors sister, and that of the EmperorAgreement betwixt the Emperor and the (...). with the sister to the King of Portugall: and that the Duke of Bourbon should haue the Dutchy of Milan, and should marry the Lady Rene, sister in law to the King.
This was that which they had euer most feared, but this doubt was for that time cleered, the Lady Regent hauing sent ample power and commission to Albert de Carpi her Ambassador at Rome, to conclude the league, the which did trouble the Pope and the Venetians: But it lasted not long, by reason of a common rumor that was spred abroad, that King Francis would neuer performe to the Emperor, that which hee had beene enforced to consent to, and that which made it credible, was, for that it was reported, that after his departure from Spaine, hee was much discontented with his entertainment in the time of his imprisonment, and especially because that to free himselfe from thence, hee had signed a very disaduantageous contract by the which he quitted the Dutchie of Bourgondy to the Emperor.
Now that they might truly know what his intent was, the Senate determined, (albeit they had decreed to send two of the cheefe of the Citty in Ambassage to him, to condole with him for his fortunes past, and also to reioice for his deliuery and manage) not to spend so much time as an Ambassage would require, but they so^nly sent into France Andre Ressi Secretary to the Preguays, where with more

speed and lesse suspition, might negociate a businesse of so great importance: and the Pope following their example, sent Paulo Vettori thither for the same purpose.
These men needed not greatly to labour to bee assured of his meaning. For after hee had louingly enterteined them, in the first discourse that hee held with either of them apart, hee did greatly complaine of the Emperors inhumanity towards him whilest hee was prisoner, not vsing him as beseemed so great a Prince as heeThe King complaineth of the Emperor. was: assuring them that hee was no lesse free then ready to moderate the Emperors insolency, wherevpon, the Kings conclusion was, that if the Pope and Venetians would send Commissioners, the league should bee presently made, the which they said was best to bee done in France, to the end the King of  England might the more easily bee drawne into it, whom they hoped would prooue a party:
Hee sayd likewise that hee would ratifie whatsoeuer had beene begunne, and for the most part concluded on by the Lady Regent his Mother, and the Councell of the Kingdome; they were then onely to bring ample authority from their Princes to contract, because that then hee would shew them how conformable his affection and good will was towards the common safety:
That hee did hope to finde in the King of England, the same intent and  like desire to abate the Emperours greatnesse, and to prouide for the defence of Italy:The King intendeth to take Armes against the Emperor.
That hee would out of hand send his Ambassadors to him, and that if the Italian Princes would doe the like, it would greatly helpe and further the cause;
That with the forces of so many Potentates ioyned together, they might more easily resist the deseignes of the Imperialls.
So soone as the Venetians vnderstood this answer, so conformable to their desire, they sent instructions and ample Commission to Rossi to conclude the league: the Articles whereof beeing before determined, were easily passed, some few things beeing altered.
Gasparo Spineli the Secretary was likewise commanded, (who at the same time,The Venetians make meanes to draw the King of England into the league. was Agent for the Signory, with the King of England) to vse meanes to induce that King to enter into that league, by declaring vnto him the great opinion which all men had conceiued of him, and the great account which was made of his authority, and that they onely craued him to bee Protector of that accord, and defender of the liberty of Italy.
But the Pope proceeded very slowly therein, so as they were enforced oftentimes to vrge him to it, wherevpon the Ambassador of the Common-wealthThe Venetian Ambassadors remonstrance to the Pope. resident at Rome, shewed him dayly the goodly occasion which presented it selfe, for the procuring of their common safety, in that the French King was desirous  to reuenge the wrongs which hee said hee had receiued of the Emperor: and that if the same desire should grow colde, and they two chance to agree together, by the Kings obseruing the treatye of Madrid, there was no more hope of defending Italy from the cruell and slauish yoake of the Spaniards.
The Pope beeing mooued by these remonstrances, resolued to send Caponi into France, in whom hee reposed great trust, with instructions and speciall power to conclude that league, albeit that at the same time Don Hugo de Moncado, comming to Rome from the Emperour, did treate to the contrary: and had in the same manner almost negociated by letters with the Senate  of Venice, to whom so soone as hee was come to Milan, hee gaue notice of his arriuall into Italy, and of the cause why the Emperour had sent him.
But the Pope and Venetians answered all his requests in one forme, That when soeuer the Emperour should seeme desirous of peace, hee should finde them disposed therevnto, but that hee was to shew it in deeds, to which they would giueThe Pope and Venetians answer^ Don Hugo, negociating for the Emperor. more credit then to words: that hee should doe well to raise his siege from before the Castle of Milan, to restore Francis Sforza to his state, and to accomplish whatsoeuer hee was tyed vnto by the Articles of the Confederacie, and that then it would bee a fit time to talke of laying downe armes, and of setling peace and quiet in Italy: but his answer heere-vnto was in generall tei mes: whereby they plainly perceiued, that this speech of peace tended to none other end but to delay with vaine hope the prouisions for warre, and by those cunnings to estrange the  French from the Princes of Italy.
They had almost obtained their desire, the French beeing not so greatly affectionate to the league as they were at the beginning, either because the King was not well assured of the Pope and Venetians mindes, by reason of their practises with Don Hugo de Moncado (albeit they were communicated to him) or, (as someThe children of France are giuen in ^stage for the King their Father. thought) that hee would but make vse of the name of the league, onely to make the agreement more easie, and to redeeme his children whom hee had giuen in hostage to the Emperor; and that insteed of Bourgondy, hee should take some other recompence: namely, for that the Bishop of Bayeux his Ambassador at Venice, sent thither for that purpose was a whole moneth without receiuing any  letters from the King, either for the conclusion of the league, or for the execution of that which had beene agreed vpon; wherevpon the Pope and the Venetians resolued to send againe into France, and with new offers to end the businesse of the league: to the which at last, the King, after that hee had intelligence that the Emperor would alter none of the Articles of the Capitulations made at Madrid, began more to incline, and vpon the tenth day or May 1526. it wasAn. 1526. The league concluded at Coignac. concluded at Coignac* betwixt those of the Councell, and the Kings Procurators on the one si^e and the Agents of the Pope and the Venetians on the other. The chiefe points of which, were, That betwixt the Pope, the French King, the Venetians, and the Duke of Milan, (for whom the Pope and the Venetians  promised the ratification) there should bee a perpetuall league and confederacy* to the end that Francis Sforza might freely enioy the D^tehy of Mi^an, and the children of France be set at liberty, by receiuing an honorable ransome, which the King of England should appoint, with other particular obligations concerning the preparations of the warre concluded with the Councell of the Realme before the Kings deliuery.
In this manner then was the league concluded, but it was not presently published, because they tarried for the King of Englands resolution, whom they desired should bee named one of the cheefe Contractants. Therefore the Confederate Princes resolued to send an expres^e message into England, to solicite  him forth with to declare himselfe against the Emperour in the behalfe of the league: Iohn Baptista Sangua, a man of singular wisedome went thither from theThe Confederates send Commissioners to the King of England. Pope, Iohn l^q i^ from the French King, and Marc Antonio Veniero for the Venetians. But the King of England albeit hee seemed to bee de^ous to listen to that agreement, as beeing distasted of the Emperor* resolued ne^ helesse not to make any publick demonstration thereof, vntill hee had first of all requestedThe King of Englands answer. the Emperour Charles to gratifie the Confederates so much, as to set the children of the most Christian King at liberty, and re^der the state of Milan to Francis Sforza, and for want of so dooing, to protest against him, and to denounce  warre, in the name of all the confederates.
Now because it would haue beene too long to haue proceeded after this manner, by reason of the difficulties which might haue beene made, such as it was, it was published with great ^olemnity, they thinking themselues strong enough to abate the Imperiall pride.
There was at the same time in the Venetians army, tenne thousand foot, nine hundred men at armes, and eight hundred light horse, and they daily expected great nombers of Suisses, paid partly by the Pope and the Venetians, and partly by the French King, at whose arriuall they resolued to march to the releefe of theThe nomber of the Army of the League. Castle of Milan and to trie if they could take the Citty. The Marquis of Salusses on the other side with the French men at armes, and tenne thousand foot, waged at the common charge of the league, was ^o enter the Dutchy of Milan, and to assaile N^ara and Alexandria, whilst in an other place order should be taken for anauall Army.
The Venetians commanded their Generall, and Petro Pesare their Prouidator  to goe and encampe speedily at Chiari, vpon the Bressan terrritory, which was the rendezuous of all their troopes: and those of the Pope, commanded by Francisco Guicciardin came vpon the Parmesan, to the end they might ioyne togetherLauda is taken ly the Confedeates. and then ma^h whether it should be thought fittest for the seruice of the league. In the meane time Malateste Baillone with a band of the Venetian troopes marched to Lauda, where he had intelligence with Lodouico Visturlin a gentleman of the same Citty; and albeit there lay within it fifteene hundred footmen in Garrison, he did neuerthelesse with ease seaze on it and became master therof, and kept it in the name of Francis Sforza.The two Armies being ioyded together m^ch to Milan.
After the taking heereof the whole Venetian army passed the Po, and within  two dayes after, ioyned it selfe with the Popes, and all of them together marched directly towards Milan, the Duke of V^bin beeing in great hope to take the Citty, because it had beene told him that vpon their arriuall the People would life, and take armes in their behalfe, and that the Imperialls Captaines ^ring it, had already sent their riches and bagage forth of the Citty, meaning forth-with to abandon it. And vpon this hope of the people rising, and of the enemies disorder, Lodouico, Earle of Belgie, requested the Duke of Vrbin to giue him two thousand footmen, with whom he offered to releeue the Castle of Milan.
Now the Confederates Army beeing come very neere to the Citty was lodged  at the Monastery of Paradis towards the Roman gate, intending to assaile that surburbe, supposing to take it and to lodge there. And albeit the enemies made many sallies and hotte skirmishes, they were still notwithstanding beaten back byThe Duke of Bourbon commeth to Milan those of the league. But the night before the day that the Army should set forward, the Duke of Bourbon who not long before was come to Genoa with six Gallies and bills of Exchange for an hundred thousand Ducats, entred Milan with eight hundred Spanish foote that he had brought with him: He was very much sollicited thereunto by the Marquis of Guasto, and Antonio de Leua. TheThe army of the league retireth from before Milan. Duke of Vrbin at these newes dispayring to take the Citty by assault, and fearing some greater disorder, if he should tarry any longer there, raised his campe, and retired in good order vnto Marignan, without any losse or empeachment at all.
The Senate, who had conceiued great hope by reason of the armies approach neere Milan, that the Castle would be releeued, which was reduced to extreame want, did greatly wonder, and was sorry, when it vnderstood by the Prouidators letters that they had raised their campe, so that the Duke of Vrbin sent Lodouico Gonsaga to Venice to insti^ his actions, who being brought into the Senate yeelded a particular account of what had passed, and of the occasions which mooued him to proceed in that manner, wherewith the Senate was well satisfied; but the Pope was nor so easily appeased, complaining very much not only of this retreat  but likewise of the whole course of the Duke of Vrbins actions, who didThe Pope is discontented. not vouchsafe in any ^ort to communicate the affaires of greatest importance to his Lie^enants, the which had greatly mooued him; so as

for to please him, the Senate commanded the Duke of Vrbin euer after to communicate with Guiccardin all matters of importance, which should be handled in the army.
On the other side, they prepared the nauall army, to assaile the sea-townes belonging to the Emperor, and to those ends the Venetians hauing appointed Lodouico Armiero for their Prouidator, sent him to Corfou, wher Iohn Mora the other Prouidator, was with the army, of which, Armiero had commandent to take 12. Gallies, and with them to saile towards Rome, to ioyne with those of the Pope and the most Christian King, that all of them together might direct there course according as they should iudge it to bee necessary and proffitable for the confederates. Diuers propositions were made concerning those places whither the nauall army was to goe. The Pope desired to haue it goe into Puglia to breake the deseigns of the Colonesie, and to diuert their forces from those places, who hauing at Saint Germans aboue seauen thousand foote, and great numbers of horse, had made them-selues fearefull to the Pope: but the French King and the Venetians thought the enterprize of Genoa to be much more proffitable for the Confederates, as well for the Commodiousnesse of the same citty and for diuers other enterprizes, as for the great good happe of that exploit, which falling out fortunately would much encrease the reputation of the League: Pedro ofPedro of (...) generall of the naual army Nauarre was declaired Generall of the Confederates Nauall army, a man  well experienced in Martiall affaires, who although hee was presented by the French King, was neuer-the-lesse entertayned by all the associates together.
But the Churches Gallies, and those of the Venetians being ready, they were a long time tarrying for those of the French King and the Generall, a matter which did greatly weary the Pope and Senate, and gaue them iust cause of discontent, and to suspect that the French King had changed his mind, by thinking on his owne particular interest, and not caring for that of the league: addingThe endfedrats suspect the King. to this suspition other presumptions: That small store of mony had beene sent to the Swisses, in comparrison of the fourty thousand Ducats which hee was  tyed to giue for the payment of tenne thousand foot of that nation, and that hee had not begun to warre on the Emperor in the parts beyond the mounts according to the conclusion.
The King alledged for his excuses, that before hee was to renew that warre, it behoued him to denounce it to the Emperor, although there was no such mention made in the articles of the confederacy: And as concerning the delay ofThe French Kings excuses. his army, and payment of the Swisses, hee layd all the fault vpon the Captaines and Officers, as the Lord of Langi gaue them to vnderstand at large. For, the most Christian King, fearing least the Confederates beeing distasted of him, should disioyntly agree with the Emperor, he dispatched the said Lord of Langi  into Italy, for to excuse the long stay of his army, with commission to goe first into Swisserland, to solicite their leuy and departure, or at least-wise to giue them to vnderstand that hee did procure and desire it.
The Lord of Langi beeing come to Venice, made the aboue mentioned excuses, assuring the Senators that the King was much disposed to warres, and that besides the Gallies hee prepared great shippes of warre in Brettaine, to saill withThe Lord of Langi commeth to Venice and Rome from the King. a mighty army, to ouer-throw at sea all the enemies attempts and deseignes. From thence hee went to Rome where hee executed the same commission: and as for the Swisses, hee said that they had promised to hold a general assembly, where all things should be resolued on in the Kings behalfe; and aboue all things  he assured the Pope and the Venetians that the King would not enter into any accord, vnlesse mention were made of a generall peace, and by the consent of all the other confederates. The king made like promise to Iohn Baptista Sa^ga the Roman*

whom the Pope had sent, (as hath been said) to the King of England: who by the way remained certaine dayes for the same purpose in the French court-
The Senate making shew that his arriuall was most pleasing to them, and that they did wholy giue credit to his saying, answered, that it had neuer doubted ofThe Senats answere to the Lord of Langi. the Kings good will and affection towards the league, and perticularly towards their common-wealth, and therefore it promised, that not only in that businesse, which concerned the common good, but likewise in all other, and at all times, their loue and forces should be inseperably ioyned to his: but as concerning peace, they had neuer refused it; that on the contrary, they had neuer taken armes but with an intent to procure a firme and assured peace: and therefore if they  might haue it, to the honor of the league and safety of the confederates, it should alway be most acceptable to them: yet neuerthelesse knowing that they might at that time rather desire such a peace then hope for it, they would incite theThe offer of the Pope and Venetians to the King. King to a greater willingnesse to warre: wherevpon the Pope and the Venetians gaue him to vnderstand, that if they should conquer the Kingdome of Naples, it should be for one of his children: the Common wealth retaining only such a portion as should be thought sufficient for the recompence of their costes, labour and trauell.
Vpon this hope, the King promised three hundred lances more, with a surplusage of twenty thousand Ducats euery moneth, for the seruice of the league, whensoeuer they should make any enterprise vpon the Kingdome of Naples. During these treaties Armiero the Prouidator being departed from Corfou with thirteene Galleis came to Terracina, where finding Andrew Doria with eleuen of the Popes Gallies they went altogether to Ciuitauechia, then from thence to Liuorne, where they met with Pedro of Nauarre with foure Gallions and sixteene light Gallies of the French King.
It being then there determined to beseege Genoa and to reduce it to the Kings deuotion, for the great profit and commodity of the confederates, the Army went first to Protouenere, which soone yeelded, with Spetia, and all the other towns vpon the riuer euen to Monega Then the army being deuided, Doria and the Venetian  Prouidator went to Portofin, twenty miles from Genoa, and Nauarre with the French Army sailed towards Sauona, which forthwith yeeleed to him: The first and cheefe deseigne of the Captaines of the league was, to stoppe victualls from entring by Sea into Genoa, whereof they knew it was badly prouided, andThe Confederates nauall army not farr^ from Genoa. that by keeping it short, they hoped quickly to reduce it vnder their obedience: and for that purpose they placed six Gallies in Gard, two of euery prince, which tooke certaine shippes with other smaller vessells loden with victualls that were going to the Citty: so that it soone felt great want and discommodity. But the beseeged were secretly releeued by those of the riuer, who furnished them with part of the victualls, which vpon sondry pretences were suffered to bee  carried to the neighbor townes, albeit it was not done without some complaint against Doria, who either for some secret enuy that he bare to Nauarre, for thatDoria is suspected to releeue Genoa vnder his authority and command his contrey should be vanquished and taken, or for any other deseigne of his owne, was suspected not to haue carried himselfe faithfully as he ought to haue done, nor after such a manner as was requisite for the speedy ending of that businesse.
The Genouois for the assurance of their Citty, had with great speed placed atThe fortifications of Genoa. the mo^th of the hauen certaine great ships loden with Artillery, besides which were six light Gallies, commanded by Gobba Iustinian, who comming foorth at times to skirmish with the enemie, would not goe farther then within Cannonsho^te  of the shippes, placed at the mouth of the Hauen, and of those of the Castle of the Lanthorne, whereby all the hope to take the Citty consisted in the seege, which still continued, the Captaines of the Pope and the

Venetians, hauing intrenched themselues, to be freed from the enemies incursions and surprises, if they should happen to come forth, as also by reason of a tempest at sea, which would not suffer them to draw the army forth of Portefin where it remained.
But the Genowais perceiuing them-selues dayly to be more shut in, determined to make a sally, and to assaill and beate downe the enemies fortifications: the Captaines of the army hauing notice of the enemies deseigne, landed Phillippin Doria and Iohn Baptista Grimani, with eight hundred foot-men, and two peecesThe Genowais are brauely repulsed in their sally. of ordnance, and turned the poopes of the Gallies towards the land, so as the soldiers of the Citty comming to execute their attempts, were not onely courageously  receiued, but brauely repulsed with great losse.
The Duke of Vrbin at the same time being solicited by the Venetians, and being prickt forward by a desire to recouer that reputation, which he had lost in their retreat from before Milan, so soone as one part of the Swisses were come to the army, to the number of fiue thousand determined to returne towards Milan, to the releefe of the Castle, in which Sforza still remained: and being come within a mile of the Citty with the army, hee sent two thousand foote-men to take Monce, and the mount of Brianca, two places very commodious for victualls which mought be brought forth of those quarters to the Campe. The residew of the army being logded there, and the Captaines being assembled in councell  to aduise by what meanes to releeue the Castle; which without was enuironed with double trenches, and great bastions, couered with great numbersFrancis S^orza yeeldeth the Castle of Milan to the Imperi^lls. of the enemies ordnance, they were aduertized that Sforza, wholy dispayring of releefe, had yeelded himselfe, and had quitted the Castle to the Imperialls, on this composition: That without preiudice to his titles he should giue the Castle of Milan to the Duke of Bourbon, who receiued it in the Emperors name, suffering him to come forth in safety, with all those that were with him. That it should be lawfull for him to remaine at Coma, which should bee giuen to him for his abode, with the gouernment and reuenue of the same Citty, till such time as the Emperors determination might be knowne concerning his affaires. That a  safe-conduct should bee giuen him to goe in person to the Emperor: with diuers other articles contained in the agrement, hee came forth of the Castle, and being accompanied by the Imperiall Captaines, hee went to the Barriers of the Army, where hauing continued one whole day, he tooke his iourney towards Coma; but the Imperialls saying, that they had promised to giue him aboade, and safe lodging in Coma, and not to cause their soldiers that lay there in Garrison to dislodge, hee would no more trust to them: And albeit hee had before determined not to doe any thing that might incense the Emperor, hee neuer-the-lesse went to the Campe of the League, being accompanied by the Count of Gajazzo with two hundred light-horse, where hauing remayned  certaine daies, hee went to Lauda, the which Citty the confederates did wholy restore to him: And because of all the Captulations made with the Imperialls, nothing else had beene performed to him but that hee and his people should come forth with their goods saued: Hee did by a publike instrument,Francis Sforza ratifieth the league. whilest hee stayed in the Campe, ratifie the league made in his name by the Pope and the Venetians.
The losse of the Castle of Milan, albeit that it was irke-some to them and of great importance for their enterprize, did not for all that drowne their hope of taking the Citty, the which they knew to bee badly prouided of all things, and that there was not within it suffitient number of men for  the defence thereof, in regard of the bignesse of it, and the great number of assaillants, diuers other Swisses beeing come to the Campe, besides foure thousand which were dayly expected, paide by the King, whereby they hoped

that it would shortly be reduced vnder the power of the Confederates either by force or by a seege.
Whilest they expected these supplies the Duke of Vrbin had resolued to send part of his forces to Cremona, to attempt the taking of the Citty, which was an enterprize very pleasing to the confederats, and cheefely to the Pope. But they were to delay the execution of that deseigne, for feare lest the Imperialls making a salley, as it was reported they would doe, should come and assaile the Campe. Neuer-the-lesse at the last Malatesta Baillone went thither, but with lesse forces then was at the first determined, by reason of the afore said feare, who being come before Cremona, found the Citty to bee fortified with a Malatesta Baillone before* Cremona for the league. double trench, and well furnished with defendants, hee neuer-the-lesse assailed it diuers times, but in vaine: whereof the Duke of Vrbin being aduertized knowing that it was an hard matter to take it with so few forces, and on the other side how greatly it would diminish the reputation of the league, if they should giue ouer that enterprize, it was resolued to send thither the Prouidator Pesare, Camillo Vrsino, and Antonio Castello, with store of foote-men, and within a while after,The Duke of Vrbin bringeth supplis to the seege of Cremona. new supplies of a thousand Italian foote men were sent thither with a thousand Swisses. But for all that the businesse going neuer the more forward, the Duke of Vrbin resolued to goe thither in person, albeit it was greatly to the preiudice of  the enterprize of Milan, who drawing forth of the army which lay before Milan, in a manner all the Venetian foote-men, hee left part of the men at armes there with all the Churches Companies, and the Swisses who were arriued to the number of thirteene thousand, and went before Cremona, making his account to haue it, not by the onely force of batteries and assaults, because that the enemies rampiers were two strong, but by seeking with great numbers of Pioners to approach neere to their trenches and bastions, and to become Maisters thereof, rather by the force of the pike-ax then by armes: but all this being not sufficient to take it, he proceeded to the battery and assaults, andThe Capitulation of the Citty of Cremona. at the last, those within it being reduced to such extreames, as a trompet being sent to summon the Citty to yeeld, there came forth two Captaines, the one  a Lancequenet, and the other a Spaniard, with Guido Vaina who capitulated: That if they were not releeued by the moneths end, they would come forth of Cremona the which they did, the time prefixed beeing expired: Whereof the Duke of Vrbin did forth-with aduertize the Senate, and the Citty was deliuered to Francis Sforza.
These newes were very pleasing to the Senate, who vnderstanding that Sforza made account to reside there, sent thither the Secretary Lodouico Sabadino, toThe Colonesie enter Rome violent^y. remaine there with him in the name of the Signory.
But in the meane time their hapned a great disorder at Rome to the cofederates great preiudice, who after the conquest of Cremona hoped to preuaile  in the enterprise of Genoa, and to bee able (according to the proiects formerlie made) to encampe in two seuerall places before Milan. For the Colonnesi hauing assembled sixe hundred horse, and fiue thousand foot, marched with greate speed towards the Citty of Rome, where no man thinking of their comming, they entred by night, and seazed vpon three gates; then running vp and downe the Citty, they sackt diuers Prelats houses, the Pallace and Church of Saint Peter, without any respect to the Maiesty of Relligion, esteeming sacred matters lesse then Turkes would haue done, so as the Pope could hardly retire, with some Cardinalls and others whome hee most trusted into the Castle Saint Angelo, the Colonnesi hauing determined to take him prisoner;  who without any long stay did sodainely leaue the Citty; the Cardinall Colonna hauing first of all attempted in vaine to cause the people to rise in his behalfe* They carried away with them in gould, and siluer, and other commodities more then three hundred thousand crownes.
The tumult being appeased which lasted not much aboue three howers: D. Hugo

after that he had taken assurance of the Pope went to the Castle to talk with him, where vsing termes beseeming a Conqueror, hee enforced him to grant a truce betwixt them, as well in his name as in that of the confederates and the Emperors for foure monethes, by meanes whereof the Pope promised speedily to cause hisThe Popes agreement with the Colonesi. Army to repasse the Po, to call home his Galleis into the Churches territories, and to pardon the Colonessi, and all others that had any hand in that assault and tumult. That the Imperials and Colonesi with their Companies should depart from Rome, and foorth of the Churches state; and should retire themselues into the Kingdome of Naples.
This truce was for the time present willingly embraced by both sides: by the  Pope because the Castle was not well victualled: by D. Hugo (the Colonesi neuerthelesse making instance to the contrary) because it seemed vnto him that he had done much for the Emperor, and because that all those, in a manner, with whom he had entred Rome being laden with spoile were slipt away into diuers places. The truce did interrupt all the deseignes of Lombardy, and the whole fruite of the victory of Cremona. But the Pope thinking afterwards more considerately, and with a setled iudgement, vpon the agreement which he had made, and foreseeing into how many dangers he had throwne himselfe in time to come, the better to free himselfe from those perrils wherevnto he was subiect if he should obserue the Articles of the truce, wrote to his Nuncios to enquire of the  most Christian King and the Venetian Senate, whether he were bound to performe that which he had beene enforced to promise to D. Hugo, or wholly to reiect it, and within a while after he sent the Lord of Liege into France for the same purpose; who at the same time was come to Rome.
The Pope knew very well that to obserue the truce, was nothing else but toThe Popes doubt concerning the agreement. giue the Emperor meanes and time to beginne afterwards a greater and fiercer warre, and to ouercome by that delay those difficulties wherewith he was pressed, assuring to himselfe in the end his states in Italy, to the great danger and hazard of the liberties of all the rest. But his immeasurable feare diuerted him from al  good councell, and hindred him from well discerning that truth* wherevppon the Generall of the Friers being come to Rome, by the Emperors commandement to treat of peace, he heard him attentiuely, and exhorted the Venetians to incline to an accord, saying, That since they were of necessity one day to lay downe armes and beeing then inuited to doe so, they ought not to contemne the occasion that was presented.
The Senate vpon this proposition assuted him that it had neuer desired warre,The Venetians answer to the Pope inuiting them to an agreement with the Emperor. but had on the contrary by warre procured an assured peace, so that it might be treated and concluded by the most Christian King, because that doing otherwise they should for euer alienate him from the affaires of Italy, and should lose  a most assured refuge in their necessities and occurrences: therefore they vsed meanes to induce the Pope to temporize, and to expect an answer from France, that nothing did presse him to precipitate his affaires, and to grant the Emperors demand on such vniust conditions, as to giue him a great somme of money, and besides, to consigne into his hands for the assurance of the treaty, Parma, Placentia, and Ciuita-uechia, places most important of the Churches State: That he was to consider that the Emperors forces were not so great as they were reported, and that the greatest ayde that he had forth of Germany came from George Fr^ndsperg, who at his owne charges had brought him an army, the which beeing not able to hold out long, would of necessity be shortly broken.
That the Garrison of Milan, beeing not paid, refused to obey hir commanders and would be gone. On the contrary how that they expected Rance de Cera from France with a great somme of money, and that there was great hope that the King himselfe, who was come as farre as Lyons, would in person come into Italy:

That the enterprize of Genoa was set forward with good successe: in a word, that all things promised an happy issue.
The Pope being vrged by these remonstrances, and most of all (perhaps) by the wrongs which he had newly receiued, resolued to hold in suspence the practizes of that new truce, and to treat onely of an vniuersall peace, by the aduise and consent of the most Christian King. The arriuall of the Lord Russell did much auaile the resolution, who beeing sent by the King of England to offer thirty thousandThe King of England offereth the Pope a great summ^ of money. crownes to the Pope for the expence of the war, came at the same time to Rome, who did greatly solicite and exhort him to continue stead-fast in the league, or  else to labour to conclude an vniuersall peace betwixt the Princes of Christendome, the which being approued by the Venetian Senate, they wrote to Nouagiero their Ambassadour with the Emperour, that he should enterpose that treaty of peace, it being decreed that the agreement should bee treated and concluded in France, and should afterwards, for the Emperors honour and dignity, be ratified and confirmed by him in Spaine.
The chiefe pointes of the treaty were, That the children of the most ChristianThe chiefe articles of the treaty. King should be set at liberty: that Lombardy should be left peaceable, and Francis Sforza restored to his State, and that the Emperour should pay the King of England that which he pretended to bee due vnto him: but difficulties dayly arising  vpon these articles, each of them prepared on a sodaine for warre. The Pope sent his troupes, which he had recalled from the campe of the league, before the townes which the Colonesi had vsurped vpon the Churches State.
The Emperour on the other side hastened the prouisions of the sea-army,The Emperors preparations by sea and land. which was reported to be of forty ships, and sixe thousand foot that were paied, who met at the port of Cartagena to goe to the reliefe of the city of Genoa: he solicited his brother the Archduke to leauy the greatest forces hee could in his owne country, and to send them into Italy: and had besides giuen charge to the Prince of Orange to goe thorow the Duke of Sauoys country with greater numbers of Lansequenets into the Dutchy of Milan.
The confederates resoluing to stop the passage of these new supplies, made great prouisions both by sea and land. Diuers vessels were arriued for the most Christian King in Brettaine and at Marseilles, with diuers others else-where which had beene taken neere to Genoa; to resist the passage of the Spanish army they laboured to induce the Duke of Sauoy not to suffer the Imperials to passe thorowGeorge Frondsperg leauieth great numbers of Lansequenets in the Emperors behalfe. his territories: But that which they most feared was the Almaines who were reported to be leauied by George Frondsperg, an old captaine, and much affected to the house of Austria, who assembled great numbers of souldiers, inciting them to enrole themselues in hope of booty; so that hauing receiued the garrison which was at Cremona, he had in all with him more then ten thousand foot.The confederates pro^ide to resist the Emperor.
The confederates, to stop these Lansequenets passage did first of all gaine the captaine of the castle of Mus by fiue thousand Ducats which were giuen him, the one halfe by the Pope and the other by the Venetians, as well to set at liberty the Ambassadors of the Signory, whom hee had surprized in their iourney towards France, as also to draw him to their party, wherevpon beside, they gaue him the command of foure hundred foot well paied, with a good pension for the guard of the Lake of Coma. The Venetians did likewise send for the same purpose Nicolao Sangotino their Secretary to the Marquis of Mantua to entreat him if the Almaines should passe the mounts, that he would not suffer them to passe thorow his State. But being aduertized that these Almaines had made prouision of artillery and munition at Trent, thinking that they would passe thorow the Veronois, they made a leauy of other foure thousand foot, and commanded certaine companies of men at armes and light horse to come from the campe. Then they appointed Augustine de Mulla for Prouidator Generall beyond the Riuer Mence, prouiding all matters to repulse them.
Now these Almaines tooke their way by the vale of Sabia very neere to Pioltella.(...) (...) c^me into Italy. By these meanes the Venetian captaines that were on the Veronois, did speedily send Camillo Vrsin to Sales, with the light-horse and certaine companies of the ablest footmen, the rest that stayed behinde were commanded to follow them by crossing the Lake, which they being not able to doe, soone enough, by reason of a tempest that arose, was the cause that Vrsin came to late to meet with the enemies, who were already passed onwards on their way; yet neuerthelesse h^uing seized on the Pace of Corona, which is a very narrow place and strong by sytuation, he enforced the Almaines, who were already on their iourney, going thither to take an other way thorow the tops of the mountaines, which  was very difficult and dangerous, by which, at the last they came to La Garda, and from thence to Chastillon: then within a while after they entred the Marquis of Mantua his State, leauing the way of Milan, contrary to the opinion of the confederates taking that of Placentia or Pauia.
They resolued to follow them and still to hold them in allarmes, the Marquis of Saluces, on the one side with great numbers of Swisses and Grisons, and the Duke of Vrbin on the other marching towards Soncina, skirmishing continually with the enemies rereward, to the great commendation of the captaines, and especiallyIohn de Medicis a great captaine. of Iohn de Medicis, who notwithstanding that all the Popes captains were departed, did neuerthelesse continue in the Kings pay, and retained a company of  men at armes in his name, who by his great courage and valor, was a merueilous terror to the enemies, and a great comfort to the confederates.
George Frondsperg hauing passed the Po without any let, and being irresoluteThe Popes feare. what way to take, did hold the confederates in doubt, and especially the Pope, who fearing least the enemies might turne towards Bolognia and from thence into Tuscany, did earnestly entreate the Venetians to command their army to passe speedily ouer the Po, for to assure the Churches territories and those of the Florentines: but their owne State being not free from the same scare; The Senate, in some sort to satisfie him, and yet not meaning to much to disfurnish  themselues, commanded Lodouico Pisani, who was in the Marquis of Salusses army, to gather together certaine foote-forces, to send them speedily for the guard of the Churches State: and Guicciardin making the same request, Baboni di Nal^i was sent thither with a thousand foote: they did beside send word to their Generall, that when he should perceiue the daungers of the confederates to encrease, and those of the Venetians to lessen, not to make any difficulty to releeue them, either with the whole body of the army, or with part thereof, as himselfe should iudge to be most necessary.
At the last it was concluded, for the present that the Marquis of Salusses aloneThe Marquis of Salusses wi^h ^is forces pass^th the Po. should passe the Po with his owne troupes and three hundred light-horse of the  Venetians, with certaine peeces of ordnance, taken from forth their campe to amuze the enemies: But the Almaines hauing crossed the Riuer Nura, and that of Trebbia afterwards, without any let of their confederates were come and encamped at Fiorenzolles, hoping quickly to ioyne with the forces of Milan: and the Imperiall captaines not being able to cause the other Almaines to march, because they wanted their pay, they presently dislodged, only with the Italian infantery, and certaine companies of light*horse.
The Senate in the meane time, being wholly desirous to satisfie the Pope, commanded the Prouidator to draw a galla^t troupe of the best soldiers forth of the army, and to send them ouer the Po, to ioyne with the Marquis of Salusses: whereupon the Prouidator Vitturi, did sodainely depart with fiue thousand foot and certaine  companies of light-horse; the Duke of Vrbin being at the same time (to the Venetians great griefe) gon to Mantua about certain particular affaires of his owne.
This marching of the enemies towards Florence, caused the co^federats to feare, least the Florentines, being troubled with the danger that threatned them, should

come to an agreement with the Imperials, to the great hinderance and preiudiceFoscare his exhortation to the Florentin^s. of the league: Vpon this doubt the Venetians did speedly send Marco Foscare their Ambassadour to Florence, to exhort them in the name of the Republike not to separate themselues (by reason of that accident) from them, setting before them the great want of all necessaries that was in the Almaines campe, the weaknesse and distresse of the Imperials: and on the contrary the great forces of the confederates, and their desire to employ them all for them, and with them to run one selfe same fortune: and then, the hope of the happy successe of that warre, by reason of the aide which they dayly expected from France, and finally the great  preparations which were made to assaile the Imperials in sundry places: Hee willed them to call to minde their ancient generosity, and in particular, sundry fortunate euents happened vnto them, being vnited with the Signory of Venice, how that the like might now befall them, hauing the selfe same constancy and magnanimity that they then had* that it was a thing most certain, that as their loue and affection towards the league did much encrease the reputation thereof, and did assure the confederates, euen so in like manner their disunion would greatly hinder and preiudice it. For, to yeeld for feare of an imaginary danger, was nothing else but to precipitate themselues into most certaine and pernitious mischiefes, and by ruining themselues to draw forthwith by their downe-fall othermen into the same precipice, or at least wise by their declyning to shake and put  in hazard the liberty of all Italy: wherevpon, for the great affection that the common-wealth did beare vnto them, and in regard of their common interest, the Senate would not faile in any point of their duty.
The Florentines declared how pleasing his comming and remonstrance hadThe Florentines answere and resolution. beene vnto them, and sent Alessandro de Pacis their Ambassadour to Venice to giue thankes to the Senate, promising to continue steadfast to the league, and in particular to haue sound intelligence and corespondence with the Republike, perswading them to leauy sixe thousand foot more at their common charge, that they might with them resist the Duke of Bourbon with more assurance, who was reported to haue drawn forces from Milan, and with them to march into Tuscany.
In the meane time the confederates nauall army did still continue neere to Genoa, which being reduced to all extremity, diuers meanes were propounded toNauar his couragious proposition. hinder the Spanish nauall army to the number of forty ships prepared at Carthagena, from comming to the reliefe thereof; and among others Nauarre was of opinion, to saile vnto the frontiers of Spaine, and to assaile the Emperours army which lay in an open hauen, and to burne it. This opinion was allowed by the Venetian Prouidator, but Doria (al-be-it he likewise approued it) did neuerthelesse consider that the quallity of that country was very contrary to that proposition, and the dangers of the sea much greater, where they should not finde any place of retreate to shield themselues from tempests and stormes: and setting downe  sundry other difficulties, he made all the hearers to be irresolute, and himselfe constant not to goe to Carthagena: wherevpon they determined to saile into Corsica or Sardinia, and nere to those Islands to waite for the Imperiall fleet, intending if it came to put forth to sea and to fight with it; for the which purpose they concluded to send for some great ships from Marseilles, and to arme the Genoa ships which had beene taken at the beginning.
Whilest they dwelt on these resolute preparations, they discouered the Imperiall fleet fifteene miles off from land, consisting of sixe and thirty vessels of all sorts, sayling with a faire winde directly towards Genoa, which was de^arted from Spaine sooner then was expected, wherein were Don Charles of Lanoy  viceroy of Naples, the captaine Alarcon, and Don Ferrant of Gonzaga. So soone as the Venetian Prouidator that lay at Porto-uennere to cause the vessels to bee armed, had notice of the enemies comming, he put to sea with sixteene gallies that he had ready, and gaue chase to the enemies vessels, but being o^ertaken

with a contrary winde he was enforced to returne from whence he came, and the Spanish army in the meane time pursuing their iourney, drew still neerer to land, determining to enter into the hauen of Genoa, but at such time as it passed by Saint Florenzos Mount, it was descried by Nauarre, who lay at the foot of the hill with seuenteene gallies, who comming with them forthwith to sea, did with great courage giue in athwart the Imperiall army, and falling foule one of an other, they fought from morning till two houres within night, where the Imperials wereThe Imperiall fleet in beaten by the confeder^tes. so roughly handled by those of the league, and their whole fleete so torne by the artillery, as had not a tempest arose, which separated them, it was certainely thought, that it would haue beene wholy defeated.
The confederates fleet retired to Portofin, staying the same night for the other gallies that lay at Portouennere: and whether they did come or not their resolution was by day breake to seeke the enemie. But so soone as it was day, albeit that they followed them as farre as Liuorne, yet they could not ouertake them, by reason that they were already to farre. The viceroy went on his way, but so beaten by the tempest, that his vessels were scattered, part of which wherein Don Ferrant of Ganzaga was, were carried into Sicily, and afterwards came to Gayetta, where they landed the Lansequenets: and as for himselfe he arriued with the rest in the hauen of Saint Stephen, which belongeth to the Sienois: ifThe Imperiall fleet scattered by tempest. Armiero the Prouidator who lay at Portouennere could haue come to the aide of  his fellowes, as he sought diuers times to doe, all the Spanish army had beene defeated, but hee could not come by reason of the tempest: yet neuerthelesse he was called home to Venice, by the councell of Tenne, to come and yeeld an account of his actions, and in particular for suffering victuals to enter into Genoa, and for that he did not goe with the army to Carthagena, and they sodainely sent Augustine de Mulla in his stead, who was Prouidator in Friul.
But Armiero hauing cleered himself of al those imputations was wholy quitted, and then they knew that the fault, why Genoa was not taken, did proceed from the not sending of suffitient troupes from the campe in Lombardy, which should neerely haue shut the City in by land: which the captaines of the gallies had oftentimes  craued.
Now the Pope, more then any else, was most troubled with the viceroys commingThe Pope m^ke ^th meanes to the viceroy for an agreement. into Italy, fearing least the aide which he had brought with him would ioyn it selfe with George Frondsperg: and therefore he sent the Archbishop of Capua vnto him to treat of agreement, and to propound in the meane time a suspention of armes: but the viceroy being desirous to treat on very hard conditions, the whole matter was broken off without any conclusion, the Pope hauing taken courage, for that his army was encreased in reputation and strength by the arriual of Rance de Cera, who beeing sent by the French King into Italy was come to SauonaThe French King se^eth Rance de Cera into Italy. with the nauall army, and from thence went to ioyne with the Church-army  which lay not farre from Rome for the subuersion of Colonnesi.
The viceroy on the other side sought to enter into the Churches territories, to defend those of the Colonnesi, and to enforce the Pope to disioyne himselfe from the league, and to giue him a certaine summe of money for the payment of his army: wherevpon he set foreward and came with twelue thousand men before Frossolona, where he encamped, which is a towne very weake, and seated in the Champaine count^y, the houses of particular persons seruing in stead of walles, within which neuerthelesse the captaines of the Church had left a strong Garrison to keepe him from any sure footing in that country. At his first commingFrossolana is beseeged by the Vicer^y. he beganne to batter the towne, not giuing any assault to it afterwards. But the  arriuall of Rance de Cera and Alessandr^ Vitelli with the Churches forces, which were much encreased by the Popes dilligence, who had augmented his campe, with great numbers of foot-men paied and commanded for the reliefe of that place, was the cause that after certaine skirmishes on either side, the viceroy

raised his campe two houres before day, and set fire to certaine munitions which were left, leauing there behind him some bullets for great ordnance, and retired to Cesenna, and from thence to Cepparane.
This fortunate successe encouraged the Pope, and at the entreaty of the confederates Ambassadors, whom he could not otherwise satisfie, he resolued to execute the enterprize of the Kingdome of Naples, notwithstanding that it was in the middest of winter, being the month of Ianuary in the yeere 1527. The Venetians for this purpose commanded Augustine de Mulla their Prouidator in the nauall army to bring it to Ciuitauecchia, and ioyning there with the Popes gallies, to  saile together towards Naples. But the French army tarrying to long, that of the Venetians sailed towards Terracina to take in three thousand foot, conducted by Horatio Baillon, who was freed by the Pope from his imprisonment wherein Pope Leo had confined him.
At the same time the Earle of Vaudemont came from France to make one inThe Count Vaudemont commeth to the army. the enterprize of Naples, which they resolued to enuade by sea and land, who determining to imbarke himselfe in the Venetian gallies, they re-enforced their army with two thousand foot.
Rance de Cera in an other place, against the Popes will, entred into AbruzzoAquila taken b^ Rance de Cera. with sixe thousand men, where by the meanes of the Earle of Montorias children, he did hope with ease to take Aquila, the which he forthwith did, by reason that Ascanio Colonna fled from thence so soone as he had intelligence of their arriuall. Doria likewise sailed before with his gallies and went and assailed Pozzola, a place very important for the confederates, in regard of the commodiousnesse of the hauen of Baja: but being at his first arriuall repulsed by the artillery, he dislodgedThe consederates take the Burr^w of t sea. from thence without assailing it; afterwards other gallies of the league arriuing, they resolued to assaile the sea Burrow of Stabia, where Diomede Caraffa lay with fiue hundred footmen, the which was taken by assault on the third day towards the side of the hill, and the day after the castle yeelded.The confederates take diuers places on the sea coast.
The tenth day the souldiers tooke the Greeke tower and Surrenta by force, and diuers other places on the coast, did within a while after yeeld on composition. They had before then taken certaine ships laden with corne which were going to Naples where victuals were very scarce.
Now the army of the league finding no resistance at sea it came so neere to the Peere of Naples, as the castle and the gallies plaied vpon it with their shot. It wasThe consederates consult about the s^ege of Naples. then consulted on, whether it were necessary to beseege the city, some saying, that by the taking thereof, the warre would be ended, they hauing taken from the enemies all meanes to come by money for the entertainement of their army: as also, because their greatest hope of being able to keepe that State, consisted in the conseruation of that city, the which being lost they would forth-with leaue the Kingdome, and retire to some other place. Diuers reasons might incite them  to that seege. First of all, the small numbers of souldiers which were in the city, and yet that small number not well disposed to put themselues forward to dangers for the maintenance of the insolent Dominion of the Spaniards. Secondly the Nobility stood badly affected to the Spaniards, who for feare of loosing their goods durst not shew their discontent: and last of all the Viceroys absence, who was farre from thence, and the small expectation which the Spaniards had of any speedy releefe from their fellowes.
Others who weare of a contrary opinion, thought it best to ^arry for Rance de Cera, the better to shut in that city with greater forces, on which they knew the whole end and successe of the warre depended, to the end to proceed therein  more considerately and with greater hope; the delaying of a small time could not but prooue very commodious to them, because they certainely knew that there was want of bread in the city, and if succors did enter into it, the scarcity would thereby be the more augmented, and would be cause of the peoples disordered

rising, which would open a more easie passage to their victory: and that therefore it behoued them in wayting for such an occasion to saile towards Salerno, to seize on that city and others neere adioyning, whereby Naples it selfe would at last be brought vnder their obedience.
But these reasons being not much approued nor thought worthy to be equaledAn Herald is sent to summon Naples. with the profit which was to bee hoped for by the then taking of that City, they resolued to send an Herald to summon those within it to yeeld the city to the consederates with the promises and threatnings determined in the councell.
Don Hugo of Moncada, who commanded there, and held the people in awe, determining to defend himselfe, so soone as he had notice that the army of theHugo de Moncada sallieth forth vpon the conf^derates. league was within foure miles of the City tooke two thousand fiue hundred foote, as well of the Garrison as of the people, and three hundred horse, and with them marched forth of the City, to shew that he wanted no courage to frustrate the enemies deseignes.
Those of the league ^ad already landed diuers souldiers vnder the command of the Earle of Va^demont and Horatio Baillone, who marching towards the City to make discouery, met with Don Hugo his troupes, and skirmishing together, they did put them to flight in such disorder as they left certaine field-peeces behind them, which Moncada, hauing made a stand with his Spaniards, recouered, and by reason thereof hauing delaied his retreat, he was so amazed as he had not the leisure at his entry to plucke vp the draw-bridge and to shut the gate: the which standing open was on a sodaine seized by Baillone who followed him at the heeles hauing no great numbers of souldiers with him, and considering that if hee should enter he could not keepe them from the spoile, which would cause them all to be cut in peeces, he retired to the gallies which were with in a mile off the City.
This exploit did so affright the Neapolitains, as they presently sent to entreat the captaines of the army not to batter the city, nor to spoile the country neere  adioyning: that they for their parts were ready to yeeld. But they could not m^ke vse of this fauour of fortune: because that D. Hugo hauing intelligence of the small number of the army, shewed himselfe resolute to defend the City: so as the army for want of men remained idle, wayting for supplies out of France which were very slow in comming, and by their delay did snatch the victory forth ofThe great disorder of the army of the league. their hands: so as in the meane time of this expectation infinite disorders arose in the Churches army, for money and victuals fayling, therewithal martiall discipline was no more obserued, the souldiers did no more obey their captaines, euery one disbanded, they contemned the commandements of the Legate Apostolike,VVhat hindred the taking of Naples. and all the interest of the league and the Pope: in such sort as diuers of the  best aduised and most respected captaines, forsaking the pay of the confederates, went and serued the Imperials.
For these causes the Pope continuing resolute in his former determination of agreement, sought all meanes to obtaine it, saying, That since he must needs serue, he had rather to do it to the Emperour, then still to depend on the vnruly wils of captaines, and namely of the basest souldiers.
Now in this meane time, the Duke of Bourbons determination to march into the field, and to come and ioyne with the Lansequenets of George Frondsperg,The Duke of Bourbon ^archeth to the field in dis^ight of all difficulties. did greatly trouble the Pope, and altered the confederates deseignes: for albe-it he found himselfe to be without money, munition, pioners, and vnfurnished of all meanes to get victuals, hee resolued neuerthelesse to passe on, thorow  the middest of so many enemies townes, and against such enemies as were farre greater in number then himselfe. Bourbon then beeing thus resolued, hauing drawne away the Garrison from Milan, and from other places, went with his troupes and crossed the Trebia, vniting himselfe with the Lansequenets that

were newly arriued, who tarried for him on the farther side of the Riuer, vncertaine as yet what course to take, al-be-it the common report was, that at his departure from Milan, hee had promised to his souldiers the sacke of Rome and of the greatest part of Italy, the like also did captaine George to his Lansequenets, who vpon that hope had endured very many miseries since their departure from Germany, for they had receiued but one onely Ducat for a man, and afterwardes two or three Ducats for the whole time they had beene in Italy.
The Pope, in regard hereof, being greatly mooued, as well in particular for him selfe as for the Florentines, did renue his practizes of agreement with the viceroy,VVhat mooued the Pope to s^ke an agreement with the viceroy. al be-it he had promised before not to conclude any thing without the consent of the French King and the Venetians. That which mooued him therevnto was his owne feare, and the continuall exhortations of the Generall of the Friers, of whom hee made great account, who beeing newlie returned from the Emperours Court, assured the Pope of the Emperours affection towards his Holinesse, and of his great inclination to peace; wherevpon, vsing this Generall in that treaty with the viceroy, hee continued in such sort as he seemed wholly to bee confirmed by that agreement, not making any warlike prouisions forThe Pope trusteth to much to the viceroy the safety of his owne person, saying, That as the vniuersall Father and Pastor, knowing the Emperour to bee greatly desirous of peace, hee ought not  for to shew himselfe lesse affected therevnto, and for the effecting thereof, freely to imploy all his meanes that hee could, without any sinister suspition, that all Christendome might enioy the peace and tranquillity which it so much desired.
Bourbon in the meane time beeing come into the Bolognia territory, spoyled all places round about, to the end that the Florentines, fearing the like dammage, should compound with him, and contribute a certaine summe of money for the payment of his army, and thereby to auoide the ruine of their pallaces and goodly houses, which lie neere to their city.
These considerations did in such sort mooue the Pope, as the Lord of Langi  beeing come forth of France to perswade him not to make any agreement with the Emperour, and the rather to induce him therevnto, had brought him twenty thousand Ducats, with promise of a greater summe, so soone as Caesar Fieramosca,The Pope accordeth with the viceroy. sent by the viceroy, had told him that his Master was satisfied with the truce for eight monthes, propounded by his Holinesse, he on a sodaine without any regard to the promises and aide of the French King, made an accord with the viceroy, saying, That time might make his condition worse, if the Viceroy should but know what disorder was in the army of the league: and that the daunger of the Realme of Naples was nothing in comparison of that of Tuscany and Rome.
Therefore passing on farther, for the better assurance of That treaty, hee procured that the Viceroy should come in person to Rome, whilest the Cardinall Triuulcio, who was Legate in the Churches army should goe to Naples to assure the Viceroy from him; who comming afterwards to Rome was honourably entertained there, and ra^ified the suspention of armes for eight monthes, according as it had beene agreed vpon by Fieramosca, promising to cause Bourbon to withdrawe his army forth of the Churches and Florentines State.
The Pope being to credulous, thought his affaires by this meanes to bee well assured, hauing promised by the agreement to giue threescore thousand Ducats for the payment of the army, and to pardon the Colonnesi, and particularly Cardinall  Pompe^, restoring him to the Cardinalship whereof hee had depriued him. But the greatest errour hee committed was, for that thorow baddeThe Popes ^rror in disarm^ng himselfe. councell hee had on a sodaine with-drawne his whole army from forth the confines of the Realme of Naples, and his nauall army to Ciuitauecchia, and

had wholly disarmed himselfe, retayning for the garde and safety of his owne person but an hundred light horse, and certaine companies of black bands which had belonged to the deceased Iohn de Medicis, notwithstanding that the Colonnesi were in armes, and committed soundry insolencies.
The Venetian Senate being aduertized of this agreement, would not faile to aduise the Pope not to trust ouermuch to the viceroy: for al-be-it that hee had proceeded sincerely therein, it was neuerthelesse to be feared that Bourbon, who had the like authority from the Emperour as had the viceroy, beeing displeased that the accord was made without his consent, would not ra^ifie it: Then they declared vnto him what inconuenience and disorder his so soone disarming did  bring with it, seeing that the Siennois and Colonnesi, with whom hee had not yet fullie ended, were still in armes.
But the Pope contemning all these reasons and remayning obstinate in his resolution did verifie the common saying, That good and whole some councell giuen by an interressed and suspected person, causeth rather a precipitate downefall. For the Pope thinking that the Venetians spake for their owne particular interest, because hee had forsaken them, would not harcken vnto them: wherevpon, Bourbon within a while after writing to Rome, that hee could no longer hold backe the souldiers for want of pay from comming to beseege it, he then perceiuing that to bee very true which they had told him: al-be-it that at the  first hee thought that hee had said so onely but for to draw some greater summes of money from him, or else in a brauado, and that hee did not meane to breake the truce.
Also hee was wont to say afterward, that though hee should haue feared any sinister accident, yet neuerthelesse hee would not haue changed his opinion, because hee would not haue the world to knowe that hee had beene deceiued by trusting to any one. Now hee imagining that the same would not come to passe which did happen, had already appointed Matheo Guilberto his Datary to goe as Legate into Spaine, to treat particularly there on the conditions  of peace.
The Venetians beeing aduertized of the Popes resolution did write to the Duke of Vrbin that hee should assemble his troupes, and ioyne them with those of the Marquis of Salusses that were on the Bolognois: They afterwards sent to Sebastian Iustinia^ their Ambassadour with the Christian King, willing himThe Venetians assurance to the King. to assure his Maiesty, that al*be-it the Pope had forsaken them that they would neuer depart from his friendship, and that if hee thought good to accept of the truce, they would likewise accept of it, and not otherwise. The Pope in the treaty of the accord which the Viceroy had reserued place for the Venetians to enter into it, because they had not shewed themselues much contrary to the  truce, the better to please him, who beeing vnited with the most Christian King were very well contented not for to breake off wholly with him, hoping still to draw him to their party: for they made more account of the friendship of France then of all the rest: wherevpon perceiuing that the King did not willingly giue eare to this truce, they would no more motion it.
But concerning his proposition to them to renue the warre in the RealmeThe Venetians answere to the King concerning the renuing of the wars of Naples. of Naples, they did very much commend the reprizall of armes but not to goe into that Kingdome, saying, That they had there lost the good will of the people, and their reputation, by yeelding vp, thorow the Popes separating himselfe from them, all the townes which they had there taken: but that the surest and proffitablest way for the present, was to prepare for the defense  and conseruation of that which they possessed in Lombardy, if the accord should happen to bee made. An if it should fall out otherwise, it should bee for the profit of the league to haue the Cities of the Churches state and the Florentines at their deuotion.
Now the Imperiall army notwithstanding the agreement conceiued at Rome betwixt the Pope and the viceroy, went still forward, although that Caesar Fieramosca had signified vnto them the agreement to cause them to returne backe, For the Duke of Bourbon at the same time, either because hee would not obey, or else it beeing not in his power to doe it, caused his army to march towardsCottignola tak^n by the Duke of Bourbon. Romagnia, where he beseeged Cottignola, the which hee tooke by composition, then marching towards Furli, hee came and lodged at Villafranca fiue miles off, and taking the way of Meldola, he shewed that his meaning was to passe Tuscany by the Val di bagna: wherevnto he was much solicited by the Sienois who offred him great store of victuals, and pioners.
The Venetians hauing notice of the enemies determination sent word to the Duke of Vrbin, that leauing strong Garrisons in the territories belonging to their State, hee should passe on with the resid^e of the army to assure the lands of the Church and the Florentines, and to oppose himselfe against the Imperials deseignes. The Duke of Vrbi^ according to this direction being come with part of the army neere to Bolognia, and the Marquis of Salusses likewise, beeing lodged in sundry places, hee passed on towardes Imola, and encamped betwixt Rauenna, and Faenza, at the same time as the enemy departed from Cottignola: It was there a long time debated amongst the captaines of the league what The consederates army doth still sollow the Imp^rials. course to obserue in that warre: and in the end it was concluded to haue two seuerall campes, the better and with more ease to cut off all victuals from the enemies, to what place soeuer they should march. The Pope taxing this councell did neuerthelesse make vse of it, vnder collour of his rash agreement, saying, That the slow proceeding of those of the league for the preseruation of that which beelonged vnto him had enforced him for to take an other course for his safety.
Now the Pope, who contrary to all mens opinions had still thought himselfeThe Pope a^knowledgeth his error and imploreth* the consederates ^ide. safe enough, beeing then strangely daunted, by this new aduertizement, called before him all the Ambassadours of the Confederate Princes which were in his Court, and after hee had declared to them on the one side, how that the zeale to  the publike good, but chiefly necessity had enforced him to accept the truce, and on the other, the malicious deceit of the Imperialls towardes him did earnestly entreat them to make intercession for him to their Princes, that they would not forsake him, nor the Florentines likewise in so manifest daunger, to the great hurt and preiudice of the common cause, and hee did particularly entreat Dominico Veniero Ambassadour at Rome for the Signory of Venice, that hee would so deale with the Senate, as that they should commaund the Duke of Vrbin to passe the Appenine hils with his army, promising to renue the league and sincerely to obserue it.
The Senate vpon this proposition, al-be-it they iudged it to bee a very dangerous  matter, to send their troupes so farre off from their owne State, and to aduenture them in the craggy mountaines, and that besides, the Pope had not giuen them any cause to take care for his affaires, in regard hee had forsaken them, continuing neuerthelesse in their former resolution, commanded the Duke of Vrbin and Lodouico Pisani, who was come to the army as new Prouidator to passe the mountes if neede should require: wherevpon so soone as the ImperiallThe two armies at one time in ^ny. army had passed the mounts, that of the Confederates followed it: so as almost at one time the two armies were in Tuscany, the Duke of Bourbon beeing then lodged neere to Arezzo, and the Confederates army at Barberina, the City of Florence remayning in a manner in the middest betwixt these two  armies.
This was the cause of great troubles in the Citty, some crauing a popular gouernment, and others would haue that of a few priuate persons, wherevpon the greatnesse of those of Medicis came to controuersie, and the popular

faction would a^ least haue preuailed, those of Medicis beeing driuen from the publike gouernment; and Hippolito and Alessandro of Medicis the Popes Nephewes being declared enemies to their country, when as the Duke of Vrbin arriued opportunely at Florence during these stirs, who so soone as he perceiued the Duke of Bourbon to direct his course towards Tuscany, taking with him fourescore gentlemen forth of the army, with the Prouidator Pisani and Frederic^ Bozzola, went speedily to Florence to continue the Florentines in their fidelity towards the league.
He by his arriuall did frustrate the deseignes of the contrary faction which was affrighted to see the army so neere, hauing no assurance of any reliefe from elsewhere, so as he reduced matters to their former state without any effusion of bloud for that time: and delt besides in such sort, as the Florentines should be vnder the protection of the league, and should maintaine, at their owne charge in the confederates ca^pe, two hundred and fifty men at armes, and fiue thousand foot, or a greater number if the Pope should so appoint it.
Whilest these things were done in Florence, the other confederates renued the league at Rome, by which they promised the Venetians to contribute towards the expence of their army, prouided that it did not depart fo^th of Tuscany or the Churches State without the Popes permission, and that it would be one of the first in the enterprize of Naples. These conditions seeming to hard to the Senate, were not accepted; Dominico Veni^ro their Ambassador, for being to forward in his offers was called home to Venice, and as one guilty for going beyond his commissionDominico Veniero put to his tryall. was deliuered ouer into the hands of the Auogario to haue his processe made, and Francisco Pesare was sent Ambassador in his stead.
The Duke of Bourbon either for that hee despaired of being able to make any attempt vpon Florence, by reason that all the confederates forces were not farre from thence, or for that he was euer d^sirous to goe to Rome, determined toVVhat caused the Duke of Bourbon to to march to Rome. march thither, being partly prouoked, by the negligence and small care that they had in Rome to prouide for the daungers which threatned it: because that the Pope relying in vaine on the people, and on a great number of husbandmen that  were retired thither, of whom more then fiue thousand were armed, had not taken care to leauy new forces, and least of all to prouide for those that he already had: namely, that hauing giuen charge to Philippin Doria to leauy three thousand foot-men, he hauing raised one thousand and brought them to Ciuitauecchia, his Holinesse did not vouchsafe to send for them to come to Rome for the gard of the City: and caused his Datary to write to Count Guy of Rangon, who lay at Ottriccoli with great numbers of foot not to come to Rome, vnlesse hee should bee expresly commanded by him so to doe, notwithstanding that the Earle was aduertized from the Duke of Vrbin, that the Duke of Bourbon marched thitherwards, and that he might haue come thither in time: but hee durst not  disobey the Popes commandement, so that diuers did blame him for it, saying, that in such a case he should haue obeyed the Duke of Vrbin, as captaine Generall of the league.
The Duke of Bourbon then, departing forth of the country of Arezzo withoutThe Duke of Bourbons great speed in his march to Rome. artillery or baggage, and marching with incredible speed, not being hindred by the raine which at that season was very great, nor yet by want of victuals, he came neere to Rome before such time as the Pope had scarcely any aduertizement of his comming, and hee found no resistance neither at Viterbo, whether the Pope had not sent forces in time, nor yet in any other place, yet neuerthelesse, before hee would come nere to the walles, hee sent to the Pope to demaund  passage for his army into the Kingdome of Naples, (as hee said) beeing mooued therevnto by reason of the small store of victuals which hee had, and fearing least by his long tarrying that hee might bee surprized by the army of the league who very neerely pursued him, or as others thought, by a

martiall arrogancy, to haue some collour for that which he had in his minde determined to doe.
The Pope would not regard his demands, nor yet heare them, as well because hee knew already the inward policies of the enemy, as for the great trust which he reposed in the people of Rome, and in the leagues nauall army of sixe and twenty gallies that lay at Ciuitauecchia with certaine companies of foot-men: As also for that Rance de Cera (vnto whom the Pope gaue the chiefe defense of the City of Rome) had rampired the suburbes, in the defense whereof hee so much trusted, that al-be-it they were in all mens iudgements very weake, hee would not permit the bridges vpon Tiber to be cut for the safety of Rome, if the  suburbes and part of the City beyond Tiber could not be defended: and had besides, made such bad prouision of all necessaries, as it encouraged the enemies to approach the walles, and to come to the assault with ladders.
The defendants did not descry the enemies till it was almost to late, by reasonThe Duke of Bourbon g^ueth an assault to the subu^bs of Rome. of a thick mist which sodainely arose, wherewith the enemies army was couered, vntill it came to the very place where they gaue the assault, where Antonio de Mo^tfalcone was in gard with an hundred souldiers, vnto whose rescue diuers of the armed people came running, who for a certaine space susteined the enemies attempts. But the Imperials continuing the assault very fiercely, these new vnexperienced souldiers perceiuing daunger hourely to encrease forsooke  the defense, and committed themselues to flight.
The Duke of Bourbon at the beginning of their assault marching formost, went before all the companies, where being shot into the body by an Harquebuze,The death of the Duke of Bourbon. he fell downe dead to the ground. The Prince of Orange, being very neere him when he fell, caused him forthwith to be couered with a cloake, to the end the souldiers might not be daunted by the death of their Generall, and then he did hotly purfue the victory.
The Pope, who in the palace of the Vatican attended what would bee the euentThe Pope with diuers Cardinals retiret^ to the Castle Saint Angelo. thereof, hearing that the enemies had entred, did forth-with flie with diuers Cardinals and other Prelats to the castle Saint Angelo. The Lords  Rance de Cera and Langey, hauing laboured in vaine to mooue the people to take armes for their owne defense, and had sought valiantly with those few forces they could gather together and with them a long time kept the castle bridge, were at last enforced to retire. The City beeing thus abandoned, and all the people in confusion and flight, the enemies on all sides entred it, and became Masters thereof without any difficulty. Philippin Doria and Count Guy, so soone as they perceiued the Duke of Bourbon to march towards Rome, did on a sodaine without wayting for any other commandement set forwards to rescue the Pope with the forces of Ciuitauecchia and Oruietta: but the Duke of Bourbon by his speed hauing preuented them, and shut vp all the  passages by which they were to follow him, did enforce them to returne from whence they came.
Now the Duke of Vrbin hauing set forward to follow the enemies, but very slowly, by reason of the hindrances of his campe, did at last with the whole army come as farre as Viterbo, who finding all the country to be spoiled by the enemies, hee was enforced by want of victuals to tarry there, his army beeing by sundry accidents much diminished, hauing in all but seuen thousand men, in stead of thirty thousand appointed by the confederates. The army, lodging in that place, the light horse and foot-men did oftentimes scoure the whole Country, where meeting with the Imperiall souldiers, that were  laden with great spoile and disbanded comming from Rome, they striped them of all they had.
Besides that, at the taking of the City all manner of crueltie was vsed:

faction would at least haue preuailed, those of Medicis beeing driuen from the publike gouernment, and Hippolito and Alessandro of Medicis the Popes Nephewes being declared enemies to their country, when as the Duke of Vrbin arriued opportunely at Florence during these stirs, who so soone as he perceiued the Duke of Bourbon to direct his course towards Tuscany, taking with him fourescore gentlemen forth of the army, with the Prouidator Pisani and Frederic^ Bozzola, went speedily to Florence to continue the Florentines in their fidelity towards the league.
He by his arriuall did srustrate the deseignes of the contrary faction which was affrighted to see the army so neere, hauing no assurance of any reliefe from elsewhere, so as he reduced matters to their sormer state without any effusion of bloud for that time: and delt besides in such sor^, as the Florentines should be vnder the protection of the league, and should maintaine, at their owne charge in the confederates campe, two hundred and fifty men at armes, and fiue thousand foot, or a greater number if the Pope should so appoint it.
Whilest these things were done in Florence, the other confederates renued the league at Rome, by which they promised the Venetians to contribute towards the expence of their army, prouided that it did not depart forth of Tuscany or the Churches State without the Popes permission, and that it would be one of the first in the enterprize of Naples. These conditions seeming to hard to the Senate, were not accepted; Dominico Veniero their Ambassador, for being to forward in his offers was called home to Venice, and as one guilty for going beyond his commissionDominico Veniero put to his tryall. was deliuered ouer into the hands of the Auogario to haue his processe made, and Francisco Pesare was sent Ambassador in his stead.
The Duke of Bourbon either for that hee despaired of being able to make any attempt vpon Florence, by reason that all the confederates forces were not farre from thence, or for that he was euer d^sirous to goe to Rome, determined toVVhat caused the Duke of Bourbon to to march to Rome. march thither, being partly prouoked, by the negligence and small care that they had in Rome to prouide for the daungers which threatned it: because that the Pope relying in vaine on the people, and on a great number of husbandmen that  were retired thither, of whom more then fiue thousand were armed, had not taken care to leauy new forces, and least of all to prouide for those that he already had: namely, that hauing giuen charge to Philippin Doria to leauy three thousand foot-men, he hauing raised one thousand and brought them to Ciuitauecchia, his Holinesse did not vouchsafe to send for them to come to Rome for the gard of the City: and caused his Datary to write to Count Guy of Rangon, who lay at Ottriccoli with great numbers of foot not to come to Rome, vnlesse hee should bee expresly commanded by him so to doe, notwithstanding that the Earle was aduertized from the Duke of Vrbin, that the Duke of Bourbon marched thitherwards, and that he might haue come thither in time: but hee durst not  disobey the Popes commandement, so that diuers did blame him for it, saying, that in such a case he should haue obeyed the Duke of Vrbin, as captaine Generall of the league.
The Duke of Bourbon then, departing forth of the country of Arezzo withoutThe Duke of Bourbons great speed in his march to Rome. artillery or baggage, and marching with incredible speed, not being hindred by the raine which at that season was very great, no^ yet by want of victuals, he came neere to Rome before such time as the Pope had scarcely any aduertizement of his comming, and hee found no resistance neither at Viterbo, whether the Pope had not sent forces in time, nor yet in any other place, yet neuerthelesse, before hee would come nere to the walles, hee sent to the Pope to demaund  passage for his army into the Kingdome of Naples, (as hee said) beeing mooued therevnto by reason of the small store of victuals which hee had, and fearing least by his long tarrying that hee might bee surprized by the army of the league who very neerely pursued him, or as others thought, by a

martiall arrogancy, to haue some collour for that which he had in his minde determined to doe.
The Pope would not regard his demands, nor yet heare them, as well because hee knew already the inward policies of the enemy, as for the great trust which he reposed in the people of Rome, and in the leagues nauall army of sixe and twenty gallies that lay at Ciuitauecchia with certaine companies of foot-men: As also for that Rance de Cera (vnto whom the Pope gaue the chiefe defense of the City of Rome) had rampired the suburbes, in the defense whereof hee so much trusted, that al-be-it they were in all mens iudgements very weake, hee would not permit the bridges vpon Tiber to be cut for the safety of Rome, if the  suburbes and part of the City beyond Tiber could not be defended: and had besides, made such bad prouision of all necessaries, as it encouraged the enemies to approach the walles, and to come to the assault with ladders.
The defendants did not descry the enemies till it was almost to late, by reasonThe Duke of Bourbongiueth an assault to the suburbs of Rome. of a thick mist which sodainely arose, wherewith the enemies army was couered, vntill it came to the very place where they gaue the assault, where Antonio de Montfalcone was in gard with an hundred souldiers, vnto whose rescue diuers of the armed people came running, who for a certaine space susteined the enemies attempts. But the Imperials continuing the assault very fiercely, these new vnexperienced souldiers perceiuing daunger hourely to encrease forsooke  the defense, and committed themselues to flight.
The Duke of Bourbon at the beginning of their assault marching formost, went before all the companies, where being shot into the body by an Harquebuze,The death of the Duke of Bourbon. he fell downe dead to the ground. The Prince of Orange, being very neere him when he fell, caused him forthwith to be couered with a cloake, to the end the souldiers might not be daunted by the death of their Generall, and then he did hotly pursue the victory.
The Pope, who in the palace of the Vatican attended what would bee the euentThe Pope with diuers Cardinals retireth to the Castle Saint Angelo. thereof, hearing that the enemies had entred, did forth-with flie with diuers Cardinals and other Prelats to the castle Saint Angelo. The Lords  Rance de Cera and Langey, hauing laboured in vaine to mooue the people to take armes for their owne defense, and had sought valiantly with those few forces they could gather together and with them a long time kept the castle bridge, were at last enforced to retire. The City beeing thus abandoned, and all the people in confusion and flight, the enemies on all sides entredit, and became Masters thereof without any difficulty. Philippin Doria and Count Guy, so soone as they perceiued the Duke of Bourbon to march towards Rome, did on a sodaine without wayting for any other commandement set forwards to rescue the Pope with the forces of Ciuitauecchia and Oruietta: but the Duke of Bourbon by his speed hauing preuented them, and shut vp all the  passages by which they were to follow him, did enforce them to returne from whence they came.
Now the Duke of Vrbin hauing set forward to follow the enemies, but very slowly, by reason of the hindrances of his campe, did at last with the whole army come as farre as Viterbo, who finding all the country to be spoiled by the enemies, hee was enforced by want of victuals to tarry there, his army beeing by sundry accidents much diminished, hauing in all but seuen thousand men, in stead of thirty thousand appointed by the confederates. The army, lodging in that place, the light horse and foot-men did oftentimes scoure the whole Country, where meeting with the Imperiall souldiers, that were  laden with great spoile and disbanded comming from Rome, they striped them of all they had.
Besides that, at the taking of the City all manner of crueltie was vsed:

euery where infinite complaints were heard of those who were inhumanely tormented, partly to enforce them to pay their ransom, and partly to bewray the wealth that they had hidden. The cries and pittifull lamentations were heard of Roman dames, and Nunnes, who the souldiers lead away in troupes to satisfieThe Imprials great cruelty in Rome. their Luxury. All holy things, the Sacraments and Relikes of Saints, where-with the Churches were stored, being despoiled of their ornaments, were euery where trodden vnder foot; wherevnto were added infinite vilanies of the barbarous Lansequenets. The sacke and pillage lasted many monthes, which according to the common report, as well in ready money, gold, siluer, and iewels, amounted to more then a Million of Ducats, and the ransomes  that were paied, did rise to a farre greater summe.
The end of the sixth Booke of the fifth Decade.




The Contents of the seuenth Booke of the  fifth Decade.
THE Venetians sorrow and greefe for the  taking of Rome and the Pope by the Imperialls. The Cardinalls meete at Bolognia to treate of the Popes deliuerance. The Venetians warlike preparations by Land and Sea to free the Pope from his imprisonment. The Venetians seaze on Rauennato keepe it for the Holy Sea. The Duke of Vrbin taketh Perugia to the same end. The Duke  of Vrbins resolution for the Popes deliuery. The French King maketh great warlike prouisions to send into Italy. Andre Doria in the seruice of the French King. The army of the Confederats remaineth on the Confines of the Siennois. The Popes agreement to come forth of prison. The Venetians resolution vpon that agreement. The Lord of Lautrec commeth into the state of Milan with great forces. Bosco and Alexandria taken by him. Pauia is taken and sackt by the French. Genoa is reduced vnder the French Kings obedience. The Turke being assailed  by Marcello, had soone after his reuenge. The Lord Lautrec marcheth towards Rome. The demands propounded by the French King in the motion of peace. The Agreement, whereby the Duke of Ferrara and the Marquis of Mantua enter into the league. The entire enlargement of the Popes person. The Venetians send an Ambassad to the Pope, inuiting him to enter into the league. The like Ambassade of the most Christian King to the same effect. The Popes excuses not to enter into any new confederacy. The Lord Lautrecs iourny into the Kingdome of Naples. The Popes demand to the  Venetians, with their answer. The Imperialls refuse to fight. The Lord Lautrec encampeth before Naples. The Duke of Brunswich commeth with great forces into Lombardy. The Venetians preparations against the Duke of

Brunswich. He returneth into Germany. The Imperialls are put to rout at Sea. The arriuall of the Generall of the Venetian Army before Naples with the discommodities which it there endured. Andre Doria reuolteth from the Kings seruice. The Pope resolueth to remaine neuter. The great wants of the Army before Naples. And lastly the Lord Lautrecs Death.




The Seuenth Booke of the fifth Decade of the Historie of Uenice.
THE accident at Rome being knowne at Venice, together with the Popes imprisonment, did greatly afflict the Senate with griefe and compassion, and with a disdaine for the wrong offered to the person of the holy Father, wherevponThe Senate after the taking of Rome, determine to oppose themselues against the Emperor. they not intending to suffer any longer the Emperors fortune  to encrease to their owne perill, determined to releeue the Pope with all their forces, and therein to spare for no cost: which caused them to write to the Duke of Vrbin their Generall, and to Pisani and Vitturi the Prouidators, to lay by all other deseignes and attempt onely, if it were possible, to free the Pope from his imprisonment: and the better to effect it to come neere to the Castle wherein hee was shutte vp, to seeke by all meanes to draw him thence; and because no other matter might hinder this enterprize, they forth-with made a new leuy of foote, to encrease their forces to the number of ten thousand foot, which lay on the confines of Crema and Lauda, to resist Antonio de Leua, who being come forth into  the field, and finding no opposition, was likely euery day to grow more strong by the aid which he expected forth of Germany. The Venetians were incited therevnto, by the great preparations of the Kings of England and France, who hauing notice of the great inhumanity vsed towards his Holinesse, and the scandall giuen to the Church of Christendome, by detayning the head thereof in prison, determining to remedy it resolued betwixt themselues at their owne charges to send an army into Italy to free the Pope, and to put him in possession of all the Churches lands: and another mighty one into Flanders by assayling that country to enforce the Emperor to abandon Italy for the defence thereof.
These two Kings were very earnest in this businesse, wherevpon the CardinallThe King of France and England resolue to free the Pope. of Yorke, who could doe more then all men with the King of England, came for  the same purpose to Amiens to the French king, to procure an enteruiew of those two kings, to the end they might consult together more considerately concerning the Popes deliuery. The most Christian King seemed to be no lesse willing therein, who sent speedy word to his Captaines in Italy to procure by all meanes

the Popes freedome from imprisonment, and to assure the State Ecclesiasticall: and the better to prouide for it with more speed, he aduised those Cardinals thatThe Cardinals meet at Bolognia to treat of the Popes deliuery. were at liberty, to meet at Anignon, where, as in a safe and commodious place, they might with ease treat thereof, and from thence send their resolutions into Spaine, The Cardinalls approouing this Councell of vniting themselues together did for sondry respects make choyce of the Citty of Bolognia for their meeting place.
The Emperor in the meane time being aduertized of the Popes taking, by his cheefe Chancellor that was going into Italy, did by his speech manifest that heThe Emperors dissimulation concerning the Popes taking. was highly displeased therewith, alleadging diuers goodly matters for his iustification. But the effects were not answerable thereunto, resoluing on nothing for his deliuery, but in his discourse did oftentimes excuse the Duke of Bourbon and his Army, he did amplifie the iniuries which the Pope had done him; he accused his inconstancy and little assurance in his treaties, calling to mind the dangers whereinto the Consederates had gone about to east him: whereby and by euery of his discourses, it was easily perceiued that in secret he was well pleased therewith, and that he would neuer consent to his deliuery, nor to that of the French Kings children, but by compulsion.
The French King hauing before sent to make a leuy of tenne thousand Suisses  for the enterprise of Lombardy, and his agents going therein slowly to worke, so soone as he had notice of the taking of Rome, fearing the alteration of Fortune, and the Imperialls deseignes did sodainly send the money to Lyons, and sollicited their speedy departure.
The Venetians on the other side did not ceasse by all good offices to maintain and encrease that good desire in the King propounding vnto him how necessary it was hotly to pursue that warre with great forces, Religion and State agreeing in one, not to suffer the dignity of the Sea Apostolick, and the liberty of Italy to be troden vnder foot: and for to incite him no lesse by deeds then words, they determined to renew their nauall army, which was much weakened by the bad ayre The Venetians preparations by Sea and land and other discommodities at Ciuitauechia, where it had for a time remayned, and to arme besides it, foure Basterd Galleis, of which they appointed Antonio Marcello Captaine, thereby to strengben the army that it might assaile the Sea-coasts of Puglia. They did moreouer propound to the King to leuy, besides the Suisses at their common charge, other tenne thousand foot, drawing in the meane time to their pay all the best experienced Captaines in martiall affaires that they could find: among whom were the Count of Gaiazzo and the Marquis Palauicin. And to encourage Francis Sforza, of whose freindship and readinesse they made great account, they lent him tenne thousand Ducats, with which he promised to encrease his forces, which were already more then two thousand foot, and to come  in person with them to Lauda, there for to ioyne with the Venetian army. Now because that the territories of Romagnia were without Garrisons, and exposed to sundry dangers in so wretched a time, no man giuing them ayde nor succour, theThe Venetians place a Garrison in Rauenna for the behoof of the Sea of Rome. Senate beeing greatly prouoked therunto, fent a good surome of money to the Gouernor of Rauenna to leuy foot forces for the garrison of the Citty, encouraging him to defend it, with promise of greater ayd if need should be, as within a while after they did, by sending him three hundred foot and an hundred light horse vnder the command of Iohn de Nalde, inioyning him to keepe that City for the Sea Apostolick and the league.
But strife arising in that Citty betwixt the Inhabitants and the soldiers, the Venetians were entreated by them of the Citty to send thither one from Venice to  be Prouidator there, whereupon Bartholomeo Contrren by the Senates consent went thither to supply that place. Those of Ceruia within a while after did the like where the Guelphes, hauing ch^sed away those of the Gibelline faction, did receiue garrison and a Magistrate of the Venetians, the Legat ernestly requiring it,

for the quiet and conseruation of the same Citty.
Whilest these things were done, the Duke of Vrbin hauing receiued the SenatesThe Duke of Vrbin taketh Perusa. commandement, and disposing him-selfe for the execution thereof, did first of all make him-selfe sure of the Citty of Perusa, wherein Gentil Baillone commanded, who was suspected to hold with the enemies part, whome with threatenings hee enforced to depart thence, and hauing left a strong garrison, there, hee marched with the army to Todi, and from thence to Oruietto where he ioyned himselfe with the French, and Ecclesiasticall troupes, as he had formerly concluded to doe. And hauing there assembled all the cheefe Captaines, to resolue on what they should afterwards doe, hee caused the Senates letter to bee The Duke of Vrbins preposition. openly read, and then assured them, for the obeying of their command, that hee intended to march directly to Rome, to free by all meanes possible the Pope from imprisonment, resoluing if the enemies should shew them-selues, to fight with them, and with others to runne one selfe-same fortune.
This proposition beeing allowed by the Prouidator Pisani, was entertained with the Generall consent of all the rest, (the Prouidator Vitturi excepted) who being of a contrary opinion opposed him-selfe against it both in word and deed, protesting by writing and detesting such an enterprize as most pernicious, and ofVittury is contrary to the Duke of Vrbin doubtfull issue, saying that their soldiers were farre inferiour both in number and valour to the Imperialls, who were very many, and for the most part good soldiers  and well experienced, either in fight, or in knowledge how to vanquish, and therefore more valliant and ready to sustaine all attempts how great soeuer. By meanes whereof hee cooled the Dukes former heate, who not-with standing continued in his first resolution to draw neerer to Rome, meaning neuer-the-lesse to lodge in a very strong and commodious place, what-so-euer should befall, then hee propounded a new inuention, to the end to trie first without danger, if hee could get the Pope from thence, which was speedily and on the sodaine to cause Fredericke of Bozzola to march towards Rome with one company of men at armes, a certaine number of light-horse, and some companies of harquebuziers on horse-backe, hoping that his sodaine and vnlookt for arriuall, might offer some  meanes to the Pope to escape by that conuoy, and to come to the army of the league, but this designe succeeded not, for diuers occasions, and cheefely because that Frederics horse falling vpon him, hee was there-with sore hurt, so that hee could goe on no farther, but was enforced to returne.
But the army in the meane time continuing their approches, they were aduertized by certaine spies, that the trenches which the Imperialls had made neere to the Castle, were very great, and hard to be forced: whereby the difficulties of the enterprize were encreased: and moreouer that they at Rome expected the Spanish Infantery which was at Naples, and that Captaine Alarcon was already arriued; wherevpon the Duke was of opinion to passe on nofarther with the army, the VVhat great forces they were to haue to free the Pope from prison. which was allowed almost by all the other Captains: and therefore hee did speely aduertize the Senate, saying that for to releeue the Castle, it behooued him to haue greater forces then he then had, and in particularizing them, he did affirme that to draw the Pope from thence, there ought to bee in the army the number of sixteene thousand Swisses, leuied by a decree of the Cantons, not accounting those that were already there, and besides the Swisses tenne thousand Italian Harqueguziers, three thousand Pioners, and fourtie peeces of ordnance.
These newes did greatly displease the Venetians in regard of the delaying of matters, and of the Popes troubles and wearysomenesse, which was much encreased  by reading of a letter, written by the Pope to his Liuetenant Guicciardyne, who sent it to the Senate; by the which hee entreated, solicited, and coniured the confederates, by all meanes to procure his deliuerance. The

Senate therefore hauing heard of the opposition and hinderance made by theVitturi called to account for being contrary to the Popes deliuery. Prouidator Vitturi, concerning the approach of the army neere to Rome, discharged him of his office, and being called home to Venice he was committed to the Auogario there to yeeld an account of his actions*
The Senate in the meane time insisting more earnestly in the same resolution, to releeue the Pope, and to draw him from thence, wrote to the Generall, and to the Prouidators, to vse all meanes possible for that purpose to approach neere to the Castle, the which the Generall refusing, chose rather to giue ouer his place, which the Senators tooke in bad part, but after that the one and the other of  them were appeased, they confirmed him in the place of Generall for two yeares more.
The French on the other side greatly detesting the Popes imprisonment, andThe kings great preparations to send into Italy. enuying the Spaniards fortunate successe, made great preparations of warre, the King making account to come to Lyons to take order for the affaires of war, hauing first commanded fifteene thousand Swisses to be leuied, and tenne thousand Italian foote. And that hee might like-wise haue a nauall army for that purpose, hee tooke Andre Doria to his pay with eight Gallies, and promised to giue him a yearely entertaynement of sixe and thirty thousand crownes, and appointed theAndre Doria in the Kings seruice. Lord of Lautrec Captaine Generall of all the troupes by land; where-with the Venetians being highly pleased, did the more to honour him, appoint Petro Pesare Procurator of Saint Marke, their Ambassador, who should meet him at his comming into Italy and waite vpon him wheresoeuer hee went.
The Imperialls in the meane time that were in Rome, albeit that their number was much encreased by the arriuall of the Spaniards that came from Naples, finding them-selues to bee foure and twenty thousand foote, tooke their leisure, enioying with ease the wealthy spoyles that they had gotten at the sacke of the Citty, their Captaines beeing not able, neither to cause them to come fourth of the towne, nor yet to restraine their vnbrideled licence: two companies alone of Lancequenets, leauing the Citty went and spoyled Terni and Narni, going on no farther, not-with-standing that the Confederates army was farre  enough of: for those of the league hauing lost their hope of the enterprize of Rome, the Venetians following the Marquis of Salusses, and all the French went and encamped on the confines of the Siennois, to assure thereby the Florentines Territories, and to bring them to this passe, (the which they did) to ratifie the league, and to entertaine fiue thousand foote in the army at their owne charges, wherein they shewed them-selues so much the more willing and ready, by how much they were neere vnto danger, the Imperiall Captaines threatning to turne their forces vpon them, being displeased with them, for that in the beginning of the Popes misfortune, they had made some shew to follow the Emperors party, and yet after-wards had cleaued to his enemies.
The Venetian forces did at that time consist of sixe thousand Italian footemen, two thousand Lancequenets, thirteene hundred light horse, and two thousand men at armes, and the French Infantery was not aboue seauen thousandThe number of the Venetians army. foote-men, albeit the King paid a greater number. But the great dearth of victuall and the sharpe diseases which did dayly decrease the army, did hinder them from enterprizing any matter. By reason whereof the enemies forces being encreased and those of the league diminished, the Pope hauing lost all hope of speedy releef, did wholly incline to practizes of agreementThe Pope inclineth to agreement. and hoping to haue a better composition of the Viceroy, who was at Sienna, he sent for him, and by the same meanes entreated the Duke of Vrbin to suffer him  safely to come to Rome*
The Viceroy went willingly and in great hast to the army, not so much for the Popes profit, as for the hope he had to be made General therof. But being arriued at Rome, whither he came by a safe conduct of the Captains of the league, he had

notice that the Lancequenets and Spaniards wisht him no good, who after the Duke of Bourbons death had chosen the Prince of Orange for their Generall, so as he had not the courage to speake of any agreement with the Pope, but much lesse to tarry there: for being not gracious in the eyes of the army, he had no more authority, neither in the affaires of warre, nor in the treaty of agreement with the Pope, who at the last being banckrout of all hope, did on the sixth day of Iune make an agreement with the Imperialls, on the same conditions, in a manner, as he might before then haue decreed vpon with them.
That the Pope should pay vnto the army foure hundred thousand Ducats:Articles of agreement betwixt the Pope and Emperor. should deliuer to the Emperor to keepe so long as he should thinke good the  Castle of Saint Angelo, the Forts of Ostia, Ciuitauechia, and Ciuitacastelane, with the Citties of Placentia, Parma and Modena. For the accomplishment of which matters, the Pope, being not yet wholly set at liberty, was to remaine prisoner in the Castle, with the Cardinalls that were with him, who were thirteene in number, vntill the army had receiued the first paiment, which was of one hundred and fifty thousand Ducats, and that afterwards they should goe to Naples or Gayetta to expect in that place how the Emperour would determine of them.
This manner of proceeding did greatly displease the Venetians: but the Pope,How the Venetians behaued themselues vpon this agreement. fearing his owne life, because of the Colonesi and the Lancequenets, was enforced  to allow of this agreement, albeit that it was very preiudicial to him: whervpon the Venetians, hoping that time might bring them better fortune, determined to keepe the Citty of Cremona, and to that end caused the army, which they had in Lombardy, neere to Crema, to crosse foorthwith the riuer Adda, to put a Garrison into that Citty, and to hinder the consignation of the others, by breaking the condition agreed vpon, and by spoyling the Contrey neere to Milan and Pauia to molest and weaken the Imperialls.
Now the Castle of Saint Angelo was by this accord foorth-with yeelded to Captaine Alarcon, who entred it with three companies of Spanish footmen, and  three companies of Lancequenets, appointed to guard the Castle and the Pope: But the other townes and Castles, that were promised, were not so easily consigned, by reason that the Castle of Ciuita-Chastelane was guarded by the Confederates, and Aadrew Doria refused to deliuer vp that of Ciuitauechia, vnlesse he were first paied fourteene thousand Ducats, which he said was due vnto him for his entertainment: Parma and Placentia on the other-side, abhorring the Spanish gouernment, refused to receiue them, and those of Modena were reduced vnder the obedience of the Duke of Ferrara, who making vse of the Popes calamity, threatning the Modenois to spoile their corne, which was almost ripe, did enforce them to deliuer vp the citty into his handes.
The Confederates army remained quiet without attempting any thing. expecting the arriuall of the Lord of Lautrec, who was said to be already in Piedmont, with great forces, both of horse and foot, albeit the Captaines in the meane* time were of sondry opinions, some thinking that being vnited with the French, it would be best for them to march directly to Rome, where they should find the Imperiall army in such disorder as they might easily set the Pope at li berty, by reason that it was much diminished, as well by the contagious sicknesseSondry opinions in the Confederats army about the Popes deliueryl which was in the Citty, as by the ouer-much licence which the Soldiers had taken for certaine monethes space, liuing without al order, and without any martiall discipline, some of them being lodged in the Citty, and others heere and there abroad, and that diuers of them beeing disbanded went their waies daily without  any leaue: whereby they might with ease driue those few from Rome that remayned behind.
Those of the contrary opinion thought, that for the effecting of that deseigne it were better to scoure the state of Milan, beeing neere thereunto, to enforce

the Imperials to leaue Rome, and to come to the defense thereof, which might prooue either to slow or insufficient to stoppe the current of the victory, wherby they might at one time execute diuers fortunate exploits, and perhaps giue an end to the warre.Lautrec ente reth the Dutchy of M ^lanwith great for ces.
This being alowed by all men, and propounded to the Lord of Lautrec at his arriuall, he entred into the state of Milan with eight thousand Suisses, three thousand Gascons, and tenne thousand footmen conducted by Pedro of Nauarre, and went and encamped before the towne of Bosco, on the marches of Alexandria,Bosco and Alexandria are taken by Lautrec. where was a Garrison of a thousand footmen, the most of whom were Lancequenets, who after they had for the space of tenne dayes sustained the  battery and sundry assaults, did at the last yeeld themselues at the discretion of the Victor.
This conquest was followed by that of Alexandria, whither the Lord Lautrec came afterwards and encamped, wherin lay fifteene hundred footmen, who being molested at one time, both by the Artillery and the mynes, were enforced to yeeld; their liues and goods beeing saued.
But the taking of Alexandria was cause of the beginning of some contentionStrise betwixt the confederats concerning the taking of Alexandria. betwixt the confederates. For the Lord of Lautrec being desirous to leaue fifteene hundred footmen in Garrison there, to the end that at al euents his owne companies might haue one place of retreat, and those which should  come from France finde some comodiousnesse of meeting there the Duke of Milans Ambassador, fearing that it would be the beginning of an occasion to possesse that State for his King, opposed him-selfe against it, the like did the Ambassadors of England and Venice, wherevpon Lautrec agreed (not without indignation) to leaue it freely to the Duke of Milan: a matter which did afterwards greatly preiudice the leagne.
Now Lautrec, after the conquest of Alexandria propounded that he would march to Rome to free the Pope from imprisonment, who, although he had agreed (as hath beene said) with the Almaines and Spaniards, did neuerthelesse still remaine a prisoner vnder their guard, vntill that he had accomplished the articles of the  agreement, as wel for payment of the money, as for the consignation of the aboue mentioned townes, where-in were found sundry difficulties: wherevppon the Emperor did not there-in shew him-selfe well* disposed nor resolute, although by his speech he sought to haue all men to beleeue the contrary.The Venetians oppose themselues against the Lord Lautrecs proposition to goe to Rome and to leaue the State of Milan.
But the Venetians did wholy dislike of Lautrecs proposition; not that they stood lesse affected to the Popes enlargement then did the King, but because they thought the enterprise of Rome lesse profitable for the common cause then that of Milan, as it had beene debated before his comming, and afterwards confirmed by himselfe, that there was at the same time great hope of beeing able to conquer  Pauia and Milan, where there were weake Garrisons, and that Antonio de Leua, who by his dilligence and skill, more then by force, did gouerne that State, lay greeuously sicke, and was vnable to prouide remedies: that losing this opportunity the affaires of the league would euer afterwards decline, in regard of the huge number of Lancequenets that were ready to come down from the County of Tiroll, into Lombardy, But by taking Milan from them, which was their only retreat, and hauing neither cauallery nor victualls, they would be enforced to change their mindes, and to tarry at home in their houses: that in the meane space it would giue time and leisure to tenne thousand Almaines, payd by the King of England, to come to the campe of the league, and afterwards they  might with those forces march to Rome, and driue the enemies before them, assuring, together with the Churches State, the libertye of all Italy.
The Lord of Lautrec inclining to their request, determined to marchPauia is taken by Lautrec. towards Pauia, before which with great speed he went and encamped (the releefe which Antonio de Leua sent, not beeing able to enter it) the which being battered for the space of foure daies, and a great part of the wall beaten downe, the soldiors making ther approches, did enter it by the breach. The Citty was sackt, and the French for eight daies together vsed all sorts of cruelty vpon the inhabitants, who had vanted that they had beene the vanquishers of the French King, because that King Francis was taken prisoner lying at the seege of the same Citty.
The Genowais at the same time being afflicted with sundry losses and calamities, and cheefely with famine, sent Ambassadors to the Lord Lautrec for to capitulate. The Citties Duke, whose name was Antonio Adorni, retired him-selfe into the Castellet, and the tumult being appeased by Phillip Doria, who was prisoner there, the Citty returned vnder the Kings obedience, who appointed Theodario Triuulcio gouernor thereof: and the Venetians, because they wouldGenoa reduced vnder the Kings obedieence. not leaue their Captaines vnrecompenced, who had valiantly behaued themselues in the reduction of Genoa, they encreased to Caesar Fregosa the conductof other thirty men at armes, and doubled his pay; they did like-wise acknowledge the valour and prowesse of Guy Nalda, Augustin Clusone, Haniball Fregosa, Caesar Martinenga, and diuers others whose valour did greatly apeare in that  action.
The businesse of Genoa being ended, and Iohn Mora, the Prouidator of the Venetians nauall army being come with sixteene Galleis to Liuorne, where hee found Doria who tarried for him, with sixteene Gallies, they resolued together to giue in vpon the Isle of Sardinia, hoping easily to winne it, and that it would bee very commodious for them, for the conquest of Sicily; but this enterprizeThe French and Uenetian fleet are scatered by tempest. proued infortunate, for the fleete being come neere to the Island, and hauing taken certaine Sea townes, it hapned, as it went from one place to another, that it was assailed by a furious tempest, which did scatter it into sundry places, certaine Venetian Gallies beeing a long time beaten in it, did at last  arriue safely at Liuorne. The rest after-wards hauing runne the same fortune, came to Corsica, whether the French Gallies had already escaped, (two excepted) which were broken vpon the rockes of Sardinia. And not being able at that time to enterprize any thing at Sea, by reason that winter approched, Iohn Mora retired with his Gallies to Corfou: Petro Lande was at the same time Generall of the Venetians nauall army, who was commanded to scoure the Seas neere to the Islands, and places of their dominions, to assure and comfort their subiects, and that sayling into Sicily hee should take all the ships that were fould to bee loden with corne, and send them to Venice where was great scarcity of victualls.
But the Generall hauing for the assurance of the Seas sent Augustine de Mulla the Prouidator with two light Gallies, to scoure on the one side, and Antonio Marcello with foure Bastard Gallies whereof hee was Captaine on the other, it fell out that Marcello beeing come to Candy into the Hauen of La Suda, had intelligence that a Turkish Gally was to passe neere vnto the Island; he suposing that it was Cortugoll, a famous Pirate, who not long before in the same Seas, had taken and spoyled a Venetian shippe, and then burnt it, killing all the Marriners and passengers that were in it, did speedily come forth of the Hauen, and beeing desirous to reuenge that iniury came on a sodaine to assaile it, the which hee tooke, and then retired with his owne and this Gally  to La Bicorna: Where the Gallies ryding with their Poopes towards the land, hee descried within a while after seauen Turkish Galleis to passe along one after another, which belonged to the Moore of Alexandria, (as the same

did which he had taken) Marcello remaining firme in that place, without any feare at all was amazed when he saw himselfe assailed on the sodaine by the Barbarian,The Turke be ing assailed by Marcello had his speedy reuenge. who hauing re-assembled his owne, did furiously assault him, where-vpon Marcello was enforced to escape by flight; the like did his fellowes, who not departing so soone as he, but one alone escaped, the other two being taken were carried to Alexandria.
The Venetian Captaine beeing to yeeld an account for this deed, the A^ogares of the Republick were commanded to take notice thereof, and for this purpose heMarcello dieth by the way for greefe. was sent for from the army as a prisoner; but greefe by the way killed him. Soliman being aduertized of the indiscretion of the Captaine, and of the Senates good  will, not like a barbarous Prince, vsing curtesie, and liberality towards the Senate,Solimans liberality to the Venetians sent back their Galleies which were taken, being loden with salt-peeter, which they greatly needed, and bestowed them vpon the Venetians as his guift. For this cause and for diuers other signes of friendship, the Senate thought good to send an expresse Ambassade to him to giue him thankes in the common-wealths name for all his curtesies and demonstrations of Frendship towards it, and to continew and encrease that good will in him.
Thomas Contaren was chosen for this purpose, vnto whom were giuen diuers rich garments and other presents of great value to present to the Baschas of the Port, and cheefely to Ibraim, who for the friendship and affection which the  great Turke did beare vnto him, was at the same time in great credit and reputation.
Whilst these thinges were done in the Leuant, the Lord of Lautrec returningLautrec leueth Milan and marcheth towards Rome. to his former deseignes, at such time as all men expected, that following the course of his victory he would haue marched towards Milan to beseege it, he turned another way, and hauing with his army passed the Po, he marched towards Placentia, intending, (as he said) to lay by all other enterprizes, and to thinke on nothing, but how to sette the Pope at liberty. All men wondred at this sodaine change, seeing the faire occasion which was offered, if he had continued to giue an end vnto the warre of Lombardy by taking the Citty of  Milan.
It was not knowne whether Lautrec was mooued thereunto, rather by someVVhat mooued the Lord Lautrec to change his determination. particular affection, or for some interest of his King, then for any care he had of the Popes liberty. It is certaine that in his heart he did beare a secret grudge to the Venetians, and Francis Sforza, for their oppositions concerning the matter of Alexandria. These suspitions were confirmed by his manner of proceeding, who speedily departing, with such ill prouision as hee had, forth of the state of the Dutchy of Milan, did afterwards pursue his iourney very slowly, and for that after hee had ioyned him-selfe with the Almaine foote-men, vpon the expecting of whome hee had at the firstexcused his delay, he remained at Parma without doing  any thing.
The Army of the league, had no better successe, who beeing lodged neere to Montefiascone did spend the time vnprofitably, notwithstanding that the weaknesse of the enemies army did sufficiently affoord them meanes to execute somme enterprize. This gaue occasion to the Venetians to suspect, that the Duke ofThe Venetians do suspect the Duke of Vrbin Vrbin, for his owne perticular interest, did not proceed with such fidelity as he ought, therefore they placed guardes ouer his wife and children who lay at that time at M^rana. The Duke of Vrbin hauing intelligence that the Venetians did distrust him, sent Horacio Florida, oue of his Gentlemen to Venice, to procure leaue for him to come thither, that he might iustifie himselfe and yeeld an account  of his actions.
The Senate, either for that they were better informed, or else beeing very desirous to fitte them-selues vnto time and necessity, would not permit him to depart from the army, but hauing remoued the guards from his wife and children

made a shew that they were well satisfied and contented with his seruice to the Republike.
And perceauing after-wards that they could not alter the Lord of Lautrecs resolution, they placed their forces which they had in Lombardy, which were fifteene thousand foote in garrison in sundry places, for the gard of those townes which they had recouered in the state of Milan, and gaue to the said Lord Lautrec fifteene hundred light horse for the enterprize of Rome.
All the care and meanes to keepe the conquered townes in the Dutchy of Milan, fell vpon the signory, Francis Sforza being not able to doe it, who of himselfe could not entertaine the ordinary Garisons, not-with-standing that he was VVhat moued the Venetians to eat the chardge of the wavve in Lombardy. obliged by the treaty of agreement, to send forces into the field to resist the attempts of Antonio de Leua: besides this, the Venetians feare to lose their owne, did incite them therevnto, who stood in doubt like-wise that the warre would light on their owne state, hauing intelligence of the great forces which were leuied in Tiroll, and in other places neere adioyning, with the great preparations of victualls and other munitions which was made at Trent to send into Italy. By meane whereof, the Senate imagining that it behooued them to encrease their army, to the number of twenty thousand foote, and to make a very great prouision to maintayne, in a manner, an other very difficult and dangerous warre, ^ent to entreat the King of England, that in so great a necessity hee would  bee pleased to releeue the Common-wealth, by contributing a part of the payment of the army, where-with they were to conserue and maintaine the liberty of Italy, whereof hee had so often said that hee would bee the Protector.
But the King of England, continuing that which hee had at other times spoken, that hee would beginne to make warre on the Emperor in Flanders, andA cotorable excuse of the King of England to the Venetians request. by that meanes enforcing him to diuert his forces else-where, hee might free Italy from that danger, made a shew, that for the common good of them all, hee himselfe was to make greate preparations, and necessary prouisions for such a deseigne. In regard whereof, the Signory, being constrained alone to vndergoe all the charges of the warre, was faine to haue recourse to extraordinary meanes, the publike treasure beeing in a manner exhausted, by reason of the continuall warres.
Among all these stirres and great warlike preparations, the treaty of peace was not altogether broken of, the Emperor making shew to desire it, both with the French King and the Venetians: where-vpon sundry practizes were set onThe French king and Venetians demands foote to that end. The Demands of the most Christian King, and the Venetians, were in efect these, that the Emperor should restore to the French King his children; That hee should set the Pope at liberty, giue ouer all that which hee held from the Church, re-establish Francis Sforza in the state of Milan, and  withdraw his forces forth of Lombardy and from Rome.
The Emperor did not altogether reiect these demands, neither yet would wholy accept of them, but in seeking, not without difficulty, to make some certaine resolution, hee demanded of the Venetians a great summe of mony, holdingVVhat was the Emperors meaning concerning peace. by that meanes the treaty in suspence, being desirous to make vse of time, and to behaue him-selfe according to the euent of the affaires of Italy, and the new stirres which his brothers preparations would procure: hoping in the meane time still to bee able, with better aduantage, to conclude an agreement with the French King alone, determining to exclude al the other Confederates, and to appropriat vnto him-selfe the Dutchy of Milan.
This was easily discerned by his owne words, persisting euer in all motions of agreement, that he would haue Francis Sforzas cause debated and censured by Iudges there-vnto appoynted, and that in the meane time the Citty of Milan, and the whole state should bee kept and garded in his name, and by his

owne Garrisons, his cheefe ayme tending wholy to become absolute maister thereof, hauing first broken all the forces of the Confederates. Where vpon all these motions of peace being laid aside, warre was againe denounced to him by the Confederates: who hoping therein to make good vse of the Duke of Ferrara,An accord in de with the Duke of Ferrara. and the Marquis of Mantua, in regard of the neere neighbour-hood of their states, both the one and the other were sounded, and it was at last concluded with the Duke of Ferrara, that hee should bee receiued into the league, on condition to send to the Confederates army, two hundred men at armes, paid by him-selfe, and monethly to contribute, for the space of sixe moneths, tenne thousand Ducats  toward the payment of the infantery: and on the other side, the Confederates promised to take him and his State like-wise into their protection and safegard, where-vpon within a while after a great and Magnificent Pallace was restored to him which was his owne in Venice.
As concerning the agreement with the Marquis, there was greater difficultyThe marquis of Mantua, ioyne^ to the league. in the conclusion thereof, because he craued to bee made Generall of the League in the absence of the Lord of Lautrec: wherevnto the Venetians would not consent, for the respect they did beare to the Duke of Vrbin. But in the end, Ieronimo Zene, Gouernor of Verona, being sent by the Senates commandement vnto Mantua, to end that businesse, hee did conclude it without the aboue-mentioned  condition, the Confederates taking the person of the Marquis, and his State into their protection.
Now the Emperor perceiuing that he was to deale with so many enemies, determined first of all to publish the iustice of his cause, and by that meanes to draw away the King of England from them, and for this purpose hee resolued toThe Emperor commaedeth that the Pope should be enlarged. set the Pope at liberty, for which hee sent an ample commission to the Viceroy, and to D. Hugo de Moncada, (who being newly deceassed,) the Viceroy did exexecute it, the Pope making ouer to the Emperor, according to the agreement, Ostia, Ciuitauecchia, and C^uito Castellane, and paying likewise, (but more commodiously) the summe of mony promised, and promising in speciall, not to haue  any dealing in the affaires of Naples nor Milan against the Emperor.
The Confederates resoluing to make warre both by sea and land, in the begining of the yeare 1528. prepared great forces for to passe into the Kingdome of Naples, as it had beene determined according to the desire and intention of the French King, not-with-standing that they were well assured, that the Imperiall army, at their departure from Rome, would take their iournie into Naples. But the Confederates thinking it a matter of great importance, to draw the Pope into the Confederacy, were in great hope thereof, because that his Holinesse hauingThe Pope complaineth of the imperialls dealings. aduertized the French King and the Venetians of the passed agreement, and his owne liberty, entreated them to excuse him, if necessity had enforced him so to doe, confessing that he was greatly bound to the Princes of the League, and to  haue receiued a very rigorous and cruell entertainment of the Imperialls.
So soone as the Venetians vnderstood that the Pope was set at liberty, and that he was newly gonne to Oruietta, they speedily sent Lodouico Pisani the ProuidatorThe Venetians Ambassad to the Pope. to his Holinesse, to lament with him, in the Common-wealths name, for his passed fortunes, and to acquaint him with the great greefe that the Signory had conceiued thereat, and with what care they had labored his enlargement, whereof they were now wonderfull ioyfull, to see that to bee effected which they had so much desired. That the Republike had willingly imployed all her forces and meanes, beene at great charge and expence to entertaine an army in Tuscany, at the same time as it behooued it to haue an other in Lombardy: had not  refused to expose it selfe to all dangers for the conseruation of the Sea Apostolike, and for the particular profit of his Holynesse Person, as it was yet still ready to doe, and to reuenge the notorious iniuries done vnto him;

that the Kings of France and England, the Florentines, the Duke of Milan and the Venetians were of the same mind, not to leaue such an Insolency vnpunished: how that cursed nation had incurred the wrath of God and men, that they did not doubt but that Iustice and Innocency would preuaile, and that his Holinesse being restored to his former state, all matters would redound to his honour and glory. And that therefore all the Confederats did greatly desire and likewise hope that his Holinesse to releeue their sinceere and entire intention with his authority, would confirme the Confederacy as Cheefe thereof, by newly ratifieing, that which before had beene agreed vpon by them, seeing that the first agreement ought to be of more force, then the latter, as beeing concluded by himselfe in The French Kings Ambassador to the Pope. quallity of Pope, and with his pure and freewill, and this latter being extorted by force and violence, as from a prisoner that was desirous of his liberty.
The French King caused the same congratulation to be made to him by the Lord of Longueuall his Ambassador whom he sent to Rome, to testifie the great desire he euer had to constraine the Emperor by force to doe that which at last he had done, and that the practizes of peace betwixt the Emperor and him, had beene to none other end but to amuze him and make him cold in the preparations for warre, and not with an intention to conclude any thing with him, helping himselfe with the same cunning, wherewith he had sundry times practized in his behalfe.
These Ambassadors were very pleasing to the Pope, and by him attentiuely heard, wherevpon, he gaue thankes to the King and the Venetians, with demonstration of great loue towards them, saying, that for his deliuerance, he felt himselfeThe Popes excuse because he would not enter into any new consedera cy. no lesse bound to the French King and the Venetians then if he had beene freed by their armes: but yet neuerthelesse all this was without any resolution, for vpon their entreaty that he would confederate him selfe with the rest, he beganne to make them sundry answers: at one time putting them in hope presently to doe it, at another, excusing himselfe, that hauing nether men, money, nor authority, it would not greatly profit them if he should declare himselfe, and yet neuertheles it might hurt him, because it would giue an occasion to the Imperialls to molest  him in sundry places: besides his Pontificall dignity, the condition of the times and the greeuous and sharpe miseries that he had sustained, did very much incite him to a neutrality, and to become a fit Instrument to treat with the French King, and the other Christian Princes concerning an vniuersall peace and quiet: and that therefore he would no more commit him-selfe to the hazards of warre.
It may be that beeing carried away by the Emperors faire promises, (who with his owne hand wrote a gentle and courteous letter to him, how that he would hence foreward follow his councell and commit vnto him the whole negotiation of the peace) he might speake thus, or else that which is most likely and which was  afterwards discouered, he was content to forget all the wrong which he had receiued by his imprisonment to haue better means to reuenge the iniuries done to himselfe and his house by the Florentines.
His intent then was with sundry excuses to couer this desire of his: for beingVVhat the Popes Intention was. discouered, it would haue bred such a distrust in the Lord of Lautrec, as it would easily haue caused him to alter his purpose from passing on any farther in the enterprize of Naples which was a thing the Pope desired, to the end that the Lancequenets might be enforced to depart from Rome, who mutening often-times among themselues would not get them thence, demanding new paiments of money.
The Lord of Lautrec beeing ignorant of the Popes deseigne, and vpon the assurance of his ayd and fauor, did in the meane time pursue the enterprise of Naples, albeit it was against the opinion and consent of the Venetians who by

reason of that new leauy of Lansequenets for the enemies, could haue wished that hee might not goe so farre off, to the end they might the better and with more conueniency be releeued.
Lautrec then, being resolute in his opinion, tooke his way thorow RomagniaLautrec marcheth towards Naples. and La Marca, thinking it to be best and most conuenient for the commodity of victuals, and for the carriage of the ordnance, determining to enter into the Realme of Naples by the way of Otronte, which diuideth the Churches State from the Kingdome of Naples, thorow which at one time were gonne before, the Venetian troupes, diuided into two bands, in the first were Valerio Vrsino and the  Prouidator Pisani: and in the other, followed Camillo Vrsino and Petro Pesare. These being gonne before, seized on Ciuitella, and afterwards on Sulmona, and on diuers others in Abruzzo, which yeelded voluntarily. But the whole troupes did afterwards meet altogether neere to Saint Fermo, to the number of thirty thousand foot, and great numbers of Cauallery, as well men at armes as lighthorse, a preparation without all doubt suffitient for any enterprize whatsoeuer, the Lord Lautrec hauing taken the longest way into Puglia by the sea side, in regard of the difficulty to carry the ordnance, if in those mountainous places hee should haue met with any encombrance of the enemies.
The Prince of Orange and the Marquis of Guasto beeing greatly mooued for  the daunger, wherevnto they perceiued the affaires of Naples to be brought* did not without great difficulty draw away their troupes from Rome, which was greatly furthered by the summe of twenty thousand Ducats which the Pope gaue to the Imperiall captaines, vnder collour of some old claimes, whereof they gaueThe number of the Imperial army. some pay to the Lansequenets, who more then the rest seemed most loath to depart. But the number of their whole army did not amount to aboue foureteene thousand, and yet so sore weakened, as well by the contagious sicknesse which was in Rome, as for that many souldiers were disbanded and gonne home to their country loden with spoile.
But the Pope by this meanes being freed of that which did most presse him, and  for the which he had till then kept himselfe a loofe from the confederates, so soone as these enemies troupes were departed from Rome, hee sent the Archbishop SipontyneThe Popes demands to the Venetians. to Venice, to demand of the Senate that it should forthwith render vnto him the Cities of Ceruia and Rauenna: and on the other side he dispatched the Bishop of Pistoya into France to excuse him to the King (whom till then hee hadThe Popes excuses to the French King. entertained with sundry hopes that he would declare himselfe for the league) for that he could not according to his desire make a new consederacy, because that wanting both money and forces, his declaration would nothing profit the Confederates; that all he could doe was to treat of peace, and for that purpose he had giuen commission to the said Bishop to goe to the Emperour, to exhort him with  vehement speeches thervnto, mixing neuerthelesse with that discourse, some complaint against the Venetians, for that they had possessed and did still detaine certaine of the Churches lands.
The Popes demand was much displeasing to the Senate, not so much for the matter in question, as because it was made in an vnseasonable time, perceiuing very well that the Pope sought onely some occasion to breake off from them, as also for that it was a matter vnreasonable rashly to yeeld vp these townes, in so disodered a time, and in which the Imperials did still hold many townes of the Churches State: yet neuerthelesse sundry were of opinion that it was not good to breake with the Pope for any occasion whatsoeuer, but that they ought by all meanes to gratifie him, and for the rest to depend on his promise and good will, reposing so much trust in him, as that he would not forsake them.
This businesse being debated in the Senate* Dominito Treuisan, Procurator of Saint Marke, a man of great reputation for his long experience and knowledge in affaires of importance, declared by sound and pregnant reasons: how that it

was best to obserue the Pope, and to render those Cities which he demanded: On the contrary, Lodouico Mocenigo Knight, one of the chiefe Senators, and who had beene of opinion to send backe the Nuncio with a refusall of his demand, rose vp, and hauing propounded the inconueniences which might redound to the Signory,Sundry opinions of the Senate concerning the Popes demand. by surren^ing, in so miserable a season, those Cities which the Pope craued, the Senators grew to be diuided, some of them inclyning to one side and some to an other. But at last they resolued to answere the Pope, That the Senate had euer beene very desirous of peace, which might be for the good and safety of the Commonwealth, and particularly to the glory and aduancement of theThe Senates answere to the Pope. Church, and that therefore it would willingly embrace any kinde of agreement, but that it behoued them first to consult together to moderate the other difficulties, and that for the same end they would shortly send an expresse Ambassadour to treate in his presence of the businesse propounded by the Archbishop Sipontine, and of all other matters, to let him know their sincere and entire loue towards him.
According to this answere, they on a sodaine appointed Gasparo Contaren their Ambassadour for Rome: but the Pope being displeased therewith, shewed himselfe more sharpe and earnest in his demaund; wherevpon the Lord Lautrec hauing sent to his Holinesse the Count Guydo Rangone, and the Knight Casall, to vse all meanes they could to appease him, they did not only loose their labour, but  he told them besides that if those Cities were not surrendred to him, in stead of declaring himselfe for the league (wherevnto they did dayly solicite him) hee would vnite himselfe with the Imperialls, causing his Nuncio to say as much to the King: and indeed he declared by euident signes that he inclined therevnto, hauing expresly sent a Nuncio into Spaine to treat with the Emperor, al-be-it he affirmed, that hee had giuen him commission but to treat of an vniuersall peace, wherevnto if the Emperour should refuse to harken, that he should denounce warre, as the other Confederates had done.
During all these practizes, the Imperiall captaines, who were already passed in^o the Kingdome of Naples, beganne to be of different opinions: For the  Marquis of Guasto on the one side councelled them to march whither the Lord Lautrec lay with his army, to trie if they could draw him to the fight, this he did for diuers occasions which mooued him to hazard the whole, on the vncertaine euent of a battaile.
F^st, because that the Confederates were diuided amongst themselues (theirSundry opinions of the Imperial captaines. infantery being greater then Lautrecs) for that the people of the Kingdome did dayly rise in the behalfe of the French, the difficulty of receiuing any money from the Emperour, and the mutines which vpon that occasion the Almaine foot* men made, in regard whereof it being to bee feared that the entire losse of that State would ensue, he thought it much more proffitable to hazard all on  the euent of battaile, wherein lay as great hope of good successe as of danger: and the French army being broken, al the townes, which they had taken, would returne vnder their obedience, and the Kingdome of Naples might thereby bee assured.
Others maintained the contrary, saying, That the safest way for them was to lodge in some place strong by sytuation, and commodious for victuals, from whence the enemies could not easily driue them, where they might obserue and narrowly marke the behauior of the army of the league, and according therevnto to order their owne enterprizes: and if that they should perceiue the enemies to encrease in prosperous successe, then to take vpon them the defense of the City of Naples, because that vpon the conseruation or losse of the same did wholy  depend the successe of that warre: That they had receiued newes how that the Prince of Melphi, and Fabricio Mara^ani were onwards on their way, with great forces for their reliefe, and that their army being therewith strengthened, they needed no more to feare the enemies attempts, but should be able to breake

all their deseignes. That it was the part of him that had charge to defend a State enuaded by a mighty army, to temporize, because that time doth very often bring with it great and vnlooked for commodities: that without all doubt there were disorders in the enemies army, and by so much the greater, by how much the interests of the Confederates were different: that there was nothing which could lesse be gouerned by discretion and good councell, then the successe of battailes: that there was none so safe and ready a way to victory, nor any thing more worthy the reputation of a great captaine, then to entertaine the enemie with sundry cunnings, and consume him by little and little, with time and discommodity, the which vndoubtedly might happen to the French campe: That they  needed not likewise to feare, but that the Neapolitans would prouide money for the necessary payment of the Lansequenets, till such time as the pay from Spaine should arriue.
This opinion beeing accompanied with the authory of Alarcon who did constantlyThe Imperials embrace the opinion of Alarcon. maintaine it, was receiued for the best, wherevpon they resolued to passe forward, with an easie march, euer lodging in stronge and safe places, and in this manner to enter into the ^erra di Lauor, to come neere to the City of Naples. But the Imperials beeing retired into Troy to make prouision of victuals and to enquire after the enemy, Lautrec (as the French are more hardy and resolute) embraced that deseigne which the enemy had quited, and determined to seeke  them out and to offer them battaile, mooued chiefly therevnto (as hee said afterwards)Lautrec resolueth to fight with the enemy. for feare least his army should on a sodaine dissolue it selfe and depriue him of the fruite of other fortunate successes till then obtained, for want of pay.
For, payment being to come from France, he perceiued that the King did openly shew himselfe to be weary of so great expences, and his officers to be negligent in appointing necessary prouisions: hee had besides great hope to winne the victory, the Marquis of Sal^ss es being ioyned with him, and daylie expecting the Venetian and Florentine troupes, consisting of very choice footmen.
On the contrary, notwithstanding that the number of souldiers in the Imperiall campe was not inferiour to the French, their valour neuerthelesse was much  diminished, as well by the great sicknesse, as by the disorder and excesse which they had for the space of many monthes committed, whereby their bodies and mindes being become weake and effeminate, had in a manner lost all their vsuall brauery: and besides, those souldiers beeing wont to liue at pleasure, with an extraordinary liberty, did no more obserue as they ought martiall discipline. Moreouer, Lautrec was much stronger then the enemy in cauallery and prouision of ordnance, whereby it seemeth that he did not without cause perswade himselfe to obtaine the victory, and to conquer that whole State.
The Imperiall army hauing intelligence that Lautrec approached, came forth of Troy, and hauing possest a little hill which rised towards the plaine, did their  encampe and fortifie it selfe. Lautrec beeing come neere therevnto, placed his souldiers in order of battaile, determining (notwithstanding that the VenetianLautrec defi^th and prouoketh the Imperial army to battaile. and Florentine troupes were not arriued) to fight with them and to offer battaile, defying and prouoking them by his ordnance which plaied vpon their campe. But the Imperials receiuing small hurt by the shot, in regard of the sytuation of the place wherein they were, and resoluing not to fight, keeping themselues within their rampiers and fortifications, sent forth onely some light-horse and a few Harguebuziers to skirmish with the French, who marching still forward came and lodged hard by the enemies campe, which they did indanger by their artillery, those that were come forth to skirmish not beeing able to hinder  Lautrec from comming forwards, wherevpon the enemies determined to dislodge, and to goe and encampe on the farther side of Troy towards Nocera: where hauing within a while after intelligence that Horacio Baillone with the Florentine troupes was come to the campe of the league, and that Camillo Vrsino

and the Prouidator Pisani, would arriue there the morrow after; they resolued toThe Imperials retire towards Naples. depart forth of Abruzzo, and to march directly towards Naples, according to their first deseigne; chiefly to defend that City as the principall of the whole State.
The Lord Lautrec being out of hope to enforce the enemies to fight, who had already so openly refused it, conuerted all his deseignes to make himselfe Master of the country, and not to leaue any enemy towne behinde him, before that he would march to Naples. Wherevpon hauing intelligence that the Prince ofThe confederates take Melfi. Melfi, had entred Melfi with great numbers of souldiers, he sent Pedro of Nauarre thither with his Gascon companies, and Baillone with the blacke bands and two  Cannons, who hauing battered it, they tooke and ^acked it.
At the same time the Prouidator Pisan^ with two thousand Venetian footmenAscoli, Barletta, Trani, and diuers ^ther tow^es, yeeld to the confederates. tooke the towne of Ascoli, and then he came and ioyned with Lautrec, vnto whom were yeelded Barletta, Trany and diuers others townes neere adioyning, some of them being mooued therevnto by the feare of the disaster of Melfi, and others by a particular affection which they did beare to the French, being weary of the Spanish gouernment, so as there was no other towne in all Puglia that held for the Emperour but only Mansredonia. Wherevpon Lautrec hauing left for the beseeging of that City and for the gard of those that he had conquered, the Venetian troupes, which were in all two thousand foot-men, an hundred  men at armes, and two hundred light horse, he marched in great speed with the residue of the army towards Naples, all places thorow which he passed, yeelding vnto him.
Being come to Caforia, three miles from Naples vpon the high way to Auersa,Lautrec marcheth with his army towards Naples. hee determined to encampe there, as the onely meanes to make himselfe Master thereof, and for that purpose caused his army to march directly towards the City, betwixt Pog^o Royall and Saint Martins Mount, the companies extending themselues within halfe a mile of Naples, and the Lord Lautrec in person wasLautrec encampeth within two miles of Naples. gonne somewhat farther then Pogio royall, to the Duke of Montalto his Farme, where he fortified himselfe.
At the same time, the Venetians nauall army hauing beene refreshed and restored at Corfou, after the losse that it susteined by tempest neere to the Isle of Sardinia, was come along the coast of Puglia, being sixteene Gallies in number, vnder the conduct of Iohn Mora the Prouidator, because that Petro Land^ Generall of the Venetian gallies was gonne into Candy, to appease certaine troubles of the country men in the streight of La Canea.
Now by the agreement and conuention of the league, sixe cities of PugliaSix Cities appointed to the Venetians by the agreement of the league. were appointed to the Signory of Venice, namely, Ottranto, Brundusium, Monopoli, Po^ignane, Mol^, and Trani, which it had in times past enioyed, and therefore  the Venetians hauing, besides the Gallies, diuers other armed vessels, did with greater courage pursue the conquest of those townes, being assured, besides their owne strength, of the loue and goodwill of the Inhabitants, who did infinitely wish for them, wherevpon so soone as the army approched, Monopoli and Trani yeelded to them, the rest making shew to doe the like, so soone as occasionMon^pli and Trani yeelded to the Uenetians. should be offered.
But the Lord Lautrec hauing solicited the Venetian captaines to come and ioyne their gallies with Philippine Doria at the seege of Naples, they were enforced to giue ouer their enterprize, they being enioyned to follow his commandements: for Philippin Doria was come before Naples with eight gallies onely, to keepe victuals from entring into the City by sea, but fearing least the beseeged  sallying forth vpon him, he might be defeated, in regard he had no greater forces, the arriuall of the Venetian gallies would assure him and more straightly shut in those of the City.
At this stay stood the affaires of the Kingdom of Naples whilest the Venetians

were elsewhere busied with alarmes, because that Henry Duke of Brunswich, after a great report of his comming, being solicited by the Emperour and his brotherThe Duke of Brunswich commeth into Italy with great ^orces. Ferdinand to passe into Italy, had entred Lombardy to diuert the Confederates forces from the enterprize of the Realme of Naples, the which being reduced to great extremity, hee could not so speedily releeue as by this meanes, The Duke of Brunswich then being come to Trent, he entred Lombardy by the Veronois territory, leading along with him about twelue thousand foot-men, saying that he would ioyne with Antonio de Leua, who was already come forth into the field with eight thousand foot-men, that they two beeing ioyned together might goe and assaile the Cities belonging to the State of Venice, against  whom Brunswich had denounced warre, and had with a vaine and rediculous proposition challenged Andre Gritti Duke of Venice to a single fight, whoA vaine and rediculous challenge. was a man of fourescore yeeres of age.
The Venetians, resoluing to defend themselues, concluded to raise twelue thousand foot-men, amongst whom were foure thousand Swisses, vnto whom they speedily sent money into Swisserland, and intreated the French King by his authority to fauour that leauy: they had besides, great numbers of lighthorse from Greece and Dalmatia: then they recalled the Duke of Vrbin from the Marches of Ancona, and commanded him to visit all their townes and fortes of most importance, to prouide them of strong garrisons, and to take order  for whatsoeuer hee should thinke necessary for their seruice, safety, and defense: they appointed afterwards, diuers Gentlemen, to command their principall cities. Ieronimo Diede was sent to Treuiso with an hundred and fifty footmen, Pedro Sagreda with like number to Padua, to Verona went Zachary Doria, Philippo Correrio, Alessandro Donato, Ambrosio Contaren, Iosepho Badoario, Lorenzo Sanuto, Augustino Canall, and Almore Barbaro, each of them with fiue and twenty souldiers with them to looke to the gates and other important places of the city.
In the meane time, vpon these newes great warlike preparations were made in France to send into Italy, of whom the Count of Saint Pol was made Generall,The Venetia^ preparations against the Duke of Brunswich. who was of the house of Bourbon, to the end to follow the Duke of Brunswich, if hee should passe on into the Realme of Naples, if not, to make warre on the Dutchy of Milan, together with the companies of the Venetians and those of Francis Sforza. But all these preparations did little auaile by reason of their late comming. For the Duke of Brunswich beeing followed with his owne forces determined to assaile certaine cities belonging to the Venetians, being the rather mooued therevnto, because that at his arriuall, Pescara, Reuotella, and certaine other townes vpon the Lake of La Garda, had yeelded to him. The Duke of Vrbin, who had put himselfe into Verona, hauing still an eye vpon Brunswich,The Duke of Brunswich being ioyned with Antonio de Leua doth come and beseege Laud^ did preuent his deseignes, and went sodainely to Bressia, where hee strengthened  the Garrison, then from thence hee went to Bergamo, into which hee caused great numbers of the people of those Vallies to enter, who were very faithfull and trusty to the Venetians, and with a wonderfull celerity, hee caused the city to bee encompassed with great trenches, making it thereby defensible, then, giuing very many trauerses and molestations to the enemies, by cutting off victuals and many other commodities from them, the Duke of Brunswich despayring of beeing able to execute any notable enterprize, after that hee had (according to their barbarous custome) spoiled the country, and burned sundry faire buildings to leaue some memory of himselfe behinde, hee departed without any other great exploit forth of the Venetian State, and came vpon  that of Milan, where he met with Antonio de Leua, who vpon report of his comming had passed ouer the Riuer Adda to ioyne with him, that they might afterwards execute some great enterprize, and hauing repassed the Adda, they went and encamped before Lauda, forth of which the Duke of Milan was

newly departed, beeing aduertized of the enemies comming, and was come to Bressia, by the consent of the Senate, hauing left a suffitient number of souldiers in Lauda, with Iohn Paul Sforza, his naturall brother, to command there, who being assailed by the enemies, did valliantly receiue and repulse them.
By means whereof, Brunswick finding himself without means to entertain such an army any long time, and beeing frustrate of his hope to returne home laden with glory and spoile, not determyning to go on any farther towards Naples, (as at the beginning hee had purposed, hee tooke his iourney towards the LakeBrunswich returneth into Germany. of Coma, to returne into Germany: hee was pursued at the heeles by the Count Gaiazzo and Mercurio Bue, who comming forth of Bergamo gaue in vpon his  rereward.
The report of the Lansequenets departure did greatly afflict the beseeged Neapolitans, loosing thereby all hope of succours, on whom it seemed that their whole safety did depend: because that not long before they had with bad successe assailed the Gallies of Phillipine Doria, supposing to open to themselues the passage by sea, seeing that by land was wholly shut from them, Lautrec hauing taken Pozzuolo and the places neere adioyning, by which great aboundance of victualls came to Naples; which was the cause that before the VenetiansPozzuolo taken^y Lautrec. Gallies arriued, they were desirous to tempt fortune, and to free themselues of the stumbling block by sea, by breaking Phillippine Doria, who with the  Gallies lay in the Gulph of Salerno.
They manned sixe Gallies, foure Fusts, and two Brigantines, with a thousandAn enterprize of the Spaniards against the Gallies of Philippin Doria. Spanish Harquebuziers of the choisest and most valliant of the army, with whom went along Don Hugo the Viceroy, and almost all the chiefe captaines and men of authority. To these vessels were added diuers fisher-boates, to amaze the enemies a farre off, by the shew of a greater number of vessels. All these Lords beeing ioyfully embarked, as if they had beene going to a triumph, came to the Isle of Capri: from thence, leauing the Cape of Minerua, on their left hand, they came into the maine ^ea and sent two Gallies before; who were commanded, that so soone as they should come neere the enemies, to make shew A policy of the enemies. of flight, to the end to draw them forth to fight at sea, hoping to take them with ease: But the matter fell out otherwise, for Phillipine Doria beeing aduertized the day before by trusty spies of the enemies determination, had with great speed and secrecy drawne three hundred Harquebuziers from Lautrec, then so soone as hee discouered the enemies fleet a farre off, making towards it, he was at the first somewhat doubtfull, in regard of the great number of vessels that hee discouered, but beeing soone freed of that scruple, when he perceiued that there were but sixe vessels onely; hee caused three gallies of his owne to keepe aloose, as though they had ment to flie, to the end that by returning, with a very faire winde, they might giue in vpon the enemies broad sides, and himselfe with  fiue Gallic^ went forward to meet them, who were commanded to discharge their ordnance vpon him, to take away, by the smoake, both his sight and aime: but Phillippin beeing quicker then they, gaue fire to a very great Basilisk in his owne Galley, which strooke the Admirall Galley wherein the Viceroy was, who with diuers others were therewith slaine, then hee discharged all his other shot, which did hurt and kill diuers.
The enemies shot on the other side slue some, but not very many: then comming neere to one an other, they beganne with Harguebuzes and other weapons a very fierce fight, which lasted along while, till such time as theThe Imperials ^e (...) at sea. three first Gallies, which seemed to flie towardes the maine sea, returning  vpon the enemies, strooke the Admirall Galley vpon the broade side, and sunke two others, two were taken by Doria, and two others, which had beene sore beaten, committed themselues to ^light, perceiuing that the enemies were victorious.
There dyed at this incounter of cheefe Commanders, Don Hugo the Viceroy,The number of the dead, and of the prisoners. and Caesar Fieramosea, with more then a thousand men of the ordinary companies: there were taken prisoners, the Marquis of Guasto, Ascanio Colonna, the Prince of Salerno, Santa Cruz, Camillo Colonna, Gobba Serenon, and diuerse other Captaines and Gentlemen; whereby the Citty of Naples was bereft of her best and brauest defendants.
During these exploits at sea, Petro Lande, Generall of the Venetians sea-army,The great commodity which the arriuall of the Generall of the Venetian Galleys brought to the confederates. arriued before Naples with twenty Galleys, who came from Puglia, where hee had taken the sixe Citties belonging to the Venetians. His arriuall did greatly profit the French, and annoy the enemies, because that hauing left sixe  Galleys at Gayetta, and as many at Cumes: hee with the residue, scowred all places neere to Naples, did shutte the sea from the besieged, suffering nothing to enter into the Citty, and stopt their passage, who were come foorth of the Towne to runne vp and downe along the Sea side, who durst not returne for feare of the shotte of the Venetian Galleis, he did beside seaze on diuers places where their mills stood, whither those of the Citty did vse to send their corne to be ground, whereby they were enforced to vse hand* mills, or to eate their graine beeing vn-grownd, which was distributed vnto them foorth of the munition.
Besides, it did greatly serue for the safe and more easie bringing of victualls to  the Army, which came f^om sea, whereof there was great scarcity, as well by reason of the great nomber of vnprofitable eaters that were there, as of the great dearth which was then generally ouer all Italy, and likewise in regard of the small care of the Captaines.The Lord of Barbezieu^ commeth to Sauona.
At the same time, the Lord of Barbezieuz, being come from France to Sauona with money for to pay the Army, and hauing sent it by sea into the kingdome, great difficulties were made for the bringing it to the Campe: the Lord Lautrec sendeth forces to the sea-side to receiue the money, but the Gallies beeing not able to come to land, by reason of the working of the Sea, the Marquis of Salusses returned the day following with his Lances, and a strong band of Gascons, Suisses, Lansquenets, and of the black-bands: Wherevpon at their returne they mette with the Imperialls, who were come foorth of Naples in great troopes to assaile them, and to take away the money, who were valiantly repulsedA fierce incounter of those of ^he league and th^ Imperialls. by Valerio Vrsino with the Venetian troopes, and by Hugo de Pepoli Captaine of the Florentines, to their great losse and hurt, but Hugo de Peopli hauing too farre pursued the runne-awayes, was within an Harquebuze shotte of the Battaillon of the black-bands taken prisoner by the Imperiall horse-men.
Hithervnto had the affaires of the league prospered, with hope of giuing aThe (...) of the A^my of the league before Naples. speedy end to the warre, by the conquest of the Realme of Naples: but within  a while after, euident signes began to appeare, not of the declination of their good fortune, but of their entire ruine, fortune in a manner declaring that shee could no longer fauour the affaires of the French in Italy. For the Armie was afflicted with diuerse sodaine diseases, sundry occasions occurring, as first of all, the celestiall influence, which the same yeare had in diuerse places caused contagious sicknesse: next, their aboade there in the moneth of August, when as the Soldiors liuing carelesly, did greedily and in aboundance eate of all manner of fruites: but that which did most hurt them, was the waters, which beeing for diuerse moneths turned foorth of their ordinary channells, and courses, had well neere drowned the whole Counttey round about, and infected  the ayre.
The Lord Lautrec being greatly troubled by these difficulties, and either enforced to continue the siege with these discomodities, or else to enlarge his troopes

farther of, was councelled by all the Captaines, to send the soldiers into the territoriesThe great sor^w of the Lord Lautrec. neere at hand, and by separating them in that manner, to take from the disease, which was already become contagious, the cause of any greater progression, and giue meanes to the diseased to heale and to looke to themselues. But that which did most of all torment the Lord Lautrec, was, for that hee perceiued the victory, which hee had almost obtained, to be snacht foorth of his hands, and that by enlarging his troopes, hee knew very well that the Imperialls, who had great numbers of horse to send abroad, and finding no resistance at all, would haue meanes to prouide for all their discommodities. Hee vnderstood dayly how that Simon Roman, whom hee had sent into Calabria, had fortunate successe, that all  those people hauing a particular inclination to the French, did yeeld vnto him: that the townes and Hauens of Puglia, were in the hands of the Venetians: that Abruzzo was from the beginning at the deuotion of the French: that the Spaniards were already in a manner driuen forth of the whole kingdome: and yet neuerthelesse, that all these happy conquests would turne to nothing, if by temporising they should giue any relaxation to those of Naples, who were already reduced to great extremity, and lose the occasion of taking that Citty, whereon depended, the good or bad successe of that enterprise.
Besides, hee was ashamed to see the Spaniards, who were afflicted with greeuous diseases and discommodities, should constantly beare them, without enduring  any speech of yeelding; whereas the French at the first touch of aduerse fortune did strike sayle, and seemed to bee ouer-come by the vanquished. HauingThe Lord Lautrecs nature. afterwards receiued a farre lesse summe of money out of France then hee expected, or was needfull for the paiment of the Army, hee dispaired of beeing able any longer to entertaine it. But that which did most of all torment him was, to see himselfe to bee constrained to enforce his owne nature, beeing not wont willingly to heare nor esteeme an other mans opinion, and least of all to giue ouer a resolution which hee had once taken: Wherevpon notwithstanding that occasion was dayly offered to change his minde, and to fitte himselfe to time, yet for all that hee would neuer consent to discampe, nor suffer any man to depart  thence, vntill that extreame necessitie enforced him to doe that which reason might haue perswaded him to; because that meane soldiers alone did not dayly dye, but the very cheefe of the Army, and among others, Lodouico Pisani, andGre^t sicknes in the French Campe. Petro Pesare the Venetian Prouidators, and the Earle of Vandemont within a while after: diuerse beeing stricken with the contagion, retired to Gayetta and to other places.
In the meane time, a new accident did more trouble him then all the rest, and caused him wholy to despaire of any fortunate enterprise, which was, the determinationAndre Doria (...) from the Kings seruice. of Andre Doria, who beeing male-content with the French, had forsaken the Kings seruice, and entred into the Emperours pay. The cause thereof  was attributed, as well by himselfe as by others, to diuerse subiects, and chiefly to a disdaine which hee conceiued in his minde, because that the King did not esteeme of him according to his merrits, not granting vnto him the office of Admirall, which was then vacant, and giuen to the Lord of Barbezieuz: That theThe cause of Andre Doria (...) reuolt. King would not satisfie his iust request, to yeeld vnto the Genowais the accustomed soueraignty of Sauona.
Sundry signes appearing of this discontent, the Pope had some suspition thereof; Wherevpon hee aduertised the King of it, perswading him to make more deere account of such a man then hee had done, who was able to doe much for the furtherance of the seruice of the league, and not to suffer him to  depart mal-content with such forces, to the Emperors seruice. But the French King suspecting at the same time all the Popes actions, his councell could nothing preuaile with him. Yet neuerthelesse finding it to bee true afterwards, and

perceiuing the matter to be of importance, knowing no meanes how to preuent it, or else beeing peraduenture willing to be freed from such expence, he councelled the Pope to giue him entertainement, in regard of his great desire to serue th^ Church, rather then to suffer him to go to the Emperors side. The Pope seemingThe Popes answer to the King, concerning the entertainment of Andrew Doria to be desirous of it, and yet not willing to displease the Emperor, excused himselfe by reason of his owne small meanes, adding that so soone as by the Kings helpe hee should recouer Rauenna and Ceruia, hee might then more freely, be at greater expence.
Doria in the meane time without longer dissembling that which he had determinedArticles ^fgreement betwixt the Emperor, and Doria. to do, sent one of his Gentlemen to the Emperor, in whose Court the Articles  of agreement betwixt them were resolued on: which were, The Liberty of Genoa vnder the Emperors protection: The Subiection of Sauona to the Geno^ois, and the entring of the said Doria into the Emperors pay with twelue Gallels, and a yeerely pention of threescore thousand Ducats.
This reuolt of Doria did greatly hinder the Confederates, and mightily preiudice the enterprise of Naples, because that the Venetian Gallies, remaining alone,The great discomodity which the reuolt of Doria did procure. were enforced to retire their Rowers or Gally-slaues, which wrought in the trenches, to looke to the businesse at Sea: and the Admirall Barbizieux on the other side beeing come from France with sixteene Gallies, tarried at Sauona, (not daring to saile to Naples) where he landed a great part of the footmen to send them  for the gard of Genoa, albeit they were appointed to goe to the succour of the Lord Lautrec: so as from this accident proceeded all the mishap of the seege of Naples, and the losse of the leagues reputation.
As also because that the Lord Lautrec could neuer make vse in time of those forces which Ranc^ d^ Cera had at Ciuitauechia, by reason of the Popes different and vncertaine resolutions, who (beeing solicited by the Lord Lautrec with huge and in a manner menacing speeches, and afterwards with gentle and courteous language to declare himselfe, promising to restore those of his family in Florence) would neuer make any certaine resolution; euer saying, that as one zealous of the common good, peace was his chiefe ayme and obiect, the which, with more  safety, and lesse suspition to treat of, he would remaine neuter, although the contrary appeared by sundry apparent signes, that he did more encline to the Emperors side, then to any other: but because he would not vrge the Lord Lautrec to prooue an open enemy, he answered, that to declare himselfe, would nothing auaile them, in regard (as he had oftentimes said) that he had not sufficient forces for any great enterprize.
That the most Christian King might neuerthelesse make vse of the Churches State, and of the commodities thereof, without renewing vpon that occasion the Confederacy. By this meanes the French forces were daily weakned, and disorders and discommodities encreased in the Campe: and the beseeged on the contrary, were in hope of good successe.
The aid from France, which had been so often craued of the King, and which hisThe wants of the army beso^e Naples. maiesty had so often promised, did not arriue, and the troopes raised in the Kingdome of Naples were not sufficient to fill vp the army, nor to supply the want of the military factions, the Campe standing in need of all thinges, because that the enemies Cauallery sallying forth many times to surprise the victualls, which was brought to the Campe from the neighbor townes, the Army in steed of beseeging was little better then beseeged.
In a word discomodities did so encrease, as there was noe one company in the whole army, but had great store of sicke persons in it. The soldiers were become  lazie and idle, and throwing their armes from them, obserued no order, discipline,Disorders (...) the army nor any obedience, especially the men at armes who beeing disbanded without their Captaines leaue, did forsake the Campe: the Captaines likewise, were partly absent farre from thence, to cause them-selues to be healed, and to

recouer their healths, and part of them also liued vnprofitably in the Campe, beeing weake and ill disposed of their persons. But among others, the Lord Lautrec was very sick, beeing spent as well in minde as body, for the great danger that hee perceiued the Armie to bee in: Wherevpon, his owne fault encreasing the sorrow and griefe of his heart, made him for the space of many dayes vnable to giue order for the affaires of the warre.
But beeing come to himselfe, and a little recouering his spirits, hee began toThe Lord Lautrec greeuously sick. visit the whole Campe, to preserue order and the Guardes, fearing to be assailed. Matters did dayly decline, so as by reason of the strength of the Imperials horsemen, there was no more commerce betwixt the Campe and the Galleys, and  those of the Campe, because they had no horse, could not runne forth of the wayes: But that which did aggrauate all the disorders, was the death of theThe Lord Lautrecs death. Lord Lautrec, vpon whose valour and authoritie all matters relyed, and it was certainly thought, that his disease encreased by too much trauaile.
The end of the seuenth Booke of the fifth Decade.




The Contents of the eight Booke of the  fifth Decade.
THE Marquis of Salusses beeing made  Generall of the French Army, by the death of the Lord Lautrec, raiseth his Campe, from before Naples, and retireth to Auersa. The taking of Auersa, and the Marquis by the Imperialls. The Citty of Genoa reuolteth from the French King, by the meanes of Andre Doria. The determination of the Confederates to goe and besiege  Milan is broken. Pauia is taken by the Confederates. Nouara with diuerse other places, are yeelded to the Confederates. The Lord of Saint Paul his iourney to recouer Genoa, is in vaine. The Castle of Genoa is raced by the people. The Genowais fill vp the Hauen of Sauona with grauell. The Pope demandeth the Citties of Rauenna and Ceruia of the Venetians. A treaty of peace held at Rome, but to no purpose. The great warlike preparations of the Archduke of Austria to send into Italy to the Emperors ayde. The Venetians lend money to  the French, and to the Duke of Milan. The French King resolueth to make warre vpon the Emperour on the frontiers of Spaine. The Venetians solicit the King to come in person into Italy. The Imperialls recouer Aquila and Matricia. The Marquis of Guasto besiegeth Monopoli. Brundusium is yeelded to the Venetians. An allarme beeing giuen to the Duke of Vrbin, hee runneth to the defence of his owne state. An enterview of the French and Venetian Armies. The defeate and taking of the Count Saint Paul by Antonio de Leua. The Duke of Vrbins retreate to Cassan. The  Duke of Vrbin defeateth a part of the enemies at the passage of a Riuer. Antonio de Leua retireth to Milan. The Venetian Senate are male-content

with the King. The Emperors arriuall at Genoa. The Emperors great forces in Italy. The Florentines send Ambassadors to the Emperor. The great warlike preparations of the Venetians. Peace concluded at Cambray betwixt the Emperor and the King. The King is very earnest with the Emperor to make an accord with the Venetians. And lastly, a new confederacie betwixt the Venetians and Francis Sforza Duke of Milan.




The Eight Booke of the fifth Decade of the Historie of Uenice.
THE Lord Lautrec beeing dead, Michaele AntonioThe Marquis o^ Sa^usses Generall ^f the Army aft^r Lantrecs death Marquis of Salusses a couragious Lord, and well beloued of the Soldiors, tooke vpon him the charge of the Armie in a manner ruined, who beeing councelled to discampe, not so much for the present state of their affaires, as for the danger and necessity that pressed  him, gathered together those forces that remained, and retired with small losse to Auersa, expecting succours from Rance de Cera. Vpon his retreate, the Imperialls comming foorth of Naples, gaue in vpon his rereward: but by reason of his good order, the losse was not great. Certaine French troopes were broken, and Pedro of Nauarre beeing taken prisoner was ledde to Naples, where hee dyed.
The Marquis beeing come to Auersa, was neerely pursued by the Imperialls,The Marquis with the Army retireth to (...). and beeing not able to make defence, hee sent the Count Ouy de Rangone to parley  with the Prince of Orange the Imperialls Generall, with whom it was capitulated, That the Marquis should quit Auersa, with the Castle, Artillery, andThe Capitulation about the y^elding of Auers^ Munition: That as well himselfe, as the other Captaines, should remaine prisoners, except the Count Guy, who treated particularly for himselfe: That the Marquis should doe his vtmost to cause the French and Venetians to render vp the kingdome, with diuerse other conuentions which made this French Armie miserable, who of vanquishers became vanquished, to the Venetians great greefe and discontent, whose fortune for the kingdome of Naples, was, to depend on that of the French their friends and consederates.
This losse was accompanied by a very greeuous and most preiudicious accident Geno^ by meanes of Andre Doria (...) from the King to the ^peror. to the league, and of great importance to the French, which caused great strife betwixt them: for, the plague beeing very great in Genoa, and by reason thereof in a manner forsaken by all men, and likewise by the soldiers, and namely

by Theodore ^riuulcio the Gouernor, who retired into the Castle: Anare (...) making vse of this occasion, came neere to the Citty with certaine Galleys, and those few soldiors that hee had, which did not exceed the number of fiue hundred footmen, not hoping neuerthelesse to performe that which hee afterward did, and entring it without any great resistance, by the fauour of the people, who were greatly delighted with the name of liberty, which hee promised them, became maister thereof, where on a sodaine hee changed the manner of gouernment vnder the Emperors protection.
It lay not in Triuulcio his power to hinder it, who beeing come to the Citty but a while before, had much to doe to escape into the Castle, hoping, (as hee  said) vpon the artiuall of succours to bee able at his pleasure to enter the Citty, and to reduce it to the Kings deuotion, as it had beene in time before. For hee sent to the Lord Saint Paul, to send him speedily three thousand footmen, by whose ayde hee hoped to recouer the Citty: Wherevpon the Captaines of the Confederates did determine, That the Lord of Montilan should turne to Genoa with three thousand Lansquenets and Suisses, which came from France, and were already arriued at Alexandria.
The Senate in the meane time, did not cease to giue order for necessary prouisions,The Venetians great preparations. for the speedy renewing of the warre in Lombardy, and for that they would not giue Antonio de Leua any time to make preparations they solicited  one an other speedily to take armes: they sent the Secretary Andre Rossi into France, to hasten the forces which were to come into Italy: they did besides, command the Duke of Vrbin to receiue all those Almaines into their pay, which had forsaken the Duke of Brunswich, hauing more-ouer sent to Iuree, money for the payment of fiue thousand Lansquenets: so as the Republick had in a veryThe number of the Venetians sorces. short space, more then tenne thousand footmen of sundry nations, Almaines, Suisses, and Italians, fifteene hundred light horse, and eight hundred men at armes, with which forces, and those of the French beeing ioyned together, they did hope to driue Antonio de Leua forth of Italy.
The Duke of Vrbins chiefe purpose was to place a strong Garrison in Lauda,The Duke of Vrbins determination. beeing a place of great importance for the Duke of Milan, and for the Venetians likewise, because the keeping there of did greatly auaile for the assurance of Bergamo and Crema: and then to passe the Po so soone as the French succours should beginne to come vpon the Alpes to ioyne with the French, and afterwards to goe and assaile Antonio de Leua. For* the supplyes of siue thousand footmen, and fiue hundred Lances, and as many light horse, which were expected, beeing arriued, the Duke of Vrbin talked with the Count Saint Paul at Monticella on the Po, to consult in what manner they were to proceed in this warre for the profit and commodity of the common cause.
The Duke of Vrbin by the aduise of the Senate, propounded to employ their  whole forces in Lombardy, to driue Antonio de Leua, if it were possible, foorth of the State of Milan, to the end to cut off all meanes from the Imperialls of sending downe any ayde by that way into Italy forth of Germany, and of hauing victuals from thence for the feeding of their Armie as they were wont.The proposition of the co^nt Saint Paul. The Lord Saint Paul, and the other French Captaines were of a contrary opinion, saying* That it was not fitte to abandon the affaires of Naples, vnlesse they should loose their honour and reputation both with the people and the enemies, propounding besides, how important a matter it was to keepe the Imperialls busied in the kingdome of Naples, who by that meanes could not come and ioyne with Antonio ^e Leua.
In this diuersitie of opinions, a way was found to content both parties: namely, not altogether to abandon the affaires of Naples, and yet to make the cheefe attempts in Lombardy.
For, the Confederates, possessing diuerse and sundry places in Puglia, where the people did greatly affect the French and Venetians; it was resolued to re-enforce those troops that they had there, to trie if they could aduance the businesse any better, and keepe the Imperiall Captaines amuzed and in feare: and for that purpose the Senate wrote to the Prouidator of their nauall Armie, that he should carry his vessels into Puglia, and to place strong garrisons in those townes which held for the Signory and for the French, and then to besiege the Castle of Brundusium: and that on the other side, the Prince of Melfi, and Rance de Cera, should passe ouer into those parts with fiue thousand footmen, whom the Venetians should furnish with vessels for their passage.
But as concerning Lombardy, and the state of Milan, they resolued, (the forces there beeing compleate) to goe and besiege the citty of Milan, and to this end allThe enterprise of Milan broken. the troopes beeing come as farre as Landriane, the Captaines were of an other opinion, hee that was sent to discouer the Citty hauing told them, that such an enterprise could haue no fortunate successe: Wherevpon they determined to goe and encampe before Pauia, the which they hoped to take with ease, because there were no more then two hundred Lansquenets, and eight hundred Italians in it, and both the armies beeing by sundry wayes come neere to Pauia, they encamped round about it, and hauing planted on the hither side of the Riuer Thesin, in the plaine on the lower side of the Citty, nine Cannons, they plaid in such The Consederates besiege Pauia. sort vpon a bastion neere to the Arsenall, that in a short space it was halfe ruined, and on the farther side of Thesin, three Cannons to batter, (when they should goe to the assault,) a Flanqueer right opposite to the Arsenall, and vpon a little hill on the hither side Thesin fiue Cannons, which did batter two other bastions, and at the foote of the hill three others which plaid vpon the wall, all which ordnance belonged to the Venetians: and that of the Lord Saint Paul serued for the beating downe of the fortifications.
After a sufficient battery in sundry places, and so soone as they had drawne the water foorth of the Dikes, they went to the assault, where for two houres space those within the towne did valiantly defend it, but their number beeing  too small to susteine such an assault, those of the league did at the last enter it with very small losse, and with great honor to the Duke of Vrbin: seauen hundredThe Conse^erates take Pauia. souldiors of the towne were slaine, the residue escaped into the Castle with Galeas de Biraga the Citties Gouernor, and diuerse of the inhabitants, who yeelded soone after vpon composition, the Citty was wholy sackt, but of no great valew; in regard of the two former.
The taking of Pauia did procure to the league great contentment and notable reputation, not onely in regarde of that Citty, but because that Nouara,Nouara and diuerse other townes yeeld to the Consederates. and diuerse other neighbour townes did within a while after, yeeld, to the great losse and discommodity of the enemies, who from thence had aboundance of  victuals for the reliefe of their Army in Milan. The Venetian Senate beeing wonderfull ioyfull of such happy successe, promised to it selfe, that it might bee able to recouer all those disastrous mishaps susteined before Naples, and in regard heereof it did infinitely thanke and extoll the Lord Saint Paul, intreating and exhorting him to goe forward as hee had begunne, hoping that vnder his conduct they should bee able to recouer not onely the State of Milan, but the kingdome of Naples.
The newes of the losse of Genoa beeing in the meane time brought into France, did greatly greeue the King, who speedily sent commandement to the Lord Saint Paul, that all other Commissions beeing layde apart, hee  should march to Genoa, to attempt the reducin^ thereof vnder his obedience: For the three thousand footmen appointed for the releefe thereof not going thither, because they wanted their pay, Tri^lcio was in great distresse,

protesting that if he were not speedily releeued he must of force yeeld himselfe:The Lord Saint Paul leaueth Milan to go to the releef of Genoa. wherby, the affaires of the league, which beganne to prosper, did afterwards fall into great dsfficulties: because that as the commoditie of conquering Milan did present it selfe by the reputation of the taking of Pauia, and by the discomodity which Antonio de Leua his army endured, where for the effecting thereof it beehooued all the forces to be brought together, with two Camps to assaile and shut in so great a Citty; they were constrained to giue ouer all, the Lord Saint Paul hauing bent all his thoughtes and deseignes to releeue Genoa, wherevpon, he did not only refuse to goe to the enterprise of Milan, but did sollicite the Duke of Vrbin to goe along with him thither with the Venetian forces for the recouery  of it, wherevnto the Senate would not consent, because that by sending their forces so farre off, they should not only loose all the fruit of the Victory, and put the Duke of Milan into dispaire, but expose the Citty of Bergamo and other townes of their owne State to great dangers.
Persisting then both the one and the other in their opinion, the French Army seperated it selfe, and passed ouer the Po at Stella, to march through Tuscany to Genoa, and the Venetians Campe, by the Senates aduise, retired to Pauia, to fauor, with the reputation thereof, the affaires of Genoa, (it beeing in the meane time in safety), and to excute like-wise what so-euer occasion would  present.
But the enterprize of the Lord Saint Paul had no fortunate successe, who findingThe lord S^ Paul his aeseignes to re lee^ Genoa proouet^ vaine Genoa to be mand with a strong garrison, and hauing in his owne army but two thousand footmen, beeing out of hope to obtaine that which he desired by tarrying any longer there, notwithstanding that he had made his approaches neere to the Citty, determined to returne into Lombardy to spend the winter time, where by the consent of Sforza he did put himselfe into the Citty of Alexandria.
Now Trinulcio in the meane time hauing notice of his departure, and expecting ayd from no place else, resolued to yeeld the Castle, as he did, the whichCastle of Genoa raced by the People. was forthwith raced to the ground by the People to take away that hinderance of  their liberty.
The Citty of Sauona like-wise, where-into the Lord of Monteian (sent thither with his forces to releeue it) could not enter, returned vnder the GenowaiesThe Genowaies fill the Hauen of Sauona with grauell. Gouernment, who on a sodaine filled the hauen thereof with stones and grauell to make it vnseruiceable.
The Venetians perceiuing that the French King did openly shew himselfe to be displeased with them, because that the Duke of Vrbin, with their forces, did not goe to the releefe of Triuulcio, were very desirous for his satisfaction to reuiue the enterprize of Genoa, as also for their owne commodity, because they accounted that Citty to be very conuenient for the affaires of the league, beeing  as it were the only Gate of Italy through which the Spaniards might enter by Sea to molest them, and therfore they wished that it were at the deuotion of the French King their friend, and especially at that time, when the report was that the Emperor was in person co^ming into Italy, wherevpon they secretly exhorted the Genowaies, to returne againe vnder the protection of the most Christian King, as of a most mighty and meeke Prince: For they could not at that time execute their desire by open force, as well for the place where they wintered, the which was very sharpe and difficult in Winter, as for the small number of their army which was much diminished by sundry accidents: and albeit they were aduertized of the great scarcity of victuals in Milan, how that AntonioThe Veneti^ forces (...) diminis^d. de leua lay sick, and his Army much weakened, all which were goodly occasions where on ^o enterprize some great and notable exploit, they durst not for all that in regard of the smalnesse of their forces goe forth into the field to execute

any thing, beeing in feare likewise of the discommodities that commonly grow in winter.
The Venetians were else where in great care for the townes which they possessed in Puglia, which at all times both in peace and wa^re were very commodious for them: they held Trani and Monopoli, and the French Barletta: the othersThe Venetians keepe the c^ties in Pagl^a. beeing abandoned, these were kept, and yet not without great difficulty, since the route of the French Army, by the dilligence of the Prouidator Vitturi, who beeing aduertised at the siege of Mansridonia where hee lay, of the disaster before Naples* hee sent speedily by Sea a certaine number of footmen into garrison into those townes, to keepe them in th^ir duty. Camillo Vrsino lay in Trani, and Gioua^ni Conrado Vrsino in Monopoli, and Rance de Cera, who was the Kings Lieutenant in the Prouince, was retired to Barletta.
The Venetians then beeing very carefull to keepe those places, and hoping to bee able not onely to resist the enemy, and to keepe the warre farre from their owne State, but likewise to make some progression, in regard of the enemies letts, determined to send reliefe thither, as well of victuals, and all sorts of munitions, as of Soldiors, by encreasing the Garrison with sixe hundred footmen leuyed in Dalmatia in the middest of Winter by the Prouidator Mula, who hauing brought them into Puglia, went back on a sodaine with his Galleis to Cor^ou, there to repaire and encrease the nauall Army, to the end afterwards to ioyne it  with that of the French King, which was making ready at Marseilles, that both of them together might oppose themselues against the Imperialls sea-forces, which were reported to bee very great at Barcelona, and were comming to ioyne with those of Doria.
The Pope in the meane time continuing his former pursutes, concerning the rendring of the Citties of Rauenna and Ceruia, caused the French King toThe French Kings instance to the Vene^ians in the Popes behalse. send the Vicount Turenne to Venice, to intreate them in some sort to sa^isfie the Pope, by yeelding vp those Citties which hee demanded. The Senate making shew of nothing more then to please the King, did represent to the Ambassador their iust ti^les to them, hauing receiued Rauenna of Obizzo Polente Lord thereof more then foure hundred yeares since, and that Ceruia was fallen to the Republick, by the testament of Dominico Malateste, by the payment of cert^ine godly Legacies, which they yeerely continued by accomplishing the Testators will.
How that if they had beene desirous to possesse Townes beelonging to other men, they would not haue refused the offers of those of Fu^ly and of other Citties of Romagnia, who were desirous to bee vnder their obedience;The Venetians answer to the King^ Ambassad^r. they would not besides haue defended nor maintained with great cost and danger, the Citty of Bolognia, and others belonging to the Pope, nor haue kept them for him: that those Citties had beene taken at such time as the  Pope had quitted the League, and that they might now for the same occasion iustly detaine them.
Moreouer, that they had spent a great masse of treasure in that warre, which those Citties were not able to recompence.
That the King was to consider, how much it might import him, if those so commodious Citties should bee quitted by his friends and consederates to bee g^uen to the Pope, who stood badly affected towards the Crowne of France, nay euen into the very hands of the Imperialls, seeing that it was apparent that the Pope, eyther by his owne proper motion, or through feare, did wholy depend vppon the Emperour: that hee was beside, to consider  of their interest, and the wrong which would bee offered to the other Consederates, to the Florentines, and to the Duke of Ferrara, who vndoubtedly would bee greatly distasted thereby, and would coole that heate which

pusheth them foreward to the affaires of the league, and moreouer how that those townes, did presently serue for a bridle to containe the Pope in his dutye, seeing that without them, he would already haue openly shewed him-selfe, a friend to the Emperor.The V^counts offers to the Pope.
The Vicount giuing place to all these reasons, went to Rome to the Pope, were for to compose the businesse, he propounded sundry offers to his Holinesse, namely, that those townes might be enfeoffed to the Signory of Venice, with a certaine annuall acknowledgment, as diuers others belonging to the Church had beene, or that they might be sequestred by the French King to dispose thereof as he should thinke fitte.
These propositions beeing made to the Senate, were neither accepted, nor wholly reiected: but calling to mynde the Republicks benifits to the Church, and what it had done for the seruice of Popes, they seemed to repose great trust in his Holinesse wisdome, how that himselfe might find some honest remedy for that difficulty, and in this vncertainty of businesse ended the yeare one thousand fiue hundred twenty and eight.
The begining of the yeare following did shew great signes of beeing disposed to peace, and of feare likewise of new trobles: but the discontent and wearisomnesse of Princes caused the Confederates to procee^ slowly in their prouisions of warre: wherevpon as well by reason of the speech of peace, as for the sharpnesse  of the winter, all military factions ceafed.
The Emperor spake openly that he desired nothing more then an vniuersall peace, and especially to fit himselfe to the Princes of Italy, and to these ends had sent the Cardinall of Santa Cruz (for this was the Generall of the Friars title) to Rome to treat of peace, and to cause Hostia and Ciuitauechia to be surrendred to the Pope. The French King, who wished nothing more, sent a commission to his Ambassadors, and the King of England sent Ambassadors to Rome for the same purpose, as vnto whom it alone appertained to conclude this treaty. The Venetians did the like, by giuing ample power to Gasparo Contaren, their Ambassador in the court of Rome, whereby he was inioyned to follow the aduise and  councell of the most Christian King, and his proper inclination to peace and to the common good of all Christendome, and to giue vnto him all power and liberty to promise in the common-wealths name, whatsoeuer should be concluded and determined in the particular conuentions: they did moreouer entreat theThe Uenetia^ offers to the Pope, so that peace might be procured. Pope to take vpon him the burthen of that businesse, to bring it to such a good end, as all men hoped for by his authority and wisdome: promising that if hee should procure an vniuersal peace; in respect of the strife betwixt the Sea Apostolick and the Signory, concerning the Citties of Rauenna and Ceruia, they would then shew their good meaning therin.
But on the other side, there were diuers presumptions why they wereto doubt  of his intention, and whether he would sincerely acquit himselfe of that charge: For it was very welknowne that the French King did suspect him, and that he gaue no credit to his wordes, nor did repose to much trust in him, holding whatsoeuer he propounded for doubtfull and incertaine: and therefore did secretly exhort theS^cret practises betwixt the King and the Venetians. Venetians to renew their forces both by sea and land, declaring how that he was in no sort troubled for the vnfortunate successe before Naples, as proceeding from a certaine maleuolent fortune, and not from the want of courage of his soldiers, and therefore that he was more ready and desirous then euer, to renew the warre in Italy,
The Emperor on the other side, albeit that he did promise to come into Italy The Emperor^ great preparations to co^e into Italy. to take the Imperiall Crowne, and to establish peace there, yet neuerthelesse the great preparations of warre that hee made, was the cause why men thought that hee had an other deseigne in his minde, cleane contrary to his speeches,

together with his great desire to appropriate to himselfe the State of Milan.
The Pope likewise had a great desire to recouer, not onely the territories ofThe Popes intention. Romagnia, but Modena and Regio, and likewise to haue satisfaction for the wrongs and greeuances which hee had receiued of the Florentines, with a will to restore his Nephewes, of the house of Medicis, into Florence to their antient greatnesse and dignity: the which was very hard to bee accomplished without comming to strokes.The Uenetians intention.
The Venetians in like manner, albeit that for many yeares they had beene intangled in warre, hauing spent therein more then fiue Millions of gold, and that therefore it behooued them to desire peace, to giue some rest and relaxation of  their fore-passed troubles, as well to themselues as to their subiects, did neuerthelesse, with great resolution, constantly persist in the protection and defence of the Duke of Milan, meaning not to suffer, in any sort, that his State should fall into the Emperors hands: but as concerning the restitution of the Citties of Puglia and Romagnia, they were ready to hearken vnto it, prouided that an vniuersall peace, for the generall good and quiet of all Italy, might bee well established.
Such at the same time were the deseignes and propositions of the confederate Princes, and such likewise were all mens discourses, concerning eyther warre or peace. The report, in the meane time, of the Emperors comming into Italy, did dayly increase, and for that end sundry great preparations were made at Barcelona, and the Archduke Ferdinand beeing come to Ispruch, gathered together certaine summes of money to pay the footmen which hee leuyed, to send them into Italy to his brothers ayde, giuing out, that it was to assaile the Venetians State.
Andre Doria, neuerthelesse, at the same time, and some other of the Imperialls, propounded to the Senate sundry meanes of agreement, saying, That the Emperor did beare a great and singular affection towards their Republick, offering themselues freely (if so it pleased the Republike) to mediate a peace betwixt them. The Venetians behaued themselues modestly in these offers and treaties, fearing that it was some cunning to separate them by these iealousies from the  friendship and allyance of the French, their ancient allyes and confederates: So as for all that they did not discontinue their preparations for warre, the Senate meaning to depend on none but it selfe, and that whensoeuer a treaty of peace should bee, it should bee made by them beeing armed with the honor of the Commonwealth.
By this time, the terme of the Duke of Vrbins seruice was expired: They confirmed hm againe for three yeares more in the same office of Generall of their Army, and augmented his pay with tenne thousand Ducats euery yeare, and his company of men at armes to the number of two hundred, and besides, they gaue to Guy Vbaldo his sonne, a company of fifty men at armes in their Army, and a yeerely pension of a thousand Ducats. They afterwards made Ian^ Fregosa Generall Superintendent of the affaires of warre, with good entertainment, for the acknowledgement of his valour and sidelitie, and for that they would euer haue in their army some one of authority and command, whom they might trust in the Duke of Vrbins absence, (as hee then was,) wherevpon they sent for him, beeing then at Bressia, commanding him to come with speed to the Armie, to execute his charge.
Diuerse others were in like manner honoured with sundry grades of honour inThe Venetians great preparatio^ by sea and (...). their Armie. The Count Gajazzo was made Generall of the light-horse, and Antonio de Castello Captaine of the Artillery: They did afterwards, send to  the Campe to the Prouidator Nani a great summe of money for the leuie of a number of new footmen to make the companies compleat. And to shew that they had likewise a care of their Sea-affaires, they made Ieronimo Pesare

Generall of their Nauall army, and Alessandro Pesare, and Vincenzo Iustiniano, Prouidators commanding them to be in readinesse to depart: they did chose moreouer tenne captaines for the Gallies, who should cause those tenne to bee armed which at the beginning of winter had beene disarmed, to the end that the Signory might haue aboue fifty gallies ready to set saile: and al^hough that by the Confederacy they were bound to surnish but sixteene gallies, they neuerthelesse, promised to adde foure more, to make vp the number of twenty for the leagues seruice, of which Ieronimo Contaren was made Generall.
Now the Duke of Milan, and the Lord Saint Paul beeing solicited by them to augment the number of their infantery (as they were bound to doe) and The Venetians lo^e to the French and the Duke of Milan. they excusing themselues, for want of money, the Senate resolued to lend the French twelue thousand Ducats, and eight thousand to the Duke of Milan. But aboue all things they entreated the French King not to abandon the Consederates at such a time, in regard of the great affection which they had euer borne to him, and for their constancy in pursuing the warre. Without this supply, the Lord Saint Paul would haue beene brought to an extreame want of men, money, and all other things necessarie for the maintenance of the warre in Italy, for there was not any preparation at all seene to bee made beyond the mounts for the execution of any enterprize, which the King had often promised  should bee done, and especially at that time when there was more need then euer, to stoppe the Emperours passage into Italy, by offering him great resistance at his entry, or by enforcing him to looke to the defense of Spaine assailed by the way of the Pirenean mountaines (as was resolued) which the Venetians did most of all pursue, thinking thereby to breake the Emperors deseigne of comming into Italy.
But they peceiuing that the King did rather encline to the warre of Italy, they were in great hope that at one time the warre might be renued in Lombardy and in the Realme of Naples, and before that the Emperours aide should arriue, to make some notable progression.
Vpon these hopes, the Senate sent for the Duke of Vrbin to come to Venice, where, in the presence of the Ambassadours of France, and the Duke of Milan, and of one of the Lord Saint Pauls Gentlemen, they might consultThe ^esolution of the assembly held a^ Venice by the Confederat^. and aduise on meanes to make warre, where in the end was concluded, before all other matters to pursue the enterprize of Milan, by seege rather then by assault, by surprizing all the neighbour townes and places to reduce the army of Antonio de Leua to want of victuals. And for this purpose it was likewise decreed for to haue twenty thousand foot-men in their army, namely, about some eight thousand in the French troupes, and as^ many in those of the Venetians, two thousand from the Duke of Milan, and two thousand Lansequenets which they daylie expected from Lyons, leauied already at the  common charge: and as for the enterprize of Genoa, they determined for to pursue it, according vnto the aptnesse of time, and the successe of Lombardie.
Now because that the whole safety of the affaires of Italy did depend vpon the stopping of the Emperours comming thither, they resolued to augment, they most that might bee, the French and Venetian nauall armies, and especially of great vessels, which might easily resist that of the Emperours which was composed of the like, to the end that the Emperour vnderstanding the difficulty of his iourney, might absteine from comming.
In the meane time they had notice that the King had changed his purpose, meaning for to make warre on the Emperour on the hither side ofThe King determineth to make warre i^ Spaine. the mounts, vpon the Confines of Spaine, as had beene before determined: at which newes the Senate beeing assembled to dispatch An^re Nouagera

newly chosen Ambassadour to the French King: the Senators were diuided in opinion, whether to perswade the King to come in person into Italy, or to send his army towards the Pirenean mountaines to enuade Spaine.
The matter being debated in open councell, where Moceniga on the oneThe resolution of the Venetian councel vpon the Kings comming into Italy. side, a man of authority and well acquainted with affaires of State, and Mark-Antonio Cornare, a man of great vnderstanding, on the other, being heard, diuersly to maintaine the one and other opinion, that of Cornare preuailed, whereby they decreed to enioyne the Ambassador Nouagera to perswade the King, or if he were already enclined therevnto, to incite him more, to depart forthwith and to come into Italy.
Nouagera being come into France did not faile to doe that which had beene resolued in the councell, whereof there had beene sundry opinions, hoping to obtaine that which he had propounded, because the King had heard him with good attention, and greatly commended his councell, as determining to put it inThe Kings answer and determination. practize: and for that purpose the King did meane within a while after to come into Languedoc, to reduce all the forces that were there into the next and neerest place to Italy, whether he promised to goe, being followed (besides twenty thousand foot-men) with tenne thousand Lansquenets, and tenne thousand Pioners. The Kings departure, being in this manner held for assured, the Senate resolued that Nouagera should remaine in France nere to the Lady Regent, the Kings mother, and that Sebastian Iustiniano, whom Nouagera was sent to succeed, should follow the King into Italy.
The Senate in the meane time did with speed make all necessary preparations for the renuing of the warre; making account that at the latter end of Aprill, the Republikes army should goe before, and beeing ioyned with that of the Lord Saint Paul, should march to the enterprize of Milan, which being executed, the Emperours comming would seeme to be wholly broken: and by meanes of this victory, and by the helpe of the army, and the Kings presence, they supposed to be afterwards able to take the city of Genoa with ease, and any other deseigne that they pleased to execute,
The Venetians at the same time were very carefull to prouide for the guardeThe Venetians care to p^serue the place^ which they held in Puglia. of the places which they held in Puglia, by sending for that purpose into the same country great numbers of foot-men, to preserue whatsoeuer they there possessed, and to attempt to make some farther progression, if occasion should be offered, and also for to keepe the Imperiall forces busied and diuided farre from Lombardy.
This great heate of the Kings beganne by little and little without any apparent cause to coole, and the prouisions for warre to goe slowly forward, wherevpon money was sent very sparingly from France to the Lord Saint Paul, who despayring in a manner of beeing able to entertaine the army, protested  that hee would gette him gonne and leaue all, seeing that of tenne thousand men, whom hee ought to haue, hee had scarce the one halfe, by reason that being badly paied, they left the campe in troupes. At the last, the Lord Chastillon, who had beene long expected, came to the campe, with lesse storeThe Lord Chastillon commeth to Venice and makes a shew that hee would g^ into Puglia. of money then was needfull, and within a few daies after, he left the campe, and went to Venice, saying that hee would goe into Puglia to assure the troupes that were there, and to carry them a certaine summe of money: for which iourney, the Senate hauing speedily commanded some vessels to bee made ready, according vnto his request, hee did daily with many e^euses, delay his departure, which gaue a suspition that hee had neither money, nor any  good will for to goe into Puglia, but that hee gaue out that hee would goe thither, because hee would not breake off the prouisions which the (...) had already made.
The King, doubting the matter, and knowing how great cause hee gaue them to suspect, did within a while after send Iohn Iaquin his Ambassadour to Venice to solici^e the departure of the army with the other prouisions for war, without making any mention at all of the Kings so much desired comming, whichThe Sena^s susp^tion ^cerning the Kings comming. did so highly import them. This did greatly encrease the Venetians suspition, and did infinitely trouble them, in regard of the daungers which threatned them from the Emperour, and also for that this delay did cause them to loose the fruite of so many hopes, their army remayning vnprofitable on the shore of the Riuer Adda, because that it was not able alone to execute the enterprize of Milan.The Venetians solici^e the King to come into Italy.
The Senate neuerthelesse did not cease still to arme, soliciting the King for that, wherewith hee cause lesly did presse them, and for this end they chose G^sparo Pineli Secretary to the Signory, to goe speedily into France to giue the King to vnderstand, that for their part all things were in readinesse to renue the warre, and that there was nothing wanting but his presence, promising to send forthwith their troupes to meet him: to the end that with greater safety and speed they might execute some notable enterprize.
At the same time the Bandetti of the Realme of Naples came into the field inThe bandetti of Naples come into the field. sundry places of the Kingdome, and did extreamely presse the Imperials, whereby Rance de Cera did promise to himselfe some good successe, being supplied with  money, and with certaine foot companies; he had by sundry messengers acquainted the King therewith, who from him did represent vnto his Maiesty the State of the affaires, that he might obtaine the supplies that he craued, the which, albe it they were promised to be sent with the army, were neuerthelesse delayed from day to day, to the great preiudice of their league, by giuing time to the Imperials to renue and augment their forces: for the report of the Emperours comming had caused diuers Barons and people of the Kingdome to change their purposes, diuers of them being desirous to insinuate themselues into his fauour, some to obtaine pardon, and others to get offices and immunities in the Realme, so that the Prince of Orange being gonne into Abruzzo, recouered Aquila is recouer^d of the Imperials. Aquila by composition, by drawing forth of the city and the whole country neere adioying an hundred thousand Ducats for the payment of his army: from thence he sent forces to Matri^a, where Camillo Parde lay in Garrison with foureMartrica taken by them. hundred foot-men, who beeing gon forth thereof a little before, promising to returne so soone as the Imperials should approach it, the foot-men that were within it, went ouer the walls and left it, whereby the towne was yeelded.
This notwithstanding, the successe of the Imperials was not so good in Puglia,Treason discouered in Barletta. where treason being secretly practized in Barletta, and discouered, Iulio of Naples, captaine of certaine foot forces, and some of the townesmen as authors and complices of the Rebellion were put to death.
Besides, the Venetians hauing drawne horse-men forth of Greece into the same Prouince, they ioyned with those o Simon Romano, and all of them together scouring the Country, did assure it, and kept the waies open to victuals, hauing driuen Pignatello Count of Borella forth of the whole Prouince.
Now the Marquis of Guasto beeing come into Puglia, would not deale with Barletta, a very strong and well fortified city, but went and encamped before Monopoli,Monopoli beseeged b^ the Marqit of Guasto. with foure thousand Spaniards, and two thousand Italians, and lodged in a small bottome couered by the mountaine, so as he could not be hurt with the towne ordnance, wherein lay Camillo Vrsino, Andre Gritti gouernor of the city and Iohn Vitturt the Prouidator, vnto whom Rance de Cera forthwith sent three  hundred foot-men by the Gallies.
The Marquis then caused a great Bastion to bee made right ouer against the walles within Harguebuze shot, and two others vpon the sea shore, on each side one, Then hauing battered the towne, and made a breach hee gaue an

assault, where he lost aboue fiue hundred men, and great numbers of Pioners,The Ma^quis giueth an assault ^o (...) ^ity to his lesse. with three peeces of ordnance that were broken, wherevpon he retired a mile and halfe further off, because that the cities ordnance did him much hurt in the place where he was lodged, which caused the Venetians to sally forth, and to assaile the bastions that he had made, where they slue aboue an hundred men, and then they assured the Hauen by a bastion made vpon their shore, opposite to that of the enemies.
The Marquis being newly returned before Monopoli, and hauing made two Caualiers, with two trenches, two hundred foot*men sallied forth of the towne and burned his workes. After that, the Marquis making an other approach  on the right side of the battery, and causing a bastion to be made behind, he planted the ordnance vpon it, and did beate downe three score fathome of the wall, within foure fathome of the ground: but hauing intelligence, that newThe Marquis re^ireth from before Monopoli. companies had entred the towne the same night, sent by Rance de Cera, he withdrew his ordnance, and at last discamped, wherevpon being come to Conuersa, he afterwards retired to Naples. The braue resistance of Monopoli and the retreate of the Marquis, did greatly encourage the Confederates, so that diuers Barons and others, repenting that they had gonne to the Imperial party, shewed themselues very ready for a new rebellion: the which emboldened the souldiers and captaines of the league, to vndertake some enterprize.
This being reported to the Senate, perceiuing that their nauall army remained idle at Corfou, expecting the arriuall of the French army, they commaundedThe city of Brundusium yeeldeth to the Venetians. their Generall to saile into Puglia, where beeing arriued, he cast ankor neere to Brundusium, hoping, (as it came to passe) that those of the towne, prouoked by a particular affection towards the Venetians, would forthwith yeeld. The city beeing yeelded on conditions was preserued from spoile, and from all wrongs of the souldiers, and Iohn Francisco Iustinian was made gouernour thereof, as Magistrate for the Signory, and presently afterwards they begann^ to batter the castles, the charge thereof was committed to Camillo Vrsino, who hauing in short space brought them to a streight passe, could not for all that enforce  them to yeeld, by reason of their hope, ere long to see the Imperiall nauy vpon that sea.
The Venetian army in the meane time did from the Cape of Otranto molest the whole country, to the great hurt of the Imperials: Simon Romano died at that exploite, who was a valiant and couragious person. The affaires standing at this stay, the Prince of Orange knowing that the Confederates forces were not so meane and weake, as they could easily bee driuen forth of the Realme, neither yet so mighty as they were able to make any progression of great importance, Or perhaps, because that the Emperour would haue the Popes content preferred before all other matters, that hee might haue him for his  friend and confederate at his comming into Italy, after that he had put strongThe Prince of Orange de^ermineth to goe to Pe^sua. garrisons into the most important places, he turned with the residue of his forces towards Perusa, to driue Malateste Baillone thence, and from thence to enter into Tuscany, to restore those of Medicis to their country.
The behauiour and approaches of the Prince, did cause the Duke of Vrbin to suspect, that he went about to enuade his State, wherevpon he departed sodainly from the army, to goe and prouide for his owne territories: The VenetiansThe Duke of Vrbin runneth to the defense of his owne State. were not well pleased with their Generalls departure, in so trouble some a season, as well for their owne interests, as for feare of the suspition of the French, who by that accident, taking some occasion of a feigned suspition, might grow  slow in the prouisions for warre. Therefore the Senate determined with all speed to send Nicolao Tepulo to him, who had beene already before appointed to go to him to the camp, to aduertize him of the new conduct, and by forcible reasons to exhort him, in the name of the Common-wealth, to returne speedily to the

army, and to induce him the more willingly therevnto, they sent him a good summe of money for the payment of three thousand foot men appointed for the guard of his State: but for that time there was no great need thereof. For the Prince of Orange hauing intelligence that the Count of Aquila, and Camillo Virsino called Parde, hauing ioyned their forces together, were come to Canosa, and their troupes dayly encreasing, it was to bee feared that they would cause some commotion of consequence, hauing changed his determination, would not at that time depart forth of the Kingdome, fearing some great insurrection of the people in regard of the great extortion that was there committed, by meanes whereof the Spanish name was very odious to them, wherevpon hee The Prince of Orange changeth his determination. thought it fit, first of-all to appease those stirres, and to make prouision of victuals, referring the execution of his former deseigne to a more commodious season (the which hee did) so that the Duke of Vrbin beeing thereby freed of his suspition, did forthwith come to the army, determining for to march towardesThe Duke of Vrbin being come backe to the army determineth to beseege Milan. Milan with all his troupes, the Lord Saint Paul hauing sent him word, that hee would take the same way; beeing inuited therevnto by the difficulties wherein the Imperials then were, and by the fortunate successe of the French; because that notwithstanding that two thousand Spanish foot-men were arriued at Milan, whom the Genowais would not entertaine, al-be-it that they expresly came to re^eeue them, discommodities, neuerthelesse, by their comming  were as much augmented as their forces, seeing that in so great a dearth and want of money they were to feed and pay them.Enteruiew of the French and Venet^an armies.
On the contrary diuers townes on the hether side Thesin were at the same time yeelded to the Lord Saint Paul, so as the whole country, in a manner, to his great gaine and reputation, was reduced vnder his power.
Both the armies then aduancing forwards, they met together at Saint Martins Burrow, fiue miles from Milan, where after a long consultation, concerning the meanes how to execute that en^erprize they resolued with both the armies to encampe round about the towne, to encompasse and take in as much ofThe two armies distrust one an other. the walles as they could, thereby to weaken the enemies defense by busying  them in sundry places: But there was not descerned in the captaines ^uch readinesse and speed as was besitting the execution of such a deseigne, because that the French said, That in the Venetians campe the number of souldiers was farre lesse then they supposed, and not so many as ought to bee, and that by separating themselues, they should, beeing alone, be weake and in great daunger. The Venetians on the other side, declared that they better accomplished that wherevnto they were tied then had the French, and that therefore they would see them encampe first, and they afterwards would doe the like, and vpon these distrusts one of an other they departed, their former resolution being broken.
The Lord Saint Paul marched towards Landriana, the Duke of Vrbin tooke the way towards Monce, and the Duke of Milan departed with a determination to enter into Pauia with all his forces: making account by this separation, to scoure the waies, molest the country, and keepe victuals from Antonio de Leua, hoping thereby to ouerthrow him, and to obtaine at last their common desire, which was, to possesse Milan and Coma, the two onely Cities of importance which held out in that whole State for the Emperour: But so soone as the French were arriued at Land^iana, they suffered themselues to bee carried away (as it was thought they would) with the enterprize of Genoa, beeing very vehemently solicited therevnto by C^sar Fregosa, who measuring matters according The Lord S. Paul resolue^ to execute the en^erprise of Genoa. to his own desire, made the euent very facile and easie, whervpon, they promised to themselues that they would soone returne to their quarter, and therfore they requested the Duke of Vrbin in staying for the^, not to stir from thence where he was with the Venetian forces and the Duke of Milans, for the execution of their

former deseignes, suffering nothing whatsoeuer in the meane time to enter into those cities.
Now the French army departing in this resolution to goe to Genoa, tooke the way of Pauia, the Lord Saint Paul, sending the ordnance before, with the waggons and the vantgard, and himselfe somewhat late, followed with the battaile and the rereward. Antonio de Leua being aduertized by his spies, how that he staied behind, farre from the vantgard, determined to follow and assaile him if occasion were offered: wherevpon in the night he came forth of Milan with his souldiers wearing white shirts vpon their armor, and marching without sound of drum in good order he met with them in the plaine, before they had any knowledge of his comming,Antonio de Leua assaileth the Lord Saint Paul. the first squadron of the French being gonne on so far, as it could not in any time arriue to the rescue of the rest, as also because that the Lord Saint Pauls selfe, did stay behinde, by reason that a peece of ordnance did sticke fast in the mire at the passage of a Riuer, where whilest he was busied with those few men at armes that were there with him, and some fifteene hundred Lansquenets vnder the command of captaine Bossu, he found, vnlooked for, the Spanish shot at his backe, who were at the first brauely repulsed by men at armes, euen into the battaillons of the Almains, but there being a deepe streame betwixt the French and Spaniards, their shot retired behind that streame, where was a pace of the breadth of thirty or forty foote. The Lansquenets on the French side did fight valliantly, and with them  the Lord Saint Paul, who was alighted from his horse, as were Iohn Ieronimo Castillon, and Claudio Rangone, captaines of two thousand Italians, who did gallantly defend themselues. But at the last the Imperials comming to the charge with a great battaillon of Almaines, the horse-men and Lansquenets turning their backes, the Italians did the like, and the Lord Saint Paul being remounted was taken as he would haue leaped ouer a dike, and there were taken prisoners with him, Ieronimo Castillone, Claudio Rangone, Lignach, Carbon, and other captains of great note.
The Count Guy de Rangone being gonne before with the vantgard early in the  morning, as it was concluded the night before, had not any notice of the ^ight till he was safely come to Pauia: all the Lansequenets in a manner escaped, and Antonio de Leua went backe with his prisoners to Milan. Those that escaped, part of them retired themselues to the Venetians territories, where they were kindely entertained, and others into other places. The Duke of Vrbin hauingThe number of the Venetian army. intelligence of this defeate, forsooke his abode at Monce, where he lay, and retired to Cassan, a place of more safety, for which the Senate did highly commend him: he had with him about fiue thousand foot-men, foure hundred men at armes, and seuen hundred light horse, with great store of carriage. But come to Cassan, which is a place nere to the Riuer Adda, he did then fortifie himselfe with strong Rampiers, leauing but one way open which was fenced and garded withall  necessaries, supposing that place to be most commodious, to be able with ease to releeue, if neede were, Pauia and Lauda, to offend the enemies, and to defend the State of the Signory; and besides, to fauour, if occasion were offered, the enterprize of Genoa by sea. Wherevpon thinking himselfe to be very safe in that place, he would not follow the opinion of Iano Mar^a Fregosa, who councelled him to retire with his army to Bressia, for feare of any inconuenience, being not equall in forces to Antonio de Leua. He being emboldned by this victory, and more desirous to breake the Confederate forces, had followed the Duke of VrbinAnt^io de Leua follow^th the Duk^ (...) Vrbin in his (...) (...) Cassa^. as farre as Vaury, two miles from Cassan, which caused some doubt in the Venetians, least hee would haue passed the Adda to haue made wast of the  Bressan, Bergamasque and Creman territories: But the Duke reposed great trust in his light Cauallery, the which surpassed that of the enemies, both in number and valour, who by scouring all the neighbour Countries round about, did not onelie cut off all the victualls from the Imperialls campe, but

had so affrighted them as none of them durst any more come forth of the trenches: therefore the Duke remayning firme in his resolution, to continue in that place, would not raise his Campe, as well in regard of his reputation, as for the victualls that were brought to him from the country, neere adioyning, which would other-wise haue releeued the enemies, and if hee should haue retyred to the Citty, hee would haue spent those which were appoynted for their friends.
Now the two armies being so neere one to an other, they did continually goe forth to skirmish on both sides, where the Imperialls were still beaten. Antonio de Leua supposing to haue some satisfaction for his losses, by some other meanes, sent Caesar of Naples on the farther side of the riuer Adda, to scoure the Territories  of Bressia and Crema, whereof the Duke of Vrbin being aduertised, leauing the Count Gajazzo for the gard of the Campe, he tooke with him a good troope of soldiers and went and ambusht him-selfe, neere to the place where he knew the enemies would passe the riuer, from whence, part of them being gone ouer, hee came forth vnlookt for, with great fury, vpon those who stayed behind vpon thePart of the enemies are defeated by the Duke of Vrbin. riuer shoare, ready to passe ouer, hauing first of all sent his light Cauallery, to intercept their way, if so bee that they would haue fled towards their campe. But Caesar of Naples beeing troubled with this vnlookt for accident, did speedily cause the bridge to bee broken, fearing least the Duke, for his part, would haue come ouer and fought with him, wherevpon, all those that stayed behind, to the number  of fifteene hundred, were either cut in peeces or taken prisoners by the Duke, and among others, it fell out, that a braue Spanish Captaine was taken by a woman of big stature, who in mans attire receiued pay of the Count Gajazzo, and the Count hauing, for mirths sake, called before him on a time, the Captaine that was prisoner, shewing him Margueriton (for so the soldiors called her) told him that the same was the soldier that had taken him prisoner, the Spaniard lookingG^eat valor of a woman in mans attire. vpon her, answered, that he did comfort him-selfe in his mishap, for that he had beene taken by so braue a man, as hee seemed to bee, but when hee told him that it was a woman, shame and disdaine did so seaze vpon him, as within few daies after he dyed with greefe.
Afterwards the two armies kept them*selues in their quarters, for the space of many daies: but the Duke of Vrbin calling the Captaines sundrie times to councell, and propounding diuers things vnto them, did suffitiently manifest his desire to assaile the enemies, and to cause them to dislodge. At the last he resolued to goe forth with all his forces, and to vse meanes by cunning to come to stroakes with Antonio de Leua, vpon some aduantage: hee caused all the ordinance of the Campe to bee brought into one place, and then hee began to march withThe Duke of Vrbins enterprize to defeate the enemie. all the troupes, both foote and horse, and with three peeces of ordnance, meaning to leaue them behind him, by retiring so soone as hee had begunne the skirmish, fayning flight both for feare and vpon necessity: whereby the enemies  comming forward to get those three peeces, should bee put to rout by the ordnance of the Campe, and being so disordred he would againe returne vpon them with greater violence. But this designe fell not out according to his expectation; because that the Count Gajazzo comming forth sooner then he should, with a part of his Infantery, and beginning the skirmish too far of from the Campe, being not able with those hee had brought with him long to sustaine the enemies fury, was enforced, not-with-standing that hee fought valliantly, to retyre in some disorder. Wherevpon, the Duke perceuing him to bee in danger did on a sodaine make hast to his reskew, and gaue in with such fury athwart the ImperiallThe enimes (...) beaten by the Duke of Vrbi^. Infantery, which neerely pursued the Count Gajazzo, as hee caused them to  make a stand, and to turne their backes, still pursuing and beating them euen into their Campe.
Antonio de Leua lost in this action more then fifteene hundred foote, part of them being slaine, and the rest taken prisoners: where-vpon hee durst no more

after that suffer his soldiers to sallie forth of the Campe, nor attempt any enterprize, continuing in great feare and doubt, what hee were best to doe, being afflicted with sundry cares and difficulties. For, on the one side, hee could tarry no longer there for want of victualls, and then hee perceiued that his aboad thereThe doubts and feare of Antonio de Leua. could in no sort profit him: on the other side, to dislodge, and to returne to Milan, he thought it would greatly blemish his reputation, and that of the whole army, as if he should confesse, that hee retired for feare, being chaced by a number of eenemies, farre lesse then him-selfe: That it was to no purpose to enter into the Venetians state, but very dangerous, all their townes beeing mand with strong Garrisons well fortified and on the other side the people of Milan, were beyond  measure discontented, and in manner desperate, by reason of the extortion and wrongs which they had sustayned by the soldiers, were ready to make an insurrection, and to alter the state, calling, without controulement, for their Duke, who lay then with his troopes in Cremona, for he doubted not but that the Venetians being desirous to see him installed in his State, would hazard all their forces, when hope of obtayning that which they so much desired should bee offeredAntonio de Leua retire^h (...) Milan. them.
But not-with-standing all these reasons, Antonio de Leua being enforced by necessity to dislodge, retired to Milan. Aftet his departure, the Duke of Vrbin was desirous to come neerer to Monce: but the Senate hauing some suspition that  Sforza did treate of an agreement with the Emperor, which if it should come to passe, their army would be inclosed, and all the passages shut vp from releeuingThe report of the Lancequen^ts comming causeth the Venetian Army to retire to the Citties. Bergamo, caused him to goe with the Army towards Lauda, to discouer the Duke of Milans intent, and to bee assured of him: But since then, the report of the Lancequenets comming, dayly encreasing, and how they did meane to come downe thorow the Verona Territory, to ioyne them-selues afterward with Antonio de Leua, the Senate decreed to place all their troupes in the townes and citties of their owne state: Wherevpon, the Duke of Vrbin, according to this resolution, retired to Bressia, with one part of the army, and the Count Gajazzo went  with the residue to Bergamo.
At the same time as these things hapned, the French King tending altogether to peace, that hee might haue home his children, and the Emperor like-wise enclining therevnto, the Lady Marguerite, the Emperors Aunt, was by him deputed to conclude this treaty on his part, hauing for this purpose sent her a large commission, which was imparted to a Secretary, whome the King had to that end sent into Flanders: Wherevpon, the King likewise did speedily appoynt the Lady Regent his mother, with like commission, which was like-wise communicated to the Emperors Agents. The commissions being viewed on both sides, the Cittie of Cambray was appointed, where these two Ladies should meet, and talke together,The Citty of Cambra^ chosen for the ^reaty o^ peace. to treat of the particularities of peace.
The King did in no sort aduertize the Senate of this treaty till it was very late, at such time as the Lady Regent departed to the Treaty of Cambray, when the matter could be no longer dissembled, neither did hee so much as communicate vnto them any particularities of the Treaty, but he onely promised the Ambassadors of the Confederates in generall, that hee would make none agreement what-so euer with the Emperor, without their consent and satissaction; then shewing his great affection towards the Republike, hee did greatly exhort them to a generall peace, (which assuring them should be mentioned in that diet) he entreated all the Confederats to send ample power and authority to their Ambassadors, which were at his Court, to bee present thereat in their names, and to  conclude the peace.The Venetian Senate are male content with the Fr^ch King.
The Senate found this manner of proceeding by the King to bee very strange, who wonderfull cunningly had along time entertayned them with hope of his comming into Italy, or to send great forces thither both by land and sea, and for

that he had done neither of them, and had euer fed them with words, for feare of breaking of the treaty, yet for all that being desirous to shew that they had still the same mind, and in^lination to peace, which they had before, they determined to send to their two Ambassadors Iustinian and Nouagera, who were at the sameThe Venetians giue author^ty to their Ambassadors to be present at the treaty of Cambray. time in the french Court, commission and authority to be present at that Treaty, and to promise in the Common-wealths name, what-so-euer should bee necessary and conuenient for the conclusion of peaco. But Nouagera falling sicke before the arriuall of this commission in France, died, to the great greefe of his Country-men.
Now the whole burthen of this charge lay alone vpon Iustinian, who had particular  instructious of the Senates meaning and resolution: the which in effect was, That in any case, that which had beene agreed vpon on the three and twentith of the precedent month, might be obserued, and likewise, that the same which had beene concluded and resolued on before, at the Diet of Wormes, might take effect: because that all the strife betwixt the Republike and the house of Austria,The Uenetians meaning concerning the Articles of peace. did onely proceed from not obseruing the precedent accords: but that aboue all other things, they would haue the state of Milan to be rendered, and restored to Francis Sforza: of which charge and commission the Venetian Ambassador had no great cause to make vse, For not-with-standing that hee had followed the Lady Regent to Cambray, hee neuer-the-lesse remayned the most part of  the time at Saint Quintins, certaine miles distant from Cambray, none of the most important particularities, nor truest articles of the treaty, being communicated vnto him.
The Senate by this meanes did doubt, that the King was desirous to conclude an agreement for him-selfe alone, without any regard to their particular intrest,The Venetians suspect the Kings carriage nor to the other Confederates; and that as concerning that which hee had promised, to conclude nothing with the Emperor without them, proceeded from feare, least they suspecting his intent, should preuent him, by making an accord with the Emperor, and hee by that meanes should bee excluded from all their friendshippes, and his accord made thereby more difficult, and with lesse aduantage. Therefore the King had sent the Bishoppe of Tarbi into Italy, with commission to goe to Venice, to the Duke of Milan, to Ferrara, and to Florence, to treate of matters belonging to the warres, albeit it was the least part of his meaning:Triuulcio his request to the Venetians from the King. And within a while after Theodore Triuulcio came to Venice, where in the Kings name he required the Senate* to deliuer ouer vnto him in Deposito, the Citties of Rauenna, and Ceruia, till such time as that businesse were ended, assuring them that hee did it to giue occasion to the Pope to declare him-selfe, it being a matter of great importance to haue his fauour.
Answer was made to this request, that as concerning his comming, the RepublikeThe Venetians answers to Triuulcio. would not faile him of all aide and succor, which it had before times promised, and to giue him a more euident proofe there of they were content to send to Suza, or to Ast, twenty thousand Ducats, before hand towards the first paiment. But for the sequestration of the Citties of Romagnia, an vniuersall peace being to bee treated of at the Treaty of Cambray, that difficulty, among others, was there to bee resolued; how the Senate ought not to consent to that sequestring, till such time as it perceiued al their affaires quiet and all other contentions setled.
But in this, the Kings cunning, and sundry ententions, beeing discouered, they did except, with great deuotion, the resolution at Cambray. Therefore the Senate commanded Lodo^ico Faliere their Ambassador in England, to treate with The Venetians recourse to the King of England. that king, who had euer shewed himself a great friend to the Republike, to be pleassed, (as he had at other times bin) to take it into his protection, and to procure, that in those affaires which were handled at Cambray, nothing might be concluded to the hurt and preiudice thereof, no^ to the liberty of Italy, whereof, many

yeares before, he had to his immortall prayse, taken vpon him the defense while^ these preparations were made on all sides, the Emperour, who for all the treaty of peace had not ceassed to pursue his deseines, nor to make his preparations for his iourney into Italy came to Genoa, with many shippes and Galleis, withinThe Emperor arriuall an Genoa. which were a thousand horse, and nine thousand footmen the which he caused to be landed at Sauona, for their more easie passage into Lombardy. His deseignes for that present, could not be truly descouered, because he affirmed that his comming into Italy was to establish peace there, and to compose all his variances with the Potentates of Italy: yet neuerthelesse, he did with all speed, andNom^er of the Emperors (...) in Italy from all parts assemble the greatest forces he could; Antonio de Leua came and  ioyned with him with twelue thousand footmen, the Prince of Orange with seauen thousand, the Lanceque nets which had beene leuied in the connty of Tiroll to the number of tenne thousand came through the Verona territory to meet him so as all his forces being ioyned together, amounted to forty thousand footmen, beside the cauallery, which was great, the Almains being folowed by tenne thousand Bourguinian horse-men.
The Emperors arriuall, and with such prouision, did greatly amaze the mindsItaly amazed at the Emperor crmming. of all Italy, together with the rumor that was spredde abroad, how that the accord betwixt the Emperor and the most Christian King was already concluded, the Confederates beeing not therein comprehended, notwithstanding that the  King had promised the contrary: so that there was not any, but the Pope alone, which was free from this feare in all Italy, (according to the particular treaty which he had before concluded with the Emperour at Barcelona), which till then had beene kept secret), whereby he made account to make vse of the Imperiall forces for the execution of his deseignes, and cheefely to restore his nephewes into Florence, and to place them in their antient dignity and greatnesse, as had beene concluded betwixt them.
Therefore, the more to honor his comming, so soone as he vnderstood that he was landed at Genoa, he sent thither three of the cheefest Cardinalls of the  Colledge for to congratulate his arriuall, and to accompany him euery where.
The Florentines vpon these newes, whom it first of all concerned to purchaseFlorentines send Am^assadors to the Emperor. his fauor, and to be assured of his meaning, did within a while after likewise send their Ambassadors vnto him, who after the congratulation, were to excuse them for entring into confederacy against him, hauing therein beene enforced by the Popes authority and commandement, and for that they had since then continued therein by necessity: and they proceeded no farther because they had not any commission, especially concerning the strife betwixt the Pope and them: bu^ the Emperor seeming to be desirous to satisfie the Pope in that which he had promised him, their Ambassador was to no purpose.
The other Potentates of Italy, did likewise send their Ambassadors to his ImperiallVVhat k^pt the Venetians from sending Ambassad^s to the Emperor Maiesty, requesting his friendship and peace* The Venetians alone remaining constant in their determination, resolued to enter into no agreement with the Emperor but vpon extremity: not, but that they were desirous of peace, but because he feared that the Emperor had a meaning contrary to the liberty ofGreat preparati^ns of the Venetians. Italy, and that he would so handle the matter as all the whole state thereof should depend only vpon him: wherevpon, they thought, that to shew themselues humble and low-minded, was nothing else but to encourage him, and to confirme him in his desire and hope of beeing able to command all Italy. So that they did then wisely by not sending their Ambassadors to him: but they gaue their consent that the Duke of milan, (who as beeing tyed vnto them, had therevppon, craued  the Senates aduise) might send his Ambassadors, as a vassall of the Empire: and as for themselues, being in a manner le^t alone, they did with speed make great prouisions for warre, to assure (as much as might bee) their owne state, they leauied new troupes of foot to augment their army, and to strengthen the garrisons

of other Citties: they chose Francisco Pascalie, Prouidator Generall for the firme land, whose principall charge was to visit their forces, and to furnish them with all necessaries: they tooke diuers Captaines into their pay, and among others Sigismond Malatest^, with a thousand foote, and two hundred light horse; and because great numbers of Lancequenets, departing from Bolognia, were already passed by, they caused Iohn Contare^ the Prouida^or, and Caesar Fregosa with a strong garrison to enter into Verona.
Now because it did greatly import them to keepe the other Italian ConfederateThe Uenetians exhortation to the consederats princes in breath, The Senate did not faile to encourage the Florentines, and to commend their constancie, exhorting them to defend their country and liberty, promising to giue them all aide and succour that the time would permit, and particularly to cause their forces to enter vpon the Parmesan, and Placentine Con^ines, so soone as the Emperor should dislodge, to draw into those quarters, for the defence of his Citties, the Emperiall forces which were in Tuscany.
They did the like to the Duke of Ferra^a, vnto whome they sent Marke Antonio Renier their Ambassador, to declare vnto him the Republikes good meaning, for the common defence of the liberty of Italy, and the particular affectionThe Venetians offers to the Duke o^ Ferrara. which they did beare to the Duke, and to his whole state, for which, being conioyned by neere neighbour-hood, and by sundry other respects, they would neuer refuse to runne one selfe same fortune with him: and therefore they desired to be  acquainted with his intent and meaning. The Duke shewed that hee was highly pleased with his Ambassade, and promised to doe much, and particularly to leuy great numbers of men of warre, which hee assembled neere to Modena, to serue, not alone for the defence of his owne state, but in all places where the Confederates should haue neede.
The Treaty of Cambray was at the same time published, which already by a Common rumor was knowne to all men, namely, how that none of the ConfederatesPublicatio^ of the treaty of Camb^ay. were comprehended in it. There was onely, place reserued for the Venetias to enter into it, so as within the space offoure moneths they would end their controuersies with the Emperor, which was nothing else but a silent exclusion in  regard the greatest difficulties remayned vndecided.
The King by the same treaty was among other things bound ^o cause those townes which the Venetians held in Puglia to bee rendred to the Emperor, and vpon their refusall to declare himselfe their enemy, and to helpe him to recouer them by force. For the execution of which article, the King did on a suddaine send his Ambassadors to Venice, to entreat them to render to the Emperour whatsoeuer they held in Puglia, being bound to make that request by the Treaty of Cambray, and that, according to the forme of the Capitulations at Coignac: adding therunto, that he did so much rely on the affection which they had euer made shew to beare vnto himselfe, and to the Crowne of France, as albeit that  there were not any Treaty that did oblige him to demand that of them, hee didThe Kings request to the Venetians. neuer-the-lesse perswade him-selfe that hee should obtaine it, at his owne priuat request, it importing him so highly, as hee could not otherwise redeeme his children from the Emperor, who were one day to succeed him in the Kingdome.
The Senate answered that it did still continue, in that good will and affection which it had euer borne to the King and Crowne of France, the Republike being in a manner ioyned to that Kingdome by an indissoluable band, in regard of sundryThe Venetians answer to the King. faire reciprocall offices, and common interests: that they could not deny but that they had greatly desired to haue beene comprehended in that accord made with the Emperor, not so much for the prouiding for their owne safety as for to  take away all suspition that they were in any fault, or that the Common-wealth had not sound intelligence, and corresponde^cy with the Crowne of France. Yet neuer-the-lesse, they did so much rely vpon the Kings goodnesse and wisdom, as they hoped by his interposing of his authoritie with the Emperor, to obtaine

peace and assurance which they so much desired. But concerning the restitution of the Citties of Puglia, it was euident, that they were not tyed to doe it by any bond, seeing that the King had concluded peace, without comprehending them therein, hauing thereby absolued them from the bond of the Confederacy, by which was expresly mentioned, that the King could not make any accord withou^ them: Yet they neuer-the-lesse desired to giue him therein some satisfaction; but hee was to tarry for some opportunity how to doe it, seeing that the deliuery of my Lo^ds his children was to bee made within two moneths, by which time, they hoped to finde some meanes to compose the strife betwixt the Empero^ and them, whereby the same businesse might in like manner by the same meanes  be finished to the Kings content.
Vpon this answer the King dispatcht the Admirall into Italy, to exhort him to vniuersall peace, and cheefely to make an accord with the Venetians, by meanesThe King entreateth the Emperor to make an accord with the Venetians. whereof, hee hoped to bee able to accomplish the conditions of the Treaty of Cambray, by causing the Citties of Puglia to be rendered to him, hauing already for his part begun that which belonged vnto him to execute, by commanding Rance de Cera with all his companies, to depart forth of Puglia, hauing consigned into the hands of the Emperors commissioners, all the places which hee held in his name in the Realme of Naples, by perswading like-wise the Venetian officers to doe the like: But they being before aduertized of the Senates intention, had  refused so to doe.
At this stay stood the affaires of Italy at that time. The Emperor being in armes, and very mighty; the Pope his friend and Confederate, the other Potentates of Italy being in a manner ready to obay him, and the French wholy chaced forth of Italy; for albeit they had not as yet layde downe their armes, it was neuer-the-lesse mentioned in the Treaty, that the King should no more medle with the affaires of Italy nor Germany, in the behalfe of any Potentates, to the preiudice of the Emperor. The Venetians alone, in the middest of so many difficulties, made preparations to resist the Emperor, if so be that he were desirous, (as it was thought he would bee) to seaze vpon the State of Milan: therefore their confederacy  being broken with all others, they did newly reuiue it with Francis Sforza, exhorting him to take courrage, and to hope well, meaning in his behalfe to employ all their forces.
The end of the eighth Booke of the fifth  Decade.





The Contents of the ninth Booke of the  fifth Decade.
FIRST, Soliman taketh Armes to restore Iohn Vayuode into the kingdome of Hungary, with the taking of Belgrade. The insurrection of the Hereticks in Germany. A motion of peace betwixt the Emperor and the  Venetians. The enteruiew of the Pope and the Emperor at Bolognia. Accord betwixt the Emperor and the Duke of Milan. Accord made betwixt the Emperor and the Venetians. Warre against the Florentines. Pope Clement crowneth the Emperor at Bolognia. Confederacy betwixt the Pope, the Emperor, the Venetians, and the Duke of Milan. The Marquisat of Mantua is made a Dutchy. The Venetians send Ambassadors to Constantinople to be  present at the Circumcision of Solimans children, being by him entreated to that end. The Almains demand a councell, and the Popes answer therevnto. The Emperor graunteth the Interim in Germany concerning religion, vntill a councell were called. Solimans great deseigns against Christendome. The Venetians make great preparations and stand vpon their gard. The Venetians resolue to remaine newter in the warre, betwixt the Emperor and Soliman. The Kings of France and England determine to make warre vpon the Emperor. Soliman returneth into Hungary with a great army. The Emperor  commeth likewise with a great Army neere to the Citty of Vienna, there to tarry for the Turke. The Nauall Armies of the Emperor, and Soliman. Coron and Patras, are taken by the Imperial army. The Duke of Ferrara recouereth Modena and Regio. A second enteruiew of the Pope and Emperor at Bolognia. The Venetians refuse to renew the league, being satisfied with the former, and not meaning to adde anything to it. And lastly a new league concluded, betwixt the Pope, the Emperor and all the Potentates of Italy, (the  Venetians excepted.)

The Ninth Booke of the fifth Decade of the Historie of Uenice.
WHILEST Italy was in alarme by reason of the Emperors arriuall  with such great prouisions, Soliman the Turkish Emperor resolued to restore Iohn Vayuode King of Hungary to his Kingdome, from whence, Fernand had expulsed him, and being entired to this end with a mighty army vpon the Confines of Hungary, he came and encamped before Buda, which he tookeSoliman taketh (...). with ease, then hee caused his Cauallery to scoure the Champaine Country of Austria, spoyling all places that were subiect to the Arch* duke, threatening him that hee would within a while after encampe with all his forces before Vienna: Wherevpon hee caused great preparations, of victualls and warlike  engins to be made, to send them thither by Danuby. These newes did greatly trouble the Emperor, perceiuing that it concerned his reputation and the safety of the States of the Empire, not to suffer so mighty an enemy to come so neere him, besides the trouble and care whereto his brother was reduced, whilest hee busied him-selfe in matters of meaner consequence, as spectator of the eminent dangers o^ his whole house, and subiects.
This mischeefe was followed by an other as great, for his brother aduertized him, that the Sect of Hereticks did very much encrease in Germany, that they were assembled in great troupes, and made shew of great innouation, and that ifThe Hereticks begin to stirre in Germany. they were not speedily preuented by rooting them wholy out, it was to bee feared  that some great hurt would redound to the Catholike Religion, which would preiudice the temporall States of Princes, and cheefly those of the Empire. These occasions being well weighed, caused the Emperor to condescend to peace, and to pursue it in effect, the which desire at the first, men thought that he had but feigned; For the Emperor thinking it not only dangerous, but smally for his honour, to depart forth of Italy, and to leaue matters imperfect, without establishing a sure peace there for a time, he beganne to shew that his mind enclined therevnto.
But because hee plainely perceiued that hee could not effect it without making an accord with the Venetians, on whome, (during these troubles) the State of all Italy seemed to depend, being yet doubtful whether the French king would ioyne The (...) in desirous of (...) accord with (...) Venetians with them, who were so much distasted of him, by reason that hee did no more care to obserue the Treaty of Cambray, now that hee had home his children, then hee had done that of Madrill, after that hee was set at liberty: Hee resolued with him-selfe to make an accord with the Venetians, and made this his desire

knowne to his owne Councellours, the better to finde some meanes to end this businesse, in which diuers men of authority did employ themselues.
Andrew Doria sent Frederico Grimaldi to Venice to offer them freely to employ himselfe in this treaty, assuring them that he knew for certaine that the Emperor was desirous of an agreement with them, and that if the Senate would be pleasedThe Venetian ^nswere to those that spa^ to them o^ Peace with the Empe^or. to haue him to meddle in the businesse, he did hope speedily to dispatch it. The Senate neither accepting nor refusing this offer; answered that it had euer desired peace, and highly esteemed (as it became them) the Emperors f^eindship* being at the same present of that mind, but that they were very desi^ous to see some euident signe whereby they might perceiue the Emperors intention to be such as  as he spake of, for, the keeping of the Lancequenets in hostile manner vppon their State, spoiling and wasting the Bressan territory, was a token of a contrary affection.
Soone after, Sigismond de la Tour, Chamberlaine and Ambassador to the Marquis of Mantoa came to Venice, to exhort the Senate in like manner to an agreement with the Emperor, affirming the very same that Doria had done, how that the Imperiall Maiesty was desirous of an atonement with them, entreating them to giue consent to suffer the treaty thereof to bee concluded in the Citty of Mantoa, whether he knew that the Emperor would forth-with send his Agents, with commissions to that end.
During these treaties the Emperour prepared for his comming to Bolognia to speake with the Pope, according as it had beene concluded at Barcelona.
All men had great hope of this enteruiew, wherein, matters of importanceExpectation of the enteruiew at Bolognia. were to be decided: of which, men greatly doubted, remaining with attention to see what would be the end thereof, especially the Venetians, because their affaires were very much intermingled and of great difficulty. The Pope seemed greatly to affect them, seeking, (by the meanes of Cardinall Cornare) to induce them to lay downe their armes, and to come to some honourable composition: and therefore hee had already before then sent the Bishop of Vaison his Nuncio to the Emperor at Placentia, who was thought to haue greatly  preuailed in disposing him vnto peace with all men, and cheefely with the Venetians.Sundry opinions in the Senate concerning the motion o^ (...) with the Emperor.
This was the cause why diuers Senators shewed themselues more strict in this negociation, some of them being desirous to tarry, till it were called vpon in the assembly at Bolognia: others, of a contra^y opinion, propounded that it behooued them to accept of the offer of the Marquis of Mantoa, and make present choyce of Ambassadors to send thither to treat of agreement: And why should we (say they) deferre it any longer? The Emperor hath a mighty army, the forcesA Discourse made in Senate concerning peace with the Emperor. of the league, being broken and dissolued, are weake, nay rather de^eated: the Florentines alone, the Duke of Milan, and We, are left to vndergoe the burthen  of such a warre: which is indeed a matter very vneasie, by reason of our smal meanes after so great expences that we haue beene at, and in regard of the great forces that the Emperor hath at this present in Italy: and yet neuerthelesse in such an inequallity of things, whilest he daily increaseth in hope, and we wax weak, he is content to treat with vs vpon equall termes, and (as I may say) to humble himself and to be the formost in inuiting vs to peace and friendship and we refuse it and make small account thereof.

And besides, it is not to be doubted, but that which Doria first of all; and then the Marquis of Mantoa haue so freely offered and promised, hath not only proceeded from his owne consent, but hath beene done by his expresse commandement, for  beleeue it, they would neuer vndertake to be dealers betwixt such great Princes, with such an assurance of their mindes, were they not more then certaine thereof, and is it then a part of wisdome to let such an occasion to escape which offereth it selfe to doe that which wee haue soe often-times desired, and

which at this present more then euer is to be wisht for? Wee haue had for many yeares, continuall warre, wherein wee h^ue spent more then fiue Millions of gold, so, as this Citty, and our whole State, which did scarcely beginne a little to breath after the forepassed warres, is now wholy ruined, and all mens meanes consumed, and yet for all that, a way being opened vnto vs, to settle vs hence-forward in rest and quietnesse to our honor and reputation, by prouiding (as there is hope) for our safety and comfort, we will hold the matter doubtfull, and expose our peace to the hazard of fortune, which may, (as it hath often done) produce such an accident, as will change the Emperors mind and will, or else, by his remayning armed here in Italy, may encrease our discommodities and dangers, or  by his departure, leauing matters in trouble and confusion, keepe vs yet for as many yeares more at as great expence in warre: and then, God knoweth, what will be the end thereof.
Those which haue hithervnto praised the constancy of this Senate, for that without sparing cost, and without feare of any danger, it hath defended, with such great affection, the common cause, and the liberty of Italy, perceiuing now, (accidents being changed, and how needfull it is to change opinions) that it doth continue in the same way and desire, to dwell in armes, and to make warre, hauing meanes to auoide it, will perhaps change their minds, and de^me vs to obstinate, and others will repute vs foolish and ill-aduised, for that wee will not handle  matters, not onely by reason, but according to our owne will, without applying our selues to time and occasion, by temporizing and expecting better fortune: It is without doubt good and commendable to deliberate maturely on matters which present themselues, but we must not excced the limmits of reason, least wee come to extremity, which is euer dangerous, but follow as most proffitable, the middle way; because it often happeneth, that a long delay of his, which holdeth matters in perpetuall irresolution and length, causeth as much, and more danger, then an ouer hasty and precipitate councell: From this, vntill now, we haue sufficiently kept our selues, hauing for so many yeares maintayned warre, and tried all possible meanes to reduce this Estate to a setled quiet and safety: Let vs now take heede, least we runne into the other extremity, for feare least by seeking to much our owne aduantage, and crauing too much assurance, we come to hinder our selues, and to expose our affaires to greater dangers.

Others were not of this opinion, thinking it more honorable and more profitableA Discourse in Senate contrary to the ^ormer. to temporize, not letting the Emperor know, that they were desirous of an agreement. These men did consider the small assurance, that was in the Emperors Army, which wanted mony and victualls, whereby, these two failing, it was of necessity to breake: That their Citties were fenced with strong garrisons, That the Emperor could not in any sort assail^ them vpon hope of sodaine taking of them: That he was besides, called away else where, and enforced to depart ere long forth  of Italy: That the Turke had beseeged Vienna, and reduced it to great danger: That all his brothers country was spoyled and ruined, by the Turkish Cauallery. That the Heretickes had raised great troubles, and of great importance in sundry places of Germany, if they were not speedily supprest by his presence: That hee, being once gone forth of Italy, and his army broken, or at least much decayed, there was no doubt, but that they might with ease seaze on the whole Dutchy of Milan, and mainteyne the Citties of Puglia vnder their obedience, and in a word, become victors in that warre, and purchase in all places an immortal glory and reputation: and where as at this present they treated of receauing an other mans lawes and conditions, the Emperor should bee enforced to sue for and accept the  Republikes friendship, on conditions to their aduantage for feare least the French, euer ready to armes, should attempt to contract a new league with them, and being afterwards ioyned together should come and trouble him, whilst he were busied in some other war: That no man was to perswade him-selfe, that the Emperor

distasting this Republick, because it had beene for many yeares vnited with the French, would come at this time for any loue therevnto, to propound conditions of agreement: but that they were rather certainely to beleeue that it was his own profit that mooued him thereunto, knowing the State of his owne affaires to be badly assured, and the impossibility of beeing able to hold together his army and to make any long aboad in Italy: That it was a general rule, that whatsoeuer pleaseth the enemy, and is by him esteemed necessary and profitable, ought to be reiected, as a thing which on the other side may beget contrary effects. His shew of humanity, and his desire of peace and quiet, was a cunning of the Imperialls to court their owne weaknesse, and to make men beleeue that by truly procuring  their owne aduantage, their only aime was the common good.

But let vs yet presuppose (said these men) that it were good at this present to make an accord with the Emperor. It is at the least more then reasonable to tarry till the assembly at Bolognia, where the Emperors will and intention may be better discouered, especially in the accord which shal be treated of, concerning the Dutchy of Milan, wheron in the end, as well by reason of the ancient and new confederacy, as for sundry great interests of the Commonwelth, the most assured resolution of peace ought to depend.

These reasons did greatly mooue many of those that were there present, who were of opinion not to lay downe armes, but with honor and safety to the Common-wealth,The Senat^s resolution. deferring for that time, the nomination of Commissioners which were to goe to Mantoa to treat of peace.
They resolued to send the Secretary Andrew Rossi to the Marquis, to thanke him for his offer and kind affection which he did beare to the Signory, and to excuse them for that they could not as yet resolue vppon any treaty of agreement, by reason that the Pope and the Emperor were shortly to meet together at Bolognia, to compose the affaires of Italy, that the Bishop of Faenza, the Popes Nuncio, had already a hand in that negotiation and particularly in that which concerned the Common-wealth.
The Pope in the meane time being gonne from Rome came to Spoleta, and  from thence to Bolognia, there to expect the Emperor, who after that the PopeThe Pope and the Emp^ror come to Bolognia. had made his entry, came thither within few dayes after, so, as sondry welcomes and reciprocall caresses being made, they beganne to treat of the affaires of Italy, and how to establish a firme peace there, either of these Princes seeming to bevery desirous thereof.
But the first and most important* was, the accord with the Duke of Milan, who after sundry goings, to and fro of the Prothonotory Carracciola, and of D. Garcia de Padiglia from Placentia to Cremona, being aduised by the Venetians, who the more to honour him, caused Marc Antonio Veniero their Ambassador, to accompany him, determined to go in person to the Emperor to Bolognia, hauing receiued  a safe conduct from his maiesty, vnder coullor of comming to him to iustifie himselfe because the difficultest point of his businesse seemed to bee, for that the Emperor was distasted of him because that being farre of, the Duke had refused to humble himselfe, and to doe that duty which did belong to a vassall of the Empire, or else for that he would haue debated his businesse with to great arrogancy, or at the least with too much distrust of the Emperours Iustice and Clemency.
This matter beeing almost finished, w^s interrupted by the Imperiallists, who demanded, for the assurance of that which should bee agreed vpon,The Imperials d^mand concerning the accord for Milan. that Francis Sforza should deliuer vnto them, the Citties of Pauia and  Alexandria, the which by the Venetians aduice hee flatly refused to doe, the State hauing mand them with strong Garrisons, and lent the Duke tenne thousand Ducats for their entertainment. This demand of the Imperiall officers did reuiue both in the Duke and the Venetians their former suspitions, that

the Emperialls were desirous to appropriate to them-selues the State of Milan: The Pope vpon this refusall, demanded to haue these Citties consigned into his hands, whereof the Duke like-wise crauing to bee excused, because hee could not doe it without the Venetians consent, and that it would bee best to referre the matter to the deciding of his cause in the assembly at Bolognia, it was referd thither without any resolution.
The Duke then b^ing come to Bolognia, and brought in to the Emperors presence, hee did very humbly thanke him for his curtesie, in that he had suffered him to come before him: then hee told him, that hee did so much rely vpon his iustice, at hee desired none other assurance or support then his owne innocency,The Duke of Milans great humility to the Emperor. and in so saying, he^laid downe at the Emperors feet the letters of safeconduct, which he had in his hand, where-with the Emperor was highly pleased: A moneth was spent in the handling of the difficulties, as well of his accord as of that of the Venetians, and at last the Pope hauing greatly imployed him-selfe therein, both the one and other were concluded.
Francis Sforza promised to pay vnto the Emperor within a yeare foure hundred thousand Ducats, and other fiue hundred thousand within tenne yeare, namely fifty thousand yearely; Coma, and the Castle of Milan remayning in the Emperors hands, who promised to surrender them so soone as the first yeares payment were made, and gaue him the inuestiture, or rather the confirmation of  that, which hee had before giuen him.
As for the Venetians, they did like-wise consent to surrender Rauenna, and Ceruia, with their Territortes, to the Pope (their clames saued) the Pope pardoning those who had practized or done any thing against him. They did like-wise agree to render to the Emperor, in the moneth of Ianuary next ensuing, all thatThe Articles of peace betwixt the Emperor and the V^netians. which they possessed in the Kingdome of Naples, and to pay him the residue of the two hundred thousand Ducats due at the last peace contracted betwixt them, namely, twenty thousand Ducats within a moneth, and fiue and twenty thousand yearely after-wards till the end of the payment, and to pay him another hundred  thousand Ducats besides, the one halfe within tenne moneths, and the other within a yeare after, and that the Duke of Vrbin should be comprized in that peace, as being vnder the Venetians protection. Diuers other Articles were added, concerning particular persons, and the generall commerce, so as by this peace and confederacy, Italy was freed from the tumults and dangers of armes, where-with it had beene afflicted the space of more then eight yeares, with infinite ho^tible accidents.
Florence alone was exempted from this good hap, vnto whome other mens peace had procured a worse and more dangerous war, by reason of the Florentines contention with the Pope. The Imperiall army leauing the Venetian State, and being come neere to the confines of Tuscany, went on very slowly by the Popes commandement, who desired to preserue the city of Florence and her whole territory from the souldiers spoile and oppression, which gaue the Florentines time and occasion to fortifie them-selues, and to make strong rampiers about their walles, and to receiue two thousand foot-men into it which Malateste Baillone brought thither, after that he had by composition yeelded the City of Perusa to the Marquis of Guasto, which made them more vnwilling to grant theThe Florentines great trouble. Popes demaunds: As also because that their delay to make their approches, had begotten an opinion in the Florentines, that the Emperour would rather in shew then in effect, satifie the Popes de^ire. But the Pope on the other side being extreamely incensed against them, because they would not referre themselues to his  iudgement, wherein ^e promised to proceed with all meekenesse, and being in great hope to obtaine his desire by freely disposing of the Emperours forces, seeing that he had no more need of them, by reason that he had made an agreement

with the Venetians and the Duke of Milan, he determined rather to come to the extreamest point of all then to giue place in any thing.
The Venetians were greatly grieued for the Florentines troubles and vexations, as their friends and confederates, and ioyned together in one selfe same cause, for the tuition and defense of the liberty of Italy: but the Republike was charged with such excessiue expences, as al-be* it that all her forces were still whole, yet neuerthelesse it could not giue them that aide and assistance which was needfull: and therefore the Senate exhorted the Florentines to make an accord, if it were possible, with the Pope, vpon any honourable condition which might not preiudice their liberty.
The Emperour in the meane time commanded the Marquis of Guasto to setVVhat moued the Emperor to en^orcethe Floren^ines to obey the Pope. forward with the army, and to goe and encampe before the walles of Florence, being mooued therevnto by his owne particular interests, besides the Popes, greatly desiring to haue those of Medicis to returne into the city, because that he had promised to giue the Lady Marguer^te his naturall daughter in mariage to Alexander the Popes Nephew, to the end that his sonne in law might hold an estate answerable to the greatnesse of so high a marriage: thinking moreouer that it would greatly profit him, for the encrease and assurance of his power in Italy to haue the gouernment of that City, which had euer shewed it selfe much inclined to the French, to depend wholly in time to come vpon him.
All the warre being in this manner brought into Tuscany and neere to the wals of Florence, all the remainder of Italy, and Christendome, were at peace, the which hapned very opportunely at the same time, that all of them being vnited together might march against Soliman, who desyring there to purchase glory and reputation by armes, being the more emboldened therevnto by the quarells and contentions of Christian Princes, did menace their Realmes and Dominions: for notwithstanding that winter approched, and that he wanted great ordnance, he was constrained to discampe from before Vienna, the which was defended by a number of braue men, he neuerthelesse cau^ed it to giuen forth abroad that he would returne againe at the spring, and beseege it with greater forces, or else  some other City of Germany.
Soliman dislodging from those quarters, did establish Iohn in the Kingdome ofSoliman restoreth Iohn King of Hungary to his Kingdome. Hungary, shewing thereby that his principall aime was to purchase the ^ame of a valiant and generous Prince: he did moreouer create high Treasorer of the Kingdome Lodouico Gritti, sonne to Andre Gritti Duke of Venice, borne of a Concubine at Constantinople, whilest being young he remained there about businesse. The conditions of peace being thus accomplished, the Venetian Senate being very carefull to establish it, and to purchase and keepe the fauour and friendship of these Princes, determined to send Ambassadors to the Pope and the Emperor to testifie both to the one and other, the gr^at conten^me^t which they had receiued  by such an accord and reconciliation, and how desirous they weare to haue that peace and friendship long to continue betwixt them. Some of the cheefest SenatorsThe Venetian^ send Ambassadors to the Pope and the Emperor. were appointed for this Ambassage, namely Marco Dandulo, Lodouico Gradonico, Lod^uico Moceniga, and Lorenzo Bragadin^, vnto whom, to make the Ambassage mo^e honorable, were added Antonio Su^iano, chosen at the first for successor to Gasparo Contare^ Ambassador with the Pope, and Nicolao Tepulo who was to be resident with the Emepror.
These sixe then came to Bolognia at the beginning of the yeare 1530* where the Pope and Emperorlay, who honorably entertayned them, where they executed the tenor of their commission a part, first of all to the Pope and then to  the Emperor. They did highly e^toll the Pope, for that a^ the common Father, embracing with Piety and wisdome, the cause of Christendome, hee had ended so many troubles and calamities* and the Republi^e did particularly thanke him, for his care of the wealth and commodity thereof, by composing in friendly

manner their strifes with the Emperour, and thereby sreed them from the expence and trouble of warre.
They declared to the Emperour the necessity which had enforced them to takeThe Ambassadors discharge their duties to the Princes. armes, and to continue the warre, their sorrow and griefe for matters past: but aboue all their firme resolution to obserue and maintaine the accord made betwixt them, and their desire of a perpetuall and an dissoluable friendship betwixt the house of Austria and the Republike.
The Ambassadors hauing in this mannerfully executed their commission, so as nothing was left for them to negociate, they were neuerthelesse commanded not to stirre from Bolognia, that they might be present at the Emperours Coronation, which was to be done in that City: because that Charles, meaning at the first to be crowned at Rome, according to the ancient custome of other Emperours, being called home by the Germains, for matters of great importance, resolued to haue the ceremony performed at Bolognia, by reason whereof great numbers of people comming thither from all parts, and Princes Ambassadours,The Emperor is crowned at Bolognia. they thought that such an Ambassage as theirs would become the pompe and sollemnity of such a day, which was vpon the foure and twenty of February, which being ended, the Ambassadours returned to Venice, being honoured by the Emperour with a guift of fiue hundred Portiguze worth ten crownes a peece, the which, according to their custome, were laied vp in the publike treasury: The ancient  fathers of the State hauing wisely decreed, that if those citizens that were sentThe Emperors gui^t to the Venetian Ambassadors brought into the publike treasury. in Ambassage to Princes, did receiue any thing of them in guift, they were to deliuer it vp in publike, they, thinking it vnreasonable to refuse that which was giuen in honour to him that did represent the Common-wealth, nor likewise to suffer that which was giuen to publike persons, to be conuerted to priuate vses, and if at times they were permitted to enioy them, it passed by the common suffrages of the Senate, wherevpon he vnto whom it was giuen, held it afterwards of the Senates grace and liberallity: and by this meanes, they did cut off all occasion from bad Citizens of being partiall for any Prince whatsoeuer, vpon hope of  gaine, to the detriment of the Common-wealth: Within a while after, three Ambassadours came to Venice from the Emperour, to render a reciprocall office of friendship, and in particular to resolue vpon the execution of certaine Articles of peace, who were entertained with all honour and sumptuousnesse, and at their departure they were presented with cuppes of gold, of the value of a thousand crownes a peece; and touching the Emperours demand, for his sake diuers of the Republikes subiects were pardoned, and others raised to great honours and dignities.
The Emperour after his coronation went to Mantua, where he was receiuedThe M^rquisate of Mant^a is erected into a Dutchy. with all royall magnificence by Frederico Gonzaga Marquis of that place, who by  him was recompenced with the degree and title of Duke, to himselfe and his posterity: from thence, being to passe thorow the Republikes State, in his iourney by Trent into Germany, the Senate commanded Paulo Nani and Giouani Delfino, Generall Prouidators in the firme land, and likewise G^ouani Mora, gouernor of Padua, and Pedro Grimani gouernor of Vincenza, to meet him at Villafranca with great company of Gentlemen, which lieth vpon the Mantuan and Verona confines, and to waite vpon him so long as he should make his abode vpon their territories: they commanded likewise the officers of Verona, to make speedy prouisionThe great entertainment giuen to the Emperor on the Venetian (...). of victuals, and other necessaries for those of his Court, and for the souldiers: and they did in particular, in the Republikes name, present him, with wine, venison, fish, sweet meats, and all other exquisite delicates fit for entertainment.
The Emperour then passed along with all his forces, beeing attended on by great numbers of Lords and Princes Ambassadours, and amongst others by Nic^lao Tepulo, appointed (as hath beene said) ordinary Ambassador with his Maiesty, and in passing by Verona, without entring the city, where, and in the castles the

gards were doubled, he came to Chiusa, being still accompanied by the Commissioners that represented the common-wealth, and being thorow all their State entertained with great honor, he seemed to be highly pleased and satisfied therewith, and protested great loue to the Republike.
As these things seemed to encrease these Princes confidence, and to confirme peace and friendship, euen so was it to be feared that they would in Soliman (great States being euer filled with iealosie) beget summe suspition, that the Signory would enter into league against him with the Christian Princes, and that which made him to doubt it, was the common report that was spread abroad, that peace was established amongst those Princes, that they might afterwards, being vnited  together, make warre vpon the Turke, and oppose themselues against Solimans great deseignes, who hauing once al^eady beseeged the city of Vienna, did threaten to returne thither againe with a mightier army. Certaine Cardinals, appointed for that end, did meet at Bolognia with the assistance of the Ambassadors of other Princes to treat of necessary preparations to beginne the warre with the Turke, and though the Common-wealths Ambassadors were not present at thatSoliman distast^d of the Venetians by reason of a report that was cu^rant in Constantinople. assembly where there was nothing concluded on, the report neuerthelesse encreasing the matter (as the manner is) and being bruted at Constantinople for otherwise then the truth, was the cause that diuers did blame that councell, who  thinking to remedy a mischiefe, fell into a greater and a more dangerous.
Now, the Senate being aduertized by Lodouico Gritti, who as Ambassador to Iohn King of Hungary had followed Soliman to Constantinople, of the Turk^sThe Venetians s^nd an Ambassage to Soliman. suspition, resolued to dispatch an Ambassadour to the great Lord, to acquaint him with the peace made with the Emperour, and with the reasons that mooued them therevnto: and also to assure him of the Senates firme and constant desire, euer to continue friends to the Ottomans: and if he should perceiue Soliman to be well inclined towards them, then to renue the Articles of peace. The Senate did not without cause vse all these respects and demonstrations of friendship to Soliman, because that not long before, at his returne from Belgrade, he had sent Ibraim Bei his Ambassador to Venice, to acquaint them with that which had (...) in Hungary, and par^icularly how that he had restored King Iohn their friend and Confederate to his Kingdome: he did besides, send an other Chiaus to the Senate, to entreate them to send their Ambassador to Constantinople to be present at the sollem^ity of the circumcision of two of his sonnes; and at the same time he vsed great liberalit y towards them, by giuing them for a present a thousand Canthars of Salt-peter, brought from Alexandria hauing heard that the Venetians did need it.
Thomaso Moceniga was chosen for this commission, who within few daies after did set forwards on his iourney with Francisco Barbaro, who was chosen Baylif, to succeed Pedro Zene, who being sent as Ambassadour to the Porte of the great  Lord, had borne himselfe as Vice-bailise for the space of seuen yeeres. This Ambassage came in a very opportune season to Constantinople, for the respects aboue mentioned: for the Croizade hauing beene published, and the report and expectation thereof being very great, by reason that the preachers in their pulpits had exhorted all the people to contribute towards the enterprize against the In^idels, Soliman had conceiued a certaine opinion in his minde, that the Venetians, after the accord made at Bolognia, had with the other Christian Princes conspired against him: whereby measuring all their actions past, he did among other matters complaine, for that by the peace they had giuen a great summeSo^iman (...) the Venetians. of money to the Princes of the house of Austria his enemies which had the  more enabled them to make warre vpon him, adding besides therevnto, that because they had not acquainted him therewith, till the conclusion of the businesse, they had not performed the part of a State that was his friend, such an one as ^he Signory made shew to be.
But all these rumours beeing already spread abroad amongst the Bashas, and other men of note, did at the arriuall of the Ambassadours, vanish, wherevpon,The circumcision of Solimans children. was speedily renued and confirmed the league, on the same conditions as it was before. Then the Ambassadours were present at the feast and sollemnity of the circumcision of his children, which was done with great pompe, cost and royall magnificence, in all which shewes, the Venetians did still hold a very honorable ranke.
During these great feasts and sollemnities, Soliman being in deed inuited to great attempts, did in his minde ruminate on affaires of consequence, he did oftentimes discourse with his Bashaes concerning the raising of an army wherewith  to returne into Hungary and Germany, to ouerthrow the power of the Austrian Princes; by reason whereof he dispatched matters of great importance: he determined to send a great Nauy to sea, intending vpon occasion, to execute some braue exploit, but especially to assure the sea by all meanes, whichThe incursions of the Knights of Malta against the Turkes. the Gallies of the Knights of Rhodes did continually scoure, who hauing planted themselues in the Isle of Malta, giuen vnto them by the Emperour, did nothing but scoure and molest all the seas, and chiefly those which belonged to the Turkes.
Soliman at the same time, thought on the affaires of peace by determining to cause all marchandizes to be brought to Constantinople, with the spices which Solimans purpose to enrich Constantinople were brought from the Leuant to Alexandria, and to other markets of his Empire, meaning (as he said) to make that city, the seate of the Empire, to abound in all things, and chiefly in gold, and therefore he had commanded all strangers not to buy silkes or spices any where but at Constantinople, whither he caused them to be brought; with great store of such commodities which he had bought with his owne money.
These things did greatly discontent the Venetians, as well in regard of the warre he determined to make, as for the change of the trafficke: for al-be-it his meaning was to assaile others and not them, yet neuerthelesse, growing mighty by the ruine of other Princes, his power was fearefull to the Venetians, and the diuiding of his army, did still giue trouble and molestation to the Republike, and did likewise put them to expence, by taking away trafficke fromThe Venetians pursuites to diuert Solimans deseignes. the vsuall and ordinary places, which did much disturbe the businesse of Marchants. These considerations did mooue the Venetians to entreate the King of Hungary, who already did treat of an agreement with Ferd^nand, to embrace this businesse, thereby to deliuer Christendome from so many mischiefs. They made the same request to the King of Poland, who was already a mediator in that agreement, to pursue it to the end. They did likewise solicite Lodouico Gritti at Constantinople, whose fauour and authority did daily encrease at the Port of the great Lord, to coole, by meanes of the Basha, that great heate of Solimans, to cause  his army to depart, by shewing vnto him how carefull the Republike was to keepe the nauigation free and safe from Pirates: and for the other likewise, to hinder the transportation of the commerce to Constantinople, which could not be done but with the great hurt and losse of all forraine nations.
Now, wholy to keepe the Turkes from arming themselues and entring intoThe Uenetians forbid the Knights of Malta to come no more vpon their Gulph. the Venetian Gulphe, The Senate commanded the Prouidator of the army, to aduertize the Gallies of Malta, no more to come vpon their Gulphe, nor to hurt those vessels which sailed on the Leuant seas which they held, and that he should threaten to disarme them if they did otherwise. The Turkes held this for a greeuous wrong* and complayning of the Venetians, said, that it did not beseeme  the friendship which they made shew to beare to the great Lord, to suffer them in their country before their faces to be so badly delt with, because that theyThe Turkes co^plaints against the Venetians. presuming vpon the forces and prouisions of the Republike, had not entertained any armed vessels.
The Emperour being in the meane time come to Ausbourg, did there connoke an assembly, where he caused his brother* Ferdinand to be elected King of the Romaines: then treating of affaires concerning religion, the Protestants craued the celebration of a generall councell, where their opinions, touching saith, might be examined and concluded, which was a pretence to collour their cause with the authority of Religion* The Catholikes likewise for other respects, desired a councell, hoping that the authority of the decrees that would thereThe Almains desire to hau^ a General Councell. be made, should suffice, if not to diuert the mindes of the chiefe of the Heretikes from their errors, yet at least to reduce part of the multitude to the soundest opinion; so as the one and other of them required one selfe same thing, namely to  haue a General Councell called.
The Emperour being desirous to satisfie this earnest request of all Germany, as also, because it fell out very opportunely for his affaires, to appease the causes of tumults, and contumacy of the people in that Prouince, did very much presse the Pope to conuoke the councell and promised him, to the end he should not feare to haue his authority and dignity endangered, to be there in person, and to haue a particular care of him. The Pope, perceiuing the small hopeThe Pope excuses concerning the conuocation of a councell. that was in it of any great good, and fearing rather some occasion of other disorders, without making any open refusall, he answered, That for diuers respects, it was not yet time to treat thereof, because that peace was not yet well established  amongst the Princes of Christendome, which ought first of al to be looked vnto, to the end that all of them being vnited together, might meete there, to aide and fauour the Councel.
The Protestants therevpon being more earnest, and the Pope fearing that it would breed some greater inconuenience, beganne to detest that Nation, and toThe Pope hath recourse to the Venetians, against the instances of the Germains. propound, that they were to be chastised with temporall armes, whereof, he often discoursed by letters, not only with the Emperour, but likewise with the Venetian Senate, to whom of purpose he sent his Nuncio, to exhort them, therein to interpose their councell, authority and forces, by intreating the Emperour to harken therevnto, and the easier to draw him to it, to offer him a summe  of money.
But the Senate being of a contrary minde, sought to disswade him from it,The Venetians answer to the Pope. and in praysing his good meaning they shewed him, how that to take armes at such a time, and without vrgent necessity, was nothing else but to shew that he was afraide of a most iust cause (whereof all men were desirous to be assured) by preuenting with force, the power which the concourse and fauour of the people might bring to the aduerse party: That it did not beseeme him, who maintained reason and truth, to flie from the triall thereof, especially by the Scriptures and by the same reason; and not to impose a necessity vpon the Protestant Princes to raise their forces, and thereby to make their cause to be more fauoured by the  people, and accounted to haue some shew of honesty, by opposing themselues against the violence which would be done to them by comming in armes: That the Princes of Italy were whole drawne drie of money by reason of the late wars: The Electors of the Empire were doubtfull in such a case, what part to take, and more desirous of peace then warre, as their Ambassadours doe affirme, who for the same purpose were sent to the Emperour at Bruxells: The free cities of Germany, are resolute in no sort to aide or fauour the Emperour if hee should seeke rather to preuaile by force then reason: and the Emperour is to weake of himselfe to leauy sufficient forces to ouer-throw the Princes and people being risen.
The Pope being mooued by these reasons, or by the anthority of the Senate, to whom he much referred himselfe, hauing changed his minde, desisted from sending his Nuncio to the Emperour as hee had determined: whereby this treatie was broken off. And to speake truely, it was then thought most fit to

consider rather how to resist the Turkes deseignes, and to keepe (as much as might be) the forces of Christendome vnited together, and chieflly those of Germany who were to susteine the first attempts of the Barbarians, by reason that it was held for certaine that Soliman, being proud and haughty, could not digest his shamefull discamping from before Vienna which he could not take and that he was (...) to returne thither with a mightier army, the which, according to the common report, he was already preparing.
The Emperour in this regard, did rather encline to peace then warre, and(...) (...) making any solid resolution, was content for that time to set downe cer^ rules, concerning religion, vntil the next future councell. He likewise desired, the better to reduce all matters to peace and quiet, to end the controuersies which remained vndecided betwixt the Archduke Fedinana and the Republike of Venice: wherevpon, he commanded to choose vmpiers according to that which they had concluded; wherevnto al be it that the Senate did not onely consent, but did likewise seeme greatly to desire it, by soliciting the deciding of the controuersie, yet neuerthelesse nothing succeeded thereof, contrary to the desire of both parties, by reason of the difficulty they had to name a third person, if it were so that the vmpiers could not agree amongst themselues. The Archduke chose the Duke of Mantua, the Bishop of Ausbourg, and the Popes Nuncio residing with himselfe; And the Venetians made choice of the Bishop Theatin^, the Archbishop (...) (...) (...) (...) the (...) (...) the (...) and (...) (...). of Salerne, who was of the family of the Adorni and the Popes Nuncio refiding at Venice, but those which pleased one of the parties, displeased the other, whereby matters remained still in controuersie, to the great preiudice and hurt of the subiects on the frontiers, and caused an alteration amongst the Princes.
Besides this, the Emperour had not yet surrendred (which was the very latter end of the yeere) the castle of Milan nor the city of Coma to Francis Sforza, as he was bound to doe: wherevpon the Venetians being desirous to haue it performed as soone as might be, for feare least time might produce some sinister accident, and Francis Sforza hauing not altogether meanes of his owne to furnish soThe Castle of Milan and the city of Coma (...) to (...) Sforza. great a sum of money, as was to be paied to the Emperour, they did lend him fifty thousand Ducats to make vp the payment, the which they re-embursed, vpon a bargain of salt they made with him, by which meanes the castle of Milan and the city of Coma, were rendred to Sforza, to the Venetians great content, whose only end was to assure the Du^chy of Milan to the Duke.
The Venetians great desire to conserue that State for Sforza, was the cause, that he seeming to haue some distrust of the French, entreated the Senate to interpose their authority with that King, that he might desist from his great warlike preparations, which he was reported to make to renue his old claime to Milan: and notwithstanding that they gaue small credit to that report, yet neuerthelesse, to shew their constant desire of the preseruation and defense of that State, and to take from the French all suspition that they would euer separate themselues from the Emperour and the other Confederates, they determined to make it knowne to all men, as well in France, as in the Courts of other Princes. But the Emperour being displeased with this declaration, did summon them besides, to arme the number of souldiers which the Signory was bound to leauy by the treaty of Confederacy. The Venetians therevpon supposing that he aimed at some particular deseigne of his owne, and would draw them to more then they were tied vnto by the league, answered, that the affaires of Italy standing at such a stay, as there was nothing to be more hoped for then  an assured peace, they were not to be vrged to so great expences.
Now at the same time, the Venetians supposing that King Francis, beeing newly married, and hauing recouered his children, should rather thinke on feasting, and pleasure, then on the trauails of warre, to make it knowne that they

desired to partake some part of his content, sent into France, Iohn Pisani, ProcuratorIohn Pisani extraordinary Ambassador into France. of Saint Marke^, their extraordinary Ambassadour to reioyce with him in the name of the Republike. But he hauing discouered some true likelihoods, said boldly, that they would not suffer the peace and publike quiet to be troubled or interrupted, and they would neuer faile in ought wherevnto they were tied by their confederacy.
In the Interim of these negociations, the Republike enioying an assured peace,The Venetians (...) the nomination of Bishopricks vnder their (...). the Senate tooke care to re-establish it in her ancient preheminences, which it had enioyed before the last warres, and amongst others, to appoint all the Bishops belonging to their owne State: for which hauing made many requests  to the Pope, without receiuing any certaine resolution they seized on the temporalties of diuers Bishoprikes which the Pope had giuen: whereat his Holinesse being incensed, made shew that he would resent it, and to those ends sought aloccasions to breake off from them.
The Senate considering the difficulty of the matter, did consult therevpon in open Councell, where the opinions were very different, some affirming that it was not good at that time to prouoke the Pope, but to deferre the matter till some other time, and to quit the seizure: Others of the contrary opinion councelled to pursue the businesse, and that the Pope would at the last be enforced to grant their demaunds, so as in this diuersity of opinions the matter remayned  vndecided. The Senate hauing at last found a meanes of agreement, it was decre^d, that in fauour of the Pope, the temporalties of those that had beene promoted by his Holinesse, should be surrendred to them, in the cities of their obedience: and yet neuerthelesse they did not giue ouer their demand, saying, that what they had done was onely for the respect and reuerence which they did beare to Pope Clement, hoping that he would grant them more then they craued: the Pope neuerthelesse, who at first made shew that hee demaunded nothing else but that, as a signe of obedience, without beeing satisfied, stood vpon farre greater difficulties. But other matters of greater importance happening, caused them to sue to the Pope, and to haue good correspondence  with him.
Soliman hauing made peace with the King of Persia in the beginning of theSolimans deseigne against the Christians. yeere 1531. determined to assaile Christendome on all sides both by sea and land, and for that purpose had sent his Standard of Generall to Cariadine surnamed Barbarossa, a famous Pirate, for his great experience in marine matters, who was renowned for the infinite mischiefes which he had done to Christians, and hauing thus receiued him into the number of his captains, had aduertized the Venetians thereof, to the end they should no more vse him as a Pirate, but as one of his owne Porte.
And although the Bashas did o^tentimes affirme that Soliman would continue  in league and friendship with the Republike, yet neuerthelesse, it seemed neither safe nor honourable to leaue the possession of the sea, to the discretion of that barbarous Nation, who was mighty, and armed: wherevpon it behooued them to make an extraordinary prouision of Gallies and souldiers: a matter which came to them in an ill time, by reason that their publike treasure being exhausted by the late warres, could not furnish them withThe Venetians craue the (...) leauied vpon the Clergie to helpe them against the Turkes. money to suffize so great expences: therefore it was necessary to haue recourse to other meanes, and amongst others, it seemed vnto them that the Tenthes leauied vpon the Clergy of their Dominions would bee suffitient for that businesse.
Now they sought in all humility to obtaine it of the Pope, but they could not thereby surmont the difficulties wherewith hee drew the matter forth in length* but to the double discommodity and griefe of the Venetians, he made account to leauy two Tenthes vpon all the goods of the Italian Clergie, for to

employ them (as he said) on the releefe of the Cantons of the Catholike Swisses, against the other protestant Cantons, who threatned them with warre; and by this meanes the Republike was frustrate of the commodity which it hoped for by the Tenths, which beeing raised vpon their State, seemed to belong vnto them vpon so iust a cause: as also because the said leauy of Tenths, gaue some suspition to the Turke, that it was done for some league practized against him.
The Senate neuerthelesse, al-be-it they were depriued of that helpe, and outThe Venetians preparations to stand vpon their gard. of hope to obtaine it, did not cease to make prouision of all things necessary, but surmounting all difficulties that were offered, they determined presently  to arme fifty Gallies, they which they sent to sea well furnished with all necessaries: But these great warlike preparations did by little and little vanish of themselues: because that Soliman being come to Andrinople, intending (as it was said) to take order for his preparations, beeing carried away with the pleasure of hunting, did daily delay the affaires of warre, so as that yeere remained peaceable and quiet on his part.
The Venetians nauall army in the meane time was not idle, for the sea beingThe Venetians by chasing away the Pirats make the s^as safe. full of Pirates, who beeing ioyned together in great numbers did scoure all the Seas, and hindred the nauigation and commerce, they were all of them chased, broken, or taken prisoners, to the great profit of all men, and to the Venetians  praise.
The King of Hungary at the same time, notwithstanding that he had all his warlike preparations well ordered and in readinesse, and that hee was stronger then Ferdinand, yet neuerthelesse whilest he expected the Turkish aide for his better safety, fearing the great forces which the Emperour was reported to leauy for his brothers aide, or desyring rather to end the matter in friendly sort, then to come to strokes, and namely destrusting his owne people, did not enterprizeThe King of Hungary secketh peace of the Emperor and of Ferdinand. any thing: so as both parties being quiet, he sent Iohn Alasco his Ambassadour to the Emperour, of whom obteyning no certaine resolution, he went to Ferdinand, where finding likewise as great difficulties, hee determined to goe to the other Princes of Germany, to treate with them of his Kings businesse, but Ferdinand taking his safe conduct from him, hee was enforced to returne into Hungary.
King Iohn neuerthelesse, did not cease by other messengers to aduertize those Princes that were assembled in the Diets held in sundry places of Germany, and chiefly the Protestants, to diuert them from aiding Ferdinand, that Soliman accounted those his owne frends or enemies, who shewed themselues frends or enemies to the Realme of Hungary.
This King, not to omit any thing, did likewise send his Ambassadours to Venice, to entreat the Senate, to be a meanes, as well to the Emperour, as to the  Pope, that embracing his cause, they might reduce matters to some honourable agreement. The Senate perceiuing that King Iohns intent was to trie all meanes euen to extremity, that he might keepe the Realme of Hungary to himselfe, al-be-it that he had the Turkish army at his command fot his defense, to take awayThe Venetians doe in vaine solicite the Pope for the King of Hungary. the cause of new troubles in Christendome, they did willingly harken to this request, and were desirous to further it to the Pope, but all their remonstrances were to small purpose, because that his Holinesse, fauouring more the cause of Ferdinand, then that of King Iohn, seemed to consent that the matter should rather be determined by armes then by accord.
Now within a while after, the rumor of warre beeing blowne abroad euery  where, how that Soliman resolued with a mighty army to come downe into Hungary to beseege the City of Strigonium which Ferdinand kept, the Pope seat the Bishop of Verona his Nuncio to Venice, to know of the Senate, their determination, and what they wold do, if the Turke should return with his army into Hungary,

and if all Christian Princes would vnite themselues together against that common enemy.
The Senators vpon this proposition were very doubtfull and perplexed. For zeale to Religion on the one side did mooue them, and the feare likewise for their owne State, the Turke waxing so mighty a neighbour: on the other side, their doubt not to finde in the Christian Princes such steadfast constancy as to expose themselues to necessary trauailes and dangers, held them backe: so as in this diuersity of opinions, they answered the Pope, that the Venetian Senate hadThe Venetians answer to the Popes demand. euer desired and sought the good of Christendome: but as the same did sodainely incite them to vndertake all matters for the seruice thereof, euen so they  were sory, that the condition of the times, and the particular estate of ^heir affaires would not permit them to shew it in effect. That the greatest Princes of Christendome were at the same time at discord and dissention amongst themselues, so as it could not be promised, that they would vnite themselues against that common enemy, that the forces alone of the Signory were to weake to march against him: besides, that their State, for the space of two thousand miles, from the Isle of Ciprus unto the end of Dalmatia was neere neighbour to the Turkes, where there were ordinarily great numbers of Citizens, and much wealth, a matter with indeed did enforce them to temporize with them, and kept them from so easily declaring themselues their enemies: That they did therefore much  commend the Popes goodnesse and wisedome, for that he did so well foresee and prouide for the perills of Christendome: And that they did hope that their excuses would bee entertained of all men as most iust and reasonable.
Ferdinand in the meane time, al-be-it he perceiued that all these treaties of league would come to nothing, yet neuerthelesse, promising vnto himselfeFerdinands deseignes against the Turkes. to bee able to obtaine by armes a more aduantageous peace then that which King Iohn had propounded vnto him, contemned all treaties that were offered, by reason that hee had beene declared King of Romaines in the assembly at Colein, and thereby successor to his brother Charles in the Empire, and had  moreouer obtained sundry aides in the Diets held at Lins and at Prague, beside the great help which he hoped to haue from his brother.
The Venetians neuerthelesse without giuing ouer their former proposition of peace, hauing sent their Ambassadours vnto Ferdinand, for to congratulate in the common-wealths name his new dignity, caused him to entertaine theThe Uenetians exhort Ferdinand to peace. motion of peace, exhorting him to embrace it, and to answere the hope which men had conceiued of him, that as a wise and vertuous Prince he would haue the peace and quiet of Christendome in singular recommendation.
All those that had regard to the publike good, and did neerely consider the conditions of those times, desired peace, because they did fore-see that great warres and calamities would arise in other places, by reason that the Kings of  France and England perceiuing a goodly occasion offered to enuade the Emperours dominions, who was enforced to turne his forces against the Turkes, toVVhat moued the Kings of France and England to make warre on the Emperour. defend the Estates of his house and the Empire, did practize sundry waies to make warre vpon him, the one beeing prouoked with an antient desire to recouer the State of Milan, and the other for a disdaine newly conceiued against Charles for defending his Aunts cause, wife to the King, whom he had put away that hee might marry with an other, therefore they had ioyntly practized the German Princes who did not greatly affect the Emperour, and in the meane time they armed: so as it seemed that they tarried for nothing else to make warre vpon him, but till the Turke should beginne, and thereby draw the Emperors forces into  another place, according to their common report.
Soliman, who had dayly intelligence of the Christian Princes deseignes, much esteeming the selfe same occasions to see the Emperour at one time busied in diuers and sundry places, seemed euery day to be more resolute to defend and

maintaine the Realme of Hungary for King Iohn his friend and Confederate, desiring to recouer his reputation which he supposed he had lost at his retreat from before Vienna.
At the beginning then of the yeere 1532. the Turke being come to Andrinople, acquainted all men what way he ment to take: but before his departure,1532. shewing both in word and deed, what great account he made of the Venetians friendship, he called home the great Gallies which he kept in Soria and Alexandria, for the aboue mentioned causes, and freely suffered them to traffick in all places as they were wont to doe, caring no more to reduce the trade to Constantinople. Then being carefull to raise his army, he sent for all the Spaches from Greece (these are horse-men, vnto whom the Prince giueth for wages, the possession of certaine lands during their liues) to come to him with their armes and horse; he demanded likewise of the Tartarians, Valachians and Transiluanians, the aide which by their confederacies they were bound to send him, so as marching into the field, and being come vpon the confines of Hungary heThe number of the Turkish army. found that there were a hundred and fifty thousand fighting men in his army, amongst whom, the most esteemed, were twenty thousand Ianissaries, who fight on foote, being brought vp from their youth in the exercize of martiall discipline.
Soliman then being arriued with his whole army before Belgrade, a City seated  in low Hungary, he caused it to be published that he would enforce the EmperourSoliman with his army commeth into Hungary. to come to battaile with him, promising to himselfe easily to vanquish him, threatning with insolent speeches to driue him forth of Germany, and to make himselfe Lord of all the States of the Westerne Empire, which (as he said) belonged vnto him, as true Emperor and Lord of Constantinople.
Vpon the report of the Turkes arriuall, the Emperour Charles likewise hauing assembled a mighty army from all parts of Christendome, and such an one as inThe Emperor with a mighty army encampeth before Vienna. the memory of man, the like had not beene seene, went and encamped before the city of Vienna: determyning there to attend the enemy.
All men were attentiue to see what would be the issue of this warre, especially  the Venetians, who vnder-hand sauored the Christian party, hauing suffered their subiects to goe, as of themselues to the Emperors army.
The effects neuerthelesse of these two great armies were farre otherwise, then were the expectation and feare which men had, because that Soliman entring very late into Hungary, beeing not able to come sooner, as well in regard of the greatnesse of his preparations, as for the distance of the way, did not directly march towards the Emperours army, but hauing onely made aSolimans retreate. shew of warre, and some few incursions, hee returned to Constantinople. The Emperour (who had not stirred from before the walles of Vienna, not going forth to met the the Turkes, notwithstanding that he had intelligence of  their approches) being assured of their retreat, did on a sodaine breake vp his army, and burning with an extreame desire to returne into Spaine, after that he hadThe Emperors retreate. left certaine Italian foot-men with his brother, and some numbers of Lansquenets hee tooke his iourney into Italy, from thence to saile into Spaine.
But both the Emperour and the Turke, hauing at one time great nauies at sea, the Venetians thought that it behooued them for the safety of their owne State, to arme likewise, because they would not by any meanes bee taken vnprouided, and to these ends determined to augment their nauy with a good number of Gallies: wherevpon, by the Senates command, twenty gallies were speedily armed in the Isles of Candy, Zant, and Corsou, and in the Cities  of Dalmatia, so as their nauall army amounted to the number of threescore Gallies, of which Vincenz^ Capel was made General, with expresse commission to take great heed that no hurt might be done to the townes and subiects of

the Signory, and that the Imperialls and the Turkes might bee vsed alike as friends, by furnishing them with Hauens and victualls, but not with armes, not war like munitions, the Senate resoluing to haue firme friendship and correspondency with both of them.
Now the Turkish Armie beeing come vpon the Leuant seas, conducted byThe Emperors and Solimans nauall Armi^* Imerall, to the number of fourescore saile, reckoning with the Galleys twenty lesser vessels, and that of the Imperialls vpon the Westerne seas, which consisted of forty light Galleys, with certaine great shippes of warre, vnder the command of Andre Doria, beeing yet vncertaine what the Captaines deseignes were, and what way they would take: the Generall Capel went and spent the time betwixt  Zante and Corfou giuing order, according to his commission, that the subiects of the Signory might haue no harme, and to auoide likewise the occasion to meete with these armies, that no suspition might bee giuen of fauouring one more then an other.
Imerall beeing at last come to Preuesa, Capello remained still at Corfou, from whence he sent one of his Galleys to visit him; the which the Barbarian taking in good part, promised him that no harme should bee done to the subiects of the Signory; and the Turkish fleet arriuing afterwards in the Isle of Zante, and in other places belonging to the Republick, tooke nothing away fro^ them by force. As for Doria, hee departed from Sicily where hee had made long aboade and sailed  towards Greece; and vnderstanding that the Venetian fleete lay at Zante,Doria his subtile meaning. hee was desirous to saile thither with all his Galleys, to haue some occasion to talke with the Generall Capello, intending, as it was thought, and as himselfe hath since then affirmed, that by causing the Turkes to suspect the vnion of their Armies, to enforce the Venetians to ioyne with him, of which vnion hee had before written to the Senate, with great offers and hopes: and the Emperors Ambassador, resident at Venice, hauing earnestly intreated that it might be so, demanded of them, that if vpon occasion the two fleetes of the Emperor and the TurkeThe Senates answer to the Emperors Ambassador. should fight one with another, whether they would haue their Generall to ayde and fauour the Turkes: wherevnto the Senate readily replied, that they did greatly  esteeme the Emperors friendship, and were well disposed to entertaine and keepe it, but they were not determined vpon his occasion, or for any other vaine hope, to breake the league with so mighty an enemy.
These two Armies then, Imperiall and Turkish, remaining quiet for feare oneThe retreate of the Turk^sh Army* of another, did in a manner spend that whole summer without dooing any thing. At the last, the Turkish fleete beeing much weakned by the Pestilence, began to retire towards Negrepont, to goe afterwards (as it was thought) to winter at Constantinople. Doria beeing emboldened by this retreat, sailed with his ArmyCoron and Patras, taken by Doria. towards Morea, resoluing to besiege Coron, which hee tooke after some small resistance of the Turkish garrison that lay there, hee did the like to Patras, but it  was by composition, then winter drawing on, hee retired into Sicily without executing any other notable action.
Both these Armies beeing retired, the Venetians meaning to bee no longer at such great expence in vaine, did disarme the Galleys of encrease, with some other old ones which were in the Army. These things were done foorth of Italy, the which in the meane time was quiet in all places; but that the Duke of Milan resolued to send his forces against the Captaine of the Castle of Mus, who beeing desirous to aduance himselfe by some nouelty, and vpon hope that the Lansquenets would assist him, had taken certaine places from the Grisons, and did sore threaten the citty of Coma. The Duke of Milan vpon this report, sent Iohn Baptist^ Speciano, one of his houshold Gentlemen to Venice, to entreat the Senate to aide him to preuent the Captains designes; the Senate answered that the Duke ought therein to beare himself modestly for feare of altering the quiet of Italy, and giuing

occasion to those that were desirous of troubles to practize other nouelties: but when need should be, he should find in them the same readines to helpe him, which he had at other times experience of. This caused that small stirre soone to be appeased, which would haue fallen out otherwise, if the Venetians had taken armes. For the Grisons hauing by the aid of certaine Cantons of the Suisses leuied certaine nombers of soldiers, did enforce the Captaine of the Castle to an agreement, whereunto the Duke willingly consented, so soone as he vnderstood the Venetians resolution, and had at last, by meanes of a summe of money, the towne of Locquaca and the Castle of Mus restored to him.
The Duke of Ferrara did at the same time, by the Emperors sentence, obtaine The Duke of Ferrara recouereth Mode na and Regio by the Emperors sentence. Modena and Regio, the which imported likewise, that the Pope receiuing an hundred thousand Ducats of him by a certaine time, and reducing the reuenew therof to the ancient forme, should againe newly inuest him in the iurisdiction of Ferrara, asbeit it was against the Popes will, who demanding caution and assurance for the summer, fifteene Venetian Gentlemen were giuen vnto him, whom the Senate did promise should be answerable for it, whervppon he accepted it. This Duke was not long before reconciled to the Venetians, who restored vnto him a goodly and magnificent Pallace, which hee had in Venice, it beeing taken from him by reason of the last warres, and had beene giuen vnto his Predecessors by the Signory.
According then to this sentence the Emperour consigned Modena to the Duke of Ferrata, which till then he had hept in deposito, by reason whereof there had beene, for a long time, betwixt the Pope and that Duke, neither open warre or an assured peace, for it vexed the Pope to quit those two Citties, which he had soThe Emperor is againe (...) rous to talk with the Pope ^t Bolognia. much sought after.
The Emperor beeing speedily come into Italy, sent word to the Pope how desirous he was to talke with him againe at Bolognia, for diuers great considerations, and cheefely to renew the Confederacy, made before betwixt them, to the end to comprehend therein all the Italians, and to taxe the summe of money, which euery one ought to contribute, if the French should inuade Italy: for hee  had intelligence that the French had some deseigne vpon Genoa, pretending by reason of their particular claimes and interests, that they might doe it without breaking the agreement made at Madrill or Cambray: as also because that Genoa was not mentioned in their treaty of the last league, but only the state of MilanWhat was the cause of the enteruiew. and the Realme of Naples.
The Pope seemed to be highly pleased with this enteruiew, for hauing propounded to marry his Neece to the second sonne of France, and fearing least the Emperor distasting it, would refuse to passe on any further in the marriage already determined and concluded betwixt Alexandro de Medicis his nephew, and the Lady Marguerite his naturall daughter, sought all meanes to entertaine the Emperour  and to satisfie him in all things; therefore he sent word to all the Potentates of Italy, to send their Commissioners to Bolognia, where the meeting should be, there for to renew the Confederacy according to the Emperors desire.
This proposition did for diuers reasons displease the Venetians: First for feare least the Turke should suspect that the renewing of the league was rather made against him, then for the defense of Italy, with whom they were to deale with great respect. Next they thought it to be against reason, so to contemne the interests and deseignes of the French King, which might beget great discontent in him, which might turne to the losse and detriment of the Signory. And then, that the Emperors intention, to renew this first league, being only to comprehend  Genoatherein, the same might displease the Turke and the French: The Turke, for that he hated that Citty and Nation, from whom that fleet came which had taken Coron, and done him so much harme; the French because that the assurance

of Genoa would enforce them to take armes against them, by reason of the report which was already currant, how that they had an enterprise vpon it. And lastly, they were in doubt that this renewing of the league was a cunning of the Emperors, to cause the French King and Soliman to suspect the Republick, and for to reduce it to this point, not onely strictly to ioyne and confederate it selfe with him, but likewise to depend wholy vpon him and his pleasure, and altogether to follow his fortune, by declaring it selfe a friend to his friends, and enemy to his enemies.
The Venetians made answer to the Emperors Agents which came from Rome for that purpose, that they were willing to maintaine and keepe the confederacy The Emperour returneth into Italy. which they had made with the Emperor, and the other Confederates, beeing desirous of the peace and quiet of Italy. The Emperor in the meane time came forth of Germany into Italy, vnto whom the Senate sent foure Ambassadors, Marco Minio, Ieronimo Pesare, Lorenzo Bragadino, and Marco Foscare, who found him at Pontiebe, and waited vpon him thorow their State with all the honor that might bee, presenting him with confi^ures and other sweet meates, where in they spent aboue ten thousand crownes.
The Emperor beeing come to Bolognia, about the latter end of the yeare, the Pope speedily arriued there, where were shewed the selfe same demonstrations  of friendship and familiarity as at the former time. Then comming to conferre together at the beginning of Ianuary of the next yeare 1533. to treate of important affaires, and chiefly to renew the last league made in the selfe same place, by reason whereof all the other Princes of Italy had sent their Commissioners thither: Marc-Antonio Veniero, and Marc-Antonio Contaren, Ambassadors of the Republick, the one with the Pope, and the other with the Emperor, were called, and earnestly intreated by these Princes, to perswade the Senate toThe Venetians are requested to consent to the renuing of the league. hearken to that businesse, which concerned the safety of all men, and the quiet of Italy, which they so much desired. The Pope, besides, these exhortations made to the Ambassadors, sent Roberto Magio, his Nuncio, to Venice, albeit it was more, (according to the common report) to satisfie the Emperor, then for any  desire hee had there-vnto.
The Venetians had vsed all meanes possible to keepe themselues from beeingThe Venetians answer concerning the renuing of the league. called into it, by promising carefully to obserue that which had beene agreed betwixt them, but beeing at last enformed to deliuer their resolution, they refused to renew the confederacie, or to amplifie the obligations therein contained, alleadging for their excuses (not mentioning the Freneh) how that the Turke had notice of the former made at Bolognia for the safety of Italy, so that comming now to renew it, in regarde all the deseignes of Christendome were presently meant against him, hee would distrust it, and vndoubtedly suspect that the Venetians had a hand in it. Besides, it was sufficiently knowne to all men, that for the  safety of Italy, there was no need to renew the league, in regard of the meanes they had to resist all attempts which should bee made against it: for if they came by Sea, the Emperors fleete was mighty enough to hinder their approaches: as for any enterprises by land, the league had prouided for it, and among others, for the matter of Genoa, whither they could not come but thorow the State of Milan, which was comprehended in the league; the which experience did sufficiently manifest, no man hauing since three yeares (that the league was contracted) dared to raise any stirres in Italy, no not those who were desirous to trouble the peace thereof.A new league betwixt the Pope, Emperor and all the Italian Potentates (the Venetians excepted).
The Emperor beeing not satisfied with this answer, and desirous speedily to  returne into Spaine, hauing already remained two moneths at Bolognia, was more earnest with the Pope to conclude one betwixt themselues, refuting all the reasons which hee for his part could alledge to the contrary: so as they began to

treate of the Articles of the Confederacie, which beeing determined and concluded betwixt the Pope, the Emperor, and the other Potentates of Italy, namely the Dukes of Milan and Ferrara, the Citties of Genoa, Sienna, Luca, and Florence; notwithstanding that the latter was comprehended in the promises made by the Pope, it was published at the latter end of February, and by the same, each of those that were therein named, were bound to contribute to the warres, according to his strength and meanes, by gathering together in the meane time a stock of one hundred and ten thousand crownes, and monethly to furnish the like summe, if warre should happen; and in time of peace fiue and twenty thousand, for the entertainment of the Captaines and other soldiers: and at the same  instant, Antonio de Leua, by a generall consent, was declared Generall of the league, with a decree, that ^ee should remaine in the Dutchy of Milan.
But it was a matter truly worthy of note, tha^ albeit the Common-wealth would not consent to this treaty, nor in any sort deale therein, yet neuerthelesse it was named in the publication thereof, and in the impression that was made of it, either to make that action to bee of more account, or else to cause the Common-wealth to bee suspected, and to become odious to other Princes, as it came to passe: for, that impression beeing carried to Constantinople and into England, it gaue occasion to those Princes (both of them beeing the Emperours sworne enemies) to complaine thereof to the Senate, and to distrust them. This league beeing concluded and published, the Emperour departed from Bolognia, and went to take shipping at Genoa, where fiue and twenty Galleys attended him, vnder the command of Andre Doria, to saile to Barcelona.
The end of the ninth Booke of the fifth Decade.




The Contents of the tenth Booke of the  fifth Decade.
VMPIERS are in vaine appointed to end the controuersie, betwixt the Venetians and Ferdinand. The Emperors and  the Turkes Nauall armies, are at one time at Sea without meeting one another. Francisco Dandulo is taken by Pirats and bannished at his returne to Venice. The Venetians take the Moore of Alexandria by night, and presently set him at liberty. Soliman calleth Cariadin Barbarossa the Pirate to his seruice. Henry Duke of Orleance second Sonne to Francis the French King marrieth Katherine de Medicis the Popes Neece. Great troubles in Germany by meanes of the Duke of Wittemberg. Sundry great fleets at one time vpon the Seas. The  Turkes recouer Coron. The Turkish fleete vpon the Coasts of Calabria. Cariadine Barbarossa taketh Tunis. The Death of Pope Clement the seauenth, and the Creation of Pope Paul the third. The Pope taketh armes for the Dutchy of Cameryne. Solimans great friendship towards the Venetians. The Emperors iourney into Affricke where heetaketh Goletta and Tunis. The death of Francis Sforza Duke of Milan. The French King seeketh by all meanes to draw the Venetians to his ^ide. The Duke of Sauoy denieth the kings passage thorow his country. The French take Thurin, Fossan, and Pigneroll. The Emperor commeth with his army into Prouence. The Kings enterprise vpon Genoa. Antonio de Leua dyeth in Prouence. The Kings deseigne to make vse of the Turke against the Emperor. Diuers wrongs and outrages done to the Venetians in Solimans countries. And lastly the Bascha excuseth all these wrongs as done without Solimans knowledge.

The Tenth Booke of the fifth Decade of the Historie of Uenice.
THe Emperor departing from Bolognia to go into Spaine, being come to Cremona, wrote wery louingly to the Senate, giuing them to v^derstand that hee had willingly admitted their excuses, in that they would not consent to the renewing of the league; and how that hee was desirous to  doe any thing that might consent them. And signes of friendship thus continuing betwixt those of Austria, and the Republike, both of them seeming to bee very desirous to end the controuersie which was yet vndecided betwixt Firdinand King of the RomansVmpiers appointed wi^h a third man, to end the controuersie betwixt Ferdinand an^ the Venetians. and the Signory, concerning the restitution of certaine townes held by Ferdinand, which did belong to the Venetians, the Emperor dealing therein, they agreed at last vpon a third man, which was Lodouico Porro a Senator of Milan, Ferdinand hauing chosen for Vmpiers, Ierome Bulfarch a German Doctor, and the Venetians Matheo Auogadre of Bressia, a Doctor and Knight; who being come to Trent, ^he Senate likewise sent thither Andre Rosse the Secretary, that he might  be present there, and acquaint the Senate with the whole businesse: But the Senate hoping afterwards to compose this controuersie by friendly meanes, and byThe assembly is bro^n vp without an^ conclution. disbursing a summe of mony, to recouer their fortes of Maran and Gradisca, they commanded Giouani Delfino gouernor of Verona to goe to Trent about that businesse, Yet neuer-thelesse, both in this and other matters, so many difficulties were presented, as the assembly brake vp, without any resolution at all.
Whilest the Christian Princes were busied about these affaires, the Turke determining to recouer Coron, had prepared a mighty fleete for that purpose, which was sent towards those quarters. Doria to giue counterpoize to this Turkish army, caused great numbers of vessells to be armed in sundry places, that he  might ioyne together the greatest forces he could.
These preparations caused the Venetiens like-wise to arme the Gallies which they had disarmed at the beginning of winter: continuing neuer-the-lesse in their first resolution, not to medle betwixt those Princes, where-vpon, they sent wordThe Venetians make preparations for their safety. to the Generall Capello, who was still in commission, to keepe the same order, and manner of proceeding as hee had done the yeare before, by reason whereof hee sent Francisco Dandulo Captaine of the Gulphe with certaine Gallies into the Gulphe, to gard it against Pi^ats, who being assembled in great numbers did much harme: and for the same purpose hee dispatched foure Gallies to Zante, and to the Promontory of Mailla the Gallion which was a greate shipp of a merueilous  building well stored with ordnance and soldiers, that place being very commodious for the Nauigation of the Venetian vessells which sailed into the Leuant, and him-selfe with the residue of the fleete remained neere to Corfou, satisfying himselfe, according to the Senates meaning, to assure their owne State, and keepe that

which belonged to the Republick from being spoiled and molested, but yet hee could not so well handle the matter, but that the subiects of the Signory did susttaine much harme and many losses, as it often happeneth in such cases. Now Francesco Dandulo being come into the Gulph, towards the coast of Dalmatia with six Galleis descried from farre twelue Galleo^s of the Barbarians, and supposing at first, that they were the Gallies of the Prouidator Canalis, he held on his course, but beeing come within kenning, he perceiued that they were Pirates, wherevpon hauing changed his mind he did put himselfe more to Seaward, determining (as hee after*wards said) to come and incompasse them that hee might  fight with them and keepe them from escaping by flight, but, not acquainting the Captaines of the other* Gallies with his determination, they supposed that he did put to Sea, not for to fight, but to escape thence, and therefore, tarrying behind, he was only followed by M^rco Cornare who commanded a bastard Galley.
The Pirates beeing come very neere them, and perceiuing their owne aduantage, by reason of the retreat of the other Venetian Gallies, fell vpon them and tooke them, and carried both the men and the vessells into Barbery, and among others,Francesco D^ duo is taken by Pirats. the Captaine and Cornare, These newes being brought to Venice, did much troble the Senate, as well in regard of the auda^iousnesse of those the eues, as for the Captaines indis^retion, who thorough his owne fault had caused the Gallies of  the Signory which were very famous at Sea, to receiue such an affront whereuppon, some propounded that it was necessary to send a sufficient number of GalliesS^dry opini ons in ^he Senate concerning the reuenge of that wrong. towards the Sea-coasts of Affrick, and cheefely to Gerbes and to Argier, there for to burne all the shipping they could find, and to doe other harmes in reuenge of the wrongs they had sustained of that nation: but others confidering that it would not be well done to ^urt all the i^habitants of that Cuntrey with whom they traded, and thereby ^ut off from the Venetians their traffick and nauigations, caused this Councell to be reiected, yet neuerthelesse, to free the common-wealth from disgrace, happened by the default or ignorance of one particular person, Dandulo being returned to Venice, hauing first beene carried  to Constantinople, and then by the meanes of Gritti, set at liberty, was confinedDandulo is banishe^ at his returne to Uenice. to Zara, for ^ot well behauing himselfe i^ this place.
There happaned besides within a while after a more notable accident, whose beginning was much more dangerous, but the end farre more fortunate. Ieronimo Canalts, prouidator of the (...), departed from Corfou with twelue Gallies, to conuoy the great Gallies which were appointed for traffick into Syria and Alexandria, and to safe conduct them from Pirates, who did vsually scoure those Seas; and all of them beeing ^ome ^ogether neere to the Ile of Candy not farre from the firme land, resolued to ^ay and cast an^or there, where the great Gallies lay, some miles distant from the light ones; lying in this sort, about sunne set, vppon  the Feast day of all Saints, the sentinells which were in the caiges of the great Gallies, descried certaine vessel^ which held their course directly towards them, whereof Daniele Bragadino Captaine of the great Gallies hauing speedily aduertized the Prouidator, he supposed ^hat they were Pirates* wherevppon hee forthwith brauely resolued to goe meet them, and that (...) confirmed him in this opinion, was, the ^duertizement which he had receiued, what course the Turkish army held, the which departing from Modon to goe and winter at Constantinople, the Pirates had beene discharged.
Departing then with speed, and beeing come forth a good way to ^ea, hee  found that he had no more then seauen Gallies with him; because that the others remained behind, the Rouers perhaps beeing not so strong or skilfull in sea matters as were the first, or else the Captaines were not so hardy and valiant* but the Pro^idator seeming not greatly to care for that, and performing the part of a good Captaine and skilfull ma^er, commanded all the Galli^ that were with

him, each of them like two Lanthornes to deceaue the enemies, by making them to thinke that the number of his vessells, were farre greater then they were: then making a stand in their view, he suffered them to come forward, him-selfe keeping still before the wind to incompasse them at his aduantage. They were twelue Turkish Gallies conducted by the Moores Sonne of Alexandria, Solimans Captaine, who, (the army being dissolued) returned to his quarter into Barbary. This young Moore then hauing descried the Venetian Gallies, keeping on his way with full sailes, was already passed beyond the Prouidators Gallies, either because his intent was not to come any neerer to the Island, or else perceiuing so many Lanthornes he was afraide, and had not the boldnesse to doe so.
The Prouidator then enforcing the bankes of Rowers went and assailed themA fight at Sea betwixt the Venetians and Turkes. on their backes, and discharged the ordnance, and beating some of them in flanke, others in poope, he^ did greately ^urt them, himselfe receauing no harme by the Turkish shot, by reason of the place where hee lay. The cheefe meaning of the Venetian Gallies was to inues^ the Moores Admirall Galley, where*vpon the Prouidator hauing assailed it, there was a fierce fight, by reason of the great number of Ianissaries that were in it, who valliantly sustayned the assault a long time, but the Prouidator had neere him a Gallie of supplies, which did continually furnish him with soldiers in their sted that were slaine or hurt, to sustaine the fight: wherevpon the Moore beeing (...) hurt, dispayring of beeing any longer able The Venetians victory at Sea against the Moore o^ Alexandria who was taken to defend his Gallies, and meaning to cast him selfe into the Sea to escape to some other of his Gallies, was taken by the Christian Rowers, and making him-selfe knowne, his life was sa^ed, but his Galley was altogether spoyled, and foure others were taken, and two were sunke, the rest escaped by flight. So soone as the Turke perceiued the Vene^ian Gallies to come towards him, hee had determined to fly, but artificiall ^ire was throwne from the Prouidators Gallie which burnt his failes* and after*wards the Helme of the same Gally was broken by a Cannon shot, whereby hee was enforced to tarry and to come to stroakes.
This fortunate successe did highly content the soldiors, and people of Candy, but the Magistrates and other men of note were sorry for it, in regard that the vessells did not belong to Pirates but to Soliman, a very mighty Lord, fearing that hee would take it ill, and imagine that affront to bee done to him-selfe, by reason hee was at peace with the Republique: Where-vpon it was thought fit by the Magistrates of Candy, and the Captaines of the Gallies, speedily to send homeThe wisely remedy the error commited by night. these ^allies into Barbary, and in the meane time, respectiuely to entertaine this young Turkish Captaine, and to gi^e him kind and curtuous language, excusing that fault by the error of the Nigh^.
The report hereof being brought to Venice, the Senate was extreamely greeued thereat, for the selfe same reasons and doubts, and so much the more, for  that the same yeares store being very smal, the citty was to be furnished with vicalls from the Turkes country, where they had not onely obtayned licence to doe it, but had like-wise loden diuers shippes, where-vpon they feared that the sameThe Venetian ships are sta^ed by the Turkish offic^rs. iniurie would bee badly disgested at that time, as indeed it came to passe. For so soone as the Turkes officers were aduertized thereof, without tarrying for any speciall commandemen^ from the Port, they made a stay of the Venetian ships which were come thither for corne. In regard whereof, some propounded to elect a new Prouidator in Canalis sted, and being thus dismissed of his place, to call him home to yeeld an acc^unt for what he had done, thereby in some sort to appeaseSundry opinions in the Senate conc^rning Canalis (...). discontented Soliman: Diuers others maintaining Canalis cause, did defend it, as a matter done by right of warre, and worthy rather of recompence then of  punishment, saying that it was a deed vnworthy the Common-wealth to chastice, or at least to make shew so to doe, their officers, that had well and valliantly behaued themselues in their place.
This reply ouercame the former proposition, and caused them to determine

to send Daniele Federico Secretary of the Preguais to Constantinople, who was a wise and discreet person, to the end to iustifie by speech, as well before the Baschas as Solimans selfe, what had hapned, by declaring how that their Captaine was enforced to fight, perceiuing in the night so many armed vessels neere to him, not knowing whether they were friends or enemies: and besides, how that the sodaine restitution of the Gallies, done the very next morrow, and the kind entertainment giuen since then to their Captaine could sufficiently witnesse theirSoliman accepteth o^ the Venetians. excuses. good and sinceere meaning towards all those that did belong vnto him. Ibrahim Bascha and Gritti, stood them in great stead to cause Soliman to allow of these excuses, but yet much more the new warre with Persia, wherevnto Soliman directing  the ayme of all his deseignes, would attempt nothing that might diuert him from it: and thereby all matters being appeased at Constantinople, Conalis was with greater praise honored by all men, who dying within a while after in executingThe Senate acknowledge Cana^ seruice by recomp^nsing his sonn^. the same office for the Republick, the Senate in acknowledgment of his good seruice decreed that Antonio his sonne should during his life enioy the reuenew of the Ile of Corfou.
These things happened in the Venetians Army; but, that of the Emperor hauing a long time stayed at Naples and at Messina, did at the last boldly aduenture to releeue Coron, which was reduced to all extremity, where at the first, hauing had some hope of Victory, by reason of the flight and shamefull retreat of the  Turkish army, it returned afterwards without any honor at all, either by the Captaines fault, or by a destined plague to Christians, seeing that the basenesse of the Turkish Captaines, did afterwards procure great hurt to Christendome. For Soliman being displeased with those vnto whom he had committed the charge of hisCariadi^e Barbarr^ssa his gre^ experience at sea. fleet, taxing their small experience, determined to call Cariadine surnamed Barbarossa, who of a Pirate beeing become a Prince, commanded at the same time in Argier, to giue him, (as he did) the whole superintendence of sea matters.
Hee beeing most expert in marine matters, and hauing of a long exercised the trade of a Pirate in Barbary, had gotten a perfect knowledge of all the Christians sea places of retreat, and in Affrick likewise making incursions vpon the Moores;  but particularly by his defeating of the Spanish Galleis, whereby hee purchased great reputation, at such time as foure yeares before, they comming vnder the command of Don Hugo de Moncada to meet Doria at Genoa, hee did assaile and defeate them. Wee may iustly say that this man was the first which taught the Turkes the meanes of well ordering a nauall Armie, beeing before then smally experienced in sea matters, as those who till then had encreased their power by armes on land: hee likewise was the first that began to vse slaues in galleys, whe^as before they were wont to man them with the first vnexperienced commers, which hath euer since made the Turkish fleetes more mighty, and more fearefull to Christians. Soliman then resoluing to make vse of this man, would so dainly aduertise  the Venetians thereof, to the end that if they should meet him at sea, they might vse him as one of his Porte, knowing very well that they hated him for the great harme which he had done them. And of a certaine, this man was afterwards an instrument of great calamities to Christendome, and of sundry losses to the Signory of Venice, as heere-after shall be seene. At the same time, albeit that the Pope seemed to bee carefull for the imminent dangers that threatned Christendom, beeing neuerthelesse more ardent then euer in his vsuall thoughts, to aduance his Nephewes and his house, had vsed some secret meanes with the French King, concerning the marriage of Catherine, daughter to Lorenzo de Medicis his Neece, with He^ry Duke of Orleans his second sonne: for the which treaty it  was concluded, that the Pope and the King should meet together at Nice, a towne belonging to the Duke of Sauoy, and seated neere the riuer of Var, which separateth Italy from Prouence.
The report of this enteruiew, the occasion thereof beeing v^knowne, had

greatly troubled the Venetians, and especially because it was added that the EmperorThe Pope acquainteth the Ve^etians with all hi^ (...). would be there: wherevpon they carefully obserued these Princes actions, because they would not be ouer taken as they had beene at the assembly of Cambray, saying that by reason of Princes ambition, they were to beware of all things, and to suspect all things, but this meeting, which should haue beene in the moneth of Iuly, beeing deferred to September following, the true occasion of that enter view was in the meane time discarded, for which there mette together at Nice, the Bishop of Faenza for the Pope; and the Lord great Maister of France for the King, which did free the Venetians from all suspition.
The Pope did afterwards aduertise them of his departure, and of the occasion  thereof, and concealing those nuptialls no longer, he sought to couer it with someThe Popes prete^ ces to coullor (...) ioy conc^iued by that m^riage. other shadow, saying that in this treaty, hee had not so much respected his owne particular interest, as the common good and safety of all Italy, wherein nothing did so much auaile (as the Senate had often told him) as to hold the forces of two most mighty Princes in equall ballance, to the end that the power of the one might giue counterpoize to the other: in regard whereof, fearing least the French King, being wholy out of hope, by reason of the treaty of Bolognia, of the friendship of the Italian Princes, would presently breake off from him, and that the Emperor thereby might come to command all, according to his owne pleasure, hee thought it fit to draw him vnto him by the bond of kindred; as hee had likewise  done by the Emperor.
Now these nuptials, which all the Princes of Italy did suspect, were celebrated, not at Nice, by reason of the difficulty which the Duke of Sauoy made (because hee would not displease the Emperor) to grant the Castle vnto the Pope; but at Marseilles, according to the Kings desire, who thought it more honorable for himselfe, to haue the meeting in ^is owne Rea^me, wherewith the Pope was pleased, beeing desirous to giue the King all content: but that which men feared came not to passe, by reason of ^dry accidents, and then by the Popes death, which happened ^oone after, so as Italy continued quiet, and the Venetians freed from all obligations of taking Armes againe.
That which did greatly helpe to moderate the Popes great desseignes, were (as it was reported) the stirres in Germany, because that the Lantgraue of Hesse hauing with other protestant Princes leuied great numbers of soldiors, to restoreGreat troubles in Germany concerning the Duke of VVittemberg. V^drick Duke of Wittenberg to his Estate, it was reported that they would afterwards march into Austria against Ferd^nand, and that from thence they would come into Italy, the which the Germaines did very much desire: but all these troubles were soone appeased, by an accord made with the King of Romaines, against whom their principall quarrell was about the Duke of Wittembergs lands which hee possessed.
In this manner were the affaires of Italy quiet in the firme land, whereby the  Common-wealth was on that side freed from care and trouble; but for the Sea, it behooued them dayly to bee at new expences, beeing very iealous of their Sta^e: so as the Republick might iustly say, that it was depriued of the benefit of a perfect peace.
It was no more freed the yeare following, one thousand, fiue hundred, thirty and foure, from troubles and ^pitions, then it had beene before, because that a(...) great preparations for (...). great fleete was prepared at Constantinople, which was to bee commanded by (...), surnamed Barbarossa, and the like was expected in the West; for the Emperour supposing that the Turkish forces would fall vppon his States, vsed all meanes to encrease his sleete, and to make it fitte and able to resist  them. The French King on the other side, beeing prouoked by discontent, caused thirty Galleys to bee armed at Marseilles, his intent therein beeing not knowne. It was likewise reported, that great numbers of vessells of all sorts were armed and prepared in Barbary, not to scoure and robbe at sea, but

to ioyne with the Turk^h Armie conducted by Ca^aaine, and among other CaptainesGreat (...) (...) at on time in (...) p^aces. there was a very famous Pirate called Sinam C^fut, surnamed the Iewe, a man very valiant and well experienced in marine businesse. The Pope in like manner to assure his Sea townes from all incursions and inuasions, or ^or some other deseigne (as it was s^pposed) had armed ten Galleys.
All these fleetes bega^ iealousie in the Venetians, and enforced them to expences by augmenting the number of their Galleys, and the soldiers of the garrisons in their sea townes: whereby beeing in extreame need of helpe in these extraordinary expences, it was propounded in the Councell to acquaint the Pope againe therewith, to the end to obtaine leaue of him for that purpose to  raise the summe of an hundred thousand Ducats vpon the Clergie of their owne State. Some others of those of the Councell, who had already in this businesse tried the Popes rigor, were of opinion that the Senate, without tarrying for that leaue, should begin to leuie that summe of money, or else to proceed therein more earnestly with the Pope, declaring how that the wealth dedicated to the Churches of their State, was very great and ample, which beeing freed from all publick contribution, their other subiects were oppressed with subsidies and intollerable charges, for the paiment of their fleets and soldiors leuyed for the conseruation of their liberty, and publick faculties. That it was not credible, that the holy intent of those who had enriched the Churches; was, that the Republick being  ruined and destroied, should be depriued of making vse of that which they had giuen to those Churches, in case of necessity: That the Pope stood badly affected to their State, and to whatsoeuer concerned them, ^o as hee made difficulties vpon all their requests, or else vsed long delayes therein.
B^t notwithstanding these prepositions, the zeale of Religion, and the respect to the Sea Apostolick, were of such force with the Senators, as preferring it before all other profit and commodity, this proposition was reiected, constantly affirmingThe Senates holy resolution that it did not beseeme the Republick, which was founded and encreased in Christianity, vnder a continuall obedience and vnion to the Church and Pope of Rome, whereby it had purchased an immortall glory and commendation to lay  her hands on Church goods, or therein to force the Popes will. That they in times past had great and vrgent affaires, for which they had prouided without that aid, and without enterprizing scandalous matters: that they were not to doubt but that he which knoweth the inward thoughtes of men, and can doe all things, would raise them vp aid and succor by meanes to them vnknowne, much greater, and farre mo^e (...) then that where-unto they wer^ counc^lled by an euill example, and if the Pope did still continew his vsuall rigor, by so much the more would appea^e before God and the world, the deuout and holy intent, and accustomedThe Veneti^ pre parations for their safe ty. wisdome of the Venetian Senate.
This opinion being allowed, they pursued with all honor and reuerence the expedition  of their request in the Court of Rome, the which at last they obteined. By this means the Senate hauing raised money, they began to augment the number of their galleis, whereof Capello was still Generall, and to leuy footmen to send to the Islands, and other sea places vnder their obedience, to the end to assure them, expecting what would become of the preparations of so many fleetes. Now the Turkes whi^est their nauall army was preparing, were come by land to besiege Coron, and did so strictly shut it in, as the Spaniards that were within it, beeing impatient, and in a manner desperate, by reason of the miseries they there endured, made a sally vpon the Turkes, which succeeding vnfortunatly, they were enforced to retire into the castle with great losse of their soldiers: whervpon, finding themselues  by that losse, and likewise by pestilence, to be reduced to a very small number,The Turke^ reco^r (...). so soone as the Sicillian ships arriued which brought supplies, the Spanish Captaines being out of hope to keepe that towne, embarked themselues in the same ships, and left it to the Turkes discretion. Yet neuerthelesse, it was supposed, as a

matter more likely, that the same happened by the Emperors expresse commandement, who perceiuing that hee would not but with great expences defend that place enuironed on all sides with enemies, and beeing out of hope of any farther progression, determined to quit it. Cariadine in the meane time hauing put to sea with an hundred saile, and beeing come neere to the Venetian Gulphe, the Generall, who narrowly obserued his actions, prepared, according as the Senate had willed him at the beginning, to retire farther in, and not to abandon the defenceT^e Turkish fleet s^oureth the Sea coast of Calabria. and safety of the Gulphe: but the Turkish fleete directing their course towards the Tirrhene sea, sailed to the sea coasts of Calabria, where on a suddaine hauing landed great numbers of soldiers, they did not onely spoile the countrey, but tooke two townes vpon the sea-shore, though of small consequence.
The feare of the inhabitants of Naples and Rome at the report of the arriuall of these Barbarians was very great, so as if Cariadine had marched thither, he might easily haue taken them, there beeing no forces to hinder him: but the Turke hauin scoured and spoiled the whole Prouince, went vnto the Isle of Ponze to take in fresh water, and then sailed towards the coast of Affrick, chiefely to exectute his deseigne, for which hee was come from Constantinople, albeit that hee had cunningly made shew to ^aile towards the coast of Spaine, that hee might on a sodaine, and vnlookt for, assaile his enemy Amulcasse King of Tunis.
Cariadine was sufficiently enformed of the whole State of that Countrey, of  the situation and strong townes, and of the Kings forces, and what affection his s^biects did beare vnto him: Wherevpon, adding to all these things which hee well knew, force, and cunning, ^ee hoped that his enrererprise would fall out prosperously, as it did. For hee gaue forth, that hee brought Roscetta with him the Kings brother, knowing how pleasing that name was to the people, where afterCariadine taketh Thuni^. sundry exploits hee did at last take the Citty of Thunis.
The other fleetes at the same time did nothing worthy of memory, except that of the Venetians, which was enforced to come to strokes with certaine vessels of Malta to chastice their Captaine. It was Philippo Mazzo a Knight of Malta, who hauing very audaciously, with certaine vessels, scoured not onely the Leuant  seas, but came into the Venetian Gulph, spoiling and robbing both Christians and Turkes indifferently, was taken by the Generall and sent to Venice, where his processe beeing by the Senate referred to the criminall Councell of the Forts, to consider thereof, and himselfe in the meane time walking at liberty in the Citty, not tarrying for his iudgement, escaped thence: then hauing againe armed three Fusts, hee continued with great arrogancy and contempt of the Commonwealth,Ph^lippo Mazzo a Knight o^ Malta looseth ^is head for ^is many robberies. his ^ormer courses: wherevpon the Prouidator hauing narrowly watched him, did in the end surprise him, and hauing disarmed his vessels, caused Philippos head to bee stricken off as author of all those misehiefes, setting all the Turkish slaues at liberty, whom hee sent to Constantinople.
It was supposed that this execution would haue incensed the Emperor, who had that Religion vnder his protection, and the great maister of Malta; but they being aduertised how the matter stood, both of them were appeased.
In the middest of these affaires, the Pope who was fallen fick at the beginningThe death of Pope Clement the seuenth. of summer, hauing a long time endured sundry accidents, departed forth of this present lise, at such time as he was at the heighth of all his happinesse. Hee beeing dead, the Cardinalls, who according to the vsuall ceremonies had shutte themselues vp into the conclaue, did with a generall consent, elect in his steed, AlexanderT^e Cr^ation of Pope Paul t^e third. of the family of Farneses, a Romaine by nation, and the eldest Cardinall of the Court of Rome, who tooke vpon him the name of Paul the third. All men  thought that hee would haue behaued himselfe as Neuter, as hee had euer done, for the space of fifty yeares or there-about that hee had beene Cardinall, and would thereby maintaine Italy in peace and quiet a long time after:

the which was very pleasing to the Venetians, as they who greatly desired to ^ee all matters brought to a setled quiet, and who did besides perswade themselues, by reason of the loue which he had euer seemed to beare vnto them before hee was Pope, that if he should leaue his neutrality hee would rather confirme the league which they were at with Clement his Predecessor, then practize any noueltie; therefore they sent eight Ambassadors to him, namely Marco Minio, Tomaso Moceniga, Nicolao Tepulo, Ieromino Pesare, Giouan Badoari^, Lorenzo Bragadino,The (...) sendeth ^ight (...) to the Pope. Gasparo Co^taren, and Federico Reniero, not giuing them any other commission, then to present to the new Pope their accustomed obedience, thinking it not fit to sue vnto him for any thing, vntil they had better discouered his deseignes  in his new fortune.
But the Emperour beeing desirous to know his meaning from himselfe, being therevnto mooued by his feare, least the French would stirre, hee did foorth withThe Emperor seeketh to t^e Venetians. sound him concerning the renuing of his league with the late Pope: And the more easily to induce him therevnto, hee made the same request to the Venetians, that they would againe confirme betwix^ them the former Articles of their confederacy, exhorting them therevnto for the quiet of Italy, which hee knew they so much wisht for, and they beeing vnited together, would bee able to maintaine and defend themselues from all the attempts of the French, although the new Pope would not ioyne himselfe with them: and yet neuerthelesse the true  meanes to draw him to them, at the beginning of the Papacie, was, to see a firme vnion and correspondence, betwixt the Republick and him, on whom the wills of other potentates of Italy were to depend.
The Venetians did not altogether approoue, nor yet reiect the Emperors motion,The Venetians answer to the Emp^ror. for they beeing in no sort desirous of innouation, said some-times; That there was no need to haue it renued, and at other times seemed to be ready so to doe, when need should bee. And in these practises ended the yeare one thousand fiue hundred thirty foure.
The Pope who did maturely confider all these matters, not dooing anything rashly, did at the beginning of the yeare following, shew how desirous hee  was to establish a firme peace betwixt the Emperour and the French King, (vnto whom hee speedily sent his Legates for that purpose), and likewise in what singular recommendation hee had the affaires of Italy, aboue all other matters, with a particular affection to the Signory of Venice. Yet neuerthelesse, as Princes actions are different and subiect to change, an occasion was offered, which had like to haue altered this good disposition of the Popes, to the great danger of all Italy.
Whilest the Sea Apostolick was vacant, the nuptialls had beene solemnized betwixt Guido Vbaldo, sonne to Francesco Maria Duke of Vrbin, and Iulia the onely daughter to Iohn V^ran Duke of Camerine, who succeeded in her Fathers  State. This marriage was at the first allowed by the Pope, and all men thought that matters would haue gone forward peaceably, but within a while after, the Pope beeing otherwise perswaded by some, or else aspiring of himselfe, (as it often happeneth to those that are at the height of their feilcity) to greater and higher deseignes, thought this a very fitte occasion for the aduancement of his owne house, by conferring therevnto this enfeoffment of the Church for a beginning: Wherevpon hee openly declared, That hee would neuer suffer that the Duke of Vrbin should, against all law and right, possesse (as hee sayd) the Dutchie of Camerine, belonging to himselfe alone, to dispose thereof,The Pope tak^th Arm^s ^or the Dutchy of (...). haui^g to this end raysed great forces to hinder the fortifications which  the Duke intended to make at Camerine, and the Garrison which hee purposed to place there.
This declaration of the Pope did greatly discontent the Venetians, vnder

whose protection the Duke of Vrbin was, vnto whom, and his whole house, they did beare singular affection, for the good seruices which hee had done to theThe Venetians seek to app^ase the strise betwixt the Pope and the duke o^ V^bin. common-wealth; and therefore they vsed all possible meanes to appease the Pope; as also because that the Duke of Vrbin did freely offer to haue the matter consulted and d^bated on by reason: but the Pope giuing no eare to their entreaties or messages, said that hee could doe no otherwise therein then hee was councelled and aduised by affaires of State, and that hee did determine without any more dissembling to recouer by force, that which had beene detained from that State: the which all men did account very strange, in regard of those times, Christendom beeing infinitely molested, both by the armes of the Infidels, and  by heresies newly sprung vp in diuerse and sundry Prouinces. The Venetians therefore not to omit ought which might quench this small sparke, which was likely to burst forth into a great flame, did aduertise the Emperor thereof, earnestly entreating him therein to interpose his authoritie, to preserue and maintaine ouer all Italy the same peace and quiet which to his honor and renowne hee had so well established.
The Emperor did willingly embrace this businesse, and hauing hotly pursuedThe Emperor ^or the Venetians sake doth maintaine the Duke of Vr^ins cause. it with the Pope, did greatly moderate his former heate: But it was supposed that the same which did most of all appease him, was a proposition made vnto him by those who managed the affaires of the Duke and the Venetians, which was, to  giue to his sonne Pietro Lodouico, some honorable estate in Romagnia, and to r^nder Rauenna and Ceruia to the Venetians, to the end thereby to oblige them to take the person of Pietro Lodouico and his State into ^heir protection and safegard, because it was not to bee doubted, but that the Venetians, in acknowledgment of such a benefit, and sor their owne proper interest, desiring rather toA new prac^ise be^wixt the Pop^ and the (...). haue a particular Lord of that State to bee their neighbour, then the Church, would employ all their forces for the maintenance and preseruation of the greatnesse of the Farne^ia family: wherevnto the Pope hearkning very willingly, and hoping for some greater matter, the pursutes for the Dutchy of Camerine was for the Venetians sakes smoothered, of whom hee then ^eemed to make  great account.The Emperors preparations for (...).
All the Princes of Italy at the same time, and especially the Venetians were in feare, and stood vpon their guard, by reason of a mighty Army which the Emperor prepared, vntill such time as they were aduertised, that it was for Affrick to recouer Thunis, and thereby to assure the kingdome of Naples, a neere neighbour to it which Cariadine did dayly threaten to inuade. The Emperor did particularly aduertise the Venetian Senate of all his deseignes, seeming to bee very zealous for the common good of Christendom, and in particular for that of their Republick, desiring to continue the same friendship and good correspondence which was betwixt them.
This demonstration of friendship was the cause of the renuing the confederacie betwixt them, according to the same conditions which had beene concluded at Bolognia, onely to shew that by the Popes death, it was nei^her finished nor broken off; Wherevpon, they commanded Marc-Antonio Contaren their Ambassador, that in signe of continuance of amitie, he^ should follow, (which he did) the Emperor whether soeuer hee went. After that generall processions and publick prayer were made in Venice by the Cleargie, that it might please God to fauour that enterprise.
This great preparation of the Emperors Army had caused the T^rkes to suspect diuerse matters, and this suspition was most of all increased in them (as it was  reported) by Iohn Forrest the French Ambassador at Constantinople, thorow his reports made to the Baschaes, seeking to make them beleeue, that the Venetians did perswade the Emperour to turne his great forces vppon

Greece against Solimans state, and yet ne^erthe lesse the French Ambassador resident at Venice, did offer to the Senate, in his Kings behalfe all fauour and curtesie that might be* he did likewise en^reat them to take speciall heed to the Emperors actions, and that such great preparations ought verily to cause them to suspect, and that the common rumors abroad were so many signes of the imminent dangers and preiudices which threatened the Common-wealth* These offers and aduerticements did greatly trouble the Senate, who did well perceiue that they tended only to cause the Republick to suspect and distrust all men, and to thrust it into open warre, either against the Emperor or Soliman, to enforce them thereby to haue recourse to the French King to make vse of his fauour toward the Turke, or of his forces against the Emperor. Yet neuerthelesse, partly dissembling these suspitions, they thanked the King for his offers and good-will, for which, though at that present they had no need of them, the Common-wealth should neuerthelesse remaine much obliged to that Crowne^ they did after-wards complain^ of the bad offers which his Ambassador at Constantinople had done vnto them, cleane contrary to truth: wherupon the King did disauow it, and assured them that he had neuer giuen him any such commissions.Soliman adue^tiseth the V^netians of what he had done in Persia:
Howsoeuer it was, it is certaine that notwithstanding all these reports and bad offices done to the Venetians towards Soliman, he did still loue and highly respect them: for at his returne from Persia he failed not particularly to acquaint them  with the prosperous successe of his iourney, how he had chased away his enemies, entred Persia, spoiled and sackt the Citty of Tauris, the Royal seate of that Kingdome, had beene at Babilon, from whence hauing expulsed the Garrison, he became Maister thereof, and lastly that he was returned victorious to Constantinople: The report was, that, soone after his returne home, he was desirous to leuy a mighty army: wherupon he called for the same purpose Cariadine and diuers other Captaines before him to consult with them about the affaires of warre, thereby shewing that his meaning was, not to suffer his Army long to continue idle.
The Emperor in the meane time, (the winter season beeing past, and all things The Emper^rs great army for his voyage into Affr^ck. in readinesse for the Voyages of Affricke) tooke shipping at Barcelona, where all the fleet lay to the nomber of three hundred ^aile of all sortes, vnder the conduct of Prince Doria, with forty thousand fighting men, not accounting the Marriners and Rowers, who were very many, being attended on by all the Spanish Nobility, together with the Infant of Portugall who met him at Barcelona with fourescore saile of shippes of warre. The first landing of the army was in Sardinia in the Hauen of Caliers, and hauing there taken order for all warlike necessaries, it sailed to Carthage: then being come neere to the land, not farre from Goletta, the arm^ was forthwith landed, which encamped not farre from thence, knowing very well that on the taking thereof depended that of Thunis: because that Goletta (...) beso^ged. is a Tower enuironed with diuers Bastions, and seated almost vppon the mouth of a Channell, through which the Sea entring in a good way, it maketh a Lake right ouer against it, vpon which the Citty of Thunis is seated, some twelue miles from Sea.
At their first arriuall the Turkes Garrison in Goletta did valiantly defend themselues; but the Emperors ordnance hauing (almost) ruined the Fort, it fell into the Spaniards possession, who entring afterwards into the Lake, did without any disficulty or fight take fifty three vessells, as Gallies, Galliots, and Fusts, which Cariadine had left there as in a place of most safety.
This losse did so daunt Cariadine, as notwithstanding that at the beginning comming Cariadi^e (...) (...). forth of Thunis with his army, hee made a shew as if he would giue the Emperour Battaile, yet neuer-the-lesse giuing place on a sudaine, he retired into the Citty of Bonna, where finding himfelfe in no great safety, and vnderstanding that Doria followed him, he went to Argiers.
The Citties of Thunis and Bonna being forsaken by their Captaine, notwithstanding that there were strong Garrisons in them, did very quickly and with easeThe taking of Thunis and (...). fall into the Spaniards hands. Cariadine escaping all these dangers, went within a while after to Constantinople, whither he was sent for, and being come into Solimans presence, who was newly returned from Persia, he did in the best manner he could excuse all that which happened, and the losse of the Kingdome: Solima^ being ioyfull for his victories, obtained in Persia, did pardon and receiue him to fauour, and after-wards gaue him the super-in-tendence of his Army by Sea.
The Emperor on the other side hauing with royall bounty rendred the Kingdome  of Tunis, which he had conquered, to Amulcasse, on condition to pay vnto him as his feodatory, an Annuall tribute of six Barbery horses, twelue falcons, and twelue thousand crownes for the paiment of a thousand Spanish footmen, whom he left in Garrison at Goletta, departed victorious from Affrick, and sailed with his whole army into Sicily; where hauing made some abode in the Citties of Palermo and Messina, he dismissed the greatest part of his fleet, and cassed hisThe Emperor retur^eth to Naples. army, retaining no more then two thousand Almai^e footmen for his guard, and afterwards went to spend the winter at Naples,
Sundry Princes, and Princes Ambassadors went thither to him: the Slgnory likewise, according to their ancient custome, sent soure Ambassadors thither to  him, namely, Marco Foscare, Gionan Delphino, Vincenzo Grimani, and Tomazo Contaren, to reioyce with him in the Republicks name for his victories obtained in Affricke.
Whilest the Emperor was on his iourney, Francisco Sforza, Duke of Milan, deceassed,The death of Francis S^orza Duke o^ Milan. without any Children of his owne to succeed him. The Senate after his death requested Antonio de Leua to haue an eye vpon that State, and to gouerne it in the name of his widdow, vntill that the Emperors pleasure were therein knowne. The Dutchesse went to Naples to the Emperor, where being honorablie entertained by him, he seemed to be very sorry for the Death of the Duke hir hu^band; either for some particular friendship which he had borne vnto him, or  elce for feare least hi^ death would breed some new troubles in Italy, or rather, by dissembling it, to seeke thereby meanes to make all men beleeue, that for his owne part, he would lay no claime to that State.
But the Venetians were extreamely sory for his death, who hauing so long a time with great expence and discomodity maintained warre, to the end that the same state might be possessed by a particular Italian Lord, perceiued them-selues, by the Dukes death, to be throwne into new doubts and difficulties, and being depriued of their hopes, to be peraduenture enforced to renew the warre. Therefore so soone as the Emperor was come to Naples, the Venetian Ambassadors that followed him, did represent vnto him the Senates desire, together with the  State of the affaires of Italy; Earnestly entreating him to find a meanes if it were possible, to maintaine that peace which himselfe had there established, and the which he seemed so much to desire. The Emperor made answer, that in regard itT^e Emperors (...) answer to the Venetians conce^ning the Stat^ of Mil^n. belonged to him as chiefe Lord to prouide for that State, he did likewise therein desire to giue content to the Princes of Italy, and cheefely to the Venetians: therfore he would very willingly learne of them what were best to be done for the safe establishing of the quiet of Italy, and also what their meaning there*in was*
The Venetians, notwithstanding they desired to haue the State of Milan fall into the hands of some particular Lord, yet neuerthelesse being therein ignorant  of the Emperors pleasure, beeing not willing (and it may be, not in vaine) to offend him, or any other, they continued constant in this proposition, to haue som one inuested therein, who should be esteemed ^it and sufficient to maintaine peace and quiet in Italy, with-out proceeding any farther: where-vppon

the foure departed* Ambassadors had no commission at al for this businesse when they departed towards Naples, whereat the Emperor wondering, and beeing defirous to draw the Venetians to his party, (occasion now beeing offered), hee beganne againe to discourse of that matter, concluding in the end, (as hee had at other times done) that being not yet well resolued on whom to bestow the State of Milan, hee would willingly know their opinions, the which hee would greatly esteeme and respect in that businesse.
Within a while after, there beeing some suspition that the French did meane to stirre vp new troubles, the Emperor sought to the Venetians, that as by the Popes death they had renewed the league betwixt themselues, euen so to renew it  now againe, by reason of the Duke of Milans de^th: that he did desire it, the better to assure the affaires of Italy, and to take away all occasion from those that were desirous to trouble it.
The Venetians beeing of the same mind did therein giue consent to fatisfie theThe Confederacy confirme^ betwixt the Emperor and* Venetians. Emperor, by confirming the league on the self same former conditions, reseruing therein, place for the Pope, and for him also that should bee chosen Duke of Milan.
It was well aduised, sodainly and freely to grant the Emperors first entreaties, to shew by that readinesse how much they did affect him, and to auoid besides, the occasion of handling that businesse at Rome, whither he determined speedily  to goe, whereof the Turkes would haue conceiued some sinister opinion in regard of the leagues which Popes were wont to propound against Infidells: although of a long time they haue beene to no purpose.
The Pope not well considering all these occasions, or else beeing ignorant of them, made shew to be displeased with the Venetians, for that they had so readily graunted the Emperors demand, saying, that they ought to haue tarried for his presence, and vntill the Emperour had beene come to Rome. The Duke of Milans death had reuiued in the French King, his former claimes, and hisThe French Kings Ambassade to the Venetians concerning the businesse of Milan* earnet desire to conquer that State; wherein being resolute, knowing how greatly the Venetians might aid him in that enter prize, he determined first of all to  sound their meaning, and to this end sent the Lord os Beauais, one of the Gentlemen of his Chamber to Venice, to vnderstand how they stood affected to the occasion which did now offer it self, to assure, (as he said) and augment their State, declaring vnto them how that his King had great store of money, friends and all other necessaries for such an enterprise, whereby they could not but hope for a good and prosperous successe: and if that they shew themselues to be his friends and Confederates, he would very nobly recompence them.
The Senate supposing it to bee no fitte time to giue an eare to these propositions,The Venetians answere to the Ambassador. made answer in generall termes, that the Republick had beene euer desirous of peace, and neuer more then now, as well by reason of the great discommodities  of the late warres, as for that Christendome was in sundry places afflicted with many heresies, the which ought to bee rooted out, before any new warre were to begin: yet neuerthelesse they did highly thanke the King for his offers, and for his confident communicating them vnto them, wherof they would stil be mindfull, and perhaps in time make vse.
The French King for all this, not giuing ouer his deseigne of sending his ArmyThe Duke of Sauoy deniet^ the Kings pa^sage. into Italy to conquer that State, did leuie as great forces as hee could to enuade it on the sodaine, and to that end sent to the Duke of Sauoy, to craue passage thorow his country, which the Duke denying, by the perswation (as it was reported) of the Dutchesse his wife, the King tooke it very strangely, in regarde  of the ancient alliance and neere kindred that was betwixt them, by meanes whereof, he determined first to enuade it.
The King had sundry occasions to bee displeased with the Duke of Sauoy,

which did the more heate and hasten him on: for, the loane of money made by the same Duke to the Duke of Bourbon, a traitor to the King: his gratulatory letters written to the Emperor when he was taken prisoner: his practises to allienate the Suisses from the alliance with France: the purchase of the County of Ast: his(...) of the Kings discontent with the Duke of Sauoy. refusall to lend Nice for the enteruiew of Pope Clement and himselfe: the Kings claimes to the dowrie of the Lady Loisa of Sauoy his mother, sister to Duke Philibert, who died without children, the King affirming th^t a great part of the succession of Sauoy did belong vnto himselfe, by reason that his mother was borne of the first wife, and sole sister and heire to Duke Philibert, together with his ^resh refusall to giue him passage thorow his countrey, to march to the conquest of the  Dutchy of Milan, all these things were euident signes of the Dukes small affection towards the King: wherevpon the Duke, knowing very well that he had grea^ly offended him, and being out of hope to be reconciled to him, so soone as the Emperor was come to Palermo in Sicily, beeing returned from his iourney of Thunis, hee did secretly send vnto him, to craue his ayde against so mightie an enemy.
This businesse could not bee so secretly carried, but that the King had speedie intel^igence thereof, which caused him on a sodaine to send his forces beyond the mounts, vnder the conduct of Philip Chabot Admiral of France his Lieutenant Generall, whom he sent to enuade Piedmont, about the beginning of the yeareTh^ French take (...), ^ossan and Pigne^oll. 1536. where finding the country badly prouided of defence, hee easily tooke the  citties of Thurin, Fossan and Pigneroll, and was besides like to haue taken the citty of Verceill, had not Antonio de Leua who was in the Dutchy of Milan come thither to the speedy rescue thereof, staying by his arriuall the designes and progression of the French. The Emperor seemed to bee extreamly displeased and incensed against the French King, for making warre in Piedmont, and causing speedily a mighty Army to bee leuied, hee did soone hope to ouer-runne him, affirming boldly that hee would goe in person to assaile him in his owne kingdome, and within a while after comming to Rome, hee c^me into the Consistory, where in the presence of the Pope and Cardinalls, and great numbers of Ambassadors and Prelates, Dukes, Earles, Barons, and other noble personages, hee  began to complaine of the French King, so as beeing tra^sported with choller,(...) chalenget^ the Frenc^ King to (...) fight. hee proceeded so farre, as for the auoyding of greater effusion of bloud, he^ would end all controuersies by fighting with him hand to hand, and that he^ would challenge him for that purpose.
The Pope did all hee might to appease him, and had already employed himselfe to make them friends, but all in vaine. The greatest difficulty was, to find^ a meanes which m^ght content both the one and other, concerning the Dutchy of Milan, in which treaty, although the Venetians had an hand, (the Emperors pleasure beeing to haue them acquainted therewith,) yet neuerthelesse they did very slowly proceed in it, in regard of the aboue ^entioned reasons, which were  much encreased by these new accidents of Piedmont. For the Duke of Sauoy beeing driuen from his State, went to Naples to the Emperor, to beseech him to haue pitty vpon him, and to helpe to restore him to his Dutchie. The Emperor beeing mooued with pi^ty, was ready to make an agreement with the French King to free himselfe from that war, and to restore the Duke of Sauoy to his state, but not agreeing together vpon the persons of the Duke of Orleance, or the Duke(...) to acco^d t^e Emp^ror and t^e Frenc^* of Angoulesme, for the Dutchy of Milan, the Emperor beeing desirous to giue it to the Duke os A^goulesme, and the French King to the Duke of Orleance, the matter remained vndecided; and the Emperor departing from Rome, after some small stay in Tuscany went, without tarrying any where, to Ast. Hauing there  assembled all his cheefe Captaines, among whom were D. Fernand of Toledo D^ke of Alua, the Marquis of Guasto and D. Fernand de Go^zaga, he conferred with them concerning the meanes to make warres, where of h^s owne proper motion, he propounded against al reason and the opinions of the best experienced

into Prouence, wherevpon to that end the rendezuous for all his troopes was at Nice whither Doria likewise came with fifty Galli^s, to second the land army, The Emperor came thither in person; from thence, entring into the French Kings countrey, he encamped not farre from the Citty of Aix, beeing not well resoluedThe Emperor (...) with b^sarmy into Prouen^e. what to attempt first, cheefely desiring to assaile either Marseilles, or A^les; and hauing spent much time in this irresolution, he gaue the King leisu^e to assemble a mighty army, who beeing come to Lyons for that purpose, did practiseThe Kings ente^ prose vpon Genoa. with sondry Italian Captaines, who in his behalfe hauing raised forces neere to Mirandola, made an attempt to surpri^e Genoa, and to reduce it to the French Kings deuotion.
The Emperor beeing by this meanes called away to defend his owne, perceiuing likewise that his army sustained diuers discommodities, by reason of the bad disposition of the ayre where it was encamped, was enforced to retire, without doing any thing, but only making a shew of his great desire to hurt the King.The Emperor (...) to retire forth of Pro^ence. But before hee came into Prouence, hee sent Roderico D'Analos to Venice to acquaint the Senate with his great preparations of warre, and with his deseigne to inuade France, and to entreat them by the same meanes to make ready those forces, which they were tyed to furnish by their Confederacy, for the defence of the state of Milan: if need should be.
The Senate therevpon determined to leuy six thousand footmen, vnder the The Senate^ answer to the Emperor. command of Antonio de Castello, Generall of the artillery, and did in the meane time answer the Emperor, that as it had beene ready to renew the league, it was likewise as diligent to maintaine that whereunto it was bound, and that for their parts they would in no sort faile to defend the State of Milan: they did afterwards adde to these foot-forces fiue hundred light horsse armed after the Burgonian manner, commanding all those forces of foot and horsse to meet by a certaine day at Azola, vpon the Bressan territory, to passe from thence when need should bee vppon that of Cremona: The Duke of Vrbin was likewise sent for, to come in person to the Arm^: but truce beeing granted by the arriuall of the Cardinall of Lorraine, this former heate of the French seemed to be quenched, wherby the  Venetians had no cause to march forth of their owne confines: yet neuerthelesse the French king made shew openly to be distasted of them, although he very well knew that he had no iust cause, by reason they did not exceed the bounds of their Confederacy, but hoping by his complaints to cause them to proceed more slowly in that wherein they were bound to the Emperor, and to abstaine from entring into any new league or confederacy with him, he complained of all these matters.
C^sar Fregoza, Captaine of a company of light horsse in Verona, departing without leaue and going to Genoa to fauour the Kings partie, was depriued of his pay, and rancke which he held, and was wholly banished from their State. The King  complained thereof, and of diuers other matters, and sometimes with very bitter speeches, because that the Venetians went about (as he said) to mar his deseignes and enterprizes: The Emperors agents on the other side seeming to be displeased, if they should casse certaine vnprofitable soldiers, said, that they did it to augment the enemies army, whither they retired themselues, which was assembled at Mirandola: so iealous were these two Princes one of an other, which of them should haue the Republick for his friend and Confederate.
The Emperour departing (as hath beene said) from Prouence went to Genoa,Antonio de (...) (...) Prou^nce. meaning to passe (as hee did) into Spaine, leauing the Marquis of Guasto for his Lieftenant Generall in Italy in Antonio de (...) steed, who dyed in Prouence, with twenty thousand foote-men, both of Almaines, Spaniards, and Italians.
Other Ambassadors from the Republicke, came vnto him to Genoa,

namely, Nicolao Tepulo, Marc-Antonio Veniero, Marc-Antonio Cornare, and Antonio Capello, and at their arriuall, he dispatched Do^ Pedro Gonzales de Mendoz^ to Venice, to acquaint them with his successe in warre, and with the cause of his returne, together with his great loue to peace, particularly rehearsing vnto them,The Emperor acquainteth the Venetians with that which he had treated with the King. whatsoeuer had beene treated of with the King, the first practises beeing againe renued, where the King had taken time for three moneths to resolue him*selfe, whether hee should accept the Dutchy of Milan for his sonne the Duke of Angoulesme, and thereby haue him to marry with Duke Sforzas widdow. And if within the time prefixed, the King did not resolue thereon, hee did intend to giue that State to Don Luigi Infant of Portugall, or to Emanuell sonne to the Duke of  Sauoy, wherein he desired to know their mindes; but he added, that for the better establishing of all these matters, it was necessary to contract a new league betwixt the Princes of Italy, for otherwise it was impossible that himselfe alone could beare such a burthen, wherevnto if they would not giue their consent, they should haue no cause to complaine of him, if hee were enforced to do that which wouldThe Venetians answer to the Ambassador. not greatly please them. The Senate beeing constant in their former resolution, not to declare their meaning concerning the Dutchy of Milan, vntill they had more particular notice of the Emperors intent therein, nor yet to make any new confederacie, other then that of Bolognia so oftentimes renued: answered, that concerning the new Duke of Milan, when the Emperor should directly name any  one, the Senate would afterwards better consider of their particular and common interests, and make a more certaine resolution: as for the new league, they alleadged the selfe same reasons as at other times, that there was no need thereof, with the same regard to the Turke, who euery day grew great, and (according to common report) prepared a mighty Army for the yeare following.
The Venetians did aduertise the Pope of what had passed, still assuring him of their great affection to the peace, and safety of Italy, for which they intreated his Holynesse readily to employ himselfe, because that hauing reuiued the matter concerning the Dutchy of Camerine, he seemed to neglect this other important businesse, satisfying himselfe onely for that hee had declared himselfe as neuer: but being at last earnestly solicited by the Venetians, and by the imminent dangers which threatned them from the Turke, which did dayly encrease, as also forThe ^ree chee^e points with the Pope bandled with the Christian Princes. that he had vndertaken to conuoke a generall Councell, which was published to be held at Vincenza insteed of Mantua, where it had beene first appointed, hee did expresly resolue to send his Legates to both these Princes, to treate particularly of this businesse, namely, of an vniuersall peace betwixt the Christian Princes of the league against the Turke, and of the celebration of the Councell.
The Cardinall Triuulcio went to the French King, and the Cardinal Carracciola to the Emperor: but these Legations were fruitlesse, because none of these three points did take effect, by reason of sondry difficulties whih happened. War by this  meanes did in such sort kindle betwixt the Emperor and the French King; as enemies and most barberous nations were there-in vsed to the hurt and ruyne of Christendome: where-in the Venetians like-wise had an hand, notwithstanding that they had determined to remaine neuters, and to be at peace and friendship with both parties.
Now by that which hath beene said, the deseignes of Francis the French King may be sufficiently discerned, who determining to trie all meanes to abase the Emperors greatnesse, and to reuenge all those wrongs which he said he had receiued from him, he did at sondry times sound the Venetians meaning, and did by diuers meanes seeke to seperate them from the Emperor: at the last, the Lord of The King (...) (...) Am^ to (...), ^o dra^ them fr^ the (...). Rhod^ comming from him to Venice, propounded sundry faire hopes and promises to the Senate, and vsed all meanes to change their former determination to continew the league with th^ Emperour, but it was in vaine.

For the Venetians were as firme and constant in keeping their promise with theThe King sendeth an Ambassador to Venice, to vs^ meanes to ^raw them from the Emperor. Emperor* as they were hard to be drawne to doe any thing which might disturbe the quiet of Italy. The kings hope herein being frustrate, and himselfe being mightily animated against the Emperor for comming to assaile him in his owne Kingdome* knowing likewise that he was to weake of him-selfe alone to finish the enterprize of the Dutchy of Milan, which was defended by the entire ^orces of the Emperour and the Venetians, supposed that there was nothing which would sooner cause him to obtaine his desire, then to purchase the friendship of Soliman (which he had already practized) whereby he did hope to enforce the Venetians, either to take his part, or at least to abstaine from following that of the Emperor;  the causes being very great and many which did moue the Venetians to make high account of Solimans authority; and on the other side, by causing the Turkish army to passe ouer into Puglia, or to other places of the Emperors obedience, hee didThe King purposeth to vse the Turke against the Emperor. thinke to diuert his forces and greatly to weaken his defence for the State of Milan.
The King then turned all his designes towards the Port of the great Turke, where not-with-standing that Iohn ^orrest was his Ambassador, hee did besides, send thither Dom Zerafin de Gozi of Ragusa, with new and more important instructions, and great promises. These two, being often in company of the Baschas of  most authority, propounded diuers matters, which being reported to Soliman, might easily induce him to grant the Kings demands: as the Emperors greatnes the which if it were not moderated, would become fearefull, or at least to bee suspectedThe m^nnes which the French Ambassadors propounded to Soliman agai^st the Emperor. of all other Potentates, with diminuation, if not of their States, yet certenly of their reputation and greatnesse: the facility of the enterprize, there being but a s^nal space of Sea for the transportation of the Turkish army from Albiana to Ottranto, and at one time to scoure the Sea coast of that country: The great discontent of the inhabitants of that country with the Spanish gouernment and especially of the cheefest of them, who as desperate persons would embrace all occasions to open the way to higher enterprizes which might abase the Emperors  authority. Aiax Listibei was at the ^ame time in great authority in the Port of the great Turke; holding the place and gard of first Bascha, a mighty enemy to Christians, and who since the death of Ibraim had often perswaded Soliman to turne his forces vpon Christendome. This man because hee would not lose the occasion, and praysing the ouertures, and propositions of the French Ambassadors, propounded them with much amplification to Soliman, vsing all meanes to incite him to the enterprize of Italy, laying before him the example of Mahomet,Aiax Bascha perswad^th Soliman to make warre in Italy. a discreet and valliant Prince, who with fortunate successe did easily take the citty of Ottranto, and by his arriuall did bring that whole country to extreame consusion opening him*selfe a way for the conquest of Italy, one of the excellentest countries of Europe, had he not beene preuented by death.
These things being represented to Soliman, did greatly preuaill with him, who did couet glory, and was full of pride, supposing him-selfe to be highly honored, in that so great a King did send to craue his aide and asistance, against anotherSoliman cons^eteth to make warre vpon the Emperor. most mighty Prince his enemy, and hee was like-wise glad that so faire an occasion was offered to diuert him from the enterprizes of India and Persia, where hee vnprofitably consumed his army: where vpon he did on a sudaine consent to promise the French Ambassador, that the next sommer hee would raise great forces both by Sea and Land, to enuade the Emperors dominions.
But aboue all other things, supposing it to be most necessary to separate theSoliman aduer^seth the Venetian of his determination. Venetians from the Emperor, he resolued to send Ianusbei one of the Dragomans or interpreters of his Port, to exhort the Senate, that hee being to march with a mighty army, it would shew it selfe a friend to his friends, and enemy to his enemies, promising them, that he would take order that nothing should be hurt which did belong vnto them.
The Senate did forthwith answere this proposition. That the republicke had euer made great account and deere reckoning of peace with al Princes, and especiallyThe Venetian answere to So^ liman. with the Lords of the Ottomans family, with whom hauing of a long time contracted peace and frendship, with a free commerce betwixt each others subiects they did at this present retaine the same desire to continue it more then euer, whereof there was no need to make any more ampl^ declaration.
It seemed that Soliman was wel content and satisfied with this answere, who was a Prince (if these quallities may be found in a Barbarian) of a goodly vnderstanding, and a friend to iustice and honour: but diuers of his seruants being desirous for their owne interest and particular affection to disturbe this quiet, and to break  this peace, setting foreward by a false complaint, the actions of sundry officers of the Common-wealth, who, (as they affirmed) had borne small respect to the maiesty and profit of his Empire, did perswade him to permit his officers likewise to vse some practises against the Common wealth of Venice, that at last the matter might be brought to an open warre; this being permitted diuers Venetian Marchants that were at Constantinople and other places of his Empire by reason of their particular affaires, were vnder sundry false pretences committed to prison and their goods confiscate: after that, two Venetian shippes vpon diuers occasions were stayed, the one belonging to Andrew Contaren taken vpon the Sea of Ciprus, by the Gallies of the Garrison of Rhodes as a man of warre, and the other VVrongs doue the Venetians in Solimans Dominions. in the hauen of Alexandria, Soliman saying that he would vse them in his most important affaires: The marchandize besides which the Venetians were wont to bring forth of Syria had an imposition layd on them oftenne in the hundred: the Bailies letters to the Senate were oftentimes intercepted, and without further dissembling their meaning, M^stapha, one of the cheefe Baschas complaining of them told them, that because they were so streightly allied to the Emperor their enemy, they had incurred the hatred and indignation of Soliman.
This gaue him some iust occasion to resent it, and some collour of a lawfull warre, if he had beene disposed thereunto, notwithstanding that diuers other reasons and coniectures did testiffe vnto them the contrary, for it was not likely that  the Turke being able to make warre vpon the Emperor alone, (who was not very strong at Sea), and easily to breake his forces, would enforce the Venetians to ioyne with the Imperialls and to vnite their forces with theirs, which being mighty at Sea, would not only hinder his enterprizes against the states of other men, but likewise greatly endanger his owne, knowing very well that for the space of eight and thrity yeares, the friendship and peace betwixt the^ had beene on both sides so carefully obserued, and namely that Soliman had euer made shew, both in his wordes and actions, to desire nothing so much as the Venetians friendships: That since then nothing had happened on the Venetians part, that might alter that quiet, or enforce them to take armes, seeing that the Senate discreetly mesuring  the forces of the Ottoman Empire, and fitting their deseignes and actions to the condition of the times, did with great honor and respect proceed in the Turkes behalfe, prouided that the dignity of the Common-wealth might not therein receiue any preiudice, temporising the best they could with so mighty an enemy, whom being not able to assaile, they thought it wisely done to keepe him for their friend, and to expect the commodity of time, or some better fortune of the Common-wealth. At the same time Tomazo Moceniga, Ambassador for the Common-wealth arriued at Constantinople* being sent, according to the manner to reioyce with Soliman in the name of the Senate for the happy successe of his warres in Persia, and for his safe returne home to the Citty, He hauing kissed Solimans hands, and presented his vsuall guifts of rich garments, he was well receiued and ent^rtained of all those of the Port, and particularly of Aiax the Visier Bascha, whoe did often-times assure him that their Lord did beare great good-will the Republicke, and was ver^ desirous to maintaine that antient

peace and friendship with it, so long as the Venetians should beare them-selues in his behalfe with the like offices of friendshippe: That Soliman had euer vsed toThe (...) ex^uses. keepe his word and promise, and thought they ought not feare that h^e would euer doe other-wise. Therefore hee began modestly to excuse the matter concerning Contarens shippe, and other things done to the Venetian Marchants and their marchandize, as matters happened without the great Turkes expresse commandement, and which should be speedily remedied.
There was then a report at that time, how that the Sophy of Persia had taken armes, and that hee would shortly be in the field whereby the Turkes would bee  enforced to turne their forces vpon Persia: And that the rumor which was currant, how that th ^ Turkes had an enterprize vpon Christendome, was rather to maintaine their re^utation among Christian Princes, then for any desire they had at that time to employ their forces against them.
The end of the tenth Booke of the fifth Decade.






The Contents of the first Booke of the sixth Decade.
THE Turke maketh great preparations both by Sea and land to enuade Christendome. The Venetians are  enforced to arme, and to stand vpon their guard. The French Kings deseigns vpon Italy. The Imperialls are afraid of the Turkish Army. Count Guy de Rangon commeth to Venice, being sent thither by the French King, and is answered quite contrary to his expectation. Three sundry accidents are cause of warre betwixt the Venetians and Soliman. The Venetians fleet is by force of wind cast vpon the Coast of Puglia, where that of the turkes lay. The Venetian fleet beeing retired from Puglia, Soliman declareth himselfe their enemy. Doria his pollicy to enforce the Venetians to ioyne with him. The Baily Canalis aduiseth the Senate to reconcile them*selues to Soliman. The Venetian Marchants are stayed, and their goods seased on ouer all Solimans Empire. Barbarossa wasteth the Isle of Corfou. The description of the Isle of Corfou. The Venetians determine to fight with the Turke. A league contracted betwixt the Emperor, the Pope, and the Venetiams. Doria his delaies, and in the end his refusall to ioyne with the Venetians against the Turkes. The Venetians are constant to assaile the Turkes, not-with-standing that Doria had forsaken them. The Vifier Bascha councelleth Soliman to raise his campe from before Corfou hauing viewed the place. Soliman seeketh the Venetians friendship.
The seege raised from before Corfou. Soliman determineth to assaile Naples of Romagnia, and Maluefia. Barbarossa his incursions vpon the Venetians Islands. The Venetians take the Isle of Scardona. The Emperor although hee ^ffirmed that hee would make warre vpon the Turkes, is suspected of the contrary. The Popes dilligence to attone the Emperor and the French King. Sundry oppinions in the Senate concerning either warre or peace with Soliman. And lastly the Emperors Ambassador goeth about to breake the Venetians Newtrallity, but in vaine.




The First Booke of the sixth Decade of the Historie of Uenice.
THE Venetians by the Bashas speech, remayning irresolute and in doubt either of warre or peace, were greatly troubled, wherein the French Ambassador did by a maruelous cunning entertaine them, hoping the^eby to cause them to condescend to his Kings deseignes, to ioyne them-selues with the French, and to abandon the Imperialls friendship, assuring them that if they would so doe, to shield them from all danger on the Turkes behalfe.
In the meane time sundry rumors were bruted in Constantinople, so^e affirming that those great preparations for the fleet, was toSund^y reports concerning the Turkish a^my. passe into Puglia, and others said that it was to enter into the Venetian Gulph, there to ^aile what-so-euer it could finde to belong vnto the Emperor: others  thought that it was for Barbary, according to the aduise of Cariadine Barbarossa, and others like-wise did threaten the Venetians, naming particularly the Isle of Corfou.
These preparations were as great by land as by ^ea, and made with great speed, so as it was certenly thought, that hee would set forth more then three hundred saile, with great store of ordnance, war like engins, and great quantity of all sortes of munition.
The Venetians being troubled with these preparations, and for diuers occasions suspecting the Turkes faith, non-with*standing that the league made of a long time with Soliman did still continue, resolued likewise to arme as fast as they could, supposing that there was no safer meanes to assure their affaires, then to stand vpon their gard for feare of beeing surprized. Therefore they beganne to make great prouisions for warre, and leauied on a sodaine eight thousand footemen to re-enforce their garrisons: they did trimme their old Gallie^, and gaue order

to build fifty new ones, they stayed some Venetians, and strangers that were bound for sondry voyages, to make vse of them for the carriage of the munitions and other necessaries for the fleet; determining if dangers did increase to arme the number of an hundred Galleis; and for that purpose, they chose for Gene^all according to their vsual manner, by way of lotte, in the Councell of the PreguaisThe Veretians pr^ arat^ns to (...) vpon thei^ gu^rd against the Tu^ke. Ieronimo Pesare, a man very skilfull in the affaires of the common-wealth, and cheefely in sea businesse, who was afterwards allowed by the great Councell. But that which among other matters did most troble them was the care from whence to haue meanes to furnish the expences which they were to make, their treasor beeing wholly exhausted by the late warres, wherby they were to inuent  sundry extraordi^ry deuises, to get money speedily. They created three Procurators of Saint Ma^ke, which is one of the chiefe dignities in the commonwealth next to the Duke, namely Andrew Capello, Iero^imo Bragadino, Iac^mo Cornare who did each of them aide the Republicke with twelue thousand crowns, they did afterwards entreat the Pope to permit them to raise two hundred thousand Ducats vpon the Clergy of their state, which the Pope making great difficultie to graunt, alledging sometimes the Clergyes pouerty, and then that he could not bel^eue that Soliman did intend to march against Christendome, they wereThe Senates carc^ ^rnish m^anes ^or ^e the expenc^ o^ warre. enforced to raise it some where else, and amid these troubles and perplexities of mind, they did not forget, following the holy and religious institution of their  Forefathers, to haue recourse cheefely to diuine assistance, whereuppon solleme prayers were commanded to be made in all Churches and foure hundred measures of wheate were giuen to the poore Friers, to pray to God that it would please him to fauour the good and deuout affection of the Councellors of the State.
The Imperialls were in no lesse care and trouble to be assured of the Turkish forces, wherevppon they caused great numbers of Spanish footmen to passeImperials aff^aid o^ the Turki^sh (...) into Italy, to lye in Garrison in the Realmes of Sicill and Naples, and in other places exposed to the enemies arriuall; they sent word to Andrew Doria Prince of Melfi, who at the same time was Admiral for the Emperor on the Mediterranian seas, that he should speedily make ready his Gallies, and come into the kingdome  to ioyne with those of Naples Sicilly, and the religion of Malta, to command there. But these prouisions being weake were not sufficient to resist the Turkish forces. For the Emperor was at the same time enforced to looke to the defense of his other Estates which the French King determined to inuade, who for thatThe King cometh to (...) to go into Italy. purpose was come to Lyons, from whencehe had sent before him into Italy fifteene thousand Almaine and Gascon footmen* whervpon the Emperor, to diuert these deseines, r^ised in his Cuntrey of Flanders an army of twenty thousand footmen, and eight thousand horse, to enter vppon the Frontiers of France.
Now that which most hindered them from prouiding for the imminent dangers threatened by the Turkes, were the rumors which were spred abroad, how The (...) forbid Doria to carry the Gal^s o^t o^ G^noa. that the French had an enterprize vppon Genoa, where the Genowaies, being aff^ighted, did boldly tell Doria that they could not suffer him to abandon his cuntrey, nor to carry the Galleys from thence, which were the sinewes of the Imperiall army, because that the two and twenty spanish Galleies that lay at Barcelona were in bad equipage to put to Sea. During these contentions betwixt the Princes of Christendome, the Turke taking his aduantage thereby (as hee had done at sundry times to molest Christendome, departed with his land army about the begining of March and came to Andrinople, where hauing remained a while, and spent some small time in hunting whilest other prouisions were made for his iourney, he went from thence about the la^er end of Iune, and  came to Scopia a Citty of Macedon, and then tooke his way through the confines of Albania. His naual army departed at the same time forth of the Streight of Galipolis, to the number of more then three hundred saile, (as hath beene said,) whereof, two hundred were Galleis, and the residue, Galeo^s, Fusts, and

other lesser vessells, vnder the command of Lufti Bascha Captaine Generall, who represented the great Turkes person: it was not certainely knowne what commission he had, nor whither he would bend his course: some said that hee was commanded to assaile the Venetians, if occasions were offerd: others affirmed theThe vn^rtaine cours^ of the Turkish fl^et, doth put the Venetians in (...). contrary, saying, That hee was commanded in no sort to touch any thing that belonged vnto them: but the common report was, that he went to inuade Puglia.
Doria in the meane time, being come to Ciuitauechia, and finding the Popes Gallies to be ready there wen to the Far of Messina, there to make a fleet of the Gallies of Naples, Sicill, and other places and perceiuing, that when they were all ioyned together, they were to weake to resist the Turkish forces, determined, (after that he had left the greatest part of the Gallies in places of safety) to saile towards the Leuant with a few light Gallies, which he made choyse of, to molest in some fort, (occasion being offered) any thing that did belong to the Turkes, auoyding by all meanes to meet with their fleet. The Venetians hauing notice of the arriuall of the Turkish fleet at Modon, being yet vncertaine whither, or with what commission it sailed, did, not without great doubt consult in the Senate what the Generall Pesare were best to doe, who was already arriued at Corfou with threescore and tenne Gallies.
The Generall had not till then receiued any other commissions then generall, and comformable to the Senates intention, still to remaine neuter, namely to hold  amity with the Imperialls, and with the Turkes, to preserue whatsoeuer did belong to the Common-wealth from wrong, to giue victualls freely to both ofThe Venetians remaine neuters betwixt the Imperialls and the Turkes them: to auoyd all occasions of suspition, and to keepe themselues farre off from the Fleets: wherevnto they added, that he should still keepe his fleet together, and not, if it were possible, lea^e the Gulph to the discretion of the Turkes, least they should hinder the Dalmatian Gallies, and others which were making ready at Venice, from ioyning with them, if need should bee.
The opinions in this Councell were very different (as it often happeneth in such consultations) what he had more to doe, but at last they resolued to referre  the whole matter to the dilligence and discretion of the Generall, because it was an hard matter well to prouide for the sundry accidents which might happen, accordingA second Generall created at Venice. to which, Captaines did for the most part vse to gouerne themselues. They only concluded to diuide the Army, and to create another Generall, of lesse authority then Pessare, so as both of them beeing together Pessare, should haue the sole command, and the other was to remaine in the Gulph, whilest Pessare should be at Corfou, or any where else.Iohn Vituri created s^cond Generall.
Giouan Vituri was by the common consent of euery one appointed for this place, who was in great account both for his wisdome and valour. This man hauing taken speedy order for his voyage, departed from Venice with some armed  Gallies of the latter Gouernours, and sailed into Dalmatia, where there came vnto him, Francesco Pascalic the Prouidator, with certaine Gallies which were at Corfou, Nicholao Bondimiero Captaine of the Gulph, and Dominico ContarenNomber of the Venetian forces at Sea. Captaine of the Fusts, so that Vituri had six and forty Galleis vnder his command, besides six Fusts, and the Generall Pessare had foure and fifty Galleis, one Gallion commanded by Bert^ci Contaren, and a great shippe of warre gouerned by Iacomo Armiero.
Now within a while after there arose among the Senators a doubt almost like the former, by reason of the report that was spred abroad how that the Turkish Fleet was comming into the Ile of Corfou, and that they had already descried it from the Ile of Zante, sailing thitherwards amayne, some thinking it fit thereupon  to keep the fleet diuided, others refuting this opinion, s^id that they ought to permit the Generall Pessare, if he should find it expedient for the Common-wealth, to make a fleet of all the Gallies; and to Command Vituri, that if Pessare should send to him for that purpose, to obey him without expecting any other expresse

commandement from the Senate. Diuers did likewise reiect this opinion, for many reasons, and propounded for the safest course (if that the peace with Soliman were broken) to ioyne their forces with the Imperials (who had already sought it at their hands) and that, as soone as might bee; for the more easie defense of Corfou. This proposition being reiected like the rest, they at last concluded to referre the whole matter to Pesare, who might ioyne with Doria if need should be.
The French being aduertized of all these difficulties, and hoping to be able by new practizes to induce the Venetians to consent to that, wherevnto till then they would ^euer harken, did forthwith send the Count Guy de Rangone to The French King sendeth Count Guy de Rangon to Venice. Venice, who being brought in before the councell of Tenne (the French Ambassadour not being present) who afterwards did the like a part by himselfe, hauing presented his letters of credit from the King, beganne with great eloquence to declare the great good will which King Fra^cis did beare to their Republike, and how highly he did esteeme it, then he did put them in minde of diuers and sundry things which the French Kings had done for the maintenance and stay of thatThe effect of the Count Rangon ^it ora^ion to the Senate. common wealth; from thence falling vpon the sundry and particular accidents of those times, he did perswade them to abandon the Emperours alliance, and to embrace that of the French King, offering them from him and by his commandement the city of Cremona, and all the country of Gyradade, so, as by their  common armies the State of Milan might be conquered, promising them besides, all aide and assistance to reduce the Cities of Rauenna and Ceruia vnder their obedience, with the territories of Puglia, Ottranto, Brundusium, Monopoli, Polignan, and Trani, by which meanes they should be restored to all that which they had enioyed before the last warres. But hee did especially insist very much vpon the miserable condition of the time, which was to bee considered, promising to defend and shield them, by his Kings meanes and authority, from all those perills and dangers which threatned them from the Turkes to their owne honour and reputation.
This proposition being vttered with great vehemency did greatly trouble the  mindes of the Auditors, for on the one side, great and faire hope^ were propounded with equall recompences, and yet not with out warre, and great trauaile; on the other side an incertenty of peace, with as many difficulties, did present it selfe before them, the selfe same dangers remay ning stil in force, made far greater by the French Kings indignation, if he should perceiue his friendship, with such goodly offers to be so often contemned and set at nought.
The Senate being assembled therevpon, the Collodge of the wise men, hauing determined to tell the Count Rangon; that the Senate did first of all thankePropositions in the Senate ^or the answering o^ the Count Rangon. him for his great and notable offers made vnto them, then, concerning the vinon which he propounded, that the King might haue perceiued by their actions past, what account they had euer made, and now more then euer of the Councell of France, to the which they had neuer beene wanting, nor would euer faile when occasion should be offered, earnestly requesting the King so to hold and beleeue it: one onely person, Marke* Antonio Cornare, a man, at that time highly esteemed,Antonio ^ornare repug^th the sormer prop^sition. for his eloquence and great reputation, though he were not very old, being of a contrary opinion, would haue them freely to answere the Count Rangon, That the common-wealth had euer vsed to keepe her promise inuiolably, which was a matter worthy and beseeming a Prince, and that therefore the same being vnited with the Emperour by a new confederacy, could not harken to any other  contrary therevnto: but they did hope that the King, as a wise and most Christian Prince, and their friend, would not for all that discontinue the good offices which he ^ad already begunne in their behalfe towards the Turke: and he did constantly maintaine this opinion by a vehement and perswasiue o^ation; wherevpon he was attentiuely heard, and commended of all men. So soone as he had ended,

Leonardo Eme one of the wise men of the councel, a man of authority, and well experienced in matters of importance both at home and abroad, rose vp, and beganRangon it answered according to the opinion of Cornare. to answer to euery point of Cornares speech: But neither his authority nor al the reasons which he all eadged to the contrary, could keepe them from answering Rangon in the same manner as Cornare had propounded.
In the meane time newes were brought to Venice how that the Turkish fleet was arriued at Valona, and that passing along thorow the Channel of Corfou, it had saluted the castle with ordnance shot in signe o^ friendship, according to the vse and manner of warre, that the castle had in friendly sort giuen them the like salutation: and how that Solimon had neither in that Island nor else-where committed  any hostile action; but that certaine things, being forcibly taken from some of the Republikes subiects, had beene restored to them, and the Robbers, for terrot to the rest* had beene hanged vpon the saile yardes of his galley. Some Senators were of opinion, that the Generall Pesare, in acknowledgement thereof, and vnder pretence of peace and friendship, should send some captaine of his Gallies to Soliman, to vse meanes to discouer some of his deseignes; but it was reiected, for feare least the Turkes would interpret it sinisterly to their aduantage, and least the reputation of the Venetian forces should therby be diminished with them, or else giue them some occasion to make some great and vnreasonable demand: but they were within a while after freed of that care, by newes that they receiued, how that  Iacomo Canalis, going to Constantinople to execute the office of Baily in steed of Nicola Iustinian, and being come to Nouobazar, was by Solimans commandment brought backe to the campe who could satisfie them in all things. At this stay stood the Venetians affaires at that time, neither at open warre, nor assured peace,Three sundry accidents caused war betwixt Soliman and the Uenetians. all matters being full of feare and suspition, when as vnluckily and vnlooked for, three sundry accidents happened which did cast the Republike head-long into warre with Soliman. The first was that of Simon Nassi the Zaratin, who commanding a Dalmatian Galley, did vnfortunately meet with a small Turkish vesselladen with victuals which was going to Valona, against which (because it would not obey  a certaine signall according to the manner of nauigation, nor strike her sailes) he discharged a cannon and sunke it. Although this fact did greatly trouble Solimans haughty courage, and all his Bashas, yet neuerthelesse making shew toSolimans discontent for the first accident. beare it patiently because he would not perhaps at that time interrupt his other deseignes, he determined to send Ianusbei the Dragoman to Corfou to complain to the Generall Pesare, how that thorow the insolency of a meane captaine of a Galley, the peace betwixt them had beene violated and infringed, and to demand to haue the author therof punished, and the dammages, amounting to more then thirty thousand Ducats, to be repaired. Vpon the neck thereof the second accidentThe second accident worse then the first. happened. There were foure captains of gallies at the same time at the gard of the channel of Corfou, to wit, Iusto Gradonico, Micaele Grimani, Iacomo de Mezze, and  Ieromino Micaele: these men so soone as they perceiued those armed vessels to come towards them, which were two Gallies and one Fust, conducting the Turkish Ambassador, without taking any farther notice of them, they fiercely charged them, so as the Turkes being amazed betooke themselues to flight, and supposing that they could not soone enough escape from them, sailed as fast as they could to Cimera, a barbarous nation and enemy to the Turkes: wherevpon, they were badly entreated there, and al of them committed to prison, and among the rest this Ianusbei. This exploit did greatly discontent the Generall Pesare who in some sort to moderate the fact, did sodainely send Francisco Zene captaine of a Galley to Cimera, to vse meanes with a good sum of money to redeeme Ianusbei, the which for  the Republiks sake he soone obtained without mony. This being likewise brought to Solimans knowledge, he was prouoked by some of his seruants to take speedy reuenge thereof, yet neuerthelesse hee would not for that time harken thereunto, but sent for the Baily Canalis to come before him, vnto whom he greatly

complayned of the officers of the Republike, who did not dayly cease to commit deeds cleare contrary to the desire of peace and good will, which he had at his arriuall assured him that the Common-wealth did beare vnto him, at the last he seemed to be content that the Baylife should expresly send some of his seruants to Corfou, truly and particularly to vnderstand how matters had passed, wherevpon he sodainely sent Alessandro Vrsino thither who was then with him.
Soliman in the meane time continuing his purpose to assaile the coast of Puglia, caused great number of horse to be landed on the territory of Ottranto, who scouring the whole country brought away men, women, and all sort of cattaile, with other moueables, filling the whole country with feare and terror.
Doria in the mean time hauing manned eight and twenty light gallies with soldiers and mariners, comming to scoure the seas nere to Zante and Zeffalonia, tooke diuers Turkish vessels, which being laden with victuals, were going to Valona, then sayling towards the Gulphe he arriued vpon the sea of Corfou, atDoria his incursions canseth the Turks to suspect the Uenetians. the very same instant in a manner, that Ianusbei being chased by the Venetian Gallies, landed at Cimera, whereby he had his part in the booty, and carried away the empty Turkish vessels, which did much encrease the Turkes hatred to the Venetians, and made them to suspect that they had some secret intelligence with the Imperials.
The Generall Pesare being aduertized of Barbarossas departure from the confines of Zant, where he had remayned to assure the victuals which came from Constantinople to the campe, and of his sayling towards Corfou, did thinke it a very fit occasion for himselfe to make vse of the liberty which the Senate had giuen him, to ioyne both the fleets together, wherevpon he resolued to enter into the Gulphe and to ioyne with the Generall Vitturi, meaning neuerthelesse by all meanes to auoide meeting with the Turkish gallies: But being on his way, and driuen by a contrary winde, he was carried to sea-ward before the winde, to thoseThe winde carrieth Pesare with all the Venetian forces neere to th^se of the Turkes. quarters where he was to meet with that which he had most of all auoided: for hauing sailed a long time with the whole fleet, and about night being come neere to land, he was councelled to ankor there, to passe the rest of the night, which  was so darke, as they could not discouer a farre off, which gaue occasion to the third accident. For it fell out, that the vantgard consisting of fiteene Gallies, conducted by Alessandro Contaren the Prouidator, did vnawares strike vpon a Turkish galley (this was an Imperial galley, prepared for the great Turke, if hee should desire to come to sea, and was commanded by Bustan Rais) those within itThe third accident occasioned by the taking of Solimans Gallies. hauing, in the Italian tongue, demanded of the Venetians, whose vessel that was which was so neere them, and they replying that it belonged to the Venetians, did aske them the selfe same question, who they were, but they making no answer, vsed all meanes to escape thence, and then on a sodaine shot off a peece of ordnance: Contaren being then mooued with disdaine, and spurred forward by a zeale  to honour and reputation, notwithstanding that the darkenesse of the night would not suffer him to discerne any thing, did neuerthelesse redouble the bankes of Rowers, and followed that Turkish galley, which had plaied an enemies part, and after a long fight, there being more then three hundred souldiers in it, he became Master thereof, by the death of all the Turkes, some few excepted who had hid themselues.
Contaren was by some reprehended for this deed as though being carried away by a particular desire of reuenge, he had enterprized that which he knew to be against the commodity and seruice of the common-wealth, by executing that hostile act vpon the Turkes: yet neuerthelesse others in excusing him said; That He had more then any man else foreseene all those disorders; by meanes whereof, to auoide all occasions, he demanded to haue the army conducted into Candy, seeing that the Turkes had passed as friends thorow the Channell of Corfou.
The Generall after this exploit passing forwards on his way, came very nere

to the coast of Puglia, where they descried an infinite number of fiers, and heard at the same time sundry shot of ordnance. They thought at the first that it had beene those of the country, who hauing descried the Venetian fleet, and not knowing what vessels they were, did giue warning to the inhabitants round about to retireThe Venetian fleet vpon the coast of Puglia. themselues into the strong townes: but they soone found the contrary, for it was a warning to the Turkes that were there, speedily to embarke themselues (as they did) and to fall into order of battaile before the Venetian fleet.
Then was there great confusion in the Venetian army for the vnhoped for arriuallThe confusion of the Venetian army when it saw that of the Turkes to be nere them: of the Turkish gallies; on the one side danger was very nere, and their doubt very great, whether they were best to escape by flight, or dispose themselues to  battaile. Flight seemed dishonorable, and of small pofit* to fight, was against the Senates expresse command, the which they were to obserue, and not on the vncertaine euent of a battaile, aud to their owne disaduantage hazard the gallies, on which depended the whole defense and safety of their Estate by sea.
Matters remayning in this confusion by reason of these irresolutions, either to abide, or to be gonne, it happened that when the Generall commanded to turne the Prowes, and to returne towards Corfou, it was done in a manner in disorder, so as all of them preparing with speed to get forth of that danger, fiue VenetianThe Venetian ^leet lo^seth foure Gallies taken by the Turkes. gallies tarried behind, either because they had not soone enough turned their Prowes, or for that they were not so light as the others, foure of them fell into the  Turkes hands, who soone after, by declaring himselfe their enemy, did inhumainely put the foure captaines to death which commanded them, as for the fifth which was commanded by Giouan Baptista Mirchouich of Pago, al-be-it it was farther behinde then any of the rest, did neuerthelesse by chance escape that danger, for carrying in her flag the cressent or half moone, they thought it to be a Turkish galley, and thereby, being not medled with, it found meanes afterward to escape to Ottranto.
Now this latter exploit caused Soliman wholly to resolue to make warre vponSoliman resolueth to make war on the Venetians. the Signory of Venice, who was before that time halfe-minded so to doe by reason of the precedent actions, whereby he perceiued the small affection that  the Venetians did beare vnto him: his seruants likewise the more to animate him therevnto, did agraua^e the matter; and afterwards, a letter of Doria written to Pesare coming to his hands, assured him of that which he most doubted: Doria had (as it was thought) forged that letter, and found meanes to haue it fall into theDoria his policy to enforce the Venetians to ioyne with him. Turks hands, to make them beleeue that he had some secret intelligence with the Venetians, and by that means to set them at ods, thereby enforcing them for their safety to ioyne with him, for the which purpose, passing along at the same time almost nere to Corfou, he had craued conference with the Generall Pesare, meaning expresly more then once to hold long discourse, that he might cause the Turkes to enter into some suspition.
All these exploits being knowne at Venice did greatly trouble the Senate, where the opinions neuerthelesse were different, some blaming the indiscretion of those who by their rashnesse had throwne the common-wealth head-long into a great and dangerous warre, contrary to the Senates intentions, others, publikely affirming the contrary said, that they had done wel and discreetly, according to the rule and discipline of sea affaires, and the reputation of their army, and after sundry other reasons propounded on both sides, they concluded to tarry for aduertizements from the Baily, to vnderstand particularly in what manner the Turke had taken those things which were past: and all their determinations against those who had offended, were deferred till then.Canalis commanded by Soliman ^o send to the Venetian Senace.
The Baily within a while after, by Solimans commandement sent Alessandro Vrsino, who did wholly resolue them of all that they desired to know, and sent them word, sharply to punish those who had violated and broken the peace, and to make it apparent that whatsoeuer had beene done was not by the Senates will

or consent, and that by so doing, Aiax the Visir Basha, did put them in hope of the continuance of the peace. Vpon this aduertisement they resolued to write to the Generall to send the Zaratine captaine, Iusto Gradonico who commanded those Gallies that were for the gard of the Channell of Corfou when Ianusbei was pursued, with all the rest whom he should thinke had offended in that action, with their legs and hands bound to Venice: as for the Prouidator Contaren they commandedThe Senates resolution vpon the Bailies eduertisement him to saile with his Galley to Zara, where leauing both it and his office, he should come to Venice and present himselfe before the Magistrate of the Auogario. Some of the Senators were of opinion to call home the General Pesare likewise, for to purge himselfe of that matter, because that all errors committed  in warre are to be attributed to the Generall who holdeth the soueraigne authority, they supposing, that if the Generall, had punished the Zaratine, all the other inconueniences would not afterwards haue happened, and that therefore he was guilty thereof: that the peace with the Turke was of such importance to the Common-wealth, that all other respects were not to be compared to it besides, in regard that the whole fleet was to remaine stil together, there was no need to haue so many Generals, who for the most part doe cause disorder in affaires of importance, rather then any good gouernment.
The Senate not consenting to call home the Generall did sendbacke Vrsino to  the Baily, and yet they would not haue Soliman at that time to be acquainted with that which had beene concluded against the Prouidator, and the captaines of the gallies, because they would not haue the Turkes to thinke that what they had decreed, was done rather to satisfie them, then for their loue to iustice. Therefore they enioyned the Baily to demonstrate the Senates sound and sincere affection, and how desirous the Venetians were to continue their friendship and peaceThe Senates answer to the Baily. with Soliman; and that for the better testimony thereof, they would shortly send an expresse messenger vnto him with particular instructions of what had passed, and within a while after, Vincenzo Grimani, Procurator of Saint Mark, was chosen for that purpose.
But before Vrsino camebacke with his instructions to Valona, Soliman, who after  the taking of Castro had beseeged Ottranto, being spurred forward by disdaine and by Barbarossas pursutes, notwithstanding that he had promised the Baily to attempt nothing til Vrsinos returne, did neuerthelesse determin to returne toSoliman resolueth to make war vpon the Venetians. Valona, and to turne all his forces both by sea and land against the Venetians, and especially to assaile the Island and fort of Corfou, it being at the same time very commodious for him.
It is reported that Aiax the visier Basha, sought by soundry reasons to diuert Soliman from this resolution, by shewing him that in so doing he would encreaseThe visier Basha his reasons to diuert him from his resolution. the Imperials forces, who were deadly enemies to the Ottomans, with whom the Venetians should be enforced to ioyne for their owne defense and safety: besides, that the yeere being already very farre spent (for it was the latter end of August) would not suffer him to beginne any long or difficult enterprize: that the campe did already want victuals, by reason that Doria had taken so many small vessels laden with victuals: But Barbarossa being greatly incensed for that Doria had taken and sunke twelue of his Gallies at the Merleres, sought to reuenge himselfe vpon the Venetians, saying that it was They, who had giuen meanes, and aduised the Imperials to assaile his Gallies neere to the Channel of Corfou, and in their sight almost, hauing secret intelligence with their enemies, furnishing them with hauens, victuals and all other commodities, so as by these reasons he caused Soliman to condiscend to his councell.The Venetians are imprisoned and their goods seized vpon ouer all the Turkish Empire.
Now so soone as he had resolued to make warre vpon the Venetians, he wrote to all places of the Ottoman Empire, where the Venetians had most trafficke, that they should imprison their persons, and seize vpon their goods, and especially at Alexandria, whither three great Gallies were come vpon his word.
Soliman came in the meane time from La Valona to Butrintotto, right ouer against Corfou, the more commodiously to passe ouer his forces from thence into the Island. Barbarossa was already gon thither with part of the fleete and some thousand horse to spoile and scoure the country (which he did.)
The newes thereof being brought to Venice (which they had before that time suspected) did greatly trouble all men: for notwithstanding that the castle of Corfou was thought to be strong enough to sustaine all the furious attempts of the Turkes, they neuerthelesse feared, that they should not long be able to resist soDescription of the Isle of Corfou. mighty an enemy, and defend their owne State exposed in so many sundry places to his mercy. The Isle of Corfou lieth right ouer against the Venetian Gulphe  betwixt the Ionian and Adriattick sea, on the North side thereof lieth the coast of Albania, from whence it is some two miles distant, and stretcheth it selfe from the West to the East in manner of a Cressent or halfe Moone, sauing that in the middest, the inward part thereof breaking betwixt the great arch maketh it like two Semicircles, it being in circuit a hundred and twenty miles; that space of sea which lieth betwixt the Island and the firme land, is commonly called the Channell of Corfou. The aire there is very good, and soile fertil enough, there being diuers goodly plaines on the Northside. The towne is seated almost in the middest of the Island, within it, vpon the sea, at the foote of an hil which in a manner doth wholly enuiron it, it is of a sufficient bignesse, and inhabited, and there  were in it at the same time aboue eight thousand persons: but the castle is of no great circuit, nor capable of contayning great store of people, but for the sytuation thereof, most safe against all the assaults of enemies; it hath two fortes in a very high place vpon the point of the hill, which doe not alone beate vpon all sides of the towne walles, and castle, but discouering likewise the sea, and the vallies and neighbour Mountaines, can with their ordnance keepe any army from encamping there, but with great danger. There is no other towne or castle in the whole Island, but diuers country houses scattered here and there in the Champaine: yet neuerthelesse on the South side thereof, vpon an hill, there is a castle called Saint Angelo, stronger by sytuation then by art.
This Island had belonged to the Venetians more then an hundred and fifty yeeres, and they did carefully keepe it, as most fit for the conseruation of their dominion at sea, it being accounted the Bulwarke of Italy against the forces of Barbarians: Babon di Nalda was gouernor thereof, being accompanied with diuersThe number of souldiers and munition in the Island. Venetian Gentlemen. There was a strong garrison of Italian souldiers in the castle to the number of two thousand, and as many of those of the Island all good souldiers: and besides the Rowers of foure Gallies which were lest there for the gard of the Island, great store of artillery and munition; and for the auoiding of all confusion, euery man knew what he had to doe, which made them without any feare at all to attend the arriuall of the enemies army.
The Senate fearing a long seege, and the sinister accidents which do commonly accompany it, did resolue to fight with the enemy to cause him to raise his campe, being inuited therevnto by sundry reasons, because they knew first, that so long as the Turkish fleet should remaine whole, furnishing the campe with men, of whom they had great numbers, that the Isle of Corfou and all the rest should remaine exposed to infinite dangers, not for any other cause then the long continuance of the warre, all the forces of the Republike being consumedThe Senate determineth to fight with the enemy. and they in danger besides, to loose some portion of their dominions: next, that which did incite them to hazard the fortune of a battaile, was, their owne great fleet of an hundred strong gallies, with the meanes to encrease it, because  they would not vnprofitably consume the great expences of such a warlike preparation: but that which did most animate them to this resolution, was their hope to be speedily releeued by the other Christian Princes, according to their offers and promises so often reiterated at what time they should enterprize any

thing against the Turke, especially of the Pope and the Emperor; and not to accept of them at that time, the Commonwealth should seeme wholly to haue forgotten her owne safety, and that of all Christendome.
The Imperials had fifty light gallies at sea, with as many other great armed vessels, the Pope had foure gallies there, and the Knights of Malta some other.The forces of the Imperials, and the Pope. These forces being ioyned to theirs, they hoped to chase away the Turkish fleet, and if they could not free Corfou from the seege, yet at least to open a way to some great and notable exploit, wherevpon* hauing certaine notice that the enemies army was come to Corfou, and thereby warre declared against them, they determined to write to Marke-Antonio Contaren their Ambassadour in the  Court of Rome, that in speaking particularly of this businesse to the Pope, togetherThe Venetians remonstrance to the Pope. with the Senates resolution, he should declare vnto him the greatnesse of the danger, in the common cause of Christendome, and the speed which it behoued them to vse, against the common enemy.
The Pope hauing vnderstood the Senates resolution seemed to be highly pleased therewith, sauing that he did desire nothing so much, as during his Papacy, toThe Popes answer to the Venetian Ambassador. see all Christian Princes vnited together against those Infidels, who in the meane time that the Christians had particular quarrells one with an other, were so mightily encreased, as they now did threaten to ruine them.
Therevpon, he did not only confirme the offers and promises that were made  before, but did likewise augment them, and as a most discret and well aduised person, he motioned the making of an vnion and league together against that common enemy, wherevnto* his exhortation to all other Princes, and especially to the Emperor, was of great force.
This league beeing resolued on, it was concluded by a Generall consent of all men to arme two hundred light Gallies, and the greatest number ofA league betwixt the Pope the Emperor and the Uenetiane against the Turke. ships of warre and other great vessels that they could, and in them to embarke fifty thousand foot-men, and foure thousand horse; But because some difficulties seemed to arise concerning the distribution of that expence, and vpon other Articles, and that the time in the meane space did vrge them speedily to send away  the army to the releefe of Corfou; the Pope by confirming that which had beene concluded, would presently haue the league to bee published, to giue it more force and reputation, and to inuite the other Christian Princes to embrace and follow it, reseruing the conclusion of certaine points, till he could receiue newes from Spaine.
It was sollemnly published in Saint Peeters Church, where Gasparo Contaren, the Venetian Cardinall, celebrated masse in the presence of the Pope, and theThe league is published at Rome, and at Venice. whole Colledge of Cardinalls: the like was afterwards done at Venice, with praiers in all Churches, to giue thankes vnto God for that he had vnited the Christian Princes against the Infidells: and for the execution of that which had beene  concluded, the Senate sent word to the Generalls, that leauing the Captaine of the Gulphe with foure Gallies for the guard of Dalmatia, they should saile with the whole fleete to Brandiza: they did afterwardes make a great leauy of foot forces for to fill vp the promised number, then they appointed captaines for the great Gallies, and for the bastard ones, who did veryThe Venetians preparations for the army. speedily cause them to be made ready, which sailed all of them vnder the conduct of Boudumiero, captaine of the Gallion: so as in a short space, all things were ready on the Venetians part.
Andrew Doria, who lay at Naples, hauing intelligence of that which had beene Doria delaies to ioyne with the Venetians. concluded at Rome and Venice, that he should meet at Brandiza to ioyne with the Venetians fleet, alleadging sundry excuses, some times that he would saile towards Marseilles against the French nauall army, then, that he would go to Genoa, to new man his gallies, and to make prouision of other necessaries, did by all meanes prolonge his departure, notwithstanding that Gasparo Bassalu the

Venetians Counsull at Naples did earnestly vrge it, by declaring vnto him the importance of the Isle of Corfou, which was to be preserued and defended from the danger wherein it was, in doing whereof, notwithstanding that he was to doe the Emperour seruice, he should neuerthelesse purchase great glory and reputation, the enterprize being executed vnder his conduct and command as Generall of the army: As also, for that he was obliged therevnto by his promise often made to the Venetians, vpon which they had not feared to commit into his hands all their forces, which were very great, and such, as the assurance of their Estate by sea, did wholly depend vpon them.
Doria, not being mooued with all these reasons, answered that they should Doria his answer and departure towards Genoa. haue accepted his offers at that time when occasion was offered of ouerthrowing Barbarossa, when with a part of his army he passed thorow the Channel of Corfou, so, as neither the Popes letters which he wrote vnto him with his owne hand, nor the arriuall of the Emperors Ambassador at Naples, who for that purpose came thither expresly from Rome in post, could in any sort alter his determination, but he speedily departed from Naples to goe to Genoa, saying that he would acquaint the Emperor with what had passed, and there attend his commandment. The departure of Doria, and his manner of proceeding did greatly trouble the Venetians, not so much for that their hope was frustrate of being able to breake theHow Dorias departure did trouble the Venetians. Turkish army, as for to see themselues vnder vaine promises, deceiued by the Imperials: yet neuerthelesse al-be-it that Doria his departure, and the report that Barbarossa was comming into the Gulphe with an hundred gallies might haue perswaded them to countermand their Generalls not to goe to Brandiza; the Senate notwithstanding, to shew their constancy in matters determined and resolued vpon, and to preserue the reputation of their army, which would haueThe Venetians constancy. beene much blemished, if they should haue seemed to depend wholly vpon Dorias councels and actions, after sundry opinions, resolued to alter nothing of that which had been determined, but made a new request to the Pope, that he would command the Count of Anguillare to saile with the Churches gallies and those  of Malta to Brandiza according to their former resolution.
The Turkes in the meane time had landed fiue and twenty thousand men and thirty peeces of ordnance in the Isle of Corfou, and builded foure Caualliers round about the castle, to make them equall to those within it, and to beate downe their defenses, hauing first wasted the whole Island, cut downe the fruite trees, burned the country houses, and led away as prisoners al those whom they found in the Island which had not saued themselues in the castle, many neuerthelesse escaped into Saint Angelos castle, the sytuation of the place being able to gard them: Then hauing begunne the battery and perceiuing, that by reason of the long distance of the place, where they had beene enforced to build their Caualliers, for  feare of the ordnance within, their cannon shot was of no great force, they were desirous to approch neerer, but they were beaten backe with cannon shot to their great harme and losse. The Visier Basha came twice from Butintrot into the Island,The Visier Basha, councelleth Soliman to raise his seege. and being come vpon the brinke of the castle dike to view the place, reported to Soliman that the sytuation of the place, and the fortifications were such as their was no hope in a long time to doe any good there, wherevpon he councelled Soliman to raise the seege, and to retire his armies, which beganne already to seele great discommodities, as well by sicknesse, as by the small store of victuals that was brought thither: as also because that winter drew nere, a very vnfit season for such an enterprize, and that the longer he tarried there, the more he should loose his reputation, being afterwards enforced to discampe  without any prosperous successe: that hee had by a sodaine alteration turned his forces vpon that enterprize which had beene prepared for other more easie purposes against the Emperour, and therefore that hee was not to wonder if the euent of a rash and head-long action, had not answered the

fortunate successe which was wont to follow the wise and discret councels of the Ottomans: that he should send away his two armies by sea and land to Constantinople, there to refresh them which were much weakened by sundry accidents, to the end they might the yeere following with better successe enterprize some exploit more assured and generous.
Such was the opinion and councell of Aiax the Visier Basha, yet neuerthelesse to preserue their reputation feigning some other deseignes contrary to that which he spake; or rather enuying Barbarossa his greatnesse, and seeking to disgrace him by reconciling the Venetian Common-wealth to Soliman, he called for the Venetian Baily, who had still followed the campe, and told him, that if his  countrymen would satisfie the harmes and dammages, as well of men as other matters, which Soliman had susteined at that seege, and make a demonstration, how that whatsoeuer had happened, was not by the consent or appointment of the common-wealth, he had so handled the matter, that the seege should be raised from before Corfou, and his countrimen should recouer peace and friendship, as in times before with Soliman: Ianusbei the first Dragoman did afterwards affirme that the same came from Solimans selfe, as that did manifest which soone after ensued, the Baily hauing leaue giuen him to send one of his followers to Venice for that purpose, who was conducted in safety by two Chiaus to Castel-nouo.
But Soliman almost at the same time not tarrying for any answere raised his Soliman dis lodgeth fr^ before Cor^ campe, and hauing shipped his ordnance and al his souldiers, sailed towards Constantinople after that he had continued his seege for ten daies space, and carried away with him more then fifteene thousand soules into bondage. The Isle of Passu very nere to Corfou, with Butrintor, seated on the firme land on Albanias side a nere neighbour to it, tasted the like harme and losse.
Barbarossa departing with the army from before Corfou, sailed towards Preueze, Soliman not permitting him to remaine vpon those seas with an hundred gallies to scoure the coastes of Puglia and Sicily.
It was supposed at that time, that the chiefest cause that mooued Soliman so sodainely to raise his campe, was certaine newes from Persia: because, that two  daies before this resolution, some Olaches were speedily come to the campe, and the cause of their comming not being diuulged, it was certainly thought that they had brought bad newes, that nation being wont to publish euery where anything that did concerne their glory or reputation, and to keepe secret and conceale that which might procure them any contrary effect: but vndoubtedly, the true cause of his dislodging, proceeded from the great difficulties which Aiax had discouered in that enterprize of Corfou.
The newes of the enemies discamping did infinitely reioyce the Venetians, and generall processions were made for it, with praiers in Churches, and sundrySoliman de mineth to a saile Naple in Romagn and Malu^ almes giuen to the poore Monasteries and other deuout places of the city. But Soliman seeking to molest the Venetians in sundry places, had at the same time commanded Cassin the Sangiack of Morea, that assembling all the souldiers round about, he should beseege Naples of Romagnia and Maluesia.
The Republike had held vnder her dominion diuers of the principall townes of Morea, the fruitfullest country of al Grecia, and the most renouned for the great number of vertuous men that are issued from thence: it had lost in the former wars against Baiazet Ottoman, grand-father to this Soliman, Modon and Coron; it stil possessed these two, being seated in a most strong place, and filled with inhabitants that did greatly affect the Venetians.
Naples is seated on a small Promontory, the which comming forth from the The discrip^ of Naples ^ Romagnia. land maketh a great and safe hauen, and is in such sort encompassed by the sea, as of the foure parts thereof, the therd is enuironed therewith, and the land side hath a very high and difficult going vp, so as there is but one little narrow way to goe vnto the towne, which lieth betwixt the hilles side and the sea; and the outward

bankes are so high and vneasie, as it is impossible for the gallies to batter the walles, or to land those that are within them: the entry likewise of the Hauen hath a very narrow mouth, so as but one galley at once can enter i^to it, which may be easily defended by the ordnance of a little castle, seated on a small rock, in the middest of the sea, right opposite to the entry, some three hundred paces off, which can on all sides beate vpon the vessels that will come nere to the hauen, and yet it selfe not to be battered from the land, nor by the gallies, none but smal boats being able to come nere it, by reason of sundry points of rocks which lie round about it.
Maluesia is likewise seated in the same Prouince, and more neere to the Description of Maluesia. Cape of Mailla, vpon a mountaine, or rather a small rock of eight hundred paces, which being diuided from the firme land, extendeth it selfe in a long and narow forme to sea wards: so as this towne being seated on an high place is enuironed on all sides by the sea, there beeing none other entrance into it but by a bridge, the waters neere therevnto not being in any sor^ foordable by reason of their exceeding depth, and as nature hath furnished that place with such strength and naturall safety, it hath likewise giuen it wholesome fountaines, with a good and fertill soile, and a goodly plaine on the top of the mountaine, from whence victuals may be prouided for fi^ty or three score men, who are sufficient for the guard thereof.
Vittore de Garzons, in quality of Baily; commanded Naples, a man of ripe yeers,Vittore de Garzons gouern^r of Naples. and of great experience, by reason of the great offices which he had borne both by sea and land. This man by his valor and good councell, and by the trustinesse of the inhabitants did not only defend the place from all perill and danger, but likewise by the sallies of his cauallery, did assure the country nere adioyning, and greatly molest the enemies.
Cassin, who for to obey Soliman was come into those quarters with as great forces as hee could raise, hauing sounded those of Maluefia both by promises and threats, returned towards Naples, and hauing perceiued the difficulty of the enterprize, and being without suffitient means to take it by seege or by assault, hee dislodged  thence, and dismissed part of his army, placing the residue in garrison in the nerest townes therevnto within ^ixe miles of the city.
Barbarossa on the other side with three score and ten gallies, and thirty as well Galeots as Fusts giuen him by Lustimbei, hauing scoured the Islands of the Archipelago belonging to the Republike, tooke some of them which had not meanes of defense, either for want of souldiers, or for that their sytuation was not strong enough to susteine his attempts, such as were the Islands of Scyro, Pathmos, Ligina, and some likewise belonging to particular persons, as Nia, proper to the family of the Pisani, Stampallea to the Quirni, Paros very famous for marble,The Islands taken from the Venetian^ by Barbarossa. subiect to the family of the Venieri, with diuers others, Barbarossa pursuing his  victory to the content of his souldiers vnto whom he gaue the pillage, reseruing neuerthelesse the b^st of the spoile as presents, for the chiefe of the Port, to purchase to himselfe new fauours, to the end that the yeere following hee might be permitted to scoure the seas with greater forces and more authority.
Diuers Venetian captaines after that the enemies had raised their campe from before Corfou, propounded, that the Venetian fleete should follow them to stop these incursions and disorders which euery man did already foresee, by that meanes to preserue those Islands, from whence they receiued many commodities, and chiefly great numbers of men for to man their gallies, yet neuerthelesse, they had respect to the time, and to the enemies forces, from whom  they feared some sinister accident: and aboue all they especially considered the Senates intention, which was to vnite the Confederates forces, to which nothing was more contrary, then to bee farre off with the army, wherevpon they resolued (quitting this proposition) that the Generall Pesare taking with

him a great number of souldiers from the garrisons of Dalmatia, should with certaine gallies goe and beseege Scardona, and Vitturi with other some should saile to Obrouazza.
Scardona, lieth nere to Sebenic, and therefore they thought it fit to take it, for the safety of that fort, and to take away the great discommodities which al those of the country round about might receiue from thence, it being possessed by the enemy: it was circled with very weake walles, and had two small castles: wherevpon,Scardona t^ken by the Venetians. so soone as the Venetian troupes drew nere, the Turkes that were wi^hin it, after some small resista^ce, did yeeld to the discretion of the generall Pesare, who notwithstand^g that he had ^termined to receiue them, on condition to giue  them their liues and goods, yet neuerthelesse, his commandement being neither heard nor obeyed in that fury, the first that entred it beganne forthwith to waste and ^oile, and the Turkes which were gon forth to escape into their Confines being encountred by a troupe of armed men of the country of Sibenic, were all of them cut in peeces. The Generall left Francisco Salom^ne for the gard and gouernment of that place, determining at that time to fortifie it, yet neuerthelesse hauing afterwards considered, the great difficulty of so doing, and the expenses of entertayning a garrison amongst so many of the enemies fortes, with the hurt which would redound if it we^ againe recouered by the Turkes, he thought it fittest and most profitable to race the castles, and to satisfie himselfe, for hauing taken  such a place of retreate from the enemies.
As for those of Obrouazza, the Turkes that were within it, though they wereThe Turke^ of Obrouazzo re^ire (...) (...) (...). but few in number, did valliantly for a time defend the place, afterwards, being enforced to quit it, they retired into the castle, the which whilest the Venetians made al things ready to beseege, the gallies were countermanded by the General, hauing had a new commandement from the Senate to saile with the army to Corfou, as resoluing aboue al things to gard that place, which was of so great importance for them. The winter season being much spent, the exploits of warre did for that yeere cease, all men expecting what would be the beginning of the yeere following 1537. Soliman seemed to be desirous of peace with the Venetians, wherof An. 1537* the Visier Basha by his commandement made a motion to the Baily Canalis, perswading him to cause the Ambassadour to come to Constantinople who hadSoliman seemeth to desire peace with (...) Venetians. beene already appointed for that purpose, vnto whom he promised to giue a pasport, and good enterteinment* But by how much the Turkes did vse gentlenesse and curtezy, contrary to their fierce and haughty nature, by so much the more didThe Venetians suspect hi^* the Venetians suspect their speech and actions, doubting that vnder these treaties, they sought not a firme peace, but how to separate them from the Emperours friendship, and to breake the practizes of the league.
The Emperor Charles on the other side made shew that all his thoughts were bent to make warres vpon the Turkes, so as he often times said, that he greatly desired The Emper^ in sh^w desire^ to make warre on the Turke. to march against them in person, to haue a share in that glory, crauing none other recompence then that; being willing to haue whatsoeuer should be conquered from them, to be ioyned and vnited to the dominions of the Venetian common-wealth, the which he termed the very bulwarke against the Turkish forces, and that he might the better* intend that enterprize, he had consented to a truce with the French King in Flanders. Such in outward apparence were the discourses of the Emperor and his officers in Italy, who made a shew to be very careful ofHis officers confirme his desire. preparing al things for the warres. Doria promised to haue his gallies ready in a short space, and to ioyne them with the Venetian fleet, assuring them that he would in that war do some notable seruice to Christendome, and to the profit of the Signory. The Marquis of Guasto gouernor of Milan did the like, both of the^ seeking to make al men beleeue, that the Emperor in that businesse did proceed w^h great zeale and affection, yet neuerthelesse, many were of opinion that these exterior shews of the Emperor were only to hide some other of his design^, and to prouoke

the Venetians in the meane time to war, who by altogether intending the league, might wholy breake it with Soliman, and thereby be enforced to ioyne with him, who was more desirous to make war vpon the French, to assure vnto himselfe the State of Milan, then vpon the Turkes.
Sundry signes of the Emperors secret purposes were discerned: his long delayThe great signes why men did suspect the Emperor. to answer the Senate concerning that which it had written to him about the league, then his refusall to make a generall truce with the French, and lastly the report which was current, how that by meanes of a Spaniard, nephew to the viceroy of Sicil, and prisoner to the Turkes, he made meanes by faire promises to purchase the friendship of Barbarossa, and namely, that Barbarossa passing by the Far  of Messina, at such a time as there were none to make resistance, had in no sort touched any that did belong vnto the Emperor.
As for the French King, all men did perceiue how desirous he was of peace, and that the Venetians should be in league and amity with Soliman, that he might seeThe French Kings designes and end: them freed from all constraint of being vnited to the Emperor, to the end that if he should happen to make warre vpon the Emperor he might easily draw them to his party; although he did greatly desire to be friends with him, hoping thereby to obteine the Dutchy of Milan for the Duke of Orleans his second sonne, perceiuing very well that he could not get it by force, wherevpon he did willingly harken to all motions of peace that were propounded to him.
Francisco Iustiniano by the Senates command went to him, not in quality of an Ambassador, but only as a Gentleman of Venice, who was honorably entertained and welcomed by the King. The Pope likewise to this end, sent both to theThe Pope sendeth to the Emperor and the French King to make them friends. Emperor and the King, to euery of whom the King answered that he desired nothing so much as peace: and whereas he vnderstood that the Emperor propounded a meeting at Narbona, there to consult thereon, he speedily sent the Cardinal of Lorraine and the great Master of France thither, with ample instructions to conclude a peace. But all these assemblies prouing vaine and to none effect, the Venetians were greatly perplexed. For some, reiecting that which did make them to Sundry opinions of the* Senate. doubt and feare, did promise to themselues that being ioyned with the other Christian Princes, they should be able not only to defend their State from the Turkes, but likewise to daunt and ouerthrow their pride, wherevpon they were of opinion to embrace the league, and to continue the war. Wherevnto they were the more prouoked by an opinion that al Germany was wholy ready to take armes against those Barbarians, being incited therevnto by Ferdinand King of the Romans to reuenge himselfe on Soliman, who had a long time molested him in Hungary. Vpon this hope, time hasted away, they not answering the Bailies letters, for that they could not resolue on the motions of peace made by the Turke, and vpon the Bashas particular discourse to the Baily, the which did greatly displease the other Senators who opposed themselues against all propositions that were made  of sending new commissions to Rome concerning the league, saying that it was not expedient for the Common-wealth to reiect all propositions of peace, and altogether to intend the practizes of the league: that they ought first, wellThe reasons of those who desired peace with Soliman. to examine the conditions and State of the present affaires, and afterwards to see how they could make warre, with what forces and meanes they could continue it: that the publike treasure was so exhausted by the last warres on the firme land, as the Republike had more need of long quiet, then to enter into a new warre, more dangerous then all the former; and for to shew that their hope vpon the aide of other Princes was badly grounded, they were to call to minde, that the Isle of Corfou by Dorias meanes, who derided their deseignes, had beene almost  lost, had not their owne forces and the sytuation of the place defended it: that they ought not stil to contemne the great interests of so many citizens, who were to vndergoe the burthen of so many subsidies, whose meanes were in the Turkes hands and who were in hope by that treaty to recouer them from them.
Diuers other reasons were propounded to direct them from war, which were answered by those of the contrary opinion, how that they did not abhorre peace, but that they did in some sort seeke to prouide for the necessities of the times, if they should happen to maintaine warre, and that which kept them from writingThe resons of those that were desirous to ioyne with the league and to make war vpon the Turkes. to Constantinople, was because they would not giue any cause of iealozie and suspition to the Christian Princes* (...) least they should after-wards grow could in their (...) (...) war^: that to make (...) greate hast to send an answer, was to discouer their weakens to the Turke, and to make him become more insolent in the conditions of (...) (...): (...) they were not to make account of expences, in regard that they were to arme howsoeuer, and being armed to treate of  peace, and not rashly to rely vpon the faith: and discretion of those perfidious enemies.
In this manner did the practize of the league continue, by delaying the affaires of Constantinople. But at the last, by meanes of diuers, who did not cease to solicit them to send an answer, and not wholy to giue ouer that treaty, and to takeVVhat the Senate propounded to write to the Baily. armes, it was propounded in the Senate to write to the Bayly, still to entertaine the Basch^ Aiax, and to tell him how that the common-wealth had great cause to complaine of Soliman, who without being prouoked had broaken the peace, and came like an enemy to enuade the Isle of Corfou, not tarring for Vrsinos returne, who by his expresse command was sent to Venice, with promise to attempt nothing  till his returne, that the Senate had beene euer very carefull to continew the peace and friendship with Soliman, whose enterprizes it had neuer sought to hinder, but had inuiolably kept there promise with him, euer behauing themselues as newters: If the Generall ^esare had met with his forces vpon the coast of Puglia where the Turkish army lay, it was by meere chance, hauing beene driuen thither by force of the windes. Their drift that propounded this was, to haue the Baily by this discourse to vse meanes to discouer the Turkes meaning concerning peace, and if he should see any good likelihood there-vnto, then to beginne to motion it.
This being thus propounded in the Senate, three daies were spent in the resolution  thereof, after-which, the matter hauing beene long debated by the cheefeThe propositio^ taketh none effect. Senators, two voyces wanting for the ending of it, the whole matter remayned vnresolued; the promises of Princes hauing made such an impresion in all men, as they wholy relied thereon.
Don Lopes the Emperors Ambassador hauing notice of this irresolution, hoping that the Common-wealth would make a more strict alliance, with the Emgeror,The Emperors Ambassador vseth meanes to breake the Venetians neutrality. beganne to solicite the Senate (as Doria had already done) to Vnite and ioyne their nauall Armies, and to bee no longer newters, but openly to declare them*selues enemies to the Turkes. But the wisest and best aduised among them, meaning not to bee carried away by words abused by vaine and idle promises, did  continue in their former proposition, not to take armes but vpon constraint against so mighty an enemy, who was able in so many sundry places to enuade the State of the Common-wealth, which was not alone of it selfe suffitient to make defence against him, and ought not to rely ouer-much on an others helpe. Therefore they determined to answer the Ambassadors offers in generall termes, and by the same meanes to thanke the Emperor as author thereof, assuring himThe S^ts answer to the Emperor. that for diuers respects they could not passe on any father, and namely because that the French and the Turkes seeking their friendshippe, they had answered them, that they would not therein giue them satisfaction, by reason that the Senats meaning was by shewing them-selues newters, to keepe their promise with  all men, intending neuer-the-lesse to remaine armed what-so-euer should befall, setting alwaies before their eyes, with their owne proper interest, the commodity of all Christendome.
At this answer the Ambassador held his peace, not making any farther reply:

but within a while after comming into the Senate, he made another request vnto them, which was, that for feare least the French should come downe into the State of Milan, they would raise the six thousand foote-men to defend it, which they were bound to furnish by their last accord, for which the Duke of Vrbin hauing taken speedy order, who was their Captaine Generall, they replied, that there was no need to cause those troupes to march any farther, which were appointed onely for the defense of the State of Milan; seeing that the French were still making warre in Piedmont, and that so soone as they should passe the riuer Sefia, it would be the^ time to vrge their promise, which they would in no sort breake.
The end of the first Booke of the sixth Decade.




The Contents of the second Booke of the  sixth Decade.
THE Venetians doe hasten the fortification of the Islands and Sea townes of their iurisdiction. Andre Doria is chosen Generall of the Army of the league. Solimans great preparations against the Venetians. The Venetian Senate resolue to make warre vpon Soliman. The league concluded andresolued on betwixt the Pope, the Emperor and the Venetians against Soliman. The French King refuseth to enter into the league. The treaty of peace betwixt the Emperor and the French King, is broken. The Pope commeth to Nice to attone them, where truce was onely graunted. Barbarossa wasteth the Islands of the Archipelago; Hee commeth into Candy, with his retreate thence. The Senate sendeth supplies into Candy. The Sangiach of Morea summoneth the cities of Naples and Maluesia in Morea to yeeld. The Turkes, wast and Spoyle Dalmatia, whither the Senate sendeth supplies. The Turkes take certaine Castles in Dalmatia. A motion made in the Senate for the recouery of  that which they had taken there. The Turkes returne doth breake that motion. The Emperor after that the Venetians had renued the league sendeth his Nauall Army to Corfou.
The Army of the league resolueth to goe and assalt the Castle of Preueze. Doria fauoreth the Army of Barbarossa Doria is vnwilling to giue Barbarossa battaill. The Generall Capel complaineth for that they did not fight. And lastly, Dorias retreat to Corfou, to the great greefe and discontent of the whole Army.




The Second Booke of the sixth Decade of the  Historie of Uenice.The Venetians dilligence to fortifie the Ilands against the Turkes.
THE Treaty of peace being wholy broken, and no hope remaining but in armes, dilligent and carefull prouision was made in Venice of all things necessary for the warre, great numbers of vessells, and soldiors, munitions and victualls to furnish the Islands, and other townes on the Sea coast. Those of Naples and Maluesia made sute to haue their Garrisons augmented, and especially to furnish them sufficiently with victualls and munition, for want of which  Naples had like to haue fallen into the enemies hands, promising that if they might be thus releeued, to sustaine all the perills and dangers of warre, to keepe those Citties vnder the Venetians obedience.
The Isle of Candy made the like request, where certaine troubles being raisedThe Isle of Candi^s offers to the (...). and sundry scandalous speeches giuen forth that they would yeeld to the enemy, if hee should come thither, for feare of sacke and spoyle, as it had happened in the Islands of thy Archipelago, the cheefe townes of the Island sent Ambassadors to Venice to cleere them*selues o^ that imputation, and to let them know that the error of some of base condition had occasioned those reports, rather by cowardize and indiscretion, then for any euell will: and therefore they did offer to spend  both their meanes and liues for the seruice of the Common-wealth, promising to giue sufficient and ample testimony of their loyalty, earnestly and humbly entreating them, not to forsake them, seeing that they were ready, and determined to make defense.
The Senate did willingly giue eare vnto them, and with faire speeches, and great promises, they were sent backe againe; where-vpon, the Generall was commanded to send fiue and twenty Gallies to the Isle of Candy, vnder the conduct of the Prouidator Pascalie, who had like-wise commission to carry soldiers and victualls to Naples, and to leaue foure Gallies there for the guard of the city. They did in like manner furnish the Castle, and Isle of Corfou, with all things necessary. As for Dalmatia, sundry companies of light horse drawne from GreeceThe Venetians are vncertaine what way the Turkes would take. and Croatia, were sent thither to gard the country against the enemies incursions. But that which did trouble them, was the vncertenty which way they would take, there being sundry speeches thereof: whereby they were at one time to prouide

for all the places which they held vppon the sea, and likewise to assure Patria in Frioul, because the report was, that Soliman in person would be in his land army which made them feare that he might come thither.
In the meane time the last conclusion of the league, was most ernestly sollicited, whose forces were supposed would be very great, which was the cause that noAndrew Doria chos^ General of the Army^ (...) the League. more mention was made of the treaty of peace, the which for a time lay dead. The Venetians, to please the Emperor, had chosen Andrew Doria Generall of the whole army, and the Pope, in fauour to the Common-wealth, had appointed Marco Grimani Patriarke of Aquileia to command his Gallies, a Venetian by nation, and of a noble and rich family. But there rested to conclude the portion of  their expence which each of the Confederates were to beare in that common enterprise, knowing very wel that the third part was to great for the Sea Apostolick, the Venetians being contented somwhat to ease it, and that the Emperor should beare the rest: but his Agents, notwithstanding they said that it was reason to ease the Pope, would neuerthelesse not giue their consent to haue him charged more then the Venetians.
The Emperour at the last fearing least that the delay of the conclusion ofThe Expence d^uided betwixt those of the League. the league, might breed some coldnesse in those who were most foreward to warre, and might in the end cause the Senate to giue eare to the propositions of peace, and that thereby he might be enforced alone to sustaine all the Turkes attempts, did encrease the authority of his Agents at Rome, promising to be pleased with whatsoeuer they should agree to, and cheefely concerning the difficultie about the expence, suffering the Pope to beare but the sixth part, and of the residew, the three partes should bee for him*selfe, and the two for the Venetians.
Whilest these treaties were made in the Court of Roome, Genesino who atThe Venetians acquainted with Solimans preparations for warre are exhorted to peace. Constantinople serued as Dragoman for the Common-welth, arriued at Venice, bringing letters from the Bayley, and was enjoyned by the Visier Bascha, and the admirall, to aduise, councell, and exhort the Venetians to harken vnto peace, he did afterward acquaint them particularly with the great warlicke preparations which were made in sundry places of Solimans Empire: he told them besides, from  Aiax the Visier Bascha, that he did greatly maruaile why they had not answered his former letters; that he did neuerthelesse beare the selfe same good will and affection to the Republike; that a way lay open vnto them for peace, if they would send their Ambassador to the Port of the great Lord, to iustifie their actions past, and by the satisfaction for losses to vse meanes to appease Soliman, who otherwise was ready to make inuasion vpon them.
The arriuall of this Dragoman and his new offers, did cause sundry effects in the Senate, for it did more animate those that craued warre, and strengthened the other in their opinion which required peace. Therefore the Senate being therevppon  assembled to answere the Baily, the businesse being brauely disputed on in the assembly, cheefely by Marc Antonio Cornare, who had at other times maintained in that place, That it behooued them to ioyne with the League, and toThe Senate determines warre against Soliman. make warre: and by Marco Foscare who was one of the Councell, and by his skill and long experience in the managing of publicke affaires, had purchased great authority, it was determined by the plurality of voices, according to the former resolution, not to write vnto Constantinople at all, but onely for to make warre.
Therevppon, within a while after, they sent ample commissions to their Ambassadors at Rome, for the conclusion of the league, and for the signing to the  articles thereof, on which, after a long contestation, they had agreed, and which were read and approoued in the Senate, beeing these: That there was a league and confederacy made betwixt Pope Paul the third, the Emperor Charles the fift, and the Republick and Senate of Venice, as well offensiue as defensiue, against

Soliman King of Turkes: whereby the Confederats did promise, to make warre vpon the Turkes with two hundred Gallies, a hundred armed ships, and fifty thousand Italian footemen, tenne thousand Spaniards, and twenty thousand Almans, with foure thousand fiue hundred horse, armed after the Bourgonian manner, to which forces were added a sufficient quantity, of artilery, munition and other necessaries, which should yearely be ready about the midest of March.
Of these Gallies, the Pope armed thirty sixe, the Emperor foure score and two, and the Signory of Venice as many, vnder the command of Vincenzo Capello their Generall, the Emperor was bound to furnish all the shippes of warre, and the Venetians to lend the Pope Gallies ready furnished with all necessaries. Concerning  the expence, it was diuided as aboue is said. Ferdinand King of the Romans, was vnder-stood to be comprehended in that Confederacy, whome the Emperor did promise should wholy ratisie it, and would cause him to leuy an army a part to assaille the Turkes in Hungary. The most Christian king was therin likewise comprehended, so soone as he should declare that he would accept of the cheefe and most honorable place, which they had reserued for him: wherein the Pope was to appoint with what forces he should be present there. That the Pope should likwise vse meanes to draw the King of Poland, and the other Christian Princes to this Vnion: and if that any contention should arise among the Confederate PrincesAndre Doria, Generall by sea and the Duke of Vrbin by land. concerning the League, the Pope was to decide it, and to make them friends. Andre Doria was (as hath beene said) Generall by Sea, and the Duke of Vrbin for the enterprizes of the firme land.
As for the conquests which should bee made by the common armes, it was mentioned in a scedule apart, that euery of the confedrates should enter vpon the same state, which had belonged vnto him: so as if they should conquer the Empire of Constantinople, it should belong to the Emperor, without preiudice to the claimes of the Republike, and so in like manner of the rest, but for the Apostolike sea was reserued the preeminecne of some State worthy the merit therof, and according to the quallity of the conquest that shold be made. Concerning other things where-vnto no man laid any claime, that euery of the Confederats might  haue a share therein according to the expences which he contributed towards the warres: and if they should chance to recouer the Isle of Rhodes, it should returneThe Venetians seeke^ to draw the King of England to the league. vnder the Dominion of the Knights of Saint Iohn of Ierusalem.
In this treaty there was no mention made of the King of England: The Venetians neuer-the-lesse supposing that they might draw greate aide from that King, who was a Prince of exceeding great wealth and authority, and had in time before shewed great affection to their Common-wealth, went about by meanes of Ieronimo Zuccate their Secretary, resident in his Court, to dispose him to fauour the league. But the King, disdayning the matter for that he had not beene particularlyThe French K^ng (...) to enter (...) the League. inuited to the treaty thereof, would by no meanes endure to heare of it, but  did greatly complaine: for that neither him-seife nor his Realme, had beene mentioned in the number of the Confederates. As for the French King, they did dayly pereeaue that he had no great desire to enter into it, because that they treated therein of encreasing the Emperors forces, and reputation, his coriuall, and perpetuall enemy.
The Venetians then, the league being concluded and established (as hath bin said) commanded the Generall Capello, that if the Turkish fleete did come into the Gulphe hee should keepe aloofe towards the Leuant, that hee might with more ease passe into Sicily, where he was to ioyne with the Confederates fleetes, as well to assure those quarters, as to hurt the enemies, if occasion were offered. And because they would not weaken their garrisons, they did on a sodaine leuy two thousand foote-men, whome they sent to the Army. Some were of opinion to referre to the Generalls discretion, in all causes, to doe that which he should iudge to be most proffitable and conuenient for the Common-wealth, according

to the occurrences of the affaires, and not to limit him what hee had to doe, which might peraduenture bee cleane contrary to reason, seeing that warre is managed by the sight of the eye: alledging for example that which happened the yeare before, by limiting the Generall Pesare what he should doe, which hath occasioned sundry disorders, and at last the warre against the Turkes: yet neuerthelesse, the other opinion was followed, because they would not hinder nor delay the vnion of their Army with the Confederates.
Now the Senates greatest care, was to find ready money for the great expencesThe Senate vseth meanes to get money to d^fray the expences of the w^res. they were speedily to be at. By means wherof it was decreed, that all those who  would put in any money into the publicke Treasury, should haue an annuall rent for it of foureteene in the hundred: and they did afterwards proceed sharpely against the debtors to the Common-wealth, as well by the imprisonment of their bodies as sale of their goods.
They did moreouer create three Pocurators of Saint Marke, Ieronimo Marcello, Bernardo Moro, and Iulio Contaren, in regard of some loane of money. As for the goods of the Clergie, they could neuer make any vse of them* for although the Pope had permitted the Senate to alienate of Church goods by reason of tenne in the hundred, to the worth of a million of gold, and afterwards calling back that fauour had giuen them leaue to raise the said somme vppon the reuenue of the  Clergy for the terme of fiue yeares, yet neuerthelesse, they could neuer draw a breefe from him either for the one or other, his Holynesse still finding new shifts and excuses.
In this great want of money the Senate went very slowly foreward in the propositions that were made vnto them of raising the said somme, peraduenture for feare of displeasing many people, and cheefely those of the Champaine countrey of the firme land: wherupon it reiected a proposition which was made (although it would haue amounted to a great somme) to sell the medows of the communalties, of which there are store ouer the whole state, in a manner, of the Republicke on the firme land.
The Senate neuerthelesse in this great necessity did spare nothing that was necessaryA treaty of peace betwixt the Emperor and the French King is broken off. for the warres. Peace at the same time was treated of betwixt the Emperor and the French King, which each of them made shew greatly to desire, and they concluded to send their Agents for that purpose to Canus which lieth betwixt Perpign an and Narbona: but hauing spent all the time there in contestations, the assembly brake vp without any resolution, by reason of the distrust that the one had of the other, which did greatly greeue the Venetians, because that by those Princes discord, the warre against the Turkes would prooue more difficult, the likelihoods thereof being already discerned. For the Marquis of Guasto,The Emperor declareth that he could not take armes for the (...). whom the Emperor had in the beginning appointed to serue in the enterprize of  the Leuant, was countermanded not to stirre forth of Italy, and speedily to augment the Garrisons in the State of Milan, so as all hope of agreement being taken away, the Emperor being constrained to diuert his forces elswhere, for feare of the French King, he did boldly affirme, that hee could at that time doe no other seruice to Christendome, then to stand vpon his owne defence against theThe Pope resol ^th to goe to Nice to ato^ the Emperor and the French King. Turkes and for to assure his owne States from receiuing any hurt from their Army. The Pope beeing infinitely sorry that the enterprizes against the Turkes were not foreward, and it concerning him, as the head of Christendome to procure peace and vnion among Christian Princes, resolued, seeing that his letters and Ambassades had beene to no purpose, to attempt to preuaile by his presence, supposing that his authority and entreaties ioyned with reason, might cause them to  condiscend to some honorable agreement: whereupon hauing exhorted and inuited the Emperor and the French King thervnto, he requested them that they would meet at Nice, whither he likewise offered speedily to come, as to a place fitt for that purpose*

The Venetians were very glad of this proposition, because that the desired effect of peace falling out successfully it would much augment the forces and hope of the League, the which with out that helpe would be very poore and weake: but on the other side they were very sorry for the losse of so much time, which was to be spent in the prouisions for warre, and in the vnion of the Armies: because they well perceiued that the Emperor comming from Barcelona by sea to Nice, Doria must needes bee imployed in that iourney, at such time as he should be busied in ordering the fleet, and sailing against the enemies, who were already with great forces vpon the Seas: on the other side they feared, that the same meeting  would bee to no purpose by reason of the great difficulties to establish a perfect peace betwixt these two Princes, in regard of what had happened on either side: and that the cause which had mooued both of them to grant the pope this enterview, was but for to iustifie themselues, and to make a shew to all men, that they were desirous of peace, but that the meanes to obtaine it were hard: bothVVhat mo^ued these Princes to grant the enteruiew at Nice, their iealozies beeing equally alike to purchase the Popes fauour, by allowing all his Councells and deseignes: for his Holinesse euer fearing to aduance the one of them more then the other, would not suffer any of them to grow more mighty by the forces and authorityes of the Sea Apostolicke, and especially in Italy.
Some likewise did thinke, that the Pope was not mooued to procure this enteruiew  only for the publick and vniuersall good, but for some particular profit of his owne, hoping by the meanes of his presence, and the meeting of these two Princes to insinuate himselfe into their fauor and to obtaine some matter of importance for the establishment of the greatnesse of his owne house, as the effectOctauio Farneze marrieth the Emperors bastard daughter. did afterwards manifest, hauing at that assembly concluded the marriage of the Lady Marguerite the Emperors naturall daughter, and widdow to Duke Alexander of Medicis, with Octauio Farnes^ the Popes Nephew, whom the Emperor inuested with the State of Nauarre.
Notwithstanding that the Venetians were possessed with these doubts and suspitions, the Senate neuerthelesse did not cease to doe the duty which the time re  quired, to testifie the honor and respect it did beare to those great Princes, and cheefely to the Pope, and to this end, to manifest how much it desired, according to their antient custome to ayde and fauour that accord, they chose two Ambassadors,Ambassadors chosen at Venice to be present at the Assembly of Nice Nicholao Tepulo and Marc Antonio Cornare, to be present at that assembly to make knowne the Senates good will, and withall, how greatly it desired peace betwixt Christian Princes, and also for to make warre vpon the Turkes.
Now the Pope departing from Rome in the moneth of Aprill according as it had beene determined, came to Parma, where he celebrated Palme-Sonday in the Cathedrall Church, staying in that Citty and at Placentia certaine dayes, expecting the Duke of Sauoyes resolution concerning the Citty of Nice where the  assembly was to be made, because some difficulties were made thereuppon, not without suspition that it came from the Emperor, who was desirous before his comming to the assembly to see what the Turkes progression would be. But the Pope at last resoluing not to make so long stay in his iourney, did set forewardsThe Pope denied entrance int^ Nice. directly towards Nice, where at his arriuall, the entry into the Citty was denied him, the Gouernour thereof saying, that he held that place for the Prince, and that the Duke his father was not to dispose thereof, where vppon the Pope was enforced to retire him-selfe into a Monastery of Moncks beeing not farre from thence, whither within a while after the Citties keyes were brought vnto  him.These two Princes refuse to set one another at Nice in t^e Popes presence.
The Emperor and the French King came sodainly into those quarters, the one being lodged at Villafranca and the other at Villanoua beyond the Riuer Var. Yet the Pope could neuer procure them to meet in his presence, because they both

determined not to grant the Popes desire in that meeting, which was to make them good friends and to establish a firme peace betwixt them, yet neuer-thelesse he procured the prolongation of the truce, which was already confirmed, for the space of tenne yeares, hoping that in the meane space, the hatred, which was so deepely rooted in their hearts, might bee worne out; that beeing done, euery one went his owne way, the Pope towards Rome, the Emperor towards Barcelona, and the King iournied to Auignion, from thence to returne into France.
But the King being come to Auignion, was adnertized that the Emperor was desirous to confetre with him; and that for the same purpose hee entreated him Enterview of Emperor and king at Aigues* Mortes. to come to Aigues-mortes where he would land; which the King willingly graunting, went thither, where both their maiesties did carsse each other, and the Emperor went and dined with the King in the towne, with great demonstration of brotherly friendship: Then the king wentinto the Emperors Gallie, where they had long conference to gether, where-vpon all men hoped shortly to see a firme peace established betwixt them, but no effectas thereof could euer since bee discerned: but on the contrary the Emperor perceiuing him-selfe to be assured, by the confirmation of the league with the Venetians against the Turkes, not alone to sustaine their attempts, beganne to make greater demands to the King, accorpingVVar renewed betwixt the Emperor and the King. to the treaty of Madrill, the King on the other side promising to him-selfe, to recouer the States which hee detained from him, made great warlike preparations to assaile him in sundry places, not tarrying for the expiration of the truce.
Now whilest Christian Princes stood vpon termes of making warre one vpon another, the Turke had in the winter time prepared all that which was necessary for his comming forth into the field, who like-wise remembring that which did belong to his owne religion (for those Barbarous people haue some impression of diuinity in their harts,) did before his departure celebrate with great solemnity,The Turkish feasts of Baieran. the feasts of Baieran, (those daies are celebrated and reuerenced by that nation euen as Easter is by the Christians) hee caused prayers to bee made in all his  Mesquites for the happy successe of him-selfe and his army. Then in the moneth of March, his armies by sea and land departed from Constantinople, where Soliman was in person, and Barbarossa neere to him, who held the rancke and grade which Lufti had done not long before, who was depriued of his place of Bascha, and confined into Macedon: But the whole army being not yet well accommodated, Barbarossa in the meane time, with sixe score sayle, went to wards the Archipelago,Barbarossa spoiled the Islands of the Archipelago. as to an assured booty to assaile the Islands, the which beeing defended the yeare before, had as then no Garrisons that were suffitient to make defence, whereby it came to passe that Schiros, Schiaroc, Schiati, with certaine others of lesse fame being first sackt and spoyled fell into the power of the  Turkes.
There happened a memorable accident at the Taking of Schiati; for the Islanders and those few soldiers that were within it, hauing constantly sustained the first assaults of the Turkes building vpon the assurance of the situation of the Castle, seated vpon an high place; some of the cheefe amongest them were desirous, either thorow feare or a premeditated malice, to yeeld them-selues vnto the Turkes, but fearing peraduenture to be punished for their basenesse and treachery, if the matter should not fall out according to their desire, did runne to the Pallace where Ieronimo Memio gouernor of the place lay hurt in his bed, who by his valor giuing example to his soldiers, had beaten the enemies from the wals, whome they slew, by whose death all matters remayning in confusion among them they did by ropes draw the Turkes vp into the Castle. This cruell and Barbarous act did so highly displease Barbarossa, as insted of recompencing those villains,

he did by death chastice their infamous wickednesse. Then hauing encreasedA worthy recompence. his forces, hee sailed into Candy to get more booty there, or else to view the strong places of the Island.
The Senate vpon the report which was currant at Constantinople, how that the army should saile into Candy, had carefully prouided what-so-euer was necessary for the gard of the Island, against so mighty an enemy, by sending thither, mony, soldiers, munition and victuals, and Giouani Moro to command there, during the warre in quallity of Prouidator Generall, a man very well experienced and of great valour and discretion. The conseruation of that Island was thought to be of very great importance, as well for the Nobillity thereof, being descended  from a Venetian Colony, as for her richesse, as an ancient seate of Kings, as also for the frutfulnesse thereof, and other great commodities which those receiued from it that traded into the Leuant. This Prouidator was cheefely enioyned to exhort the Gentlemen and Knights, (for so are the feudataries of the Republicke termed who enioy the benefits thereof) to the defence of the Island, and to assure them that the Senate would neuer forsake them.
Now Moro being come into Candy, did assembly the Generall councell of all the Nobility of the Collony in the Citty of Candace, to dispose them by some honest exhortation constantly to attend the enemies comming.

If yee consider (said he) the quiet of your state, where at this present, yee doe  peaceably enioy so many goodly inheritances, so sweet an aire, such aboundanceMoro his oration to the gentlemen of Candy. and commodity of all things as grow here, or else are brought hither from the countries neere adioyning, I doe assure my selfe that this remembrance will be of greater force with you, then the efficacy of all my words can bee able to perswade you to doe all you can, and to be sparing neither in expences, trauaill, nor life itselfe, to keepe either your selues, or children, from changing your present condition, and to fall from the toppe of so great happinesse, into a Gulphe of misery and calamities, as it is like to happen, if this Island falling into the Turkes power (I tremble with feare onely to thinke thereof, and to tell you of it) yee should be enforced to goe and dwell else-where, to forsake your country, so great  wealth, and so many commodities as yee here possesse; or else tarrying here still, be subiect to the Tyranny of a faithlesse and Barbarous nation. An other thing besides your wealth doth oblige yee to defend this Island, one of the cheefe and most important members of our Common-wealth, which is, the loue and duty which you owe to our common country, from which I hope, the distance of place is not able to diuide you, beeing true members thereof, and not cut off from it, hauing a share in the honours, fauours, and in all other her fortunes. Now your particular interest being, for these respects, inseparably conioyned to ours, it behoueth mee to labour to let you see, the importance of the businesse in question, and to stirre yee vp to prouide those remedies which  may defend yee from such a danger. I will then onely entreate you, not for any feare what so-euer, to lose that courrage, and good resolution which I discerne in you all, least being disfurnished of valour, and strength, yee happen to vndoe your selues. I will not deny but that the enemies power is very great, and that wee ought not to contemne it; but I dare well assure you that it is not such as may cause yee to despaire of beeing able to resist it; but on the contrary wee are to hope, that their comming will purchace vs honor and reputation, by valliantrepulsing them from the whole Island. We are certainly to beleeue, that although there bee great numbers of soldiers in the enemies Army; yet neuer-the-lesse  they haue no store of ordnance, or other necessary matters sufficient to batter and force townes, whereby wee are assuredly to thinke, that if they doe come to this Island, their intention is rather to spoile and get booties, if by our negligence wee will suffer them so to doe, then to tarry here and make warre. And though

they should come hither to that end, what-like-lihood is there that they will busie them-selues in a long and difficult enterprize, perceiuing so many mighty fleetes of the Christian Confederat Princes at sea, which may on a sudaine assaile and fight with, either their fleete, or some of their townes: for they are no lesse carefull for the preseruation of their owne, then they are to offend and conquer other mens. I know, and am expressely commanded from the Senate to acquaint you with it, how highly aboue all other things it esteemeth the preseruation of this State, and your safety, for which, they are ready to expose all their forces, witnes the prouisions which of it owne proper motion, it hath speedily sent vnto you. You then, whome these dangers doe more neerely concerne, and for whom wee  are here assembled, are so much the more obliged not to omit any thing wherein you may manifest your loyalty, dilligence, and loue, towards both the one and other country: Let euery man then dispose him selfe to succour the common cause with his wealth, authority, and person; I doe assure my selfe that in so doing, we shall not onely auoyde the greatest danger, but shall free the whole country, to your great glory and praise from the enemies spoiles and incursions.

The Prouidator had skarce made an end of his exhortation, when all of themThe Prouid ators speech is applanded by all men. arose, applauding his speech, and promising with great offers, to employ all their power, care and dilligence in the defence of the Island: Hee did afterwards make the same remonstrance to the people of Candy, exhorting them to their owne  defence: wherevpon all of them beganne with great speed to prouide things necessary, to arme certaine Gallies, and to assemble the country people, vnto whom hauing giuen Armes, they placed part of them in Candall, to encrease the garrisonThe Candio (...) preparations for their defenc^. of Italian foote men, and the rest were sent to the gard of sundry passages and places of importance to stoppe the enemies progression. The Gentlemen of the Island and the feudataries of the Common-wealth, did proceed therein with such earnestnesse and courrage, as the family alone of Calergians, which is one of the cheefe and ritchest of the country, did raise more then fiue and twenty thousand armed men.
Barbarossa pursuing his iourny came neere to the Island on the North side, betwixt Standia and the Citty of Candace, and without casting ankor ranne along the Island as farre as Rettima, where making but a short stay, because that theBarbrrossa commeth into Candy. Citties ordnance did greatly hurt him, he sailed to La Suda, hauing there found better abiding then in any other place, by reason of the Hauen which is great and safe, whose entrance was then open to him, it being not fortified as it is now at this day, hee landed great numbers of his people to scoure and spoyle the Country.
This Citty was in old time called Cidonia, and reckoned among the cheefe of the Island. Andre Gritti was Gouernor thereof, hauing with him about a thousand  Italian foote-men, and diuers Greekes of the citty and places neere adioyning. These men perceiuing the Turkes to approch in disorder, who had not intrenched them-selues, did boldly sally forth of the Citty and assailled them, who being first beaten with the Citties ordnance, whereof it was well prouided, and being found in disorder, they chaced, and slew a great number of them: Those which scoured the country had no better fortune, by reason that great multituds of the Islanders arising who were diuesly armed by their Lords commandement, went and incountered the Turkes which were loden with spoile, whome they fell vpon and slew many of them; so as they enforced them to giue ouer their enterprize, and to retire with speed to their Gallies.
Barbarossa hoping for better and more fortunate successe in another place, or at least to recompence that losse, leauing behind him neuerthelesse some memoriall of his being there, to the peasants detriment, sent an hundred Gallies to Sithi^.
This place is seated in another corner of the Iland on the west side, beeing weake and ill prouided of defense notwithstanding that a particular magistrate sent from Venice doth vsually make his abode there. From thence the enemy might easily passe into the Ile of Scarpenta, possessed at that time by the Turkes and distant from thence some forty miles.
The enemy finding that place to bee abandoned, tooke away certaine peecesBarbarossa bi^ etrc^t from Candy. of ordinance and other munitions, spoiling all the Champaigne neere adioyning. But fearing least the Venetian Fleet comming to the ayde of Candy would enforce them to come to strokes, the Soldiers being speedily imbarked and all the Gallies beeing vnited togeather, they sailed towardes  Negrepont,
The Sangiach of Morea did at the same time by Solimans command beseegeThe Sangiach of Morea sum moneth Naples and Maluesia to yeeld. Naples and Maluesia. He hauing encamped before those two townes, wrote to the Gouernors and people thereof that they should speedily yeeld, promising to them great rewards in so doing, and on the contrary, seuere punishment, if they should continew to make resistance: that Soliman had sent him thither commanding him by no meanes to stirre from thence vntill he had reduced both of them vnder his obedience: that their succors were sarre off, and their hope vaine, long to hold out, and therefore that it was best for them to fitte themselues to the time and to the fortune of the van quisher.
The Gouernours and all the people, resoluing brauely to defend them-selues, asResolution of those Inhabitancs. well by reason of the situation of the place as for their hope that the Venetian Army would shortly releeue them with victualls and necessary munitions; made none answer to his letter, but betooke themselues more carefully to the Guard of their townes.
And because they in Naples wanted water, the horssemen that were Stadiots a hardy and warlike nation, making diuers sallies, beeing followed by the Italian Harquebuziers did prouide for that want. The Generall Capello hauing intelligence of this sieege, and beeing very desirous to releeue those valliant and  trusty defendants, did opportunely with six Gallies send them supplies of whatsoeuer they needed.
But during these exploits those of Dalmatia were in like manner greatly aflictedThe Turkes wast Dalmat^ by the Turkish Army, who entring into the Countrey made an horrible spoile there, carrying away, men, woemen, little children, and all sortes of cattell, burning the houses, and putting the whole Contrey in feare and confusion: so as Camillo Vrsino, Gouernour of the Prouince, had thought to haue abandoned all the other Citties, and that the Soldiers should retire to Zara to assure it, as the chiefest and easiest to guard, fearing that to attempt to preserue al of them against such great nombers of enemies, would bee a cause to expose them all to great dangers.
The Senate did not allow of this opinion, esteeming much more, besides the losse of so many Citties, this note of infamy, to haue at once without any fight giuen place vnto the enemies insolency, and abandoned so goodly a Countrey: wherefore, vsing all meanes to preserue and defend it, it determined to make a new leuy of horse and foote, to weet, twelue thousand footmen and fifteene hundred horse, hoping with these forces to bee able sufficiently to assure the Prouince: and also to encrease the Peoples affection towardsThe Venetian^ aid sent into Dalmatia. the Common-wealth, and to encourage them brauely to defend themselues, they appoynted fifteene Gentlemen who should speedily be transported thither for the guard of Zara, S^enic and Catarra, with thirty men a peece*  moreouer Lodouico Badoario was sent vnto Zara, in quality of Prouidator General of Dalmatia, with commandement neuerthelesse, not to goe forth of that Citty without the Senates permission aud leaue: the Inhabitants like-wise of

Dalmatia were permitted to send their wiues and children to Venice for feare of the enemies.
In these occurrences, the Prince shewed the Senate, how that euery man was to helpe his country in a time so miserable, and alledged vnto them for example that which had beene performed and done in the last warres of the firme land, in which (said he) the Cittizens loue towards their country, the vnion and readinesse of their helpe, had beene of so great force, as in dispight of bad fortune, they had drawne the Republike forth of so many calamities, and had restored it to her fauour, splendor and dignity, wherein, (God be thanked) it now continued. That the dangers present, were no lesse then those that were past, hauing to doe  with an enemy, who though hee be alone and of him-selfe, is neuer-the-lesse very mighty, and to be feared, whome if they did not speedily resist, but suffer all things to fall out according to his desire, his ouerweening would in such sort encrease, as they were neuer to looke for any safety from him: that their hope of forraine aide, did dayly more and more vanish, the Confederates, proceeding with such vncertenty, and slownesse, as they were to expect nothing from them: That their true, safest and onely defence, depended vpon them-selues. It did then behooue euery man to finde meanes to surmount his forces, and speedily to releeue the Common-wealth with councell, meanes, yea and with his owne life: That the publike Treasury would shrinke vnder an insupportable burthen, vnlesse it were  speedily releeued by the Cittizens; in regard that the expence alone of Dalmatia with the new prouisions thereof, did monethly mount to more then fiue and twenty thousand crownes: that it behooued them to glad the people who were ouer pressed with sorrow, and amazed, and to comfort them by the presence of those, vnto whome the conseruation of the state did belong, to shew that they were desirous to be sharers in the dangers, and troubles, which should be offered. Let those then (quoth hee) who were appointed depart with speed, and goe to execute that which is commanded them, and let others, vnto whome some publike charge shallbe commited, freely accept thereof: He that is moued therevnto by his duty, encreaseth his owne glory, and he that maketh none account thereof, let obedience moue him; if nothing else can prouoke you, yet at least wise let necessity and the present dangers, make yee difcreet, dilligent and ready in all things. The Princes authority, and the force of his reasons, did confirme diuers, who would haue freed them-selues from taking any publicke charge vpon them.
The Turkes in the meane time, the more that they vnder-stood the great preparations which were made to preuent them in Dalmatia, the more they madeThe resolution of the Turkes in Dalmatia. hast to come and assaile it: And for their better weakening of the Venetians defences, they resolued at one time to assaile all the Principall townes, to the end that the one might not helpe the other: And hauing assembled great forces at Cluin, a towne vnder their obedience, they entred with foure thousand horse  and as many foote, vpon the Territory of Zara, and beseeged Nadin the VenetiansNadin yeeldeth to the Turkes. cheefe Castle, seated vpon those confines, Sebastiano Sagreda being Gouernor thereof, who had an hundred and fifty Italian foote-men with him, vnto whome the onely sight of the enemies gaue such feare and terror, as they basely yeelded on condition to haue their liues saued, without making any proofe of their valour, or vse of the places situation, and retired to Zara, whether they brought more feare then comfort, by exalting the enemies forces to couer their owne shame.
The like befell the Castle of Laurana which was commanded by Vittore Sorance with like number of soldiers as in Nadin, who hauing for one whole day sustayned The Turkes take the castle of Laurana. the battery, fled away and was taken by the enemies: but Zemo^ being abandoned by the I^alian footmen, was garded and defended by certaine Sclauonians, whome some Venetian gentlemen of the family of the Venieri, vnto whom it did belong, had placed there.
The Turkes hauing put Garrisons in Nadin and Laurana, went vp and downe scouring the country euen to the gates of Zara, so as none durst come abroad although the enemies campe lay farre off. The Cities of Antiuare, Dulcina, and Sebenic, were in the same trouble. The Sangiach of Scutari went with great forces of foot and horse to Antiuare, and did encampe betwixt the sea shore and the walles, and had sent part of his forces to beseege Dulcina.Succors sent to Antiuare.
But Bondulmiero, captaine of the Gulphe, hauing notice thereof did speedily releeue the Antiuarians, the like did the Generall Capello within a while after, by sending them souldiers and munition, so as the Basha despayring of any speedy or happy successe in his enterprize, determined to raise his seege from before Antiuare, causing those who at the same time lay before Dulcina to doe the like.
As for Sebenic, part of the forces that were assembled at Cluin, went thither at the first, and after the taking of Nadin and Laurana, many soldiers did goe thither, who neuer came neere the city, because their number was not comparable to aThe Sibenssans braue resolution. true army, but went scattering vp and downe, and spoiled the country. The Sibenssans hauing intelligence of the enemies comming, resoluing brauely to defend and keepe the towne for the Venetians, did assemble themselues together in the market-place, where they all swore a sollemne oth that they would not yeeld to the enemy, but endure all extremity rather then falsifie their faith. But the Turkes being not able to execute their deseignes vpon the other townes so easily as they  supposed, would not likewise medle with this, hauing before bent their thoughtsThe Turkes leaue Dalmatia, and goe into Hungary. vpon Hungary: wherevpon so soone as they had reduced all their forces together, and made vp the body of an army, leauing three thousand men for the gard of the frontiers, they marched towards Bossina, from thence to passe into Hungary. The Turkes departure forth of the confines of Dalmatia did greatly ease the Venetians, and freed that poore people from much calamity. But as the alteration of affaires doe easily alter mens deseignes, the gouernors and captaines of that Prouince, who did badly digest the wrongs which they had susteined by the enemies, and most of all because an infamous imputation was laied vpon them for the losse of certaine townes, and for suffering them without resistance to scoure and  spoile the country, made a proposition (being desirous to make vse of the occasionThe Proposition of the captains in Dalmatia. which did offer it selfe by reason that the enemies campe was farre off) to attempt the recouery of those townes which the Turkes did possesse; wherewith acquainting the Councell of Tenne, they did affirme that the forces which were in Dalmatia, were sufficient for the execution of that enterprize: As also, because that if the castles nere to Zara were not recouered, the city would be still in feare, hauing such mighty enemies to their neere neighbours who not stirring forth of their Garrisons, did hold it in a manner beseeged.
These propositions were enterteined in the Senate with great attention, where the desire to be reuenged on the enemies caused the more credit to be giuen vnto  them: next, the Duke of Vrbins perswations, vnto whom the whole matter was imparted, did augment their hope, who did not only commend that proposition, as a matter of great importance, but affirmed, that by adding fiue thousand LansquenetsThe Senate and the Duke of Vrbin, allow this proposition. to those Italians that were in Dalmatia, and certaine numbers of Italian horse to the Greekes and Stradiots, it would be an easie matter with those forces to enter into Bossina, and seize vpon some good towne, which might open them away to greater conquests. That it was better and more profitable to make war in their enemies country then in their owne, and that there were but three thousand horse in garrison at Bossina.
This aduise carried with it a goodly shew, and a certaine valour attended by  profit: wherevpon they concluded speedily to raise the Lansequenets, and to this end Constantino Ca^zza, Secretary to the Councell of the Preguais, was sent into Bauaria, who by meanes of Duke Lewis, a great friend to the Common-wealth, did in a short time performe that he was enioyned, so as those souldiers hauing

receiued their first payment, marched forthwith into Friull. Camillo Vrsino hauing in the meane time assembled forth of the garrisons of Dalmatia foure thousand foot and fiue hundred horse, and taken with him some peeces of ordnance, went and beseeged Obrouazza.
The taking of that towne was of importance, it being a place of retreate for the Turkes, where they were wont to assemble themselues to enuade the Venetians confines. The castle was neither strong nor well manned, whereby the enterprize was thought to be as easie as profitable. The castle then, hauingThe Venetians take Obronazza. beene battered two daies one after an other, the third day the souldiers went to the assault, where after some small resistance, they entred by the ruines of  the wall.
Vrsino being Master of the place, perceiuing that he could not fortifie it but with great difficulty, nor afterwards keepe it, but with much trouble, commanded it to be razed downe to the foundations. But the Turkes being aduertized thereof, came backe on a sodaine and found the Venetians ruining off the castle, who being possessed with feare and terror by the Turkes vnlooked for arriuall, did forsake their worke and retired in disorder towards their ships, beingThe Turkes arriued causeth the Uenetians to quit Obrouazz^ and there other enterprizes. followed at the heeles by the Turkes, who in the end would haue broken and defeated them had not captaine Camillo de Monte the Neapolitan with certaine troupes made head against them, whilest the souldiers were imbarked.
As these deseignes had at first encreased mens courages and hopes, euen so, the condition of the affaires altering in a short time, there was no more speech of the other enterprizes of Nadin, Laurana, Clissa, and Ostrouizza, greater difficulties being dayly discouered concerning them, those likewise who had shewed most heate and forwardnesse towards the Turkish enterprizes, beganne by the same accident to grow could, and especially the Duke of Vrbin; who had propounded it, did alleadge diuers impediments, saying that the number of souldiers which he had first craued was not sufficient to enuade those places, andThe difficulties allead^ed by the Duke of Vrbin. withall to keepe the passages against the enemies, and that a great number would need so great a quantity of victuals and other prouisions as it would be an hard  matter to send them thither, by reason that they were to passe thorow the enemies country. In these perplexities of minde what was best to be done, opinions were very different, some supposing that their forces being ready, they were to be imployed for the releefe of the people, who by that meanes might hope for some better fortune, and not to keepe them idle: others on the contrary hauing maturely considered the matter, were of opinion to dismisse the Lansquenets, by giuing halfe-pay to the souldiers, and great gifts to the captaines to keepe them stil their friends when need should be, and not to passe on any farther against the enemies, for feare least by prouoking them, they might draw vpon themselues the whole Turkish forces, to the entire ruine and losse of Dalmatia, seeing it was more The Senate resolueth to send home the L^squenets, to passe on no farther. expedient to quench that fire then to kindle it, in regard that all forraine aide did deceiue them. These reasons were allowed of, and the Lansquenets were sent home into their country.
The Turkes after this exploit returned into Hungary hauing first refreshed their Garrisons, which remayning quiet the country was for a time at rest.
All men were in the meane time very desirous to see what would become of those naual armies: Barbarossa departing from Candy retired towards the confines of Negrepont not attempting any thing, for feare of meeting with the Christian armies. The Generall Capello hauing great number of gallies, one gallion, and diuers ships of war, the Patriarke Grimani being ioyned with him with the Popes The Venetians ^aual army, and that of the Pope, ioyneth ^ogather. gallies, did waite for the Spanish nauall army which was reported euery day to arriue, but none effect thereof was to be seene, consuming to the great griefe of all men the fittest time and season for Marine actions.
The Emperor did promise, speedily to send the 30. Neapolitan gallies which lay

at Messina, to Corfou, and fifteene ships of warre with three thousand Spanish foot-men conducted by Don Ferrant de Gonzaga, Lieutenant for the King in Sicily, who (because the Duke of Vrbin by reason of his indisposition could not come to the army) was to supply his place: he promised moreouer, that so soone as he should come to Barcelona, he would forthwith send away Doria with two and thirty gallies, to saile to Corfou to ioyne with the other army.M^n did doubt the Emperors promis^s.
Diuers things neuerthelesse caused men to doubt that it would not so come to passe: first, because that the Emperor before his going to Nice, had of^en said, that it was impossible for him at one time to assaile the Turkes and the French, and the assembly of Nice being broken off without any effect, by reason of the  French, there was no great hope in his forces. Next, his officers at Naples did not only hinder those captaines whom Camillo Vrsino had sent to leauy souldiers in the Kingdome for the defense of Dalmatia, but vnder seigned excuses refused (contrary to the treaty of the league) the Generall Capello a certaine quantity of corne for the entertainment of the army. Diuers others deeds and words gaue iust occasion of suspition, that the Emperor sought nothing else but to let time ship away vnprofitably, not being willing, or else able, to make warre vpon the Turke as he should, hindring on the other side as much as he could, the VenetiansThe Emperor^ desci^ne. from agreeing with them, for feare least the whole burthen of the war should light alone vpon himselfe.
The Emperor in the end seeking new meanes of assuring himselfe, propounded to the Venetians the renuing of the capitulations of the league, the which although it was a superfluous matter, in regard of the short time since the agreement was made at Rome, they did neuerthelesse satisfie him therein, because they would not omit any thing which might serue for the vnion of the armies to let all men know their great desire to pursue the warre.
The Capitulations being confirmed, the Emperor commanded Gonzaga, who was not yet gon, to saile to Corfou, where he arriued with the Gallies only, hauing left their ships behind to the end (said he) that the residue of the foot forcesDon Ferra^ de Gonzaga commeth (...) (...) which were not yet come thither might haue shipping. But his so much desired  comming, was to no great purpose, because that the Generalls to the Venetians and the Pope, hauing made a motion to goe from thence and to scoure towards the Leuant, he would not consent therevnto, saying, that it was no safe matter for the Confederates, nor very honourable for the Emperour to execute any enterprize with so few forces, wherevpon he was desirous to tarry till the arriuall of the ships, which he knew could not much linger.
The armies remayning in this manner at Corfou, the Patriarke Grimani beingThe Patriarke Grimani his enterprize vpon the castle of Pr^ueze. impatient of so long stay there, without doing any thing, departed thence with sixe and thirty gallies, and sailed toward Saint Nicolao de Ciuita, and hauing intelligence by the way, that the castle of Preuese was not very well garded, he resolued  not to let slip such an occasion, but to assaile it on the sodaine, the place being an assured retreate for the Turkes, when they did meane to enuade Christendome: the Patriarke going on in this resolution to assaile it, hoping to take it by some vnlooked for assault, and being come to the Channel of Preuese, the galley of Paul Iustinian did shew the way to the rest, where all of them being entred, he landed his souldiers and artillery in the plaine field a mile of from the castle, and because the greatest hope of the happy successe consisted in speed and dilligence, without spending time in making trenches and rampiers, he beganne sodainely to batter the castle-walles with the artillery, himselfe being come on shoare to hasten the businesse, and to continue the battery without intermission. But they had scarce begunne the battery when on a sodaine, people from al places round about come running into the field where the Venetians lay, and the number of them hourely increasing, grew so great, as our men being lodged in the same field without trenches or rampiers, were affraide least the enemies cauallery

should come and ouer-run them, wherevpon they resolued on a sodaine to re-embarkeThe Patriarke saileth of his enterprize. the souldiers and the ordnance, and without any farther attempt to returne to Corfou.
Grimani his valor and speed was highly praised by some, and condemned by others, who said, that he should haue vsed more mature deliberation, and not rashly to haue exposed himselfe to so great a danger, his iourney neuerthelesse was to purpose, for the viewing of the sytuation of the place, and for what-soeuer should belong to such an enterprise, and was the cause that within a while after, an occasion of a goodly victory was offered, if the Venetians had knowne better how to haue vsed it: because that Barbarossa hauing intelligence that the Patriarke had  entred the Gulphe of Larta, did forthwith saile thither with all the army, hoping to find him there still and to ouerthrow him.
Now newes being brought to Corfou which way Barbarossa directed his course, and that he had tarried at Preuese, the captaines opinions were very different concerning that which was to bee done. Some said it was best to send to Messina; whither Doria was come from Spaine, for to hasten his comming to Corfou: others, that it was not good to depart from Corfou, but there to expect him, because he did meane to come thither shortly, it being neither for the profit nor safety of the Common-wealth, to abandon the castle of Corfou and the gard of the whole Gulphe.
Doria at the last came to Corfou vpon the seuenth day of September, but notDoria comm^ to Corsou. with all the gallies, for he had some of them in Spaine for the gard of those seas against Pirats, and other some were gon into Affrick to the aide of Thunis and Goletta, there being some suspition that the Moores and Turks of those quarters would raise some tumults. At his arriual they began a new to consult on that which wasThe army of the ^eague resolueth to goe to Preueze. to be done, where by the General consent of all men they resolued to goe to Preuese to fight with the enemies. The meaning of our men was, so soone as they should come thither, to land the troupes, and to vse al meanes to become Masters of the castle, and to build a fort right ouer against it, to keepe the entry of the Gulph  open, that it might be in their owne power to take what resolution they pleased, either to enter into it to fight with the enemies army, or to stop the going forth thereof, and to defeate it of it selfe. There were in the leagues nauall army a hundred and six and thirty gallies, two gallions, and thirty armed ships. These vessels were diuided into fiue battaillions* in the first were all the great ships placed, vnder the command of Francisco Doria, and in the other foure, all the light vessels diuided in this maner: The Patriarke Grimani sailed formost, and the General Capello last of all, and in the middest, were Doria and Gonzaga. The whole fleet staied aThe order of the league army. while at the Gomenizzes, tarrying for the Emperors other ships, but they making no haste to come, and the Generals hauing a prosperous winde, sailed towards  Saint Maure.
The Turkes hauing notice that the Christian army, which departed from Corfou, did saile directly towards them, were greatly amazed, as those who thoughtThe Turkes do wonder at the Christians boldnesse. themselues safe enough in that hauen, and could not thinke that those armies would so soone haue beene vnited together, or that being vnited, they would haue resolued to seeke them out to sight with them: wherevpon, wondering at their sodainnesse, they were in great doubt what they were best to doe: some thought it a goodly matter, for that after they had scoured the seas all the sommer, and greatly endammaged the Venetians, they had retired themselues without any losse into the Streight of Gallipolis, being able (as they said) by drawing the warre out in length, to consume the Venetians, and to separate the intelligence and forces of Sundry opinions of the Turkish army. the Confederates, and by that meanes, purchase to themselues a more assured victory: wherevpon they councelled Barbarossa not to stirre forth of the Hauen, where they might liue safely, by reason of the castle, and the Streight of the Channell, with commodious aboundance of all things: others with a barbarous

insolency not being able to endure that the Christians who were wont to fly from them, should now shut them vp into an hauen, made a motion presently to goe forth with the whole army to fight with them, saying, that to continue so shut vp, besides the great infamy that would redound vnto them thereby, it would not purchase them any safety, by reason that they might be kept in longer then they thought, and thereby be depriued of all commodities: How that Soliman would vndoubtedly commend that valliant and generous councell, rather then to endure that his enemies should come and defie his army in his owne hauens and vnder his owne fortes, to the contempt of the reputation of his forces and happy fortune, and of the Ottoman Empire.Barbarossa his considerations vpon those sundry op^nions.
Barbarossa was a man valliant and couragious, and accustomed to the hazards of fortune, who had often fauored him, he knew likewise how that diuers of the great Turkes Porte did enuy his greatnesse, and that the retreat from Corfou and the infortunate issue of that enterprize, whereof he had beene the chiefe author, had caused them to vse sinister speeches of him, whereby he feared the diminution of his credit, and the losing of the great Turkes grace and fauor: besides, he had some hope, that the captaines of the Christian army, notwithstanding that they were nere them, were not fully resolued to fight: and that which confirmed him in that opinion, was the treaties of agreement which Doria had already practized with him.
These things made him resolue to goe forth with the army, and promised himThe number of Barbarossas slect. great reputation for such an exploit. He had in his fleet, a hundred and fifty vessels which vsed the oare, and a certaine number for faile, wherein were comprehended, diuers Galeots, Fusts, and other smaller vessels. Resoluing then to goe forth and to shew himselfe to the Christian army, not to seeke, nor refuse the battaile, but as a politike and well aduised captaine, to vse meanes to discouer the enemiesBarbarossa sendeth sorth fifty Gallies to discouer the Christian army. behauior and deseignes, he would before his going forth with the whole fleet send forth fifty of his gallies, to sound the meaning of the Captaines of the league, and to discerne whether their intention was to fight, and in what order they did set forward.
The Confederates nauall army did at the the same time saile towards Saint Maure; but those in the tops hauing discouered the enemies that were come forth, aduertized the captaines, who altered their course, sayling against them towards the entrance of the Gulphe of Larta, from whence they came: wherevpon by altering their course the order of the fleet was likewise changed, so as the Generall Capello was in the vauntgard, who from as farre as he could descry the Turks vessels causing those of his battaillon to double the bankes of Rowers, did speedilyThe Turkish Gallics are in a manner put to^out by the army of the league. set forward against the enemies and by discharging diuers Canons vpon them, enforced them to returne from whence they came, the which they did speedily (being come forth only to discouer and not to fight) as they fell into some disorder, whilest euery one of the gallies striued which should enter first to free themselues from danger, which neuerthelesse grew greater by their fight, by reason that by turning their gallies, their poopes lay open to the ordnance shot, being neither able to defend themselues, nor to be releeued by their fellowes, who kept the mouth and entrance of the Gulphe closely shut vp.
Doria who sailed in the battaile, so soone as he perceiued it, did set forward, all men supposing that he did it to keepe the enemies from entring into the mouth of the Hauen, who being beaten both in poope and flanke, could not choose but bee vanquished or sunke: But so soone as hee came nere to them, he sent commandement thorow the whole fleet (no man knowing the cause why) that  vpon paine of punishment, all his gallies should forthwith retire, and being ioynedDoria in sauor to the enemies causeth his army to retire. altogether should saile to the Ducall Cape in the Island of Saint Maur, to the great astonishment and griefe of all men, wherevpon, men did boldly and openly thorough the whole army vse reproachfull speeches against him, for that by his

meanes they had lost the commodity of ouer-throwing a great part of the enemies fleet without the losse of one only man.
Being come to that place the chiefe of the army beganne a new to consult onwhat were best to be done: some were of opinion to send part of their gallies to assaile the castle of Lepanto, affirming that Barbarossa would neither himselfe come forth nor yet suffer his gallies to leaue the Gulphe without vrgent necessity: and if he should come forth, it would be in their owne power to take what aduantage they pleased to giue battaile; others thought it fit to returne speedily to Preuese, because that the Turkish army not stirring forth of his place, they might assaile the castle, and if it did come forth they would be enforced to come to battaile  to their disaduantage, and be assailed before they could put themselues into order of battaile.
This opinion was allowed, as being thought fi^rest for the honour of our army, and for the assurance of breaking that of the enemies: and thereupon the army of the league, departing from Saint Maur on the eight and twentith of September, sailed forward in the same order as at the first. But the winde hauing failed them by the way, which till then had euer fauoured them, they were enforced because they would not separate the gallies from the ships to tow them with great discommodity and delay, by meanes whereof the Turkes had time to comeThe Turkes come forth of the Gulphe and doe put them selues in battaile. forth of the Gulphe, and to order themselues in battaile as they desired, contrary  to the opinion of the confederates: so as the army of the league descried that of the enemies in battaile, before it could come to the mouth of the Gulphe, the which came sailing with a faire winde vp to ours.

We haue now (said Doria) caused the enemy to dislodge according to our desire, it is now in our power to fight, but certainely it behooueth vs well to consider of it: it is a matter of very great importance, and repentance afterwards will be in vaine. We are to consider, that by giuing battaile, we commit toDoria his remonstrance (...) the whole army. the hazard of a short time not onely this army, but likewise the whole reputation of the Confederate Princes, and if I may so say, the wealth and safety of all Christendome;  because that these forces being Iost, where are the meanes to set forth an other fleet to oppose the enemies to stop the course of their victory? What hope is there of being able to defend and preserue the sea townes, without forces at sea? Then turning himselfe towards the Venetian Generall, he added, that it was his part, whom it most of all concerned, to consider those things, because that the danger which threatned the State and liberty of his Common-wealth was greatest of all other.

Capello made answer, that the Senate had commanded him to fight with the enemy when occasion should be offered, and that at the same time so faire an one beingCapello his answere. presented, he was to obey that commandement, and to beseech God that the  iustice of their cause might be accompanied with a fortunate successe to the seruice of all Christendome, and their owne particular commendation, and that his desire was to be placed in the most dangerous part of the battaile which he would willingly accept. The Patriarke Grimani seemed to be of the same minde, notwithstanding that in the beginning he had councelled them to goe to Lepanto.
Doria perceiuing that all men consented to a battaile, Be it so the^ (quoth he) and I beseech God to fauor our enterprise, and in so saying, he did speedily cause the battails banner to be erected, and gaue order for whatsoeuer was necessary, saying that with his owne battaillon he would be the first that should charge the enemy: All men were ioyfull when they vnderstood this resolution, for the great hope they had of victory, and in regard of the smal forces that were in the enemies army,The resolution to giue baitaile reioyceth the ^hole army. wherevpon they imagined that they would not haue the courage to attend them, but that they made that shew only in brauery. The captaines in the meane time did exhort the souldiers to fight valiantly, setting before their eyes the greatnesse and facility of the victory, the rich spoiles, and the immortal glory prepared

for the vanquisher. Doria would needs saile formost with his galleys, placing Capel in the battaile, and Grimani in the rereward, to succour with his battaillon those parts which he should perceiue to haue most need, he commanded Antoni^ Doria who conducted the great vessels, that keeping before the light galleys, hee should vse meanes to get the winde of the enemies, that he might with more ease runne vpon them, and with his ordnance disorder them, before they should come too neere the light galleys. But the Turkes on the other side, seeking the same aduantage,The Turkes purpose broken by Doria. vsed all meanes they could to get before the Christian Army, that they might first assaile it; which Doria perceiuing, did in time draw his army towards the land, to keepe the enemies from possessing those quarters. Then vpon the sodaine, there beeing no winde at all, it was an hard matter to pursue that desiegne, in regard that the light Galleys were with many turnings enforced to towe the great ships: yet neuerthelesse, all men were so earnest to the battaile, that by their industry this impediment was taken away, and the two great ships, namely the Argozy and the Gallion, were placed at the head of the Army like two strong Towers, to breake the enemies first assaults.
So soone as Barbarossa perceiued those two great ships comming against his Armie before the calme, fearing least hee should bee first enforced to fight with them, hauing auoided it as much as hee could, began to repent his comming forth^arbarossa repentcth his comming sorth of the Gu^phe of Preueze. of the Gulphe of Preueze: Yet neuerthelesse taking presently courage, hee did  euery where play the part of a good Captaine, thinking on nothing more then on fight, seeking all aduantages that the condition of the time and place would affoord him, and chiefly hee sought to bend his course towards the cape of the Island of Saint Maur: wherevpon auoiding at the same time the meeting with those two great vessels, hee did vse meanes by turning to the other side, to charge oue Army on their backs, the which being desirous to keepe the great vessels vnited to the light ones, could not but with great difficulty and disorder mooue and chang their place; and therefore he did solicite his soldiers, both by promiscs and threats not to be discouraged; and to speake truth, he did that day do whatsoener belonged to a discreet and va^ant Captaine. He had diuided his Army into three parts, the right wing was gouerned by Trabacchio, the left by Salecca, both of them valiant Captaines, and renowned for their great experience, and Barbarossa was inThe order of Barbarossa his Army. the middest with the body of the battaile. Dragut a famous Pirat, went before the whole army, with great numbers of Fusts, Gal^ots, and some light Galleys, as it were to lead the way to the rest, and with those lighter vessels to begin the skirmish. The long delay and irresolution of our men, or the speed and good fortune of the enemies, the sea beeing calme, so that the great vessels could doe no seruice for want of winde, did giue the Turkes time and leisure first to possesse that part neere to the firme land, which the Captaines of the league had determined to seaze on, and to driue the enemies from it, who lying in a very commodious  place, and a great way off from our vessels, lay in front of the Christian Army to descrie how it would make vp towards them, supposing themselues to be foorth of danger, by reason that they perceiued that the Captaines of the league were determined to giue battaile without those great vessels, and that it was dangerous to tow them any further on in the view of the enemies; so as it seemed that it was in their power either to giue battaile or not.
Doria in the meane time beeing followed by all the light Galleys, turning towardsThe enemies got into a plac^ of safety thorow the fault of those of the league. those great vessels, had for a time not onely held our men, but the enemies in doubt what he would doe, all men expecting when he would turne the prows vpon the enemy, and begin the fight. But during this long delay, he gaue time to the Turkes to get the vantage, and to eschew the battaile. Dorias pollicy was (as he said afterwards) to beguile the enemies, who beeing vncertaine what courseVVhat Dori^ purpose wa^. he would hold, thought it best to lie at sea in the same place, and close order which they held: whereby it had beene an easie matter for him, by fetching a great

compasse, to haue assailed them with his Galleys in sundry places. But Barbarossa perceiuing his intent, did with great speed (as hath beene said) make to land-ward, keeping still, as he sailed along, the prows of his Galleys turned towards our Army, keeping as farre off as he could from our great vessels.
The Army of the league in the meane time, to all mens wonder, stood immoueable to behold the enemies insulting, and the faire occasion which it lost; the Generall Capell, and Grimani, began to cry out with a lowd voyce, that they were no longer to loose time, nor the certain hope of so goodly a victory. Capel, presently after, leapt into a Frigat, and was carried round about the fleet, stirring vp all men to battaile, beeing reciprocally welcomed and commended of all men, and being Capels speech to Doria to prouoke him to the battaile. come to Dorias Galley, he said vnto him, Let vs goe my Lord to charge the enemies that flye from vs; time, occasion, and the soldiers cryes doe call vs forth, the victory is ours, I will bee the first that shall charge, and I tarry for nothing but the commandement to begin the fight.
Capell was a man of three score and thirteene yeares of age, of a cheerfull countenance,The whole army crieth out for battaile. healthfull constitution, singular iudgement, and was reuerenced of all men for his age and great discretion, ioyned with a singular experience in marine matters, so as great estimation was made of his aduice and councell; and indeed all men were desirous of battaile, and did ioyntly cry out, battaile, battaile, victory, victory. Doria at the last beeing mooued by these cryes, and spurd forward by  shame, commanded the rest to ^et forward, and himself with his battalion did passe on beyond the great ships, our army came neerer to the enemies Galleys, who were already come to the place they wisht for, their poopes beeing towards the land, and their prows to sea-ward: wherevpon, from both parts (though a farre off) the Cannon plaid, so as a man would haue thought that the battaile had binA beginning of the battaile a sarre off. begun, and yet neither on the one side nor other, did the Galleys set forward. Doria did still looke when that the Turkes, all amazed, would forsake the Galleys without fight, and saue themselues on shoare, and Barbarossa perceiuing the light Galleys to bee backt by the Gallion and the Argozey, durst come no neerer for feare least the Ordnance of those great ships would disorder and sinke him, but Doria his retreat encourageth the Turkes. Doria hauing for a time continued in this manner, and perceiuing that his pollicy tooke no effect, and resoluing (as his actions did afterwards shew) not to commit himselfe to the hazard of a battaile, began openly to retire.
The Turkes taking courage by the retreate of our men, did come so farre forward, as diuerse of the enemies Galleys were very neere to the Gallion and the Argozey, who by reason of the place, wherein they were, and their greatnesse they could not retire so soone, but a Cannon shot beeing made vpon the Gallion, and fire taking in a barrell of powder, the marriners and soldiers were in great feare and disorder: but the Captaine prouiding a speedy remedy for it, did defend them from danger, and the Turkish Galleys comming still neerer to these ships, both of them at one time discharged their ordnance vpon them, so as euery Bullet dooing execution, they enforced them sodainly to retire.
In this manner the whole army of the league beeing safe and vntoucht (sauingThe Army of the league returneth to Corsou. a few vessels that were lost in the retreate) was brought to Corfou. Doria in his Galley would be the last that should retire, thereby to shew himselfe more braue and valiant, or else that hee had a great care of the Army: but all men knew, that it did not proceed from magnanimity of courage, or from any good will that hee did beate to the cause, but onely because hee trusted to the swiftnesse of his owne Galley, wherein he might easily escape, which Capel perceiuing, would not likewise depart, till the very selfe-same time that hee retired.
The end of the second Booke of the sixth Decade.




The Contents of the third Booke of the  sixth Decade.
BArbarossa retireth into the Gulph of Larta, for feare of Sea tempests. How all men did condemne Andre Doria. The Confederates take Castel Nouo in the Gulphe of Cathara. Doria with his Galleys retireth into Sicily. The Venetians take Rissana. The occasions which mooued the Senate to make peace with the Turke. Gritti goeth to Constantinople for that purpose. Guy Vbaldo, Duke of Vrbin, sonne to Francesco Maria, is made Generall of the Venetian troopes. An Accord betwixt the Pope and the Duke of Vrbin for the Dutchy of Camerin. Barbarossa recouereth Castel-nouo. The Bascha alledgeth Solimans complaints concerning the accord with the Venetians. Barbarossa giueth an  assault to Cathara, hoping to take it. The Baschas vnreasonable demands vpon the agreement with the Venetians. The Emperor Charles passeth thorow France into Flanders, to chastice the Gantois. The Cardinall Farneze commeth into France, as Legat at that enter view. The Conclusion of the peace with the Turkes according to their owne minde. The sorrow and discontent of those of Naples and Maluesia, when they vnderstood that their Townes were made ouer to the Turkes. And lastly, the Consignation of  those two townes into the Baschas hands, with the departure of diuerse of the Inhabitants, to goe and dwell else-where.

The third Booke of the sixth Decad of the Historie of Uenice.
THE Army of the league beeing returned to Corfou, Barbarossa not beeing satisfied that hee had escaped shame and danger, went into the Isle of Paxu, some twelue miles from thence, where he continued for a time, daring as it were the Confederates to come forth of their Hauen and fight, or else waiting for an opportunity to endanger them, but the Army  of the league was filled with disorder and feare, Doria his conduct beeing thought most infortunate, and his loyalty and counsell much suspected: there was no man that durst vndertakeThe Turkish Army retireth into the Oulph of Lar^a. a deed of consequence: if any proposition were made, infinite numbers of difficulties were found therein, and the Galleys remaining thus in the hauen, without any military action, the Turkes after that they had braued the Christian army, fearing foule weather and tempests, by reason that part of October was spent, retired into the Gulph of Larta.
Such was the successe of that yeare, such was the end of so great a warlick preparation, and in a word, that great expectation of all men came to nothing, to the great hurt and disaduantage of all Christendome, and to the particular dishonor of Andre Doria, against whom, all men cried out, some taxing him of cowardise,All men cry out vpon Doria. others of treachery, and for that hee stood badly affected to the good of Christendome, and particularly to that of the Venetians. Those who spake of it more openly, did blame his sundry immoderate affections, his intollerable ambition, his feare to expose himselfe to dangers, his great auarice, wherewith he was some-times so blinded, as hee esteemed nothing so much as his owne priuate gaine. The Spaniards more then all others cryed out against him, and especially the Marquis of Aguilar the Emperors Ambassador at Rome, who  went about to wipe out the opinion which all men had conceiued, how that the Emperor his maister had intelligence with him, and that by his commandement he had so carried himselfe. But the Venetian Senate beeing well aduised, thinking it not fit to make him their enemy, in regard hee still had the command of the Army, was desirous, amid these publick curses, to shew that they did in no sort resent it, nor were any whit displeased with him, but wrote him a very louing letter, to assure him that they beleeued, that he, as a wise and discreet Captaine, had done nothing, but with great consideration and good councell. Yet neuerthelesse, the imputations laid vpon him, beeing come to his hearing, did greatly afflict him: so as since his returne to Corfou, he did for many dayes liue in priuate, not comming  abroad in publick, and when in his owne presence, any mention was made(...) so^row for his fault. of that which had happened in that voyage, hee did seeme to bee extreamly sorry for it, beeing scarce able to keepe him selfe from shedding teares, (either true or seigned,) in acknowledgment of his fault.
All the Army of the league after that retreat, did for a time remaine at Corfou: but the Confederates supposing it to bee a disgrace vnto them to continue so long in the hauen, the season being fit for sea actions, notwithstanding that it was then Autumne, and the enemies beeing farre from thence, they began to propound sundry matters. The Generall Capell did solicite them to saile with the whole Army into the Archipelago, where (as he said) some new occasion might be offered of fighting with the enemy, and though that should not come to passe, yet an other notable and certaine profit might redound by that iourney, in regard that diuers ships that were loden going to Constantinople, would fall into their hands as an assured booty, besides, they should releeue Naples and Maluesia, and Sundry opinions in the confederates councell. might recouer diuerse Islands of the Archipelago, as easily as they had been lost, from whence they might draw great commodity, and chiefly of Rowers for the Nauy, whereby double profit would redound to them, as to driue the enemies from thence, and to make aboade there by reason of the hauen^, wherewith those Islands doe abound, where the fleete might lye in all safety, and their abode there would make Barbarossa iealous and fearfull, so as hee would not dare to carry his fleet to Constantinople, and that Gulphe beeing taken from him, which was very commodious for his vse, hee would not come forth at all, or else very late, to sea the next yeare: whereby his honor and reputation would enforce him to come  to a battaile.
Others, and especially Doria were of opinion, rather to go and besiege Durazzo, thinking it a dangerous matter to saile at that season vpon the Archipelago, and the labour likewise which should be bestowed in the recouery of those Islands would be lost, there beeing no safe nor assured Fort; wherevpon so soone as the Turkish Army should shew it selfe, they would bee againe recouered: But on the contrary, they could but haue great hope of the happy successe of the enterprise of Durazzo, inregard of the quality of the place, beeing of it selfe very commodious, a neere neighbour to Italy, and fitte for opening the way to greater exploits in Albania. But this proposition likewise did finde sundry difficulties, first, that there were no hauens there fitte for the Fleet, especially for the ships, who  without danger could not ride vpon those shallow flattes: Next, that the countrey was full of Turkish Cauallery, who might easily breake the enterprise, the like might Barbarossa doe comming to Valona: so as it would bee no safe matter to land the soldiers, and to leaue the vessels vnfurnished, hauing so mighty an enemy neere them: that they were to make warre else-where, and to molest the enemy in places farther off from his greatest forces, which consisted in horse and foote.
Both these propositions then beeing for these reasons reiected, they resolued to enter the Gulphe, there to enterprise some-what, which might assuredly, and without difficulty answer their desire. The Army then departing from Corfou, sayled to the mouth of the Channell of Catharra to besiege Castle-nouo, a place seated on the sea-shore, a little within the Gulphe, which Mahomet had certaine yeares before, taken from Chersega: that place was sufficiently esteemed, not for beeing great, or of an impregnable fortification, but onely for the situation,The Confederates Army commeth ^o besiege castelnouo. commodious for diuers matters, and chiefly for the Venetians, for the safety of Cathara. Aboue the Towne there is a Castle, kept by a garrison of Turkes, all the other inhabitants are Dalmatians or Sclauonians.
The fleet hauing entred the Gulph, Doria landed his footmen not farre from the castle, and within a while after his ordnance to batter it, giuing the particular charge thereof to Don Ferrant de Gonzaga. But whilest they planted the ordnance, the Generall Capello beeing come neere to the Citties walls with his galleis, forth of the danger of the Castles shorte, the which comming from aboue ^lew ouer their heads, hee began to giue an assault to the Towre with his Rowers and mar^iners, who vsing their oares insteed of ladders, and (...) it in sundry

places, did at last enter it, and opened the Gates to the soldiers: Wherevpon the Turkes did sodainly retire into the Castle, but within a while after, perceiuing that they could not long hold out, they yeelded vpon discretion. The towne was sackt by the Spaniards, notwithstanding Don Ferrants prohibition, who knew that the spoile did belong to the Venetians, but the insolency of that nation was so great, as not beeing satisfied with the spoile of the Citty, when they did meete with any of the Venetian Rowers, returning to the Galleys loden with pillage,The Spaniards insolency. they did take all from them, and would perforce enioy the fruite of other mens labours. Barbarossa beeing aduertised that the Christian Army was gone to besiege Castel-nouo, did leaue Preueze, and was onward on his way, meaning to go  and releeue it, or at least by the report of his comming to breake the enemiesThe most part of Barbarossas fl^et is cast away by tempest. enterprize: But hauing sailed halfe way thither, a marueilous tempest arose, in which thirty of his Galleys were cast away and sunck: Wherevpon hee returned with the rest, very much beaten to Volona.
The Christian army hauing intelligence of this losse, all men began to cry out and said, that it behooued them to saile forthwith towards the enemies, who were weakened both in courage and forces, to fight with them: the Generall Capello did with great vehemency perswade Doria not to lose such an occasion, seeing it was not farre from thence to Valona, where they might assaile the Turkish fleet, which was not in state to fight, beeing weakned by the fortune of the sea, nor was  able to escape, by reason that all their Oares were in a manner broken: neither could it presume vpon the safety of the place where it lay, the Castle of Valona beeing not able to defend them, because it was too farre off from the hauen. But Doria making excuses, saying some-times that hee resolued to goe thither, andDoria his excuses because be would not fight with Barbarossa. afterwards that the season was vnfit for such an enterprise, with diuerse other impediments, did make such long delayes, as hee gaue Barbarossa time and leisure to conduct his army in safety to Constantinople, hauing left Dragut in the Gulph of Lepanto with fiue and twenty Galleys, and a certaine number of Galeots and Fusts belonging to Pirats, to hinder the Christians nauigation.
Doria afterwards alledging new occasions, that he might be gone from thence;  and chiefly the want of Bisket that was in the Army, resolued to depart, and to carry his Army into Sicily, notwithstanding that he was councelled and exhorted by his owne friends and countrey-men, and namely by Don Ferrant, to keepe the armies ioyned together all that winter, either at Corfou, or in some other commodiousDo^ia with his galleys retireth ^nto Sicyll. place, to the end they might at the spring put to sea betimes, and outstrip the enemies preparations. He left foure thousand Spaniards for the guard of Castel-nouo, vnder the command of Captaine Iohn Sarmiento, notwithstanding that the Venetian Generall entreated him, that according to the capitulations of the league, the towne might bee consigned to him, to bee kept by his soldiers: but excusing himself for that he had no commission so to do, he referred that businesse  to the Emperor: he went about beside to place six thousand Spanish footmen in garrison in the citties of Budua, Antiuari, and Dulcino, vnder coulor that he did it for the Venetians commodity, the better to assure those townes, and to haue soldiers alwayes ready to make speedy vse of, at the Spring.
Doria beeing gone, the Patriarke Grimani followed him within a while after, and sailed to Ancona, where hee disarmed the Galleys, and sent them empty to Venice: afterwards hee went to Rome to yeeld an account to the Pope of that which had beene done. Capello in this manner remaining alone (all the other Commanders beeing gone) in the Gulphe of Catharra, went to Rissane a small towne not farre from thence, held by the Turkes with a small Garrison, which  beeing soone yeelded vnto him, he manned with Soldiers, and made Lodouico Zene their Gouernor. Capello in the meane time, by reason of the toyle and trauaile which hee had susteined, or rather with greefe and discontent, to see

matter, handled contrary to his desire, fell into a greeuous sicknesse, in regard whereof hee besought the Senate to giue him leaue to returne home to Venice to take order for his health.
The Duke of Vrbin at the same time beeing consumed by a lingering diseaseThe death of the T^uke of Vrbi^. dyed, not without suspition of beeing poisoned, to the Venetians great greefe and discontent: Sollemne obsequies were made for him at Venice in the Church of the Saints Iohn and Paul.
Now the occasion beeing so often lost of fighting with the Turkish fleet with a certaine assurance of the victory, and the Spaniards seazing vpon Castelnouo, did more and more encrease the suspition which all men had conceiued of the  Captaine Generalls small sincerity, or great cowardize: but some said that he had proceeded in that manner by the Emperors will and consent: wherevpon the Senate was greatly troubled and perplexed, for that it had vndertaken such a warre against so mighty an enemy, and made their at^onement with him more vneasie by their refusall thereof, (hauing beene therevnto inuited), vppon the weake and vncertaine hope of the aid of Christian Princes, so as it knew not by what means to assure the conseruation of their State.
The Emperor by good offices had beene disposed to the obseruation of the Articles of the league, namely, to grant a proportion of corne out of Naples and  Sicily toward the entertainment of the army; to cause Castelnouo to be consigned into the hands of the Republicks officers, and to command the Gallies to be ready in the moneth of March, that the fleets might be ioyned together: but the Emperor performing nothing of all this, did still find out delayes and excuses;The Emperors excuses for not performing his promise. for concerning the proportion of corne, his officers were first to haue their owne share and diuision: for the restitution of Castelnouo, they aleadged that the Common-wealth should first pay the Spaniards for keeping that Fort till then; and as concerning the ready expedition of the Army, in regard that the Emperor determined to be in it in person, it behooued them to make greater preparations, and also to haue more forces, and so consequently a longer time.
But in some of these things, reason, and the effect did manifest, that hee did neither regard equity nor the common good: the Emperors speeches were very magnificent, full of goodly promises, but greatly suspected that he did only intendThe Emperors (...) ayme. to keepe the Venetians bound, by meanes of the league, that hee might make vse both of their armes and friendship, in as much as concerned his owne particular profit and comodity, and not for the wealth or seruice of the Republicke, by reason that it was knowne, how that the Estates assembled in Spaine did beseech him not to deparrt forth of the Cuntrey: besides, his want of money was so great, as although his meaning had beene to haue gone in person into the Army yet hee would not haue had meanes to haue defraied the expences of  such a iourney: in regard whereof all men may perceiue that it was farre more safe and expedient for the Signory of Venice to thinke on peace and agreement rather then on armes. That which mooued them to this Treaty, was their hopeThe Senate resolueth to be at peace with the Turke. to obtaine peace on honest conditions, seeing that the Turkes did vse them with more respect then they were wont, for they had released the Baily forth of the Tower of the great Sea, and admitted them into Constantinople, and did likewise put them in hope (as it came to passe) speedily to restore all the Venetian Marchants to their liberty, and to suffer them to trade in the same manner as they had done before, so as they would be bound one for another, not to depart from Constantinople, nor to send their goods forth of the Ottoman Empire.
There came besides to Venice a man whose name was Antonio de Modon, dwelling at that time in Zante, bringing letters from Ianusby his friend, which he had written to him concerning their owne particular traficke, wherein hee mentioned how that the great Turke and the Bascha were desirous of a Peace

with the Republick: so as if an Ambassador were sent from Venice to Constantinople for that purpose, some agreement might bee easily concluded, and that this Iauusbey did offer, (so that they would intreate him) willingly to employ him selfe therein.
All these things did mooue the Councell of Tenne to begin some practise of agreement: but to the end it should bee kept secret, they would not for that time send any publick person to Constantinople, but appointed Lorenzo Gritti theGr^tti goeth to Constantinople to treat of an agreement. Dukes sonne for that iourney, vnder coullor of some affaires of his owne, and in particular for the recouery of certaine goods belonging to a brother of his, who a little before dyed at Constantinople. They enioyned him first to speake of a  generall truce, and that hee should bee very earnest therein, the better afterwards to come to some resolution. But if the Turkes should not entertaine it, then to motion a treatie of peace for the Common-wealth, by renuing the ancient capitulations, and on conditions that both sides should yeeld vp those places that had beene taken during that warre.
The French King had an hand in this treaty of truce, sending an Agent expresly for that purpose to Constantinople, but the small hope of any peace was soone discerned, the Turke beeing not willing to haue any accord with the Emperour, wherevpon the better to turne all his forces against him, he had propounded and consented to an agreement with the Venetians. But so soone as Gritti his going  to Constantinople was published, notwithstanding that the cause was kept secret, all men did suspect the matter, how that his iourney was to treate of peace with Soliman. Don Diego Hurtado de Mendoza, Ambassador at that time for theThe Emperors Ambassador doth in the Senate complaine against this agreement. Emperor at Venice, beeing come into the Senate in secret audience, did discouer this suspition, and made a modest complaint, for that they went about to treate of peace with the common enemy, not comprehending therein the Emperor, their friend and confederate, and did afterwards seeke by a long and perswasiue oration, to disswade them from peace with the Turkes. They answered him that the Republick had more then two years since entred into the league, and yet neuerthelesseThe Senates answer to the Ambassador. it might truly say, that it had alone susteined all the Turkish attempts: That  they did allow of the lawfull occasions which had held back the arriuall of the ayde of the other Confederates, at that time when they most needed them, that they did likewise beleeue, how it might easily come to passe, that by sundry accidents the same occasions might be againe offered: and yet neuerthelesse they had euer borne and would beare great respect to the Confederates: that the French King had procured generall truce at Constantinople, by accepting whereof they did suppose to haue procured much wealth and profit to the common cause, whereby great commodity might redound to the league, if there were nothing else then the gaining of time, which the Emperors selfe did thinke to bee most necessary for his voyage into the Leuant.
The like pursute was made in the Emperors Court betwixt his Maiesty and the Ambassador of the Common-wealth: But it was not to any purpose, either to hasten the Emperor to make prouisions for warre, or to with-draw the Venetians from the treaty of peace already determined. With such successe endedAn. 1538. the yeare 1538. about the latter end whereof, on the seuen and twenty day of December, Prince Gritti deceased, beeing foure score and foure yeares of age, hauing gouerned fifteene yeares and seauen moneths, and was buryed in Saint Francis Church.







PIETRO LANDE the seuenty eight Duke.








PIETRO LANDE was chosen in his place, a noble man, and of three score and eighteene yeeres of age. The yeere following was in a manner spent about the negotiation of peace, at the beginning whereof, the Venetians supposing that it behooued them onely, to trust and hope in their owne forces for the safety of their state, went about to encrease the Garrisons of their The Senate prepareth for the conseruation of their sea townes. fortes, and to re-enforce their Armie, wherevpon* they made a great leuy of Soldiers, and armed other light and great galleys at Venice, they likewise sent a commandement to Alessandro Contaren the Prouidator in Candy, that hee should speedily arme fiue and twenty Galleys in that Island.
The Senate at the same time decreed, that foure thousand artificers of the Citty should bee enrolled, with whom, foure times a yeare, the Galleys appointed for that purpose should bee manned, that they might all of them row together, and they did commonly call it, Regater: and sundry stipends were appointed for such as had continued that course thrice together: This was done, that they might bee assured by this exercise still to haue men fit and ready to man on a sodaine, a  certaine number of Galleys.
They did likewise confirme Guy Vbaldo Duke of Vrbin, in the degree of Generall of their forces by land, who in his fathers life time, had serued the Republick, they encreased his place with an hundred men at armes, an hundred light horse, and the pay of ten Captaines, with foure thousand Ducats for his entertainement. This Duke was thought a very fitte man for the seruice of the Common wealth, as well for the excellent parts that were in him, hauing from his youth beene trained vppe in martiall discipline, vnder his deceased Father, as by reason of his Countrey, full of good Souldiers, it beeing commodiously seated, for the easie sending of them from thence to their Fortes along the Sea coast: Therefore the Senate after the death of the Duke his father, did in signe of loue and honor, send Francesco (...) their Ambassador, to condole with him for his death, and to assure him that the Senate would

neuer forget the notable seruices which hee had done to the common-wealth. But certaine moneths were spent before they confirmed him in his place, in regard of the Pope, fearing least hee would take it ill, to see them honor and entertaine a Duke that was a feodatarie of the Church, hee being at variance with him. The occasion of their stri^e, (as hath beene already mentioned) proceeded from the Dutchy of Camerin, which the Duke of Vrbin did enioy, by reason of his wife, the sole daughter and heire to the last Duke of Camerin, and the Pope pretended that the line masculine failing, that infeofment was to returne to the sea Apostolick. The Senate in remembrance of Duke Francesco Maria, who had deserued well of the common wealth, and for the loue that it did beare to the  sonne, did earnestly employ it selfe in that businesse, fearing least it might stirre vp some new troubles in Italy, because that the Duke of Mantua, Vncle to Duke Guy his wife, did determine to defend him, not onely with his owne forces, but with those of strangers whom he did meane to call into Italy. The Pope at the last, resoluing by force to haue that Dutchy, if hee could get it by faire meanes, it was agreed that Duke Guy should referre himselfe to the sea Apostolick, and that hisAgreement betwixt the Pope and the duke of Vrbin. Holynesse should giue him a certaine summe of money in recompence, in name of dowry of the Dutchesse Iulia his wife.
This controuersie beeing thus ended, Duke Guy was confirmed (as hath beene sayd) in the pention of the Common-wealth. But to the end likewise that the  Nauall Army should not bee without an Head, whilest Capell, by the Senates permission lay at Venice for the recouery of his health, who was not yet in state to execute his place, they chose in his steed Iohn Moro, Prouidator Generall at that time in Candy: but the Senate hauing notice within a while after of his death, the place of Generall was giuen to Thomaso Moceniga, a man excellently seene in the important affaires of the Common-wealth at home and abroad. Iohn Moro was slaine in Candy in a Popular Comotion betwixt the Greekes and the Italians of the Garrison, among whom hee running with his Halbardiers to appease the tumult was stricken with a stone vppon the head, whereof within a while after hee died.
These were the preparations of the Venetians, whilest the Turkes did speedilyThe Turkes great preparations for the recouery of Castel-nouo. make ready their fleete, beeing not able to digest the losse of Castel-nouo, as men that were alwayes wonte (to the great losse of all Christendome) to winne and not to loose: therefore resoluing before all other things to attempt the recouery of that place, thereby to repaire their honor which that accident had bereft them of, they made great preparations of men and warlike engins, sufficient for a farre greater enterprise.
Dragut in the meane time, whom (as hath beene said), Barbarossa had left in the Gulphe of Lepanto, departed thence with thirty vessels both Galleots and Fusts, all well armed, and beeing come into the Isle of Paxu, did there barre the  Christians free Nauigation: for hiding himselfe in Saint Nicholas Hauen, foure miles off from Corfu, hee often sent his vessels to scoure the channell of Corfou, and to take those ships which should arriue in that Island: but the Prouidator Pascalic beeing not able to beare that indignity, determined to goe forth with twelue of his best Galleys, against certaine Turkish Galleys, which were come neere to the land: but the enemies not tarrying for him, fled towards the Gulphe of Larta, to deceiue the Prouidator, and to make him thinke, that there were no other Vessels of theirs at Paxu: but as the Prouidators Galleys, giuing chaseDraguts policy to encompasse the Venetian Galleys. to those Galeots, were come farther to Sea-ward, they discouered Dragut, who comming forth of Paxu, with the residue of his Galeots and Fusts, had put himselfe  forward to Sea, to take the aduantage of the winde, that hee might the better bee able to encompasse the Prouidator, who then perceiuing the danger, whereinto hee should runne by gooing any farther forward, did sodainly

did sodainly hoist sailes, and turned back towards Corfou, beeing still pursued by the enemies vessells, which comming very neere to them, caused three Venetian Gallies, who feared that they should not be able to escape by flight, to runne on ground vppon the Sands of Messanga twelue miles off from Corfou, where they did beat themselues in peeces, all the men within them, with their goods, escaped, one only Galley, belonging to Antonio Canalis, whose saile yards were broken and thereby vnable to follow the rest, was taken by the enemies.
This successe hauing made the Turkes more bold and insolent, they went with those vessells into the Ile of Candy, where landing vpon the territory of Canea, they burnt and spoiled the Countrey; but great numbers of Stadiots and  feudataries of the Island being gathered together, did charge them so fiercely as hauing slayne diuers of them, they did enforce the rest to returne to their Gallies Gritti the same time returned* from Constantinople about the beginning of Aprill, hauing made great hast in his iourney: hee reported how that by the meanes of Ianusby hee had beene brought into the presence of the Visier Bascha, who although hee entertained him very curteously, did neuerthelesse first of all greatly complaine, of the hostile actions which sundry officers of the RepublikeThe Basche complaineth to Gritti against the (...) had executed vpon the Musulmans, which the Signory had left vnpunished, then proceeeding farther hee told him how badly hee did digest their manner of proceeding against the great Lord, and all those of his Port, hauing neuer  vouchsafed to make any answer to the propositions of agreement which hee had set downe vnto them. Gritti vpon this discourse supposing that the Turkes were not at that time much disposed to peace, had craued a suspension of armes, on allTruce for three (...) betwixt the Turkes and Venetians. sides, for threee monethes, to the end that in the meane time they might treat of an agreement, which hauing obtained, hee did at the same time publish as hee passed along vpon the Frontiers; so as the Turkish troopes encamped before Sa ona to take it, that they might afterwards goe and beseege Spalatia, did sodainly retire vpon this publication.
The newes of this truce did not greatly please the Venetians, diuers fearing that his suspension of armes for so short a time might rather tend to cause some distrust  in the Confederate Princes, then procure any peace: therefore the opinions in the Senate, touching the pursute of this businesse, were sundry and different, where after long disputation it was resolued to send an Ambassador to Soliman to treat of peace, and Petro Zene was chosen to that end. And whilest he was preparingPetro Zene (...) chosen Ambas sador to goe to Soliman. for his iourney, and the accustomed presents, Gritti was dispatched to Constantinople to carry news of the Ambassadors election, and to vse means to prolong the truce, and to begin, as occasion should be offered, to motion peace, being expresly inioyned, therein to imploy the fauor and Councell of the Lord of Rincon, Ambassador for the most Christian King at the Port of the great Lord, who had very earnestly often times offered himselfe to deale in that businesse: but it was afterwards perceiued that hee did more harme then good, by making the matter more difficult, to the end that the King his maister might at the least be chosen vmpier of their controuersy, and might reconcile them to Soliman,The French Ambassadors deseigne. and thereby oblige them to him-selfe and disioyne them from the Emperor.
At the same time that Gritti arriued at Venice, the new Generall had receiued the Standard of the Common-wealth and was ready to depart to his charge, but beeing not yet gon forth of the Hauen, his departure was deferred, supposing that his proceeding on his iourney might cause the Turkes to suspect that this negociation of peace was feigned, and by that meanes might returne to inuade the confines of the Republique, which newly began to liue at quiet: but to the  end that the Army in the meane time should not be without an head, the same power and authority which the Generalls by Sea were wont to haue, was giuen to the Prouidator Contaren.
The Ambass. Zene within a while after departed from Venice being sufficiently

instructed what hee had to doe, but being come to the Serraglio of Bossina, and falling greeuously sick, hee dyed there within a while after, whereof the Senate beeing aduertised by Petro Franceschis his Secretary, they chose Thomas Contaren in his steed, a man of foure score and foure yeares of age, but greatly esteemed for his wisdome and particular knowledge in the Turkish affaires, with whom hee had a long time conuersed vpon sundry occasions. Hee was enioyned to depart within foure dayes, and in the meane time they speedily aduertised Gritti, and the Secretary of the new election, to the end hee might acquaint the Bascha therewith, with whom Gritti his proposition, concerning a generall truce, was to no purpose, the Turkes still continuing their preparations, determining to recouer Truce is prolonged wi^h the Venet^ans. Castel-nouo rather by force then by agreement. Barbarossa was already gone thither with an hundred and fifty saile of all sorts, and with great store of Artillery: the Beglerby of Grecia was at the same time gone thither with a great Cauallery: so, that beeing contented to make an agreement with the Venetians, they did likewise make no great difficulty to prolong the truce with them for the whole moneth of September. The report of this treaty beeing diuulged, men did diuersly discourse thereof; interpreting it according to their owne passions: the Pope neuerthelesse among others did greatly commend the Venetians, for that they had in such sort prouided for the safety of their state, seeing that the other way would rather haue hurt then profited them. Now Barbarossa pursuing his iourney, did in  no sort hurt any thing that did belong to the Venetians, saying, That his meaning was to obserue the truce with them, but that the Emperor was not comprehended therein, wherevpon he was desirous to besiege Castel-nouo, which was heldThe Spaniards not being ab^e to keepe Castelnouo, offer it to the Venetians. by the Imperials: The Spaniards that were within it beeing dannted by the arriuall of the Army, and great numbers of Turkes, did offer that to the Venetians which they had before so brauely refused, namely, to deliuer Castle-nouo to them; but the Senate answered, That the same offer was out of time, that they had oftentimes requested that the Capitulations of the league might be obserued, and that according therevnto, that the same place might be deliuered to them, and that at the same present, beeing enforced to a treaty of peace, they neither ought  or could doe any thing that might interrupt it.
Barbarossa then in the moneth of August, beeing come into the Gulphe of Catharra with ninety Galleys and thirty Fusts, did cast anchor so farre off from Castel-nouo, as the Artillery within it could not offend him, and safely landed his troopes, with foure score peeces of ordnance of all sorts. At the same time in a manner, Vlaman Sangiach of the Prouince came thither with great numbers of foot and horse, which encamped round about the towne, those within it not beingCastel-nouo it taken by Barbarossa. able by their sallies to hinder their encamping. The Turkes hauing begun the battery in three places, did so well continue it, and did afterwards assaile it in such sort, as all those of the towne, after they had brauely defended themselues, being taken  and slaine, Barbarossa made himselfe maister of the place, who after the taking of Castel-nouo went to Rissane, which was yeelded vnto him without contradiction, by Lodouico Zene, the Garrison being not strong enough to defend it: Barbarossa sent to Matteo Bembo Gouernor of Catharra, to will him to deliuer that place vnto him, with whom hee sought occasions of quarrell, that hee might assaile that towne.
In the end, after sundry complaints that his runne-away slaues were retyred thither, with other feigned matters which hee alleadged, hauing layde aside allBarbarossa su^moneth the Gouernor of Cata^ra to deliuer the towne vnto him. respect of the truce, hee did audaciously send word to the Gouernour to deliuer the Citty of Catharra into his hands, otherwise hee would come and  take it by force, beeing commanded by Soliman to seaze vpon that Forte, and on what-so-euer the Signory did possesse in those quarters: therefore hee should not doe well to attend and waite for his owne ruine, but to prouide

in time for the safety of himselfe and people; that he would giue leaue to as many as would depart thence, so to doe, and good entertainment to such as would abide there.
Bembo not being daunted with these summons, although hee did not looke forThe Gouernors answer to Barbarossa. them, vsed speedy meanes to prouide all things necessary for the defence of the towne, and to stirre vp the Citizens and souldiers to a braue resistance; then hee answered Barbarossa, that hee did greatly wonder, and so would likewise all the world beside, at his audacious demaund, the which beeing wholly against all reason, hee could not imagine to proceed from Soliman, who was euer wont to keepe his word and promise, and that therefore hee did so  much relie vpon the iustice of his owne cause, as hee did determine to keepe and defend that towne, committed vnto him by his Country and Commonwealth.
Barbarossa made no reply to this answere, but caused part of his Gallies to set forward, the which being inconsiderately come neere to the forte, were to their great hurt and losse beaten backe by the Artillery: Barbarossa beeing the next day come thither with the residue of the army, was likewise repulsed by the ordnance; and hauing landed great numbers of souldiers farre of from the castle, those which went by the way of the hill, comming very neere  vnto the walles, were so hurt by small peeces of ordnance which were planted vppon the highest place of the castle, as beeing disordered they made all possibleBarbarossa doth in vaine giue assaults ^o Catarra. haste they could for to returne towardes their Gallies: but vpon those who went on the land side where the Church and Monastery of Saint Francis standeth, with whom Barbarossa was in person to view the place, the Stradiots with certaine Harquebuziers on horse backe made a salley, and enforced them to retire to their losse, and to saue themselues on the toppe of the next hill whither the horse-men could not follow them.
Barbarossa hauing well viewed and obserued the castle, and the resolution of those within it, brauely to defend themselues, despayring of beeing able to take it, hauing stayed there one day longer without enterprizing any thing, determined  to raise his campe and to returne to the mouth of the Gulphe; whether being come, and leauing a strong Garrison in Castel-nouo, hee did wholly depart forth of the Gulphe of Catharra: it was then thought that hee would goe to scoure the sea-coasts of Puglia; and by the way hee passed by the Channell of Corfou, wherein signe of friendship hee was saluted with certaine Cannon shot from the castle, and presented from the Gouernour with fresh cates, and certaine garments, which hee did very willingly receiue with great thankes, and kinde speeches.
The report of the taking of Castel-nouo, and Barbarossa his enterprize vppon Cathara was not very pleasing to the Senate, fearing, that their army beeing  deuided, the enemy would make some other attempt vppon their State. At the same time whilest that the Turkes did batter Castel-nouo, Andrew DoriaDoria his proposition to the Prouidator Contar^n. departing from Sicily was come to Casopa, from whence hee sent word to the Prouidator Contaren, who lay at Corfou, that a faire occasion was offered to ouerthrow the enemies, whilest they hauing forsaken their Gallies were busied in battering Castel-nouo, therefore hee did aduise him for to ioyne both their fleetes together: the Prouidator hauing answered him (the better to sound his intent) that hee would bee ready to releeue Castel-nouo, and toThe Prouidators answer to Doria. execute any other enterprize, so that all the forces might bee ioyned together with hope of profit: Doria making no replie at all vnto this answere, retired  to the hauen of Brandissa.
The Ambassador Contaren in the meane time iournyed towards Constantinople, whither beeing come and brought into Solimans presence who had graunted him audience, all the time that hee was deliuering his commission,

Soliman held his hand vpon his brest, signifying (as his seruants interpreted it) a troubled minde, yet neuerthelesse hauing quietly heard him, hee told him that hee was welcome, not making any other answere to his negociation, referring him (as the manner is) vnto his Bashas: with whom Contaren afterwardesThe Basha^ demands to Contaren. conuersing, and beginning more particularly for to explaine his commission, so soone as they heard him to motion the yeelding vppe on both sides, of places taken in that warre, they answered on a sodaine that hee was not to speake any more of that; how that their Lord was greatly animated against them, and especially for their league made with the Emperour against him, whereby hee was so farre off from harkening to any restitution, as on the contrarie they were not to hope to obtaine any thing of him, vnlesse that they did render vnto him the Citties of Naples and Maluesia, with whatsoeuer the Signory did possesse on the sea of Constantinople, as farre as Castel-nouo, by meanes whereof all cause of warre should bee taken away for after times, and a firme peace established betwixt them: they demaunded moreouer, to haue Soliman recompenced for his expences in that warre, hauing beene by them drawne to it perforce, and not mooued therevnto by any auarice, but for his owne honour, knowing very well that they had granted as much to the Emperour, a farre meaner Prince then hee.
The Ambassadour declaring that hee could not grant any of their demands, told them that his commission did not extend so farre, that the CommonwealthThe Ambassadors answer to the Bashas. ought verilie for to desire peace, so farre forth as it might stand with her honour and dignity, the which it would euer maintaine and defend by armes, and that for himselfe, hee beeing but an actor of the Senates will and pleasure, neither could nor would say or doe any other thing, but that hee would acquaint them at Venice with the whole matter; intreating them in the meane space that the same businesse might bee delayed till such time as hauing written thither he might vnderstand the Senates resolution therevpon.
The Bashas did put him in hope that the businesse might haue a prosperous end, so that the Venetians would grant part of their demaunds: how that  their custome was to craue much to obtaine little: therefore they did aduise him to returne backe in person to Venice, particularlie to acquaint his superiours with the whole businesse, that they might afterwardes come to some new treaty, and that his returne would bee in a very fit time to bee present at the nuptials of the great Lords daughter, and at the circumcision of one of his sonnes.
Contaren vpon these words, notwithstanding that so many iourneys and delaies were tedious to him in regard of his yeeres, and the important businesse that was in hand, yet neuerthelesse supposing that if he should stay any longer at Constannople, after this leaue giuen him, it would put the Turkes in hope to obtaine their  demands, hee resolued to depart, hauing first very speedily aduertized the Senate of all that which had passed.
The Ambassadors departure did greatly trouble the Senate, together with the difficulties made vpon the accord: for the found it a very hard matter alone andThe Senates doubt vpon those newes. of themselues to make warre vpon so mighty an enemy: that their hopes grounded vpon other mens forces, although weake and to small purpose, were by that negociation wholly lost: on the other side, to accept peace on such vniust conditions would to much blemish the Republikes reputation, and by quitting so easily their townes, and giuing away their money, was nothing else but to cause the enemies who by nature are insolent, to demand greater matters.
During these irresolutions Casar Cantelmo came to Venice, who hauing beene already sent (as hee said) to Soliman from the most Christian King, about the negociation for the truce, at his returne into France, had informed the King of the whole matter, wherevpon hee returned againe by

his commandement to Constantinople for the same businesse.
The French Ambassador comming into the Senate, told them that the King his Maister did expresly send that gentleman to Constantinople, about the affairs of the Venetian Common-wealth, and from him to deale in the negociation of peace, and therefore he was come to Venice to receiue their commandements therevpon, being by the King enioyned to execute them as though they were his owne. The Lord Iohn Francesco Valerio a Venetian Gentleman, did affirme the very same, who hauing remained a long time in France, had beene very familliarThe French Kings loue towards the Venetians. with the chiefe Lords of the Court, who did often acquaint him with matters of importance: this Gentleman did testifie the Kings loue and hearty  affection towards them and his readinesse to send other Agents to Soliman, if the Senate should dislike of Cantelmo; exhorting them to trust to the King, and to his loue towards the Republike, the totall summe of this negociation: that there was no better nor safer way then that to reconcile them to the Turke, with more honour, and lesse losse.
They were aduertized at the same time that an enteruiew was practised betwixtThe Emperour desi^eth passage through France to goe into Flander^. the Emperour and the French King: the cause thereof was the iourney which the Emperour determined to make into Flanders, to chastice those of Gant who had rebelled, resoluing to goe thither through France, and to talke with the King, and to treat with him (for so it was reported) about some good agreement, that being good friends they might afterwards ioyne their forces together against the Turkes.
The enteruiew of these Princes furnished all men with matters of sundry discourse, and chiefely the Venetian Senate, where it was a long time debated whether they should continue the treaty of peace with the Turke, in regard of matters offered, and the hard conditions propounded by Soliman: On the other side, some were of opinion to embrace the occasion of Cantelmo his voyage, and the Kings offer; if they should refuse it, it was to bee feared, that his Maiesty would take it in ill part, thinking that they made small account of him or his friendship: that they were at least to entreat that Gentleman on the Kings behalfe  to insist vpon the Generall truce, which beeing graunted, would greatlySundry opinions in the Senate. serue, for the fitnesse of the time and the quiet which thereby would arise, to enioyne him besides, to assure the Turke, that the Senates intention was none other then to procure a firme peace vpon honest conditions.
Others propounded that it was best to send a speedy messenger to Contaren to command him for to tarry in that place where hee should meet with him, and there to expect a new commission which the Senate would send him, according to the progression of the affaires: others thought it fit to proceed to the election of a new Ambassadour, or else to referre the whole businesse to the Bayly Canalis, who was at liberty, and able to negociate: but these men were not of opinion  to make vse of Cantelmo in this negociation, nor to impart any thing vnto him: that he was a Neapolitan, bannished from his Country, who besides the Kings deseignes and interests, quite contrary perhaps to those of the Republike, had his owne likewise a part, which might hinder and not further the good successe of that businesse: That their safety and publike dignity did not permit them to discouer vnto such men any iot of the Senates intention, the which they were to suspect, and not without cause, that hee was very desirous to know rather to crosse then to further it: that the Emperour sought all occasions to breake this pursute of peace, which did so much trouble and anoy him;  and the French King vpon hope to recouer the State of Milan, was ready to con; tent him in all things.
To all these considerations they added an other, which was of no meaneDearth of victuals in V^nice. consequence, which was, that because the haruest of the same yeere had beene euery where, and especially ouer all Italie, verie badde, wherewith the

City of which was to feed an infinite number of persons, was greatly troubled, so as the people, who were wont to fare delicately, and to eate none other bread then that which was made of wheate, were enforced to feed on all sorts of graine, and in hazard likewise to want them, vnlesse they might bee brought from forraine countries (Venice hauing no corne territory of her owne) a thing which did greatly trouble the Senate; wherevpon, the better to prouide for a matter of so great importance; some said that the friendship of the Turkes was very necessary: and others thought it fit to haue recourse to the Spaniards to get proportions of wine and graine from their countries: whereby it fell out that the same subiect serued for a foundation whereon to build the two sundry opinions.
In this manner was the time spent without any certaine resolution, so as the Ambassador Contaren hauing continued his iourney, and receiued no new commandementCantelmo departeth from Venice without any commission. from the Senate, arriued at Venice, and Cantelmo departed thence without any commission.
These irresolutions gaue the Emperor some hope, who espied al occasions to breake the negociation of peace with Soliman, and once more to draw the Venetians to confirme the league, therefore supposing that there was nothing which could better further his intention, then to make them beleeue that he was friends with the French King, and that being thereby freed from all other lets, he would  employ all his forces vpon the enterprize of the Leuant, and that the French King would aide and fauour the league, determined to send some noble personage to Venice, perswading the King to doe the like, to acquaint the Venetians with the enteruiew, and to discouer somewhat of their intentions.
The Marquis of Guasto who was gouernor of Milan for the Emperor, and the Lord of Annebault Marshall of France, and Generall for the most ChristianThe Emperour and French King send to the Venetians to diuert them from peace with the Turkes. King in Piedmont, came to Venice vpon the tenth day of December. Their entertainment was magnificent, as well in regard of the Princes greatnesse that sent them, as for the quality and nobility of the persons, great numbers of Senators  went to meet them with the Bucentaur, and seuen Gallies; then they were lodged in a goodly pallace, and their expence defraied by the Signory. Their first audience was giuen them in the great Hall, where the great Councell is held, in the presence of many people, where there were no other speeches vsed but complementall and of entertainment.
Returning at an other time into the Senate in secret audience, the Marquis ofThe Marquis of Guasto his speech to the Senate. Guasto began to tell them, that he was sent by the Emperor Charles to acquaint them, as his trusty and inward friends, with the enterview which he determined in France with the French King, and in Flanders with King Ferdinand his brother and the Queene his sister, who did then gouerne those countries for him, assuring  them that in the same assembly of Princes, affaires would be handled concerning the common good of Christendome, and the particular profit of that Common-wealth, which the Emperor did as much desire, as that of his owne Estates. And that now seeing they were ready to assaile the Turkes with very great forces, the Emperour was desirous to know the Senates will and intention therein, what prouisions they would iudge to be necessary, and what they would haue him to doe for his part, for the better mannaging of his deseignes: that the peace with the French King, although it were not established, might neuerthelesse be held for done, in regard of the mutuall disposition and good correspondence betwixt those Princes: whereby all men were certainely to beleeue, that they would both together turne their armes (beeing freed from all  other lettes) vpon the Infidels: but because the greatnesse of the businesse did likewise carry with it length of time, and for that the time of yeere was already to farre spent to make such great prouisions, the Emperor thought it fittest for the time present to stand vpon the defensiue rather then on the offensiue with

the enemies, wherein he would not faile to haue as great a care of the safety of his friends States as of his owne.
The Lord of Annebault spake in a manner to the same effect, protesting his Kings good will and desire to the peace and profit of all Christendome. It was no hard matter to discerne wherevnto all these practises tended; and what the Emperours true deseignes were, namely to feed the French with a vaine hope of restoring vnto them the Dutchy of Milan; and the Venetians, by propounding vnto them to make great preparations for warre against the Turkes, not caring very much to performe these things, but onely thereby to winne time, by being assured of the armes of the French, diuerting the Kings thoughts from  warre, and of those of the Turkes, by opposing against them as a Bulwarke the States and army of the Venetian Common-wealth.

Answere was made to the Marquis and to the Lord Annebault how that theirThe Senates answere to the (...). arriuall was very pleasing and acceptable, as well for respect to the Princes which sent them, as for their owne persons, for which, and for the honour and friendship which they did beare to the Common-wealth, they did infinitely thanke their Princes* the newes of the good correspondence, and certaine hope of peace betwixt such mighty Princes, had much reioyced them, and so much the more, by how much greater the profit was which al Christendome might receiue thereby. But as concerning the declaration of their meaning and intent towards the  present occasions, it might be sufficiently knowne by their actions, seeing that they had so soone at the first taken armes, many times refused all propositions of agreement, and liberally furnished all expences requisite, without niggardize, neither had they refused to execute all enterprizes how dangerous soeuer* how that for their parts, they had already for the space of three yeeres borne the whole burthen of the warre: and being at that time inuited by those hopes, they were ready againe to expose themselues: yet neuerthelesse all men might well perceiue that they were not able alone to hold out long against the power of so great an enemy: therefore what could they say more? Their necessity beeing knowne vnto all men: how euery one knew that Barbarossa lay in the Gulphe of Lepanto with fourescore saile, intending (as it was reported) to winter there, whereby the whole world might perceiue to what daunger the whole State of the Common-wealth was exposed, and by consequent that of all Christendome, vnlesse the nauall armies might bee euerywhere ready by the month of February, to diuert his deseignes: all which things were very exactly to bee thought vppon and considered, and speedily r^medied.

This answere without any resolution at all was thought fit for their proposition, and the condition of the times: and without proceeding to any more particular negociation, the Ambassadours of the Emperour and the King returned  home into their countries.
The Pope on the other side hauing had notice of these Ambassadours comming to Venice, was displeased therewith, because that the enteruiew was resolued on, without his knowledge and consent; not that hee didThese cause of the Popes doubt and discontent. any way distrust the Republike, beeing very well assured that it would euer runne the selfe same fortune as did the Sea Apostolike: but because hee greatly feared, least all that outward shew of honour and friendship should couer (as at other times) some important practize against the liberty of Italy: wherevpon, hee did by all good offices solicit the Venetians, that their might bee betwixt the Sea Apostolike and their Common-wealth a sound and perfect intelligence  and correspondency, and he for his owne part would not any way faile for to prouide all possible meanes to beate backe all the daungers which might happen.
The Emperor hauing intelligence of these suspitions of the Pope, fearing least

his discontent might be some hinderance to his deseignes, did on a sodaine lend Luigi Dauila to Rome, and caused the French King to send the Lord of Saint Iust thither, to acquaint the Pope with that enterview in France and for to iustifie their actions. The Pope by the arriuall of those Ambassadors was greatly satisfied, and the better to demonstrate it, he determined to send his Nephew, theThe Pope sendeth the Cardinal Farnese Legatinto France. Cardinall Farneze, into France, to the end that as Legat to the See of Rome, he might be present at the assembly of those Princes, fauor the conclusion of peace, and offer the Popes authority, with all the Churches treasure, for the enterprise against the Infidels. The Senate in demonstration of the friendship and respect which it did beare to those Princes, did appoint two Ambassadors to be present  likewise at that enteruiew, namely Antonio Capello, and Vincenzo Griman^, both of them Procurators of Saint Marke, who were enioyned by the Senate to thanke the Emperor and the French King for the friendship and honour which they had shewed to the Common-wealth, by acquainting it with what they determined to doe; next to praise and commend their intentions, and to incite them to prouide for the dangers of Christendome, and lastly to excuse them for that they had sent an Ambassador to Constantinople, being enforced therevnto, because they had not sufficient forces to resist the enemy.
At the same time an Ambassador came to Venice from the King of Hungary, to request the Senate to make a firme alliance with him for the common defense An Hungarian Ambassador co^meth to Venice. of both their States, and to exhort them besides to continue the treaty of peace with the Turkes, in regard the Emperor would neuer be at peace with the French, so long as he could haue the Estates of the Venetian Republike, and the Realme of Hungary for his Bulwarke: for the which aduertisement they thanked his King, and for that present delt no farther with him.
But although the Pope did offer his forces to maintaine the warre, and exhorted the Senate to prouide dilligently for the conseruation of their States and defense of Christendome, yet neuerthelesse he did not dissemble the suspition which he had conceiued of the Imperials, and the smal hope he had in their aide: wherevpon, he did often times affirme, that being assured that the Venetian Senate, as  most prudent and well aduised, would neuer make peace with the Turke, vnlesse they were enforced therevnto by very vrgent necessity: euen so, the occasions being once knowne to be such, he did commend their councell, which knew how to fit it selfe to times and necessity.
Now about the same time the Senate receiued letters from the Bayly Canalis, who aduertised them that great and magnificent triumphs were preparing at Constantinople for the nuptials of the great Lords daughter, married to Rusten Basha and for the circumcision of two of his children, and to that end they expected some from Venice, and that the Basha did greatly desire, that according to the vsuall custome, some Ambassador of theirs might come to the Porte, to haue an occasion to reuiue the treaty of peace.
The Senate being assembled therevpon, and a proposition being made to elect an Ambassador to send to Soliman, all of them with one voice and consent embracing the businesse, did choose (...) Badoario, a Senator of great authority, and one of those who had most of all perswaded the Senate to an accord with Soliman, offering himselfe, if neede were, to goe thither for that purpose.
They did then enioyne him first of all to procure the negociation of the GenerallLodouico B^doario is chosen Ambassador to goe to Soliman. truce, according to the former instructions of the Ambassador Contaren, continued by the French Kings Agent: then to motion the restitution of all  those places possessed on either side during that warre; and if hee could not obtaine that, then to treate of a finall peace, by renuing of the ancient capitulations:VVhat the Senate did enioyne the Ambassador. giuing authority for to offer some fiue or sixe thousand Dicat^ a peece for the Cities of Naples and Maluesia, and to promise three hundred

thousand Ducats for the expences that Soliman had beene at in that warre. This was the Senates commission. But the councell of Tenne, who at that time did Soueraignly treate of the most serious affaires of state, without communicating them to the Senate, to the end they might be more secretly managed among fewer persons, added another more ample commission, namely to haue power, if hee should perceiue the treaty to bee wholy desperate, to surrender vnto them the townes of Naples and Maluesia.
These Senators, who were of the ancient and best experienced in the gouernment, did very well know how greeuous, and insupportable that warre had bin vnto them: how that Naples and Maluesia were farre off from them, and therefore The Emperor commeth to Paris. hardly to be releeued and easie to be beseeged by the enemy, whereby they had beene in danger oftentimes to haue beene taken, in regard of their want of many things: So as they would ere then haue fallen into the enemies hands, had not the truce protected them. That the Common-wealth was at the same time in great danger, where-vpon it was discreetly aduised, to cast away some*what, although it were deere and pretious, to conduct it safely to the Hauen of peace, forth of the rockes of that dangerous warre: That it was a Maxim confirmed by many experiences, that time, in the Negociations with the Turkes doth breed danger, and the conclusion of matters, by delaies, haue euer had a bad and difficult  successe.
This happened about the latter end of the yeare, and at the beginning of the next which was 1540. the Emperor came to Paris, where the king entertained him1540. with all possible signes of honor and friendship. Christophero Capello, Ambassador at the same time for the Signory in France, did acquaint both of them with the Senates answer to the Marquis of Guasto, and the Marshall D. Anibault, wherevnto the Emperor answered, that although for his owne part hee did resolue to make warre vpon the Turkes, yet neuer-the-lesse hee could not see, in regard of the shortnesse of the time, how they might satisfie the Republcks desire: and therefore that it would be to more purpose, at that present, to obtaine a generallThe answers of the Emperor and the French King to the Venetian Ambassador. truce, during which they might haue time to prepare forces, conuenient for such  an enterprize, and that he in the meane time, would not omit to doe whatsoeuer lay in him for the common safety of their Sea Estates. The most Christian King did at the same time make great protestation for his good will, saying, that hee would let men know, that his intention neuer was to diuert the common good of Christendome, but that he was ready speedily to embrace peace, and concord with the Emperor, that he might afterwards vndertake a warre, more proffitable and necessary, but that the present time would not permit him to treat of those bussinesses, because he would not mingle graue and serious matters among feasts, and ioy for the Emperors arriuall, the negociating whereof might breed difficulties and discontents, where-vpon, they had referred the whole businesse to the assembly  of Flanders.
Capello hauing acquainted the Senate with the Emperors and French Kings answers, they were found to be very generall, so as no certaine hold could be taken thereon; neither of peace betwixt themselues, not of warre against the Turkes;The Senate resolueth on peace with Soliman. where-vpon they resolued more earnestly to persue the treaty of peace already begun: and did write to Badoario, who ariuing at Constantinople about the middest of Aprill, began to treat according to his commission with the Baschas, therein vsing the fauour and aduice of the French Ambassador. But at the beginning of their negotiation, great difficulties did arrise, not that the Turkes were vnwilling of an agreement, but because they hauing notice of the secret commission, giuen to Badoario, and thereby being growne more insolent, as well in regard of the feare and desire of peace, which they discouered to be in the Venetians, as for that they were assured to obtaine what-so-euer they demanded, began forthwith to protest that they would not harken to any other proposition, vnlesse* that

besides the Ilands of the Archipelago and the Castles of Nada Laurana which they already enioyed) the Citties of Naples and Maluesia might bee freely surrendred to them, and restitution made for the expences of the warre.
The Ambassador beeing amazed at these demands so sodainly and obstinately made, and suspecting the truth of the matter, did for certaine daies giue ouerBado^rio is greatly (...). that negociation, incertaine of himselfe what he were best to doe, on the other side he was drawne from it, when he considered how that by continuing this trea ty and consenting to the Turkes demaunds, he should put them in hope to obtaine other matters. Hauing spent certaine daies in this perplexity, Barbarossa seeming to be desirous that he should go foreward with the treaty of agreement perswaded him not to giue ouer his enterprize, offering to aid and fauour him, and although he opened him a way to be a better hope, yet neuerthelesse by continuing the Treaty he found no alteration in the Baschas, wherevpon he was enforced in a short time by little, and little, to consent to that which was reserued till the very last, namely to giue ouer, besides the Townes which they already possessed, the Citties of Naples and Maluesia, and to pay vnto them within threePeace conclu ded with the Turkes according to their owne mindes. yeares towards the expences of the warres, the summe of three hundred thousand Crownes. Then were the antient Capitulations renewed and confirmed, together with diuers other particularities concerning the establishment of the  peace.
The report of this agreement beeing brought to Venice, although euery man desired it, the Republick being in great distresse by reason of the discomodities of the warres, and the dearth of victualls, and at such a stay as it had need of, being restored by peace, was neuerthelesse badly welcomed, when men vnderstood the particularities thereof, many blaming that Councell for hauing bought peace at so deere a rate, by the giuing away of so goodly a portion of their state and so great a somme ofmoney, wherewith they might haue beene still able for a time to haue maintained the war: others did taxe the Ambassadors ignorance, or to much feare, who by a precipitate resolution had yeelded at the first to the  Turkes demands. and had suffered himselfe to be carried away by latest remedies, reserued for the safety of most desperate matters. But these first motions beeing vanished, and the State of the affaires more maturely considered on, with the reasons which had mooued those wise Senators to consent thereunto, all men did rest satisfied and very well contented, praysing their good aduise and wisedome.
Within a while after, the trechery of certaine perfidious persons was disco uered,The Tr^itors which bew^ayed (...) commission to the Turkes. are disc^nered. wherby the intention and honor of the Ambassador Badoario was preserued. The traitors were Constantine and Nicholao Cauazzo of the order of Cittizens, who entring into the Councell of Tenn and into that of the Preguais in quallity  of Secretaries, receiuing pension of the French King did accquaint him with the affaires of greatest importance of the Common-wealth: with them Maffeo L^one, of the order of Senators, was ioyned, who by reason of his place had accesse into both of the Councells: besides Augustino Abondio, and Francisco Valerio had a hand in that trechery. These men being discouered by meanes of certaine letters found in the Cabinet of Abondio, where-in matters of State were mentioned, three of them, to wit, Nicholao Cauazzo, Abondio and Valerio, retired vnto the Pallace of the French Ambassador; as vnto a place of franchise.
This retreat of theirs hauing caused the Senate to thinke very badly of  them, the officers were forth-with sent to apprehend them, where somme resistance beeing made, they were enforced for to bring a small Barke thither,Force is offered to the lodging of the, French Ambassador. with two great peeces of Ordnance in it to spoile and batter the

house, where-vpon the traitors were deliuered to them, and being committed into the hands of the officers of Iustice, and their processe made, they were hanged inThe traitors are punished. the market place of Saint Marke. Constantine Cauazzo and Maffeo Leone, leauing the Citty betimes, had leasure to escape to some place of safety: They were proclaimed thorrow the Citty three seuerall daies, with promise of a good summe of mony to any that could take them aliue or dead.
The King seemed to be much displeased, for the violence offered to the AmbassadorsThe French king compla^neth to the French Ambassador. lodging, so as for certaine moneths space he denied audience to Giouan Antonio Veniero Ambassador to the Signory, vntill that one day being at the Campe before Perpignan, and being desirous to here newes from Constantinople, he called for him, and complained (but very modestly as though, he were halfe reconciled) for that his Ambassadors house had beene forced, vsing these speechesThe Ambassadors braue answer. among others, what would you haue said, if the like had beene done vnto you? Venier made this ready answer. If God should send into my house, and vnder my power, a traitor to your Maiesty, I my selfe would lay hands on him, and deliuer him vnto you, being wel assured if I should doe otherwise, that the Signory would sharpely reprehend me.
During the negociation of the treaty of peace, albeit that the Generall Moceniga was abroad with a great fleet of Gallies, yet neuer-the-lesse hee executed no warlike exploit, for feare least he should hinder the agreement, but onely sailed  vp and downe, entertayning the time, and hauing intelligence that Dragut lay neere to the Isle of Zante with great numbers of Fusts, and other vessels belonging to Pirats and robbed all those that hee met with, hee sayled thither-ward to meete and fight with him; But he hauing a farre off descried our Gallies, and hauing a faire wind, tooke another way and escaped, and after*wards not daring any more to returne into those seas, he went into the West, where hee was taken by Ianetin Doria, with eight of his vessells.
Now after the conclusion of the peace, the Generall before he would goe toThe sorrow and greefe of those of Naples and Maluesia when they vnderstood the conditions of the peace. Dalmatia to disarme the fleet, went to Naples of Romagnia, and Maluesia, to acquaint those people with the successe of the businesse concluded at Constantinople, and the Senates resolution, to quit those townes to the Turke. It is not to be imagined how greeuous these newes were to the people, being as loth to tarry there as to go from thence: For to liue vnder the Turkish tyranny, seemed a very hard matter vnto them: To depart thence like-wise, and for euer to abandon their country, goods, houses and sepulchers, was a greefe almost intollerable.
The Generall then to comfort them, (the whole people of Naples, being assembled in the market place) spake to them in this manner.

The fatherly loue wherewith the Common-wealth hath imbraced and receauedThe (...) Moceniga his oration to the people of Naples. you from the beginning vnder her rule and protection, and then gently gouerned you for a long time, may very easily perswade you, that the same which I am now  enioyned to deliuer vnto you, (which perhaps yee already know) how that this Citty and Maluesia your neighbour, are by an agreement made at Constantinople, to be deliuered to Soliman, hath beene done rather vpon extreame necessity, then by any free or voluntary will. Diuers things may make you see how deerely the Republike hath euer loued you, and especially in these last warres, in which for your releefe it hath readily exposed part of her forces to great dangers: it hath furnished you with mony, soldiers and victualls, for feare least yee should fall into the enemies power, who with barbarous cruelty would haue bathed their hands in your blood, (as they threatened to doe) and made this Citty desolate: hath in aword, not to come to this last point to leaue her deere and welbeloued  subiects, vnder a tyrants power, made great prouisions of Armes, beene at excessiue expences, and at last, vndergone for a time, the insupportable burthen of warre. But what greater signe of loue, can the Common*welth shew vnto yee in this present affliction, then to promise, (as it doth) vnto al those who are willing

to depart, to giue them another fit dwelling place wherein they may safely liue vnder her protection, and to helpe, fauour and nourish them. The ancient Sages said, how that the same place may be truly termed a mans Countrey, where hee liueth well: but what better thing is there, or more to be desired, then to liue vnder the moderate gouernment of a good Prince? yee shall remaine vnder the gouernement of the Common wealth, wee will find yee out a dwelling place in an other Countrey, where yee may liue, if not so commodiously as heere, at leastwise more safely, and free from the continuall dangers and alarmes of the Turks, to which I may truly say that yee were dayly exposed. Diuers nations, their numbers waxing ouer great at home, haue of their owne free-will departed from  their natiue Cuntrey, haue followed fortune, seeking by armes for new and vncertaine habitations. In miseries and calamities to haue a certaine and assured refuge carrieth with it such a comfort, as a man doeth o^ten-times remember things past with greater contentation. Without all doubt our cheifest desire hath beene, to haue still liued at peace, not to haue had the enemies to come and beseege this Citty, not to haue purposed to take it by force, or if this should happen, to haue had greater forces to resist and repulse their attempts. But seing neither the one or other was in our power or yours, what other thing is ther now to be done in this State that we stand, but for vs to performe the duty of a good Prince, Father and Pastor of his people, to defend, vnder our safeguard and  protection, your persons, seeing that we cannot preserue, and beare from hence the houses and walls of this Citty; and for you, to comfort your selues with the loue of your Prince, to fit your selues to time, and to make vse of necessity: your persons shall be preserued, your posterity shall encrease, and of you, beeing valiant fathers, shall be borne generous Children: who knoweth but that some of them may one day reuenge your wronges? so great is the change of humaine affaires, whereunto the greatest Empiers are no lesse subiect then the meanest things on earth. It is certaine that the Common-wealth will euer retaine the same will and desire to take armes against these enemies, so soone as it shall perceiue  the Christian Princes so well vnited together, as it may hope for som commodity thereby, and bee able to doe some notable seruice to Christendome. Therefore as it is necessary, so is it great discretion, and a gallant resolution to seeke to liue in safety, and still hope for better and better.

Whilest the Generall did thus comfort them, all men did shed warme teares, being no lesse moued by loue, then by greefe and sorrow.
The Generall after-wards did make the same remonstrance to those of Maluesia, whereby the poore people beginning by little and little to bee resolued, theNaples and Miluesia are consigned to the Turke. greatest number of them prepared for their departure, carrying with them their best and deerest wealth: And so within a while after, in the moneth of Nouember  the treaty of peace beeing confirmed and ratified, the Prouidator Contaren came thither with twenty Gallies and diuers other Vessells of all sorts, in which hauing imbarked the artillery, munitions, soldiers, and those inhabitants who were willing to depart, with their bagage, consigned, (as it was decreed) those two townes into the hands of Cassin Bascha of Morea, who came thither with smale forces.
All matters being in this sort pacified, the Generall and the Prouidator did disarme, leauing only abroad the ordinary number of Gallies for the gard of the Gulph. But so soone as the Prouidator Contaren came to Venice, he was called into question by Petro Moceniga, Auogator for the common-wealth, to answer (according to the Senates decree made three yeares before) for that which hee  had done in Puglia when he sanke the Turkish Gally; but the matter being debated in Senate, and diuers Senators defending Contarens cause, the Commandement of the Auogatore was declared to bee of none effect, and Contaren was wholy acquitted, in regard of the worthinesse of his good seruices done, during

the time of that warre. No other thing worthy of Memory hapned during this yeare 1540. which was made notable by the peace concluded with the Turkes, which continued for the space of thirty yeares.

The end of the third Booke of the sixth Decade.




The Contents of the fourth Booke of the sixth Decade.



THE occasion of the warre of Hungary. Soliman determineth to make warre in Austria. The French king resolueth to make vse of the Turkish forces against the Emperor who had broken promise with him. The Imperialls doe murther Rincon and Fregosa going in Ambassage from the most Christian king to Soliman. The Emperor granteth the Interim in Germany.
The Senate deny the Pope the holding of a Councel at Vincenza. The Accord betwixt the Turke and the Venetians is confirmed. The Venetians are discontented  because there was not a particular Duke of Milan. An Enteruiew betwixt the Pope. and Emperor at Luca. The French King being incensed against the Emperor doth at one time prepare three armies against him. Maran is taken from Ferdinand. A league betwixt the Emperor and Henry King of England against the French King. Barbaros^a with his Army aideth the French King. Enteruiew betwixt the Pope and the Emperour at Basset. The Turkish Army in Hungary. Maran by agreement remayneth to the Venetians. The English men take Boloin. Peace betwixt the Emperor  and the French King. Trruce graunted betwixt the Emperor and Ferdinand on the one side, and Soliman on the other. The Pope giueth Parma and Placentia in title of Dutchy to Petro Lodouico. And lastly the great contentions betwixt the Emperor and the French King, which were the causes of the quiet of Italy.




 The fourth Booke of the sixt Decade of the History of Uenice.
PEACE being in this manner concluded betixt Soliman and the Venetians (as hath beene said) and the Venetians hauing elsewhere no warre with any Christian Princes, they did hope after so many toyles and trauaills of warre, to see an age full of peace  and felicity. For Soliman made shew, that hee was disposed to make a generall truce for a long time with the Princes of Christendome. Wherein the French Ambassador did much good, who assured them that he held the to ^all resolution thereof in his owne hand, and that which made them to giue more credit to his speeches, was because though the fleet were ready to set saile, yet Barbarossa his iourney was held doubtfull, and beside, no preparationThe great hope of a long peace. at all for a land army was made, which might giue cause of suspition of any enterprize.
The Emperor on the other side and the French King had confirmed the truce, formerly made at Nice, and shewed to one another sundry good offices of loue  and reconciliation: For whilest the Emperor stayed in France in his iourney towards Flanders, hee remained for a time with the King, which gaue hope to all men that those Princes hauing trodden all hatred and rancour vnder their feet did determine to liue in peace and quiet. But the new accidents which did happen (as humane affaires are subiect to change) did alter the State of things, and altogether breake of all hope of peace.
For Iohn King of Hungary beeing deceased, and leauing a young Child by his wife Is^bell, daughter to Sigismond King of Poland, and Perdinand King of the Romanes; saying that the Realme belonged vnto him and not to the child, byThe cause of the warre of Hungary. vertue of a late agreement made with that King, made hast to get it by armes, and hauing to that end raised great numbers of Soldiers, he entred, vnlookt for, into the Kingdome, and seazed on Alba Regalis, Visgrade, Peste, and other townes of Hungary, and at the same time he sent Ieronimo Alasco to Constantinople to treat with Soliman that hee might obtaine the Kingdome after the same manner as King Iohn had held it: but the Queene, widdow to King Iohn, had likewise sent thither, procuring by meanes of a sollemne Ambassade of the cheifest Barons of the Kingdome, the aid and succor of the Turkish army to keep the Kingdome for hir Sonne, which by the selfe same armes had beene maintainedSoliman incensed agoinst Fer dinand determineth to make warre in Austria. for the Father. Soliman seemed to bee greatly displeased therewith, and by so much more, as he supposed to haue receiued a double iniury from Ferdinand, for enuading a state recommended vnto him, and vnder his protection, and for crauing thatby his Ambassador which he went about to take by force. Wherwith being greatly incensed, he did not only cast from him that good inclination which he seemed to beare to peace and concord, but for the reuenging of this

iniury determined to assaile Ferdinand with great forces both by Sea and Land, and at the same time to keepe the Emperor so busied as he should not be able to helpe his brother: Therefore hauing reuoked that which hee had treated with Rincon the French Ambassador concerning the truce, hee sent him backe to his King to tell him that hee had changed his mind, resoluing altogether vpon warre.
The troubles of Flanders were in the meane time appeazed, the Emperor hauingThe Emperors reso^ution contra^y to his promise. rigoro^sly punished the Gantois for their rebellion, to giue feare and terror to others. This being done sooner then was expected, was cause, that the foundations of peace betwixt him and the French King were not surely laid, and finding The King resolu^th to vse the (...) aid^ against the Emperor. himselfe freed of that let which hindred him, hee resolued in no sort to quit the Dutchy of Milan. On the other side, Solimans hatred to the house of Austria, did augment the French Kings courrage, hoping to make vse of his mighty aide, and thereby to reuenge the wrong which he had supposed he had done to him by contemning his friendship.
Rincon then being come to Venice did acquaint the Senate particularly with all what-so-euer had beene done, and of the Turkes great warlike preparations, the which he presumed to be able to dispose of at his Kings pleasure, and crauing after-wards a conuoy for his safe passage into France, Mercurio Bue was commanded to attend vpon him with his company of light horse as farre as the confines  of their State. And because there were but three moneths limited him for his returne to the Port of the great Lord, the King hauing speedily dispatched him, and returning onward on his way to Venice, from thence to passe to Constantinople, hee was neere to Pauia, vpon the riuer of Po, assailed, taken, and murthered, together with Caesar Fregosa, by certaine Spanish footmen, and by the commandement (as it was thought) of the Marquis of Guasto.
This deed, did more then can be imagined incense the French King, for that during the truce they had so vilanously slaine his seruants, and that the Emperour notRincon and Fregosa being se^t Ambassadors to Soliman are marthered. being satisfied (as he said) to haue deceiued him with words, hauing at first put  him in hope of peace, and that hee would restore the Dutchy of Milan to him, after-wards to bee so slacke therein, hauing appeased the troubles of Flanders, and besides, to haue iniuried him contrary to the law of Nations, by the trecherous murther of his seruants. He complained hereof and caused to be published al a broad that hee would bee reuenged thereof; hee wrot to all Forraine Princes,The kings complain^s against the Emperor. giuing them to vnderstand that he had not broken the truce: Then he did particularly aduertize Soliman thereof, to whome he sent Captaine Polin, enioyning him to goe first to Venice, to feele how they stood affected to the Emperor, and to acquaint them with his iust occasion to take armes for the reuenge of such aniniury, and after-wards, to offer vnto them for his owne part what-so euer hee  could doe for them at Constantinople, by imploying his credit and authority so long as he should continue there in quality of Ambassador.
Polin hauing executed his commission, and crauing of the Senate that hee might passe on safely, a Gallie was giuen him for his transportation to Raguza.
The Emperor at the same time was in Germany, where at Ratisbon hee held a Diet concerning matters of Religion, wherein nothing beeing concluded he graunted to the Protestants an interim, so as euery man might vse the same ceremonies which before hee had done; and vpon report of the Turkes great warlike preparations, who were already come into hungary (Soliman being there  in person) a here they had defeated Guillan of Rocandolf, Lieutenant Generall to King Ferdinand, perceiuing that in regard of his own honour, being in Germany and so neere a neighbour to that defeate, all men expected when he would march against the Trukish forces; he, the better to free him-selfe from it, determined to

vndertake the enter prize of Argier, thinking it to bee easier then that against the great Turke, to the great amazement of all men which did see him to attempt an enterprize nothing so honorable as the other: but hee did it vpon hope that passing along by Italy he might take the King vnprouided, and make some attempt vpon him, desiring rather to leaue his owne patrimony in prey then to omit any occasion to be reuenged on the King, whom he knew he had greatly wronged by the murther of his Ambassadors: but he found that the Lord of Langey, Leiutenant fot the King in Piedmont, had dilligently prouided for all matters. Such were the State of affaires and such were the deseignes of Princes concerning Peace and warre. The Venetians thought it fit in those stirrs  to beare them-selues with great consideration and vigilancy, and to keepe themselues neuters, and free from all danger of beeing offended. They very well knew how important a matter the losse of Hungary was, as well for Christendome, as because hereby the Turke, their common enemy, would grow more mighty. But what hope was there of any happy successe? King Ferdinand was not strong enough of himselfe to resist the Turkish army: the Emperor resolued not to hazard his forces against the Turkes in his brothers defense. Germany, badlyThe reasons that mo^ued the Ven^ians to keep themselues (...). affected to the house of Austria, would enterprize nothing which might augment the power and authority thereof* and on the other side the widdow Queen Isabell and the King hir sonne, young and without meanes to defend that Kingdome, and enforced by necessity not onely to make vse of the Turkish ayd, but wholy to depend vpon them. The Venetians notwithstanding that they knew all this, did neuerthelesse determine to be Spectators of all these miseries, and to auoid all occasions that might cause the Turkes to suspect any sinister affection towards them, beeing not desirous to prouoke them to take armes against the Signoty.
Whilest these affaires were thus carried the Pope entreated the Senate to grant, That according to that which had been concluded at Luca, betwixt him and the Emperor, the Councell might be held at Vincenza, the yeare following 1542. but the Senate supposing that it would greatly hurt them, by reason The Senate refuseth to haue their Councell helda^ Vincen za. of the Turkes, made an excuse, saying, that at that time when they had warrs with the Turkes, they could willingly haue granted it, but that now, Soliman would thinke that the Venetians went about to stirre vp the Christian Princes against him, and by that meanes they should draw ruine vpon them-selues, for a small and vncertaine hope of a great good: As also because they knew very wel that the cheefe Prelates did intend to make the Christian Princes friends, before that they would assemble the coun^ell. This excuse was strengthened by an accident newly happened, which gaue suspition that the Venetians stood badly affected to Soliman: it was thus, two Turkish Galeots going from Barbary toward Constantinople, and suspected, by reason that they fled from our fleet, to be Pirates, were taken by the Prouidator of the Sea: the greatest nomber of the Turkes were slaine, and all the Christian slaues within them were set at liberty: the Turkes tooke this in bad part, and especially Barbarossa, vnto whom those vessels did belong, who beeing greeuously incensed thereby, threatened to bee reuenged.
The Senate speedily excusing the matter, did at last obtaine that their might be a treaty concerning the making of amends for it, and the businesse beeing delayed, and Barbarossa being by time and sundry good offices appeased, the strife was ended by meanes of a summe of money to the content of both parties, the Venetians resoluing to continue their freindship with Soliman who sent Ianusby to  Venice to cause the Prince and Senate to confirme the agreement made at Constantinople by the Ambassador Badoario, who was likewise enioyned vpon enteaty of the French to dispose the Venetians to contract aliance with their King.
The Turkish Ambassador was honorably entertayned, and his demands attentiuely

heard: as concerning the confirmation of the Treaty of peace, he was therein speedily satisfied: But to his proposition of fauoring the French they answered, how that they were at peace and friendship with the French King, intending to continue the same: But they they could not as then doe any thing which might enfore them after-wards to take any armes against other Princes: how they were assured that Soliman being a most wise and iust Prince, would like wise allow of their lawful reasons and excuses. This answer being reported to Soliman by Ianusbey,Peace confirmed betwixt the Turkes and the Venetians. was allowed by him, and vnderstanding by the same man, the Venetians firme desire faithfully to obserue the agreement, he was very glad of it, and seemed to be desirous to performe the like towards them. This is all which passed at that time betwixt Soliman and the Signory of Venice: But as concerning the Christian  Princes, they dealt with them with no lesse respects, ayming still at this, not to offend any one, nor to fauour any one, not yet to doe any thing contrary to their neutrality. The Venetians for sundry reasons were greatly displeasedThe Venetians are greeued for that there is not a Duke of Milan. with the contention betwixt the Emperor and the French King, they were likewise displeased for that the Treaty of placing a new Duke in the State of Milan was broken, a matter so often promised to them, and treated of not long before with the French king at the enteruiew of Paris: and to suffer the Emperor peaceably to enioy that state, was nothing else, (as the wisest and discreetest Senators had a long time before foreseen) but to support the Emperors immoderate greatnes, to the great preiudice of the liberty of Italy, and yet for al that, to depart from  his confederacy, and to enter into a new war, the conditious of the times, and the Common-wealths necessity would not permit them. They were greeued besides,The Venetians are solicited to leaue their neutrality. for that the Turkes being sollicited by the French against the Emperor, had determined to march with their army to the hurt of Christendome: yet neuer the-lesse they onely busied them selues, in furnishing their sea townes with soldiors, munitions, victualls, and all other necessaries, in re-enforcing and augmenting their army not medling with the affaires of other men. Each of those Princes did vse meanes to diuert the Senate from the resolution of their neutrallity, by propunding sundry meanes vnto them of new agreements.
The Emperor was ready come into Italy, resoluing to passe into Affricke, notwith-standing  the Pope disswaded him from it, setting before him his brothers danger: His Captaines like-wise propounded vnto him the doubtfull euent of the enterprize of Argier, being to attempt it in the Autumnall seasons of the yeare, which is commonly subiect to diuers alterations, and in a place filled with all discommodities. Yet neuer-the-lesse, considering the great forces of the Turkes, and how farre they were able to enter, (which was a pollicy to draw the Venetians to another Treaty by altering the former capitulations) he did propound vnto them a new confederacy for the safety of Italy against the incursions of those Infidels, assuring them that the Pope, King Ferdinand his brother, and diuers other Princes should enter into it: But the Senate resoluing no more to enter into those dangers, excused it selfe from harkening thervnto, and being more earnestly sollicited, theyThe Senats refus^th to make any new alliance. wholy refused that proposition, especially when they heard that the Pope had no great inclination there-vnto, by reason of the smale hope he had (being wise and well aduised) to bring that businesse to a fortunate end, as also because he hauing dispoiled Ascanio Colona of all his Estates, by reason that hee had beene rebellious and disobedient to the Sea Apostolike, would auoide all occasions of restoring them againe vnto him, as hee well perceaued that hee should bee enforced to doe, by making a new league with the Emperor, who for his owne honor could not forsake a man that had so well deserued of him, and that had beene cheefe of his faction in Italy: besides, aiming at an other matter, he was  desirous to continew in his neutralitiy, to the end that he might obtaine first to haue the state of Milan deliuered into the hands of Octauiano Farnese as Guardian thereof, and to yeeeld to the Emperor and the French King a certaine homage, til such time as they should find out some more assured meanes of Agreement

wherin he presumed that the Venetians would interpose their authority. The Venetians perceiuing that they proceeded slowely in that businesse, and with small hope, beeing desirous not to giue the Turkes any occasion of suspition, did abstaine from it, notwithstanding that they were diuers times sollicited by the Emperor, to send their Ambassadors to Luca where the Pope and hee were to meet* In all other matters they had neuer failed in their duty to the Emperor. They had giuen passage through their state to the Almaine footmen leuied for the iourney of Affrick, and so soone as they vnderstood of his comming into Italy by the way of Trent, they appoynted foure Ambassadors, to weet, Iohn Antonio Veniero, Nicholao Tepulo, Marc Antonio Contaren, and Vincenzo Grimani, who entertained him very honorably vpo^ the Verona territory, and attended vpon him so long as he remained vpon their State, which was for the space of two dayes; for beeing come to Pescara he entered the Mantuan territory, from whence afterward, he went to Milan, from thence to Genoa, and then to Luca where hee met with the Pope, with whom hauing made some small abode, he pursued his iourney for the enterprize of Affrick, which succeeded badly, as it had beene foretold: for hauing landed his soldiers vppon the sands of Argier, he found more resistance in the Garrison of the Citty then hee did expect, and did besides receiue great hurt by the Arabian horsemen, procured by the Turks, who comming vpon them with great celerity, and fighting  in a new and vnusuall manner with our soldiers, did preuent all their deseignes and the businesse beeing drawne forth in length, great harme happened: for their arose so terrible a tempest at Sea, as the ships beeing not able to ride at Ankor, by reason of the force of the wind, som of them were driuen on shoare, and the others to Seaward in the midest of the tempest, So as hauing lost diuers of his vessells, and the residue beeing sore brused and beaten, the Emperor was enforced to giue ouer his enterprize. Diuers men of note dyed in that voyage by diseases and bad ayre, and among others, Marin Iustiniano Ambassador for the Signory, who by the Senates command had still followed the Emperor, and Doctor Nicholao de Ponte, who at that time was gouernour of Vdina, was sent  in his place During the Emperors iourny, the French King was not at quiet whoThe French King is incensed against the Emperor. being mightily incensed (as hath beene said) against the Emperor, thought on nothing but meanes how to be reuenged of these wrongs which he had offered him: therefore by meanes of his Ambassadors whom he sent to Luca to meet the Pope, he had earnestly entreated his Holinesse to declare the truce made at Nice by his owne meanes and authority to be broken and infringed, by the murther of Fregosa and Rincon, the better to let all men see the iustice of his cause: But resoluing by all meanes to preuaile by force, he did with greater vehemency reuiue his former conceits to preuent the Emperor by meanes of the Turkes aid and friendship, whereupon he determined to send back Polin to Constantinople  to treat in particular of the comming of the Army against the Emperor and as he passed along to vse new meanes to draw the Venetians to his party.
Polin then beeing come to Venice from thence to passe to Constantinople,Polin* soliciteth the Venetians to make a league with the French King. he with the Bishop of Montpellier, ordinary Ambassador to the King, came into the Councell of the Tenne, according to the vsuall custome of secret audiences, where they discharged their commission from their Prince: Polin. siriuing very much by a long oration to perswade the Senators by a new aliance to embrace the Kings friendship. But all his discourse and goodly reasons could not preuaile with the Senators to make them alter their opinion, or to draw them to any new alliance, thereby to entangle them in a new warre.The Senates answere to (...)
Therfore that businesse being referred to the Senate their resolution with a generall consent of them all was like to that of the councel of the Tenne, to giue the lame answer to the French Ambassadors as was made to Ianusby: How that the Common wealth did deerely account of the French Kings friendship, the which

for their parts they would euer constantly and inuiolably maintaine: yet neuerthe*lesse; they determined to liue at peace wi^h other Princes, and not to enterprize any thing which might procure war betwixt them. Polin after this answere being inbarked in the Venetian Gallies sailed into Albania, and from thence pursued his iourny towards Constantinople, with a certaine assurance to cause the Turkish army to march whither he would desire: but the deseignes of the French tooke none effect for that yeare, either because it was already to far spent to make great preparations, and to execute all at one time, or else because Soliman had setled all his thoughts vpon the enterprize of Hungary, making account to goe thither in person with a farre greater army. The French King in the meane time resoluing  on warre had raised three armies, the one conducted by my Lord the Daulphin went to beseege Perpignan, the other commanded by my Lord the Duke of OrleanceThe French king at one time raiseth three armies against (...) Emperor. marched to enuade the French County and Luxembourg: the third greater then any of the rest, by reason of the supplies of the Duke of Cleaues, gouerned by the Duke of Vendosme Prince of the blood of France, entred Flanders by the country of Artois. But all these forces did by the report of such great prouisions more am aze then hurt the Emperor: because that the Daulphin finding Perpignan to be suffitiently fortified by the Duke of Alua, returned without any notable exploit, the Duke of Orleans on the other side, did but scoure and wast the country: Wherevpon the French King perceiuing all his deseigns were to no  purpose, did greatly taxe Soliman and the Venetians because they had not taken Armes to fauour his party whilest the Emperor was busied else-where.
The King being thus discontented, was the more incensed against the VenetiansThe King is (...) with the Venetian* thorow the bad offices of the Bishop of Montpellier his Ambassador, so as Polin being informed of his Maisters discontent, did openly in all places oppose himselfe against the Venetians affaires, scandalizing the Baily and the Commonwealth: and because he hoped to haue the Turkish army the yeare following, at his kings deuotion, he said, that it being once ready, he would make the Venetians feele, to their losse, what great force his Kings pursuts and authority had against them. The cause of the kings discontentment proceeded from that which is aboue  mentioned, for that they went armed and in troupes to the house of the French Ambassador, to take the three traytors that had retired them-selues thither, who after som resistance being deliuered ouer into the hands of iustice, were forthwith executed: whereof, the Ambassador hauing aduertized the King otherwise thenPolin iis pract^ses against the Venetians. the matter was handled, his maiesty shewed both by word and action to be highly displeased with the Venetians: but afterwards hauing truly vnderstood their manner of proceeding therein, hee sent the Prothonotary Monluc to Venice, to excuse him, if by meanes of a false report hee had sinisterly conceiued of the Commonwealths friendships, protesting vnto them that he would neuer more remember any thing that was past, but esteeme them as his good and trusty friends: within  a while after he caused the same Prothonotary to return to Venice (who by his commandement went to Rome, to acquaint the Pope there-with) to remaine there as ordinary Ambassador, in the Bishoppe of Montpelliers place, who was called home at their entreaty and to please them. Another accident happened at the same time which did greatly troble the Common-wealth as well for it owne particular interest, as for the respect to other Princes which was the surprising of the towne of Maran vpon King Ferdinand, vnto whome it had bin giuen by their last agreement.Miranis taken ^rom Ferdinand. Bertrand de Sacchia a subiect to the Venetians hauing of his owne proper motion seazed on Maran, perceiuing himselfe not strong enough to keepe it called Petro Strozzi to his aid who was banished from Florence, who speedily came  thither with a great troope of soldiers assembled in hast, and hauing entred it, did forthwith erect the French kings bane^, saying that they held it for the king, thretning those of the town to deliuer it ouer to the Turkes, if they were not speedily seconded by som Prince or other, rather then to returne it into the hands of Ferdinand. That, as the begining to a great war was very troublesome to the Venetians.
For on the one side they considered how that Ferdinand might suspect that they were consen^ing therevnto, the cheefe Au^hor of that trouble being one of their subiects: on the other, they knew not what to thinke, in regard those that had seazed on it did shield themselues vnder the name and authority of the French King,The Venetians doubts vpon the taking of Maran. being ignorant of his meaning therein: But that which did most trouble them, was their feare least that towne should bee deliuered to the Turkes, it being but foure and twenty miles of from Venice, wher being once setled they might howerly at their pleasure make incursions vpon the land, by meanes of the lake which is a very neere neighbour to it.
The Senate then determining speedily to prouide for those inconueniences, caused proclamations to be made: That none of their subiects on paine of bodily punishment, should carry victualls, or other releefe to those of Maran: They did besides, commit to safe and sure keeping, the father and wife of Sacchia who were at Vdina, that they might haue in their power, a sufficient pawne to bridle his audatious rashnesse: yet neuer-the-lesse they did still entertaine those of Maran, with faire and gentle speeches, putting them in hope to end all matters to their content, for feare least Ferdinand comming with a great Army, and they disparing (without aide) of being able to resist him, should receiue a Turkish garrison into the towne. The Venetians in this diuersity of suspitions resoluing not to medle therein, but onely so farre forth as necessity should enforce them, did  abstaine from doing any thing, that might incense the Princes interessed in that businesse.
Vpon these newes Ferdinand sent the Bishoppe of Trent to Venice to request the Senate to aid him with vessells for the recouery of Maran, concealing that which concerned the French King: The Senate answered, that it was very desirous,The Senats answere to the French Ambassador. as a louer of iustice and equity, that Ferdinand should recouer Maran which had beene so trecherously snatcht from him, and therefore it was ready to giue passage to his troupes and to furnish them with victualls: yet neuer-the-lesse, they were in hope that all matters would bee ended in friendly sort. And questioning with the French Ambassador there-vpon, he answered that the King would  no otherwise dispose of Maran, then should stand with the Senates good liking,The Senats answer to Ferdinad. and therefore he desired to know their meaning therein: The same Senate replied that his King was so discreet, as he needed no other mens councell; but that their desire was to proceed by such meanes as might preserue vnion and concord.
During these Treaties time ran on, and those which continued in Maran (Sacchia hauing beene driuen from thence by his owne fellowes, who going forth of the gates, to accompany the German gouernors wife, who went to get mony to pay their ransome, returning backe, was shut forth) waxing more bold and insolent began to build a Fort at the Hauen of Lignare, fiue miles of from Maran,The V^netians raise the sort of Maran. that they might haue a safe place of retreat, when they should come forth, (as they oftentimes did) to surprize and rob such vessels as passed along that way. The Venetians thinking it a disgrace to suffer a deed of so great consequence did sodenly resolue to beate it downe and ruine it: The charge thereof was committed to Bernardo Sagreda, who speedily and fortunately executed it. This resolution made them to obtaine that certaine Imperiall gallies, sent for the recouery of Maran, did not enter into the Gulphe: for the French King being aduertized of their going thither prepared other some to goe to the same place, to the releefe of Maran, which would haue beene a great preiudice to the Venetians to haue seene both those fleets in their Gulph, but both the one and the other, at the Senats entreaty, refrained from comming thither.
The affaires of Maran remayning thus doubtfull, the French King and the king of Romans, had in the meane time begun to treat of an agreement about that towne, in which new difficulties daily arising, Storssi and those within Maran, seemed desirous to deliuer vp that Fort rather to the Signory of Venice then to any

other Prince whatsoeuer, protesting that vnlesse they did speedily agree amongst themselues, they would treat and deale with the Turkes.
Ferdinand although he truly knew the Venetians int^grity, or else beeing desirous to dissemble the suspition which he had conceiued, knowing that their friendship and aide might greatly auaile him in that businesse, did choose two Commissioners to end the controuersie, heretofore often mentioned, concerning the intelligence and obseruation of the treaty of Trent: They came to Venice: FrancescoThe controuersie be^wixt the Venetians and Ferdinand is put to compromise. Contaren, and Francesco Sanuto, chosen in former time for the same businesse, were deputed by the Senate therevnto, who conferring together, and with them the Emperors Ambassador as a louing vmpier, matters seemed to be brought to  a good passe, and in a manner to an agreement, if they could haue found meanes to haue composed the controuersie, about the townes of Belgrad and Castel-nouo, engaged heretofore with other castles by the Emperours of the house of Austria to the Duke of Saxony, whereon, and vpon the quality of the engagement hauing a long time insisted, the whole businesse remained vnresolued on.
This assembly was broken off by reason of the rumors spred abroad at the beginningAn. 1543. of the yeere 1543. of the great prouisions for warre made in sundry places, and chiefly at Constantinople, to enuade Hungary and Austria, and to scoureGreat preparations for war on all sides. all the sea-coasts belonging to the Emperour. The French King hoping by meanes of this army, raised in his behalfe, and at his entreaty, to breake the Emperors  designes and forces, had likewise raised a great army as well of his owne subiects as of Swisses, to vphold the Duke of Cleues rebellion and to assaile the Emperor in diuers and sundry places: who on the other side determining to reuenge the wrongs and iniuries receiued from the French, and especially to chastise (as he said) the audaciousnesse of the Duke of Cleues a feudatary of the Empire, for taking armes with his enemies against him, did assemble the Dyet of Princes and free townes according to the custome of the country, where hee procured them to make warre on the French King, and the Duke of Cleues, at the common charge of all Germany: and for the augmenting of his forces, he resolued to ally himselfe with Henry King of England, notwithstanding that the same King The Emperor allieth himself wi^h Henry King of England. had repudiated his Aunt Queene Katherine, and shaken off the yoake of the Romish Catholike Church, that they might both of them together make warre vpon France.
King Henry did easily agree to the Emperors motion, beeing distasted of the French King, for fauoring Iames King of Scots his enemy.
The Pope in the meane time and the Venetians did still continue in their neutrallity, meaning as much as in them lay to maintaine the peace of Italy. The Pope neuerthelesse being for sundry reasons displeased with the Emperor, made suite to the Venetians to contract a more strict alliance together for their commonThe Pope goeth about to make alliance with the Venetians. safety, propounding at that time termes tending wholly to peace, and not to  depart, but vpon constraint, from their neutrallity, but determining neuerthelesse, as it was perceiued by sundry signes, to draw the Republike afterwards to some new confederacy with the French King.
The Senate continuing the accustomed answers, and telling the Pope how that there was not any cause to mooue them to renue their alliance, which mightThe Sena^es a^swer to the Pope. (not without suspition to Princes) rather hasten then preuent the mischiefe to come, made an excuse, saying, that it could not make any new agreement with any one, for feare least the Emperour would be incensed against them, who had so often sought vnto them for new confederacy, to the which they had neuer consented. But they were most of all troubled to see the Turkish army to  depart from Constantinople, whereof men spake diuersly; notwithstanding that the Turkes did promise them in no sort to meddle with any thing which did belong to their Common-wealth, and that captaine Polin, who was to goe along with it, had assured them of the like, who by his Kings commandment had changed

his minde. Yet the Senate not relying ouer much on all these promises, determined likewise to arme the number of three score Gallies, and to appoint a Generall ouer them, which was Stefano Tepulo, a man very famous for his rare vertues and deserts: whereof they forthwith aduertized all Princes, to the end thatThe Venetians doe arme for their owne safety and defense. the making ready of their fleet, might not make them to suspect that they had any sinister meaning; saying that the Republike had armed certaine Gallies for the defense of their owne subiects, and for the gard of their sea-coasts: and they commanded their Generall to visit the Islands vnder their dominion, and all their forts vpon the sea, to giue order and prouide for all things necessary, with expresse charge to auoide all occasions that might giue the Turkes any cause of distrusting  their friendship towards them: whereinto they very well knew that Doria would haue oftentimes cunningly drawne them.
The Turkish nauall army in the meane time consisting of sixe score saile departed from Constantinople vnder the command of Cariadine Barbarossa, captaine Polin going along with him, and comming to Negrepont where it made some stay to take in souldiers and other necessaries, it sailed to the Hauen of Figara, and from thence directed their course towards the West, and hauing passed the Far of Messina, came neere to Calabria, where landing certaine of his troupes, he tooke the city of Regio, and after he had spoiled it and scoured the country round about (the castle still holding out) he did re-embarke his people,The Turkes take Regio in Calabria. and held on his course towards France, and by the way, he tooke in water at the Isle of Ponze, and next at Ostia vpon the Riuer Tiber, whereby Rome was in alarme, but Polin did by letters assure the Gouernor of the towne, that no harme should bee done to any one vpon the coast, then hoysing ankors, and still coasting along the Riuers of Tuscany and Genoa, he arriued in the Hauen of Tolon, where finding two French Gallies, hee was by them conducted towardsBarbarossa his fleet at Mars^illes. Marseilles, whither the Kings other foure and twenty Gallies came.
Barbarossa went on shore where hee was magnificently entertained in the city together with great numbers of Ianissaries, Polin riding post to finde the King and to receiue his commandements, whom Barbarossa was enioyned wholly  to obey, did speedily returne to the army, which being encreased by sixteene French Gallies, and certaine shippes wherein were sixe thousand foote-men, hee departed from Marseilles and sailed with a faire winde to the hauen of Villafranca to beseege the city of Nice which the Duke of Sauoy then possessed, which had euer belonged to the crowne of France.
The Artillery and souldiers beeing landed, the City for certaine daies wasBarbarossa taketh the city of Nice and then r^turneth to Marseille^. battered, whereby it was enforced to yeeld without being sacked: but the Marquis of Guasto hauing victualled the castle, and Barbarossa being diswaded from makeing any longer aboade there, Autumne being very farre spent raised his campe and returned with his whole fleete to the hauen of Marseilles.
Now the Venetian fleete beeing truely aduertized what course the Turkes held, and how that Ianetin Doria was gonne into the Leuant, did entertaine time in the Gulphe, the Generall thinking it more safe and proffitable to prouide for that which concerned themselues, and to auoide occasion of meeting with the others, that he might take away all suspition of being desirous to helpe or hinder their deseignes.
The Emperor at the same time resoluing to goe into Germany to stirre vp that country against the French King, hauing first caused the Estates of Spaine to accept the Prince Don Philip his sonne for their King, came to Barcelona where finding Doria with forty Gallies and certaine ships he imbarked himselfe  with the Spanish fantery, and came to Genoa. Vpon the report of his arriuall in Italy, the Venetians chose foure Ambassadours, to wit, Carlo Morosin,The Emperor returneth into Italy. Gabriele Veniero, Lodouico Faliere, and Vittor Grimany, to meet him as he passed through their State and to entertaine him by the way.
The Pope in the meane time hauing promised other matters to himselfe, seeing that the confederacy propounded to the Venetians had taken none effect, resolued to talke with the Emperor, determining first, better to assure his owne affaires, as well for temporall matters as for Religion, and his Pontificall dignityThe Popes des^ignes to confer with the Emperor. in the councell which was to be held at Trent a city in Germany: and next, meaning once more to try if the Emperour would quit the Dutchy of Milan to Octauio Farneze for a certaine summe of money, which he perceiued the Emperour stood in great need of, by reason of the warres he had in hand: but concealing for that time those his secret deseignes, made shew, that the cause which mooued him as the common father and head of Christendome to embrace the Emperor  passing along so neere him, was to exhort him to peace with Christians, and to warre against the Infidels; and to try if his presence in that businesse would be of more force then his exhortations made by his Legats sent to the Emperor into Germany, and into France to the most Christian King.
Now the Pope hauing acquainted the Venetians with his departure from Rome and going to Bolognia, alleadged no other reason of his iourney then the former, wholly concealing the negociating concerning the Dutchy of Milan, thereby to feele if he could discouer any thing from them concerning it, for, on the one side he knew that the same treaty was pleasing vnto them, but on the other, it behoued them to proceed therein very respectiuely in regard of the aboue mentioned matters. The Senate continuing the old resolution not to meddle with these negociations, did vnfeignedly commend the Popes good and holy meaning, with his resolution in so honest and important a businesse for the common good of all Christendome, not passing on any further to any other consideration.
The Pope seeming to bee greatly desirous of that enteruiew did not cease to pursue it, notwithstanding that hee was alone in that negociation, and that the Emperour alleadged diuers difficulties and lets, who making no great account of him, made shew that he did not much affect him, either because hee was distastedThe Emperor resuseth to conser with the Pope. of him, the Pope hauing not openly shewed himselfe his friend as he ought to haue done by reason of the honour done by the Emperor to him and his house, hauing by the marriage of his daughter preferred it to so many other noble alliances: or else because he did suspect the truth of the matter, how that the Pope would recommence his suite, that the Dutchy of Milan might be made ouer to Octauio Farneze, the which he resolued not to quit to any man whatsoeuer: and therefore he was desirous to eschew all occasions of discontenting the Pope, and of prouoking him to embrace the French Kings friendship, by refusing his demand.
But the Pope supposing it would greatly blemish his greatnesse and dignity, if he should let the Emperour passe thorough Italy without seeing him, had to that end sent, first, Petro Lodouico his sonne to Genoa, and then the Cardinall Farneze his Nephew, to entreate him that the enteruiew might be at Bolognia, and vpon his Maiesties excuse that he was not willing to come so farre backe and to delay his iourney, he determined to come farther forward euen to Busset, where it wasThe Pope and Emperors enteruiew at Buss^tisto no purpose. concluded they should see one an other, which was a towne very discommodious and smally frequented belonging to the Palauicins: but this enteruiew had no better successe then all men expected, nothing being there concluded, either for the Churches seruice or the particular profit of the Farnezes. For the Emperor continued his resolution to make warre vpon the French King, and the Duke of Cleues, and as for Milan, because he would not flatly deny it, hee told him that he could not dispose of that State, vntill he had acquainted the Princes of the Empire  therewith, whereby he might easily perc^iue that he did meane to appropriate it to himselfe.
The enteruiew being dissolued which onely lasted three daies, the Emperour pursuing his iourney entred vpon the Venetians State, where the foure aboue

mentioned Ambassadors met with him, and did honourably entertaine him, furnishing him with whatsoeuer he needed either for his owne person or his household, so long as he continued vpon their territories, wayting vpon him as farre as the confines of Trent, making diuers offers vnto him in generall in the name of the Common wealth, not mentioning any negociation till they were ready to take their leaues of him, and then they besought him to be a meanes to his brother for a dispatch concerning the agreement of Trent which they had taken vpon them. From Trent the Emperour went to Vuormes, and from thence to Spire, to be nerer to that which he had determined to doe, hauing still resident with him Daniele Bouricci Secretary to the Common-wealth, the Ambassador  de Pont remayning sicke at Trent, who being returned to Venice for the recouery of his health, Bernardo Nouagera was chosen in his stead.
Warre was at the same time much kindled in Hungary whither Soliman beingThe Turke maketh warre in Hungary. come in person with a mighty army (hauing first scoured and wasted the country) had beseeged the city of Strigonium, from whence he sent an Ambassador to Venice to acquaint the Senat with his iourney and deseignes, and also there to vnderstand newes of his fleet, which at that time lay in the hauen of Villafranca at the enterprize of Nice, where of the Senate aduertized him, and withalA Turkish Ambassador commeth to Venice. did infinitely thanke him for the honor he did them by acquainting them with his actions and deseignes. This demonstration of friendship from the Turkes did  serue them for two purposes, first to continue peace betwixt them, and next, to encrease their reputation with other men. Therefore Soliman hauing againe sent an other Ambassador to Venice to aduertize them of his progression in Hungary, the Senate resolued in reciprocall manner to render him the like demonstration of honour and friendship, by sending an Ambassadour to him. This charge was committed to Stefano Tepulo (hee hauing giuen ouer the place of Generall) who at the spring was to goe to Constantinople to Soliman (who was come thither from Hungary) to reioyce with him in the Common-wealths name for his fortunate successe, and to make shew at his Porte of a correspondency of loue and frindship.
The affaires of Maran were not yet appeased, but on the contrary much more enkindled, as well in regard of the French, who did meane to keepe and defend it, as for the Almaines who determined to haue it by force: so as besides foure hundredSharp war about Maran. foot-men which the Lord of Senei brought thither, the French King sent great troupes of horse and foot: on the other side the King of Romaiues hauing caused certaine companies of Lansequenets to passe the mounts at Pontieba, vnder the command of Iohn Baptista Sauella, did besides assemble all the souldiers on the neerest places of his Dominions to make a bodie of an army, and to beseege it. The Senate had giuen free passage through their State both to the one and other, to shew that they had no hand in that businesse: they were neuerthelesse  displeased for that one Fust and two Brigantins had beene armed at Trieste which entring into the Hauen of Dignana had begunne streightly to shut in those of Maran on the sea side: wherevpon, to suffer them to stay their, besides the drawing of many others thither, would seeme greatly to preiudice the Republikes claime to that Hauen, and shew some partiality, by suffering them to offend Maran from that place: the which they determyning not to suffer, because they would proceed modestly therein, did entreate Ferdinand and the Emperour likewise to cause those armed vessels to depart forth of the Hauen, sending thither at the same time an armed galley to hinder their incursions, till such time as they should receiue an answere.
During these treaties, Iohn Francisco de Pacis a Florentine came to Venice, toA motion made to the Senate for the hauing of Ma^an. offer vnto the Senate in Strossi his name the fort of Maran for some honest recompence, protesting that vpon their refusall, he should be enforced to negociate with some other great Prince, whom he knew would gladly accept it: Strossi

resoluing in no sort to render it to Ferdinand, but rather to get some great summe of money for it, by contracting with the Turke: that the French King had left Maran to bee disposed of at Strossi his pleasure, to make his profit thereof, in recompence of the good seruices done by him to the crowne of France.
The Senate therevpon was greatly perplexed, either to accept or refuse it. It desired to auoide all occasions of contention with Ferdinand, who might suspect that they had some intelligence with Strossi: and to suffer that place so nere a neighbour to Venice to fall into the Turkes hands, would be very dangerous, not only for the Common-wealth but for all Christendome. Being then mooued with feare of such a danger, they resolued to harken to Pacis proposition, and  to that end two Senators were appointed, Antonio Capello, and Francesco Contaren, to treat with him vpon the particularities of the agreement: where after sundry contestations the composition was made in this manner: that Strossi forAgreement betwixt Strossi and the (...) concerning Maran. consigning Maran into the Venetians hands, should for recompence receiue fiue and thirty thousand Ducats at one entire payment. This being thus concluded, Alessandro Bondimiero was so dainely chosen Prouidator of that place, who going along with Pacis, with some few foot forces, was brought into it, and Strossi hauing consigned the towne to him, the whole people with great ioy did forthwith take the oth of obedience to the Republike of Venice.
The Venetians did afterwards acquaint the Emperour and Ferdinand with theThe Venetian^ excuses to the Emperor and Ferdinand, concerning Maran. causes which had mooued them to embrace that necessary resolution: that their actions in two yeeres space, that the towne had beene offered vnto them, could yeeld sufficient testimony of their integrity, during which time they had not only refused to giue an eare to their often propounded offers, but had giuen passage, victuals, and other commodities to Ferdinands troupes for to recouer it: that they had likewise considered, how that place was of no great importance to Ferdinand, neither for the States confines, nor reuenew there of: but on the contrary of great expence, accompanied with extreame danger for all his States if it should haue fallne into the Turkes hands, as vndoubtedly it would haue so happened, if they should haue refused Strossi his offer.
These reasons being cunningly deliuered to those Princes by Bernardo Nouagera, and Marin de Canalis, Ambassadours for the Signory, the one with the Emperor, and the other with King Ferdinand, did in some sort appease them, both of them hauing at first taken the treaty concerning that place in bad part: and then the quallity of the times did greatly helpe to make those Princes capable of the reasons by them alleadged: by reason that a Dyet had beene published atAn. 1544. the beginning of the yeere 1544. Where all the chiefe Princes and Lords of Germany were to meet to treat of affaires of great consequence, to make warre vpon the French, and to resist the Turkes attempts: for all the thoughts of the Emperour and the King of Romans tended only to those two ends; hoping  besides (as a matter which they much desired) that the Venetians perceiuing so many Princes and free townes of Germany leagued against the Turkes, would enter into league with them, and abandon that of the Turkes; this was the vsuall talke among Courtiers.
Now the Emperor was greatly afraide least that the Venetians, vpon the least discontent giuen vnto them from himselfe, should quit his alliance and embrace that of the French King, who had so often sought to them for it; aud his feareThe Emperor^ and French Kingspractizes to draw ^he Venetians to their party. was at the same time greater then euer, in regard of his hope (being ioyned to the King of England and the Suisses) to molest France more then euer he had done, perceiuing himselfe to be freed from the care of releeuing Italy, which would be  peaceable so long as the accord with the Venetians should last.
The French King on the contrary hauing the selfe same considerations, did hope to defend his owne Realme by troubling Italy, with the warres of Naples and the Dutchy of Milan, to constraine the Emperour to diuide his forces, and

to send part of them to the aide of those countries, and to that end did againe vse meanes to draw the Venetians to his party, and supposing that the quallity and reputation of the man might greatly further the businesse, he caused the Cardinall of Ferrara to goe to Venice to that end, who was honourably entertainedThe Cardinall of Ferra a exharieth the V^netian. In the French Kings behalfe. there, and comming into the Senat in secret audience (as he had desired) he beganne in substance to declare vnto them what the Emperours deseignes were; who only aspired to a sole Monarchy, and especially to that of Italy, the which he might with ease attaine to, did not the French King counterpoise him, who being their louing and trusty friend, did by him entreat them to enter into league with him, and speedily to send their nauall army into Puglia, where they  should finde the country disfurnished of Garrisons, and all the people at their deuotion, who did openly hold the Spaniards for their enemies, and he in the meane time, for the safety of their State, offered alwaies to haue fifteene thousand men ready in Piedmont, or in any other place that they should thinke fit.
The Senate according to the custome, did not at that time giue the Cardinall any answere to his proposition, but the businesse being afterwards debated in the councell, they answered him, That as the Republike did highly esteeme and deerelyThe Senates answer to the Cardinal. reckon of the French Kings friendship, it did likewise determine still to embrace and cherish it: but it neither could nor would (being now at peace with other Princes, and in want of diuers things by reasons of the last warres) enter into trouble  and expence by a new warre.
The King supposing this answere to be no flat deniall (so desirous hee was to draw the Venetians to his party against the Empetour) within a while after the Cardinals returne to Rome, imagining that the speech which the Pope had vsed in his behalfe would be of force to alter the Venetians mindes, caused Barthol^meo Caualcanti, who was banished from Florence, to goe from Rome to Venice, to acquaint the Venetians with the Popes great affection towards the affaires of France, and to reuiue the negociation of the league, not long before propounded;Anew practize to draw the Venetians to the league with the King. although the King by dissembling it, to make the offence and sorrow seeme lesse, for that so many of his attempts had not taken effect, did protest that  Caualcanti his going to Venice proceeded from the Cardinals sole and onely motion.
Caualcanti was a man of great iudgement, and an excellent Orator (as his workes that are published doe manifest) who made a long and excellent discourse to the Senate, contayning the selfe same substance that the Cardinall had before vttered: but the Senate being firme in their resolution did stop their eares to his speech, till they heard him speake of peace betwixt the Emperour and the French King, with all men so much desired.
The Pope to hasten the matter, sent two of the chiefest Cardinals, to wit, MoronTwo Legats sent to those Princes to procure peace. to the Emperour, and Grimani to the French King, exhorting the Venetians  to send their extraordinary Ambassadours, as they had done at the assembly at Nice, to the end that the exhortations both of the one and other might be of greater force to perswade them to so good a matter; and worthy the piety of any Christian Prince.
The Senate although it desired to see peace and concord betwixt those Princes, did neuerthelesse know that it behoued them to gouerne themselues moderatly therein for diuers reasons, hauing oftentimes had experience of the bad offices done vnto them, by sinisterly interpreting in the Courts of Christian Princes, their sound and sincere actions, and that the selfe same interpretations had beene divulged at Constantinople vnder false collours, to their preiudice, yea, euen  in Solimans hearing, and satisfying themselues with doing their duties by their ordinary Ambassadors, they were desirous to eschew that vaine and dangerous apparance. These Ambassadors acquainting the Senat with what was done in the Court of those Princes, reported, that they were very much enclined to

peace, not so much for any desire they had to be good friends, as because theyThe English do beseege (...). were weary of the warres: for the French being on the one side assailed by the King of England who comming to Calais with a mighty army did in person beseege Bullin, and on the other by the Imperiall army, which after along seege had taken the city of Saint Desier vpon Marne, was very desirous by peace to free himselfe from so many discontents: the Emperour on the other side, wholy wanting money for the continuing of the warre, and fearing the losse of that which he held in Italy, by reason of forces raised in the Kings behalfe neere to Mirandola. Doubting likewise the successe of that warre in regard of the great numbers of Swisses which went to the Kings aide, and being very desirous to see  the Duke of Sauoy restored to his State, who vpon his occasion had beene despoiled there of, the which could not be done but by agreement, was very willing and desirous of it: but each of them did looke when some other would motion the businesse.
The French Queene offered to employ her selfe therein, who was the EmperorsA Spanish Frier beginneth the treaty of peace betwixt those Princes. sister, hauing caused Don Gabriel de Guzman a Spanish Frier and her Confessor to goe to her brothers campe, to motion the matter to the chiefe of the army, supposing therein to doe a pleasure to her husband and brother both at once.
This treaty then begunne by Guzman after sundry goings and commings from  one campe to another did speedily take effect. Therefore, there being assembled the Admirall of France and the Secretary Bayard, which Granuelle and D. Ferrant de Gonzaga to conclude in their Princes names on the conditions of peace, it wasThe Capitulations of the peace. deereed; that on either part those townes which had beene taken since the treaty of Nice, should bee redeliuered; that all particular controuersies which might arise therevpon should be decided in the city of Cambray by Commissioners therevnto appointed: that the French King should aide the Emperor with a certaine number of horse and foote whensoeuer hee should make warre vpon the Turke: that the Duke of Sauoy should be restored to his State, certaine places thereof excepted, to the which the French King laied some particular claime: and for the better assurance of this accord, the Duke of Orleance, the Kings second sonne should marry the Emperors daughter, or one of his Neeces, daughter to Ferdinand, according as he should thinke fit, (who within foure monthes was to resolue himselfe therevpon) and yet with a different dowry; for marrying with the Emperors daughter the whole Low-Countries were promised him for her dowry, and for the Neece the Dutchy of Milan. The Venetians as friends to them both were comprehended in that peace, who had so discreetly behaued themselues during those warres, as both the one and other of them were satisfiedBoth sides complaine of the Pope. and pleased with their proceedings: the like did not happen to the Pope, of whom the French did greatly complaine, because that hee hauing made a  shew to fauour their party, had not aided them at their greatest need: the Imperials on the other side did accuse his deseignes, saying, that if hee had not openly declared himselfe for the French King it was not for want of loue, but for feare of the Emperors forces; so as his Legat had much to doe to get him to be comprehended in the peace: but because it was said to be made for the common good of Christendome, it was requisite and necessary to haue him therein named, as the chiefe of Christians.
This peace happening at a time and after such a manner when all menDiuers opinions concerning this peace. least expected it, gaue occasion to men to discourse diuersly thereof, some thinking that it would continue, because the King did thereby purchase  vnto himselfe, either the Dutchy of Milan, or Flanders, with the whole Low Countiers, others beeing of a contrary opinion did imagine that the same accord would bee of none effect at all, by reason whereof the Emperour, who would not see the Realme of France to bee any way ruined by

the English (which was the cause of the agreement) would not likewise endure to see it grow great and florish by peace, and by the purchase of so many goodly dominions. The Venetians for all that did not let to reioyce therefore both by bonefiers and other demonstrations of ioy, yeelding sollemne thankes to God for that he had inspired the hearts of those Princes to imbrace peace.
Barbarossa in the meane time departing from Villafranca to returne towards Constantinople, and sayling alongst the coast of the Realme of Naples, he spoyled and wasted the whole country, and chiefly the Isles of Ischia and Lipari, which with a barbarous cruelty he did miserably ruine; from thence sayling to Corfou, and saluting the castle as a friend, he receiued the accustomed presents, not sufferingBarbarossa his cruell spoiles as he returned home. any harme to be done to the inhabitants of the Island. Captaine Polin was in that fleet with fiue Gallies and other vessels, who hauing brought the Turkes as farre as Lepanto, returned with all his vessels to Marseilles.
The Turkes were displeased at the newes of this peace betwixt Christian Princes, thinking it be done, the better to breake their deseignes vpon Hungary or Transiluania, for which they had already made preparations; but they went about to conceale their discontent for the better maintenance of their reputation, being wont to contemne Christians; and therefore not giuing ouer their former determination they caused to be giuen out that they were making farre greater preparations then at any other time before, to march at the spring against the  States belonging to the house of Austria: and yet neuerthelesse, the report at the same time was, that if the Ambassadors of those Princes did come to that Port, they should be entertained and willingly harkened to: for by their law they can not deny audience to any that come to sue for peace and friendship with their great Lord: the report of these great preparations, caused the Emperor and FerdinandThe Emperor and Ferdinand doe send Ambassadors to treat of agreement with the Turkes. expresly to dispatch their messengers to that Port to treat of peace and agreement: and for their safer going to worke, they caused the French King first of al to send one of his seruants to sound Solimans disposition therevnto, and withall to craue a passe-port for their Ambassadors.
The King did willingly entertaine this businesse, as well to free himselfe of that  he was tied to by the treaty of peace to aide the Emperour when he should make warre vpon the Turke, as in some sort to wipe out that blot, for which men taxed him; that a most Christian Prince had made vse of the armes of Infidels against Christians: wherevpon, his Ambassadour passing by Venice, did tell the Senate by his Kings commandement, that he had to none other end entertained the Turkes friendship, but only to make vse of it vpon such occasions for the good and profit of Christendome.
This Ambassador being come to Constantinople found Soliman disposed to whatsoeuer he demanded, and the passe-port which he craued being deliuered to him (which was at the beginning of the yeere 1545.) Ioronimo Adorni, did in An. 1545. Ferdinands name goe to Constantinople; the Emperor hauing to that end appointed Doctor Girardo, caused him first to goe to Venice, where he, and the Prothonotary Monluke, ordinary Ambassadour for the French King with the Signory, did imbarke themselues in the Venetian Gallies for Raguza, and fromThese Princes Ambassadours come to Constantinople. thence went to the Port of the great Lord. Before their departure from Venice they had entreated the Senate that their Baily might haue an hand in that businesse, the which was granted, and commandement sent to him so to doe, but that he should doe it so cunningly as the Turkes might not conceiue any sinister opinion, whereby any harme might redound to the Common-wealth, or profit to themselues.Commissioners decide the controuersie betwixt Ferdinand and the Venetians.
They treated at the same time in Venice of composing the strife betwixt King Ferdinand and the Republike, as well for the execution of the sentence of Trent, as for that which happened since concerning Maran, where after great contestation they did at last conclude for the businesse of Trent, to send Commissioners

thither to decide it, but for Maran it was referred to the Emperors councell: one of the chiefe conditions was that the Venetians should giue to Ferdinand threescore, and fifteene thousand Ducats, the which (all other controuersies being ended) they promised to pay in three yeeres, and at three equall payments.
This accord although it tooke none effect, was maliciously interpreted bySolimen is (...) informed of the Venetians. some, who vsed to sow discord and contention, telling Soliman that the same treaty was made against him in Ferdinands behalfe, vnto whom the Venetians promised that summe of money to leauy souldiers. These false reports being iustified and the truth of the matter knowne, Soliman was satisfied therewith: wherevpon the Senate thought it fit not to giue him any more cause of suspition: and therefore they wrote to their Baily, willing him no more to visit the Ambassadors, nor to  make any more publike demonstration of dealing in their businesse, the which he did exactly obserue, yet neuerthelesse some times when he had any secret conference with the Bashas, he did not let to doe all good offices which might further the conclusion of the accord: wherein because the Republike had no other aime but the common peace and quiet, they solicited the Bashas that it might be mentioned in the treaty, that the Emperor and Ferdinand should not attempt any thing in Italy during the truce.
Rustin hauing heard this proposition, and seeming to be desirous to performe  any thing for the particular profit of the Signory, sayd, that by all meanes it was particularly to bee inserted in the treaty of the accord, as the friend of the great Lord, and expresse mention was made, how that during the truce the Venetians State should in no sort be molested by the Princes, comprehended in the agreement, who doing otherwise it should be vnderstood to be broken with Solimans selfe: yet neuerthelesse, it was thought that the Venetians had opposed themselues against that truce then handled, seeing that they could not procure peace, which caused the Emperor for that purpose to returne from Trent to Venice his Ambassador Mendoza, who not dissembling this suspition, and assuring them of the Emperours hearty affection towards them, entreated them from  him to fauour the treaty of truce, which was already (as hee said) well forward at Constantinople, and which for the Republikes sake might easily bee effected, promysing to haue it comprehended in the treaty as their good and louing friend.
This did the rather mooue the Venetians to solicite a suspension of armes betwixt those Princes, in regard, that besides other commodities, they were to receiue thereby great assurance, and reputation, by being declared friends to both parties, enioying the benifit of peace which they were to hope for by such an agreement. It was thought that the Emperor did not so earnestly pursue theVVhat did mooue the Emperor to solicit truce with Soliman. conclusion of the league, for any distrust not to be assisted by Germany against the Turkes; but because he perceiued himselfe to be enforced to take armes against  the chiefe Lords and States of that country, who hauing pell mell ouerturned all matters sacred and prophane to the great contempt of the Church of Rome, and the Maiesty of the Empire, went daily vp and downe practizing nouelties by a manifest rebellion, so that the Emperour, who from the beginning to draw them to his party had consented against the Popes minde, that the councell should be held in the city of Trent, to the great aduantage of the Almaines, did afterwards repent him of it, knowing that therein he had done no great good seruice to Religion: that he had broken with the Pope, and nothing preuailed with the Almains, wherevpon he sought to moderate the conditions with which it had beene published.
The Venetians on the other side perceiuing that the assembly of the councell (though they would not openly hinder it) was not pleasing to the Pope, as being made in an vnfit time and place, and by meanes not beseeming the dignity and authority of the sea Apostolike, would not send their Ambassadors thither.
Concerning the accord treated of at Constantinople, of which al men hoped for a prosperous end by meanes of a long truce of many yeeres (certaine difficulties arising about the restitution of some few castles in Hungary) it ended by aTruce for one yeere betwixt the Emperor, his brother, and Soliman. short suspension of armes for one yeere, with an intent neuerthelesse (as Solimans selfe did say, and write to the French King) that after the matter should bee well debated in Ferdinands Court, the Ambassadours might returne to the Port the next yeere following with new Commissions to strenthen the peace with a longer terme.
In the meane time a new Contention arose betwixt the Turkes and the Venetians about the confines of Dalmatia, where the Sangiacks of Bossina and Clissa Contention betwixt the Venetians and the Turke. being desirous to disturbe the peace for their owne particular profit, or else to spoile the country, or to receiue so me presents of the Venetians, would haue vsurped a great part of the territory of Zara, saying, that a country contayning nine and forty villages did belong vnto them, as dependances of the castles of Nadin and Laurana, which by the last accord remayning to the great Lord, they said did likewise belong vnto him with all their territories: wherevpon they forbad the inhabitants of those places vpon grieuous penalties, to acknowledge any other Lord but Soliman.
This new trouble did greatly vex the Venetians, the country in question being of great importance, both for it selfe and for the preseruation of the city of  Zara, and although their reasons were vnreasonable, in regard that Nadin and Laurana, small castles, had no territory belonging vnto them, but did with the other villages nere adioyning depend on Zara, the chiefe city of the Prouince,A tyrannicall law of the Turkes. yet neuerthelesse fearing least the strange and insolent proceedings which the Turkes are wont to vse in such businesses (who hold it for a law, that the whole country whereon the horse of the great Lord hath once trod doth belong vnto them) might occasion longer strife, had recourse to Soliman, who referring the decission of that controuersie to the Sangiac of Chersega, and to two Cadis (these men are ordinary iudges in law) was desirous to haue whatsoeuer they should set downe to be executed, who were to meet in the same place with the  Commissioners of the Signory. The Senate did for that purpose choose Lodouico Rayniero who handled the businesse so wisely and discreetly with the Turkish officers, as the whole territory in question was quietly adiudged to the Republike of Venice.
The same yeere deceassed Prince Landi, leauing behind him a great and singular reputation to haue well and wisely gouerned the Common-wealth for the space of sixe yeeres and eight monthes, and lieth buried in Saint Antonies Church. Francesco Donato was chosen in his place.










FRANCESCO DONATO the seuenty ninth Duke.








ABout the beginning of the yeere 1546. all those that desiredAn. 1546. the peace of Italy were afraide, least it would be shortly shaken with new troubles, because that the peace betwixt the Emperor and the French King (the principall Articles thereof taking none effect) was so badly assured, as there wanted nothing but a fit time to take armes.
The French King by the sodaine death of his sonne the Duke of Orleance hauing not obtained the Duchie of  Milan promised vnto him, by meanes of the marriage, had not for all that lost his desire to recouer it: the Duke of Sauoy likewise could not be restored of his State, the King still detayning it vpon sundry pretences, hoping to enforce the Emperor to some other conditions by the restitution thereof, seeking thereby to obtaine his desire.The Pope giueth Parma and Placentia in title of Dutchy to his sonne Petro Lodouico.
An other new matter happened in Italy which gaue cause of feare of some new troubles: for the Pope perceiuing al his deseignes to fal out contrary to his desire for the aduancement of his house, hauing cut off from the Churches demaines the cities of Parma and Placentia, which Pope Iulius the second had annexed therevnto, gaue them in see to Petro Lodouico his son, on condition to pay a yeerely rent  of eight thousand crownes to the Church, and in recompence thereof to make ouer to the sea Apostolike the Dutchy of Camerin, and the Signory of Nepi wherwith his son Octanio had beene inuested. This Cession did so much displease the Emperor, as he could by no meanes be induced to giue the Pope the inuestitureThe Emperour refus^th to inuest Petro Lodouico in the Dutchy of Porma and Placentia. of those two cities which he demanded, hauing beene in formet time incorporated into the Dutchy of Milan.
This resusal of the Emperor had equally incensed both the father and the son: so, that Petro Lodouico would willingly haue embraced the first occasion offered against the Emperour: and the Pope, distrusting both the Emperour and the French King, resolued by all meanes to maintaine and defend what he had done  concerning the erection of the new Dutchy in the person of his sonne, who discoursing with the Venetian Ambassadour told him, into what danger Italy was like to fail, so soone as the French King should be at peace with the King of England, which at that time was treated of; and that the Emperor, if he could

not at the Dyet of Ratisbon draw the Protestant Princes to his desire, would bee enforced to make warre vpon them: therefore he did exhort the Senate to ioyne with him a firme and sound intelligence, as it behooued them for their common interests, and for a greater assurance, he caused the new Duke to send Augustino de Landes his Ambassador to Venice, who acquainting them with the new gradeThe new Duke his offers to the Venetians. and dignity which he had lately obtained, did in his name offer both his State and person to the seruice of the Signory.
The Senate did very louingly thanke him for his offers, offering him the selfe same, but in generall termes, which could not tie them to any thing, because they would not thereby giue his Holinesse any hope by their meanes to raise any  troubles in Italy: then, prouiding for the defense of their owne States, and foreseeing what might happen, they tooke into the seruice of the Common wealth Guido Vbaldo Duke of Vrbin, in quallity of Generall of their forces by land, with a yeerely pension of fiue thousand crownes, and fifteene thousand crownes for an hundred men at armes and a hundred light horse, which he was bound to haue continually ready for the seruice of the Signory.
But the troubles wherein the Emperor and the French King were engaged, was cause of the safety of Italy; because that the one, notwithstanding all his attempts could not get Bolloigne from the English: and the other hauing called the Protestant Princes to the Dyet of Ratisbon, to treat of affaires concerning Religion, although he were there in person, could not induce them to decree or conclude any thing: but whereas at the beginning it seemed that they would haue beene satisfied to haue had the councell held in the city of Trent, whither they promisedThe Emperors and the French Kings difficulties were cause of the peace of Italy. to send their Doctors to treat of matters concerning faith, and afterwards to hold and embrace what there should be decided: they did then craue first of all to haue a nationall councell held in Germany, and if afterwards it should happen to be referred to that of Trent, that the assembly might on all sides be free, with diuers other exorbitant and vnreasonable demands. This caused the Pope no more to feare the councell, and to assure the State of Parma and Placencia to his sonne, the Emperor, Princes and people of Germany, hauing turned their  thoughts to other matters, determining to end that controuersie by armes.

The end of the fourth Booke of the sixth Decade.






The Contents of the fist Booke of the  sixth Decade.
THE Venetians goe about to diuert the Pope from taking armes against the Protestants. The Venetians grant passage thorow their Territories to the Pope and the Emperors Soldiors, who were the Protestants partakers. The Venetians refuse to lend mony to the Duke of Saxon and Lantgraue of Hesse. The Protestants take the Castle of Chiusa to stop the Italians passage. The cause of the losse and ouerthrow of the Protestants. What the Venetian Gentlemen are, with their prerogatiues. The commotion of the Sienois against the Spaniards. Petro Lodouico Duke of Parma and Placentia is murthered. The Death of Francis the first, French King. The death of Henry the eight King of England. The occasion of the new warre betwixt the French and the  English. Horacio Farnese marrieth the daughter of Henry the French King. The Venetians being solicited by the Pope and the French King against the Emperour, continue Neuters. The Popes great perplexities. Soliman takes armes against the Persian, making truce with Christian Princes. Contention betwixt the Emperor and the French King concerning the Truce with the Turke. Controuersy about the Place wherein the councell should bee held. The death of Pope Paul the third with the election of Pope Iulius the third. Horatio Farnese committeth him-selfe and his family into the French  Kings protection. Great warre in Italy concerning Parma and Placentia. The Publication of the Councel of Trent. Pietro Strozzi his pollicy to reuictuall Parma. The German Princes Treate with the French King against the Emperor. The French King being incensed against the Pope forbidd^th the Annates in France. The Turkes warre in Hungary and Transil^ania. All Germany in league against the Emperor and his brother. Ferdinand to free him selfe from the warre with the Turkes, offereth to pay him tribute for Transiluania. And lastly the murther of Frier George, Cardinall of the Sea Apostolike.

The fift Booke of the sixt Decade of the History of Uenice.
THE Pope perceauing the Emperor to be distasted of the Protestants (as hath beene said) began to heate him more, by promising to aid him with great numbers both of horse and foote paid by the Sea Apostolike. The Senate from the beginning vsed meanes to appease the Pope, and to diuert  him from medling in that warre, the which it thoughtThe Venetians reso^s ^o diuert the Pope from medling with the Protestants could bring no good to Italy, and there was small hope to preuaill by force in matter of Relligion: For all the free townes of Germany hauing declared them-selues for the Protestant Princes, fearing that the Emperor, vnder other pretences, went about to subiugate them, Germany on the other side standing badly affected to the Pope, and Court of Rome, it was to be feared, and not without cause, that the same fierce and warlike nation would by reason ther of make incursions into Italy, where they that had in no sort delt in that businesse were to smart for it: Or if the Emperor should happen to quell Germany; hee by that victory growing more mighty, both in forces and  reputation, his greatnesse would proue fearefull to the Princes of Italy. But the Senate knowing him to be resolute therein, and that being prickt forward by two mighty spurrs, Feare, and Hope, concerning the affaires of state, of his own greatnesse, and that of his house, he would not embrace any councell contrary to his owne opinion, did for beare to speake vnto him any more concerning that matter, but vpon the Pope and Emperors motion vnto it about that exterprize, by their Ambassadors, it made a modest answer, because it would not vainely offend theThe Senats answer to the Pope and the Emperor. Emperor, without praising or dispraising it, being not willing to giue any occasion to be requested to aide him. Yet neuerthelesse it was certainly reported, that the Common-wealth had promised at the conclusion of the league at Rome, to giue  paiment for fiue thousand footemen, which was most false.
The Venetians being desirous, in some sort, to content these Princes in any thing which was not of expence, and being intreated so to doe, did promise freeThe Venetians grant passage to the Pope and Emperors troups. passage to the Popes soldiers, who being assembled at Bolognia to the number of twelue thousand footmen, and fiue hundred horse, were to passe thorrow the Territory of Verona to goe to Trent: the like was done to the Emperors forces, who for their mony were furnished with victualls and other necessaries. The best andThe number of the Emperors Army. brauest soldiers of all Italy were in the Popes Army, whereof Octania Farnese his Nephew was Generall, who was a yong Lord of great hope: But that of the Emperor was composed of sundry nations; namely of diuers Almans, drawne forth  of the patrimonial States of the house of Austria, fro^ those of the Dukes of Bauaria and Cleues, and the Marquis Albert of Brandenbourg, who did follow the Emperors party, so that the whole number of his forces were forty thousand footemen and fiue thousand horse.
The Protestant Princes made preparations at the same time, the cheife of whom were Iohn Fredericke Duke of Saxony one of the Electors of the Empire, and Phillip Lantgraue of Hesse, who, saying that they would defend the liberty of Germany, which Charles went about to vsurpe, (as they said) did draw vnto theirVVho they were that took part with the Protestants. parts diuers of the greatest Lords and Citties of Germany, as the Duke of Wittemberg, the Count Palatin another Elector, with the Common-wealthes of Argentine, Vlmes, Francfort and Norimberg, the Citty of Ausbourg hauing a long time before declared it selfe in their behalfe: all which hauing resolued to hold a diet at Vlmes did send their Ambassadors and Commissioners thither, to treat particularly of the preparations for warre, where the concourse of all GermanyThe number of the Protestants Army. was such, as they leuied a very great army of fourescore thousand footmen, and tenne thousand horse, with which forces they promised vnto themselues to be able to ouercome those of the Emperor, and to driue him forth of Germany, in regard hee was not able to assemble Germaine forces comparable to theirs.
They feared none but forraine soldiers, and especially the Italian Fantery, leuied by the Pope: whereuppon, to stoppe their passage, they did write louingly to the Venetians, and by putting them in mind of the antient freindship betwixt the Germaine nation and them, they entreated them not to giue passage to those through their territories, who came only to offend them, and to serue the Emperor,The Pro testants suite to the Venetians. who went about to bring Germany into seruitude. The Senate answered that it did hold their freindship deere, which they had euer embraced, and generaly that of all Germany, but, their Countrey being open and Champaine, they could not stoppe the soldiers passage but with great forces, which they were wont to employ but against open enemies. Within a while after, they receiued particularThe Senaoes answere to the Protestants. letters from the Duke of Saxony and the Landgraue of Hesse, which acquainting them with their deseignes, and how that for their owne defense they had beene enforced to take armes, did ernestly entreate them to lend them a certaine summe of money. The King of England did greatly fauour his demand, by his Secretary residing at Venice, who presented his letters; (that King being distasted of the Emperor): but the Senate making still one answer, said, that it did hold those The Duke of Saxon and the Lander^ue of Hesse their suite to the Venetian Senate. with their answer. Princes for their good and trusty freinds, and did wish them all prosperity and aduancement, but that they could not satisfie their request without offending other Princes with whom they were in league and freindship, which they did mean to maintaine, and that (these respects excepted) they did greatly affect the Germaine nation. Those of Ausbourg likewsie hauing by their letters and by an expresse messenger recommended their Marchants to the Senate, (many of whom were retired to Venice, and greater numbers comming daily thither for feare of those trobles), were kindly answered, that their Cittizens, with all others of anyThe Venetians gentle answer to those of Aus bourg. other Citties of Germany, which came to Venice, should be very welcome and vsed as their owne Cittizens, as they had beene in former times. Now Whilest  either party was busied in making preparations for warre, and that already great numbers of soldiers raised in Italy were ready to march, a rumor was spred abroad how that both sides were at peace and become freinds, the Capitulations whereof beeing vnknowne, and no Postes beeing sent abroad into all places to publish it, did sufficiently manifest that it was nothing so, yet neuerthelesse these sodaine newes did amaze the Venetians, considering that such great numbers of soldiers which at that time filled all Italy, were sufficient to affright other mens states which were vnfurnished of force, whenso euer they should bee desirous to turne their Armes vpon any other enterprize. The Pope hauing intelligence ofThe Venetians are in some doubt seing so many soldiers in Italy. the Venetians doubt, and fearing least the Senate would determine, for their safety, to league themselues with some other, with a resolution cleane contrary to his deseignes, did enter into a long discourse with the Ambassador for the Signory, telling him how that for the Common good ^hee had euermore beene carefull of the peace and quiet of Italy, with a particular desire to aduance

whatsoeuer did belong to the safety and greatnesse of the Venetian Commonwealth: wherefore he willed him to assure the Senate of his good meaning, that they might continew their sound intelligence with him, seeing that thereby they should preserue one anothers states in safety, yea and all Italy beside; that he wasThe Popes discourse to driue the Venetians from their suspition. desirous at that time to reuiue that discourse when he was armed and out of danger to be outraged, to let them know that it was not feare, but a true and zealous loue that mooued him so to discourse with him, and to open vnto him the secret of his thoughtes.
The treaties of peace being broken, and the Armies on both sides in the field, the Protestants seeking to do that of themselues, which they could not obtaine of others, namely to stop the Italians passage which were comming against them  went to seaze vpon the Castle of Chiusa, a place in the County of Tiroll, seated among the mountaines, by which they supposed that the enemies would passe;The Protestants take Chiusa. but the Pope and Emperors Armies, keeping the way that leadeth neerer to Ispruch, entred the Dutchy of Bauaria and from thence went to Ratisbon, where the Emperor with his other forces expected them.
The two armies as well that of the Emperor, as the enemies, continued a long time idle, each of them watching for some aduantage, notwithstanding that they were oftentimes so neere together, as sundry great skirmishes were many timesThe occasions of the enemies losse. made in one an others view, without comming to battaile, which the Emperor, being wel aduised, did as much as in him lay seeke to auoid, the better to draw the businesse out in length, and to defeat the enemies, (who were many heads of seuerall minds, by temporizing, the which he did.
For the soldiers and the townes beginning to loose their former great opinion of beeing soone able to vanquish and defeate the Emperor, and to feele the discomodities of tedious contributions towards the wars, King Ferdinand hauing on the other side entred Duke Iohn Fredericks State with a mighty army, accompanied by Duke Maurice of Saxony his enemy, there arose such a confusion and amazement in the enemies Campe as suffering diuers Castles to be taken before their faces, and their Army dissoluing of it selfe, the Emperor might in a shortThe Cardinall Farn^se commeth to Uenice space contrary to his expectation giue an end to that dangerous warre. For hauing  by these fortunate euents, purchased great fame, and reputation, diuers of those Protestant Princes and free townes returned to their obedience and begged pardon: so as in a few monethes space, he wonne a great part of the Contries of those great Lords and mighty Common-wealthes, the which he had scarcely hoped to be able to haue done in a long time and with great labour and trauell.
This Warre thus ended, winter being already come the Emperor dismissed the Popes troopes, which being disbanded returned back into Italy. The Cardinall Farnese, the Popes nephew, who had beene his Legat in that Army, returning towards Rome was desirous as he passed along to see the Citty of Venice, where hauing notice that they made preparations for his entertainment, he determined  to goe thither in priuate, where he was so well receiued and entertained of all men both in publique and priuate, as he departed from thence well satisfied and contented. The Farneses not long before at the Popes request, had beene receiued into the number of the Venetian Gentlemen, in all places so highly reckoned of, both for the ancient gouernment of the Common-wealth, and for the name of liberty which they haue euer inuiolably maintained together with the dignity and command of great dominions: And because occasion is now offered by the way to speak sumwhat of this nobility, we wil breefly make some mention thereof.VVho be Venetian Gentlemen with their Pre^ogatiues.
The Venetians do call those Gentlemen that haue a share in the gouernment of the Common-wealth, that is to say, those that haue authority to elect the publick magistrates, and may themselues likewise bee elected: this authority is giuen them from their birth, so as who-so-euer is borne of noble parents, is noble

and may at a certaine time and manner limitted by the lawes, enter into the great councell, where the ordinary electon of Magistrates is made. Into this ranke are receiued, either those who hauing beene the cheefe inhabitants of the Citty, and most famous for vertue and wealth, haue from the beginning had the mannaging of publike affaires: or alse those who for some notable and worthy act, done in serof the Common-wealth, are at sundry times, and for sundry accidents, admitted therevnto: who for the most part haue beene of the cheefe and noblest families, of some other place: or some others vnto whome by speciall grace and fauour, this title of Nobillity hath beene giuen: Wherein neuer-the-lesse they haue carried them-selues very moderately, it being graunted but to Lords of great Estate, and in this manner were the families of Este and Gonzaga, with some others of the cheefe of Italy, admitted there-vnto; namely, Henry King of France and Poland, being at Venice, in the yeare 1574. and among other honors receiuing the title of a Venetian Gentleman, did seeme to be highly pleased, and satisfied with that guift. Besides, all those that descend from them, who haue beene once receaued into this degree, haue the same preeminence, and to the end it may continually be the better maintayned in it perfection, they do curiously search out the pedegrees of those who are to enter into the great councell, not only the nobillity of the father, but like-wise whether they bee borne of lawfull matrimony, and of no common woman, but of some honorable degree and condition, wherof a regester  is kept by one of the cheefe magistrates, termed the Auogario of the Commonwealth. But to returne to our history, the Emperor Charles was in all places highly praised, and commended for his fortunate successe, and for breaking the enemies army: Duke Fredericke and the Landgraue, were yet vnuanquished, who despayring, as authors of al those troubles, of obtaining the Emperors fauour, did still continew in their rebellion: and yet for all that men might perceiue that theyThe Popes complaints against the Emperor. could not long resist the forces or so great and victorious a Prince. The Pope calling to mind by himself, whatsoeuer was past, perceiued how much more proffitable it had beene for him to haue followed the Venetians councell; whose wisdom he highly praised, for he saw no prosperous successe of any thing that he had taken  in hand; The councell lay open as before, the Emperor doing it to content the people of Germany, although by reason of the warre certaine Prelats were gone home againe: That Pietro Lodouico was in no great fafety, in regard the warre was so sonne ended, the which he thought would haue continued longer, with diuers other matters which discontented him, and gaue him cause to complaine. The Emperor on the other side made his complaints, saying that he had broken promise with him, because the warre being not yet ended, which hee had begun thorowThe Emperors complaints against the Pope. his perswasion, he had countermanded his troupes, leauing him still entangled in Germany, betwixt two mighty enemies, the Duke of Saxony, and the Landgraue of Hesse; the which he much amplified, to draw the Pope to a new contribution  of mony, or that hee might haue leaue to make vse of the wealth of the Churches of Spaine, which he had often craued, or els to make his victories seeme greater by exalting the enemies forces; so, as they made him more proud, and encreased in him his desire to rule, especially after that he had in battaile vanquished and taken Iohn Fredericke Duke of Saxony prisoner, and enforced the Landgraue to craue his pardon: wherevpon entring intriumphant manner into the Citty of Ausbourge, he there held a Diet, where he obtayned whatsoeuer he demanded for his owne proffit and commodity. Yet neuer-the-lesse, in the middest of all these prosperities his mind stil ran vpon the affaires of Italy, how he might keep to himselfe the State of Milan, whither he sent great store of ordnance, which he had taken The Emperor returneth so Milan. from diuers Lords of Germany, with great numbers of Spanish foot, as those in whom he reposed most trust, and him-selfe going thither afterwards, caused the oth of allegiance to be made vnto him-selfe, and to him whom he should appoint for their Prince, (meaning his Sonne Philip) who for that purpose was shortly to

passe into Italy: yet neuer-the-lesse he procured an agreement with the Swisses, whereby they were bound to maintaine and defend the State of Milan. He had moreouer placed foure hundred Spaniards in Siena, for the gard of the Citty with an officer of his owne, who in diuers matters vsed great authority, and wentThe Sienois rise against the Spaniards. about to build a Castle there, that he might afterwards make him-selfe absolute maister thereof, vnder collour of the commotions of the people and nobility, who being not able in the end to endure to see them-selues brought into bondage,The Emperors deseigns in Italy. had driuen the Spaniards forth of the citty, and committed diuers other outrages against the Imperiall Maiestie; he did likewise vse meanes to seaze on the towne of Piombino, to take it from the true Lord vpon sundry pretences,The death of Petro Lodouico the Popes Sonne. promising to recompence him with some other place, hoping to make vse of the commodiousnesse of that place, being seated on the sea of Tuscany, and fit for his other deseigns: But his seasing on the Citty of Placentia, together with the death of Petro Lodouico, did more then all the rest amaze euery man, and especially theThe death of Francis the first French King and Henry the eight King of England. Pope: and for the ful accomplishment of the Emperors happinesse, there died at the same time, not long one after another, the two greatest and mightiest Kings of Christendome, Francis the first of that name French King, and Henry the eight King of England; so, that all things seemed to fauour him, and to fall out according to his desire, seeing that those two great and mighty Princes, being taken away, who were his enemies, and enuious of his greatnesse, hee remained alone  of him-selfe in a manner Iudge and Vmpier of all matters, with a soueraygne authority.
Henry Daulphin of France succeeded King Francis his Father, not onely in the crowne, but in the selfe same affections and desires, in no sort to giue way to theHenry the Second French King. Emperors fortune. The Senate were greatly greeued with King Francis death, where-vpon they chose two Ambassadors, namely Vittore Grimani and Mateo Dandulo, who were in all hast to goe into France to the new King, and according to the custome to bewaile with him his fathers death, and next to congratulate his comming to the crowne, and to assure him that the VenetianThe Senate sendeth Ambassadors to the new Fench King. Republike was disposed and resolued to continue peace, and friendship with him, as it had done with his Father the late King. As for Henry King of England, Italy was not so much greeued fot him, that Kingdom being farther off: the Venetians alone bewayled him, by reason of their ordinary commerce, and trafficke into that realme, for which, they kept an ordinary Ambassador in England. Edward the sixt of that name succeeded his Father Henry, who was yong and gouerned by theAnd to Edward the Sixt, King of England. cheefe Lords of the Kingdome, vnto whom the Senate send Dominico Bollano for their Ambassador, who found them very willing to continue friendshippe and vsuall trafficke with the Venetians, promising to giue kind vsage to as many of their nation as should come into those parts.
The French King was desirous at the same time to make warre vpon the English  for diuers respects, but especially for the towne of Boloign. Those which feared the Emperors to much greatnesse, were sorry that the French King should busie him-selfe in that warre, which made him to forget the affaires of Italy, and to suffer the Emperor freely to pursue his owne deseigns, but the Pope was more discontented then any other, as he that for his owne particular interests, and not for the common good, did determine by the armes of the French to abate the Emperors greatnesse: therefore hee resolued to send the Cardinall of SaintThe Cardinall Saint George is sent Legat into France. George into France, vnder collour (as it was giuen forth,) to cause the French Prelates to come to the councell published at Bolognia: But in effect it was for other ends, namely to incite the French King to turne his deseigns against the  Emperor, and to stoppe his pregressions, offering him for that purpose all ayde and friendship.
King Henry did willingly harken to this motion, as one desirous to execute

some great enterprize, and who would not omit any occasion whereby he might hope to purchase glory by some generous action: wherein the Pope, by meanes of his forces, was thought to be a very fit Instrument for the affaires of Italy, as well in regard of the commodiousnesse of his State, as most of all for his authority.Pet^o Stross^ sent sor into France to troble the peace of Italy. wherevpon the King beeing easily perswaded to harken to this proposition resolued to strengthen his intelligences in Italy, and to purchase friends there, and among othere, he sent for Perro Strossi into France, whom he forth with honored with the order of S. Michell, which at that time was a great honor, and giuen to none but noble persons, or to such as had well deserued of the Crowne of France: this man was highly esteemed for his excellent witte, and also for that he  was an enemy to peace, and greatly followed by the bandetti of Florence and others, which was a ready means to trouble the affaires of Italy. The King did likewise fauour thereuolt of the Sienois promising to aid them in the defense of theirHorratin Farn se marrieth King Henries daughter. liberties. But together with the Pope (for the vnion betwixt them was already confirmed, Horatio Farnese sonne to Pedro Lodouico hauing married King Henries daughter) he was likewise desirous to draw the Venetians to that league and Vnion, because hee would attempt nothing against the Emperor in Italy, but that which he was sure would take effect.
The King to this end sent his Ambassador to Venice, so did the Pope his Nuncio, who supposed to find the Venetians more ready to condiscend to their demandes, then they had beene in times past, in regard of the Emperors dealings, and especially for the Villany committed vpon the person of Petro Lodouico who had beene murthered by certaine Place nti^e Gentlemen, by the consent (as it was reported) of D. Ferrant of Gonzaga, Lieutenant to the Emperor in Italy, who presently after had seazed vppon the Citty of Placentia, leauing great numbers of Spaniards in Garrison there in the Emperors name who by that meanesGonzaga ^xeu seth^im concer ning the death of Petro Lodouico. went about to take away an other mans rightes not by open force but by deceit.
Gonzaga knowing that the Venetians would suspect and think strangely of that deed, did speedily send Giouan Baptista Schizze, a Senator of Milan to Venice, toacquaint the Senate with what had beene done, and by quallifying the matter to  assure them that he was not guilty thereof; but that he could do no lesse, beeing sent for and sought vnto by the Dukes murthererers who presently came to him to Milan, to haue him goe and receiue that Citty in the Emperors name the which he did, but till such time as hee might receiue newes what the Emperors pleasure was therein: but his deeds were contrary to his worps; for so soone as he entred the Citty, he caused the building of the Castle, which the Duke had already begunne, to be set foreward, and caused the nobility and people to take the oath of aleadgeance to the Emperor, and made speedy preparations to goe and beseege Parma, notwithstanding that Octauio Farnese complained in vaine that so great an iniury was done vnto him he beeing the Emperors sonne in law.
This stirre being in very deed of great importance had caused the Venetians to make prouisions for the defense of their townes: therfore they made Stephano Tepulo Prouidator Generall on the firme land, to the end that in that office hee should prouide for all their soldiers, visit the Forts belonging to the State, and take speedy order for what soeuer should be needfull: They did besides, call home the Duke of Vrbin Generall of their Army, who was then at Rome, about his marriage, not long before concluded with Virginia, daughter to Duke Pietro Lodouico, Farnese They wrote afterwards to Antonio de Castello, who serued them as maister of their Artillery, and a man of great credit, that he should make hast to the Citty of Bressia, to augment the ordinary Garrison that lay there; the Prouidator  Generall did the like at Verona and in all other townes of importance, theThe Pope an^ French King do solicit^ the Venetians against the Em peror. Venetians supposing that all places were full of deceit and trechery. Things standing at this stay, the Pope and the French King did daily more ernestly solicite the Venetians, openly to declare them-selues without any more delay, and not to

deferre the remedying of the present mischiefe till it were too late. The Senate for all that did not make hast to take armes against a most mighty Prince their neighbour, who at the same time exalted to the very height of his prosperous greatnes, because that the common-wealth was not so weake and low brought, as whosoeuer those should bee that were desirous to assayle it, might thinke their enterprize easie; nor yet so mighty as it was able to keepe others in awe, and thereby gaue them cause to goe about to abate their greatnesse: so as the condition thereof was farre different from that of others, because it might without any feare of beeing assayled by the Emperor, expect that which time, and the alteration of affaires might procure it; which might (as it often happeneth) open a way  to some better and safer course. Whereupon, after that the matter had beeneThe Senates a^swer to the Po^e and French King. well debated in open Councell, the Pope and French Kings demands were answered after one maner, and yet apart, how that the Senate did infinitely praise their care of the common safety, together with the prouisions which they had made, for the mainetainance and defence of that which did belong vnto them: that they would follow and imitate that Councel, and haue a watchfull eie on the defence of their State, supposing that remedy alone to be sufficient for that time, to free them from all feare and dangers: and therefore, they did not thinke it necessary to enter into a more strict and particular vnion, whereby they might stirre vp and prouoke those that were desirous to trouble their peace.
Although this answer did not greatly please the Pope and King, they did neuer-the-lesse dissemble it, because they would not altogether estrange them from their friendship, and loose their hope of seeing them one day (hauing changed their minds) to bee ioyned with them. Wherupon, commending the graue and mature Councell of that Senate, they said, that when they should haue a further insight into the Emperors intention, which could not bee long concealed, together with the suspition which all men had conceiued of his ambition, they would then on a sodaine resolue with true and firme foundations to assure that which concerned themselues and the whole State of Italy. Now notwithstanding thisSundry practises in Italy. resolution of the Venetians, and that their hope of their good successe in their own  enterprises was for the most part lost, the desire neuer-the-lesse of taking armes against the Emperor was not diminished, neither in the Pope nor French King: and being not able in the meane time, by reason of sundry difficulties, to come to open force, yet diuers secret practises were broched betwixt the French and the Farneses in sundry Citties of Italy, and cheefly at Genoa, Siena and Millan, Citties infected with the humors of diuers factions. The yeere following 1548. was in a manner spent in such like businesses and secret practizes, and conspiracies ofAn. 1548. Princes against one ano^hers States and yet without any effect of importance. For although the French King was desirous to trouble Italy, that he might altogether keepe the Emperor busied there, and yet neuer-the-les, he thought it a weake and  feeble thing to build his hopes vpon the Popes friendship, who was very old and poore, and one already in the graue and perhaps not very firme and constant to maintaine war, if the Emperor should propound vnto him (as it was likely he would by reason of his alliance with Octauio Farnese) some means of agreement: he did likewise perceiue, that the Venetians being not wel resolued to take arms, were stil desirous to remaine neuters, and were so strongly vnited with the Emperor since certen yeares, as he thought it an impossibility to bee able to disioyne them, besides, he was desirous to pursue the war with y^ English, hoping by reason of the conte^tionThe French Kings doubts and deseignes in Engla^d betwixt the Gouernors of the yong King, not only to keepe Scotland, which he hoped one day would fall to his eldest son, by the mariage of the  Infanta of that kingdom, but likewise to win and recouer the towne of Bouloigne, by means whereof, although he continued his sundry practizes, not only with the Pope, concerning Parma, but likewise at Genoa and Siena, for the alteration of the gouernment of those townes, depending on the Emperors authority, yet neuerthe-les hee made no preparation to put his desiegnes in execution, nor declared himselfe openly the Emperors enemy.
The Pope on the other side beeing extreamly desirous to reuenge the wrongs which the Emperor had done him, and to restore the Citty of Placentia to his house, did greatly doubt, whither it were best for him to proceed therein by armes, or by way of agreement: some-times hee hoped that the Emperor as Lord of soThe Pope is greatly ^erpiexed. many great States, although hee did for a time shew himselfe sterne and seuere, would not in the end depriue Octauio his sonne in lawe with his children descended from that mariage, of that State, and reduce them to a priuate fortune and condition, for which hee had more then once sent expresse messengers vnto him, to entreat him to deliuer the Citty of Placentia to Octauio, and to for beare to molest him any more about the possession of the Citty of Parma: but at the same  time that hee sent these Ambassadors, hee dealt with the Fre^ch King, to take Duke Octauto, with the Citty of Parma, into his protection against the Imperiall forces.
The Pope in this sort beeing tossed vp and downe, resolued, (for the satisfying of the Emperor and the Almaines, with whom hee was at oddes in regard of the Councel which he would haue had to be kept at Bolognia, and others at Trent) to send the Bishop of Fane his Nuncio to the Emperor, and the Bishop of Verona at the same time for his Legat into Germany, with power and authority to grant theThe Pope to (...) the Atmains sendeth a Legat into Germany. Almains sundry things which they craued for some alteration of the ordinary customes in the Romaine Church, the which the Emperor had iustly lookt into, the better to bridle that nation, after that he had granted them the Interim: and in the meane time, for an answer to the Pope, hee fed him and the Duke Octauio likewise, with sundry hopes, without any certaine resolution; propounding sundry kinds of agreement vnto them, some times that hee would recompence him with some other State in an other place: then he said that he would first see who had most right to that State, either the Church, or the Empire: at other times likewise, seeming to bee discontented, insteed of surrendring Placentia, hee demanded to haue Parma deliuered to him: in a word* those which best knew his inward meaning, did suppose that he went about by those incerteinties to entangle the Pope in perpetuall doubts, hauing already determined with himselfe by no  meanes to quit the Citty of Placentia, as beeing very commodious for the State of Milan, but sought to prolong and giue time, and to keepe himself from beeing enforced to take armes, waiting for the Popes sodaine death, that he might in the meane time be able to execute his other great deseignes. Now whilest the Christian Princes, enemies to peace, did in this manner vex themselues with sundry thoughts, their Estates were by meere chance, and vnknowne to themselues, freed from the assaults of the Turkish armes, because Soliman was desirous to lead hisSolimans Army against the Persians. Army appointed for Hungary against Persia, beeing therevnto prouoked by a desire of glory which hee hoped to purchase by the defeate of Tamas forces. This caused him more willingly to grant the truce for which Ferdinand had sent an  Ambassadge to him to Constantinople, which was confirmed for fiue yeares, on condition that Ferdinand should pay him a yearely tribute of thirty thousand Ducats, for the lands which he possessed in Hungary. The Venetians in this agreementSoliman maketh truce with Christian Princes. were on both sides mentioned, which procured them much safety and reputation, especially by that wherein it was expresly said, that none of those that were mentioned, should during the time of the truce, trouble the peace and quiet one of another. There hapned certainly at the same, a matter worthy of note, which was, that our Princes distrusting one another, did of themselues, by diminishing their owne reputation, encrease the authority and pride of the common enemy. For the Emperor craued that the French King might be mentioned in that agreement,Strise betwixt the Emperor and French king and enioyned to performe that which the late King Francis his father had promised him, and on the other side, the King did earnestly labour to haue it expressed in that treaty, that the Emperor, during the time of the truce, should not make war vpon any Christian Prince, and the matter went on so sar, that although

the treaty was in a manner concluded: King Henry did with speed send the Lord of Cottignac his Ambassador to Constantinople to crosse the accord, saying, that the Emperor had not consented to the truce for any other end, but that hee might with more ease make warre vpon him, whereby Soliman was to be aduised and not suffer the Emperors power so much to encrease, who would neuer haue entertained the truce, had hee not thought to profit himselfe thereby. The Lord of Cottignac vsed the same speech at Venice as he passed along, exhorting the Senate to vse meanes that this treaty, without that clause, might be of none effect,Soliman sendeth Imperio^s letters to the Emperor. which the Venetians making small account of, he went forward to Constantinople, where finding the truce to bee concluded and finished, hee did neuerthelesse  obtaine letters from Soliman to the Emperor, and to Ferdinand, written very imperiously, but with a stile fit for a great and iust Prince; how that hee had willingly granted the truce, with an intent that there should bee a sur^ease of armes on all sides, betwixt those who were friends to either party, and therefore if any of the Princes, mentioned in the accord, should goe about to molest one another by armes, hee would giue ayde and succour to the party offended, against the disturber of the peace.
The French King in this businesse had diuerse suspitions of the Venetians, who beeing desirous speedily to conclude that accord, wherein they were to bee mentioned, had without caring for the King their friends interest, too much fauoured  the Emperor and Ferdinands party: and on the other side, the Emperor complained of them, saying, That they had first giuen that councell to the French King, and afterwards fauoured it at Constantinople, to the end he might be more strictly enioined to be at peace with the French King, by reason that they were desirous to take away all occasion of warre in Italy, which was so highly displeasing vnto them. At the same time, the discontents betwixt the Pope and the Emperor were much encreased, and men did already perceiue great signes of warre betwixt them two, by reason that the Emperor continued in his resolution, that the Councell should bee speedily held (according as it had been published) in the Citty of Trent, as well to satisfie the Almains who desired it, as because hee supposed that  his reputation would be impaired, if the Councell already published at Trent by his authority, should contrary to his pleasure bee held else-where: and on the other side, the Pope no lesse constant in his opinion, would haue it to be kept at Bolognia, whether diuerse Bishops and Prelates by his commandement were already come, but although the Pope had commanded the Imperials to depart from Trent and to come to Bolognia, saying, That the Emperor without all doubt, was Protector of the Councell, but that hee had no authority to conuoke it, did neuerthelesse, tarry still at Trent, obeying the Emperors authority and command,Contention concerning the place where the Councel should be held. who on the contrary sent to the Prelats that were at Bolognia, and to the Popes selfe, making great protestations: and to haue more apparence on his side, hee  caused the Cardinal of Trent, of the family of Madrucis, a Prince of the Empire, to go to Rome, where he protested that he would not allow any other councell, then that which had bin published to be held in the citty of Trent, and if they should go about to crosse that, and thereby be cause of infinite other miseries, he did request to be acquitted of it before God and men. These things being very greeuous to the Pope, and hapning presently vpon the neck of the bad successe of Parma, did greatly trouble him: yet neuerthelesse his hope of agreement with the Emperor did make him proceed more slowly therein. But during these delaies and prolongations, Octauio beeing impatient of staying any longer for the euent of the businesse, concerning the recouery of Parma, after that he had attempted in vaine to  reduce it vnder his obedience, his entry into the (...) hauing bin denied by Camillo Vrsino, who commanded the citty, did on a sodain determine by a precipate councell, to throw himselfe into the armes of the same Spaniards of whom he had receiued so many wrongs, that he might be able (as the Emperors Ambassodor at

Rome had craftily perswaded him) by meanes of their Armes to get that Citty: at which strange action the Pope greatly wondering, and by reason of the greefe thereof, together with his weaknesse and great age keeping his bed, hee beeing foure score and foure yeares old, did within a few dayes after depar^ out of this mortall life, after hee had with great commendations gouerned the sea Apostolick fifteene yeares, hauing euer shewed himselfe a good and discreet Prince, and a louer of good and vertuous people, and aboue all other things, hee had for aThe death of Pope Paul the third. time remained neuter betwixt those Princes beeing very desirous of peace and quiet. The Popes death did put the Italian Princes in great feare, that it would be cause of the disquiet of Italy, seeing that the French and the Imperials did in diuerse  places leuy forces, meaning (as it was thought) to recouer the Citty of Parma, which Camillo Vrsino did still possesse, but with a very weake garrison andParma is kept by Camill^ Vrsino. small prouision, for the maintenance of the warre, who would not obey the letters and commandements of the colledge of Cardinals, who had willed him to consigne that Citty into the hands of Octauio Farnese, who promised to keepe it for the future Pope. This feare of troubles encreased by reason of the long time that the Cardinals spent in the creation of a new Pope, for the two factions of Cardinals French and Imperials, did obstinately striue one with another.
The Venetian Senate in these long disputations, according to the custome of their ancestors would not meddle therein, but ayming onely at the common  good, did write to the colledge of Cardinals, exhorting them to choose a Pope that might bee for the wealth and commodity of Christendome. The Venetians as well aduised, haue neuer sought to haue Cardinals partiall on their sides, nor haue medled in the creation of Popes, although they had as much interest therei^ as any other Prince, for they beeing in the number of the chiefest Potentates of Italy, there is no doubt but if they were desirous to haue a hand in it, that their faction would be one of the strongest: but they considered the great mischiefes which the Common-wealth might receiue by such f^iendship and intelligence with particular persons in the Court of Rome, and how that this word faction hatcht at Rome about Ecclesiasticall dignities, might afterwards slippe among  them and infect the Common-wealth: and this is the reason why they haue abstained from it. Now after a long strife, Giouan Maria Cardinall of Monte, wasThe Cordin^ll de Monte is chosen Pope, and called by the name of Iulius the third. for his sanctity created Pope, who was borne at Mont S. Seue in^ in Tuscany, a man who obteining the dignity of Cardinal, not by fauour of Nobility, or help of kindred, was reputed to be very vertuous, and especially to be a man newter: the Venetians being very ioyfull for this election, were perswaded, that he depending no more on the Emperor then on the French King, they might procure him to hold them both for friends, and mediate likewise betwixt them, and especially in Italy, a firme peace. Wherevpon the Senate did speedily write to Matteo Dandulo their Ambassador at Rome, to congratulate Pope Iul^us (for so the new Pope  would be termed, who was the third of that name) with great demonstration of friendship and entire affection: then within a while after, determining to send a solemne Ambassage to him, to present their vsual and due obedience, foure of the chiefe Senators were chosen, namely Philippo Tron, Francesco Contaren, Marc-Antonio Venieri, and Nicolao de Ponte. But the effects did in no sort answer the hopeThe Senat^ (...) Ambassador^ (...) the Pope. which men had conceiued of this new Pope, and especially in that all men did expect and desire, namely, that he would appease the troubles, and prouide for the quiet of Christendom, and for the safety of Italy. For addicting himselfe to buildings and other vaine matters, he seemed to contemne serious things, and such as beseemed the ranck and grade which he held, and the miserable condition of those times, in which Christendome was in diuerse places much afflicted. For notwithstanding that peace ensued betwixt France and England; all men did neuerthelesse, perceiue that the same peace was the beginning of a farre greater warre. For (...) the French King beeing greedy of Fame, and finding him-selfe freed from

the warre with the English, hauing recouered the towne of Bulloigne, could not long liue in quiet: for Horatio Farnese comming into France to entreate his MaiestieHoratio Farn^se putteth himselfe and family into the French K^ngs protection. to take his house, himselfe, and brother into his protection, and to defend and keepe the Citty of Parma, things which had beene already motioned by others, he was very kindly welcommed, and the King did embrace his protection vpon certaine conditions, beeing desirous to disturbe the peace of Italy, whereby he might afterwards haue a more open occasion to take armes against the Emperor, hoping more-ouer (although the matter fell out very diuersly) that it would open him away, either to vnite himselfe more strictly with the Pope, or at least to disioyne him from the Emperor, by taking vpon him to defend a vassall of  the Church, whom the Emperor went about to oppresse and ruine, the Popes entreaties beeing of no force to make him desist from his enterprise; by meanes whereof, fire was already much kindled in the heart of Italy.
King Ferdinand on the other side, hoping vnder coullor of some contention betwixt the Barons of the Realme of Hungary, and certaine rebellion hapned in Transiluania, to bee able to impatronize that Prouince, departed from August^ (vpon sundry promises of ayde which the Emperor had made to him, the better to induce him to quit the succession of the Empire to his sonne Philip) and went into Austria, where he had already assembled a Dyet to leuy men and money for such an enterprize: it was besides reported, that Soliman at his returne from Persia  to Constantinople, could not endure, that the young King of Hungary, who was vnder his protection, should be so dispoiled of part of his dominions: as alsoPresages of great warres. for that hee accounted the fiue yeares truce to haue beene broken by Doria, who ^ad taken certaine places fro^ him in Affrick, held by Dragut, which he had manned with Spanish Garrisons: ^o, that all these things beeing exactly considered, were presages of great warres.
These accidents did greatly displease the Venetians, and by so much the more, as they were in hope to prolong the truce for a longer time, Soliman beeing come to Constantinople, beeing willing to shew how desirous hee was to continue friend to the Venetians, sent a Chiaus to Venice, to acquaint them with his returne The Turke sendeth an Ambassador to Venice. from Persia, and with his happy successe, ex^olling (according to the manner of that nation) all his exploits done there, saying, That in regard hee found the Persians stronger then he expected, his attempts had not succeeded to his desire. The Senate, beeing desirous still to enterteine Solimans friendship, resolued to do the like by him, and to send an Ambassador to his Port; wherevpon Catherin Zene was appointed to that end, who although he was foure score and foure yeares ofCatherin Zene (...) sent Am^assador to the Turke. age, did not refuse to vndertake so long and tedious a iourney for the seruice of his coun^rey: His Ambassage was to great purpose, for by his wisdom he caused to be troden vnder foot the complaints which the Turkes made for the death of Saba R^is, so often reiterated, wherevpon, Soliman promised that it should neuer more bee remembred.
In this manner was the yeare 1550. spent, famous of it selfe ouer all Christendome,An. 1550. it beeing the yeare of Iubilee, but it was more noted by the publication of the Councell of Trent, whither speedily from all places diuerse Prelates began to come: then there hapned a great dearth of corne, which was in a manner generall,A (...) (...). but greater in Italy then in other places: whereby it behooued Princes to open their treasures for the reliefe of their poore subiects, and in particular the Signiory of Venice, who prouiding with singular bounty and affection for the necessity of the people of the Citty, and other their subiects, gaue great guifts to such as brought come to Venice, to prouoke those of forraine countries to  (...) the (...), which was afterwards distributed among other Townes of their obedience.
The yeare following 1551. did open great warres ouer all Italy, whereof theAn. 1551. Pope by his (...), rather then of malice, was the chiefe Author, who by

little and little falling from his first resolution, did publish monitories against Octanio Farnese, (of whom not long before himselfe had taken vpon him the defense and tuition) accusing and cursing the French Kings protection of the citty of Parma, although that (according to the common report) when hee was madeThe Pope not * thinking there on, causeth great warres in Italy. acquainted therewith, hee seemed to allow it, or at least in no sort to contradict it. Hee did not consider how that by his ordinary reuiling of the French and the Farneses, he did enforce them to league themselues more strictly together, and to augment their forces, which hee hauing no meanes to resist, in that hee had not prouided in time, was enforced to haue recourse to the Emperor, who for the very selfe same matter of Parma was displeased with him.
Hee was by little and little falne into these inconueniences, by the craft of the the Imperials, (vnknowne to him,) his owne seruants, in regard of their particular profit, not caring to let him know the truth, giuing credit to the dissimulation of other men, and enterteining him in the meane time with vaine suspitions: whereby, without knowing it, he had in a manner giuen ouer his neutrallity, and had giuen occasion of disturbing that peace, for which hee had so much sought to purchase fame and glory. The Venetians had often dealt with his Holynesse for the appeasi^g of these troubles, fore-seeing the long and dangerous warre that might proceed from them, hapning then in a bad time for Italy, in regard of Solimans great preparations to enuade Christendome by sea and land: and by putting him in minde, that it was his duty, as the common father, to mediate peace betwixt Princes, and in no sort to shew himselfe partiall, but neuter, as he had determined at the beginning, they caused him to consent to procure some accord: Wherevpon within a while after, hee sent the Cardinall of Medicis to Parma, who was brother to the Marquis of Marignan, and kinsman to the Duke of Parma, offeringProposition of an agreement about Parma. to giue him the Dutchy of Camerin and Nepi in recompence of Parma, the which should remaine to the Church, whereof hee forthwith aduertised the Emperor, assuring him that the Venetians councel had made him to resolue thereon: the Pope supposing that the Emperor would easily condiscend to that agreement, as well because it was reasonable, as for feare likewise, that by refusing it, he  should league himselfe against him, and augment the French faction in Italy, which would bee dangerous for the kingdome of Naples, in regard of the great troubles raised there at the same time.
It was thought that the Emperor was willing of himselfe to haue granted it,VVho hindred the Emperor from allowing of that agreement. but that he was altered by his seruants and officers, and especially by Don Diego de Mendoza his Ambassador at Rome, and by Don Ferrant de Gonzaga Gouernor of the State of Milan, shewing therein (as it was openly spoken) their particular hatred to the Ferneses. But the Pope perceiuing that it did not please the Emperor, and not daring for feare of his forces to displease him, fell to his former resolution, to pursue the Farneses by Armes, who beeing already strictly allyed to  the French King, would no more accept of that offer. Warre then beeing kindled in Italy, the French King hauing sent ayde to the Farneses, and the Emperor to the Pope, it increased in such sort, as the Pope entring into some distrust of the Emperors deseignes and actions, detesting openly his officers manner of proceedings, repented for what hee had done, and sought occasions to with-draw himselfe from him: Wherevpon hee determined to send his nephew Ascanio de la Cornia to the French King, to perswade him to lay downe Armes, and to consent to some agreement, by putting him in minde of the difficulty of his enterprize, defending a Citty so farre off from his kingdome: not long after, hee sentThe Pope seeketh meanes of agreement with the (...) King. Achilles de Grassis to Venice, whose comming, although it seemed to be only for  the iustifying of his actions, and in counter change of so many good offices which the Venetians had done to him, was neuerthelesse to entreat them to bee a meanes to draw the French King and the Duke to some agreement; which the Senate did not greatly deny, so as they might see any hope of beeing able therby

to aduance the common good. Now Ascanio beeing returned from France, reported that the King had vsed many goodly speeches, and seemed willing of agreement, and had likewise caused Octauio to giue consent that Parma should returne to the Church, prouided that the Emperor would doe the like by the Castles and strong Townes which hee held vppon the Parmesan; and that hee would not with-draw his forces from Parma, till such time as hee were well assured, that it should neuer more returne vnder the Emperors power: Wherevpon sundry difficulties arising, all men perceiued that the proposition tended onely toThe warre continueth in Italy. draw the businesse out in length, and to weaken the affaires of warre, rather then to any firme peace: so as at last, al their care on either side, was to strengthen  themselues with soldiers and other necessary things for warre.
The King still sent troopes into Italy vnder the command of the Duke of Neuers and other Captaines, causing Pietro Strossi to make an other leuie of soldiers in Mirandola. The Pope and the Emperor did the like, so as those two Armies, Ecclesiasticall and Imperial, beeing ioyned together, amounted well neere to fifteene thousand footmen, with great numbers of horse, of whom Don FerrantStrossi his pollicy to victuall Parma. de Gonzaga was Generall: but Strossi his wit and dilligence was to bee admired, who on a sodaine going forth of Mirandola, entred vppon the Bolognois, scouring and wasting the Countrey with such terror, as the Pope beginning to stand in doubt not onely of Bolognia, but likewise of Rauenna and other places  in Romagnia, was compelled to call his forces foorth of the Parmesan, and to command them to goe speedily to the Bolognois, to the reskew of their fellowes, whereof Strossi taking aduantage, did with great speed march towards the Parmesan, and entred with great numbers of footmen, and store of victualls into Parma; in regarde whereof, the assailants beeing out of hope to take it of a long time, did perceiue that the warre would long continue.
The Venetians in the meane time looking warily to all matters, and not willing by any means to depend on any but on themselues, determined to leuy foure thousand foot, and fiue hundred light horse, with whom hauing encreased the garrisons of their frontier townes, and caused most of their best Captaines to  goe thither, they were watchfull for the guard of whatsoeuer did belong vnto them. The Duke of Florence on the other side, beeing greatly obliged to theThe Duke of Florence taketh the Emperors party. Emperor, did openly fauour his party both with men and money, not with any intent to feed this fire, which hee would willingly haue seene quenched, but because hee would not haue him thinke sinisterly of him: for he likewise, with the other Princes of Italy, did not allow of the behauiour of the Emperors officers, nor yet of his desiegnes, suspecting them very much, and especially in regard of a new Castle which he had lately built in Sienna, which was commonly termed, Il Ceppo della Toscana.
As for the Duke of Ferrara, although as a vassall to the Church, it behooued  him to beare himselfe discreetly in that businesse, yet neuerthelesse following his owne passion, hee did secretly ayde the French faction: Wherevpon, the Imperialls, to keepe all succours from the besieged on that side, did seaze vpon Brisselles, and on two other small Castles of the Dukes, seated on the frontier: WherewithThe Duke of Ferrara craueth aduice of the Venetians how to behaue himselfe in those troubles in Italy. the Duke being greatly mooued, sent Ieronimo Serafino his Ambassador to Venice, to craue (as he said) the Senates aduise, after what manner hee should behaue himselfe in so miserable a time, resoluing to follow their councell, and especially in their neutrallity: but finding himselfe too weake of himselfe to doe it, hee feared, vnlesse hee were releeued, to bee enforced, for the conseruation of his owne State, to ioyne himselfe with some one or other, and to deale otherwise  then hee desired.
This demand was thought to be very suspitious and ful of cunning, they supposing that the French went about by this meanes to sound their meaning, the better to draw them to some confederacie, or at least to discouer some-what

of their interior purposes: wherupon the Senate was of opinion to answer him in generall termes. Now it had aboue all thinges desired the peace of Italy, and that to those ends it had vsed al possible means with the Pope, and others besides, according as it had seene occasion: but (...) nothing preuailed therein, they were at least resolued to keep themselues in peace and in their ancient neutrality, and the better and more honorably to doe it, and with greater assurance, other men being armed, they thought it ^it to arme; and by prouiding for that whichA discre^t answer of the Venetians to the Duke of Ferrar^. concerned them, had together taken care for the preseruation of the Dukes state, in regard of the particular affection they did beare him, and for their owne interest likewise, being in manner inseparable with his by reason of the neere neighborhood  of their States. This answere not satisfyieng the French, they resolued to discouer themselues more plainely to the Senate, seeing that all men knew that they did meane to en terprize some matter of consequence vpon Italy, for which Lodouico Alemani beeing sent to Genoa, had vnder sundry pretences attempted to raise his faction there, and craued in the Kings name, that it might please the Genouois to lend him their hauen, for his fleet to lie in safety, where hee might land those troops which he intended to send into Italy. Now the Cardinall Tournon beeing at the same time at Venice, whither he came from Rome, vpon the Popes commandement that all the French Cardinals should leaue the Citty, King Henry wrote vnto him that he should in his name expose to the Prince and  Senate in open Councell, the State of the affaires of Italy, the occasion and intent, for which, and with which he had resolued to send his troopes to the aid of Duke Octauio, and to defend his cause, That hee thought he should performe: aInstructions sent by the French King to the Cardinall Tournon to be propounded to the Venetian Senate. noble part, and worthy a great Prince, and which in particular ought to be pleasing to the Princes of Italy, to defend an Italian Prince, weake, and vniustly oppressed by the violence of other men, who had cast himselfe into his armes and protection: that he could hardly be perswaded that the Pope would hinder the defense and preseruation of his owne vassall with an other mans armes and aid, seeing he himselfe was able to giue him small releefe: and that beeing so defended he could least of all beleeue that the other Italian Princes would crosse him in going  about to moderate the Emperors greatnesse, and curbe his vnmeasurable desires, aiming (as all men did plainly see) to rob weake Princes of their States, and to bring Italy into bondage: that the matter it selfe was able to giue sufficient testimony that his deseignes tended to none other ends, seing that he stood vpon those termes, that without needing the Citty of Parma, possessing so many town^s in Piedmont, the passages lay open to himt through which hee might march against the State of Milan: but, because hee then knew, that his actions were sinisterly interpreted, he was resolued to giue ouer that enterprize: yet neuerthelesse he could not be perswaded but that the Venetian Senate, beeing so great and wise a Prince in Italy, on whose authority all others were at last to depend, would be mooued with these troubles which drew after them sundry others of very great importance: that he did excuse that which the Pope had done as falling out by constraint, rather then of set purpose, being incompassed with feare in the midest of the Emperors power and armed forces, as also in regard of the Councel already published, with very dangerous deseignes, the Hereticks ofThe Senates answer to the Cardinall* Tourno^ Germany being come to it: but when his Holinesse should be assured that other men would aid him, it was not then to be doubted but that hee would embrace some other resolution; seeing that to quit the Emperors friendship in such a case might rightly be termed, a setting of himselfe at liberty. The Senate gaue the King thankes and did highly commend his generous deseigne of defending  such as are destitute of helpe: yet they were in good hope that by an accord already treated of with the pope, who did not resist it those businesses might in som sort be composed. The King notwithstanding, continued the war although contrary to his desire he found none in al Italy Octa^io ^arnese excepted, whom

hee might bee assured did fauour him, but resoluing to declare him-selfe afterwards more openly against the Emperor, hauing sent other forces into Piedmont, hee did vnlookt^ for cause diuerse places to bee assailed which were kept by the Imperialls, some of which hee tooke, hee did at the same time proclaime warre by sea, commanding the Prior of Capua brother to Pietro (...) Admirall of the French Galleys, that scouring the seas hee should fight with the Emperors vessels: whereby it happened within a while after, that Doria w^th his Galleys conducting Maximillian King of Boheme and his wife from Barcelona to Genoa, he hardly escaped the French fleet, yet neuerthelesse some of his vessels that lod'g behinde were taken and brought to Marseilles. But the Kings treaty with Duke  Maurice of Saxony, Albert Marquis of Brandenbourg, and other Princes, andThe Germaine Princes treate with the French King against the Emperor. free Citties of Germany, was of fa^re greater importance, all these beeing merueilously distasted of the Emperor, though vpon sundry occasions, some beeing not able to digest the wrong done to the Landgraue, whom the Emperor kept prisoner contrary to his promise, and others, beeing prouoked against the Emperor, for matters of Religion.
King Henry resoluing vpon this league, and hauing imparted it to Giouan Capello the Venetians Ambassador resident with his Maiesty, hee did assure him that hee would in person goe into Germany, earnestly entreating him to follow him thither, to the end, (as it was supposed) that hee might haue occasion to practise  some confederacy with the Venetians, or at least to keepe the Emperor in perpetuall iealouzie and suspition. The Senate, although it had determined not to enter into any farther allyance with the French, did thinke it against reason to deny the King that, as well to shew their good meaning towards him, as in regard of the profit and commodity which the Republick might receiue thereby, to the end that the Emperor, who by reason of Parma and Placentia, and other his actions, which all Italians did greatly suspect, might know, that a more strict alliance might bee easily contracted betwixt the French and the Venetians, to the great danger and preiudice of his Estates in Italy. The Pope in the meane time beeing mooued with these troubles, and considering that himselfe hauing beene the  motiue thereof, by reason of Parma, all men did blame him for the warre whichThe Pope by his Legate goeth about to att^ne the Emperor and the French King. hee had raised in Christendome, and whose successe beeing different, himselfe was to beate a part in it, determined to send two Cardinalls to those Princes, as Legats from the sea Apostolick, to weet, Verale to the French King, and Carpi to the Emperor, to exhort them to lay by all hatred and malice, and all desire of making any more warre one vpon another: how that the taking of Tripoli, and diuerse other great warlike preparations of the Turkes for Christendome, ought to excite them to firme peace and friendship.
But the flame was already growne so great, as all his exhortations could not quench it, although the French King for his part gaue some hope thereof, and  had within a while after sent the Cardinall Tournon to Rome, to prosecute the treaty of accord, and that the Venetian Senate was entreated to haue an hand therein: yet, all men might perceiue that hee was more disposed to warre then to peace, and that all his practises tended to draw the Pope to his party, and to make him a companion in the war which he intended against the Emperor, who on the other side, suspecting these treaties of peace, had re-enforced his army that lay at the siege of Parma, thinking that it would greatly blemish his reputation, if during these practises, they should surprise and take him vnprouided. The Pope on the other side, being in great doubt and feare for that hee was disioyned from the Emperor, and vncertaine of the friendship of the French, knew not what to resolue  vpon, yet neuerthelesse beeing mooued by the Emperors great power, and already tied vnto him by a particular confederacie, thought it best to make shew of that was not, and in no sort to seeme to doubt of his friendship. Hee did afterwards create diuerse Cardinals at his deuotion all Imperialls, vsing in open

Consistory very bitter speeches against against the French King, detesting sundry of his actions, and especially his alliance and friendship with the Turkes, so as the King beeing out of hope to haue him for his friend, dismissed his Legat from his Court, and called home the Lord of Termes his Ambassador at Rome,The King inci^ed agai^st the (...) (...) biddeth annates. threatning both the Pope and the whole Romaine Court; forbidding his subiects to send any more to Rome for Bulls concerning benefices, saying, That it was against reason to make warre on his kingdome with his owne money.
At the same time a very great and mighty Turkish Fleet departed forth of the Hauen of Constantinople, commanded by Sinan Bascha, and Rusten the visier Bascha with diuers other Captaines of authority and experience. Vpon report A great Tur^ish fleet at Sea. thereof, the Senate did augment the number of their forces with seauen and forty Galleis, as beeing vncertaine what way the Turkes would take, and Stefano Tepulo was for the second time chosen Generall. But the Turkish Fleete sayled peaceably through the Channell of Corfou, and held on it course towards Sicely, where the Bascha was desirous to know of the Viceroy, what account the EmperorThe course held by the Turkish ^leet at Sea. made of restoring the townes which Doria had taken in Affricke the yeare before, and beeing answered that hee did meane to keepe them, to take away those places of retreats from Pirats, who did ordinarily scoure those seas, hee landed great numbers of souldiers, who tooke and sackt the City of Augusta, carrying away with him from that Sea-coast great number of prisoners, whom they  made slaues, from thence the Fleet sayled to Malta, which they hauing begunne to batter, and finding the interprize to bee very difficult, hee did on a sodaine reembarke his Souldiers and Artillery, and went to Goze, a smale Island eyght miles distant from Sicely, the which was likewise spoyled and wasted, and the Castell taken by force, although it was man'd with a strong Garrison: from thence sayling into Barbary, it stayed before Tripoli, which after some small battery was yeelded by the Knights of Malta, that commanded there, who with some of the cheefe inhabitance of the towne escaped into the French Galleis which followed the Turkish Fleet, great cruelty beeing vsed vppon those that tarried behind, contrary to the promise made vnto them.
This is all which the Turkes did at sea, but at land on the parts of Hungary and Transiluania, the Christians were strongest, for King Ferdinand by the helpe of Giouan Battista Gastalda, Sforza Palauicin, and other his Captaines, made himselfe maister of all Transiluania, and of the County and Citty of Temisuar: the which lands although they belonged to yong King Stephen, and to the widdow Queene his mother, were neuer-the-lesse vnder Solimans protection, whoThe Turke^ make war in Hungary and Transiluania first sent the Bas^ha of Buda and after him the Beglerbey of Grecia, with great numbers of horse to driue Ferdinands troopes from thence, but all their attempts were for that time to no purpose. A certaine Frier, called George, who serued the young King, did by his authority and good councell much further that enterprize, by whose aduice, not-with-standing that the cheefe of the kingdome were of a contrary opinion, aduising the Queene to tarry for the Turkish succours, which were expected, she all amazed resolued to quitte Transiluania to King Ferdinand, and in recompence thereof, to take the Dutchy of Opelia, hee promising her to giue his Daughter in marriage to the King her sonne, so sooneF^rdinand doth (...) enioy (...). as hee should bee of age: so that Ferdinands souldiers hauing fortified themselues in Transiluania and Temisuar, could not bee driuen from thence by the Turkish succors that came thither afterwards, who beeing compelled by the extremity of winter, did wholy giue ouer the enterprize, and returned with small credit and reputation.
In regard of the selfe same commodity of winter, all exployts of warre ceased in Italy, notwithstanding, that Parma and Miranda were still beseeged without any further progression.
The yeare following 1552. the Emperor Charles and Ferdinand his brother

were threatned with great warres, whereby they were to defend their owne States and dominions. All Germany in a manner was banded against Charles, the Almaines hauing resolued in a Dyet to driue him by force forth of all Germany, and to elect a new Emperor, because he (as they said) had done diuerse things to the preiudice of the Empire, and against the liberty of Germany. King FerdinandAll Germany is band^d aga^nst the Emperor and his brother Fer^inand. was likewise greatly perplexed, by reason of the great warlike preparation which Soliman made to enuade Hungary and Transiluania, the which hee knew not how to resist, despairing of all ayde from the Emperor his brother, as well for that hee was busied else-where, as also in regard of the discontent betwixt them, because Ferdinand would not quit the succession of the Empire to Philip sonne to the  Emperor, and his Nephew: therefore seeking by other meanes to prouide for the safety of his owne, he vsed meanes to appease Soliman, by offering to pay him anFerdinand to free himselfe from war wi^h the Turke offere^h to pay him tribute. other yearely tribute of thirty thousand Ducats for Transiluania, as he already did for those lands which hee possessed in Hungary.
In the meane time, the better to assure himselfe against the rebellions and commotions which were then made, and all intelligences which the Turkes might haue vpon those newly conquered countreys, hee caused good guard to bee kept, and that all such as went and came too and fro, should be narrowly obserued: whereby he discouered that Frier George, who at his entreaty had beene made Bishop of Varadine, and afterwards Cardinall, beeing spurd forward by new ambition, had secret intelligence with certaine Baschus, and did fauour the Turkes party, aspiring to appropriate that Prouince to himselfe, vnder Solimans protection: thisFriar George the C^rdinall is murthered. beeing verified, he determined to put him to death, and hauing giuen charge thereof to Sforza Palauician be with one more entered on a day into the Cardinals Chamber to entreat him to signe a passe-port, and whilest hee was subscribing it, both of them fell vpon him and slew him.
The news thereof beeing brought to Rome, the Pope, and the whole Colledge of Cardinals were greatly offended with it, wherevpon King Ferdinand, with all those who had beene consenting to his death, were excommunicated: but the King offering to iustifie himselfe, and to prooue, that if hee had not dyed all Christendome  would haue been in danger to haue receiued great losse, he alone, at the Emperors intreaty was absolued, and none of the rest.
Now the report of Solimans great warlike preparations at Constantinople,The Venetians preparations when they heard how the Turkes armed. which were making ready against the Spring tiime, did hold all men in doubt; because they did not certainly know for what place that Army was destin'd, nor what Solimans desiegnes therein were. It more troubled the Venetians then any else, in regard of the great expences and perplexities of minde which the comming forth of those fleetes from Constantinople had procured them, causing them stillto bee well prouided: therefore they chose Stephano Tepulo for their Gerall the third time, they did re-enforce their Garrisons in the Islands and other sea  townes, they caused certaine Galleys to be armed in Candy, and to haue store of them they speedily commanded new to bee built in the Arcenall. The Senate appointed twenty Captaines for their Galleys, and the great Councell as many Lieutenants, to the end all matters might bee well ordered, and that their fleete, if need were, might be encreased with the number of an hundred Galleys.
The end of the fifth Booke of the sixth Decade.





The Contents of the sixth Booke of  the sixth Decad.
THE French Kings great Army where hee was in person to back the Protestants of Germany against the Emperor. The French take the Citty of Me^z. The Protestants great forces. The French King ouer runneth the Countrey of Luxembourg. The Prince of  Salerno commeth into France, to incite the King to the enterprise of Naples: The Emperor is enforced by the Protestants to retir^ and escape by flight. Peace betwixt the Emperor and the Germaine Princes. The French King soliciteth the Venetians against the Emperor. The Almaines doe band themselues against the French King, for the citties of Metz, Thou, and Verdun. The Emperor besiegeth Metz. The Spaniards are driuen from Siena. The death of Edward the sixt King of England. The election of Pope Paul the fourth, of the family of Caraffa. Siena is surrendred to the Emperor. The Pope declaring himselfe for the French King, is assailed by the Duke of Alua. The Duke of Guise commeth into Italy with great forces. Peace betwixt the Pope and the Spaniards. The death of the Emperor Charles the fift, of his two Sisters, and of Mary Queene of England. Peace betwixt the French King and the King of Spain. The death of Henry the second French King. The death of Pope Paul the fourth. The Creation of Pope Pius the 4. The Cardinall Caraffa with  three of his kinsmen are put to death. The Ouerture of the Councell of Trent. Charles the ninth French King. Strife betwixt the French and Spanish Ambassadors in the Councell, is appeased by the Pope. A strange matter happening at Rome. And lastly the death of the Emperor Ferdinand.

The sixth Booke of the sixth Decad of the Historie of Venice.
ALL these great warlike preparations made by the Turkes, could not cause the Christian Princes to make peace among themselues, but on the contrary it seemed that the French King was more prouoked thereby to molest the Emperor, whilest he saw him busied in answering the Turkish forces. For continuing in his determination to passe  into Germany, hee perswaded himselfe that the Emperor, beeing assailed in so many sundry places, and especially by the Germaine Princes, who had all conspired against him; would, to free himselfe from so many dangers, condiscend to some accord, by surrendring vnto him some State or other in Italy or else where, to which the crowne of France laid some claime.
Hauing then assembled forty thousand footmen of sundry nations, and foure thousand horse, he marched towards the countrey of Lorraine, whither the Constable of Montmorencie beeing already gone before, had seazed on the Citty ofMetz is taken by t^e French. Metz, an Imperiall citty, which was gouerned by the Bishop and some principall  townsinen, and the King comming thither afterwards, was very honorably entertained. Hee remained for a while with his Armie in those parts, to stop the Flemish troopes leuyed by Queene Mary, sister to the Emperor, from hindering his deseignes, or till the consederate Germaine Princes should set forward, who had already begun their enterprise prosperously, the Citty of Ausbourg beeing at their deuotion, and passing speedily forwards without delay, thorow the Duke of Bauarias countrey, had greatly amazed the Emperor and King Ferdinand, who were then at Ispruch, so, as they presently resolued to retire to some place of safety: but beeing afterwards encouraged, and hauing fortified certaine narrow passages of the Mountaines, thorow which the enemies were to passe vnto them, they determined not to stirre from thence.
The French King beeing aduertised of the Emperors amazement, with that of Ferdinand his brother, and of their enemies progression, thought it best not to let slip the occasion offered, the Emperor beeing weake both in courage and sorces: Wherevpon he resolued to march towards the riuer Rhine, to encourage their confederates, and to fauour their enterprise, intending likewise to passe onThe French King commeth as farre as the R^ine in fauor of the Pr^testant Princes. farther if need should bee. But beeing come to the riuers side, hee receiued news that made him turne back againe: for the Confederates thinking themselues strong enough to expell the Emperor, and desiring to keepe forraine sorces forth of their countreys, for feare of receiuing some discommodine thereby, thought it fit that Duke Maurice should write to the King, how that they had already agreed with the Emperor, whereby they had obteyned their desire, and that there remained nothing more for them to doe, but to thanke him most hartily for the great pleasure hee had done them, for the which all Germany

should owe a perpetuall bond and remembrance to the Croune of France. These newes did trouble the King, who saw his hope frustrate besides the (...) and expences of such a iourney: yet neuerthelesse beeing vnwilling to keepe his troopes idle he marched toward the Dutchy of Luxembourg, where he conquered(...) the (...) of ^bourg. diuers places of importance, and among others, the Castle of Monualier, accounted the key of that countrey, in which the Count Man^felt was taken, who was Gouernour thereof for the Emperor. Then propounding to himselfe other important deseignes, he determined to fashion himselfe in some sort to the Pope that he might disioyne him from the Emperor, wherby he obtained at last, that for Parma and Mirandola, there should be betwixt the Sea Apostolicke, and the  Croune of France a suspention of Armes for two yeares.The Prince of (...) (...) (...) (...).
During these practises the Prince of Salerno came to the Kinges Campe, who propounding vnto him the enterprize of Naples, his Maiesty did willingly harken vnto it, entring into discourse with him what forces would be sufficient, and what meanes were to be vsed for the execution of that enterprize: for which the Prince hauing made great offers to the King and promised diuers matters, grounded chiefly vpon the peoples desire to shake of the Spanish yoake, and to cast themselues betwixt his armes, the King concluded that he should be the cheife ofThe enterprise of (...) propounded to the King. that enterprize.
This Prince leauing the Realme of Naples by reason of some contention  betwixt him and Don Pedro de Toledo the Viceroy, and for hatred to the Emperor, because hee maintained his enemy against him, came to Padua, where for a time he remained, and then determining to be reuenged of his wrongs and of the small account the Emperor made of him, hee resolued to goe into France: but he was desirous first to passe by Venice to conferre with the Senators concerning his deseignes, that he might the better informe the King of their meaning, conferring the proposition that he intended to make vnto him. And beeing brought vnto the Senate, he began with a long and eloquen^ speech, to set forth the occasion which then offered it selfe to them, for the recouery of thoseThe Prince of Salerno his proposition to the Venetian Senate. Townes and hauens which they had in former times possessed on the coast of  Puglia, and for assuring themselues against the Emperors greatnesse; going about thereby to sound their meaning, concerning such an enterprize, if the French King should propound it vnto them: seeing that the Neopolitans were tired with the Spanish gouernment, and wearied with the Viceroyes pride and tyrany, who was not only backt and maintained by the Emperor, but highly reconed and esteemed of him, and cheifly in regard of the inquisition which hee went about to bring into that Kingdome, to the persecution and ruine of the Nobility; who beeing no longer able to endure such bondage, were resolued to embrace any other party whatsoeuer, rather then to continue vnder the Emperors obedience, who did so contemne and ouer-maister them That the selfe same reasons  had beene already represented to the French King, who tooke great compassion of their misery and calamtiy: and had likewise as a magnanimous Prince freely embraced their protection, and promised to aid them in all he might, which hee had put off til some other time that he might performe it with such an army as hee desired. Therefore (added this Prince) it behooueth the Venetian Senate more then any others to listen to that enterprize, as an Italian Prince, a louer of liberty, and most potent at Sea, and one that may lay iust claime to some part of that Kingdome: that there was no alliance more profitable to their Commonwealth then that of the Crowne of France, as thi^ ges past could giue them sufficient testimony, and in particular, the King then beeing, who did so deerely  loue their Republique, as it might hope to obtaine any thing how great so-euer it were. But what greater commodity, (said he) can bee hoped for, then that which now offereth it selfe? And what greater trouble and vexation of mind can there happen vnto the Emperour, then that where-in hee is presently

wrapped by the warres of Germany, and by the preparations where-with the Turke threatneth his brother Ferdinand? But aboue all other thinges the mature iudgement and wisdome of the Venetian Senate, ought to be well aduised, and not to suffer the Neopolitans, destitute of all aid and succour, to cast themselues headlong by constraint and necessity into a wretched resolution, not only hurtfull to themselues but much more to others, by hauing recourse to Solimans protection who was vpon the point of sending a very mighty army into the field they beeing determined so to doe for their last refuge. All these reasons and remonstrancesThe Senotes answers to the Prince of Sa^. would not preuaile with the Senators, none amongst them beeing of opinion to accept their offers, whereupon the Prince was dismissed, with this answere, That they did much lament the discommodity of the time, and particularly  his owne toyles and sorrowes, extenuating the importance of the businesse, which merited a long and more mature deliberation: yet neuerthelesse this Prince going afterwards (as hath beene said) into France, and acquainting the King with his deleigne, he heard him, and resolued to execute that which hee had propounded. At the same time as the French King did ruminate in his mind certaine doubts concerning that enterprize, he receiued newes which did confirme him to execute it; namely the vexations and trobles where vnto the Emperor was reduced, which were such and so great, as he verily seemed to be forsaken of that good Genius which had euer waited vpon him in all his actions with wonderfull The Pace of ch^usa is taken by the Protestants. prosperity. Duke Maurice and the other Confederates holding on their way towards Ispruch, and beeing come to the pace of Chiusa neere to Fussen, (which was strong and narrow), in the conseruation whereof the Imperialls had placed their cheefest hope by stopping the enemies passage) they forced and tooke it, opening themselues thereby a way to march to Ispruch without any contradiction. The Emperor, and his brother Ferdinand about midnight receiuing newes of the losse of this place, hauiug but fiue hundred horse with them, did sodainly leaue Ispruch, went towards Persenon, and from thence into the County of Tiroll: then hauing inteligence that the enemies were at Ispruch meaning to march on farther they againe ^ourneyed through sharpe and steepe mountaines, and tarried in no place till they came to Villac, where they continued in great feare  and suspition, being aduertised by such as came forth of Italy, that they had seen great numbers of horse and foot in the contrey of Frioul, which made them to suspect tha^ the Venetians, ioyned with the French Kings and Almains, had assembled those forces to ouerrun them. This suspition proceeded from the passengers who had seene great numbers of horse which the Sauorgnians had assembled in those partes neere to the Castle of Osoff to meet the Count Gazuoles, and to entertaine him at thei^ Castle, who was going to the Emperor.
His maiesty had by so much more giuen credit (as men are easily drawne to be leeue that which they desire or feare) to these reports, in regard of the pursuites and practizes of the Prince of Salerno; so, as being councelled whilest hee  remained at Ispruch, to goe into Italy, he seemed not to allow of that Councell* considering with himselfe that there was small safety in passing through the Venetians State: and yet they had neuer lesse will to hurt him then at that time, hating to take aduantage on the aduerse fortune of a great Prince their freind and Confederate, notwithstanding that certaine Germaine Princes had solicited them to take armes against him, offering them tenne thousand footmen and two thousand horse, which the Senate would neuer accept of: but hee being afterwards informed of the truth of the matter by Dominico Morosin, who in quality of Ambassador had stil attended vpon him, he did commend it, and highly thanked  the Senare for their loue and good meaning toward him in so hazardous a fortune.
His maiesty then perceiuing that in his greatest desaster the Spanish footmen whom he expected were not arriued turned all his thoughtes vpon peace: and to to this end, the Confederate Princes holding a Diet at Possonia, King Ferdinand

went thither in person to treate of the conditions of peace: But the Protestants desiting to make vse of the time, to abase the Emperors authority and to preserue the liberty and priuiledges of the Princes and free Citties of Germany, made very vnreasonable demands: where vpon the Emperor, sometimes being enforced by necessity, and so many miseries, did for their satistaction grant their demands, and at other times againe, recalling his vsuall courrage and inuincible constancy, he said that he would rather endure all hazards of Fortune, then grant things vnworthy of himself and his Imperial dignity. In the end standing firme for the matter of Religion, not to innouate any thing in the Citties, which had accepted the interim, nor like wise to submit to the decrees of the new Diets, that whichPeace betw^xt the Emperor and Germaine Princes. appertained to the prerogatiues and authority of the Empyre, hee condescended, by accepting the accord to the inlargement of the prisoners, and granted a generall pardon to the rebells. These troubles had put the French King and Prince of Salerne in great hope, to be able to execute the enterprize of Naples: in which they supposing that the Venetians could doe more then any others, the Prince of Salerne returned to Venice, where he and the Lord of Selua, Ambassador forThe Prince of Salerno ^neth to Venite from the king. the King, made new and more earnest practizes, to draw the Common-wealth into a league for that purpose: They declared whatsoeuer they thought might incite the Senate to hate the Emperor, and on the contrary they forgot nothing which  might serue to insinuate the French King into their fauour, and to extoll him as well in regard of his great forces, as for his loue and affection towards the Republick: And because they perceiued the Senate to bee resolute to persist in their neutrality, the Lord of Selua embracing the matter with great vehemency: spake thus.

My Lords doe you not perceiue, that it lyeth not in your power to diuertThe Oration of Selua the Frech Kings Ambassador to the Venetian Senate* the King from this enterprise, hee beeing wholy inclined therevnto, either alone, or in your or others company, and whatsoeuer your resolution is, these Princes are to striue together for their fortune* to which side soeuer it shall incline, it is to bee feared that your newtrality will not bee able to defend your State, and that  which belongeth to you, exposed to infinite dangers, beeing equally hated of the victor and vanquished: of the one, because that when you had meanes to assist him, you did not respect his misery, nor vouchsafed to doe it: of the other, for that enuying his wealth and prosperitie, you would not ioyne with him. And what can my King presume eyther of you, and of your so ancient (as you terme it) and deere friendship, if to your owne profit and commodity yee accept not his offers, full of affection and good will, and grant not his honest and iust demands? What hope may hee haue of your friendship in aduersity, if you make so small account of him in his prosperity? What fitter or more commodious occasion can you expect for the aduancement of your Common-wealth, or for your assurance against the Emperors redoubred power, if you reiect that which  is now offered? How often vppon lesse occasion, haue your Ancestors and your selues, to the immortall praise of your Senates magnanimity taken armes? Perhaps you thinke that my King, beeing now able, to his great aduantage, to make an accord with the Emperor, and refusing so to doe, will without you at some other time, hearken to it to his owne disaduantage and yours: or peraduenture some hope, that the Emperor recouering his former greatnesse, will remember this good office, for that you beeing sued vnto, would not take armes against him: but vndoubtedly it is more like, that hee according to the custome of all Princes, and in particular, following his owne naturall inclination, will make more account of his owne interest and particular pofit, then of all  duties and good offices done vnto him: Florence, Siena and Genoa, may serue you for examples, whom, in recompence of their good seruice, hee hath wholy depriued of their liberties.

These reasons were great in shew, but being neerly examined, it was perceiued that they were not well grounded hauing no firme foundation: and therefore after that the Senate had maturely considered the matter, as well that which concerned their newtrallity, as the time of yeare already farre spent, and vnfit for anyThe Senats answere to the Prince of Salerne and the French Ambassador. great enterprize either by Sea or Land, they concluded with a generall consent to answer the Prince, and the French Ambassador, thus. That the Senate did infinitly thanke the King and Prince, for their loue and affection towards the proffit of the Commonwealth; and that it would perpetually remember it: but the Venetians hauing for many yeares beene at peace with all Princes, they thought it not a fit thing to breake it vpon no occasion: that in any other matter the Senate  would striue to satisfie the Kings desire, vnto whom, and his Realme likewise, it wished all health and prosperity.
After this answer the Prince continuing his propositions, did in the Citty of Chioggia assemble diuers of the French faction, to determine with them on fittestThe enterprize of Naples being found very difficul^ is re^ by the King. meanes for the enterprize of Naples. There met the two Cardinalls, Ferrara, and Tournon, the Lord of Termes the Kings Lieutenant in Italy, Selua the Kings Ambassador at Venice, The Duke of Somma, with other Dukes of the realme of Naples, and certaine other Lords, vnto whom the Prince hauing represented the businesse very easie, the Assembly did not so finde it, in regard of diuers great and euident difficulties: the which hauing like-wise beene well examined by the King, he wrote to the Prince and to his Ambassador, not to motion it to the Senate: but they had already done it, as hath bin said: whereby the Senates answer and resolution was the more commended by all men.
Whithin a while after, matters beginning to turne and change, the French King was aduertized how that the Almans had forsaken his alliance, and were banded against him, because he had seazed vpon three Imperiall citties, Metz, Thou, and Verdun: that Queene Mary hauing raised an army of Flemmings had beseeged Hesdin: and how that his owne army on the contrary did dayly decay, by reasonThe Almanis band themselues against the French King concerning Metz Thou, and Verdun. of the contagious sickenesse which was crept into it: whereby he was enforced to leaue the contry of Luxembourg and by breaking off the corse of his victories  to send a great part of his forces to winter at home, in their owne houses, and to leade the residew to the frontiers of his Kingdome, to gard it; and in the meane time tenne thousand Spanish foote-men came and ioyned with the Emperor.
The Marquis Albert of Brandenbourg, who in the beginning held the kings party, changing his mind, turned with his forces to the Emperors side, so as by example, diuers of the chefest of Germany did the like, who at the first had made shew to fauour the King: after-wards they fell at ods with him, because he would not graunt their demands, which were altogether vnreasonable.
The Emperor being moued by these new accidents, resolued without any  more delay to go in person with his forces to beseege the Citty of Metz, notwith-standing that winter drew neare, and that the Castle of the Citty, which was great both by situation and arte, and excellently well manned with diuers good Captaines, did disswade him from that enterprize, together with his owne seruants, who were of a contrary opinion: For that action being made out of season, had no prosperous successe: for after that he had extreamely trauelled his Army, and lost great numbers of soldiors, he was enforced to retire, hauing done more hurt to him-selfe then to his enemies. In the meane time an other fire, which had a long time layne raked vp in ashes, began to breake forth in Italy; for the Siennois being not able to endure the ouer cruell and seuere gouernment of the  Spaniards, resoluing to driue them forth of their Citty, sent messengers to Rome to acquaint the French Agents there with their resolution, crauing their aide and fauour therein, promising to keepe their city for the French King. This

offer, for which diuers secret practizes had beene already made in France was willingly entertained, and commandement was forthwith giuen to certaine foot companies of the Kings that lay at Parma and Miranda to goe thither, and prosently after, the Lord of Sansac went thither to encourage the people, to whose aide other forces being brought by the Count Pettillan, the Spaniards were driuen forth of the towne, their fort rased, and diuers other indignities were committed (such force hath the peoples liberty not being restrained by lawes or power of the Magistrate) to the disgrace and contempt of the Emperor, they tore in peeces his Ensignes, brake his priuiledges, and trod his armes vnder their feete, the which did make the matter more odious, and did the more incense the Emperour  against them, who being desirous not to delay his reuenge vpon the Sienois,The Emperor s^ndeth the Vicero^ of Naples against Sienna. nor to suffer the French to haue an other place of retreat in Italy, did command Don Petro of Toledo, Viceroy of Naples, to march speedily into Tuscany with fiue thousand Almaine and Spanish footmen, seeing that the Realme of Naples was in no danger to be enuaded, and that he should attempt to reduce Sienna vnder his obedience.
It was supposed that the deseignes of the French, succeeding prosperously, would greatly hurt the Emperour. For although the French did publikely say that they had taken the defense of the city vpon them, to free it from the tyranny and oppression of the Spaniards, and to restore it to her former liberty and  spendor, yet neuerthelesse, they plainly made shew of their meaning therein, in regard, that refusing all motions of agreement that were propounded, they went about to place their Garrisons in that city for their owne behoofe, and in other places depending thereon, and to leauy forces in Italy for their owne deseignes:The Kings demand t^ the Siennois. wherevpon the French King craued of the Siennois, that in recompence of their liberty they would declare themselues friends to his friends and enemies to his enemies. Now the Viceroy being desirous to execute the Emperors commandement, hauing obtained passage through the Churches territories (the Pope saying that he had giuen him leaue, by reason hee had no meanes to hinder him) entred with his army vpon the Siennois territory, and spoyling whatsoeuer he met  with, he tooke certaine weake places by a voluntary reddition: for the stronge townes were well fortified with men, victuals and all other necessaries, so that theThe Viceroy of Naples spoileth the country of the Siennois. Imperials would haue spent much time in winning them; wherein the Viceroy being very wilfull, beseeged Montalcina, because if that fort should hold out, Sienna being well prouided of all things would be in lesse danger. But the Siennois doubt to be seuerely punished by the Emperour if hee should take their city, did mighily encourage them to their owne defense, together with the hope to bee soone rid from the Imperiall army, by reason of the Turkish and French forces, which were to come into the Realme of Naples.
The Venetians had done all they could to quench this fire kindled in Italy, fearing, like men that saw their neighbor houses on fire, that it might fall vpon theirs; but by their valor and discretion they auoided it. In the meane time a famous Pirate called Mustapha Bifo scouring their seas, entred the Adriatricke Gulphe with diuers Fusts, spoyling and robbing whatsoeuer he met with vpon the coast of Dalmatia, Cristofero Canalis Admirall of the Gulphe went forth to meet him with certaine Gallies, and incountring with him, he did brauely assaile him, and hauing sunke all his vessels, he tooke this Mustapha, and struck off his head vpon the side of his Galley.
Thus ended the yeare 1552. the ensuing yeare was full of warre as well in Tuscany,An. 1552. as in Piedmond and Picardy, the Emperor making great preparations of  men and money to renue the war with the French, that he might recouer his reputation which he supposed to haue lost at the seege of Metz. At the same time, Petro Zene being chiefe of the councell of forty, communicated to the councell of Tenne, that it was necessary to reuiue the remembrance and execution of the last

will and testament of the Cardinall Zene, who in his time, hauing beene veryThe councell of ^enne reuiueth the memory and execution of the l^st will and testament of the Cardinal Zene. rich, had left a goodly and honorable Legacy of a yeerly rent of two thousand one hundred Ducats, to the Prince, Signory, and Senate, to forraine Ambassadors, to the Clergy, and diuers others, as is more at large mentioned in his testament, on condition that all of them should be present at the seruice yeerely celebrated in the month of May in Saint Markes Church by his appointment: the which being granted did procure great magnificence to the memory of that great Prelat, and gaue much content to the whole family.
At the same time great troubles arose in England by the death of yong KingThe death of Edward the sixth King of England. Edward the sixth, whom his sister Mary succeeded in that Kingdome.
Prince Donato in the meane time, after that he had repaired and embellished the Ducall palace, after the same manner as it is to be seene at this day, and by his example animated diuers Senators to doe the like, departed forth of this life to the great griefe of all men, in the seuenth yeere and sixth month of his principallity, and lieth buried in Saint Maries of Serui.



MARC-ANTONIO  TREVISAN the eighty Duke.








MARC-ANTONIO TREVISAN sonne to that Dominico Treuisan who was so renowned for his great seruice done to his country, succeeded him after the accustomed manner: He was a man of such integrity and holinesse of life, as they had much to doe to perswade him to accept the dignity; for being a good man and brought vp from his youth in all simplicity, he knew not what ambition did meane. At the last being enforced by his friends, he consented to their pleasure, with as great humillity and modesty as could be desired; so, as being feared and honoured of euery one, he maintained iustice without any parciallity. He found the Republike at peace both at home and abroad, by the  discreet gouernment of his predecessors, who had cut off all occasions of warreThe Duke of Florence sendeth forces against the Siennois. with forraine Princes, continuing still Newters.
In the meane time, Cosmo Duke of Florence hauing declared himselfe against the Siennois, sent Giouan Giacomo de Medicis, Marquis of Marignan, with Italian and

Spanish forces to assaile them. The French King being incensed there at commanded Pietro Strossi his Lieutenant Generall in Italy to beseege the city of Florence to vse meanes to take it, and to restore it to her former liberty, expelling the Duke: but the Marquis preuenting Strossi came with his forces vnlooked for in the night to assaile the city of Sienna, and hauing at his first arriuall giuen i^ vpon one of the Gates, the allarme was so hot, as euery man ranne thither, whereby he was repulsed and enforced to retire, but with no losse of courage, for in his retreate he seized on a fort builded with in a Harquebuze shot from the walles, which the Lord of Termes had caused to be made there for the defense of the city, and fortifying himselfe therein, he could not be driuen thence by any meanes  that the Siennois, or Strossi could vse, who vpon the report thereof came speedily to Sienna, where for the safety of the city he caused an other fort to be built, betwixt that of the enemies and the Gate, forth of which they did vsually come to skirmish.
Strossi after that, marching into the field with certaine troupes, surprized Rodolfo Baillon and Ascania de la Corne who were going vpon an enterprize against Chiusi, whom he put to rout, slew Baillon, and sent Ascanio prisoner to the King, who did ransomlesse set him at liberty.
Thus passed this yeere 1553. which was full of warres in sundry places, the An. 1553. next ensuing was not exempted from it, and yet the Venetians were no way touched there with being spectators of other mens games, they themselues hauing no hand therein, though warre was very neere them as well in Tuscany, as in Parma and Mirandola, and afterwards in the Isle of Corse against the Geneuois the Emperors partisans. In this manner did the city of Venice enioy an assured peace on euery side, when on a morning Prince Treuisan being at Masse in the Hall of the Heads, died sodainely of a faintnesse that tooke him, proceeding (according to the common report) from to much abstinence, hauing gouerned eleuen monthes and seuen and twenty daies, hee lieth buried in the Church of the Saints Iohn and Paul.







FRANCISCO VENIERI the eighty one Duke.








FRANCISCO VENIERI a man of sixty foure yeers old was vpon the eleuenth of Iune chosen in his steed. The Republike likewise was in his time at peace, whilest fiers of warre flamed in all places neere vnto them, and that no Prince or common-wealth of Italy but felt the misery thereof, the armes of the French and the Imperials ranging euery where abroad.
In this sort was the yeere 1554. spent, which in sundryAn. 1554. places was full of warre, desolation, fiers, smoke and ashes: in the yeere following An. 1555. The death of Pope Iulius he third. diuers alterations of State were seene. For first, Pope Iulius the third deceased on the three and twentith day of March, whom the Cardinall Marcello Ceruin succeeding, who was a Tuscan by Nation, death within a while after buried both his name and memory.
Giouan Pietro Caraffa a Neapolitan, called in former times the Cardinall Theatin,The election of Pope Paul the fourth. was chosen in his place, who being termed Paul the fourth, did at his entrance put all men in great hope of a good reformation in the Church, and of a generall peace, to which he being not able to induce the Emperor and French King, warre beganne to kindle more then before. Sienna after a long seege did, through want of Victuals, yeeld to the Imperials, and yet vpon honorable composition which  was partly performed, but not altogether.
The Emperor Charles at the same time bending vnder the burthen of worldly affaires, and being discontented to see that great good fortune which had euer accompanied him in all his haughty enterprizes, to giue place to that of the French King or else being touched with some remorse of conscience for hauing beene theThe Emperor Charles resigneth all his States to his sonne Philip, and to his brother Ferdinand occasion of so much bloudshed in Christendome, in regard of the length of the sad precedent warres, sent for his sonne Philip forth of England to Bruxels, and resoluing to quit the Empire, his owne Kingdomes, and honours of this world, did by authenticall letters of the fiue and twentith of October, resigne vnto him all his Lands and Signories, enioyning all his Estates and subiects to acknowledge him their true and lawfull King, determining to withdraw himselfe (as he afterwards  did) into a Monastery in Spaine, hauing likewise renounced the administration of the Empire to King Ferdinand his brother, and recommended him by letters to all the Princes and Potentates of Germany.
Philip then according to his fathers earnest exhortation, seemed very much toTruce granted and soone broken encline to peace, but in regard of the great difficulties which were found therein on either side, truce was granted for fiue yeeres, that in the meane time they might haue leisure to conclude a peace, but this truce likewise was as soone broken as concluded, being supposed to haue beene but a false baite to delay the prouisions of the French in Piedmont, whilest the Duke of Alba should set forward, wherevpon warre beganne againe more hotly then before, to the great griefe of  al men, which continued the yeere following 1556. in which Prince Venieri beingAn. 1556. ill disposed of his person, aud ordinarily sicke, departed forth of this mortall life, hauing grouerned two yeeres, one month, and one and twenty daies, and is buried in Saint Sauiors Church.








LORENZO PRIVLI the eighty two Duke.








THE Senate being afterwards assembled, according to the vsual manner, did in his stead elect Lorenzo Priuli, a man wise and learned. At the beginning of his principallity the plague beganne to shew it selfe, which within a while after ceased by the dilligence and industry of Petro Mosto the Senator, deputed at  that time to the office of La Sanita. The pestilence was followed by a dearth and want of victuals, proceeding from a suspition that the sicknesse still continued, by meanes whereof strangers did no more bring any thing to the city.The Pope an enemy to the Spaniards.
At the same time Pope Paul the fourth a bad friend to the Spaniards, did imprison in Castle Saint Angelo, the Cardinall Santa Fior, Camillo Colonna, Iuliano Caesaren* and the Abbot of Bresegna, all of them enemies to the house of France, for secret assemblles which they made in Rome in the houses of Marc-Antonio Colonna and that Cardinall Marc-Antonio escaping went to the King of Spaine, who presently commanded the Duke of Alua to releeue them.
This Duke being Viceroy of Naples, was greeued to see the Pope openly to pursue the Roman Lords Spaines partizans, and being desirous to obey the King his Masters commandement, marched into the field, and tooke from the PopeThe Duke of Alua taketh diuers townes from the Pope. neere to Rome, Agnane, Pila^tina, Segna, Tiuoli, and last of all Ostia, whereby he did cut off victuals from the Romans, he on the side, and the Colonnessi on the other keeping the Pope in this manner shut vp within the circuit of his wailes.
The Pope made meanes to the French King, sending the Cardinall Carassa his Nephew vnto him his Maiesty wrote to the Marshall Stossi who then lay in Tuscany to march thitherwards and to expect aide which the Duke of Guise should bring him. His Holinesse di^ likewise send to Venice to mooue the Senate to The Venetians being entreated by the Pope vse meanes to pacifie the Duke of Alua. aide him. The Senators being greeued for the Popes troubles, and desyring to haue him at quiet, s^rit Phaebe Capello, a very wise and discreet Secretary to the Duke of Alua, to pacifie the matter if it were possible.
Philip King of Spaine in the meane time perceiuing this warre to be backed

by the French, and that thereby it was likely to prooue more dangerous in regard of the intelligences and partiallities which they had in Italy, did receiue Duke Octauio of Parma into fauor, restoring to him the city of Placentia and allOctauio Farneze (...) (...) his Dutchy. other places nere adioyning which he had seized: in regard whereof, this Duke embraced the Spanish party, to the Popes great discontent, who said, that a Prince feudatary of the Church, as he was, ought not to make an accord with his enemies without his leaue, wherevpon, he caused him to be cited to Rome, together with the Cardinal Farneze his brother.
The Duke of Guise about the same time came from France into Italy, which was at the beginning of the yeere 1557. with fifteene thousand footmen, eightAn. 1557. The Duke of Guise commeth into Italy. hundred men at armes, and twelue hundred light horse, to aide the Pope against  the Imperials, with whom within a while after Strossi, Monluc and others, (who by the Kings commandement were gonne before to Rome with six hundred horse and fiue thousand foot) ioyned themselues.
Vpon the report of the arriuall of these forces, the Duke of Alua had retired himselfe to the frontiers of the Realme of Naples, by his retreat opening a way to Rome for the Duke of Guise, who presently went thither, vpon hope to finde great forces ready there, according to the accord concluded betwixt the Pope, the King, and the Duke of Ferrara, but finding none at all there, he went into La Marca, where the Marquis of Montebel came vnto him with the Churches forces, and from thence they marched into the Realme of Naples where they stayed not long, by reason that the aide came not which the Cardinall Caraffa had promised to the King, and because the French army for want of pay did dayly decrease, an^ on the contrary, that of the Duke of Alua did encrease: wherevpon, the Duke of Guise returning to La Marca, and afterwards going to Rome to talke with the Pope, perceiuing the small meanes his Holinesse had to make warre, and the great pursuite made by the Duke of Alua, hee aduized him to harken vnto peace and agreement with the Spaniard, resoluing to returne into France. For at Rome hee receiued letters from the King bearing newes of the losse of the battaile of Saint Laurence, and of the taking of SaintThe losse of the battaile of Saint Lawrence, and the towne of Saint Quintins. Quintins by the Spaniards, with commandement presently to returne into  France; the Duke of Guise being willing to obey, tooke his leaue of his Holinesse, and went forward on his iourney home-ward, the Pope determining to follow his councell.
During this warre against the Pope, The Venetians and Cosmo Duke of Florence, had solicited King Philip and the Duke of Alua, to make an accord with his Holinesse, either of them answered that they had not taken armes to take from him any thing that was his, but only to defend the Realme of Naples* and that they had made warre in an enemies country to defend their owne subiects; and therefore so soone as his Holinesse should leaue his confederacy with The Spaniards demands vpon the treaty of peace with the Pope. the French, and the resolution of making himselfe master of the Realme of Naples, they would yeeld him the obedience due to the soueraigne pastor of Christendome, and would restore whatsoeuer they had taken from him during that warre: to which the Pope giuing eare, the Cardinall Caraffa with certaine others went to the Duke of Alua to treat of peace, the which was easily granted with restitutionPeace betwixt the Pope and Spaniards. on all sides of places taken in the warre, the Duke of Ferrara being therein comprehended.
The Senate to mediate this agreement, sent Marc-Antonio de Franceschis thither, who was Secretary to the Common-wealth, a very wise and discreet man, who stirred not from thence till the finall conclusion thereof. In the  meane time two hundred Turkish Gallies returning from the coast of Calabria, did cast anchor at La Valona, and did in no sort hurt the lands belonging to the Venetians.
Within a while after the two sonnes of Soliman, Selim and Baiazet, tooke

armes against one an other in Asia, and because the father did most fauour theVVarres betwixt Solimans two soones. elder brother Selim, the other was enforced to haue recourse to Tamas King of Persia, who in hatred to Soliman did willingly aide him, and giuing him great forces, the two brethren ioyned their battaile, which continuing a day and a night, Selim was victor, his brother being fled from the battaile hurt, and more then forty thousand Mahometans one either side slaine in the place.
The Senate on the other side being still desirous to continue their ancient customes and alliances, sent Giouan Capello Knight, and Bernardo Nouagera Ambassadors to the Emperor Ferdinand to congratulate his promotion to the Empire (as hath beene said) and Paulo Tepulo to King Philip.
This was at the latter end of the yeere: the next, 1558. bred great warres both An. 1558. in France, Piedmont and Tuscany, together with the death of Princes and Princesses. For so soone as the Duke of Guise returned into France, hee executedThe taking of Calais. the enterprize of Calais, a long time before determined of, and reduced vnder the Kings subiection the country of Oye, and all the forts which the English held there: the Duke of Neuers on the other side tooke diuers places in the country of Luxembourg, as Herbemont, the forts of Iamoigne, Chygni, Rossignoll, Villeneufe and diuers others.
This happy successe did change the French mens sorrow into gladnesse (their hearts still panting for that red and bloudy battaile of Saint Lawrence) andFrancis Daulphin of Viennois mar^ieth the Queene of Scots. chiefly at Court, where the ioy was doubled, in regard of the marriage of Francis Daulphin of Viennois with Mary Steward Queene and Inheretrix of Scotland, daughter to Iames the fifth and Mary of Lorraine, daughter to Claude Duke of Guise, and that of Charles Duke of Lorraine, with Claude the younger daughter of France. This ioy was accompanied with an other, by reason of the taking ofThe French take Thyonuille Thyonuille, which after a long battery of fiue and thirty great peeces of ordnance, was yeelded vpon composition. Great preparations for warre being after this manner dayly made, Almighty God tooke pitty on the people and raised vp Mediators of peace betwixt those two great Kings, the which at that time tooke noeffect, in regard of the great difficulties which were presented. But the death of  Charles the fift happening in Spaine, and that of his two sisters, Flenor Queene Dowager of France, and Queene Mary Dowager of Hungary, who accompanied him, Mary Queene of England died soone after, which procured the accomplishment of the peace, turning the bitternesse of the precedent warres into a pleasing sweetnesse of accord, by meanes of the alliances made the yeere following 1559.An. 1559. For as the Commissioners of both Kings did treat together, the death of Charles the fifth happening in September, and that of Queene Mary of England in Nouember, altered the place and time of that conclusion.
Peace was concluded in the castle of Cambresis, by meanes of the marriagesPeace conclud^ betwixt the (...) and Spanish Kings. of Philip with Elizabeth, eldest daughter to King Henry, and of Philibert Emanuel Duke of Sauoy with the Lady Marguerite the Kings only sister, who tendred backe to the Spaniard whatsoeuer he had taken from him, and to the Duke, Sauoy and Piedmont, and to the Geneuois Corsica. But whilest the nuptials of the Kings daughter and sister were celebrated at Paris with all sports and delights that might be imagined, this pleasant Commedy was turned into a mournfull and lamentable tragedy, by King Henries death, who being at tilt stricken into the eye with a splinter of a Lance, died, the eleuenth day after his hurt.
But to returne to the Venetians, great numbers of pirats did at the same time scoure the Adriattick sea, and by their vsuall spoiles and incursions did great harme on the sea coast of Dalmatia and Histria. Matteo Bembo, a discreet person  and well experienced in many matters and Generall of the Venetians nauall army, came forth of the Gulph of Corfou with twelue Gallies, and with great speed pursued those Rouers, gaue them chase, and di^ greatly molest them, who escaping into the Hauen of Durazzo, those of the (...) hauing taken (...) (...)

their behalfe, Bembo being incensed thereat, not regarding the peace which the Venetians had with Soliman, discharged his Cannons vpon the cities walles whereThe Pirates pursued by Bembo saue ^hemselues in Durazzo. some of the inhabitants were slaine and yet he could not seize on the Pirats. The Turke tooke this battery and manner of proceeding in very bad part, and determined to reuenge it: the Venetians, considering the losses and harme that might arise if they should breake peace with so potent a Lord, did appease him both by presents and excuses, banishing Bembo from their State, being not able to apprehend him, that they might giue him an exemplary punishment, which did the more coole and appease Soliman. On the other side by the death of Mary Queene of England Elizabeth her sister, obtained the crowne. To Henry the second succeeded  Francis the second Daulphin of Viennois his eldest sonne of the age of sixteene yeeres. At the same time died Pope Paul the fourth, who being extreamly hated of the Roman people, as well for the behauiour of his Nephewes, as forThe death of Pope Paul the fourth. the Inquisition which he had established in Rome, before he had scarce giuen vp the ghost, the people arose, and being led by the chiefest of those that beene iniured by him, ranne to the palace of the Inquisition, from whence with their swords hauing driuen the Monkes, they opened the prisons and set all the prisoners at liberty: the like did they to all the other prisons in Rome, then they went to the Capitoll, where finding the brazen Statue which the Romans had erected in honourA Popular commotion in Rome. of the Pope at the beginning of his papacy in regard of the good offices he  had done them, they brake it in peeces, and drag'd the head diuided from the body through the dirt and mire of the city, that done, they threw it into Tiber.
The Venetians sent their Ambassadors to the new French King to congratulate (according to their manner) his comming to the crowne. Nicolo de PontVenetian Ambassadors to the French King. Doctor and Knight, and Bernardo Nouagera were appointed to that end: and within a while after the Prince falling sicke deceased, to the griefe of all men, in regard of his integrity and learning: he was buried in Saint Dominikes Church in the monument of his ancestors. Then by the example of former times, they chose Ieronimo Priuli brother to the deceased Duke, a man very famous and of great Maiesty.




IERONIMO DE PRIVLI the 83. Duke.





AT the beginning of his gouernment, Giouan Angelo deThe creation of Pope Pius the fourth.Medicis a Milanois, brother to the late Marquis of Marignan was chosen Pope to the great contentment of all the Romans, taking vpon him the name of Pius the fourth, which was at the latter end of the yeere 1559. who to make his actions conformable to his name, pardoned the people of Rome the commotion and mutiny made by them against his predecessor: then seeing all Christendome at peace, he tooke order that the generall  councell begunne at Trent, and broken off afterwards, by reason of the warres, should be reuiued. And although he was by nature meeke and gentle, yet neuerthelesse beeing enforced, by the great complaints made vnto him against his predecessors Nephewes, who during their vncles Papacy had committed infinite extortions, hee imprisoned Charles and Alphonso Caraffi Cardinals, the Duke of Palliano brother to Charles, and two others of their nere kinsmen, who, their processe hauing beene made, and considered by Iudges deputed to that end, being found guilty of sundry bad crimes, the Cardinall Charles was strangled in Castle Saint Angelo, and forthwith buried, the Duke ofThe Cardinall Carassa and three of his kinsmen are put to death. Palliano with his other kinsmen were beheaded in the tower of Nona, and shewne  afterwards in publike, and Cardinall Alphonso as least culpable, was sent home to his owne house by meanes of a pecuniary amends which hee paied, and the office of Chamberlaine was taken from him.The death of Andre Doria.
About the same time died that famous Prince Andrew Doria, being foure score and thirteene yeeres of age, famous as well for the great enterprises he executed, as for restoring the city of Genoa, his natiue country, to the liberty it enioyeth at this day.
The Venetians in the meane time beeing vnwilling to bee surprized, if theyThe Venetians send Ambassadors to the Pope. should happen to be enforced to take armes, receiued into their pay Sforza Palauicin Marquis Cortemajor a very famous captaine: then they sent Ieronimo Grimani, Ieronimo Zene, and Marc-Antonio de Mulla Ambassadors to Pope Pius the 4* an inward friend to the Common-wealth, who entertained them very louingly: and hauing giuen them audience in the Chamber of Kings, hee did greatly commend the Republike, promising to fauor and augment it with all his power, who being desirous to roote out heresies, which on euery side troubled the CatholikeThe ouerture of the councell of Trent. Religion, did by his briefe cause the Generall councell to be published at Trent in the Octaues of Easter of the yeere following, exhorting the Prelats to come thither and Christian Princes either to come or send their Ambassadors.
In this manner ended the yeere 1560. wherein Francis the second FrenchAn. 1560. Charles the ninth French King. King deceased, and Charles Maximillian Duke of Orleance his brother succeeded  him in the Kingdome of France, being twelue yeeres of age, and was called Charles the ninth.
In this meane time the ouerture of the councell still continued at Trent, whither the Pope sent seuen of the chiefe of the Colledge of Cardinals famous both for learning and good life, namely, Hercules Gonzaga of Mantua, Ieronimo SeripandThe Cardinal^ se^t by the Pope to the the councell. the Neapolitan, Giouan Moron of Milan, Stanislaus Hosius a Polander, Lodouico Simonete a Milanois, Mar^-Sitic a German, and Bernardo Nauigera a Venetian. The Emperor likewise sent his Ambassadors thither, who were Sigismond Thuonius Archbishop of Trent, and Antony Muglitius of Morauia, Archbishop  of Casurgia. Those of the French King were, Regnard Ferrier a very learned man, and well seene in the tongues, and Lewis of Saint Gelais, Lord of Lansac, Knight of honour to the Queene the Kings mother. For Philip King of Spaine there was Claudio Fernandes Earle of Lunel a very noble person: and for the King of Poland Valentine Herbutus a Polonois.
The Venetians sent thither Nicolo de Ponte, and Matteo Dandulo, men much renowned for their singular learning and knowledge in many matters: they were accompanied by Antonio Milledonna the Secretary, a man of so rare and excellent a wi^, as being employed in some actions in that holy assembly, he made him selfe to be admired of all men.
Toward the latter end of the same yeere the last Session of the General Councell was held at Trent, and about the beginning of the yeere following, that which had there beene concluded, was sollemnly published, and sent to Rome to Pope Pius the fourth, who in the open consistory of Cardinals accepted and ratified it, commanding it to be receiued ouer all Christendome.
At this councell were present, diuers great Prelats of the Venetians State,The Venetian (...), that were present at the councell of ^rent. all borne at Venice, namely, Bernardo Nauagera Cardinall, and Legat in the councell, in stead of Seripand who died there, Giouan Treuisan Patriarke of Venice, Daniele Barbaro chosen Patriarke of Aquileia, Pi^tro Lande Archbishop of Candie, Marco Cornare Archbishop of Spalatra, Philippo Moceniga Archbishop of Cyprus, Antonio Coceo Archbishop of Corfou, and afterwards clarke of the Chamber, Lodouico Pisani the Bishop of Padua and afterwards Cardinal, Georgio Cornare, Bishop of Treuiso, Iulio Contaren Bishop of Bellun, Tomaso, Bishop of Cap-(...), Giouan Francisco Commendune Bishop of Zant and Cesalonia, and afterwards Cardinall, Pietro Barbarico Bishop of Cursoles, Pietro Contaren Bishop of Bassus, Dominico Bolano Bishop of Bressia, Federico Cornare, Bishop of Bergamo, Andre Moceniga, Bishop of Himosia, Ier^nimo Treui^an Bishop of Verona, Ieronimo Ragazzone Bishop of Famagosta, Matteo de Priuli, Bishop of Vincenza, ^rancisco Contaren, chosen Bishop of Baffus, Giouan Del^ino Bishop of Torcelles, and Ieronimo Vielmo, Bishop of Citta-noua, all men of singular knowledge, and admirable learning.
At the beginning of the councell there arose a controuersie (which did greatly trouble the Pope) betwixt the Ambassadours of France and Spaine, about precedency, each of those Kings beeing desirous to haue their Ambassadours to take the chiefest place next to the Emperours Ambassadour: King Philip sent word to the Pope, that his pleasure was to haue the chiefe place assigned  to his Ambassadour, or otherwise, hee gaue him to vnderstand, that hee would not onely call home his Ambassadour from the Councell, but likewise all his subiects: King Charles protested against it, saying, That if they went about to doe him that wrong to take from him the place and ranke which his predecessors had euer held, as well in regard of their nobillity and antiquity, as for the great benifits which the Church of Rome had receiued from them, hee would not onely call home his Ambassadours, but himselfe, together with his whole Kingdome, would depart from the obedience of the sea Apostolike.
The Pope to preuent the inconueniences that might arise thereby, did decree, by the aduise of the consistory of Cardinals, That the French AmbassadourThe Pope end^ the controtronersie bet^ixt the Ambassadors of France and Spaine. should keepe his vsuall ranke and place, and that hee of Spaine (to giue some satisfaction likewise to that King) should sit in the middest of the Cardinals below the Priests, and aboue the Deacons, by meanes whereof the whole matter was pacified.
About the same time there happened a very strange accident at Rome, the like whereof had neuer before beene seene, which was thus: certaine youngA strange accident at Rome. men of verie good place, beeing prouoked by a vision, which they said they had receiued from Angelles, how that to the Pope then liuing an other diuine  Pope should succeed him, who should bee the onely Monarke of the world, commanding both the Spirituall and Temporall iurisdiction, and should bring all men to the knowledge of the true God, and they being desirous to haue

it sodainely come to passe, not tarrying till the Pope should die his naturall death, resolued to dispatch and kill him, whilest (as his manner was) hee should giue audience, and one of their number called Benedetto Accolto tooke vpon him to strike him, as hee should read a supplication that hee would present vnto him, but when it came to the execution, so great feare and amazement seized on him, as hee withdrew himselfe all trembling, wherevpon, one of the conspirators fearing least that they should bee discouered, went presently to the Pope and opened the whole complot to him, so as they were all apprehended, and publikely executed.
In other places great numbers of pirats scoured the Adriattick seas, so thatThe Venetians chase away the Pirats. nothing could escape their hands, comming euen as farre as Chioggia. The Venetians disdayning these incursions, sent Christofero Canalis against them, who departing cheerefully from Venice with foure Gallies, did so narrowly pursue them, as he tooke part of them, whom he forthwith hanged, and chased away the rest, so as by that meanes the nauigation was assured.
Toward the latter end of this yeere the Emperour Ferdinand died, whom hisMaximil^an Emperor in (...) fathers stead. sonne Maximilian, before crowned King of the Romans, succeeded, who so soone  as his fathers funeralls were ended, did forthwith march against the Transiluanian, to reuenge the wrongs which he said he had done him in his Realme of Hungary, determining hotly to pursue him, but the Transiluanian being backt by the Turke, enforced the Emperour to retire.

The end of the sixth Boke of the sixth Decade.




The Contents of the seuenth Booke of the  sixth Decade.
THE great hurt caused by the Inquisition after the manner of Spaine. The Venetians beeing solicited by Pope Pius the fourth to  receiue it, doe excuse themselues because they would not trouble their Dominions with it. The death of Pope Pius the fourth with the election of Pope Pius the fifth. The death of Soliman before Zighet, which is concealed by Mahomet Bascha. Selim succeedeth Soliman. The ceremony which is vsed in bringing Ambassadours into the presence of the great  Lord, with the forme of the oth which hee vseth to make. The first motion of the enterprise of Cyprus by the Turkes. And lastly Selims resolution to enuade the Isle of Cyprus.




The seuenth Booke of the sixt Decade of the History of Uenice.
THe Pope being desirous at the beginning of the yeere 1565. toAn. 1565. pluckvp by the roots al heresies forth of Italy, and to diue into the very secret thoughts of men, fearing least that Prouince should The great harme with the Inquisiti^n doth after the manner of Spaine. embrace heresies like others, did throw it head-long into very great and difficult Labirinths, which had almost caused an intestine warre in the country. For he procured King Philip to establish the Inquisition after the manner of Spaine in Milan, namely this

sharpe and cruell inquisition, by which the conuicted do loose both liues and goods, to the great hinderance and vndoing of their heires.
Now King Phillip hauing written to the Senate of Milan that his pleasure was to haue the Inquisition of Spayne receiued into the Citty, all the People beganThe Senate of Milans answer to the King of Spaine concerning the Inquisition. to mutine, and take armes against the Spanish officers that went about to introduce it: which the Senate of Milan perceiuing made answer to him that brought the Kings commandement, that they were ready to obey whatsoeuer his Maiesty should please to command, and that they would take order to haue his will performed in euery point: yet neuer the lesse they were not of opinion to haue that  commandement to take place as then, in regard of the Kings profit, as well because those rigorous lawes were needlesse in Milan, by reason that the Inquisitors would know all matters, though distinct and diuided, from al customes and lawes as also for that the Citty of Milan, and all Italy in generall did detest that new manner of proceeding, which might in the end breed much hurt: That it was not good, especially in these times, ful of miseries and calamities, to put good men and a warlike people into desperation, for feare of the mischeefes which might ensue thereof, which could in no sort profit his maiesty. This discreet answere of  the Milan Senate, did change King Phillips determination, who reuoking his Edict, did greatly assure and confirme the Milanois.
The Pope perceiuing that his deseigne had taken none effect at Milan as he deThe Venetian^ answer to the Pope. sired, he did by letters exhort the Venetians therevnto, entreated, and in a manner went about to enforce them to embrace that nouelty. The Venetians beeing wise and discreet, after they had maturely considered the businesse, together withthe great danger they were like to incurre, if they should permit such cruelty to take place in their Townes and Citties (in regard that the Realme of Naples for the selfe same matter, had in a manner reuolted from the Emperor, and the Milanois had bruely impugned it,) they being vnwilling openly to seeme to deny the Pope, nor likewise to grant his request so dangerous vnto them, delayed as  much as they could to make him an answere.
But his Nuncio still vrging them more and more to grant the Popes demand, the Senate was assembled for that businesse, where after sundry opinions had beene propounded, they dilligently considered the discomodities which might arise vnto them by means of the Popes wrath and indignation, if they should refuse him, who being already not very wel affected to the Common-wealth, would be the more enflamed against them: On the other side they did represent before their eyes, how that the wretchedest of al others was a ciuill and domestick war, whereby the Republick did weaken her owneforces, which were sooner raised, then pacified.
Therefore the Senate, all this being well examined, made the Pope an answer  full of meeknesse and humility: how that it was of opinion by rigorous and sharp punishment to extirpate all execrable heresies: but that it was not seemely to depriueThe Death of Pope Piu^ quar^us, and the election of Peus quintus children, guiltlesle of that crime of their fathers successions, seeing that they had Citties very zealous of Catholick Religion, which had no need of such great rigor and iustice: yet they would take order, that those who should be conuicted of Heresy should abiure their errors, or else, should be punished with death according to the manner of their Iustice.
About the latter end of this yeare dyed Pope Pius Qu^rtus in the sixth yeare of his Papacy, vnto whom succeeded, at the beginning of the yeare 1566. FrierThe death of Soliman before Zighet. Michaell Giseleo of the order of Saint Dominick, called the Cardinal Alexandrine, who tooke vpon him the name of Pius Quintus
Soliman lying at the seege of Zighet, and beeing inraged to see a handfull of Christans so brauely to resist the great numbers of his soldiers, this disdaine and rage did so alter him, as it brought him to a flixe, which killed him on the fift day of September: but his death was in such sort concealed by Mahomet Bascha, who

next him was the cheifest man in the Army, as the Turkes knew it not, fearing (as it was likely) that the newes of the great Lords death, would be the cause of the ruine of the whole Army, Selim his sonne succeeded him in the Otoman Empire.
But to returne to the Venetians, of whom our meaning is cheifly to speake, certaine monethes after that this new Emperor of Turkes was installed in his Empire, and that from all parts Ambassadors were sent vnto him to congratulateThe Venetians send Ambassa dors to Selim the new Emperor. his happy comming to the Crowne, they appointed Marin Caballo, a nobleman, and excellently well seene in the knowledge of diuers things, being both learned and ritch, to goe and reioyce with him likewise in the Common wealthes name  for his aduancement to the Empire, and afterwards to confirme the ancient Articles of peace and alliance which they had made with his father Soliman: the which that hee might obtaine with more ease, hee tooke along with him the presents which Ambassadors were wont for to carry to the new Emperors. But whilest he prepared for his iourney, it happened, that one called Iohn Miches a Iew by nation, a great fauorite of Selims, a man of an euill disposition, and who had turned Turke, for a certaine wonderfull pollicy, did continually sollicite Selim against the Duke of Necsia, (one of the Islands Ciclades, descended from the race of Crispes, and was the one and twentieth Duke of that Island) to bereaue him of his Prnicipallity, hoping (as it came to passe) that he being driuen thence, easily  to obtaine it for himselfe.
This Duke beeing aduertised of the practises which were wrought against him, went to Constantinople to iustifie his cause, where, knowing that the fauour and friendship of the great Lords Councellors is bestowed on such as giue most forA mischeuous practise of a reuoulted Iew. it, he car^ied with him fifteene thousand Crownes to bestow among them, hoping by that money to winne those of the Councell to his side, but at his arriuall the laid hands on him, and being committed to prison, he lost at one time both his money, and all the wealth he had.
At last beeing set at liberty as innocent, and hauing committed no fault at all, he could neuer afterwards recouer his principallity, so as beeing reduced to extreame  pouerty he came to Venice. The Venetians taking pitty on that honest man, who by the mallice and enuy of that Iew was fallen into such misery and calamity, and not through his owne fault, were very liberall to him: the like did the Pope when he came to Rome.
By this time Marin Caballo, who was appointed by the Senate (as hath beene said) to goe Ambassador to Selim, was ready, who departed from Venice, and with a faire and gentle wind sailed towards Constantinople, where at his first arriuall he treated (according to the vse) with the cheife of the great Lords Councell: (for no stranger is admitted to speake with the Emperor, till such time as his demaund be determined and concluded by them) but he had much to doe to obtaine  that which he demanded, those Councellors feigning that Selim the new Emperorrefused to confirme their aliance, which was only to draw greater guifts from them, which they did: for the Ambassador hauing giuen them many other great presents he did at length procure the Councellors, to consent to the conditlonsThe Ceremony of bringing Ambassadors to the great Lord of peace and freindship: then hee was brought in by the Captaine of the Port, and led by the Armes to kisse the Emperors hand, the like did diuers young Gentlemen which had accompanied the Ambassador: but they were led in another fashion: for two Turkes held each of them by the armes, and brought them as prisoners, who did not Kisse the Emperors hand, but his knees, that doon, they returned, and went backward, their faces being still turned towards the Emperor. These young Gentlemen being led forth of the roome, not any Christian remained in Selims Chamber, but only the Ambassador, who spake breefely vnto him in this manner.
As much greefe (most gracious Emperor (as our Venetian Common-wealth, highly affected to the Ottomans, hath receiued by the death of Soliman that gloriousThe Venetian Ambassador^ ^on to the Empepor. and most wise Emperor, euen so much ioy and contentment hath it, to vnderstand that the diuine power hath raised you to such a dignity and placed you in the throne belonging to the famous and mostiust family of the Ottomans. For it is most certaine that the soule of Soliman doth at this present glory, not only for that it did so much surpasse all men in good hap and glory for high enterprises, in wisdome and knowledge of diuers things, for being meeke and gentle to the humble, liberall to his freinds, and faithfull to his allies; but much more for leauing you his sonne behind him, farre more excellent then himselfe. For hee haui^g beene euer inuincible, and hauing neuer giuen place to any man, is not only at this present ioyfull, but likewise accounteth himselfe more honored sor being surmounted and ouercome by his sonne in all vertues belonging to an Emperor. The excellency of so many great Emperors your Auncestors doe inuite vs, nay rather doe enforce vs, (most mighty Emperor) to expect as much from you, the glory of the Ottomans, the high attempts of your progenitors, euery where so much renowned doth draw vs therevnto, and the fame of your fore fathers, continued for so many yeares without intermission doth confirme it to vs. These things beeing thus, the Venetian Senate hath sent mee hether to confirme and establish the same friendship and alliance which hath euer beene betwizt  the Ottoman Emperots and our Republicke, and this amity with your most excellent maiesty, ought to bee so much the more pleasing vnto you, by how much it is more ancient, confirmed by sundry good offices on either part, and continued for so many yeares. For in very deed all worldly things doe by long tract of time corrupt and grow weake, and still new things are found best, but freindship which is a sacred and diuine thing, and which can not be but among good and iust men, the older it is, so much more perfect and durable is it. Our Republick then being mooued by these reasons, doth continually pray vnto Almighty God for your health and prosperity.
The Ambassador hauing ended his speech, Selim swore a sollemne oath, and ratifyed  that which was written in his Patents sealed with his seale* The forme ofS^lim ratisieth the Venetians alliance. Selims oth was thus, I sweare and promise by the eternall God creator of Heauen and Earth, by the soules of the Seauenty Prophets, by mine owne soule, and those of all mine Auncestors, to obserue from point to point all the rightes of alliance and freindship maintained vntill this present, and to keepe them sacred and inuiolable, in the same manner as they are confirmed by my seale. Selim as the Ambassador was taking his leaue, answered him in few words badly polished, but yet full of all curtesie and humanity.
Gaballus departing from the great Lords Pallace, and mounting his horse, wasThe forme of the great Lords oath. conducted by the Ianissaries (vnto whom before hee had audience he had giuen  guifts) to his owne lodging, then preparing for his returne to Venice, the Baschaes of the Councell vsed him with great curtesie and liberality, giuing him sumptuous garments, Terra Sigillata; Balsamum, and diuers other pretious things; somtimes likewise they doe vse to feast and banquet one an other.
At the same time such numbers of Pirates, did scoure the sea-coasts of Dalmatia, as men could not liue safly in their own houses they did not only rob those whom they encountred at Sea after the maner of Pirats, but did likewise come on shore, putting all to fier and sword, killing old men and young Children: carrying awayThe (...) do pur^e the (...) of Pirats. with them Men, Women and Cattail. The Venetians were not able to indure that insolency, ^ut did on a suddaine arme forty Gallies vnder the command of Hermolao Tepulo, whereof these Pirates beeing aduertized, departed speedily from thence, and left the Prouince in quiet. In the meane time Ieronimo Priuli dyed, hauing governed eight yeares, eleuen monethes and foure dayes, and was honorably buried in Saint Dominicks Church in the monument of his Auncestors.




PIETRO LOREDANO the 84. Duke.








PIETRO LOREDANO, a renowned and excellent Senator, was chosen in his steed on the 26. of Nouember, all men hoping that his gouernment would procure great commodity to theThe Arcenall of Uenice, burnt. common-wealth, and so ended the yeare 1567. Not long after the Arcenall of Venice was set on fire, which was fearefull for the noyce it made, it beeing heard many miles off: after which followed an intollerable dearth, so as for the peoples reliese they were enforced to imploy the munitions which were reserued for the fleetes.
These two inconueniences happening one after an other in the ci^ty, did prouoke the Turke to make an attempt vpon the Isle of Cyprus, beeing vrged therevnto by Iohn Miches, who of a Iew beeing become Turke, could doe much with Selim (as hath beene said). This man, the better to perswade him to the enterprize of Cyprus, did acquaint him with the aduertisement which he had receiued from the Iewes at Venice, how the Arcenall had beene burned on the third day of September 1569. where all the munitions had beene for the most part spoiledThe first motion of the enterprize of Cyprus for the Turke. and lost, together with the great dearth which had followed that losse, where with the citty was still afflicted.
Selim who long before then had beene desirous to seaze vpon that Island, and  to take it from the Venetians, and who for that purpose, had in the yeare 1567. secretly sent to the Duke of Sauoy, to incite him to recouer that Island, which did of right belong vnto him, promising him all ayde and succour, and to make him quiet possessor thereof; but the Duke giuing no eare therevnto, hee himselfe resolued to haue it by all meanes. As also because he beeing desirous to build a Mesquite (for no great Lord is truly proclaimed Emperor, vntill hee haue builded one, and endowed it with reuenues) was diswaded from it: their Mufti, (who among them is as the Pope with vs) saying that hee could not doe it, till hee had made some great enterprise against Christians, to the augmenting of his religion  and Empire, and hauing made a conquest, to endow it with the wealth thereof, it beeing no way lawfull for the great Lord to build a Mesquite with the reuenue of the Empire, or that of the Casnata (which is like to the Chamber of accounts in France) but onely with that of the countrey conquered by him.
He hauing along time debated these reasons with him-selfe, did at last resolue to communicate the matters to his Baschas. And departing from ConstantinopleSelim com^ the enterprise of (...) ^o bes (...) as. in the moneth of Nouember, the third yeare of his Empire with his cheefe Baschas to ride on hunting, (the Turkes terme it the councell on horse backe) hee began to acquaint them with that enterprize.

Mahomet as Visier Bascha began cunningly to diswade him from it, as well forThe councel of Mahomet the Visier Bascha. the loue he did beare to Christians, as for the great profit which he ordinarily receaued from the Venetians, telling him that vpon what occasion soeuer hee was moued to take armes, either for Religion, Empire, or for glory, he ought by no meanes to breake with the Venetians, whose friendship had been euer proffitable for their nation: That he ought rather to attempt to releeue the Moores of Granado, as a matter more beseeming the greatnesse, wherein by the grace of the great Prophet Mahomet the Ottaman Emperors were seated, not to abandon the defence of those, who by an holy and constant resolution had neuer forsaken the Mahometan religion: That it was like wise necessary for the power and safty of his Empire, and for the glory which Selim seemed so much to desite, not to suffer any one Potentare to grow too great, but presently to abase those which might make head against the power of the Ottamans, such as was that of the king of Spaine, which though it would be a difficult enterprize, would neuer-the-lesse be full of glory and great hope. Therefore he besought him to acknowledge and make good vse of that great occasion which God offered him, to preserue the  faithfull Musulmans, to molest his enemies, and to open to him selfe away to great and glorious conquests.

The other Baschas Piali and Mustapha, did with no lesse vehemency then MahametThe opinion of the other Basc^as contrary to that of Mahomet. had done maintaine the contrary, for they not onely enuying him, but hauing declared themselues his open enemies, did euer crosse his deseignes and councels, and did more earnestly embrace this businesse, knowing that the great Lord did affect it, and highly extolling his deseigns, they hoped to win his fauor, and to disgrace him that councelled the contrary: Likewise, they thought that by councelling him to what he was addicted, that they themselues should be employed in  that enterprize, the one by Sea, and the other by Land; wherevpon they perswaded him that the Venetians forces were of themselues weake, and the aide of ChristianThe reasons of the two Baschas contrary to M^homet. Princes vncertaine and badly grounded, as they had knowne by experience: that the Isle of Cyprus being farre from Venice was not easily to be releeued, and easie to be enuaded by them, by reason of their neere neighbourhood: that it was a most rich and excellent Island, and very commodious for all his other states, and (...) in a place, which might much assure his subiects nauigation vpon those Seas.
Selim lent a willing eare to those two, because they were of his opinion, and Mahomets credit was thereby much diminished, and his speech greatly suspected, so as after-ward, that enterprize was resolued and concluded, to the which SelimSelim resolueth to inuade the Isle of Cyprus promised to goe in person, with such a will and resolution as all men thought that the very first yeare of his Empire he would haue vndertaken this warre if other lets had not detained him. For after Solimans death he found the Empire much wasted, by reason of his fathers continuall warres both at Malta, Zighet and in other places, where he had lost great numbers of Soldiers and spent much treasure: besides, his army was ill prouided of all necessaries, which it behooued him to renew by rest and time, and with all to repaire his fleet; all which being done there was no more likelihood that it would be any longer deferred.
The Venetians were speedily aduertized of all these things, by Marke Antonio Barbaro their Baily in Constantinople, a very wise and discreet ma^, who at that time did many great and good seruices to the Commonwealth. But these things at the first seemed vnto them impossible, so as the Senators could hardly be drawne to beleeue it, for when motion was made of making prouisions for the nauall army

they answered that it behooued them to proceed discreetly therein, and not to prouo^e Selim, who peraduenture had neuer thought on such a matter, which would rather hasten the danger then preuent it.

The end of the seuenth Booke of the sixth Decade.




The Contents of the eighth Booke of the sixth Decad.
THE Senate are certainly aduertised of the Turkes enterprise vpon Cyprus. A Cypriot practiseth treason ouer the whole Island. The Venetians implore the ayde of all Christian Princes. The Pope soliciteth all Christian Princes, in the Venetians behalfe. The Venetians solicit the King of Persia to make warre on Selim. The Turkes great preparations for the warre of Cyprus. Selim by the perswasion of Bascha Mahomet, sendeth a defiance to the Venetians, vnlesse they quit the Isle of Cyprus. The small entertainment giuen to the Chians of the great Lord. The Venetians prouisions and preparations for the warre of Cyprus. The Popes Proposition to preuent the delay of the vnion of the Armies. Mark-Antonio Colonna, Generall of the Popes Armie, in title of Gonfalonier of the Church. The enterprise of the Marquerites is broken off, by reason of the bad accesse to the place. The vnion of the Armies of the Pope, King Philip of Spaine, and the Venetians. Mustapha, Generall of the enterprise of Cyprus. The Turkish Armie landeth in Cyprus. The small forces which were in the whole Island. The enemies come and encampe before Nicotia. The situation of the Citty of Nicotia. Those of Famagosta will not suffer Baillon to goe to Nicotia, who was sent for thither. And lastly the Prayers and Processions of those of Nicotia.

The eight Booke of the sixth Decad of the Historie of Uenice.
ANTONIO BARBARO Bayly in Constantinople hauing  giuen sundry intelligences to the Senate, he sent theThe Senate are certainly aduertised of the Turkes enterprise vpon Cyprus* last thither vpon the first day of Ianuary 1570. whereby he aduertised them, not of the common report, but of the certaine resolution made in the Councell of the great Turke, concerning the enterprize of Cyprus, although the Baschas did constantly affirme the contrary, vsing all meanes to keepe it secret. For the Bayly seeming to beleeue nothing of the matter, dealt with the Turkes, and chiefely with Ibrahim their Dragoman, who was one of the Visier Baschas Domesticks, and thereby more reckoned of, did sound him, and draw him into sundry discourses of diuerse matters which hee had learned of the Bascha, about the prouisions which were made, and especially of the great number of ships which were built in the Gulphe of Aizza, and in the great sea; of the commandement giuen by the Captaine Generall of Asia, whom they terme the Beglerbey of Natolia, to the soldiers of that Prouince to bee ready to goe to Caramannia, with other like matters, which gaue sufficient testimony, that the enterprise of the next ensuing Spring, was onely for the Realme of Cyprus, which they did meane to enuade on the sodaine.
The Senate by these so often reiterated intelligences, desiring speedily to redeemeThe Venetians preparation for the warre of Cyprus. the time which they had lost, began to prouide all things necessary for a long warre: Wherevpon they suddainly resolued to send troopes of soldiers in Garrison into Cyprus, commanding all the Gouernors of the Island, to take speciall care for the gard thereof, and to prepare for their owne defense, exhorting the people to bee loyall to them, and the Gentlemen which were feudatories, to make prouision of armor and horse, as they were bound to doe.
They did likewise speedily prouide for the other Sea-townes of their dominions, sending men of authority to command their cheife Castles. They made great leuies of footmen in sundry places of Italy, and tooke into their pay the  best Captaines of those times: in a word, they left nothing vndone, which might serue to defend themselues or to offend their enemies; they caused great numbers of Gallies to be made ready in the Arcenall, they chose eleuen Captaines of the great Gallies, and made Francisco Duodo their Admirall, a man much esteemed for his valour and skill at Sea, and fourescore captaines for the light Gallies, who were of the cheifest Gentlemen of the Citty, and best experienced in marine matters. Pietro Troni was made Captaine of the armed ships, Ieronimo Zene Procurator of Saint Marke was declared Generall of all that fleet, hauing been chosen to that office two yeares before, no occasion beeing offered them to send forth their fleet to Sea, and he by that meanes hauing not executed his place, did neuerthelesse still retaine the same dignity. He was reputed both in particular and in publick to be a man till then very fortunate and had well and honorably discharged the most important offices of the common-wealth which had beene imposed vpon him. Al things being thus ordred, they waited for nothing but to

put them in execution, wherevpon they consulted how to employ those forces: some thinking it fit to send forth Galleys towards the Leuant, which lying in the hauens of Candy should bee euer ready in all occasions, which the time, and the enemies attempts should present: saying, That by so dooing they should encourage their subiects, and encrease their reputation, and might besides breed diuerse doubts in the enemies mindes, which might for a time delay their iourney, they not determining to hazard themselues forth of the streight of Gallipolis, but with all their forces ioyned together, especially when they should vnderstand of any that were able to stay them. But opposition was made against this opinion, some saying, That the danger was greater* then the assurance which that aduise  did promise, because that those Galleys which the Turkes doe vsually keepe armed at all times for the garde of their townes, are so many in number, as diuerse Fusts belonging to Pirats (which they ordinarily vse in time of warre) beeing ioyned vnto them, it might happen that ours would bee exposed vnto great danger, the which by so much the more was to bee auoyded, as the hope was great that all their forces beeing ioyned together, might execute some notable enterprize.
I will not forget to obserue by the way, how that some fewe moneths before Selim resolued on that seege, some of his councell seeking by all meanes to surprise that Kingdome, beganne to consult by what treachery and deceit they  might obtaine it, not fearing to be reprehended for it, but rather highly commended, seeing that if the worst should happen they could but restore what they had taken.
Now as the way of trechery was the safest, it seemed likewise vnto them the easiest: for if any towne of Cyprus should be taken in that manner, it was a very easie matter in regard of the neere neighborhood, not only to keepe it, but likewiseTreason practi zed by a Cipriot. to seaze on others, by reason of the great and ordinary quarrels and dissentions a mong the Cypriots. For the execution of this deseigne, one Diasorinus seemed vnto them avery fit Instrument. He was by nation a Cipriot, by nature subtil and cunning, a great Courtier, and one that had much credit among the Cypriots. To this man Scander, Gouernour of the higher Misia; sent letters full of courteous complements, with whom by little and little he beganne to enter into a league of freindship, sending often-times letters and presentes one to an other.
After familiar conuersation by letters, Diasorinus being won through faire and goodly promises by the Gouernour gaue consent to betray his Contrey, and to that end, wrote to Scander, as often as any fit occasion was offered, sometimes in the Greeke tongue, and at other times in Charactery: The Characters were small animalls, as flies, ants, spiders, butterflies and such like.
But because Gods will was not to haue the Cypriots as yet to fal into that misery, they beganne to suspect Diasorinus, in regard of the frequent sending of Treason is dis couered and the Author ex^cuted. letters and presents betwixt them, wherevpon, they found meanes to interrupt some of his letters which they finding to be written in Caracters with the figures of these animalls, they forthwith supposed that there was some secret in them which they would not haue all the world accquainted with.
Diasorinus was presently apprehended, his letters laid before him and beeing loath to confesse any thing hee was put to the tortures which made him to confesse that not only himselfe, but diuers others of the cheife of the Island, drawne by the goodly promises of Scander, and wearied likewise with the Venetian Gouernment, vnto whom they would not giue place either for nobility or fot wealth, had conspired and determined to receiue the Turkes into the Island: wherevpon he with his other complices were put to death.
Now to returne to the Senates determination concerning the resisting of the Turkish Army: they resolued to place strong and sufficient Garrisons in the

Castles of Cyprus, speedily to send thither the necessary aid; and beeing ready to choose a Commander to conduct those forces, Eugenio Singlitico Count of Roccas a Gentleman of Ciprus, (who at the same time beeing Lieftenant Generall of the Army of the firme land, did for the most part continew at Venice) didSupplies of one thousand men sent into Cyprus. freely offer himselfe to aid his Contrey at such a need and to serue his Prince; wherevpon hauing a speedy dispatch he imbarked himselfe with a thousand footmen, the Senate hauing first made him General of al the Cauallery in the Island. Ieronimo Martinenga, Captaine of the men at armes, did likewise freely make offer ^o raise within a few dayes vpon other princes states two thousand footmen to conduct them to the releese of Famagosta, and to remaine there with them The voluntary offer of Ieronimo Martinenga. for the defense of the Citty: the which hee hauing in a short space done to his great honor, and brought them to Venice, to imbarke them in the vessells appointed for that purpose, he would first shew them in armes to the people in theThe death of Martinenga. market place of Saint Marke, who tooke great pleasure to beehold them, which being done, they sailed towards Cyprus, but their Captaine falling sick at Sea, dyed within a few dayes after, for want of looking to, who was mightily bewayled, and being carried into Ciprus was buried in Famagosta in S. Sophias Church.
The Senate beeing desirous to implore the ayde of all Christian Princes, sentThe Venetians implore the aide of Christian Princes. word to their Ambassadors residing in their Courts, that they should acquaint them with the cause, which at that time did onely concerne themselues, but would  shortly bee common to all Christendom; the which they did, not so much for any hope they had to bee releeued, as for that they were willing to take from them all cause of suspition that they despised other mens ayde, and that presuming too much on their owne forces, they went about to precipitate into a manifest danger the euent of that warre, whereon depended the common cause of Christendome.
First of all they made meanes to the Pope, as well to draw some succors from him, as that hee by his authority should dispose other Princes to send them supplies. Micaele Suriana was at the same time Ambassador for the Commonwealth at Rome, who augmenting the Popes good-will and disposition by sundry reasons, did continually solicite him effectually to embrace the protection of the Republick in a time so dangerous, by setting before him the example of other Popes, who vpon other occasions, had readily ayded them against that common enemy of Christendom: Hee did likewise put him in minde of the Republicks benefits bestowed vpon the Sea Apostolick, for the conseruation whereof, it had often-times exposed hir forces and State, against very mighty Princes: but heeReasons propounded to the Pope to (...) him to releeue them. did cheefly set before his eyes, the manifest danger which threatned other Christian Realmes, and especially the Churches territories, if the Venetian State, which all men thought to bee the Bulwarke of Christendome should bee ouerthrowne and ruined.
By these reasons and diuerse others, the Pope beeing drawne to defend the Venetians, hee seemed to bee very zealously affected to the cause, and desirous to prouide for the necessity of that warre, and to aide the Common-wealth; yet neuerthelesse, excusing himselfe for that hee was not able to doe what hee would, hee bewailed the misery of his time, wherein the Sea Apostolick by sundry accidents was very bare of means, and especially by reason of the troubles in France, which threatning the citty of Auignon, had constrained him to be at great expences: wherevpon although it was often propounded in the Consistory to embrace the Venetians defence, and to aide them; and that the proposition was approoued by the Colledge of Cardinals, yet neuerthelesse, it tooke no great effect: at the  first they were onely permitted to leuy vpon the whole Clergie of their State without any exception, the sum of an hundred thousand Ducats towards the expence of the warre. Hee did afterwards make a motion, to ioyne with all possible speed, the King of Spaines Galleys, with those of the Venetians, that they might

make a mighty fleet, able to resist that of the Turkes, and to disapoint their first attempts: And in the meane time to make a league with the same King and other Christian Princes, whereby all their forces might continually be ioyned together, to make head against the enemies greatnesse. The Ambassador Suriana acquainted the Senate with his Holynesse proposition, who entreated them to accept thereof, and to referre the whole businesse to him; that hee would manage it as the common Father, with great affection, to the good of all Christendom, and to their owne particular desire and profit; the which the Senate very willingly did.
The Pope for the beginning of this Treaty sent Lodouico de Torres, Clarke of the Apostolick Chamber, into Spaine to King Philip, to dispose him to ioyne his  forces with others against Setim Ottoman the common enemy, vnto whom hauing related, from the Pope, as well the publicke interest of all Christendome,The Pope sendeth to exhort the Catholicke King to ioyne in that warre against the Turke. as his owne particular, hee found his Maiesty ready and well inclined to doe that wherevnto his Holynesse exhorted him, referring neuerthelesse his finall answer till his arriuall at Siuill, (for hee was then at Corduba, at the assembly of the Estates of Castill) but vpon Torres reply, that nothing would so much hinder that businesse as long delay; hee granted him, that his owne Galleys, with those of his Pentioners and Confederates, which amounted to the number of sixty fiue, besides those of Spaine, who by reason of the troubles of Ganado continued vpon  those seas, should be brought into Sicely, commanding Giouan Andre Doria their Admirall to obey the Popes commandement, concerning the time and meanes to ioyne them with the Venetians, that they might afterwards saile into the Leuant: Hee did likewise obtaine a Commission to the Viceroy of Naples, and Sicill, to permit the Venetians to furnish themselues forth of these countreys with corne sufficient for the fleete: but as concerning the entring into the league, he answered, That it craued a larger and more mature deliberation for which heeThe King of Spains answer to the Popes content. referred him till some other time: yet neuerthelesse within a while after his comming to Siuill, he concluded it of his owne peoper motion.
The Venetians had enioyned Sigismond de Caualli their Ambassador with the Catholick King, to ayde and further the Treaty of Torres, who hauing well and  duly acquitted himselfe of that charge, returned to Venice: Leonardo Donato was sent thither in his place, who dealt so with the King, as hee continued him in that good desire and inclination.
Torres, hauing dispatched his businesse in Spayne, did for the same purpose make a iourney into Portugall, hauing first obtained letters of recommendation from the Kings mother, who lay then at Madrill. Sebastian the first of that name was at the same time King of Portugall, beeing seauenteene yeares old, bred and brought vp in Christian piety vnder the gouernment of D. Luigi Genzabeil a Iesuist, a man very famous and of great authority neere the King, by whose meanes the Pope presumed to obtaine of that Prince whatsoeuer he was able to  doe for the profit and serucie of Christendome- Torres hauing requested this King to send the tenne Gallies, which were vsually ready armed in that Kingdom, that they being ioyned with the King of Spaynes might altogether saile into Sicily. The King shewed great loue and reuerence to the Sea Apostolick, and seeming to be desirous to satisfie his Holinesse demand, in a matter so holy, iust and honorable, did to his great greefe excuse himselfe for that hee could not accomplish his good desire; saying, that his Gallies were at the same time vnready and disarmed by reason of the contagious sicknesse which had the yeare before beene at Lisbone, and that it would be impossible to make them ready vppon a suddaine, or to be seruiceable that yeare: so as by this meanes Torres iourney into Portugall was to no purpose.
During this negotiating in Spayne, Giouani Michaele being the Venetians

Ambassador with the Emperor, a man of singular vnderstanding and well seeneThe Venetiansolicit the Em peror to the same effect. in affaires of importance, had already motioned the matter to the Emperor, telling him that the occasion was now offered which he had so often desired in their discourses together, how he might fearlesse enuade the Turkish States whilest they being busied at Sea might not haue leisure to succour them: and therefore he should not delay it till they had ended their warre and assured their Sea coasts at which time it was to be feared that they being freed from all other care, would seek to enlarge their Empire, by his losse and ruine: as for the small safety in the truce with them their Example might giue him sufficient testimony thereof, Selim hauing broken it with them, and infringed his, oath vpon none occasion,The Emperors answer to the Venetian Ambassador. but only through a couetous desire to rule ouer the whole world. The Emperor gaue a willing care to these remonstrances, with a ready answer, that he would neuer be wanting to the wealth and commodity of Christendome, but that he was desirous to see, how the King of Poland, the Muscouit, with other Christian Princes, and especially the King of Spayne would carry them-selues there-in, vnto whom hee woold send an expresse messenger into Spayne to know his mind.
As for Charles the ninth the French King, the Pope vsed all the meanes hee could by his Nuncio to draw him into the league, exhorting him to fauour and further it with all his power, notwithstanding al the domestick warres and broiles The Pope (...) the French King to haue ^n band in this warre. which had for certaine yeares molested his Kingdome; if not with his forces yet atleast with his name and authority; the which the King seeming not to be able to satisfie, and being likewise vnwilling to neglect the authority and exhortation of his Holinesse, he said, in manner of delay that he would see what others would do, who were more mighty, and free from all other letts; for he had at the same time sharpe warre in his Realme, where not long before the battaile of Mon^contour, was fought betwixt his brother the Duke of Aniou, his Lieuetenant Generall, and the Photestants, of whom the Duke of Aniou gat the victory: But the Queene Mother who had the entier gouernment and managing of affairs, making a more open excuse, alleaged, That the condition of other Princes was not like to that ofThe answer of the King and the Queen his mother to the Pope. hir sonne, because that others treated of continuing warre against their enemies  wheras they made a proposition in France to breake the truce with a most mighty Prince their antient freind, and therefore that the businesse deserued longer and more mature consultation.
Yet neuerthelesse the King and Queene, gaue louing and kind speeches to the Venetian Ambassador residing in their Court, and besides diuers offers made to the Senate from them, by their Ambassador resident at Venice, the King did expressly send thither one of his Gentlemen to offer to the Signory that which the condition and misery of the time would permit his Kingdome, troubled with such gre^uous accidents, namely to be a meane to diuert that warre, and to composeThe French Kings offer to the Venetians that controuersie with the great Lord; making vse in that manner of that  freindship, the which he himselfe had not contracted, but hauing found it established by his Grandfather, and afterwards confirmed by Henry his father, he would vse meanes to preserue it, the which hee supposed would for that time bee to purpose, and redound to the profit of the Venetians, his ancient, and great freindes.
The Senate did not thinke those offers of any force at that time, the preparations for warre being very foreward on both sides, fearing least by an vncertaine hope of peace the mindes of other Princes, who were already much animated to warre would be so ftened: The Italian Princes were much disposed to this league, as the Dukes of Vrbin, Sauoy, Florence, and Ferrara, who did all of them offer  to spend their meanes and liues in that warre.
Tamas King of Persia was sollicited to take armes and to reuenge the old and new wronges receiued from the Ottomans, and to this end (...) Alessandri a Cittizen of Venice was sent thither, who hauing dwelt a long time

at Constantinople could speake diuers languages. Hee beeing come to CasbinThe Venetians solicit the King of Persia to make war vppon Selim. where the King of Persia lay, was by meanes of certaine Armenian Marchants brought in by night, according to the manner of the Contrey, although it was in the summer time, before Sultan Caydar Mirisi the Kings third sonne, who was at the same time his Lieuetenant, with whom hauing a long time discoursed concerning his comming ^hither, and telling him what great warlike preparations Selim made against the Venetians, together with the great prouisions of al Christian Princes to fight with him, hee entreated him in the name of the Senate to make vse of such an occasion, and to make warre vpon the Turkes in Asia, whilest the townes there should bee vnfurnished of Garrisons by reason of the warre of Cyprus.
Caydar lending a willing care to this discourse, did dilligently craue to bee informed of the whole mattter, not promising him any thing, but to procure him audience of the King his father. But Alessandri perceiuing that they vsed many delaies therein, beeing aduised and assisted by Coza Ali a marchant of Tauris, vnto whom (he comming with him from Venice) the busines had been recommended, he beganne to deale with the great Chancellor of the Kingdome, who after diuers ordinances, made a free answer, That his King was a very wise and discreetThe Chanceller of Persia his answer concerning the Emperors demand. Prince, who knowing that in a matter of so great importance it was necessary to proceed very maturely, he would first see the successe of the league, wherevppon  he might afterwards more safely resolue.
Alessandri hauing receiued this answer, and perceiuing that he could not bee admitted to speake with the King, left Persia: for he plainly discerned that Tamas, being very old, was altogether adicted to peace, and auoided all occasions which might cause the Turkes to suspect that he had any intelligence with Christians against him
Such were the Venetians preparations, such their resolution, and thus did they treat with forraine Princes, that beeing vnited together they might oppose themselues against that Common enemy: at what time the Turkes beganne to vse hostile actions, and staied diuers Venetian Marchants with their goods who traded  at Narenta, and other places of Albania in the Turkes dominions; they did likewise vnlode (although vnder another cullor) two Venetian shippes which were at Constantinople, not suffering them to depart from thence. Therevppon it was thought fit at Venice to doe the like by the Turkes subiects, and their goods, to the end that vppon all occasions the bodies and goods of those men might be answerable for their subiects.
Whilest the Venetians were busied in their preparations, the Turkes at Constantinople did hasten the prouision of all necessaries for their iourney, they didThe Turkes preparations for the warre of Cyprus. in their Arcenall build new Gallies, trimmed the ould ones, cast new peeces of Ordnance: enroll great numbers of Pioners in Grecia, made huge proportions  of Biskets in Morea, sent fiue and twenty Gallies to Alexandria, to fetch all prouisions made there for the Army, and Selim continuing his resolution to goe in person with the army, they prepared an infinite number of vessels called Mahonnes, and Palanderias, and made great prouisions of all things, according to the custome of that nation whenso-euer their great Lord doeth goe vnto the Army.
But the Baschaes, Mustapha, and Piali, with diuers others of the Councell vnto whom the enterprize of Ciprus was committed, consulting afterwards on what course were best to be held in that warre, and there being some contrariety found in their opinions, some stay was made of the businesse.
In the meane time, the Venetian Baily that lay at Constantinople, beeing acquainted with all these proceedings, tooke great care how he might aduertise the Senate thereof; to write he durst not, fearing least his letters would bee intercepted, as some of his had already beene, wherevppon, knowing that the Bascha

Mahomet was euer against this enterprize, hee did hope by his meanes to obtaineThe Baylies remonstrance to the Bascha Mahomet. his desire: Hee did by Ibrahim acquaint the Bascha, and afterwards himself by word of mouth, how-ill beseeming it was for the Maiesty and generosity of so great a Prince, to inuade those on a sudaine and vnlookt for, who vpon his word and oath, thought themselues safe and firme, as though when time and occasion should bee offered, hee could want forces to employ against them, for the recouery of that which hee might iustly thinke did belong vnto him, against whom hee ought first to proceed by way of Iustice, and next by force, vsing first gentle meanes, before hee did take Armes. The Bascha being mooued by these reasons,Selim s^ndeth a d^fiance to Uenice vnlesse they surrender the Realme of of Cyprus. perswaded the great Lord, to send some of his seruants to Venice, to demand  the Realme of Cyprus, before hee sent his Army to enuade it, which councell Selim allowed. Cubat Chiaus was appointed to that end, who some two yeares before had beene at Venice vpon other businesse: the Bayly vnder this coulor, tooke occasion to send one of his seruants to accompany the Chiaus, to conduct him safely thorow the Venetians territories, and to cause this negotiation to bee the more esteemed, Hee determined to send Lodoutco Bonriey, his Secretary, whom hee thorowly instructed with all matters; hee did likewise obtaine leaue of the Bascha to send his yong sonne Lodouico to Venice, fearing least hee should miscarry among those Barbarians, in such wretched times.
This proposition to send to Venice, did occasion an other good, for there was  a suspention of Armes on the Turkes side, till the returne of the Chiaus, whereby the Venetians had time to man their townes with strong garrisons, and to prouide for their affaires. The Chiaus beeing come to Venice, the Senate beeing before aduertised of the cause why hee came, and hauing resolued vpon an answer, commanded that no man should talke or conuerse with him; but beeing left alone with the Secretary Bonriccy, and two Dragomans, they decreed that without any other ceremony, hee should haue priuate audience; where hee comming into the Senate, and beeing placed in the vsuall seate, vppon the Princes right hand, hee went and kissed his Gowne, and after diuerse reuerences, hee presentedThe Chiaus presenteth Selims letters. a pursse of cloth of gold Tissue, wherein according to the custome of that  nation, Selims letters were, and said: Most excellent Prince, this is a Letter from my Lord, when you are acquainted with his demand, I expect to haue an answer: Wherevnto the Prince answering that it should bee so, and the Chiaus standing still, perplexed in minde, because no other speech was vsed to him, added.

My Lords, Mahomet the Visier Bascha hath commanded mee to tell you, that hee is very sorry, that an occasion is offered, that hee must needs breake off from you, hauing euer sought by all meanes to continue your friend: but complaints comming so often to the Porte, and from so many places, of the vnfriendly dealings of the officers belonging to this State, and especially of the kinde entertainment and reception giuen to the Westerne Pirates in Cyprus, who this very  yeare, haue done great hurt to the Musulmans, hath taken such impression in the minde of the great Lord, and hath so prouoked him against this State, perceiuing that speech vsed so often vpon these complaints to your Bayly, hath beene to no purpose, as his authority hath beene no longer able to keepe warre from beeing denounced against you: and because hee knoweth that yee cannot long hold out against the power of so potent a Prince, hee aduiseth you as a friend to take some other course to shield you from so many dangers, and to this end he hath procured my comming hither, and offereth to doe all hee may, that yee may auoyde this mighty stroake of fortune, and continue your ancient friendship with the great Lord: and hauing ended his speech hee presented a letter from the same  Bascha, conteining in substance that which hee had spoken.

The Chiaus hauing deliuered his message, the Prince told him, that the SenateThe Senate^ answer to the (...) had resolued on an answer, the which should bee read vnto him, that hee might the better vnderstand and know their intention: Wherevpon hee commanded

Antonio Milladonna, Secretary to the Councell of Tenne, to read it, which in effect was thus. That the Senate did greatly maruaile, that his Lord beeing no way by them prouoked, nor vpon any iust cause, would violate and enfringe that oath, by which he had so solemnly confirmed the peace, and tooke for a pretence to make warre vpon them, that they should giue away a kingdome which the common-wealth had for many yeares lawfully and peaceably enioyed; the which hee might bee well assured that they would neuer part from; but seeing hee was determined to proceed against them after that manner, the Venetian Senate would not faile to defend that which did belong vnto it, hoping by so much more to bee the better able to doe it, by how much the iustice of their  cause would procure them all ayde and succour, both diuine and humaine. They told him afterwards, that his Lords letters beeing translated and read, hee should receiue an answer, and so the Chiaus without any farther discourse was dismissed.
The beginning of those letters was stuffed with sundry complaints against theThe contents of (...) letters. Venetians, for that they had disquieted the ancient bounds of Dalmatia, which by conuention, made with his predecessors, had beene established betwixt both the one and other Empire: that contrary to the old and new agreement, the Admiralls of the Venetian Galleys h^d put diuerse Turkish Pirates to death, after that they had taken them aliue in fight; but especially for that the Westerne Pirates were welcome into the Isle of Cyprus, who did continually disquiet his neighbour  cit^ies, and barred his subiects from their free nauigation* then toward the latter end hee craued, that if the Venetians were desirous to continue their ancient friendship with him, that they should surrender vnto him the Isle of Cyprus, to take away that cheefe cause which did entertaine those controuersies betwixt them; otherwise, they should prepare for a fierce warre by sea and land, for hee was determined to send his nauall Army with great forces to take that Island, and in other places to inuade their dominions by land, hoping in God, the giuer of victories, and in his blessed Prophet Mahomet, by whose fauour the Ottoman Family had obtained so great an Empire, to be victorious in that enterprise.
The Senate made this answer to these letters. That the Venetians had euer  inuiolably maintained peace made with the Ott^man Emperors, and contemnedThe Senates answer to (...) letters. all other respects whatsoeuer, by refusing all occasions whereof they might haue made good vse to their owne profit: because that aboue all other things they thought it fit and beseeming a Prince, carefully to keepe his promise, and they being desirous to auoyde all suspition of so great an infamy, had dissembled and buried in silence, diuerse wrongs done vnto them, because they would not bee the first desturbers of the peace: But now perceiuing that vppon no occasion, warre is denounced against them, at such a time as they least expected it, they would not refuse it, for the defence of their owne, and in particular for the defence of the Realme of Cyprus, the which as their Aucestors had enioyed it  with so iust a title for so many yeares, they did likewise hope that God would giue them the grace to defend it valiantly against all those that would vniustly take it from them.
Warre beeing in this sort denounced against the Venetians, and by them entertained, the Senate made a decree to sell diuerse publick possessions, to accept of sundry loanes of money, to the great profit of those that brought them, andThe Venetians great preparations. in a word to vse all meanes to gather great sums of money together: wherevpon for this purpose the number of the ^rocurators of Saint Marke was augmented, which is the cheef dignity next to the Duke, bestowing it vpon those that should lend twenty thou^and Ducats: to the Common-wealth: they did likewise permit  all young Gentlemen to enter into the great Councell before the time appointed by the lawes, who thereby might be capable to elect magistrates, and likewise to execute the like places themselues, so as they would lay in deposito certaine sommes of money in the publique treasury.
The surcease of armes had continued for a while till the returne of Cubat, and the end of his negotiation, but being come to Raguza, the answere which he brought was soone divulged, wherevpon the souldiers that lay in the parts neere adioyning, not tarrying for any others commandement being assembled in greatVV^r opened in a^ (...). numbers, did not only waste and spoile the champaine country of Albania and Dalmatia which was subiect to the Venetians, but went and encamped before Dulcina and Antiuari, who finding them to be manned with strong Garrisons and hauing no ordnance to batter them, they were enforced to retire.
Now the Chiaus being returned to Constantinople, and the Senates answere being knowne, all men did greatly wonder at it: for the Turkes hauing seene in  former time what deere account the Venetians made of the great Lords friendship, supposed that they would try all meanes before they would take armes against him. But Selim did not so much wonder as he did scorne and disdaine, accounting himselfe highly wronged and contemned in his owne person, because that the vsuall ceremonies and entertainments done to Ambassadors had beene denied to Cubat, and for that they had not sent an expresse messenger to him with their answere, but had contrary to their promise, detained the Secretary Bonricci at Venice. In regard whereof his pleasure was, being so councelled by Mahomet, to haue Cubat come into his presence, and particularly to relate the Venetians speeches and entertainment giuen vnto him, together with their preparations Selim is greatly discontented for the smal respect and entertainment giuen to his C^ians. for warre: which he vnderstanding from his mouth, was some times amazed at the report of the Republikes forces, repenting him in a manner of his determination, and on a sodaine he would enter into rage and choller, being therevnto prouoked by his owne pride, and by the flattery of his councellors: wherevpon, he placed gards about the Baylies house, that he should not goe abroad, commanding the Bashas of Cairo and Aleppo to doe the like to the Venetian Consuls of Alexandria and Syria yet they were afterwards set at liberty, on condition they should not depart nor conuay their marchandize forth of the Turkes Dominions.



LODOVICO MOCENIGO  the 85. Duke.








IN the meane time Prince Loredan died at Venice, and Lodouico Mocenigo was chosen in his place, to the peoples great ioy and vnusuall applauds, presuming that they had a Prince, who was wise, discreet, and a louer of the poore, and would constantly oppose himselfe against all those perils and dangers which did then threaten the Commonwealth.
The Sena^e after this election hauing acquainted all Christian Princes with the comming of the Chiaus to Venice, together with their answere, went about to continue the former motions of the league. Therefore for the greater recommendation of the matter, they resolued to send an expresse Ambassador to the Emperour, and to that end they appointed Giacomo Sourance, a man of greatThe Venetians (...) Ambassador to t^e E^peror to solicit him to enter into the le^gue. authority and reputation, who had a long time delt for the Commonwealth in Princes Courts; the Senate thinking it necessary, first to solicit that Prince, who already beganne to grow could in the businesse, to the end that by his example other Princes might be drawne into that vnion for Christendome.
Being come to the Emperors Court, he found that he did alleadge sundry difficulties, and that he was ready to send the tribute to Constantinople, which he vsed to pay to the Turke for the Realme of Hungary, the which he vsed meanes to hinder, or at least to delay it till the finall resolution. Yet neuerthelesse the EmperorThe Emperors answer to the Venetian Ambassador. seemed to bee glad of his comming, either for his owne excuse or else because he desired to haue an expresse Ambassador to come from the Signory about that matter, to the end he might be present at the Imperiall Dyet which he determined within a while after to hold at Spire, and hee supposed that his presence would be the occasion of propounding and concluding so great and important a matter.
As for the Spanish Court there was no speech of the league, that King hauing  sent backe the treaty thereof to Rome to D. Estuniga his Ambassadour and to the Cardinals (...) and Pacheco, but the Popes Nuncio and the Venetian Ambassador made earnest request, that the King would command Doria, that so sooneThe Venetian* propositions in the ^ourt of S^aine, with the difficulties alleadgea there^pon. as he should bring those Gallies, which he had appointed him into those seas; to goe presently and ioyne with the Venetians fleet, concerning which proposition those of the Kings Councell made sundry difficulties, some times alleadging that it was against reason that the Admirall of the Kings Gallies should obey the Venetians Admirall: then they made shew to suspect that the Venetians went about to make vse both of the apparence and name of those forces to treat with more aduantage with the Turkes; and therefore they concluded that the treaty  of the league ought first to take place, as most necessary.
Now at Rome, whither the treaty of the league had beene sent backe (as hathThe Popes proposition to a^ delay. beene said) the Pope perceiuing that to particularize the conditions thereof, would breed a very hurtfull delay, he propounded, that seeing the King of Spaine and the Venetians were agreed to make that vnion, that without any more delay, they should publish the league, being made in the same manner as in the yeere 37. and that in the meane time their forces should ioyne together, to inuite other Princes to declare themselues, and thereby to affright the enemies.
During these practizes the Generall Zanne departed from Venice about the beginning of Aprill, and went to Zara, which was the Rendezuous of all the fleet, and for all the prouisions for warre, that so soone as things were ready they might from thence saile into the Leuant. But the fleet, to their great hurt, stayed there longer then was expected, tarrying for certaine Gallies, and for armes for the souldiers, and other warlike engins ordained in great number, for the souldiersThe fl^et receiueth great discommodity by their aboad at Z^ra. did endure there sundry discommodities, and many of them grew sicke, by meanes whereof the Gallies were badly furnished with souldiers and marriners: yet neuerthelesse so soone as the Senate heard newes from Rome that the King had commanded Doria to ioyne with the Venetian nauall army, it wrote to the Generall, that leauing foure Gallies for the guard of the Gulphe, vnder the command of one of the captaines that had at any time beene an Admirall, he should  speedily saile with the residue of the army to Corfou, and there to expect newes from the Gallies of Spaine, that he might afterwards ioyne with them at Messina, and the two fleets beeing so vnited should shape such a course as God should direct them.
According to this commandement Zanne departed from Zara the twelfth day of Iuly and sailed to Liesna, where he found sixe great Gallies, and certaine ships which he ioyned to his fleet, and from thence, he went directly to Corfou. At the same time, twelue Gallies were in the Popes name armed at Ancona to be sent to the Venetian fleet at Corfou. For, after sundry propositions made in open consistory concerning the aide which the Church might affoord the VenetiansThe Pope armeth twelue Galli^s whereof Colonna is made General. in that warre, it was concluded that twelue Gallies should bee armed by the sea Apostolike, but rigged by the Venetians. The Pope committed them to Marc Antonio Colonna duke of Palliano with title of General to the Church in that warre against the Infidels.
The Venetians seemed to approoue the Popes choise and wrote to him about  it, Colonna sent letters to Venice, wherein hee gratified their loue and good will towards him, which he promised in all points to answer to the honour and seruice of the Commonwealth.
The Turkes on the other side so soone as the Venetian fleete was gonne from Zara, beganne to spoile and waste Dalmatia, with great troupes of horse and foot, where they tooke some castles. Now the Venetian Generall being come to Corfou with three score and tenne light Gallies (for the great Gallies and Ships staied by the way) he beganne to consult what was best to bee done (in the councell, by the Senates appointment, besides the Generall who had two voices both the Prouidators of the army and Sforza Palauicin were present) all men  were desirous that the fleete should without delay passe forward; but many things hindered this deseigne; first, because they had no certaine newes of the Gallies of Candy, which were in number twenty, vnder the command of Marco Quirin Admirall of the Gulphe, and next because they had no certaine intelligence of the deseignes of the Turkish fleet; for it would haue beene a very rash attempt with halfe the forces to haue hazarded the whole fortune of that w^rre on the incertaine euent of one fight, seeing that by a little temporizing they might more commodiously assure the estate of that action.
And lastly because the sicknesse which first beganne at Zara, by reason of the  miseries which the souldiers and ma^riners had there endured, was so mightilyThe cause which s^aied the (...) at C^rfou. encreased, as great numbers daily died, whereby many Gallies were empty of men: this was the chiefe cause of the delay, and the captaines tooke great care how to make new leauies of men to furnish the fleet: To this end, commandement was sent to the Gouernors of Zant and Cephalonia to raise the speediest and greatest supplies that they possibly could.
In the meane time because the souldiers should not grow idle, the Generall resolued to send them to beseege the castle of Marguerits, a place of it selfe nothing famous, but very necessary for the obtayning of other conquests, in which action it was thought fit to employ them, till such time as the Gallies of the  Pope and the Catholike King should arriue. The charge of this enterprise was giuen to Sforza Palauicin Generall of the Venetian troupes, who departing from Corfou with eight and forty Gallies, commanded by the Prouidator Celsi, with fiue thousand foote and foure great peeces of ordnance, arriued by day breake in the Hauen of Nista opposite to it, where he speedily landed his souldiours, and willed them to march on a sodaine to assaile the enemies, thereby hoping with ease to surprize them and to seize vpon the place, and to this purpose, he sent certaine Harquebuziers before, and himselfe followed after with the residue of his forces: but hauing marched a great while through narrow andThe enterprize of the (...) broken off in (...) of the d^fficulty thereof. difficult waies, they did from farre descry the ca^tle which they went to surprize, being seated on the top of an hill, in a pla^e of very difficult accesse. (...) hauing well considered al matters and finding things to be otherwise then they had beene reported, thought it against reason, to hazard those troupes which were destined to greater atchiuements, and therefore on a sodaine hee turned backe

againe, although the Prouidator was of a contrary opinion, and countermanding the Harguebuziers that he had sent before, he marched backe to the Hauen of Nista and returned to Corfou.
At the same time Marco Quirini came with his Gallies from Candy to Corfou, hauing by the way taken the fort of Brazza de Menia, which the Turkes held. He was presently commanded to go with twenty Gallies and scoure the Islands of the Archipelago: wherevpon, he sailed to the Isle of Andros one of the renowned Cic^ades. Within a while after, the Generall Zanne receiued commandement from the Senate to saile with his forces farther vp into the Leuant, and by assayling some of the enemies townes to diuert them from the inuasion of Cyprus. Wherevpon, he left Corfou and went to Modon where Quirin with his Gallies met him, and within two daies after he arriued in the Isle of Candy anchor^d in the Gulph Anfialea, which at this day marriners call the Hauen of Suda. TheThe Venetian fleet (...) (...) by the Senats commandement. Generall being there desirous to make speedy prouision of whatsoeuer the fleet needed, found great difficulties in it, chiefly in recouering suffitient numbers of men to supply the places of them that were dead, wherevpon, he sailed with forty Gallies to Candace the chiefe city of the Island, the sooner by his presence to hasten the necessary prouisions, leauing both the Prouidators and Palauicin in the hauen of Suda with foure score Gallies, enioyning them to leauy men from all parts.
Now after that the fleet was sufficiently furnished with souldiers, marriners and other necessaries, they vnproffitably spent the time and the best season of the yeere, expecting the Popes and Spanish Gallies, the which, according to the Venetians directions, being ioyned together, were to meet them in Candy. At the last, toward the latter end of August, Mar^-Antonio Colonna the Churches Generall,The (...) of the Pope, King of Spaine and V^netians ioyne together. and Gio^an Andrea Doria, the Catholike Kings, being arriued, the Venetian (...) was merueilous ioyfull of their comming: The Generall and fleet went forth of the Hauen of Suda to welcome them, where according to the manner they saluted with volies of shot; then all of them entring together into the hauen, made no long aboad there, but after some propositions made, the whole fleet retired  to Si^hy, there more maturely to consult what were best to be done to free the Isle of Cyprus from inuasion.
Whilest the Christian fleet had spent much time in preparing and vniting it selfe togither, the Turkes with greater celerity had assembled all their forces, and being mighty at sea, had without any difficulty, prosperously pursued their enterprize, the which was more speedily performed, because that Selim, who said that hee would in person goe to the army changed his determination and resolued to remaine at Constantinople, by the aduise of Mahomet and Mustapha,Mustapha, Generall of the enterprize of Cyprus. to whose authority and councell all the other Bashas condescended. Selim then tarrying at Constantinople made Mustapha his Lieutenant Generall in that  warre, committing the whole enterprize by land to him, and all marine actions to Piali, Admirall of the Gallies. Piali within a while after departing from Constantinople with fifty fiue Gallies and certaine other vessels, Mustapha set saile with like number, vnto whome for an extraordinary fauour the great Lord had giuen the Imperiall Galley to transport him, which is of extraordinary greatnesse and most sumptuously decked, in which the great Turke embarketh himselfe when he goes forth on any enterprize. They anchored first at Negrepo^t, then at Rhodes, where hauing intelligence that the Venetian fleet lay at Zara, and could not depart from thence by reason of ficknesse and other impediments, and that they had no newes at all of the Spanish fleet: the Turkes being out of feare  that the fleetes would ioyne together, and supposing that they durst not come on any farther, determined to saile directly to Cyprus: But as (...) Turkish fleet passed along from Negrepont to Rhodes, Piali made an attempt to take the fort of Tina, which is an Island in the farthest part of the Archipelago, belonging to the

Venetians, and comming vnlooked for in a morning to that Island thinking to surprize it, it was discouered at sea by Ieronimo Paruta a Venetian Gentleman Gouernor of the Island, a valiant and discreet person, who of a long time hauing feated their arriuall, hee made prouisions of all necessaries for defense. Hee perceiuing the enemies for to bend their course thitherward, shot off a warning peece to aduertize those of the Island that were abroad in the country, that they should quickly retire into the castle, which beeing done in time, they prepared themselues to withstand the Barbarians assaults, which were very cruell, not onely once, but twice and thrice, in euery of which, they were brauely repulsed, with great losse of their men, and were enforced to discampe,The Tuk^s re^ from Tina. after that they had with incredible fury wasted the whole Island, burned the Country houses, ruined Churches, and slaughtered all the cattaile that were in that Island.
From Tina Piali went to Rhodes, where all their fleet lay which amountedThe number of the Turkish fleet. to more then two hundred armed vessels, accounting an hundred and fifty Gallies, together with Fusts and Galeo^s, but in the great fleete were certaine Mahonnes, which are like to great Gallies, not altogither so bigge as a Gallion, sixe ships, and great numbers of other vessels commonly called Caramuscolini, and some fifty Palandaries to transport horse.
This fleet bending it direct course toward Cyprus was discried neere to Baffo 1570. on the first day of Iuly in the yeere 1570. which scoured all the coast from Limissa as farre as the Promontory commonly called the Cape of the Cat: then landing part of their forces they burned and spoiled the sea coasts, takingThe Turk^sh fleet landed. many prisoners: the next day pursuing their iourney, they went to Salines, where finding no resistance, they vnship't their ordnance, and the rest of the souldiers who presently fortified their campe with deepe trenches and strong Rampiers, from whence they afterwards wasted and spoiled the country neere adioyning. Then marching to Leucata, nine miles from Salines they did easily make themseluesMustaph^ by (...) (...) to win the Cy^. Masters of the country and people, vnto whom Mustaphaa gaue great guifts and goodly promises to draw on others, and especially those of the mountaines, seeking rather to winne them by faire meanes then by force.
In the meane time they dispatched foure score Gallies and diuers flat bottomed vessels to Tripoli, and to the Riuer of Caramania, there to raise other horse and foot for^es, which arriuing in Cyprus, made vp the number (as most authors write) of fifty thousand foot, fiue and twenty hundred horse, three thousand Pioners, with great numbers of horse of carriage and thirty peeces of great ordnance with an hundred and fifty Falconets.
There were no suffitient Garrisons in the whole Island able to resist these forces: for the ordinary Garrison was but two thousand Italian foot men, and some thousand others sent from the firme land, with Martinengos two thousand  souldiers, many whereof died by incommodious transportation; so that the greatest hope of beeing able to defend the townes and castles, consisted in the new supplies which those of the country had promised to leauy. There was no other cauallery in the whole Kingdome but fiue hundred Stradiors which were kept there in pay by the Common-wealth.
Things beeing thus, and suffitient forces wanting to repulse ^o mighty an enemy, for the cauallery was to weake for to hinder his landing, and the infantery not suffitient to defend for any long time the two chiefe fortes which they held, Nicotia and Fa^agosta, and for to guard the mountaines and other passages of the Island hee beeing landed: therefore they resolued espetially to  defend those two cities.
Astor Baillone who by Martinengos death was Generall of all the forces inAstor Baillone General in Cyprus. the Island, in the absence of the Prouidator (for Lorenzo Bembo died, not

long before) and other Venetian Magistrates, called a councell, where the chiefe offices and comma^d in that warre were distributed to sundry Cypriot Gentlemen, of honourable ranke, as well for their wealth as nobillity, but smally experienced in martiall matters. The Count Roccas was made Lieutenant to Baillone, Giacomo de Nores Count of Tripoli, Master of the ordnance, Gio^an Singlit^co captaine of the Cypriot cauallery, Giouan Sosomene, captaine of the Pioners, Scipio Caraffa, and Pietro Paulo Singlitico captaines of the foot, who were appointed to guard the strong places of the mountaines, and others were appointed to other places.
They did likewise conclude in that councell to attempt to hinder the enemies  landing; and to that end, the chiefest of them went into the field with the greatest forces they could assemble, but, considering their enterprize to be to dangerous, and vnseasonable, the enemy hauing already landed part of his forces, they returned home to their Garrisons, so that the Turkes landed without any difficulty, which made them at first to suspect, that they did it for some pollicy, to draw them afterwards into an ambuscado, wherevpon at their first arriuall they were very wary, but running afterwards vp and downe the country, and finding no opposition, beeing thereby emboldened, their army did not onely aduance forward but went about in disbanded troupes, without Ensignes to robbe and spoile at their pleasure.
The Turkish captaines beeing vnwilling to loose time resolued to assaile one of the two chiefest fortes of the Island. Piali was of opinion, to beseege FamagostaPiali is of opinion to beseege Famagosta first. first, hoping quickly to take it, and that it being taken, Nicotia would of necessity yeeld, which had many vnproffitable eaters within the circuit of her walles, which being seated farre from sea, in the middest of a champaine country, possessed by great numbers of enemies, could not bee releeued, nor without new prouision long hold out the seege: that Famagosta was no great fort, but weake, and so defectiue as it would neuer endure one onely battery, and that they within it were not many, or so bould and valliant as to sustaine any assault.
Mustapha mainteined the contrary, saying, that the reputation of so great an Mustapha mainte^neth the contrary and his opinion is followed. army as theirs, ought not to be blemished by attempting any meane enterprize, thereby to encrease the enemies courage, and diminish their owne: That the Geneuois for foure score and tenne yeeres had held Famagosta, at the same time as the Kings of the family of Lusignan commanded the Island, whereby might be gathered, that the taking of that city, would bee of no great importance for the winning of the whole Kingdome. That the Nobillity, and very many of the people were retired into Nicotia, that all the wealth and munition of the whole Island was there, so as that onely exploit beeing well performed would end all the rest, and their first attempt giue end to all their deseignes.
These reasons forcible in themselues and strengthened by the reputation  of the author, caused them to resolue first to beseege Nicotia, whither the whole campe marched the two and twentith of Iuly, hauing first sent fiue hundred horse towards Famagosta, to cut off all correspondence and intelligence betwixt those two cities* the Turkes pursuing their iourney approached neere to the walles of Nicotia. Great feare seized on the inhabitants when they perceiued the enemy at their Gates, like men who wanting discreet fore-sight to prouide for dangers a farre off, did extreamely feare them beeing neere at hand, hauing alwaies beene incredulous that the Turkish fleet would come into the Island, though the Venetian Baily at Constantinople, and the Senate, had giuen them many aduertizments thereof that they might prouide for their affaires in time.
Nicolo Dandulo was at the same time Gouernor of the city, a man to weake

to vndergo that burthen, which not desert but opinion had laied on him: yet to whom long experience had rather giuen abillity to execute, then nature to direct. The sodainnesse of the danger had encreased his feare, and his feare the danger, for, at the arriuall of the enemies army, the trenches were vnfinished, and the souldiers disordered, and the city vnvictualled.
Now whilest those in Nicosia, beeing incompassed with many miseries, were busied in furnishing the city with necessaries, and inconsulting by what meanesThe enemies are encamped before (...). to srustrate the enemies deseignes, they were so tedious in their resolutions, in regard they had no eminent Commander able to decide the controuersies which arose from diuersity of opinion, that the Turkes had time to pitch their tents, to plant their ordnance, and likewise for to fortifie their campe, which  stretched it selfe from Saint Marines as farre as Aglangia, possessing the whole space opposite vnto foure B^lwarkes, and on the other side of the towne which was not enuironed by the campe both the Bashas did daily send an hundred foote and as many horse, that none might issue forth or enter into the Citty.
This Citty is seated in the middest of the champaine, in an wholesome temperate aire: it hath great store of water, and the soile is very fruitfull: In formerThe sytuation of the city of Nicotia. times it was nine miles in compasse about, but the Venetians beeing desirous to fortifie it, reduced it to three: it is proportioned like a starre  with eleuen points, in euery of which is a bulwarke, made onely of earth, which were not yet finished when the Turkish army arriued: and the rules of fortification were so well obserued, as the greatest Inginers accounted it the most absolute peece in the world.
Howsoeuer, the City rather was vnfurnished of a skilfull Commander, and braue men, then of fortification. There were tenne thousand foot-men in the city, amongst whom were fifteene hundred Italians and the rest were natiue Cypriots, namely three thousand Cernedes, two thousand fiue hundred of the city, two thousand new men enroled in the townes and villages of Cyprus, that  were retired thither, and a thousand Nicotian Gentlemen, all with vnexperienced troupes, were for the most part badly armed.
They likewise sent to Famagosta for to entreat Baillone to come thither with some certaine troupes to command the city: but those of Famagosta hauing no superfluous forces, and beeing vncertaine whether the enemy changing his determination would on a sodaine come and assaile them, did constantlo deny the Nicotians request, not suffering the aide they required, nor the captaine to goe forth of their city: vpon this refusall Baillone likewise excused his departure, adding that Martinengas souldiers by wanting a captaine, said that they would obey none but him, so that his departure might breed some great disorder and confusion in the City. Moreouer, there was store of ordnance  in the towne, which wanted but braue men for to mannage it: There were many Pioners, for besides foure thousand vnder the commaund of GiouanDiscord among the commanders in the city. Sosomene, as many more were come to the citty; neuerthelesse, for all this great multitude of people, the captaines beeing diuided amongst themselues, this so necessary fortification was left imperfect, which did much weaken the forces within it.
On the contrary side, there was in the enemies campe such agreement, and obedience towardes the captaines, as all military actions were speedily executed. Mustapha a couragious person and a great soldier, besides the ranke which he then held, had great credit and authority amongst the souldiers, in regard of the fame Mustapha his great credit among the souldiers. and reputation he had purchased for his command in Selims army before he was Emperour, when hee made warre on his brother Achomat, all men attributing

the vnexpected victory which ensued, to his onely valour and prowesse: and therefore the souldiers being accustomed to martiall deeds, trauaile and danger, were growne much more actiue and valliant, hauing their captaines valour for their obiect, togither with the hope of great reward if they were victorious.
His army was reported to be very strong, but his chiefe force were sixe thousand Ianissaries, and foure thousand Spaches (these are horse-men, neuer out of pay, which some time when need is, fight on foote) all valliant men and bred vp in warre: Therefore by how much those of the city wanted humaine aide against such forces, by so much greater was their recourse vnto God. For, dayPrayers and Processions in Nicotia. and night praiers were made in priuate Houses and Churches, and sollemne  processions ouer all the city, which were performed with great deuotion and concourse of people, therein following the example and exhortation of Francisco Contaren Bishop of Baffa.
Hee at that time was chiefe amongst the Clergy in that city (for Philippo Moce^igo Archbishop of Nicotia was then at Venice) did not cease to aide and assist the people as if hee had beene their owne pastor, and hauing on a time assembled the chiefe of the towne, in Saint Sophias Church, hee gaue them a briefe and learned exhortation befitting the time, from whence they departed so well satisfied and resolued, as they did put one an other in good hope and comfort of a fortunate issue of that warre, and did  brauely dispose themselues to defend their country.

The end of the eight Booke of the sixth Decade.




The Contents of the ninth Booke of the  sixth Decade.
THE Turkes beseege the City of Nicotia, with their furious battery. The taking of the Bulwarke Constance, whereof ensued the Cities losse. The Barbarous cruelties  committed at the sacke of the City. Therest of the Island yeeldeth to the Turkes, Famagosta excepted. The Turkes approach the City of Famagosta, with the inhabitants resolution. The sundry opinions of the captaines of the Christian army, who at last resolue to goe and fight with the enemy. Doria hauing intelligence of the losse of Nicotia, returnes home into his country. Many townes subiects to the Turkes yeeld to the Venetians. The Popes exhortation for the conclusion of the league. The difficulties which arose in the conclusion  of the league. The Emperour refuseth to enter into the league. Supplies sent to Famagosta. Mahomet Basha propoundeth a treaty of peace to the Venetians. The Venetians are doubtfull and vncertaine either for peace or warre. The Emperor opposeth himselfe against the title which the Pope had giuen to the Duke of Florence. The Pope and Spaniards seeke to the Venetians, least they should make an agreement with the Turke. The league is concluded and signed, with the Articles thereof. Don Iohn of Austria is made Generall of the league. The meanes which the Venetians vsed to get  money. What Selim promised to himselfe after the taking of Nicotia. The enemies are defeated in Candy. The Turkes spoile and waste the Islands of Zant and Cephalonia. And lastly the conditions of peace propounded to the Venetians by Mahomet Basha.

The ninth Booke of the sixth Decade of the History of Uenice.
THe enemy without any empediment being come before Nicosia, sent certaine horse to make incursions neere to the city, to draw those within it forth to skirmish; the Italians would gladly haue sallied, but at first the Gouernor would not suffer them; yet beeing ouercome by the importunities of all the captaines, he permitted Caesar of Vincenza, Lieutenant of theThose of Nicosia mak^ certa^ne sall^es. Count Roccas, to sallie with certaine horse, which being few in number could not  execute any important matter, but onely sought to draw the enemy within the shot of the cities ordnance: and hauing done so two daies togither, a captaine of a troupe of Stradiots, whose name was Andre Cortese, was taken by the enemy, and being brought before the Basha, hee presently commanded his head to bee cut off.
The enemies afterward without any empediment did build a fort on Saint Marines mount; some foure hundred and forty paces from the city: for although the beseeged vsed all meanes to frustrate the enemies deseigne towards the curtaines of Podocatera and Caraffa (for so were those Bulwarkes called, by the name of those Gentlemen that had particular command in the building of them) and  did continually with their ordnance play vpon that part, yet, they could not hinderThe Turkes build three for^es neere to the city. the enemy, who wrought day and night, from executing his enterprize; who not satisfying himselfe with that one fort, did on a sodaine build three more in three other seuerall places, the one vpon a little hill at Saint Georges, the second opposite to the Bulwarkes Constancia and Podocatera, on a little rising, called Margueri^s Mount, and the third on the top of the Mount Mantia, hoping with these fortes to batter the Bulwarkes, curtaines, and houses of the city.
They did afterwards make deepe and broad trenches which they brought vntoThe enemies fierce battery. the ditch of the old walles and placed courts of gard in them, which could not bee hurt by the cities ordnance: then, for foure daies space, without intermission, from morning till night they furiously with all their ordnance battered the walles; but perceiuing it to bee to small purpose, because the bullets for the most part fell vpon earthen Rampiers and made no breach, they ceased the battery, and fell to the spade and ma^tock, so as they presently came vnderneath the counter scarpes, thinking thereby to ouerthrow them: then they plaied vpon foure Bulwarkes, namely Podocatera, Constantia, Dauila, and Tripoli, all whichA fierce assault giu^n ^o foure bulwarks at one time. they determined to assault at once, in which for a long time both sides fought valliantly, but in the end the Turkes were with with great losse repulsed.
Mustapha wondering and raging thereat, beeing almost out of hope to take the City, solicited and animated his souldiers, to goe once againe to  the assault, promising great rewards to such as should doe valiantly, and after that hee had made a speech to them worthy a Generall, hee caused a proclamation to bee made thorow the whole Army, that any three which should first

mount the citty walls should be made Sangiacks, and if any Bascha dyed, hee that should first enter the citty, should succeed in that dignity.
The souldiers beeing thus encouraged, the assault was resolued on: The next day early in the morning the Turkes marching by day breake in great silence toAn assault giuen to the Bulwarke Constantia. the same Bulwarkes, assailed the besieged on a suddaine and vnlookt for, hoping thereby with more ease to obtaine the victory, (as indeed it did). For the Turkes finding those that had the garde of the Bulwarke Constantia halfe a sleepe, andThe Turk^s take the Balwarke Constantia. mounting furiously the Parapet, gaue them no time nor leisure to make any defence, who beeing drowned in slumber and feare, forgat to retire into the Citty.
The great opinion which the besieged had conceiued of the arriuall of supplies from the Common-wealth of Venice, which they so much desired, made them beleeue, that the noise which they had heard the night before, whilest the Turkes were preparing for the mornings assault, was a token of the enemies discamping; in regard whereof, and because they were oppressed with long watchings, and intollerable labours, they had securely disarmed themselues, and fell to rest: The Turkes then in this confusion entring pell mell with the Christians into the last rampiers, there arose a great cry, accompanied with feare and amazement, whervpon, many betooke themselues to open flight.
The Count Roccas quarter was neere to the Bulwarke, who by the suddaine  noyse beeing certified of that which was done, did presently arme, and comming in among the thickest throngs, hee found so great disorder there, as notwithstandding all his meanes and perswasions to cause the souldiers to stand fast, and make valiant resistance, his labour was in a manner lost, to such a desperate passe wereThe Con^t Roccas slaine. matters brought, and himselfe beeing shot into the head with an Harquebuze, fell downe dead, wherevpon all those, that by his arriuall had taken courage, and began by little and little to make head, leauing the defense of the walls, ran home to their houses to prouide for the safty of their wiues and children. Pietro Pisani and Bernardino Polano Captaine of Salma, comming thither in hast, could not by their authority and example stay the disordered runne-awayes; among whom Polano thrusting himselfe, and going about to hold them back by force, was together  with them cut in peeces. Pisani perceiuing his fellow to be slaine, did with the rest retire to the market place, whither from all parts the poore inhabitants came, who were not yet pursued by the Turkes, who hauing taken the Bulwarke Constantia, would before they went on any farther, make themselues maisters ofAll the Bulwarke (...) taken. all the rest, in which the Italian footmen did still fight brauely with the enemy: but in the end when they perceiued their strong places to bee lost, and that they were at once assailed in front and on their backs, beeing vnable to make any longer resistance, they abandoned the walls, and making themselues way thorow the middest of the enemies, they retired to the market place, where they made head for a time, vntill that the Basha of Aleppo arriued, who entring the towne at the  Bulwarke of Tripoli, went first to make good the walls, where hee made great slaughter of such as hee met with, and finding no more resistance, hee marched towards the market place, where seeing so many armed people to make head, hee caused three peeces of Ordnance to bee brought from the walls, and bestowing his shot among them, hee enforced them to quit the place, many of whom retiredThe Cit^y of Nicosia is taken. to the Pallace; whither the Gouernor, Bishop Contaren, and many of the chiefe Cittizens had already escaped, those which could not enter, running vp and downe heere and there thorow the streetes, were presently either slaine or taken prisoners.
They within the Pallace hauing receiued the Baschas word for the safety of their liues, so soone as they had opened the gates, the Turkes presently runne in vpon them, who were able to make no resistance beeing vnarmed, where they were all murthered: therein, the Gouernor, Bishop, and common people running one selfe same fortune.
That beeing done, and the Turkes freed from farther trouble, they ran confusedlyThe Citty is sackt. and without Enseignes about the citty, sacking houses, spoiling and ruining Churches, dishonouring wiues, rauishing virgins, and putting all to the edge of the sword, without distinction of age or condition, so as that day, twenty thousand persons dyed by the hands of the Turkes: and those whom the cruell enemy left aliue, rather to reserue them for some miserable punishment, then for any compassion towards them, were bound in chaines, and haled to prison ouer theThe number of the dead. dead bodies of their friends and kinsfolke. In this manner did this Citty in one day, taste the extreamest of calamitie, which for a long time had liued in great pompe and magnificence, nay rather in all excesse and dissolutenesse, seruing for  an example of the inconstant mutability of humaine affaires. The Citty was taken and sackt vppon the ninth day of September, and the foureteenth day of the siege.
The Turkes did afterwards with ease become Lords of the rest of the Island, Famagosta excepted. For the other townes following the victors fortune, didCyprus yeeldeth to the Turkes, Famagosta excepted. presently yeeld, and Cerina likewise as readily as the rest, notwithstanding that Giouan Maria Mudazzo Captaine of the Castle, and Captaine Alphonso Palazza beeing entreated by those of Famagosta, had determined to hold out and brauely to desend it. Those of the mountaines did the like, Scipio Caraffa, Paulo Singlitico, with diuerse other Gentlemen, and some Greeke Preists, and great numbers  of Countrey people, yeelding them-selues to Mustapha, vnto whom they sware fealty and aleageance; so that the Venetians possessed nothing in the Island but onely Famagosta, whither Mustapha determined to march, leauing 4000. footmen for the gard of Nicotia.
Mustapha, hauing taken order for Nicotia, marched towards Famagosta with his whole armie, and encamped at the village Pomodama, three miles from the Citty, causing his Turkish horse to make dayly incursions to the very gates, who bore the heads of the chiefest Nicotians vpon their lances points, to daunt the souldiers, and to diuert them from their resolution in susteining the siege: hee did afterwards draw neerer to the Citty, making great trenches: but those within  the towne ^allying to skirmish, did so disquiet the enemies, as they twise draue them from their trenches, and with their ordnance did ruine three Forts which they had almost finished in places very commodious for them; namely at Saint Georges, Perispola, and at the Crane tower, which neuerthelesse, did afterwards do them great hurt, for they therein spent aboue fifty thousand pound weight of powder, which since then they wanted.
Now because winter drew neere, an vnfit season for a siege, which they perceiued would prooue long and difficult, and that it behooued him besides to strengthen his Galleys, by reason of the intelligence hee receiued of the vniting of the Christian fleete; Mustapha beeing vnwilling to enterprize any thing, that might  darken or eclipse his glory purchased at Nicotia, did often and in sundry sorts solicite those of the citty to entertaine some agreement, and to yeeld: He permitted Iohn Sosomene, who had beene taken at Nicotia to go to Famagosta, vpon his own word, to procure money to pay his ransome, that hee might exhort them to a voluntary yeelding, and to tell them that they could by no meanes hold out long. But the Captaines, Magistrates, and people of Famagosta, resoluing to defend it to the last man, would in no sort listen to his discourse, but insteed of intreating the Senate to quit that citty to the enemy, they humbly besought it to send them aid: and the better to acquaint it with what they needed, they resolued to send Nicolo Donato to Venice, with two Galleys, and with him Ieronimo Ragazzone, the  Ci^ties Bishoppe, who was well instructed of all matters, and very fit for such a businesse.
But it is now time to returne to the Christian fleet, which departing as hath

beene said forth of the Hauen of Suda was come to Sithy, where the Captaines beganne to consult what was best to be done. Propositions were made by some of them to enuade some places belonging to the Ottoman Empire, and thereby enforce the enemies to leaue Ciprus to come to the reskew of his owne, affirmingSund^y opinions of the Capta^nes o^ ^he Christian fleet. it to be the surest meanes to frustrate the enemies deseignes. The Generall Zanne was of a contrary opinion, perswading them to saile directly to Cyprus, alleadging how that the fleet was cheefly destined for the defen^e of that Kingdome, which by directing their course elsewhere could not bee preserued from the danger which threatened it: That the only remedy was to goe and fight with the enemies fleet, because that vpon report of their comming, the Turkes would be inforced to quit the land enterprize and to retire to their nauy for the  defence thereof: which if they shouldnot doe, they were then sure to find the empty Gallies in the Hauen exposed to their mercy: That it was most likely, that the Turkes, vpon intelligence that the Venetians forces and Gallies were vnitedThe Generall is o^ op^nion ^o meet with the enemy and sight with him. with those of the Pope and King of Spayne, would presently leaue Cyprus, not to fight, but to returne to Constantinople: and that therby they might find meanes to incounter them by the way, and fight with them with great aduantage: for though they were Inferior to the enemies in number of men and vessells, they were neuerthelesse without all doubt in goodnesse of shipping, and magnanimity and courage superior to them; beeing besides fresh and lusty, whereas the enemies could not but be much wearied and wasted with their exploits done since  their arriuall in the Island moreouer, to approach the enemies fleet, though no other profit should ensue thereof, would encrease their owne reputation, wheras on the contrary to turne away from such an enterprize would argue feare and cowardize, encrease the enemies courages and diminish their owne, especially theirs that haue the guard of the Fortes in Cyprus: That it was no sound aduise to loose ones owne vppon hope to get it of another man, and least of all when as a weaker Prince, such an one as was the Common-wealth of Venice, could hardly defend it being gotten, or recouer from the Turkish power and in the middest of all his warlike countrey that which is lost.
These reasons beeing strong and forcible were approued by euery one, as agreeable to the Senates decree, namely to leaue all other enterprizes and to intend the voyage of Cyprus already resolued, wherevppon the fleeet departed from Candy the eighteenth day of September to saile thitherward.
The whole fleet consisted of an hundred and fourescore light Gallies, namely anThe Number of the Christian fleet. hundred and foure and twenty of the Venetians, twelue of the Popes, and fiue and forty of the Catholick King: and besides all these, twelue great galleys, and foureteene Venetian men of warre, with great numbers of other vessels of burthen, which carried Munitions and other necessaries. In the whole Nauie there were fifteene thousand mercenarie footmen, besides great numbers of voluntaries, and the most of them Gentlemen, and men of note, commanded by sundry Captaines of great experience and reputation. The fleete sayling with a faire winde towards Cyprus, did in three dayes, rid away three hundred miles, and arriued at Castel-rosso, which is seated on a rock, opposite to Caramania, some hundred and fifty miles from Cyprus, where by reason of night that stole vpon them, and a tempest that arose, they were enforced to land in the Hauens of Vathi and Calamita, where the same night they receiued sorrowfull newes of the losse of Nicotia.
This did greatly trouble the whole fleete, wherevpon the next day a CouncellDoria hearing of the losse of Nicotia, is desirous ^o returne home. was called, to determine what was to bee done. Such as from the beginning  had not approoued that iourney, did then condemne it more then before: and Doria did openly protest, that he would returne home, and said, That he came from Candy, with an intent to releeue Nicotia, which beeing lost, the cause of his iourney ceased, and that he knew none other reason sufficient to expose them to

the hazard of a bataile, which in regard of the losse of that Citty was much more to be well considered: because that the enemies beeing then free from land actions, and growne more proud and insolent by meanes of the victory, would bee imbarked in their Vessells, not alone to repulse but to assaile vs; adding heerevnto, the vnfitnes of the season, winter drawing on, and the long iourny they were yet to make before they should arriue at their wished Hauen, and also his particular charge of preseruing his fleet which was committed vnto him by the Catholicke King.
These reasons making him resolute in his opinion, he could not be diuerted fromThe Generall and Prouidator vse reason to Doria to perswa^e him (...). it by the Generall Zanne, nor by the Prouidator Veniero, who being already imbarked  for Ciprus, seemed highly to allow of that iourney, each of them telling him that since they were come so farre together, he ought with them to run one selfe same fortune, and make proofe of the hazards of warre, wherof they should not afterwards haue cause to complaine, thereby blotting out the infamy which all men might throw vpon them, for hauing such gallant forces and consuming so much time in vaine without attempting any memorable matter: but all these perswasions were to no purpose with him nor with the rest likewise who had noe liking to the iourney, who vpon Dorias refusall to goe on any farther, the Generall Zanne to his great greese was enforced to permit it.
The Christian fleet then departing from Castell-rosso, and comming all of Doria returneth home. them to Scarpanto into the Hauen Tristano, Doria on a sodaine took his leaue directing his course to wards Puglia, and from thence into Sicily, his only care being to retire safely into his Contrey.
Colonna and Zanne being desirous to exploit some worthy enterprize, remained still together. But hauing intelligence that Piali, with a great number of well armed Gallies was come from Cyprus to ouertake them, and finding themselues to weake for resistance, they weighed ankors and sailed into Candy to the Hauen of Canea, not without danger of being assailed by the Turkish fleet, which hauing notice of the Christians departure sailed speedily to the Ile of Stamp alia: and Piali determining to goe to Candy, i^ hope to find some assured booties on those  Seas, could not execute his proiect by reason of stormes and foule weather, wherevppon he returned back, and went into the Archipellago: where hee entered the Hauen o^ Calegiera making a shew as if hee would winter there, but on a suddaine changing his mind, hee went with his whole fleet vnto Constantinople.
At the same time certaine Townes of Albania which were subiect to the Turke did rise against them, and being desirous to shake off their slauish yoak, they sent to request the Venetian Magistrates their nearest neighbors, to send them supplies of men and armes a suring them that at the first sight of their Euseignesthey would speedily come vnto them and become their subiects, and for a sure testimony  thereof, they offered to giue them their children in hostage: which request of theirs, though it could not bee granted, as befitted their need and desire, great numbers neuerthelesse of inhabitants of the black Mountaine, and neere toDiuers places subiect to the Turke yield to the Venetians Boyan, called at this day the countrey of Drina, and other places belonging to the Marcouichians, did submit themselues to the Venetians, so that the Gouernors of Antiuari, Dulcigna, and Budua, did in the name of the Venetian Commonwealth, receiue the oath of allegiance of more then an hundred townes and villages. The Christians of Zara were in armes, not so much in hope to make any new conquest, as to repulse the enemies, and to free the countrey from their continuall incursions: But there was no memorable matter done, in regard both  parties were apter to robbe and spoile then to fight.
In the meane time, the renewing of the league was treated at Rome, whither so soone as ample commissions were brought from Spayne and Venice to their Agents and Ambassadors for the conclusion therof, the Pope hauing called them

before him beganne to exhort them all to enter into league against the common enemy, telling them that the cause was common, (although that in respect of present losse it did more neerely concerne the Venetians), in regard the quarrel was betwixt Christians and Infidells, and that if his owne presence should be necessary,The Popes ^x-hortation for the conclusion of the league. his age should not hinder him from the iourney: That he would entreat, solicite, and admonish the Emperor and all other Christian Princes to enter into the league, for which he promised continually to pray vnto God that it might please him to grant it victory ouer his enemies.
The Ambassadors and Cardinalls seemed to be greatly mooued by this exhortation, giuing his Holinesse many thanks for it, each of them promising to proceed  therein charitably, speedily and sincerely, as became a matter so important, holy, and desired by their Princes, as well in respect of their owne particular interest, as for the Common good of all Christendome: these words beeing often re-itterated by them did not produce effects conformable therevnto, but euery of them aimed at his owne particular profit, which beeing sundry, brought forth different opinions, breeding extreame and important delayes in the conclusion of that businesse, wherein diuers monethes were already vainely spent in idle and needlesse disputations.
The Pope had appointed fiue of the greatest and noblest Cardinalls of theLong (...) vsed in the conclusion of the league. Colledge to bee present in the name of the Sea Apostolick at the treaty of the  league, to wit, Alexandrine his Nephew, Moron, Cesis, Grassi, and Aldobrandino, betwixt whom and the two Spanish Cardinalls, with the two Ambassadors of Spaine and Venice, the treaty hauing beene begunne to be decided, they presently fell into sundry difficulties: for euery of them aiming to haue the league concluded to his owne particular profit, propounded very strange matters, as it often happeneth in such cases: But the Pope who proceeded therin very sincerely, his ayme beeing only for the good of all Christendome. went about somtimes to moderate the excessiue demands of the Spaniards; protesting that if they did not presently conclude it, to reuoke all power and authority granted to their King to leuy money: Then turning his speech to the Venetians, he exhorted them to  harken to an agreement, though it were somwhat to their disaduantage, promising neuer to faile them in any aid or releefe possible.
The Cardinalls likewise that were his Holinesse Commissioners, speaking now to the one and then to the other, did all they might for the ending of the businesse, but especially Cardinall Moron, a man well experienced in the managing of most important affaires, and very eloquent, who allowing the propositions of the Venetians Ambassador, as those which tended to the vniuersall good, went about to draw the Kings Ambassadors from their owne priuate interest, and to make them capable of truth which hauing done by a very eloquent remonstrance, and theyThe Spaniards idle excuses. vnable to make any reasolable answer, fell to new excuse, saying that they would  write thereof into Spayne and expect a more particular and expresse commission from their King.
The Spaniards added to the former difficulties which they had propounded, That the Venetians should be bound on paine of Ecclesiasticall Censures to obserue in euery poynt that which should be resolued on in the league, as though they had suspected the Venetians loyalty, which had like to haue broken off theThe difficulties propounded by the Spaniards. whole businesse: They did moreouer striue about a General to command the Army, the Spaniards arrogantly crauing not onely to appoint a Generall (which was freely granted) but a Lieftenant, who in his absence should haue the same  authority in the Army, there-by wholly distrusting the Venetians, which suspition still encreasing, did much coole the treaty of the league, which was begunne with such earnest heate.
The Senate being highly displeased there with did expresly send a new Ambassador to Rome to acquaint the Pope with their earnest desire to see the league concluded,

together with their firme resolution to continew the warre. Giouan Sorance was deputed to this end, who comming to Rome, and finding the same difficulties, his arriuall and speed could doe no greater good, so as to all mens greefe time was vnprofitably spent, which rather craued the execution of matters already resolued, then consultation about new.
The league was at the same time propounded in the Emperors Court, where it had no better successe for the Emperor vnder sundry coullors hauing spentThe Emperor (...) to enter into the (...). many monethes before he would giue any certaine resolution, beeing still desirous to gaine time did in the end declare, That hauing Truce with Selim for eight yeare s, three of which were hardly expired it would be against his honor not to  keepe his word; and though he were desirous to doe otherwise, yet he could not without the consent of the Princes and Estates of the Empire, neither did hee intend to doe it without the aduise and Councell of his owne particular States of Austria, wherevppon he craued time to thinke thereof, and to see the resolution of others, the which peraduenture by reason of the accident of Nicotia, might alter, and that hee would not consult on a matter of so great importance, but maturely and at leisure: By this answere it was easily perceiued, that hee had noe great inclination to intangle himselfe in that warre: the like did the other Princes and Common-wealthes of Germany. For the Emperor in the diet of Spyrehauing propounded to call another assembly to consult particularly on matters belonging  to the league, answer was made, that when his maiesty had beene molested by the Turke they had not suffered him to want any aid or succour, but that then they would not but vppon vrgent necessity fall againe into so dangerous and difficult a warre.
The Senate hauing notice of the Emperors resolution and perceiuing that it was to no purpose any longer to entertaine an Ambassador there, called him home, the like they did to Antonio Tepulo appointed for the same purpose to goe into Poland, who so soone as they vnderstood the Emperours resolution they sent back for when he was halfe way on his iourney being assured that although the Polanders were a warlike nation and enemie to the Turke, yet they  would not take armes vnlesse all Germany did the like. Such end had the negotiation of the league for that yeare.
Now to returne to the fleet, the Venetian Generall came to the hauen of Cania as hath beene said, as well in regard he was to neere his enemies and farre fromThe Venetian (...) resol^ (...) (...) to Fama^. his freinds, as for theseason of the yeare vnfit for marine actions, thinking it folly then to goe to releeue Famagosta, whither for that time hee only resolued to send sixteene hundred footmen in three shippes, with twelue Gallies for their conuoy, vpon intelligence he had receiued how that eight Turkish Gallies lay at ankor not farre from thence, to keep all releefe from it. The Prouidator Venieri made intreaty that for more assurance, ^ee should send thither as many  more shippes and soldiers, seeing that in the defense of that only Citty, the whole hope of the conseruation, or rather recouery of that Kingdome consisted;The Marquis Rangon (...) (...) b^s excuse. which beeing not effected by reason of sundry impediments, Venicri in regard thereof, or rather in regard of the indisposition of his person, remained in Candy.
The Marquis Rangon Palauicin was chosen to command those new supplies, but absolutely refusing to goe thither, said, That hee came to goe vnto Famagosta, if that Baillone were not there, or else vnto Nicotia, but the one beeing lost and Baillone remaining in Famagosta, hee was quit of his promise^ but this excuse seeming vnworthy for so great a soldier, espetiallyLodouieo Martinenga (...) supplies t^ Fa^. at such a time, hee lost his former reputation and shortly after his life in conceipt there of Lodouieo Martinenga Captaine of the men at Armes and then Gouernour of Cania, was elected in his stead Captaine Generall of those supplies, who freely accepted that charge.
This beeing done, the Generall thought it fitte, for the ease of the Island to depart thence, and leauing Qutrini in Candy, with the Galleys of the Island, and three great Galleys, hee sayled with the rest of the fleete to Corsou, beeing by the way by a terrible tempest driuen into the Hauen Vatica. There hee wayted for the Senates commandement to know what hee should doe, eyther to stay there, or else (as himselfe aduised) to passe on farther into Dalmatia, there to t^imme his Galleys, and furnish the fleete, with many things which it wanted.
Colonna preparing for his departure to Italy, was by reason of foule weather enforced to carry a whole moneth in the Hauen of Casopa, from whence tired with long stay, hee set sayle, and in his iourney incountred many misfortunes. For his owne Admirall Galley strucken with lightning, was in an instant burnt,Collonna ^peth two great dangers as (...) returned kemeward. himselfe hardly escaping into the Galley of Francisco Troni, the which not long after beeing by the same tempest driuen on sho are, was there beaten in peeces: but the weather waxing faire, hee arriued at Zara, hauing escaped two wonderfull and notable dangers: from whence hee wrote to the Senate, acquainting it with that late accident; then hee directed his course towards Ancona, and from thence rode poste to Rome, to yeeld an account to the Pope of his iourney.
The Generall Zanne within a while after fell sick, as well by reason of the great trauailes hee had sustained, as with greefe of minde: Wherevpon hee besought Sebastiano Venieri is made Generall in Zanne bis steed. the Senate to giue him leaue to come home to prouide for his health, which beeing granted, Sebastiano Veniere was chosen in his steed, who remained in Candie; hee was speedily commanded to sayle from thence with two Galleys to Corsou to take charge of the fleete, the which by the Senates Decree was to Winter there, and to bee furnished with all necessaries. And the Senate fearing least Venieri should bee gone to Cyprus before hee could receiue his Commission, it determined to create a Prouidator Generall at Sea, who in Venieri his absence, should haue as ample authority as the Generall, and when Venieri should bee in the Army, to hold the chiefe place next him. Augustino Barbarico, a man of singular wisedome and integrity of life, was by a generall consent chosen, on whom it seemed the Common-wealth might safely relye and build vpon.
In this manner, and with such successe, ended the first yeare of this warre, begunne with greater resolution then successe. Now the vnhappy losse of Nicosia, with other euents, cleane contrary to all mens hopes, greatly perplexed the Senate: so as vpon sundry occasions, it was much distracted. For on the one side, the earnest desire to recouer their reputation, and to bee reuenged for iniuries receiued, did prouoke them to renue the warre in fiercer manner then before, and to make new proofe of their fortune and valour: but on the  other side, considering their enemies power, and the vncertainty of other Princes ayde, who were all addicted to their owne particular interests; they were transported with other thoughts, and some-times changed to accept some honorable conditions of agreement, from which they knew by intelligence from their Bayly, that the Turkes would not much starte: and in regarde they still held the Citty of Famagosta, the report which was spred abroad euery where of the league, and of the Confederates great forces, together with the vncertaine successe of that warre, did put them in good hope and comfort, the more easily to obtaine peace and quietnesse, and to reduce their affaires to their former State:
Besides, the great difficulties which hindered the conclusion of the league, the bad presage and ill successe of so vnfortunate and vnluckie a beginning of warre, and the confluence of so many aduersities, did take

away from the mindes of the most generous, all hope of any future successe.
The Senators beeing thus irresolute a very fit occasion was offered them with their honors to negotiate a Peace. For the Bascha Mahomet still desiring to compose this warre in friendly manner, was willing to renew the motion of peace, the successe of that warre in no sort liking him, for if, it should prooue vnfortunate it would encrease the danger of their Empire, if prosperous the authority and reputation of his enemy Mustapha.
Mahomet then beeing moooued by these reasons did oftentimes discourse withThe Bascha Mahomet reuiueth the trea ty of peace. the Venetian Baily concerning the treaty of peace which was broken off, going about to draw from him whether he had any commission to deale therein: at the  last taking occasion through the ordinary complaints made at the great Lords Port by the freinds and kinsfolkes of those Turkes that were imprisoned at Venice, or whose goods had beene seazed there at the beginning of the warre he began to deale with the Baily to vse means to the Senate that the Ottomans subiects so imprisoned might bee set at liberty, and their goods restored to them, saying, That it was against all equity, the Venetian Marchants liuing at liberty and enioying their goods ouer the whole Ottoman Empire, the subiects of the Turke should bee dispoiled of their goods, and kept in miserable bondage and captiuity.
The Bascha in speaking heer of told him that his Lord was vexed thereat, and  that hee did not only wish him to write to Venice, but to send an expresse messenger thither, to treat of that businesse more effectually. Ibraim vsed the like speech to the Baily, wishing him to incite the Senate to send a messenger of purpose to Constantinople, to the end that vnder coulour of this treaty concerning Marchandize, some meanes of a Generall Agreement might bee propounded.
The Baily vppon this assurance, and by the Baschas permission dispatcht his owne steward with one of the Dragomans to carry letters to Venice, which the Bascheas selfe had dictated to him concerning the affaires of Marchants, acquainting them afterwards more particularly what hee had done, and with the  Baschas intention*
Grassinan a French-man departed at the same time from Constantinople, hauing beene Agent for the most Christian King there; who arriuing at Venice, told the Senate that the Bascha had vsed diuers speeches to him concerning the treaty of peace, and that he brought letters from the great Lord and the Bascha to his King to that end, knowing very well that they would not take it in bad part that the most Christian King, as friend to both sides, should mediate such an agreement.
Although the Senators did sum what suspect these propositions, fearing, that they were rather made to delay the preparations for warre, then to lay downe  Armes, and enter into some honorable accord; Neuer-the lesse the sundry accidents of those times did much perswade to harken to those Treaties, cheefly for that at the conclusion of the league a new difficulty arose about the time when it should beginne. For the Spaniards, would haue let slippe all that cheefe part of the Summer, and not haue had it to bee mentioned in the capitulations therein contained, and that it should not bee in force till the yeareThe Venetians great doubts and perplexities. following.
The Venetians on the contrary fearing that they should not bee able to repulse the first attempts of that mighty Army, which the Turkes were said to haue prepared, and which was ready to march, had very earnestly written to the Pope, that hee by his authority would remooue that difficulty, giuing him to vnderstandThe Venetians request to the Pope. how that by his Councell they had embraced warre, dismissed the Chiaus from Venice, and contemned all other means of agreement propounded

oftentimes by their Bayly: that they had likewise by his aduise and councell, so long wayted for the Spanish Galleys, as in the end, their ayde was more in name then in effect: and yet they had euer shewed them-selues ready to conclude a league sutable to his intention, and to the present need of all Christendome. But all these increaties and pursutes did not produce such effects as the time required: For the Pope beeing of him-selfe well disposed, and wholy inclining to the generall good, knowing that the Venetians were agreeable to his will, confessed that their request was iust and honest, exhorted them to continue stedfast, and not to giue place to these first accidents of warre. And yet, hi^ Holynesse beeing ouer-credulous, and suffering himselfe to bee carryed  away by those, who for their owne particular interest fauoured the cause of the Spaniards, was cyther remisse, or did not constantly with his authority withstand such impediments, as were perceiued eyther to weaken the league, or delay the conclusion thereof.
The Venetians were likewise much greeued to see the Pope at that time entangledThe Emperor will not allow of the Popes new (...) giuen to the Duke of Florence. in other affaires: for the Emperors Ambassadors protested, that vnlesse hee did reuoke and disanull the new title which hee had bestowed on the Duke of Florence, their Maister should bee enforced to maintaine his owne dignity, with that of the Empire, by all meanes possible: The Pope though by Nature timerous, would not for all that retract that which hee knew hee might  doe, and was well done, but made preparation by temporall armes to defend his owne authoritie, and that of the Sea Apostolick: Therefore hee speedily leuyed forces, prouided armes, money, and all other necessaries for warre, causing Proclamation to bee made in all places vnder the Churches iurisdiction (to the particular hurt of the Venetians) that it should not bee lawfull for any, without exception, to leuy Souldiers forth of that State; and therevpon hee imprisoned Pompeo de Castello, and Giouan Aldobrandino, who beeing Pentioners to the Venetians, had in their name enrolled footmen in the Churches territories, whereby all men thought that Italy would fall into a dangerous warre. This made the Senate resolue to send the Secretary Formenti to Rome, to appease  this new stirre: but his departure was delayed, and Commission sent to their Ambassadors there, to make the same request to the Pope, and to put him in minde of the miseries of the time, the greatnesse of the present dangers which threatned Christendome, together with the remedy (if there were any) alone residing in him. Wherevnto though the Pope gaue a willing care, hee neuerthelesse excused himselfe by reason of his owne necessity, and did still pursue his priuate deseignes, leauing the euents of the common warre very doubtfull.
These troubles caused the Venetians to welcome the arriuall of these men from Constantinople, and likewise vppon so faire an occasion carefully to The Venetians resolue to ^arken to peace. thinke on the treaty of peace, because they dayly saw their hopes more and more to decline, and the cause to cease for which they had first neglected it. They determined then to hearken to the treaty of peace, and so much the more willingly as it was offered from the Turkes: neuerthelesse, because they would not seeme too greedy of it, nor inuite the Turkes thereby to infringe it vpponThe Articles of peace propounded by the Venetians. euery trifle, without motioning peace at that time, they gaue Commission to Giacomo Ragasson, a man well experienced in such businesses, to goe to Constantinople, to treate of the enlargement of prisoners, and restitution of Marchants goods taken on eyther side: and besides, the Councell of Tenne gaue him another secret Commission to giue to the Bayly, which in effect was, that if  afterwards the Turkes did motion peace, hee likewise should seeme to desire it, and enter into farther discourse thereof, if he should perceiue that it might take effect on reasonable and honorable conditions for the Common-wealth, namely

of recouering the Realme of Cyprus, in paying some great tribute to the Turke for it, or else that they might still keepe the Cirty of Famagosta, or by quitting it to the great Lord, to haue some other State else-where in counter-change, and also for the restoring of their ancient confines of Albania and Dalmatia. They did impart as much to Ragasson, and gaue him power to speake thereof, if the Turke, who had first craued to haue one sent thither of purpose (for the Bayly was imprisoned) if for any other respects they should refuse to treate with him.
Ragasson his departure from Veniee to Constantinople, was presently diuulged in the Courts of Princes, but they assured them (as indeed it was so) that  they had sent him for the dispatch of businesse belonging to particular marchants, without any other commission at all: yet euery man suspected that hee had some other secret Commission to treate of peace, the which they were the rather induced to beleeue, because that the Venetians had occasion thereby to seeke to assure their affaires, hauing had but an vnfortunate beginning in their warre, perceiuing their hopes dayly to vanish.
The Pope hauing a share in this suspition, and beginning to shake off his feareThe Pope and Spaniards seeke to the Venetians to conclude the league. of the Emperors armes, did hotly reuiue the Treaty of the League, beeing therevnto prouoked by the Spaniards, and determined to send Marc-Antonio Colonna to Venice, who beeing wise and pollitick, and very gratious with the Venetians, might with his speech interrupt the practises of peace, and by granting them somewhat, which had beene denied them before, to induce them to consent to the speedy conclusion of the league.
Colonna beeing come to Venice, and often-times brought into the Senate, did vse all good meanes and offers, to perswade them to embrace the league, labouring to let them see how profitable it was for the Common-wealth, and how that his desire to serue at once the Pope his naturall Prince, the Catholick King, vnto whome hee had vowed and dedicated his seruice, and them selues likewise, vnto whom, in respect of the trust they had reposed in him, hee wasColonnas remonstrance to the Venetian Seuate. no lesse bound then to any other whatsoeuer, did make him more earnest in that businesse, beeing not able to bridle his loue, nor conceale that which  reason commanded him to vtter, and hauing by a long Oration particularly acquainted them with the preparations of the League, hee did earnestly entreate them to embrace it.
Colonnas authority and cloquence was of force to haue perswaded the greatest part of the Senate to this confederacie, but the importance of the businesse, the experience of the former yeares successe, the quality of the generall propositions, and they vncertaine, and the hope that the Treaty of peace might haue more prosperous successe, held the Senators in suspence: wherevppon,The Senates answer to Colonna. by a Decree of Senate, Colonna was answered in generall termes, how  that their actions might testifie their disposition towards the league.
At the last, time pressing them to make a speedy resolution, and Colonna hauing receiued new instructions from Rome, whereby all matters were granted them, concerning their forces, time when to employ them, and likewise for the increase of the number of their Galleys for the first yeare; the Pope did besides particularly promise to permit them for fiue yeares space to leuy three tenths vpon the Clergie of their State: these things beeing considered by the Senate on the one side, and the practises of peace on the other, by the commissions giuen to the Bayly and Ragasson, made the Senators very doubtfull, Peace and Warre beeing at their owne choyce and liking: wherevpon the Senators  were of contrary opinions concerning the continuation eyther of the one or other, not growing to any certaine resolution. Especially two of the most principall and eminent in the gouernment of the Republique, dissented farre

in opinion; the first (which was Paulo Tepulo, a man very famous, and muchT^pulos opinion (...) to warre. practised in the gouernment o^ the Common-wealth,) said, That without relying on Mahomets goodly propositions, which rather tended to deceiue and ^ull them a sleepe, then benefit them, they ought without longer delay, to embrace the league, in regarde the conclusion there of was certaine, and the euentsBa^oario is of a contrary opinion. of the Treatie of Peace most vncertaine. Andrea Badoario, a man of equall authority, was of a contrary opinion, saying, That seeing they had motioned peace, and had to those ends giuen ample Commissions and instructions, they could doe no lesse then expect an answer, and not make such hast, or rather precipitate themselues into the conclusion cleane contrary. Both of them were attentiuely heard, and their reasons did in such sort mooue the Senators, as they  still continued irresolute. But at last the most part inclining to the conclusion of the league, the better to raze out that note of Infamy, wherewith the formerVVarre is resolued at Veniee. vnhappy euents of warre had blotted them, they all on a suddaine altered their opinions, and resolued to send ample power and authoritie to their Ambassadors at Rome, in their name to conclude the league, and presently gaue Colonna a pleasing answer, who suddainly returned to Rome, where the Pope hauing notice of their resolution, called the Ambassadors of the Catholick King and VenetiansThe league against the Turke concluded. into the Consistory, where causing the Datary to read the Articles, agreed vpon betwixt them, hee was the first that swore (laying his hand vppon his brest) strictly to obserue them: The Cardinall Pacheco likewise swore in the behalfe of  the Catholick King (Granuell beeing gone to Naples) the Ambassador of the same King did the like, and those of the Venetian Common-wealth in their Princes name swore on the Euangelists.
Then the Pope commanded, that the next day after diuine seruice was sollemnly celebrated, and the Procession ended in Saint Peters Church, it should bee published, not withstanding that the Venetian Ambassadors were of opinion to deferre the publication thereof, till the Emperor were acquainted therewith, that his intention mightbeeknowne.
The particuler Articles of the league were these: Betwixt Pope Pius Quintus,The Articles of the league. prom sing for the Sea Apostolick and his successors, with the consent of the whole Colledge of Cardinalls, Philip the Catholick King, and the Duke and Senate of Venice, aleague and perpetuall confederacie hath beene made, to abate and ouer-throw the Turkes power, who of late haue with a mighty Armie, enuaded the Realme of Cyprus, a countrey very commodious for the conquest of the Holy land. That the Confederates forces shall consist of two hundred light Galleys, one hundred ships of warre, fifty thousand footmen, Italians, Spaniards and Almaines, foure thousand fiue hundred horse, with Artillery and Munition proportionable to such forces: all which shall bee imployed, as well for defence of the Confederates states, as to assaile the enemies, and particularly  for the enterprises of Argier, Tunis, and Tripoli: That all these forces shall bee vnited (in the moneth of May next ensuing, or at the beginning of Aprill) at Ottranto, to passe into the Leuant against the enemies, as time, and the councell of Captaines shall thinke fit. That these forces neuerthelesse may bee changed, by increasing or diminishing the prouisions for warre, as necessity and the quality of the enterprise shall require: wherevpon a yeerely meeting shall bee at Rome in Autumne, there to consult what is best to bee done. And if it shall there bee concluded, not to attempt any thing that yeare in common, yet it might bee lawfull for euery of the confederates to execute their particular enterprises, and especially for the King of Spaine, to enterprise those of Argier, Tunis, and Tripoli, in which, so that there bee no mighty Turkish Army abroad, the Venetians shall bee bound to ayde the King with fifty Galleys for that purpose.
That the King likewise shall bee bound to ayde the Venetians, whensoeuer they

will enterprize any thing in their Gulph against the common enemy, on this condition neuerthelesse, if he which shall craue this aide, haue far greater forces ready. That all the Confederates shall bee reciprocally obliged to defend the States of any one of them whom the Turkes shall enuade, and in particular the Citties and other places belonging to the Church.
That for the expence of warre, the Catholick King shall pay the one halfe; and the other moyery beeing deuided into three parts, the Venetians shall pay two, and the Pope the third: they shall bee bound to giue the Pope twelue Galleys ready rig'd, and munitioned, which his Holynesse shall man for the seruice of the league. That generally each of the Confederates shall bee bound to contribute  for the common necessity, whatsoeuer hee shall aboundantly haue, and others want, and afterwards shall haue it allowed in their accounts. That the store-houses for Corne shall bee euery where open for the common good, and that graine may bee taken forth of commodious places, so that hee from whom it is taken, haue first made his owne prouision. That at Councels and consultations the Commanders of the three Confederate Princes shall bee present, and what the most of them resolue on, shall bee concluded: Neuerthelesse, the execution of matters determined, shall remaine to the Generall of the Army (whoDon ^ohn de Austria Generall of the Army. was presently named) to wit, Don Iohn de Austria, and in his absence Marc-Antonio Colonna with the same authority, though at the same time, hee retaine the  title and ranke of the Churches Generall. A place was reserued for Maximilian of Austria the elect Emperor, the most Christian King, and the King of Portugall, to enter into this confederacie, when they should thinke it fitte, and to all other Christian Princes likewise, that had a desire to enter into it. There was no particular mention made of places which should bee conquered, for that was referred to bee disposed off in the same manner, as in the league of the yeare 1537. wherein was expresly mentioned, If any strife should arise betwixt the Confederates, the Pope as Vmpier and Iudge should decide it, without any breaking off, or preiudice to the confederacie, or stoppe to the execution of matters by it established.
These Articles (as hath beene said) beeing sworne to and signed by the Ambassadors, were within foure moneths after, as the same Princes had decreed, read, and ratified a new. But because the Confederates were not tyed to obserue allSome particular treaties. that is aboue mentioned, till the yeare following, it was agreed vpon in another writing a part, wherein the aboue mentioned matters were not particularly specified, that the same yeare in the moneth of May, foure score Galleys, and twenty ships of warre, should meete at Ottranto to ioyne with the Venetian fleete, not comprehending in that number those of the Pope, Duke of Sauoy, and Knights of Malra.
During these treaties of peace and league, the Venetians with a generall consent, made speedy prouisions for warre: they had not forgotten the affaires of Cyprus, and especially the conseruation of Famagosta, on which depended theSupplie sent to Famagosta. hope of all fortunate successe. Marc. Antonio Quirini beeing chosen for this purpose, departed from Candy with foure ships to carry supplies thither, for whose conuoy twelue galleys were appointed. Hee beeing come neere to Famagosta, caused his ships to saile some-what before in the enemies view which were in Constantia, himselfe keeping toward the land: So soone as the enemies descryed these shippes, they sent foorth seauen Galleys to inuest them, which beeing perceiued by Quirini, hee suddainly aduanced with his Galleys, to get betwixt them and home.
But the Turkes, hauing discouered the Venetians galleis, and altering their purpose Flight of the enemies Galleys. from offending others to saue themselues, did speedily make to the shoare from whence they came, so that they had time by help of those of the campe, who in great troops came to their aid, to escape to land, and forsaking their galleis, some

of them were sunke by Quirinis ordnance, who perceiuing some signes of a future tempest gaue speedy commandement that the ships should bee ^owed into the Hauen, that he might safely land his supplies consisting of sixteene hundred foot, with great store of munition and victuals, which did much incourage those of the city, who infinitely commended his care and dilligence; and whilest hee remayned there, hee tooke a ship of the enemies and some other smaller vessels ladenThe Venetians (...) the (...) at Gambella. with munitions and victuals which were going to the Turkish army, and hauing intelligence that the Turkes had builded certaine fortes at the Rocke of Gambella, he sailed thither with his Gallies, and on a sodaine razed them.
These things beeing fortunately performed, Quirini supposing his longer stay there to bee to small purpose did on the sixteenth day of February 1571. arriue  with his Gallies in Candy. The Senate beeing very carefull to prouide for Famagosta,More aide sent to Famagosta. sent two other ships thither with eight hundred footmen and great store of munition, vnder the command of Honoreo Scoto, with letters to the inhabitants full of hearty affection, highly commending their constant loyalty, intreating them still to persist in their owne defence and by no meanes to rely vpon the word or promise of those Barbarous infidels: The like letters in effect were written to Baillone, wherein his valour was much commended, as worthy of his Ancestors, and the loue which himselfe and predecessors had euer borne to the Common-wealth, promising highly to recompence him.
When these last supplies arriued at Famagosta, they made vp the whole number The number of soldiers in Famogosta. of foure thousand Italian footmen, eight hundred of the Islanders which are termed Legionaries, and three thousand Citizens and country people, with two hundred Albaneses.
At the same time the rebellion of the Albaneses against the Turkes did stil continue,The (...) re^bel against the (...). diuers of the countries of Ducagina, Pedana, Ematia and Sadrina, comming dayly to make sundry offers to the Agents of the Common-wealth, wherevpon, the Prouidator Celsi was commanded to saile to Catharra with tenne Gallies, but Celsi falling sicke by the way, Nicolo Suriano, who was Lieutenant of the Gulphe, was commanded to take that charge vpon him, and with foure Gallies to enter into  the Riuer Boyan to backe the rebellion of that people, and carefully to obserue whether he could with good successe make any attempt vpon Durazzo, Scatar, or Alexia which the chiefe of the Albaneses had propounded. Suriano hauing continued certaine daies in those confines, perceiued very well that the deeds were not answerable to their words, and that it was in vaine to make any attempt vpon the enemies territories without suffitient forces for that purpose: the Senate neuerthelesse beeing vnwilling to omit any thing which it knew might auaile the Common wealth, chose Giacomo Malatesta for Gouernor Generall in Albania, who comming to Catharra was desirous to make incursions into the enemies country, where hauing taken a great booty, and heedlesly returning  homewards through a valley, hee was assailed by the enemies, and beeing wounded in the thigh, and beaten from his horse was taken prisoner and carried to Rissana.
In regard of the great expences which the Venetians were to furnish, which would monthly amount to three hundred thousand Ducats, the Senate soughtPrince Mocenigo his remonstrance to the great counc^ll. by all meanes to raise money; wherevpon it againe encreased the number of the Procurators of Saint Marke, they likewise sold the pastures and voide grounds, and the pawnes and pledges of La Zecca were opened vpon sundry conditions. Prince Moceniga in that and all other matters shewed himselfe very carefull and vigilant to make speedy provisions of all necessaries; and being present on a time  in the great councell, whither all Gentlemen that haue voyces in the creation of Magistrates doe vsually come, he made a briefe but important speech, exhorting all of them to bee willing to releeue their deerest country in that time of need and warre, either with money, aduise, or any other thing which it might want,

euery man according to his power and meanes, saying that they could neuer doe it in a time more conuenient, and thereby should not onely preserue their wealth, but their honor, children and liues, all which would be exposed to great danger i^ the insolent enemy should prooue victorious.
His words being pronounced with much earnestnesse did greatly mooue those of the assembly, and encouraged them boldly to continue that warre, with hope of better successe, wherevpon, whatsoeuer was requisite for the furnishing of the Nauy, or for prouision of victuals, and money, which is the strongest sinew of warre, was presently determined and concluded.
Whilest the Venetians were thus busied in their preparations, the Turkes on  the other side raised new forces to pursue the course of their victory. Selim had receiued such content for the taking of Nicotia, the newes whereof was brought to him by Mustaphas sonne, together with many ri^ch presents, as hee was desirous all other things laied aside to intend onely the ending of that enterprize, notwithstanding the great report which was made of the Christian fleet, the which after the conquest of Cyprus he promised to him selfe to defeate, and then presently to become Lord of all the Islands belonging to the Venetians, most commodious (as he said) to open a passage to the city of Rome, chiefe of the Romaine Empire and belonging to him as to the greatest Emperor, and of a long time promised by their Prophets to the Ottoman family.
Selim ruminating on these vaine and idle thoughts commanded his fleete, that so soone as Cyprus should be furnished with suffi^ient supplies, then to fight with that of the Christians, and afterwards pursue other enterprises as occasion should be offered. And according to his owne proiects hee sent twenty Gallies from Constantinople vnder the command of Caiacelebey, who by the way meeting with the Gallies of Chios and Rhodes, sailed altogether towards Cyprus, to keepe out all releefe from Famagosta. After his departure from Constantinople thirty other Gallies came to him, and beeing come to Finica to leauy souldiers, he went from thence into Cypras, where making some aboade, hee sent his Gallies in the meane time to Tripoli, to take in new supplies and munitions: then  his Nauy being furnished with all necessaries he left Cyprus, leauing Ar^mat there with twenty Gallies, tenne Mohannes or flat bottomed boates to transport horse, fiue ships, with many other vessels for the guard of the Island, himselfe taking foure and fitry Gallies with him, and went to meet Portau, ne^ly made a Basha in Pialis stead, who beeing come from Constantinople, and by the way ioyning the Gallies of Naples in Romagnia and Miteline with his forces, was with an hundred Gallies at ^astel rosso, the Rendezuous of the whole fleet, whither within a while after Vluzz^li came from Argiers with twenty of his owne Gallies, and diuers other vessels belonging to Pirates, and not long after, Hassan sonne to Barbarossa came thither likewise with twenty Gallies.
The whole Turkish fleet beeing in this sort vnited, to the number of two hundredThe number of the Turkish fl^et. and fifty saile, went directly to the Isle of Candy and entred into the Hauen of Suda, and sayling afterwards towards Cania, it landed great troupes of souldiers neere to the city, who presently falling to booty, did put al to fire and sword. Against these the Prouidator of Cania sent great numbers of souldiers of the citties Garrison with diuers of Quirtni's Gallies which were then in the Hauen, who enforced the enemies to retire, and our men beeing presently backt by three hundredThe Turkes are put to ^outin Candy. Corsicans conducted by Colonel Iustinian, the enemies were put to rout and with great slaughter beaten to their Gallies, not daring to assault the castle. The enemies fleet departing from Candy, where it had done infinite harme, sailed  to Ceriga, where it did the like, and from thence went to Iunca, where hauingThe Turkes waste the Islands of Zant and Cephalonia. trimmed their Gallies, they made incursions into the Isles of Zant and Cephalonia, and the inhabitants being retired into the fortes, all the villages and country houses were burned, and the whole country wasted.
The Turke beeing not satisfied with setting forth a fleet, had likewise raised a land army, vnder the command of Achmat Basha, determining to enuade the Venetians both by sea and land, in regard the treaty of peace was wholly broken off, and no hope of agreement left. For so soone as Ragasson came to Constantinople, the Turkes hoping by accord to obtaine that which they could hardly get by armes, he was together with the Baily brought before Mahomet the Visier Basha, who beganne highly to extoll the power of the Ottoman Empire, and to relate the great Lords deseignes against the States of the Venetian Common-wealth, who resolued to enuade them by sea and land; That Selims intent was to propound peace on very hard conditions, neuerthelesse hee would find Bash is Mah^mets proposition to the Venetian Bayly. meanes to moderate that great seuerity, prouided likewise that they would consent to what hee should tell them, which in effect was, that the Baily should perswade the Senate freely to surrender to Zelim the entire possession of Cyprus, as a State iustly belonging to the Ottoman Empire.
The Baily perceiuing thereby that the treaty of peace could not bee continued to the honour of the Common-wealth, aduised Ragasson to leaue Constantinople (which hee did) the other businesse concerning merchants remayning likewise imperfect, which once was concluded, but presently reuoked, by reason of some false reportes brought from Syria and Alexandria, so that Ragassons iourney  was altogether vaine.
The end of the ninth Booke of the sixth Decade.




The Contents of the tenth Booke of the  sixth Decade.
THE Spaniards absolutely tell the Pope and Venetians that they will not ioyne their forces till Don Iohns arriuall. The great progression of the Turkish fleet. The  league is concluded at Rome and published at Venice. The Turkes take Dulcigna and Antiuary. The Venetians great preparations so soone as they heard that the Turkes were come into their Gulphe. The enemies come before Mandracchia, with their base retreat. The Pope soliciteth Christian Princes to enter into the league. The arriuall of Don Iohn and the Spanish forces. The Turkish army before Famagosta. Marc-Antonio Bragadino Gouernor of Famagosta. The enemies at one time batter the city in fiue seuerall places. The beseeged make a counter-battery. The Turkes giue many fierce assaults to the city. The cittizens by reason of extre^me want are enforced to yeeld vpon composition. Mustapha his perfidious cruelty; His impiety against the dead. The vnion of the Christian fleete, with the number of the vessels. The Christian fleet resolueth to fight with the Turkes. The famous battaile of Lepanto, where the Turkish fleet is defeated and put to rout. The number of the dead on both sides, with the number of the enemies vessels that were taken. The great ioy at Venice for newes of the victory. Don Iohn retireth to Messina. The Venetians take the fort of Marguerites. The Christians enterprize vpon Saint Maur is bootles. And lastly MarcAntonio Colonna his magnificent entry at Rome.

The tenth Booke of the sixth Decade of the History of Uenice.
THE Confederates nauall army which should haue met at Ottranto in May, there to haue ioyned altogether, came not thither at the latter end of Iune, neither was there any tidings of it. The conclusion of the league hanging in suspence, and the Venetians fearing that they should not bee strong enough of themselues, to incounter and repulse the enemies fleete, which was reported to bee farre greater then those of the former yeere, determined The Venetians expect the ^onfederates * fleets. to set forth threescore Gallies of the best in all the fleet at Candy, to employ them for the releefe of Cyprus, or other places as need should bee, to hinder the enemies nauigation vpon those seas, and to cut off the rereward of the Turkish Gallies which should lagge behind the fleet, and in a word to take hold on all occasions which time should offer. Such was the State of the Venetian fleet for that time, the greatest part whereof remayning at Corfou, did daily expect the arriuall of the Spanish Armada.
The Pope and Venetians made earnest request that the Gallies of Naples and Sicily which were ready might goe to Ottranto, but the Spaniards would not  heare of it, resoluing to tarry for Don Iohns arriuall. The Turkes on the other side hauing intelligence that the forces of the Christian Princes were not yet vnited, departing from Candy did boldly saile forwards, the great Lord hauing commanded them to seeke out the Christian fleete and fight with it, and in the meane time to waste all places by the way belonging to the Venetian State. The Generall Venieri hauing intelligence of the enemies course and deseignes,VVhat (...) the Generall Uenieri to sa^l to Messina. and knowing that nothing could hinder them from passing forward, resolued to saile with the fleet to Messina, fearing (as it was very likely) that if the enemies fleet should come neerer to Corfou, his owne Gallies would bee exposed to sundry perils and and dangers, and if the Turkes should come and lie betwixt  the Fana and the Merlieres, hee likewise feared that they would hinder the vniting of the Confederates forces.The league is published at Venice.
Whilest these determinations were made abroad the league on the second day of Iuly was with great solemnity and concourse of people published at Venice, after the celebration of Masse in Saint Markes Church by Don Guzman de Silua Ambassador for the Catholike King, in the presence of the Duke, Senate, Princes Ambassadors, and great numbers of Prelats, who together with the whole Clergy going afterwards through the city in Precession, came into the great Market-place which was ritchly hung with tapistry and other costly ornaments, whither so soone as the Prince came to the vsuall place where proclamations are  made to the people, the league was by an Herald published with great silence, which being done, the ordnance were shot off, drummes beaten, and trumpets sounded to the great ioy and content of all the people.
The league being in this sort published, they hastened the preparations already begunne, and solicited other Princes to enter into it, that they might the better encrease their forces. Wherevpon the Pope determined for that purpose to send his Nephew the Cardinall Alexandrine into Portugall, supposingThe Pope (...) the King of Portugall to enter into the leagu. that the forces and territories of that King would bee fit to affoord aide and reputation to the league, hee beeing Lord of many armed vessels, and his countries of the Indies confying vpon the Turkish Empire: in respect whereof the Senate likewise resolued that Antonio Tepulo then Ambassadour in Spaine should to the same end goe to the King of Portugall to bee there in the name of the Common-wealth at such time as the Popes Legat should treat of that  businesse.
The Venetians, the league beeing thus concluded, were so bent to warre, vpon hope to encrease their forces by the assistance of other Princes, as they would not harken to any discourse of peace* for the most Christian King hauing dispatched the Bishop of Aix to Constantinople, chiefly to negociate some accord, and hee comming to Venice acquainted them with the zeale and affection of his King towards the good and proffit of the Common-wealth, togither with his Commission to procure peace betwixt the Turkes and them; The Senate thanked him, and without giuing farther eare to his propositions called in theThe Uenetia^s will not heare o^ peace. Confederates Ambassadours that they might heare his message; this they did  to take away all iealouzy and suspition, and to animate them to warlike preparations like themselues.
The Turkish fleet in the meane time came still forward into the Venetian Gulphe, none daring to oppose it: on the other side the Sangiacs of Scopo, Durazzo and Ducagina, taking fiue thousand men, tenne cannons and many other lesse peeces with them, came neere to Dulcigna, hauing enforced the countryThe Turkes come before Dulcigna. people to quit the streight passages which they guarded, wherevpon the inhabitants resolued to abandon the city and to retire to Catharra: but Nicolo Suriana, and Sciarra Martinenga comming with newforces, did confirme and encourage them to defend their city, although it were not strong either by art  or nature.
The enemy beeing encamped before it, after that hee had made a battery and a reasonable breach, the Ianissaries prepared for the assault, wherevpon Martinenga beeing out of all hope to hold out long without sresh supplies did speedily send for the French men which hee had brought thither, with whom for a time they valliantly defended it: but the enemies fleer approaching, and Suriana in that respect beeing with his Gallies enforced for to quit those seas, all the inhabitants and souldiers beeing affrighted, and wholly despayring to hold the towne any longer, craued a parley, the battery hau^ng continued for the space of twelue daies, and the accord was made with the Basha Dulc^gna yeeldeth to the Turkes in composition, which is badly obserued. to depart with their liues and goods, with promise to giue them foure ships, to transport those to Ragusa that were willing to depart, and good entertainment to such as would still remaine there, and that the souldiers might depart with their armes and ensignes.
The city was deliuered to the Turkes, though that the conditions were afterwardes badlie obserued, because that since then, some contention either true or feigned arising therevpon betwixt Pertau and Achmat Bashas who were come to that seege, they tooke occasion to deale cruelly with those poore wretches, who relying on their word had submitted to them, for they caused all the inhabitants in a manner to bee imprisoned, and did put diuers valliant  Albanese souldiers to the sword, that were come thither to defend the city: onely they kept their word with the Gouernor, Martinenga, and some few other of the chiefest, who were safely conducted to Rag^sa.
Dulcigna beeing taken, the enemies fleete sailed towards Antiuari, where the inhabitants were much daunted with their neighbours misfortune, though they feared not the fleete, the Citty beeing foure miles from sea. The Gouernor hauing intelligence of the enemies approach, did without waiting for their comming, send the Citties keyes to the Bascha by some of the p^incipall townesmen, in regarde whereof hee was afterwards by the Senate condemned to perpetuall banishment.
In the meane time, newes beeing brought to Venice, how that the enemies with a mighty fleete were come into their Gulphe, the whole Citty was much terrified, especially when it vnderstood, how that in all places where they came, they left terrible scarres behinde them, the Venetians presently began to fortifie all passages, and especially the Porte of Saint Nicholas on the shoare, opposite to which is a very strong Castle builded, and well stored with ordnance, the defence where of was committed to Lodouico Grimani, with certaine foote companies, and furnished with expert Gunners: they afterwards gaue Vincento Mor^sin, one of the cheefe Senators charge of all the Fortifications along the shore, with sixe other Gentlemen of the order of Senators to assist him, namely Daniele venieri, Marco Iustiniano, Ieronimo Contareni, Francesco Mith^ele, Lorenzo Souranze, and Andrea Bernardo.
Those men caused a mighty Iron chaine to bee drawne from the aforesaid  Castle to the opposite shore, the which embarred the whole Channell, and behinde it they placed three great Galleys, and a certaine number of light ones, which were well stored with Ordnance. All other passages were likewise assured: they did more-ouer place sundry corps du Guard in diuerse places of the citty, and in a word omitted nothing which was necessary for the preseruation and defence thereof.
But it was knowne within a while after, that all these speedie preparations were altogether vnnecessary: For Vluzzali, Admirall of that fleete, afterThe enemies fleet (...) forth of the Gulph of Vinice. that hee had wasted, (as hath beene sayd) the Isles of Lisena, and Cursoles, went back againe to ioyne with the Basha, who with the residue of the fleete, lay at the mouth of the Channell of Catharra, where making some aboade, hee summoned the Castle to yeeld, and yet made none attempt vppon it; because peraduenture hee was vnwilling to performe any great enterprise, or else feared the vnion of the Christian fleetes.
Wherevpon hee departed thence, and sailed to la Valona, where hauing reenforced his Armie with diuerse troopes, brought to him by the Sangiack of Bossina, and sent foorth certaine Galleys, truely to discouer the estate of the Confederate nauall Armie, hee bent his course towards Corfou; and comming to Paxu, hee sent first to view Mandracchia, and the Galleys going vnto Butintro, the Captaines coasted vppe and downe the I^land, and heedfully  obseruing the sytuation thereof, could not agree vppon that which they would haue done.
In the meane time, diuerse souldiers which were in the Fusts going on shore to get pillage, fell into an Ambuscado of certaine troopes of horseThe Christians surprize some of the enemies by ambuscad^. belonging to the ga^rison of the Citty vnder the commmand of Captaine George Mormori, by whom all the enemies were eyther ^laine or taken, and among others Cassan, surnamed Baffa, a Renegado of Candy, a man very famous, not so much for his experience in marine matters, as for his notatable crue^ty.
In the end, the whole fleete drew neere to the Island, and yet as they passed  along many Cannon shot were bestowed among them, which did no great harme thorow the fault and small experience of the Gunners. And comming to Potama, great numbers of soldiers were landed, who assaulted the towne, our men who

had seazed on the passages of the mountaines beeing to weake to hinder their passage, Phillippo Rancone with foure hundred footmen garded the Towne, part of his forces were Greekes and the rest Italians, who perceiuing the enemies great numbers, beganne to retire towards the plaine, where finding other supplies sentThe Turkes come before (...). from the Castle, he made a stand, and caused the Turkes that followed him to doe the like:
But the day following, greater numbers beeing landed, together with sixe hundred horse which they had taken in at Butrinto, they gaue an assault to the Castle Saint Angelo, and finding it to be a farre difficulter enterprize then they had immagined, gaue it ouer: but being desirous before their departure to leaue some token of their barbarous cruelty behind them, they burnt many Country  houses, and diuers Churches, ruining the Villages and Vineyards neere to the Citty, and the third day after they departed from the Island.
The Venetians did with great greese endure all these miseries and calamities, still trusting to the aid of the league, and yet they receiued not thereby the profit and commodity which they had hoped for, for which to their great losse they had altered their former deseignes, and in a manner engaged their forces: because that a decree beeing made that the Gallies of Candy should saile towards Messina, there to ioyne with those Confederates, they were doubtfull of the successe of Famagosta, hauing receiued no newes whether it had been releeued  or not: and for that on the other side their Generall, by waiting for Don Iohns arriuall, was an idle Spectator of all those wronges and outrages which the enemies had done vnto them and yet durst not set fore-word to take reuenge.
Therefore they resolued to shew vnto the Pope, how that by his meanes theyThe Venetians complaints to the Pope. had entred into that warre, and had refused all meanes of Agreement, therein to obey the authority of the Sea Apostolick, and not to seeme likewise to distrust other Christian Princes, that they for their partes had notwithstanding all expences and dangers prouided what soeuer was necessary for the vnion; and, they did not see that the Confederates effects were correspondent to their diligence and industry: so as that league which had beene made for the honour and glory  of Christendome, did more dishonour them, and in particular did great harme to their Common-wealth, by reason of the losse of Famagosta, which vndoubtedly would shortly ensue, except it were speedily releeued.
These complaints beeing propounded to the Pope who found them very iust and reasonable, he speedily dispatcht a Post to Don Iohn, writing by him to his Nephew the Cardinall Alexandrine, who was in Spayne, earnestly to (...) that businesse according to his former instructions.
The Legat Alexandrine was honorably entertained by the Catholick King, who in smooth termes accquainted them with his ernest desire therein to satisfie the Pope, hauing determined for that purpose, that Don Iohn with the SpanishThe King of Spains answer to the ^ardinall Alexandrine. Gallies should goe and spend the winter in Sicily, thereby to bee readier to execute that which should bee concluded at Rome. And although hee had often by letters in former time exhorted the Emperor to enter into that vnion, hee would expressly neuer the lesse send Don Pedro Fassardo to him, to entreat him from him to condiscend therevnto
Hee beeing come to the Emperors Court found him very doubtfull: for heeThe Emperor is doubtfull. receiued many messages and letters from the Bascha of Buda who exhorted him to obserue the peace, promising him faire and Kingly neighborhood and freindship: on the other side hee had Intelligence of the Turkes warlike preparations, who remaining till then at Scopia held all men in suspence to what place hee determined to bend his course: in the end hee resolued to send the accustomed tribute to Constantinople, beeing assured that it could in no sort hinder the

league, nor keepe him-selfe from entring into it, when time should serue, whereasThe Emperors resolution. on the contrary, by delaying it any longer he might receiue some great losse; because that Selim doubting his loue and good meaning, might assaile him on a sodaine.
These things did greatly trouble the Venetians, who knew very wel that peace with the Turkes, in the warlike and mighty Northerne Prouinces, would greatlie preiudice the league, and precipitate the state of the Common-wealth into greater daunger: in regard whereof the Pope and the Catholike Kings Agents, propounded to the Emperor, that they would giue him out of the Confederate forces, twenty thousand foote, and foure thousand horse, to enuade the enemies  on that side, and that the other thirty thousand which remayned (according to the treaty of the league) would suffize for the execution of their Sea actions.
The Emperors Ambassador resident at Rome, had oftentimes assured them, that the Emperor wanted no good will to warre on the Turke, but meanes; andThe leagues offer to the Emperor. therefore if the Confederate Princes would promise him aide, he would without all doubt enter into the league; and that all Germany being at last prouoked by necessity and shame, would ioyne in that warre and by their example, Poland and Muscouy would doe the like.
Neuer-the-lesse, all these offers were vaine and to no purpose, because that  the Emperor making many excuses, continued his former resolution to send the tribute to Constantinople. In the meane time the Gallies of the Pope, Venetians, Florentines and Malteses met at Messina, where with great earnestnesse they waited for the arriuall of Don Iohn, who departing from Cathalognia with seauen and twenty Gallies and fiue thousand Spanish foote-men, did at last arriue on the last day of Iuly at Genoa, where making short stay, leauing Doria with twelue Gallies, to make prouisions for the fleete, him-selfe went to Naples, where hee was entertayned with great magnificence, and receiued the standard of Generall for the league which the Pope sent him: and within a while after leauing thirty Gallies to conuoy the shippes, hee went with the  residew of the fleet to Messina, where he knew that the Generalls of the Pope and Venetians expected him.The arriuall of Don Iohn with the Spanish forces.
Hee was accompanied by many great Lords of Spaine, namely by Don Bernardin de Requesens great commendador of Castill, Don Aluares de Bassan Marquis of Santa Cruz, Don ^uan de Cardona, Earle of Piega, Antonio Doria, Carlo d'Analos Duke of Sessa, Ferranti Loffra, and the Marquis of Treuic, who for Nobillity, and the Kings fauour, were very famous: These were of Don Iohns Councell for warre.
Now so soone as Don Iohn arriued at Genoa hee dispatcht Micaele de Moncada the Kings counceller to Venice, to acquaint them with his comming and to The offers of Don Iohn to the Venetians. gratifie the Senate for the good opinion it had conceiued of him, and to promise that he would in such sort manage all matters, as they should not bee deceiued in him: being very desirous speedily to execute some notable enterprize vpon the enemies.
These newes, pleasing to all men, did awaken their former hope. The Turke then departing with his whole fleet (as hath beene said) from Corfou returned to Butintro, where remayning for a time to receaue some intelligence of the Christian fleete, and a new commission from Constantinople, hee went after-wards to Preueze, where the Bascha receiued certayne newes of the taking of Famagosta, and a particular commission to goe and seeke the Christian fleete  to fight with it.
The Turkes after the taking of Nicosia had deferd the seege of Famagosta, by

reason of winter and other discommodities, vnfitting for a seege: but so soone as it drew neere towards the spring, they speedily prouided all necessaries for it, as ordnance, munition, and other war-like engins, which were sent to them from Syria and Caramania: fifty thousand Turkes came thither like-wise, many of whome tooke no pay, but onely serued in hope of booty, the Bascha hauing craftely giuen forth, that the spoyle of Famagosta would be farre ritcher then that of Nicosia.
The enemies army being thus prouided, and strengthned, did about the middest of Aprill approch the city, hauing brought fifteene peeces of battery from  Nicosia, and making great trenches, one part of the army encamped in the gardens,The enemies army before ^amagosta. and the other at Percipola: Then on the fiue and twentieth of the said moneth they made platformes whereon to plant the ordnance, with deepe and broad trenches for the Harguebusiers, so close together as it was impossible to anoy them, hauing ordinarily (but espetially in the night) forty thousand pioners at worke.
The enemies intent being discouered, they of the towne began to rampier vp all places which they thought the enemy would batter: there was euer a strong gard on the way couered with the counter-scarpe, for the better defence thereof,The care of those within the Citty for their ^ortifications. and they raised new flanquers; they did afterwards on that side of the wall which  was battered make a trench twelue foote in depth, and breadth, with small loopeholes for the Harquebusiers, from thence to defend the counterscarpe.
Marke-Antonio Bragadino was Gouernor of the Citty, who together with Astor Baillone did carefully prouide what-so-euer was necessary without any confusion at all, being a man that well knew what did belong to his place. Antonio Bragadino lay in the Castell raising new flanquers to defend that side of the Arsenall. The Knight Goita was Maister of the ordnance, who being slaine in a skirmish, the Gouernor gaue his company to Nestor Martinenga. More-ouer, three Captaines were appointed, to take charge of the fire-workes, each of them hauing twenty soldiers vnder his command, chosen out of all the companies, to bestow those fiers when neede should bee, all the ordnance was brought to those  places where they expected the battery.
Besides, they made diuers sallies to molest those abroad, and to hinder their workes. At the last they cleered the citty of all vnprofitable eaters, which wereThe number of seruiceable men in the citty in number eight thousand persons, who retired into the villages, the Turks doing them no harme: The rest of the people being numbred amounted to the summe of seauen thousand seruiceable men, namely three thousand fiue hundred Italian foot, and the rest Greekes.
Bragadini dayly perceiuing the dangers to encrease by reason of the enemiesBragadins exhortations to his soldiers. approaches, exhorted and encouraged his soldiors, telling them that the time was  now come to manifest their singular vallour and generous courrage by brauely defending that Citty, so farre remote from other parts of Christendome, against the power of the Ottaman Empire, in so iust a quarrell as theirs was, and to cast away all feare, hoping onely that God, who is the giuer of victories, would giue them good and fortunate successe.
This speech caused euery man to encourage his fellow cheerely to entertaine labour and danger. Three hundred of the beseeged with sword and target, accompanied with as many Italian Harquebusiers made a salley, who at first did put the enemies to flight, but at last were so rougly charged, as in their retreate they lost thirty of their men, where-vpon it was concluded to make noe more sallies.
The enemies beeing by little and little come to the toppe of the counterscarpe,The enemies (...) fiue batteries at one time. and hauing ended their fortes which were tenne in number, beganne the battery with three score and foure cannons, among the which were

foure Baliliscos of an exceeding bignesse did beat the Gate (...), euen to the Arsenall.
They beganne to batter it in fiue seuerall places at once; the one at the Tower of the Arsenall on which fiue Canon from the fort of the Rock continually plaid, the other against the curtaine without the Arsenall which was battered by eleuen peices; the third was out of another Fort with eleuen Cannons vppon the Tower of Andrazzi, and two Caualiers aboue it: the fourth plaid vpon S. Napes great Tower with the foure Basilisks; and the last was against the Gate Lemissa battered from six fortes with three and thirty Cannons, where the Generall MustaphaThe dil^gent care of the Captaines of the Citty.* was in person. At first they began rather to batter the fortifications of the Citties Ordnance, then to ruine the walls, by reason that it did much anoy them; wherevppon the beseeged, so soone as the enemy had begunne the Battery, quartered themselues vnder the wall where they continued till the end: Bragadin kept the tower Andrazzi, Baillone that of St. Nape, and Tepulo that of Campo-santo, that they might be present at euery action, to reward the valliant and rebuke cowards. The charge of the Ordnance was committed to Lodouico Martinenga, and six other Captaines were appointed vnder him to command the Canoniers and to furnish them with what they wanted.
Captaine Francesco Bogone commanded the Tower of the great Caualier of Euery Captaines charge. the Arsenall: Pietro el Conte lay at the Courtaine of the Caualier Del Volti, and at the Tower of Campo-santo, Nestor Martinenga had charge of the Caualier of Campo*santo, of that of Andrazzi and of the Curtaine as farre at Saint Napes tower, together with that Curtaine which lieth neere the Gate Lemissa: Horati^ Valatri had the guard of the Rauelin and Curtaine towards the Bulwark, Robert Maluezzi co^manded the Caualier of Lemissa which was more anoied then al the rest.
Besides, so soone as the battery beganne, Bragadint commanded wine, cheese, and poudered flesh to be carryed to the Italian and Greeke soldiers and Gunners vpon the walls, so as the soldiers spent but two Venetian souls a day in bread, and were payed euery thirty dayes. The beseeged did for tenne daies space make soThe (...) m^ke a counter battery. furious a counter-battery, as they made fifteene of the enemies peices of Ordinance  vnseruiceable, and flew thirty thousand of their men, so that they were not safe in their forts: but the beseeged foreseeing the want of pouder were enforcedto limit, how many shotte a day euery peece should make, namely thirty, which must bee made in the Captaines presence, for feare of shooting inThey want pou^er. vaine.
The Famagostans beeing thus carefull a Fregate arriued from Candy on the 29. day of May, which encouraged and told them that they should speedily be releeued. The enemies in the meane time hauing by force and great slaughter of their men wonne the Counterscarpe, did beginne to digge downe the earth neere to the wall of the Counterscarpe, which the beseeged did day and night  carry in: the enemies perceiuing it, made certaine loope holes from which to beat them in flanck, to hinder their workes, (which tooke effect) wherein they afterwards threw so much earth as it filled vp the Dike; then hauing perced through the Counterscarpe, they made a passage through the Dike euen to the wall, which they fortified with wooll sacks and fagots: so as they could not be anoyed but from aboue, and that sildome.
The enemies being come so neere the walls began in sundry places to vndermine, wherevppon the beseeged make countermines the charge where*of was committed to the Knight Maggio, they threw fire workes vppon the enemies, which did greatly an^y them; some of these mines did no good, the rest tooke The Toure of the (...) (...) by a mine. effect, as that at the Tower of the Arsenall, which with great noyse brake the wall which was of a wonderfull thicknesse, and threw more then the one halfe of it to the ground, carrying with it part of the Paraper.
This breach caused great numbers of Turkes with their Ensignes to

mount it. Pietro el Conte with his company had the gard there, who did brauely at first sustaine their assaults, whither other Captaines with their companies comming to second him; the ^urkes were roughly repulsed, the assault hauing continued aboue fiue howers.The enemies are repulsed from the breach.
The beseeged in this action lost aboue an hundred and three-score men, and many were wounded there. Marco Criuellatore and the Knight Maggio did afterwards in all parts, where they perceaued mines to be made, make places of refuge well flanqued with barrells full of moist earth, and sackes full of straw, the Greekes for that purpose bringing willingly what-so-euer they wanted, for the  speedy reparation of the Parapetts, ruined by the enemies artillery, which plaid vppon them day and night without intermission.
These reparations were to very great purpose because that the shot lighting on no solide substance did no other harme then carry away with it some of those sackes, and others beeing presently put in their place, the breach was still stopt vp. The enemies, pursuing their former deseigns, gaue fire to the mine of the raueling of the Rocke, which made a very great breach; where-vpon,The Turkes in the presence of the Generall Mustapha, giue a furious assault and are repulsed. they presently gaue a furious assault, Mustapha looking vpon and encouraging them. Count Hercules Martinenga and his company did brauely with-stand them, till the other Captaines came thither, and then the enemies were repulsed with  great losse: the like happened at the Arsenall, where after an assault, which lasted sixe howers, the Turkes, to their great shame, were enforced to retire: The Bishop of Limissawith the crosse in his hand, came to the assault to encourage his countrymen; the like did many valliant Ladies, bringing armes, stones, and scalding water to the soldiers.
The enemies being by these meanes, and by the singular valour of the beseeged, so often repulsed, and out of hope that way to take the Citty, began to build other forts neerer to it, from whence they might with more ease beate downeThe great labour and trouble of t^e beseeged. the defendants fortifications and safe places of retreat, and taken from themselues all impediment: and hauing to this end built seauen ^orts, they planted great  store of ordnance in them, from whence they continually shot, keeping them still in alarum and made shew (especially in the night) as if they would giue an assault, whereby the beseeged had not a moments ease, nor any meanes to rest, but onely in the heat of the day.
The Turkes at last perceuing that breaches of the mines were not suffi^ient to open their passage, fell to vndermining the walls, so as they reduced the Rauelin to so small a space, as the beseeged were enforced to giue themselues scope withAn assault giuen ^n foure sundry places ^t one time. boords and other matter. Then the Knight Maggio perceauing that of necessity they were to abandon the Rauelin, being no longer able to keepe it, hee made a mine there, that he might quit it to the enemies great losse,
Mustapha perceauing that the wall might bee mounted in sundry places, resolued at one time to giue an assalt in foure seuerall places, namely at the Rauelin at Saint Napes tower, at that of Andruzzi, and at the Curtaine and tower of the Arsenall; in all which they fought continually for sixe howres space, in three of which the enemies were brauely repulsed, but the fourth, which was the Rauelin, was of set purpose forsaken, to the great hurt both of the Turkes and Christians. For, it being assalted those within it being not able with their armes to stirre vp and downe, by reason of the small roome, and going about to retire as it had bin already determined, the enemies mingled them-selues among them, wherevpon, fire being giuen to the mine, it blew vp a thousand of the enemies, and two  hundred Christians. Mustapha him-selfe was present at euery assault, where he encourraged his soldiers, rebuked some, and promised rewards to others according to their deserts. The Rauelin being lost there was no more betwixt the assaillants and the beseeged then the thickenesse of the places of retreat, made (as hath beene said) with tuns and sacks full of earth, and straw, so, that those of the campe, and the

(...) ^oldiers, did often times talke together according to the manner of war, the Turkes flouting and bragging, and the Christians deriding their vani^y, and amid their iests the enemies brought ^om Christian slaues they had in their Camp to propound to them some particular agreement^, as they had already o^tentimes done by letters to the Gouernour and people ^yed to arrowes, which were neuer answered nor any consent giuen to come to parley.
The Turkes perceiuing that their cunning trickes were to no purpose, did againe turne to force, and came to a new assault by meanes of the Rauelin which they had already wonne, where on both sides was a braue fight, but most of all to the honour and reputation of the beseeged, for, valou^ous and bra^e Baillone^he volour of the (...) in (...) the (...). beeing more couragious in deedes then words, encouraging his Soldiors in the formost rankes, did himselfe take from a Turkish Enseigne-bea^er, an Enseigne wherein the Armes of the Venetian Common wealth was painted, which they had wonne at the taking of Nicosia, and Lodouico M^rtinenga (...) the other side, who had the guard of that quarter, oftentimes refreshing his men in the fight, putting new in their stead that were hurt or tired, still exhorting them to doe worthily, did that day purchase the fame and reputation of a discreet and valiant Captaine.
This attempt of the enemies, hauing no good successe, they inuented anotherAnother inuen tion o^ the enemies to take the Cit^y. way, yet vnpractised, ^hey did cast a great heape of wood called ^eglia which  is very apt to burne, against the gate of the Rauelin with store of pitch^ ^agots, which thy set on fier, it burnt so fiercely as it was impossible to quench it, this fier lasted fiue dayes, by meanes wherof the beseeged were enforced to retire farther in by meanes of the great heat and smoake.
Notwithstanding all these discommodities, labours and troubles, these valiant men did still continew the defense of their Cittie, determining to hold out euen to the last Man: but all things fai^ing, sauing hope and courage, and all manner of victuals beeing very scarce, they hauing already eaten asses, horse, doggs, catts and hauing no more bread nor corne to make any, drincking nothing but water, perceiuing besides that three other mines were making towards the Cauallier of  the gate, that of al the Italian soldiers there were only but eight hundred in health, and they so tired and spent with long watching and continuall trauell sustained in fight in the heare of the day, and the most part of the Greekes being slaine; the cheefe of the Citty determined to present a petition to the Gouernour, whereinThe estate of the beseeged (...) them to yeeld. relating the want and misery wherevnto they were reduced, they besought him, in regard they had freely exposed their liues and meanes to maintaine the Citty vnder the obedience of the Common-wealth, that he would by yeelding on honorable conditions, preserue the honour of their Wiues and Children, which would bee exposed eauen as a Prey vnto the enemies, if they should enter by force.
Vpon this Petition of the People, the Magistrates and cheefe Captains consulted what was best to be done, their opinions beeing very different: for some  thought it fit to continue their defense, and to dy with their swords in their hands raiher then to yeeld, or else to sally forth in the night, and on a suddaine to assaileThe Captains s^ndry opinions. the enemies, and with their blood by dying to reuenge their death: That they could not beleeue that the Turkes would obserue and performe any accord they should make with them, perceiuing that necessity had rather induced them therunto then any free motion, that their yeelding would wrong and impaire the honour and reputation which till then they had gotten. Others on the contrary said, That it did not beseeme them, vnto whom the guard and conseruation of that Citty had beene committed, to shew themselues more cruell towards the inhabitants, then the very Turkes, because that there was nothing more certaine, then that the Captaines of the Camp did only propound an accord because they would preserue the Citty from being sackt, and to saue the Inhabitants liues,

knowing that if their soldiers should once enter by force; it would then bee to late to hold them backe: besides, as it was not the part of a valliant man basely to yeeld for feare of death, in like manner to lose his life rashly and vnprofitably, proceeded rather from foolish obstinacy then from magnanimity. These reasons with diuers others being alleadged to the same purpose, did after a long consultation preuaile, and they resolued to yeeld on honorable composition. In this manner on the first day of August, after sundry treaties it was concluded, by meanesThe beseeged resolue to yeeld on composition of an Italian enseigne which was prisoner in the campe, that ther should be truce; and vpon giuing of hostages on either side, began to treate of the particularities of acord for the citty. Hercules Martinenga, and Matteo C^lti, a Cittizen of Famagosta, were giuen in hostage for those of the Citty, and for the enemies, Mustapha his Lieutenant, and the Lieutenant to the Aga or Captaine of the Ianissaries,(...) giuen on both sides. whome Baillone with certaine horse and two hundred Harquebusiers went to receiue at the gate, our men were like-wise honorably entertayned by the enemies, Mustapha his Sonne comming forth to meet them, with great numbers of horse and foot, who brought them to his father, who hauing entertained them, bestowed on them two ritch gownes imbrodered with gold, and then sent them to lodge in the Aga's Pauillon.
It is a thing to be wondred at that those in the Citty which had sustained so great labour, misery and calamities, in sted of reioycing for that their troubles  would shortly end, were sad and melancholy, as men foreseeing their future wretchednesse. The Commissioners seemed easily to grant what-so-euer was propounded to them, which in effect was, That the soldiers should bee safely conducted into Candy by the Tur ish Vessells, carrying along with them their armes and bagage with fiue peeces of ordnance, and three horse belonging to the three cheefe Commanders: That the inhabitants that were desirous to depart, mightThe arti^les of the (...). doe the like, and those that would tarry behind should haue assurance giuen them to enioy their goods and to liue in their Christian Religion. These Articles were in one day propounded, signed and granted, and countersigned by Mustapha with his owne hand: wherevpon for the execution thereof, forty Vessells of all sorts  were on a sodaine sent to the Heauen, where the sicke men began to be embarked, the rest standing vpon their guard to hinder the Turkes from enterprizing any matter contrary to the accord, till such time as they were all shipt, the Turkes neuer-the-lesse dealing curteously with them both in word and deed. Yet so soone as the enemies came into the citty, they began to wrong the inhabitants, and to commit violence, wherewith Braga^ini hauing acquainted Mustapha, entreated him that for the performance of his owne promise, and obseruation of the articles, he would command the soldiors to cease from farther violence, and to sendMustapha his seigned curtesie more ships to embarke the remainder of the Christian soldiers. Nest^r Martinenga was sent on this message to the Bascha, who courteously entertained him, and  graunted his demand, seeming to be very desirous to know Bragadini and to conferre with him, as with a valliant and noble Captaine, of whome him-selfe had made tryall.
Bragadini giuing credit to these sugred words, leauing Tepulo in the citty, did the ending of the same day, beeing accompanied with Baillone Martinenga andBragadin (...) to Mustapha his tent. Quirini, goe to the Baschas tent, attended on by sundry Captaines, and Greeke Gentlemen all on horse backe, with some forty Harquebusiers on foote. Bragadini rod formost vnder a crimson Vmbrella or Canopie, clothed in purple, wearing his vsuall robe of Magistrate, who being come to the Baschas Pauillion, left their weapons at the doore, and being entred were curteously entertayned  by Mustapha, who caused them to sit downe, where after they had discoursed on sundry matters, the Bascha dissembling that which hee had already determined in his mind thought it time to put it in execution, and the better to bring it to passe, he craued caution for the vessells he lent them, wherevnto Brag^dini hauing

made answer, that no such thing was mentioned in the Articles, and that therefore they were not tyed there vnto, and besides, he had no man there with him whome he could leaue behind for that purpose. Mustapha pointing to Quirini, said, let this man be a pledge, Bragadin constantly maintayned the contrary, and told him that he could not iustly detained any of them: the Bascha waxing impatient, and being no longer able to master his choller, did fiercely thunder many iniurious speeches against them, accusing them that they had during the tru^e contrary to the law of armes put diuers of his Turkes to death, whome they had taken prisoners, (which was most false) and rising from his sta^e, commanded them all presently to be manaclcd: then thrusting them forth of his tent, he caused his soldiers Mustapha his (...) ^cliy. to murder Baillone, Martinenga, Quirini and all the rest before Bragadins face, who was reserued to a greater torture, hauing before his death endured many marterdomes, they caused him twice or thrice to offer his necke, as though hee would haue cut off his head, which he most courragiously presented to them, they would not at that time put him to death, but did onely cut off his nose and eares.
Count Hercules who had beene sent as an hostage, being like-wise manacled, was hid by Mustaphas Eunuch till his Maisters fury was past, whose slaue he became after-wards. All the Christian soldiors were presently taken and bound, not distrusting any such perfidious cruelty. Those which were already shipt had no better vsage, for beeing dispoyled of their goods, they were all made Gallieslaues.
Two daies after, Mustapha entred the Citty, where he commanded Tepulo to be brought forth of prison whether hee had committed him, and presently to bee hanged at the yards arme of a Gallie: Then causing Bragadin who was wounded and dismembred to be brought before him, he loaded him, (though he were weake and feeble) with two baskets full of earth, the one before, and the other behinde, and willed him to carry them to the breach, making him to kisse the ground as oftenMore then barbarous cruelty. as he passed by him: then sending him to the Hauen into a Gallie of R^odes he caused him to be bound in a chare, with a crowne at his feete, and in that manner to be hoisted vp to the maineyard of the Gallie, that hee might bee the better discerned by the slaues and Christian soldiors that were in the Hauen, at the last, the noble Gentleman beeing brought backe to the citties Market-place, with drums and trumpets in the view of all men, was stript forth of his clothes, and was there most ignominiously laid a long vpon a scaffold, and most cruelly flead a liue, who without any murmuring, taking his marterdome patiently, did onely taxe the Bascha with his perfidious cruelty and periury, hauing his hart still lifted vp to God, beseeching him to giue him grace to die constantly for his holy faith and religion, and then so soone as the executioners with their bloudy kniues were come as farre as his naule, his blessed soule leauing his fraile earthly mansion flew vp to heauen. His skinne was presently stuft with straw, and carried round about the citty; then it was hung at the yard arme of a Galleor, and carried all along the coast of Syria, in his returne towards Constantinople, proudlie and vainegloriously shewing it to the whole world: the body was cut in foure quarters, and  set vp at the foure principall batteries.
It was not certainly knowne why Mustapha vsed such barbarous cruelty: some said, that he hauing taken the spoyle from the soldiors which hee had promised them, went about to satisfie them by the punishment of a few, in reuenge of the great multitude which hee had lost at the seege: others say, that hee being prouoked by their obstinate holding out, and for that he had lost some of his deere friends at that seege, whome hee loued, had sworne to bee reuenged. There bee like-wise which say, that Mustapha was of so cholericke a nature, as being once moued, he would for the time be like a mad man, and that hee was prouoked  by scorne and disdaine, when hee saw Bragadini and the rest to come to his Pauilion attended by troupes of soldiers, and in such stately manner, as though hee

had beene a conqueror and not conquered. But this occasion beeing to idle of it selfe to cause him to commit such cruell and barbarous actions is not very credible; for he being mooued by his owne wicked and diuilish disposition, did vse like cruelty towards the dead. For comming into the Cathedrall Church of S.Great impiety against the dead. Nicholas, he caused the toombs and monuments to be opened, and the bones of the dead to be throwne heere and there, he ouerthrew Altars, and Images, with other brutish and cruell actions, for which his owne soldiers did much condemne him. Hauing in this manner conquered the citty, he presently caused the Dikes to be clensed, the forts that were abroad to be razed, the trenches to be filled, and whatsoeuer within the walles had beene ruined to be rampierd vp againe, so as in  a short space the Citty was restored to her former beauty, and made stronger then before.
The Basha hauing left the Bey of Rhodes Gouernour there departed from Cyprus on the twenty fourth of September, and returned victorious and triumphantThe Bascha returneth to Constantinople. to Constantinople where with great ioy he was welcomed by al men, notwithstanding that his victory was bought at a deere rate: for in that warre he lost aboue fifty thousand men, and among others many excellent Captaines, and great numbers of his best soldiers. But now to returne to the Christian fleet.
THe triumuirate Admirals D. Iohn, Sebastiano Venieri and Mare Antonio Colonna,The vniting of the Confederate fleet. meeting after some delay all at Messina in Sicily, after ioyful and mutuall gratulation of their so happy and desired conuention, leauing those Ceremonies, they proceeded to the more essentiall parts of the businesse. They first priuately consulted how to employ those forces to some honorable and co^modious end, that the successe of the warre might counterpoize the charge and expectation. This Councel consisted of some few of the most select and eminent of the Army, both for authority and iudgement, as principally D. Iohn Generall, Sebastiano Venieri the Venetian Admiral, Marc Antoni^ Colonna, the Popes Admirall, Bernardino de Requesens Great Comendador of Castile and Lieutenant Generall of the Army, and Augustino Barbarico Prouidator Generall of the Venetian fleet.
The proposition was whether they should seeke to oppresse the enemy by maine battaile, or defend their owne territories, wherein, various opinion interchangeablyThe Aduise of D. Bernardino de Requesens for fighting or not fighting with the enemy. vttered, Bernardino de Requesens, D. Iohns Oracle, being inuited by the rest, with cleere voyce, graue countenance, and significant gesture said thus.

Your Highnesse (most excellent Prince) in commanding mine opinion before these more sufficient, obserues the order of feasts, where the coursest meates are tasted first. My Councell may perhaps be lesse pleasing, yet as holsome as some other. The question is whether wee shall assault the enemy by sea, or keepe him from infesting vs by land. This will best be resolued when we haue made true discouery and comparrison of his forces and our owne. If we be stronger, it is more  honorable to inuade, if weaker more safe to repell; what the number of the aduerse Gallies is we may see, how those Gallies are fortefied and man'd we may coniecture, and how those men are flesht and confirm'd with late victories wee need not doubt. Let vs take heed that while wee seeke to reuenge our harmes, wee doe not aggrauate them, nor lose in striuing to recouer. It were a shame to returne so great a fleet without some notable effect: but i^ were both shame and vtter vndoing not to returne it at all. The Common-wealth were better want the interest then the principall. This fleet is the surest Ankor of our hope, and to lose it would indanger the wracke of Italy. Let vs not therefore offer to fight, vnlesse some aduantage of place  or time on our side counterpoize the odds of strength on theirs: or to preserue with hazard of our fleet somthing of greater importance (if any can be) then the fleet it selfe. The storminesse of winter will shortly calme the fury of this Turkish

nauy. In the meane time it wilbe a degree of our victory to limit and stop the course of theirs. This, most excellent Generall is mine opinion, to which I am not yet so wedded, but that any cleerer iudgement may diuorce me.

This was of some cooler tempers heard with applause, but of the noble Venieri and Barbarico, not without disdaine, which yet was modestly oppugned by Barbarico as followeth.

I deny not (most excellent Generall, and you my noble Lords) but that thisBarbarico (...) speec^ pe^swading to fight. speech of D. Bernardino de Requesens is inritched and strengthened with forcible argument: wherein if there yet be any defect, it proceeds not from to little iudgement, but too much care and tendernesse of the Christian State, a zeale which not onely excuseth, but almost iustifies and endeares his error: I confesse, that to oppose against a stronger, a weaker power were to betray it. But wherein appeares it that we are the weaker? If they exceed vs in number of Gallies, we excell them in strength and swiftnesse: if they vs in multitudes of men, we them in courage, and discipline? He thinkes their victories haue added much to their courage, I thinke deduc'd more from their strength. Questionlesse our men in Cyprus and other places held their Altars, liberties, wiues, children, wealth, countries, and liues at to high a rate to deliuer them vp gratis. They haue found the Christian markets deare, nay happily their victories may beget ours, breeding in them not animosity, but security and presumption, euer their owne traitor. Was this fleet built and  set together with so much care, cost, and difficulty, presently to dissolue and break vp, as if we meet but to salute, or went to sea onely to purge and returne? or shall we stay only to looke on our enemies, as if we could destroy them like Basilisks? But winter will coole their heate: were not we better quench it now that it may not breake out againe the next spring? Will not this crocodile which deuoures vs both by sea and land, fatned with Christian bloud and spoile, wax stronger by a yeeres growth? If we be to weake for him now; How shall we resist him then? How shall we looke our Country, nay Heauen in the face, or lift vp our eyes to it, not daring to lift our hands against their enemies? But I surfet your eares with perswation needlesse to such a iudgement and resolution. Your fathers Imperiall  Maiesty displaied in your brow promiseth the same magnanimity in your brest. There is I know to much Caesar in you to haue the patience not to fight. Make hast then Illustrious Prince to reape this mature and fruitfull victory with your sword.

This was the sence of his speech which the speakers reputation and gracefull deliuery gaue more life and strength to. It was afterwards more amply and methodically confirmed by Cornia a Spaniard. The sympathy betweene whose tongue, and the Generals eare farthered perhaps his resolution to fight, willing that so noble a councell might be rather attributed to one of that nation then to Barbarico. Cornia his speech was in effect this.

There are three motiues (most magnificent Generall) which without imputationCornia his speech confirming Batbaricos. of feare, or omission of duty, may induce a Commander to decline battaile. First, disproportion betweene the benefit of victory, and preiudice of ouerthrow on either part. In this respect, the Duke of Alua did politickly abstaine from incountring the Guyse in Naples, where the French could loose but their army, but the Spaniard his army and Kingdome of Naples.
Secondly if he foresee an easier, cheaper, and safer meanes to dissolue the aduerse army, then by battaile. Thus did your Highnesse father Charles the fifth, of sacred memory, breake the neck of the Protestants army in Germany.
Lastly the inequallity of strength. He being the weaker and likely to miscary in the attempt, whereof there are so many Presidents that we need alleadge none. But neither of these can be applied to diuert vs from battaile, wherein if we preuaile wee recouer our owne againe, and happily Greece for forbearance. If fighting valliantly we be ouercome, yet shall we in the conflict so farre weaken

and maine the aduerse fleet, that we shall sooner arme a defensiue nauy, then he an offensiue, and easilier secure our own then he make any farther impression on it.
Touching protraction. The winter will in deed dissolue his fleet, but so, that it will bud forth againe the next spring; perhaps grow greater and get the start of our nauy. His being vnited by nation, ours by combination.
Touching inequallity of force, it is probable we exceed them more in men then they vs in vessels. For he must needs consuine many men in taking so many strong townes and forts, and imploy many in keeping them. Neither are the ska^s of the late pestilence yet healed among them; Therefore my aduise is, the Gallies of Candy being come, that you hasten to Corfou, by which they must needs passe, least hauing intelligence of your resolution to fight, they preuent the danger of incounter, and carry from you the fruits of their owne victory, and opportunity of ours.

Don Iohn after this serious consultation concluded to assaile the Turkish fleet and attempt to intercept their haruests of Cyprus, and other Maritime parts of Christendome ere they should house it. Therefore departing from Messina on the 17. of September, being at sea, he composed his Gallies to that forme of battaile he ment to obserue in fight: so marshalling and exercizing them before, that euery squadron might know his place, and euery Galley his squadron, and bee able to transforme themselues into all figures, without confusion, when occasion should  require. Two daies after they arriued at the Cape of Colonnes, where they came to anchor by reason of a contrary winde, as also for that they were there to take in fresh supplies of footmen. In the meane time they dispatched Gill Andrada with three other Venetian Gallies to Corfou, to make certaine discouery of the Turkish fleet, of which three, that of Cater^no Maripietro presently returned to conduct Paulo Vrsino and the Colonel (...) to the Nauy, bringing newes thatThe Turkish fleet in the Gulph of Lepanto. the Turkish fleet had passed along in view of Zant, and were entred into the Gulph of Lepanto.
Herevpon, though with much difficulty, by reason of contrary windes, they put to sea, and the seuenteenth of September arriued at Corfou: from whence the  last of the same month they set saile and came to anchor in a safe and spacious Roade at the Gamonisses, where Giouan Andrea Doria being by the Generall commanded to suruey the army, finding some Venetian Gallies not compleat in men, distributed amongst them certaine companies of Spanish and Italian souldiers, whereof Mutius Tortona commanded one band. He a man of a turbulent insociable nature being vpon some occasion aboord Calergo the Candiot fell at difference with some of the company, proceeding from words to blowes. Venieri not farre off, informed of the tumult, sent first one of his captaines, who, not preuailing,An accident which had like to haue bred great mi^chiefe. was seconded by the Admirall of Venieri his squadron, who ouer confidently interposing himselfe in the quarrell became a sharer amongst them of  some blowes, and in conclusion was dangerously wounded, which Venieri interpreting an intollerable contempt of his authority, iealous rather of the States dignity then his owne, commanded Mutio and his Enseigne to bee apprehended, and according to martiall seuerity in case of mutiny presently hanged at the yard arme of the same Galley to deterre others from like insolence.
This priuate sparke of dissention had like to haue kindled a generall flame through the whole army and haue turned their swords, now drawne against the common enemy, vpon their owne bosomes. For the Generall naturally partiall to the Spanish, and perhaps enuious of Venieros Authority, as his Corriuall in honour, considered only the seuerity of the punishment but not the capitalnesse  of the crime exacting it, so that now the combustion suruiued the Author, and the discord bred in an inferior member of the army was ascended to the head, and endangered the whole.
Don Iohn complained that his authority was more contemned by Venieri

then Venieri by Tortona, for which if the councell of warre gaue him nothonorableDon Iohn (...) (...) against Venieri. satisfaction, he would take it himselfe, and teach him that though he respected the honor of the Venetian Estate, he would not neglect his owne. To these coales the friends of Tortona and maligners of Venieri (a very base office) serued as bellowes.
Venieri on the other part protesting that he did it not to blemish the reputationVenieri his answer to them. of the Generall, but to preserue his owne and preuent the sodaine contagion of the mutiny, desired Don Iohn, would make his reason, not his affection iudge of it, and consider the party executed not as a Spaniard but mutineere. Affirmed that if the Generall should take this iust, though seuere execution, as an occasion  to breake the league which was applied as a meanes to keepe it, it would be manifest, that not deuotion induced, but ambition diuerted him from this honourable action. As for violence, hee should finde him as dangerous an enemy as otherwise a necessary friend.
Colonna Admirall of the Popes Gallies, a man worthy so eminent place, wisely foreseeing what this might grow to, as a man equally beloued and louing both parts, nobly vsed his intercession to suppresse, or at least co^pound the strife* Chiefly importuning Don Iohn, in whom hee found greater obstinacy of discontent and estrangement, telling him the act was iust, though sodaine, like the occasion, and that suddainnesse necessary in dangers of so swift extention, as hauing once  got the start, remedy could hardly ouertake them. That mutiny in an army was of as instant conueyance as a Gangrene in the body, if the parts infected were not presently cut off, it endangered the whole. That it was no intrusion on the Generalls authority, for an vnder Admirall in his owne squadron on to execute a priuate offender. That in deed hee had no cause of offense, or if hee had cause, yet no leisure to entertaine it. That the enemies strength could not so much endanger them as their owne diuision weaken them. That as nothing could heape more honour on him then the suppressall of the enemy, so nothing could lay fowler aspersion then to loose this opportunity of doing it. Therefore ifhee could not cassier his passion, hee should imploy it against the common  Aduersary.
These petswations, strong but not bitter, deliuered by a friend, though for a reputed enemy, mooued him to abstaine from the effects of choller, though not to extinguish it. So that distasted of Venieri, he communicated al important deseig nes and consulted with Barbarico.
From hence they held on their course to Cephalonia, according to their former resolution, and on the sourth of October passing the Channell of Viscarda, on the fifth they anchored in the vale of Alexandria. Where Gyll Andrada, and Giuan Baptista Contareni brought letters from Paulo Contareni, Prouidator of Zant, confirming their intelligence of the Turkish fleet. Herevpon by vnisent  of the whole councell of warre and earnest desire of the souldiers they hasted to the Gulph of Lepanto to fight with the enemy. And drawing neere vnto vnto the place, Don Iohn commanded the decks to be cleered, chests stowed, those cabins which might bee impediment to the valliant taken downe, the rest that might bee receptacles to cowards lock'd vp, leauing neither excuse for his men nor aduantage for his enemies. And as hee prepared all essentiall so hee neglected no imaginary or opinionate part of defense or offense. Therefore knowing that strength was the beauty of an army, but brauery the Enseigne of that strength, his men were armed ritchly, and his Gallies sutable to his men, both carrying the badge of triumph, and a face of victory, displaying magnanimity  and confidence, not effeminacy, like a bright but dreadfull flame.
And now, that hee might husband the small remainder of time of the vtmost minute, he caused victuals to be proportioned to his men moderately not superfluously, farre from the swynish custome of some northerly nations, who as if

wine were the nursse of valor as oyle to a lampe, against any sea fight knock the heads out of their barrels, and drinke the wit out of their owne heads and so reele aboord, some times stumbling vpon victory but neuer vpon honor, which must euer be deriued from vertue, not vice. This noble tempera^e captaine vnderstood drunkennesse could not be the fountaine of resolution, and therefore distributed so much to his souldiers as might strengthen their bodies, not weaken their iudgements, and breed courage in them, not rage; which with more speed then ceremony ended, the Heroick Generall, with countenance and habit becomming such a place and person, descended into his Barge, in which he passed through the fleet, being arranged in forme following.
It consisted of foure distinct partes principall, viz. Two wings, the maine battaile,The order and forme of the chr^stian battaile. and a reseruation of succors. In the right wing were conteined three and fifty Gallies, whereof Giouan Andrea Doria was Admirall, bearing in his maine top a greene flag. The lest wing was composed of an equall number of Gallies commanded by Augustino Barbarico with a yellow flagge on the starboord side of his toppe. In the maine battaile were included three score and one Gallies wherein Don Iohn the Generall was himselfe, distinguished by a sky-colloured flag. The two wings and the maine battaile were one hundred sixty seuen Gallies strong, so placed that the two wings carried forwards the body with equall pace, one not forsaking the other: yet betweene all three was there suffitient distance  to admit three or foure Gallies a brest without falling foule either of themselues; the wings, or maine battaile: as well to giue way to those supplies of reskewes which should be needfull in any part, as to transforme the whole battaile it selfe into any figure without confusion. Aluarez de Bassan Marquis of Santa Cruz bearing a white flagge in his poope, conducted the reseruations of succor, consisting of thirty eight Gallies, out of which were deducted eight, commanded by Don Iuan de Cardona, precursor of the whole fleet, who running twenty or fiue and twenty miles before the rest, by swift Fregats, signified vnto the Generall whatsoeuer was necessary to be known in their discouery, with commandement when they descried the Turkish Nauy to retire and impe themselues  to the wings in equall diuision: Cardona into the Right.
The Galeasses and Argozies were halfe a mile before the Gallies, two before the right wing, two before the left, and two before the middle battaile, euery Galeasse a mile from each other: the first were commanded by Ambrosio and Antonio Bragadini, the second by Iacomo Guori, and Antonio Duodi, the third by Andrea Pisar^, and Pietro Pisano. The vse of these greater vessels (being fortified with plenty of ordnance and lined with multitude of smal shot) was to receiue the first fury of the enemies fleet passing by, that beeing weakened and disordered by them, the next charge might be more safe and easie.
And in respect they were huge and vnwildy vessels vnapt for oares, euery Galeasse  was towed by two seuerall Gallies whensoeuer they were becalmed and had lost the vse of their sailes. The Galeasse of Antonio Duodi was towed by the generall and Colonna. The Galeasse of Iacomo Guori by Sebastian Venieri and Christ ofero Lieni. The Galeasse, of Ambrosio Bragadino by Augustine Barbarigo. The Galeasse of Antonio Bragadini by Antonio Canali. The Galeasse of Andrea Pisaro by the Prior of Messina. The Galeasse of Pietro Pisano by Gionan Andrea Doria. The generall like the heart in the middest of a body was seated in the middest of the battaile, guarded on the right side by Marc: Antonio Colonna the Popes Admiral, and on the left by Sebastian Vinieri the Venetians high Admirall. Colonna was flanked by the Admirall of the Geneuois, whereof Hector Spinola was captaine, associated  with the Prince of Parma.
Venieri was flanked with the Admirall of Sauoy, commanded by Lie^y, accompanied with the Prince of Vrbin.
A sterne the Generall, Colonna and Venieri were back't with a Galley named

the Prince of Spaine, and an other belonging to the great Commendador of Castile.
The right side of the maine battaile opposite to the wing was strengthened by the Admirall Galley of Malta commanded by the Prior of Messina. The left side was guarded by a Galley called the captaine of Petro Lomelino, commanded by Paulo Iordano Orsino.
In the right wing Iohn de Cardona seconded Giouan Andrea Doria. In the left wing Augustino Barbarico was supported on one handby Marco Quirini, and on the other by Canali. Yet was the whole fleet though distinct in order so intermix^ in nation, that neither the Spanish, Venetian nor Popes Gallies could respect their particular safety.




The particular names of euery Galley, his place and captaine of the Christian fleet may be found in this Catalogue.


These Gallies and captaines went before the  fleet for discouerey.


Gallies.

Captaines.


1. The Saint Magdalen of Venice.

Marco Contareni.



2. The Sunne of Venice.

Vincento Quirini.



3. The Admirall of Sicily.
 


4. The Vice-Admirall of Sicily.
Iuan de Cardona Admirall of the Sicillian fleet.


5. The Admirall.

Dauid Imperiali.



6. The Ioannica of Sicill.
 


7. Saint Caterina of Venice.

Marco Cigognia.



8. Our Lady of Venice.

Petro Francesco Maripietro.




The Gallies and captaines of the  left wing.


Gallies.

Captaines.


1. The Admirall of Venice.
Augustino Barbarigo Prouidator Generall of the Venetian fleet.


2. The Vice-Admirall of Venice.
Antonio Canalis an other Prouidator likewise of the Venetian fleet.


3. The Fortune of Venice.

Andrea Barbarico.



4. The Atcher of Naples.

Martino Pyrola.



5. The Trebble hand of Venice.

Georgio Barbarico.



6. The double Dolphin of Candy.

Francesco Zeno.



7. The Lion and Phoenix of Cania.

Francesco Mengano.



8. Saint Nicolas of Cherso.

Colanes Drafi.




9. The Victory of Naples.

Octauio Roccardi.



10. The Lomelina.

Augustino Coneuali.



11. The Elengina of the Popes.
Fabio Valciati knight.


12. The Lady of Cania.

Philippo Polani.



13. The Sea-horse of Candy.

Antonio de Cubellis.



14. The double Lyon of Candy.

Nicolo Fratello.



 
Before these went Ambrosio Bragadino with his Galeasse.


15. The Lion of Istria.

Dominico de Tucco.



16. The Crosse of Cephalonia.

Marco Cimera.




17. The Saint Virginia of Cephania.

Christofero Crissa.



18. The Lion of Candy.

Francisco Bonaccio.



19. The Christe of Candy.

Andrea Cornelio.



20. The Angel of Candy.

Giouan Angelo.



21. The Piramis of Candy.

Francesco Buono.



22. The Lady of Candy with the Armed-horse.

Antonio Eudomeniano.




23. The Christe raised againe of Venice.

Simone Gora.



24. The lesser Christe raised againe of Venice.

Frederico Renieri.



25. The Christe of Corfou.

Christofero Condocollo.



26. The Christe raised againe of Cania.

Georgio Calerga.



27. The Christe of Venice.

Bartholomeo Donato.




28. The Christe raised againe of Vegia.
 


29. The Retimana.

Nicolo Auonali.



30. The Christe of Candy.

Giouan Cornelio.



31. The Christe raised againe of Cania.

Francesco Zancaruolo.



32. The Rodus of Cania.

Francesco Molino.




33. The S. Euphemia of Brescia.

Horatio Fisogna.



34. The Lady Marquis of Doria.

Francesco Sphedra.



35. The fortune of Andrew.

Giouan Lodouico Belui.



3^. The Arme of Cania.

Micaele Vizamano.



37. The Sea-horse of Venice.

Antonio Canali.



38. The Christe of Cania.

Daniele Calefattio.



39. The Arme of Venice.

Nicolo Lipomano.



40. Our Lady of Zant.

Nicolo Modono.



41. The Christe raised againe.

Francesco Zancaruolo.



42. Our Lady of Venice.

Marc-Antonio Pisano.




43. God the father in Trinity.

Giouan Contareni.



44. The flame of Naples.

Iuan Cueua.



45. The Saint Iohn of Naples.

Garcia Vargaro.



46. The enuy of Naples.

Torribio Acaueso.



47. The valliant of Naples.

Micaele Quixada.



48. The Sancta Iacobea of Naples.

Monseratto Guardiola.



49. The Saint Nicolaico of Naples.

Christofero Mongiua.




50. The Christe raised againe of Venice.

Giouan Baptista Quirini.



51. The Angell of Venice.

Vnfredo Iustiniano.



52. The Saint Dorotea of Venice.

Paulo Nani.



53. The Admirall of Venice.
Marc-Antonio Quirini Prouidator of the Venetian Nauy.



In the maine battaile were these captaines and Gallies.


Gallies.

Captaines.


1. The Admiral of Lomelina.
Paulo Iordano Orsino, Admirall of that fleet.


2. The Master Lomelina.

Petro Baptista Lomelino.




3. The Admirall Bandinella.
Bandinello Saulo vice-admirall of that fleet.


4. The Master of Genoa.

Pallerano.



5. The Toscano of the Popes.

Metello Caracciolla knight.



6. The Sea-man of Vincenza.

Iacomo Dressano.



7. Our Lady of Venice.

Giouan Zeno.



8. The Saint Ieronimo of Lesina.

Giouan Balzi.



9. The Saint Ioannica of Venice.

Giouan Antonio Colleoneo.




10. The S. Alexa^drica of Bergamo
Georgio De Aeste Admirall.


11. The Admirall Marina.

Ieronimo Canali.



12. The Logge of Venice.

Bertuccio Contareni.



13. The Mongibello of Venice.

Francisco Dandolo.



14. The Virgin of Candy.

Cypriano Marini.



15. The tempera^ce of Giouan Andrea Doria.

Vincentio Pascalic.



 

Roccano Fuluio.



16. The good fortune of Naples
 


17. The castle of Spaine.

Baccia Pisano.



18. The victory of the Popes.
 


19. The Piramis.
Marc-Antonio of Saint Vliana.


20. The Christe of Venice.

Ieronimo Contareni.



21. The Saint Francis of Spaine.

Christofero Guasches.



22. The peace of the Popes.

Iacomo Antonio (...).



23. The Pearle of Giouan Andrea Doria.

Giouan Baptista Spinola.



24. The wheele serpentine of Venice.

Gabriele Canali.



25. The Piramis of Venice.

Francesco Buono.




26. The Palme of Venice.

Ieronimo Venieri.



27. The Admiral of Gyl. Andrada.

Bernardo Cinoguerra.



28. The Granado of Spaine.

Paulo Boteino.



29. The Admirall of Genoa.
Hector Spinola accompanied with the Prince of Parma.


30. The Admiral of Venice.
Sebastiano Venieri Admirall of the Venetian fleet.


31. The Galley Royal.
Don Iohn of Austria General.


32. The Admirall of the great Commendador.
 


33. The Popes Admiral.

Marc-Antonio Colonna.



34. The Admiral of Sauoy.
The Lord Lieny accompanied with the Prince of Vrbin.


35. The Grifonia of the Popes.

Alessandro Negroni.



36. The St. Theodora of Venice.

Theodoro Balbi.




37. The Mendoca of Naples.

Martino de Caide.



38. The mountaine of Cania.

Alessandro Vizamano.



39. The Saint Iohn Baptista of Venice.

Giouan Mocenigo.



40. The victory of Giouan Andrea Doria.

Philippo Doria.



41. The Pisana of the Popes.

Hercole Lotta.



42. The Figuera of Spaine.

Diego Lopes de Diglia.




43. The Christe of Venice.

Georgio Pisano.



44. The Saint Iohn of Venice.

Daniele Moro.



45. The Florence of the Popes.

Tomaso de Medici.



46. The George of Naples.

Eugenio de Vargas.



47. The Maister of Naples.

Francisco Benauides.



48. The Moone of Spaine.

Emanuele Aquilar.



49. The Passara of Venice.

Lodouico Pasqualigo



50. The Lyon of Venice.

Pietro Pisano.



51. The S. Ierome of Venice.

Gasparo Mari Pietro.



52. The Admirall of Grimaldi.
Georgio Grimaldi Admiral.


53. The Maister of Dauid Imperiali.

Nicolo Lucano.




54. The S. Christopher of Venice.

Alessandro Contareni.



55. The Iudith of Zant.

Marino Sicuro.



56. The Larmelina of Candy.

Pietro Gradonico.



57. The middle Moone of Venice.

Valerio Valeresso.



58. The Doria of Giouan Andrea Doria.

Iacomo Casali.




59. The order of Saint Peter.

Santabio.



60. The order of Saint Iohn.

Lodouico Tessera.



61. The Admirall of Malta.

The Prior of Messina Admirall.




The Right wing.


Galleys.

Captaines.


1. The Admirall of Sicill.
D. Iuan de Cardona Admirall.


2. The Piedmontan of Sauoy.

Octauio Moreto.



3. The Admirall of Nicola Doria.

Pandolpho Polidoro.



4. The Force of Venice.

Reniere Zeno.



5. The Queene of Candy.

Giouan Barbarico.



6. The Nino of Venice.

Paulo Polani.




7. The Christ raised againe of Venice.

Benedetto Sorance.



8. The Armed ma^ of Retima.

Andrea Calergo.



9. The Eagle of Retima.

Andrea Calergo.



10. The Palme of Cania.

Iacomo Medio.



11. The Angel of Corfou.

Stellio Carchiopulo.



12. The Saint Ioannica Arbera.

Giouan de Domeni.



13. The Lady Frauica.

Lodouico Cypico.




14. The ship of Venice.

Antonio Pasqualigo.



15. Our Lady of Candy.

Marco Fescarini.



16. The Christ of Crema.

Francesco Forneri.



17. The Saint Vittoria of Crema.

Euangelisto Zorlano.



18. The Maister of Grimaldi.

Lorenzo Trecchia.



19. The maister of Marini.

Antonio Cornili.



20. The Margaret of Sauoy.

Battaglino.



21. The Diana of Genoa.

Giouan Georgio Lasagna.



22. The Gingana of Naples.

Gabriele Medino.



23. The moone of Naples.

Iulio Rubbi.



24. The fortune of Naples.

Diego Madra^.




25. The hope of Naples.

Pietro Busto.



26. The Fury of Lomelina.

Iacomo Chiappio.



27. The Maister of Lomelina.

Georgio Greco.



28. The Negrona.

Nicolo Constano.



29. The bastard Negrona.

Lorenzo de Turri.



30. The fire of Candy.

Antonio Buono.



31. The Eagle of Candy.

Ieronimo Georgio.



32. The S. Christopher of Venice.

Andrea Trono




33. The Christ of Venice.

Marco Antonio Lando.



34. The Hope of Candy.

Ieronimo Contareni.



35. The Royalty of Padua.

Patara Buzacarino.



36. The Saint Iosefica of Venice.

Francesco Oseda.



37. The Resolute of Naples.

Giouan Caraffa.



38. The Sicilia of Sicilia.

Francisco Amadea.



39. The Maister of Nicola Doria.

Iulio Centaurio.



40. The Eagle of Corfou.

Pietro Buono.




41. The S. Trisonica of Catarra.

Ieronimo Bazanteo.



42. The Tower of Vincenza.

Lodouico de Portu.



43. The S. Mary of the Popes.
Pandolfo Strozzi Knight.


44. The S. Ioannica of the Popes.
Angelo Bifalio Knight.


45. The Maister of Nigroni.

Lodouico Gamba..



46. The Admirall of Nigroni.

Giouan Ambrofio Nigroni.



47. The Monarca of Iohn Andrew.

Nicolo Garibaldo.



48. The Hand-maide of Iohn Andrew.

Nicolo Imperiali.




49. The Admirall of Giouan Andrea.

Giouan Andrea Doria.




The Reseruation for succour, placed behind as a Garde, are these Captaines and Galleys.


Galleys.

Captaines.


1. The Saint Ioannica of Sicily.
 


2. The Buccana.

Giouan Pietro Morilo.



3. The Leena of Naples.

Pietro de Lagia.



4. The Constancie of Naples.

Pietro de Lagia.



5. The Marchesa of Naples.

Iuan Machado.



6. The S. Barbera of Naples.

Iuan Ascaleo.



7. The S. Andrea of Naples.

Iuan Rufio de Valasques.



8. The S. Caterino of Naples.

Iuan Rufio de Valasques.



9. The S. Bartilmeo of Naples.
 


10. The S. Angelo of Naples.

Iuan de Ripe Melino.




11. The Terrana of Naples.

Marco Molino.



12. The Christ of Venice.

Giouan Loredano.



13. The double hand of Venice.

Aluarez de Bassan Marquis de Sancta Cruz.



14. The Admirall of Naples.
 


15. The Faith of Venice.

Giouan Baptista Contareni.



16. The Pillar of Venice.

Catarina Mali Pietro



17. The Magdalen of Venice.

Lodouico Bulbi.



18. The Lady of Venice.

Giouan Bembo




19. The Menidus of Venice.

Filippo Leo.



20. The Hope of Venice.

Giouan Baptista Benedetto.



21. Saint Peter of Venice.

Pietro Badoario



22. Saint George of Sabenica.

Christofero Lachico.



23. The Saint Michael of Venice.

Georgio Cochio.



24. The Sibilla of Venice.

Daniele Trono.



25. The Crane of Spaine.

Luigi de Hereda.



26. The Admiral of Vaschedo.

Vaschedo Coronado.




27. The Suprana of the Popes.

Antonio de Ascoli.



28. The Occasion of Spaine.
 


29. The Maister of the Popes.
 


30. The faire wether of the Popes.
 







THe Generall descending (as hath beene said) into his Barge, passed thorow his fleet, taking a short but exact view of the forme of his battailes, and by breefe, but effectuall speech, breathed courage into his men. His Oration was to this purpose.

Braue, inuincible spirits, whom gratious Heauen hath held worthy to bee hirDon Iohns Oration to his soldiors. Champions: to whom the Angels will not bee idle spectators, but actors and assistants in this sacred Tragedy. Nature I know hath giuen you the strongest temper of valor, and Deuotion set so keene an edge on that temper, as I need not whet by any farther incouragement. Onely let mee tell you, you now haue faire occasion to vnsheath and vse it. Let Victory set such a glosse on it, as no rust of forgetfulnesse may euer eate out. Now bring this darke halfe Moone, which seeks to eclips the bright sunne of heauen, to such a waine as shall neuer fill againe. Let hir not any longer vsurpe domination of the Sea. Our enemies execed vs in numbers, made vp of cyphers and shadowes of men, but let vs excell them in resolution, the essence of Soldiors. They are imprisoned and immured by shores and rocks, as much as I should say, victory cannot escape vs. They must fight because they cannot flye, wee because wee must ouer-come: Wee haue necessitie of conquest; the danger mixt with it, doth but season and ennoble it. Who would

triumph ouer woemen, Wee are to share the whole wealth of nature: the earth to the suruiuors, heauen to the martirs. Euen the scarres of the wounded willbe beautifull because honorable, who would ingratefully refuse to bleed for that louing God which hath not refused to dye for him. Courage therefore diuine Champions, forget not that som of ye are Romains, and which is more all Christians.

This speech was euery where answered with applausiue and hopefull conclamations. In which resolution wee will leaue them a while, to view the countenance of the aduerse Nauy. The Turkes in the meane time vsed circumspection and prouidence nothing barbarous. For hauing intelligence by spies, fugitiues, and  prisoners not only of the conuention of the Confederate nauy, but their aproach beeing now in the Gulph of Lepanto, Mehemet Bey was dismissed with 60. Gallies to Aspropicio a neighbor Citty to bring from thence competent supplies of victuall and men, in which businesse he vsed such celerity that in short time he returned, bringing with him plenty of victuall and munition besides ten thousand Ianizaries two thousand ordinary soldiers and two thousand voluntaries, with which multitude and false supposition of our paucity they were not so co^firmed, but that they stood possest of a certaine fatall ominous misdeeming the euent. In which respect the high Admirall Ali Bascha, though by his owne inclination and his maisters command he stood resolute to fight, called a Generall Councell  to deliberate so important a deseigne: Most of them perswaded to giue battaile, but Partau Bascha Generall of the land forces earnestly oppugned it, on the contrary part Hassan Bascha sonne to Barbarossa somtime Viceroy of Algier a young man yet of great spirit and worthy so noble a father whose magnanimity he seemed to inherit, licensed to speake with braue countenance and apt gesture spakeThe speech of Hassan Bascha perswadi^g to fight. as followeth.

Most excelse and victorious Prince, the Turkish Nation hath euer so nobly behaued it selfe that it is a question whether their fortune hath bred their greatnesse or their valour commanded their fortune. Once it may be affirmed that if our starres haue fauored vs, wee haue not forsaken our selues, nor shamed them, but  magnified their influence by our actions. Our Predecessors haue left vs ample territory, wherein wee haue not been vnthrifts but haue so husbanded it that if they made little, much, wee haue extended much almost to infinite. So that if we hold on this course of victory, Alexander neuer stood more then wee, in need of new worlds: which if these prying inquisitiue Christians had not discouered to vs, our valour ere long would want work. Yet let vs not seeme so glutted and cloyed with conquest as to refuse to accept this one triumph more. This by Sea wilserue to counterpoize that other balance of land victories. Let vs fill both the hands of our Emperor, one with spoiles of the land, the other of the Sea. These feeble tired Christians haue been but our Porters. They are now ready to deliuer it. Let  not vs disdayne to take it of them least they couzen vs now, as they did my father about thirty yeares since, and ran away with their burthen. Wee haue Gallies enough not only to stowe their wealth, but if need were their Gallies. Therefore most inuincible Admiral let vs preuent their flight by speedy assault.

This speech vttered by a man whose performance had euer heeretofore beene correspondent to so confident a perswasion, not only encouraged but inflamed many of the hearers, whereof Vluzzali Generall of the forces of Barbary could not containe him-selfe, but with many earnest and pregnant arguments aue^r'd the same: alleaging besides the opportunity, the necessity of obtaining the great Lords command. Caiabeg the Sanzach of Smitna ecchoed Vluzzali.
Yet many the grauer and aduiseder Captaines dissented from this more hotte then deliberate determination, especially Mehemet Bey the Sanzach of Negropont which if not eloquently, yet truly demonstrated the danger of fight as followeth.


I am sorry (magnificent Alli) that at this time the Councell of IllustriousMehemet Bey bis speech, dissweding from fight. Hassan, is rather to bee admired and applauded for greatnesse, then followed for soundnesse, fitter to set our tongues on worke then hands: I meane to bee answered then executed. It is most true, in raysing the Ottoman Empire, that the Turkish valour hath euer guided their fortune: but as true, their wisdome hath directed their valour, else had they neuer created this world of their greatnesse out of nothing, or made it of Attomes and so slender principles. They haue not by poasting to the end of their desires lamed or tyred the meanes that carried them, but by going softlier, haue gone farther. Greatnesse is steepe and high, not to bee ascended but by leysure. Those that striue to rise violently fall  precipitately. Such was the suddaine floud and ebbe of the Goths, such the inundation of Tamberlan. One Kingdome is a sufficient croppe for one yeare. After that rate wee may soone begger Christendome, and perfect the Turkish Monarchie. As wee haue wonne Cyprus, and may keepe it, so wee may lose both that and ourselues too, in seeking to get more. If you conceiue the Christian^ haue come so farre, but with resolution to fight, or to fight, but with probabillity of preuayling, you must thinke them either fooles or cowards. But if after so familiar and long hostillity, ouer-vallewing our selues, hinder vs not to know them, wee must needs confesse their swords and wits as sharpe as ours. Not their Pusillanimity, but diuision hath ruined them; and our multitudes rather  wearied then conquered them. From Preueza themselues departed, not wee draue them: at least the shame of flying then, will excite them to fight now. Our oddes of strength is vncertaine. If they bee the weaker, supplyes may strengthen them. If wee the stronger, many accidents may weaken vs, but none strengthen. Therefore my councell is, that wee go home while our way is open, and wee haue our welcome in our hands, and not let hope defraude vs of certeinty. Yet is mineopinion opinion euer subiect to your correction.

This speech was highly approoued of Partau Bascha, Siroch, and Carabey. Yet fate, and their Emperors expresse command, vrged publickly by Vluzzali, so farre carried them against their owne iudgements, that they resolued not onely to hazard  battaile, but seeke it. To this end hauing distributed those foureteene thousand soldiers where they found most need, They weyed anchor, and came to Galanga, about the euening the seuenth of October, and there stayed. There supplying their Galleys and themselues, with whatsoeuer was requisite for the incounter. Now drawing neere, the Admirall neglected nought that tended to the augmentation of the strength, or ostentation of the brauery of his Galleys and men. One principall care was, the fastning of his slaues, least their bodies his, but mindes his enemies, might insteed of necessary instruments, be conuerted to dangerous bosome aduersaries: knowing that desire of liberty and reuenge, two violent appetires, would make them apt to snatch at any opportunity. Hee  caused their allowance of dyet to bee augmented, so cherishing their bodies, that they might bee apt for labour, and mixed hope of future lenity, with feare of present punishment, that stubburnnesse, a thing inuincible in the obdurate minds of slaues, might not hinder the vtmost extent of their strength. Hee likewise keeping good aduises at sea, to preuent suddaine inuasions, drew foorth his fleete into order of battaile, that both his men and Galleys, when need required, might not bee to learne their duty or order: which hee neglected not continually to practise, as hee approched the Christian fleete, till hee had brought them to perfection therein.
The eight of October very early in the morning, hoping vnexpectedly to haue  come vpon the Christian fleete as they were at anchor, they hoysted their sayles halfe mast high, so to hinder their discouery, and with a gentle gale sailed towards Cephalonia. Both fleetes were within twelue mile of one an other, yet vndescried, by reason of certaine points and head-lands diuiding and shadowing them.

They first kend the Christian Nauy cleere of the Cruzulares, which had somewhat disordered them. And seeing Andrea Doria stand to sea-ward, vainely imagined hee had fled, as vpon the like reason the Christians were deluded with the like conceit of them, which opinion as it begat contempt of the aduerse part, so it bred confidence in themselues. The place where the fleetes met, serued aptly to fight, but not to flie. The Gulph beeing in circuit not aboue two hundred and fifty miles, immured with rocks, shores, and Islands so thick, that to flie, threatned well nigh as much danger as to stay. On the North, they were shut in by part of Albania, extending from Saint Maura to Lepanto foure score miles. On the East they were embarred by Morea stretching seauenty miles from the mouth of the  Gulph to Cape Tornezzo. On the south the Isle of Zant opposed it selfe. 25. miles in length. the west was closed vp by Cephalonia and Saint Maura, the one beeing, 40. the other 15. miles long on that coast. On the coast of Albania, scarse a mile from the maine, were the Rocks Cruzalares of an equall bignesse, but the lesse the more dangerous. Heere againe the Christian fleet before concealed by interposition of headlands bewrayed truly hir owne greatnesse, which though inferior to the Turkes, yet exceeding their expectation did some-what shake their former resolution: yet hope, shame, and which was more then both, necessity, spurring them forwards, they approached in forme following.
They diuided their fleete which consisted of two hundred and seauenty vessels,The order of the Turkish, flect. Galleys, Galeots and Foists, into foure battailes, correspondent to that of the Christians. In the middle battaile was the high Admirall Ali Bascha, and therein were conteyned foure score and ten Galleys, in the middest of whom, in a ritch and well fortisied Galley was he himselfe, flanqued on the right side with Partau Bascha, and on the left with the Treasurer of the Nauy, who were likewise assisted each of them by three Admirals. The right wing consisted of fiftie Galleys, where of Mehemet Siroch had the charge. The left wing included ninetie Galleys, conducted by Vluzzali. The Reseruation for supplies was a mixture of ten Galleys and twenty Foists, commanded by Amurat Dragut Rais. Hee himselfe in a beautifull and well armed Galley, sometime Admirall of Constantinople. Their maine battaile was opposite to ours. Their right wing to our left, and their left to our right wing. Euery battaile distinguished by different Flagges, very curiously and richely wrought. Euery priuate Galley adorned with Pendants and Enseignes of great worth, and beauty, which serued rather to breed appetite in the couragious and greedy Christians, then feare: Tht Galeasses they did rather wonder at for hugenesse of Bulke, then doubt for offence or danger in seruice, thinking them fitter for burthen then fight, wherein notwithlike the horse of the Greekes lay buried their greatest mischeefe: neither could they yet entertaine an assurance that their aduerse fleet would assaile them, being (as I may say) affraid not to hope. Yet did not this distraction make them neglect  all possible meanes of their owne safety or enemies harme. All vnnecessary things they stowed in hold, all needfull they brought vp on the hatches, as powder, shotte, Pikes, arrowes, aud all offensiue or defensiue prouision. Euery Captaine incouraged his souldiers, euery soldier his fellow; and custome of victory kept out all conceipt of beeing ouercome; each one cherishing in himselfe the remembrance of the Christians flight at Preueze: vicinity of place bringing it to their apprehension. The very wind seemed to whisper in their eare secret argument of preuailing, to which their credulitie harkened. But soone was that Argument confuted, when the winde which till now had beene partiall to them, became a newtrall to both, and a flat calme giuing as it were attention to the  voyce of the Cannon. And not onely the winde, but the Sunne seemed now to bandie against them, for hauing with too much light blinded the Christian Nauy, at the instant of ioyning battaile, remooued that preiudice to the Turkes.

And not onely the winde but the Sunne seemed now to bandy against them, for hauing with too much light blinded the Christian Nauy, at the instant of ioyning battaile, remooued that preiudice to the Turkes. And the winde as if awakened, and come to doe seruice to the God who made it, breathed a gentle gale from the West, which aptly serued to carry the mists of the water and smoake of the Ordnance vpon the Turks, whose battailes conteined these particular Captaines with their Galleys.




The Turkes diuided their fleete  into foure Battailons.

The right wing.
1. The first was the Admirall of Mehemet Siroch Gouernor of Alexandria.
2. The second Galley of Alexandria, was gouerned by Caras Tubat.


All these had Galleys of Alexandria.
3. Bagly Saraf.
4. Giafer Chiagey.
5. Osmanan Celebin.
6. Pe^usio Reis.
7. Bink Cusapogli.
8. Osman Occan.
9. Driuis Aga.
10. Baiazet Siman,
11. Osman Ali.
12. Deli Aga.
13. Dardagan Bardanbely,
14. Casli Cuian.
15. Iufuf Aga.
16. Iusuf Magar.
17. Calafact Cheder.
18 Mustafa Genouell,
19. Dermigy Pery.
20. Mat Assan.


21. Cheder Aga.
22. Soliman Bey.
23. Hibraim.


Their Galleys were of Co^stantinople.
24. Saban.
25. Caiacelebin,
26. Cheder Siman.
27. The Sonne of Cara Mustafa.



Their Galleys were of Tripoli in Barbary.
28. Iuran Saba.
29. Dauid Iusuf,
30. Solac Rais.
31. Arnaut Ferrat.
32. Iuzel Memy.


33. Schender Selim,
34. Lumag Iusuf.
35. Bardach Celebni,
36. Bagdat Asau.
37. Guzel Allibi.
38. Brusali Piry.
39. Rodle Ali.
40. Aga Bascha with the Admirall of Constantinople,


These commanded ouer Galleys of Despotado, in old time Aetolia.
41. Sinaman Mustafa.
42. Giegiore Ali,
43. Amurates Reis,
44. Calepi Memy.
45. Marul Mustafa.
46. Heder Lumet,
47. Sinaman Deruis,
48. Meminey Durmis.
49. Algagias Sinan,
50. Adagi Rustan,
51. Chingeuey Musata,
52. Iusuf Celebni,
53. Tufer Mustafa.


54. Ali a Genowese and Pyrate Captaine of small Galleys.
55. Megil Reis with a small Galeasse,
56. Mehemet Bey, with the Admirall Galley of Negroponto.


The Battaile had these Captaines and Galleys.


With Galleys of Rhodes.
1. Assam Bey the Gouernor of Rhodes,
2. Deli Chiafer the warden of Rhodes,
3. Occi Rais,
4. Postunag Ogli,
5. Calefact Ogli,
6. Gazizy Reis,
7. Dromus Reis with an Admirall Galley of Constantinople:
8. Herbercy,
9. Caragias Rais,


10. Ocean Rais,
11. Deli Piry,


with Galleys of Constantinople.
12 Giafer Aga.
13. Bachian Rais,
14. Coz Ali,
15. Colach Rais,
16. Oluz Rais.
17. Assan Bassa, sonne to Barbarossa.


Their Galleys were of Naples in Romagnia.
18. Caruf Rais.
19. Alman Rais,
20. Gungli Ogli,
21. Arnaut Celebin,
22. Magar Ali,
23. Giafer Celebni,
24. Deli Celebni,
25. Deli Assan.
26. Caraperi Aga.
27. Sinan Rais
28. Carau Mustafa.
29. Sali Arauar.
30. Preuil Aga captaine of Naples in Albania.


with Galleys of Mittilene.
31. Balahzi Ogli.
32. Bararzi Mustafa.
33. Sinan Baly,
34. Agdadi Rais.


35. Two sonnes of Ali, in a Galley of Constantinople.
36. Osman Rais in an Admirall of Constantinople.


with Galleys of Mitilene.
37. Deli Iusuf
38. Ferat Baly,
39. Cuiacelebin.
40. Bagdar Rais.
41. Haluagi Mustafa.


42. Giaur Alli Mustafa, Admirall of small Galleys.
43. Caracoza with Galleys of Valona.
44. Mamatre Saderbey Gouernor of Mittilene.
45. Aly Bascha high Admirall of the fleet, in a Galley Royall.
46. Portau Bassa, generall by land with an Admirall Galley.
47. Mustafa Esdey Treasurer,
48. Marmari Rais.
49. Alcicgoli,
50. Caras Deli.
51. Ferat Ceragli.
52, Tramontan Rais, with an Admirall of Constantinople,


with Galleys of Constantinople.
53. Sulimun Celebni.
54. Deli Ibraim.
55. Murat Corossaa,
56. Denur Bali,
57. Caby Heit,
58. Murrat Trasy Scribe of the Arsenall,
59. Peruis Sinam,
60. Dardagan Bali,
61. Giafer Caran,
62. Deruis Sach.


63. Curbaly.
64. Giafer Aga, the captaine of Tripoliin Barbary,


These Galleys were of Tripoli,
65. Carau Hamat,
66. Rustan Cialmagi,
67. Durmis Ogli,
68. Schender Dernigi,
69. Maumet Alis.


These Galleys were of Calipolis.
70. Afis Cluega Gouernor of Callipolis,
71. Selim Siach,
72. Heder Baschi,
73. Sicun Mustafa,
74. Salu Rius,
75. Dely Ischender,


76. The Lord of Marue with an Admirall Galley of Constantinople.


Their Galleys also were of Callipolis,
77. Peruis Lahumagi,
78. Hasuf Bali,
79, Siran Bardachi,
80. Iusuf Cinigi,


81. Piri Begogli, with an Admirall Galley of Constantinople.


with Galleys of Constantinople:
82. Deli Osmun,
83. Piry Sinan,
84. Demir Celebni,
85. Deruis Hidir,
86. Sinan Mustafa,
87. Hasirgy Rais.
88. Ascy Ogli.
89. Caias Saraf,
90. Agadi Ahameth,
91. Osman Sehet.
92. Deruis Celebin,
93. Giafer Rais,
94. Dardagan the Gouernor of the Arsenall.




The left wing.
1. The first was an Admirall, whereof was Captaine Carau Hozias,


With Galleys of Natolia.
2. Catalus a Pirate,
3. Chiazell Sinam.
4. Chior Mehemet.
5. Hignau Mustafa.
6. Cademly Mustapha,
7. Vschiufli Memy.
8. Carau Morat.
9. Passa Deruis,
10. Iagli Osman.
11. Pisman Rais.
12. Tasciuis Sisman.
13. Iesil Hogli.


14. Cara Cialibina, Captaine of small Galleys.


They had small Galleys, and did obey Cara Cialibin,
15. Suizi Memy.
16. Magli Rais.
17 Osey Assan.
18. Cumigi Hasuf.


These two had Galleys of Constantinople*
19. Cadeh Sidir,
20. Osman Rais,


21. Caraperi a Pirate, and also Captaine of small Galleys.


These had small Galleys, and were commanded by Caraperi their Captaine,
22. Iulio Peruis,
23. Calobodan Soliman,
24. Iachuli Mamat,
25. Sayr Giafer,
26. Chior Memy,


27. Chiusuel Giafer, with a Galley of Constantinople,
28. Ramazzan,
19. Calemy Memi,
30. Giesman Ferrat,
31. Hiupris Assan,
32. Zambal Murat.
33. Sarmasach Rais,
34. Tunis Suliman,
35. Calepi Iusuf.
36. Techedel Assan.
37. Cyan Memij.
38. Osman Bagli,
39. Caragial with the Admirall Galley of Algeirs.
40. Caraman Ali.
41. Alman.
42. Sinam Celebni.
43. Agdagi Mustafa.
44. Daglias Ali,
45. Seith.
46. Perius Selmi.


These had small and also some common Galleys of Algier.
47. Murat Deruis,
48. Hes Ogli.
49. Machazer Ali.
50. Ioias Osman.
51. Sali Deli.


52. Nasut Fachir, with a Galley of Constantinople.


Their Galleys were of Negroponto.
53. Gymongy Mustafa.
54. Rustan Cinigi,
55. Bali.
56. Dauid Ali.
57. Sit^au Rais.
58. Carum Hidir.
59. Magar Ferrat,
60. Arnaut Alis,
61. Natis Rais,
62. Curmur Rhodo,
63. Cos Cluagin,
64. Clusly Memi.


65. Caram Bey with the Admirall of the sonnes of Vluzzali.


They had small Galleys of Valona.
66. Deli Murar,
67. Abazar Rais,
68. Scin Schiander.
69. Alman Balli,
70. Assan Suumbar,
71. Seit Aga,
72. Assan Sinam,
73. Cumy Falagan,
74. Osman Gynder.



Their Gallies were of Suriasaro.
75. Dermar Bey.
76. Iusuf Alis.
77. Caran Alman.
78. Murat Biassan.
79. Carabiney gouernor of Suriasaro.


80. Calau Bastagi.
81. Carabi.
82. Giafer Hedi.
83. Ferrat.


These Gallies were of Constantinople.
84. Memy Beogli.
85. Osman Piry.
86. Piry Rais.


These Gallies were of Constantinople.
87. Casam Rais.
88. Talatagi Rais.
89. Rus Celebin.
90. Tutur Ali.


91. Vluzzali King of Algier with an Admirall Galley.


The Battaile of Succors.
1. Was an Admirall Galley of Constantinople gouerned by Amurat Dragat Rais.


These were Fusts.
2. Caram Casli.
3. Hassam Rais.


4. Abdula Reis, and that was a little Galley.


These were also Foists.
5. Aligau Assan.
6. Cus Ali.
7. Ginzel Ali.
8. Curtat Celebin.


9. Deley Bey.
10. Saudagi Memi, this was also a Foist.
11. Dardagno Reis, and he had an Admirall of Constantinople.
12. Deli Dorni, and he had a Galley.
13. Cuidar Memi the Gouernor of the Isle of Scio.
14. Shetagi Osman.


These had Foists.
15. Haeder.
16. Delius Heder.
17. Armat Merny.
18. Susan Reis.
19. Gyafer Bey.


20. Cabil Sinam, his was a Foist.



These were Foists.
21. Amurat Reis.
22. Sariogi Grafer
33. Mor Ali.


24. Piali Murat and this was a small Galley.


These were Foists.
25. Caragiali Rais.
26. Murat Alias.
27. Iumez Alias.
28. Assan Sinan a Galley of Constantinople.
29. Bostagi Murat a Foist.
30. Deli Suliman, this was an Admirall Galley of Constantinople.







All things thus disposed of, Ali Basha, ritchly cloathed and armed after the Turkish manner, in the poope of his Galley, thus spake to the Captaines and Commanders of the nauy there assembled to receiue direction.

MOst Heroick Captaines, and Inuincible Ianizars, the scourge of the Christian,Ali Basha his speech of incouragement to his captaine^ and soldiers at the in^ant of battaile. and right hand of the Ottoman Empire, we haue here to fore taken pains  to fetch our slaues, our enemies haue now brought them vs. Despayring their successe on land, they are come to try the same fate in an other element, as if there were important difference to burne on shoare, or drowne at sea. They haue changed place but not spirit. The same effeminacy which they had in other parts they haue transported hither, constant only in their vices and vanities. Magnanimity and the effect, Honor, are not more inherent or hereditary to vs, then cowardize and seruility to them. We much exceed them in number, but more in weight of sufficiency: we were souldiers euen when children, they children now they are men. What are their souldiers but players, minstrels and tumblers, a multitude of vngelt Eunuches? what is their Generall but a youth, fitter  to leade a maske then an army? what are both but the remainder of this yeeres victory, whereof Cyprus was the late ritch earnest? neither can they so soone forget to yeeld, nor we to ouercome. Therefore be confident braue fellowes in armes, that not resolution but their destiny hath brought them hither. Italy is the gate of Christendome, and Venice the key of Italy, This fleet is that Barre which if we can either breake or put backe, all flies open, and we shall goe beyond Caesar in the VVest, Alexander in the East, making the rising and setting of the Sunne the confines of the Turkish Empire. Come on them, let vs fill the sea with their bodies, our Gallies with their wealth, our selues with honor and felicity of both.


The Christians hauing in all respects prouided for so great an attempt, asThe memorable battaile of Lepanto. farre as humaine wisdome or strength extended, considering this fleet to be their Arke, God himselfe being interessed in the controuersie, ceased not with humble but importunate inuocation to implore the aide of Heauen, which by their Priests and Churchmen was confidently promised, Their deuotions concluded, and both battailes now facing each other, the charge sounded by a cannon from Ali the Turkish Admirall, and answered by one from each wing, with barbarous clamors, after their custome, which they thinke awakens the courage of their owne, and amazeth and terrifieth their enemies, swiftly made towards the Christian fleet, who in a contary manner made trumpets, drums, fifes and other such martial musick the delightful Prologue to a more dreadful scaene. Venieri back't his Galley with two other of Giouan Loretano and Catarini Malipietro. Colonna did the like with two other.

And now being within distance of their ordnance, the Turkes passing by the Galeasses were vnexpectedly torne by their great shot, which brake forth on all sides like thunder and lightning out of some darke cloud: they being high and close, infinitely spoyled the naked Turkes and Rowers, and made as it were that breach at which the Christian fleet entred. For it disordered them then when they had no time to reforme themselues. In which confusion yet desperatly passing the Galeasses, they ranne vpon a sharper point of danger. For the winde resisting the swiftnesse of their approch, staied and set them vp as dead markes to the Christian ordnance, which had more certaine ayme at them lying still, then in motion and course. Besides, it did benight them with smoake, augmenting the terror of those inuisible mischiefes which they felt, but could not see to shun or reueng. The horrible noize of some commanding, others answering, the crack of Gallies, foule of each other, terrified both the Turkes which suffered, and Christians which but heard it; victory appering to them in a dreadfull countenance. In some Gallies, the officers slaine, the slaues brake lose and like Lyons slaughtered their keepers. In others, the powder taking fire casually, seemed to rebell against them too; shooting their bodies vp in the ayre as sacrifizes to that Christ whom they blasphemed. Here men fallne ouer-boord wanted Gallies, heere Gallies emptied of their companies, wanted men, and floted like dead bodies without soule, which Mehemet Siroch, now finding himselfe a truer Prophet then he desired, obseruing, with-drew himselfe from the body of the fleete thinking to circumuent the Christian  left wing: betwixt whom and Syroch, Augustino Barbarico interposed his squadron, wherewith he shut vp his passage, the easlier by reason of a Promontary called Mahanguli extending it selfe on that part. Marino Contareni resolute to be a sharer with his vncle Barbarico both in honour and danger, followed and vnited himselfe to that squadron, betwixt whom a cruell fight was maintained on both sides. The Turkish left wing commanded by Vluzzali, and confronting our right was very neere to haue ioyned with Doria, who considering himselfe inferior in number of Gallies (he hauing but fifty, his enemy ninty) vrged it not. Vluzzali balancing with the fortune of the Christian his owne oddes of strength, was contented likewise to absteine. Doria after some suspence stood out to seaward with certaine of his Gallies a mile from the remainder.
In the meane time, Don Iohn, Colonna and Venieri the confederate Admirals in exact order incountred the middle battaile of the enemy, exchanging in the approach three or foure vollies of great shot, with much disaduantage to the Turkes. The Christian vessels being snugge and stooping from the ordnance of the Turkes higher Gallies, and many of their peeces choaked with Christians bullets casually shot into their mouthes and there sticking. Which difficulties bred rather fury then despaire in them, and induced them with violence of oares to make hast to grapple, that there fighting hand to hand, the difference might  be decided by pure valour. And beeing now come neerer, swarmes of arrowes and small shot enterchangeably stung both sides, and artificiall fiers reciprocally lightned euery where. At last boording, death and wounds, drest variously, were the entertainment of that hostile and vnwelcome visitation. Whence sprung such a deluge of bloud that this might haue beene more properly called the red sea. Now Siroch perceiuing himselfe not only frustrated by interposition of Barbaricos squadron, but distressed by the vnresistable force of it, persisted in fight, to saue his honor though not life, vsing his vtmost incouragements to reuiue the languishing hope of his men, wherein by speech, but more by example, he so farre preuailed, that desperation supplying the want of resolution, they had now recouered, not onely hope of resistance, but victory: For after doubtfull and vnequall conflict in many parts, here number oppressing valor, there valor counterpoizing the ods of number, especially in the Gallies of Barbarico and Ciconta; Barbarico whilest with inuincible courage he still ran to the weakest part, like the

vitall spirits in the body, was vnfortunately and mortally wounded by a fatall Turkish arrow in the left eye, himselfe being in deed not onely the eye but the very heart of his squadron. He falling downe, gaue demonstration that the life bloud of an army runnes in the veines of the Commander. His owne men shrunke back, the Turkes intruded and prest in his Galley, which had beene then taken, but that Frederico Nani and Siluio Porcia came in to her reskew. These heroick gentlemen growing vp like Hidraes heads in the roome of Barbarico, repeld the Turkes and recouered the former hope of victory. Porcia receiued a wound in his thigh, the honorable badge of his valor.
In an other part, Ciconia opprest with multitude of Turkish Gallies, was as I  may say refined with wild fire, and his face beautified with an eminent skar, but was at last preserued by speedy supplies, being so farre from yeelding either to wearinesse or torment, that after this he boorded and tooke a principall Galley, and one of their Imperiall Enseigns; which in the Venetian armory serues now to display the inuincible courage of the taker. But Siroch inuironed with danger and mischiefe on all sides, hauing no meanes to satisfie his desire of reuenge on al, desperatly ranne vpon Giouan Contareni (whose kinsman was before not idely slaine) with such violence, that he had almost stem'd his Galley; which he obstinatly perseuering to boord, was there mortally wounded; as before in iudgement, so now in valor hauing manifested himselfe a compleate and absolute souldier. He falling, bred like amazement with the Turkes, as the fate of Barbarico had with the Christians: his men slaine, wounded and dismaied left their decks naked to their thronging enemies, who rushing in, were like to haue made the Galley a common sepulchre to both; For shee, being shot betweene winde and water was now ready to sinke. The Turkes leaped ouer-boord, hoping by swimming to finde the land more mercifull to them then the water. Siroch was taken, not quite dead, but his wounds serched, and found incurable, in pitty, not cruelty he was dispatch't. His death, though it were deerely bought, was a mortall wound to the Turkes whole Nauy. For those that were before busied with his incounter, this right wing, or arme, now cut off, conuerted their forces, though much enfeebled, against other  members of the fleet, assisting where they saw need and had opportunity. Besides, the battaile of succors continually supplied and releeued impartially all parts distrest.
Now the two Generals, Don Iohn and Ali Basha meeting like two furious Currents, began so cruell a fight in the middest of both fleets that the rest seemed but spectators to them two. The Gallies incircling them were the Theater, these two the Stage. Contrariety of Religion, emulation of honor, anger, hope, and feare producing admirable effects in both. While the Basha made violent impression on the prow of Don Iohns Galley, she by others was likely to haue beene entred on the poope, which seene was preuented by those that back't her, who  boording these boorders tooke their Gallies, but with great slaughter and difficulty. The Turkish Admirall knowing the fortune of the day to depend vpon his successe, desperatly contended to inforce Don Iohn, wherein he so farre preuailed, that he compelled him to bring out of hold his fresh reseruations, to exchange place with his wounded and wearied men vpon the hatches, which strange and vnexpected supply as it were new borne out of the wombe of the Galley to defend their mother, bred amazement, and by amazement hastned the destruction of the fainting Turkes. The Basha shot in the head, his Galley soone yeelded; himselfe being yet aliue presented to D. Iohn, had his head strooke off, which, mounted on the point of a pike, he held vp in publike demonstration of victory, a gratefull obiect  to the Christians, but dreadfull to the Turkes. The same cause bringing forth at once most contrary effects, extremity of hope and feare, which yet lesse dismaied them, not discerning it a far off, then the aduancement of the Crosse royall in the top of their Admirall Galley. That was seene throughout the fleet, and the fatall

signification easily interpreted. Now they all fly, but so confusedly, that while they shun the pursuite of one Galley, they fal foule vpon an other. Besides, Marco Quirini and Antonio Canali intercepted many of the Gallies flying, and men swimming to the shoare. In this memorable fight many notable captaines on either side were taken and slaine, whose distinct Catalogue ensues at the end of the battaile, not yet absolutely ended. For Vluzzali foreseeing now to late this generall ouerthrow, studied how he might in some measure reueng what he could not preuent; therefore houering alooffe from the fleet to expect some straglers of the Christian Nauy, at last found opportunity to cut off certaine Venetian Gallies which at first had followed Doria, but now desirous to haue beene sharers in so noble  a victory, were retyring to the maine battaile: them he chased, fetched vp and boorded, yet they brauely repelling him, and Doria wheeling about to assaile him abaft, knowing it dangerous for him to perseuer in fight where his owne force would continually decrease, and his Aduersaries be augmented, by confluence of reskew from all parts of the army, executing his most mischiefe vpon those Venetians, he with saile and oares stood off to sea, towing after him the Gallies of Pietro Bua of Corfou, of the Prior of Messina, and Lodouico Cipico of Trahu, Benedetto Soranza, mortally wounded and oppressed by multitude, fighting valliantly to the last was slaine, and his Galley taken. But so, that such getting in conclusion proued their losse. For many of the enemies thronging into the Galley, either  by casualty or desperate malice of some captaine, she fired, and they perished in a wretched mixture of death, burning, and drowning. It seemed that the fury of the slaughtered Turkes suruiued and was vnited in Vluzzali, who alone gaue all three battailes some taste of his diuilish rage. Notwithstanding, all those Gallies which he had taken, were recouered, but that of Petro Bua of Corfou, in whose purchase he had a very hard bargaine. The night was his best protection, which shaddowed him from the pursuing Christians. Who now despayring to fetch him vp, whom they could not see to follow, gaue ouer the chase and stood back to the fleet, and Vluzzali escaped with about thirty Gallies. Many which could not swim being aliue, as if death had taught them that skill, floted being dead. And the sea glutted  with multitudes swallowed, spued their carkases vp againe. Many laboring in the water for life, found now more safety in their wracks then before in their Gallies, and sometimes a Turke and Christian, laying hold of one planke, began a priuate fight, while a third tooke benifit of what they stroue for; the sea in the meane time proouing victor of both. Here a tired Christian calls to his friend for helpe, here a Turke implores it of his enemy. Lamentable and confused cries come from both, when now the billowes begin to roare louder then all. For the nauy was yet scarce collected and reduced to a safe Hauen, towards night, when there arose so sodaine and violent a storme, as if the battaile had not now beene ended would haue beene a cruell stickler in it.
To conclude, the insolent enemies being thus ouer-throwne, and their spoile gathered* the next care was to cure the wounded men and repaire the brused and torne vessels. Wherein the Commanders testified no lesse industry then in preparation for the fight, and valor in it. It is hard to resolue which of the three Admirals D. Iohn, Venieri, or Colonna merited most applause, they all did what could not be exceeded by any other, nor equalled but by themselues. The former distast twixt Don Iohn and Venieri, as it had beene prouidently pacified by mediation of Colonna, so was it in the conquest nobly forgotten of themselues, D. Iohn toward the beginning of the battaile being endangered by inequallity of number, Venteri with his owne danger brauely reskewed, like two fierce mastiues iarring betweene  themselues, when the Beare comes, forget priuate strife to assaile the common enemy, which noble curtezy the Generall gratefully and publikly acknowledged, honoring him with the title of father, and which was more, father of the victory. The whole army in vnited voice gratified the diuine mercy for so great preseruation,

and eleuating their victorious hands to heauen, acknowledged them to bee strenthened by it. Euery man congratulated the safety of his liuing friend, yet moderatly lamented the fate of those dead, the sorrow of their death being dried vp with ioy of the cause. Those bodies which were recouered were honorably buried: the rest detained by the sea, were yet eternized on the shoare. To repeate the noble actions of euery particular man were a labour worthy Plutarke, euery life would be an history. But amongst the most eminent shines the noble indifferency of the Marquis de Sancta Cruz, who disposing of the reseruation of succors distributed them not by his owne affection but other mens necessities, bewraying at once excellency of iudgement, courage and celerity.
Many circumstances gaue luster to this victory, but nothing more then the flight of the Christian fleet not many yeeres before from the same place, the infamy of the one glorifying the other and seruing as a foile to it, as shaddowes set forth and enlighten any bright picture. It was a pleasing consideration to those who had beene in that fugitiue nauy to thinke that after so many yeeres they should finde their honor where they lost it. To this they added remembrance of the like battaile betweene Augustus Caesar and Marc-Antony many hundred yeers before fought in the same place, as if destiny had made it a stage for great actions, and this battaile had beene but the second part of the first.
The totall number of the dead in the Christian army were 7656. others say  7566 the chiefe of the Venetians were Augustino Barbarico Prouidator Generall of the Venetians fleet, Benedetto Soranza, Marin and Ieronimo Contareni, MarcoAntonio La^de, Francesco Bicono, Iacomo de Messa, Caterin Maripietro, Giouan Loredano, Vincento Quirini, Andrea and Georgio Barbarici all of the degree of Senators. Of Romans, Horacio Caraffa, Ferrante Bisballo, Virginio and Horacio of the noble family of Vrsini in Rome. Of the Spaniards, Iuan and Bernardino de Cardona, of the knights of Malta were many slaine, amongst whom these three were most famous, Ioakin Spart Commendador of Moguncia. Ro: of Hamberg Commendador of Hemmend orf, and Francis Drost, by nation Germains. The chiefe men wounded were, D. Iohn the Generall, Venieri the Venetian Admirall, Paulo Iordano, Marco Molino, and Troylo Sauello, and well nie seuen thousand priuate men. This losse of it selfe great, was lessened by comparison of the Turkes, who were reported by some Authors to haue beene dismembred of 29000. of their brauest souldiers slaine and taken: some affirme it lesse, some more. But the multitude of their Gallies taken, wracked, and dead bodies floting on the sea (carrying with it a resemblance of the generall deluge) acknowledge it to be great. Amongst those slaine, the most eminent was Ali Basha the high Admirall Generall, one of great magnanimity and worthy such a place. Mehemet Bey alias Siroch Gouernor of Alexandria a man of singular iudgement and valor, fighting to the last, not (as others) that he saw not, but contemned the danger. Hassan Basha the valiant sonne of his  valerous father Barbarossa, and many others equally valliant, noble, and deere to the Emperor their Master. The most welcome prisoners were Achmat and Mahomet sonnes of the Generall Ali Mehemet Bey Gouernor of Euboea, and three thousand and odde vulgar souldiers. There escaped Partau Basha who since others would not follow his councell in abstaining from fight, made vse of it himselfe. Vluzzali a desperate and subtill Rennegado who fought, but so alwaies that he might flie, and as the Parthian horse-men, did most mischiefe in flying. There were taken 130 vessels. Whereof 117. were Gallies, 13. Galeots. Some report, 160. some more, some lesse. The escape of the rest making the number of such as were taken vncertain. The Galley of Cleopatra was not more ritch, curious or beautiful  then the Admirall Galley of Ali, neither did the beauty of it better become peace, then the strength warre. There was much treasure and many things of great value found in it, which the noble Generall, not basely conuerted to his priuate vse but distributed to those who most deserued it. Amongst these, a Macedonian by

whose fortunate hand the Basha died was worthily the greatest sharer. And because Don Iohn held gold to poore a reward for such vnestimable merit, he approued those other guifts with honor, and knighted him. But the munificent Venetians thinking this a petty remuneration, nothing equiualent to the dignity of their state, gratified him with an annuity of 300. Ducats.
The most esteemed spoile of the Turkish fleet were the enfranchised Christians, in number 1200. words are but mute expressals of the wretchednesse of their captiuity (being at once compelled to suffer for, yet doe against their Religion) Nothing could equall it but this ioy of their enlargement, which was such as that of Ionas may be apprehended at his birth and resurrection out of that monster. Neither was this excessiue gladnesse confined to their owne brests, but at their  arriuall multiplied by diuision among their friends and kinsmen. Of whom these liuing mar^ires receiued such welcome as was giuen to the three Ebrew Salamanders comming out of the furnace. They seemed but then married to their wiues, and their children new borne to them: Embracements were now in steed of fe^ters, and kisses of blowes (blessed exchange!) And now they wept for ioy that they had no contrary cause to weepe. The misery past seemed to sweeten their present felicity, so that this day was with all deuotion, magnificence and exhileration celebrated as the Saboth of their slauish labours. The ninteenth of the same month Vnfredo Iustiniano arriued at Venice with aduertizement of victory to the Senate. Neuer any musicke so feasted their eares as that newes, no Oratory  could be so harmonious as the plaine relation of it. The only word of victory was the Epi^ome of all Retorick. The death of particular men seemed only a letting bloud for the generall health. No man grutched to bestow a sonne or brother towards this common sacrifize. Euen the heroick Barbarico was rather enuied then lamented, they which honored him aliue, being dead welny adored him: so that sorrow was now banished out of Venice, and confined to Constantinople.
The gratulatory Ambassadors of all neighbour Princes flocked thither, acknowledging the Venetians their protectors and champions.
The time of the yeere, and weaknesse of their fleete and men, moued the Generall D. Iohn to desist from pursuing the victory any farther. Therefore he proceeded to diuision of the spoile, which was thus proportioned.


The Popes share was.

Gallies. 21.
Whereof 19. ordinary, 2. Galeots.


Ordnance. 54.
Whereof 9. great, 3. murtherers, 42. smaller peeces.


Prisoners. 881.
Amongest whom were Achmat and Mahomet the sonnes of the Generall  Ali Basha.



The Venetians share was.

Gallies. 44.
Whereof 39. ordinary and a halfe, 4. Galeots and a halfe.


Ordnance. 131.
Whereof 39. and halfe great, 5. murtherers and an halfe. 86. smaller peeces.


Prisoners 1162.
Of all sorts.



The Spanish share was.

Gallies. 64.
Whereof 58. Gallies and a halfe, 6. Galeots and an halfe.


Ordnance 214.
Whereof 58. great peeces and a halfe, 8. great murtherers and an halfe. 128. smaller peeces.


Prisoners 1713.
Of all sorts.



The Remainder were distributed among the assistants.
The diuision concluded not with equallity, yet generall satisfaction; the Venetians thinking they had the more honor, though the Spaniard the more luggage. Venieri indefatigable in doing nobly, and exasperated with the yet smarting blow  of Cyprus, esteeming one Christian Kingdome not to be counteruailed with many barbarous fleets, extolled highly the magnanimity of the General, hoping that praise would haue spurred him forward in so faire and open a way of victory, proposing the reskew of Greece, an action which would more immortalize him then the conquest of Tunis had done his father, whose Genius he said would not enuy to see it selfe exceeded by him, which was not equalled by his Predecessors. This, much enflamed the hot-aspiring minde of the youthfull Prince lately fleshed, in so much that they proceeded to consultation how they might perfect this trophei whose hardest worke (the foundation) was already laied: when the secret maligners of Venieri hauing now againe by his meanes leisure and security to oppose  themselues to any deseigne of his, diuerted D. Iohn from so braue a resolution. Therefore making Aprill the time, and Corfou the Rendezuous of their next yeeres conuention, they dissolued the Nauy. Don Iohn returning to Messina.
This abrupt departure in the eye of expectation, appeared a running away, or tergiuersation (I had almost said Apostacy) from victory, whom he seemed to leaue vnkindly, desyring him to stay longer. All men greeued to see hope pregnant and great, likely to bring forth faire issue if she had gon out her time thus miscarry. The death of Ali by a Grecian, that miserable nation interpreted an Omen of ensuing liberty; and in opinion manumzied, after they found themselues thus deluded, groaned as vnder a new subiugation. Vpon intelligence of  the ouer-throw, they had taken heart and would haue taken armes too, had they beene offered: It greeued him now to dismisse that resolution so necessarily entertained. They desired if D. Iohn would not himselfe, only to let his shaddow (his fame) fight for them, while he stood by. That he would doe them the grace to eternize himselfe by their deliuery. And being certified of his returne cried out that he at once for-sooke himselfe and them, their liberty and his glory being the Twinnes whereof he was in labor, and that it was but a little greatnesse which one victory could fill. And surely had this opportunity beene well improoued, there might haue beene farre more made of it. For though that ingenious Turke to expresse the inequallity betweene the losse of our Cyprus and their Nauy, said, That  Selim had cut off the Venetians arme, they, but his beard: insinuating, That timber growes, but not Kingdomes; and ships might be built, but not Islands: yet is it manifest that the chiefe strength of this Samson layin this haire, and that if hee had beene assailed ere it grew out againe, the razor which cut his beard might haue cut his throat. Thus much the Tyrant himselfe vnwittingly acknowledged by the intended massacre of the Christians vnder him, cunningly fathered on reuenge, but begot by feare. He knew captiues of the quality of fire, as dangerous as seruiceable. It is true that the next spring, his fleet (not as it might haue beene quite rooted out) budded forth to his former hight: his Arsenals spawning shoales of Gallies, yet barren enough in marriners, the eye of a fleet; without these his  Gallies were blinde, not directing, but groaping their way: his expertest Pilots, old naturall sea-men, begot as it were on Marmaides, and nurst vp in the armes of the sea, perrished in the last battaile; these fresh multitudes did not man but fraught his vessels.
But these publike considerations were lesse potent to mooue D. Iohn to persist, then other priuate respects, to reduce him from this honorable expedition. Therefore the noble Venieri, whose actiue vntired spirit, neither the yeeres winter, nor his owne, could be numbe, was excited, not deterred, by his departure, so far from being ^etrograde in his course of victory that he determined to goe a step farther: and knowing that the terror of the late ouer-throw had much shaken and made a breach in the Turkish courage, he thought good to enter it ere time or supplies should repaire it. Being in this deliberation, Philippo Bragadino Prouidator of the Gulphe arriued with sixe Galleasses and ten Gallies, and after consultation, strengthing his owne fleete with this addition, and both with his owne reputation, he sodainely dispatch't Quirini, associated with many braue captaines to  Marguerita, which Venieri his fame deliuered vp to them; but finding it vntenable they razed it.
Venieri taking this as an earnest of some farther successe propounded an expedition for Saint Maura, which many of the councell of warre oppugned, alleadging the strength of the place, the vnaptnesse of the time, and disproportion of their owne powers to both; yet he full of hope and courage, resoluing, wheresoeuer the impediment were, it should not be in himselfe, proceeded thither, and hauing better viewed the impregnablenesse of the place, hee thought it a part of wisdome, next the not vndertaking a dangerous attempt, speedily to lay it downe, and therefore returned to Corfou.
Colonna leauing D. Iohn (on whom all supreame and exquisite honors were heaped) at Naples, from thence with great magnificence passed towards Rome: by the way, all mens eares and eyes taken vp and reserued soly for this obiect. Euery tongue being a Preface to the voluminous praises dedicated to him afterwards at Rome. Venice held the enemy at the armes end but had he euer closed with Italy, Rome would haue beene shrewdly griped. This Ague offeare thus shaking her, imagine how welcome the Physition was that cured her. To haue secured her from mischiefe, had been meritorious, but to returne it thither whence it came, was an infinite obligation: Arriuing therefore at Rome, long after himselfe, his fame had out-stripped him, and raised the spirit of that ancient city in a shape of triumphe to see her aged glory in this bright Glasse of victory, and entertaine her new champion. The city seemed to be turned inside outward: their ritch tapistries now beautifying the walles without, the streets strewed with flowers as at a marriage. At last came Colonna accompanied with the chiefe Senators and attended by the most eminent captiues, in number 160. suted rather to his fortune then their owne, very ritchly, yet in their countenances retayning a maiestick sorrow. Thus passing through many triumphant Arches erected in his honor, he came to the Popes place, at whose feete prostrating both himselfe and his dignities, and deliuering vp the sonnes of Ali, late likely to haue arriued in a lesse  welcome manner, he was most graciously entertained. His Holinesse applauding his proceeding generally. But quite contrary was his opinion of Doria: whom he said behaued himself more like a Pirate, or newtral, then one of the Christian party.
The end of the tenth Booke of the sixth Decade.






The Contents of the first Booke of the  seuenth Decade.
THE farther expectation of al men after the famous victory of Lepanto. The Venetians preparation against the spring. The Emperor beeing solicited by the Pope and Venetians to enter into the league refuseth it. The French King, Kings of Portugall and Poland doe the  like. The Spaniards seeme vnwilling by reason of the troubles of Flanders. The Venetians great preparations to passe into the Leuant. The Turkes scoure the seas whilest their fleet is making ready. The death of Pius the fifth, with the creation of Pope Gregory the thirteenth. Don Iohn his allegations for his stay at Messina. Souranza comming thither solicits Don Iohn to depart and vnite himselfe to the Venetian fleete. The cause of Don Iohns delay. Souranza bringeth supplies to Corfou. Iealozies betwixt the French and Spaniards by reason of the troubles of Flanders, with the French Kings complaint against the Duke of Alua. The Spaniards  are iealous of the French. The Pope and Venetians send Ambassadors to the most Christian and Catholike Kings to remooue their distrusts. Vluzzali Generall of the Turkish fleet putteth to sea. The Senats resolution perceiuing the delays of the Spaniards: Don Iohn certifieth Marc-Antonio Colonna of his departure: The Christian fleet notwithstanding leaues Corfou: Vluzzali determineth to fight with the Christian fleet: The Christians resolue to assaile the Turkes: The enemies alter their purpose and refuse battaile: The death of Sigismond King of Poland: The Venetian General intending to giue battaile  encourageth his soldiers. And lastly the retreat or rather flight of the enemies.

The first Booke of the seuenth Decad of the Historie of Uenice.
THE victory of the confederate Princes ouer the Turkes, who by their fortunate successe had till then made themselues terrible to all nations, had begot such expectation and hope in most men, as they supposed a fit occasion was now offered to reuenge all former wrongs: and that the Ottoman Empire forsaken of her late felicity would be ouerthrowne by the power of Christian Princes; perswading themselues that the onely report of the arriuall of the Christian fleet was sufficient to open a way to gallant enterprises  and conquests, and to cause the inhabitants of the Prouinces possest by the Turkes to reuolt, who did deadly hate their religion, customes, and gouernment: But the discreeter sort were not transported with such idle suppositions, nor fed with such vaine hope, considering the euent of things by reason, and not by affection, knowing that so long as the Turkes land forces (the true foundation of their Empire) were vnshaken, there was no likelyhood at all to preuaile againstSmall hope in the reuolt of the Turkes subiects. them, nor to hope on the peoples reuolt who commonly are wont to produce cleane contrary effects, and especially in the Ottoman Empire, where subiects are poore and needy, wanting commanders, armes and meanes, so that their commotions  can not greatly hurt the Turkes, or profit others: and that the Greekes, accustomed of a long time to seruitude, had lost the greatest part of their ancient generosity.The Uene^ians preparations against the spring.
The Venetians vpon these considerations were carefull to make new warlike preparations, to augment the number of their Gallies, to refresh their army with new souldiers, and generally to prouide whatsoeuer should be necessary, that they might speedily send their fleet into the Leuant against the Turkes.
But Christian Princes (shutting their eyes in regard of their owne particular affections) did not apprehend the fit occasion offered to abate the power of so great and terrible an enemy, and in a manner enuying one an other they discoursed  thereof as though it had beene a forraine warre (wherein notwithstanding consisted the common safety) and reiected the good fortune which the former prosperous successe did promise them: for the Emperor being entreated and solicited by the Pope and Venetians to embrace the cause, and being likewise perswaded by the Catholike King, who to that end had sent Don Pedro Fassardo to him, still persisting in his vsuall delaies, and irresolutnesse, alleadged new but greater difficulties, and wanting will, was very glad to entertaine any excuse to free himselfe from it: therefore he demanded to haue ready money giuen himThe Emperors excuses to free himselfe from entring into the league. insteed of those foote forces which they offered, and sufficient caution for it in some free townes of Germany, adding farther that he would be assured of the  continuance of that supply for a long time, and that to those ends they should insert more strict and expresse obligations in the Articles of the capitulations: this hee propounded onely for a shew, knowing well enough that they would neuer be granted; and it was likewise knowne, that hee had prepared the

tribute, and already made choice of a messenger to carry it to Constantinople. Charl^s the French King on the other side, solicited by the Pope, not to be wanting to all Christendome in such an expedition, answered that he would first vnderstand the Emperours resolution, and so soone as his forces were ready, hee would not faile speedily to send his aide to ioyne with the land-troupes of Germany, vnder the conduct of his brother the Duke of Aniou, but that hee neither could, nor ought, to suffer his sea-forces (farre inferior to those of Spaine) to ioyne with them.
At the same time the Cardinall Alexandrine hauing executed his commission in Spaine, was by the Popes commandement gon in Portugall, from whence  they hoped to procure thirty vessels of warre for seruice of the Christian fleet: the King did honourably entertaine him, yet hee could draw nothing from his Maiesty but generall promises, whereby he saw, that the King inclyning wholly to the enterprize of Barbary against the Moores, did not greatly respect matters farre from home. Not long after, Antonio Tepulo hauing accomplished his Ambassadge into Spaine, went thither likewise, verily perswading himselfe that the newes of the late victory would the easier haue induced that King to embrace the league, wherein a very honourable place was reserued for him, the Confederates fortunate successe inuiting him therevnto, together with his owne interest, that the vnbridled greatnesse of the Turkes might bee abated, whom (not without  cause) hee might feare would prooue bad neighbours to his Indies. All this could not procure the King to incline to the league, nor could the AmbassadorsThe King of Portugals answer to the Cardinall, and Venetians. draw any other promise from him, then this, That hee would the next yeere send foure thousand footmen to the seruice of the league, and ioyne some few of his owne vessels to the Confederates fleet, the which he could not then doe, because that certaine French Protestants of Rochell, did ordinarily make incursions vpon his territories and sea coasts, whereby he was enforced continually to entertaine certaine armed vessels, to resist them and the Moores of Fesse, and of this by letters he certified the Senate.
Tepulo in the end, because his Ambassage should not be fruitlesse, told him, that he might assist the common cause of Christendome against the infidels by other meanes, not hindring himselfe at all, namely by causing his officers in the IndiesThe King of Portugals promises. to acquaint the Persians, sworne enemies to the Turkes, with the vnion of the Christian Princes, with their late victory against Selim, and with their deseignes, and afterwards by sending certaine numbers of Portugall Harguebuziers from the red sea, vnto the confines of the Turkish Empire, to keepe them busied in sundry places, or at least to amaze and hold them in suspence. The king promised so to doe, adding therevnto that they should stop their commerce from Ormus and Bazzana, and the transportation of mettal through the Persian seas, which aboundantly was brought to them from China.
The King likewise gaue meanes to the Cardinall Alexandrine, to conuey certaine Breefes to the Persian King, Prester Iohn, and some other Kings of Arabia written vnto them by the Pope, wherein he solicited them to take armes against the Turkes, the which letters tooke none effect, nor were euer answered.
The Pope likewise solicited the King of Poland, with whom at the same time the Cardinall Commendon remayned, who promised to draw that King intoThe Pope soli^ the King of Poland. the league, in regard of sundry accidents which happened, besides the victory, the Turkes meaning to bee reuenged on the Polakes, for that they had fauored the Valachian, to the preiudice of the Ottoman Empire, and for that purpose had in hostile manner entred Prussia, Padolia, and Russia. But the King falling  sicke during the treaty and not beeing able to bee present at the negociation, it was referred to some Lords of the Kingdom, who did smally affect that war, being vnwilling to contribute (according to their custome) towards the expense of forrain war: As also because that at the same time they had intelligence that a Chiaus

was comming from Constantinople to their Court, to treate about that contention, al the Popes endeuor and authority could not make it sort to any good effect.
After this manner were matters handled in the Court of Christian Princes, who seemed already to decline from their former hope, and knew, that for the abating of the Turkish power the Sea-forces were not sufficient, but that a mighty land-Army was needfull: and that therefore it especially imported them to haue the Emperor to enter into the league, all men holding it for certain, that Poland, Musco^y, and the other northerne Prouinces, apt to take Armes against the Turkes, would presently yeeld to the authority of the Empire: this being considered by the enemies they vsed all meanes to preserue the Emperor Maximilians friendship, thinking the danger, which threatened them, not to be small, if all Germany  should league it selfe against them.
Therefore Mahomet Bascha had written to the Emperor, and had particularlyBascha Mahomet soliciteth the Emperor. acquainted him with the battaile, making the ouerthrow farre lesse then indeed it was, and the power of the Ottoman Empire very great, requesting him not to breake the truce for other mens pleasures, but to preserue his inuiolate freindship with Selim; which beeing once knowne, would continue for euer. But that which did heerein most trouble the Pope and Venetians and made them to feare,The Pope and Venetians doubt. was, their suspition, that the Spaniards would not shew themselues so ready to pursue the course of the victory, as the importancy of the cause did require: because that diuers of the Catholick Kings courtiers murmured against D. Iohn for  hazarding the Kings forces in battaile, seeing that his maiesties interest was vnlike that of the Venetians where-vppon they were differently to bee mannaged: and for that afterwards when they vnderstood, that the Duke of Sessa, a noble and famous Gentleman, came to command in the Army in stead of the great Commander Requ^sens who went to be Gouernour of Milan, they inferd therevppon, that the Catholik King would not haue D. Iohn attempt ought without his aduise and Councell.
Now the greatest let then found in pursuing this warre of the Leuant, was, the bad successe of the affaires of Flanders, where they daily grew from bad to  worse, not without som suspition that the Protestants of Germany, England and France would fauour and asist that rebellion so, that a fit and conuenient opportunity being made to vnite the Nauies and put to Sea, notwithstanding that Leonardo Contaren the Venetians Ambassador with D. Iohn, did solicite this vnion and shipping of the soldiers, all his pursuites were in vayne. The Venetians alone, not loosing time, spared neither cost nor labour, but sought to make vse of the victory, and with great speed trimd their Gallies, augmented their number, made new leuies of soldiers to compleat their army, that it might speedily bee ready to saile into the Leuant. And because that D. Iohn and the Spaniards had entertained some distast of the Generall Venieri (as hath beene already said) the  better to take away al occasion of hatred and diuision, they chose Iacomo Poscarini their Generall who at that time was Prouidator Generall in Dalmatia, who hauing notice that hee was elected, and receiuing the Common wealthes standerd from Lodouico Grimani who succeeded him in Dalmatia, he departed from Zara on the first day of Aprill with nine Gallies and went to Cor^ou, where taking charge of the fleet, which at that time consisted of 40. Gallies, he made a General review, and sent for great numbers of footmen vnder diuers Captaines from Brindisi, he stored the Gallies with victualls, armor, munitions and all other necessaries: this being done, the Generall Venieri with some Gallies retired into the Gulph, there to execute some Noble enterprize, if occasion were offered.(...) Turkes (...) of the Christians before the battaile.
This in effect is all that was done by the Christian Princes. The Turkes after the battaills losse, were by so much more aflicted, as inured to victory, they could not entertaine conceit of contrary successe, and contemning the Christian forces, they came rather to spoile then to fight: but this vnexpected ouerthrow

made them more circumspect. wherevppon Selim who then lay at Constantinople, fearing ^least some innouation might happen at Constantinople, presently went thither and shewed himselfe to the people, dissembling as much as in him lay, his discontent and feare. The Baschas neuerthelesse were very carefull to prouide all necessaries for the army, so as it seemed they were in hope to reforme their former error, and to recouer their lost reputation: they repayred their old Gallies, built new, enrolled great numbers of Marriners, sent for soldiers forth of the Prouinces to come to Constantinople, so that vsing industry and speed to the hurt and wonder of the Christians, Carassali departing forth of the streight of Gallipolis with threescore armed vessells, began to scoure the Seaes, and to wast  the Islands of Tino and Carigo, whilest Vluzzali prepared a great fleet: for they had determined being once vnited to passe on, and to inuade the Isle of Candy; or else face the Venetians Nauy, frustrate their deseignes, and assure the Seas belonging to the Ottoman Empire. These prouisions and the Confederates delaies and irresolutions, had much imboldened the Turkes, and although in the beginning they had sundry times conferred with the Venetian Baily concerning peace, and seemed to be very desirous of it, they neuerthelesse delayed the certaine resolution thereof till the arriuall of the Bishop of Aix Ambassador to the most Christian King, whom they knew at that time to be come from Venice towards Constantinople vppon important affaires, supposing that hee brought The (...) of peace beoken. som particular commission with him concerning that businesse, and that by his mediation together with his Kings authority, they might the easier establish and conclude some honorable agreement: but the condition of matters being afterwards changed when they came to treat on particulars, they propounded very vniust Articles, being desirous to make peace as though they had been victorious not vanquished, menacing the Venetians with losse and destruction: The Confederates neuerthelesse being no whit mooued by these nor other geeat mischeefs, went very slowly to work, as though the enemies had beene wholly defeated, that they had no more cause to fight, and as if at their own pleasure they might haue enioyed the fruit of the Vlctory. All men did wonder at these delaies, and differently  discoursed therof: A rumor was spred abroad, that the French did no longerRumors diu^lged by the Spaniard. in secret but openly assist the Flemmings who determined to inuade the territories of the Catholick King; that to this end, they prepared fifty shippes of warre at Rochell, which should be commanded by Phillippo Strozzi: and elsewhere other stirrs and rumors of war were reported to be currant in the Realme of Nauarre.
These soe important and dangerous reports, held the Spaniards in suspence, and would not suffer them to imploy their sea*forces, in which their greatest hope consisted) in forraine enterprizes, fearing not to haue them again at their need, for the defense of their owne territories Many alleaged other reasons  which mooued the Spaniards not to set forth: But whatsoeuer the true occasion was, it was after the Spannish manner kept very secret: for they, making no shew to feare the French, or that they had giuen ouer the enterprize of the Senate for any other respect, they did still affirme the contrary, promising from day to day to come to Corfou: all this they did very cunningly, knowing well enoughThe Spaniards feare least the Uenetians make peace with the Turks that if the Venetians should suspect that the Conederates went about to forsake them, it would enforce them to make vse of the present time, and to agree with the Turkes: a matter which would greatly preiudice the Spaniards, who resoluing for to continue perpetuall enemies vnto the Turkes would alone bee constrayned to make head against the forces of so great a  Potentate.
After this manner did the Spaniards at the same time beare themselues, not bewraying their inward intentions, but temporizing in conclusion did nothing.

In the meane time Pius Quintus dyed generally lamented, a man of great Sanctimony(...) of Pius Quintus. and zealous of the common good of Christendome, the onely instrument of the preseruation and augmentation of the league.
These newes flying to Venice, the Senate presently by letters sollicited theThe Venetians solicite the Cardinalls in the (...) of the (...). Colledge of Cardinalls, not to suffer the league, which his late Holinesse had cherisht, to dye with him, knowing how mortall delay was to it, and how preiudiciall the dissolution, to the common good: the Colledge resolued to continue the preparation for warre, and instantly committed the ma^naging of the businesse vnto the former Commissioners, who then presently (...) in hand with it.
The Papacy was not long vacant, for the same day the Conclaue elected H^go Boncompagno Cardinal of Saint Sixtus, a Bolognesse and doctor of the lawes long resident and very famous in the Court of Rome intituling himselfe Gregory 13.
His Coronation solemnized he confirmed the league in the former condition but concerning the conuention of the fleetes there arose many delayes and difficulties: for D. Iohn only seeking procrastination, grew scrupulous of his departure, saying his commission extended no farther, but euery day expected a more ample, where with hee hoped ere long to satisfie them: by this meanes was the great preparation of the Venetian frustrate, and D. Iohn perseuering in these protractions, wrote to the Generall Foscarini that his onely stay was for the Duke of Sessa, who if he came not uery speedily, himselfe resolued without him  to come to Corfou: hee likewise taxed Collonna, because his expectation of the Florentine Gallies, made him delay his ioyning with the fleet. The Senate had enioyned the Generall Foscarini not to attempt any particular enterprize till the Spanish Gallies were arriued, ^erst he therby should hinder the common cause of the league,The enterprize vppon Castelno ^o propounded to the Senate.
At the same time Sciara Martinenga of Bressia a man famous for his martiall experience, and Gouernor Generall of Albania propounded the enterprize vppon Castelnouo to the Senate, a matter greatly desired by the Venetians, not so much for facillity of conquest, the towne beeing small and badly inhabited, as  for the commodious situation thereof, lying at the mouth of the Gulph of Catharra.
The Senate in som sort desirous to let the enemies feele the fury of their Armes committed this attempt to Martinenga, who told them that he had already sufficiently viewed the place, and that the execution thereof was easie. Hee imbarked himselfe and fiue thousand footmen at Chioggia, among whom were many Frenchmen, gallant fellowes and good soldiers, hee directed his course towards the Gulph of Catharra, carrying with him a commission from the Councell of Tenne to the General Venieri to aid and asist him in that enterprize, whom me^ting by ^he way neere to Sisena they sailed together towards the mouth of the The attempt vppon Castelnouo in vaine. Gulph, where landing their soldiers and attempting to surprize the Towne, the alarme was so whot ouer the whole Countrey, as multitudes of Turkes comming to defend it, Martinenga and the Generall were enforced to quitt the enterprize and to retreat, the one to Zara, and the other with his French forces to Catharra,
After this manner did the Christians affaires languish, and were nothing answerable to the reputation which the late victory had gotten them, their fleets and soldiers remayning idle at Corfou and Messina, being spectators of the enemies insulting braues at sea, their number and victualls daily diminishing D. Iohn still remayning at Messina and vsing his former delayes, did infinitely discontent the  Generall Foscaren, who somtimes determined of him selfe to attempt somewhat vppon the enemy, but at last making a vertue of necessity and knowing his owne forces alone to weake for any great enterprize, he was enforced to spend the time in expectation of the confederates arriuall. And yet he did by all meanes auoide

any occasion that might discontent the Spaniards, or giue them cause of any suspition, that they might haue no lawfull cause to bee wanting to the common cause.
Foscarini beeing thus perplext, thought it best to send the Prouidator Soranza to Messina, who was newly come from Candy, hoping that by his wisdome and discretion, Don Iohn being put in minde of his former honor, might bee speedilySoranza is honorably enterteined by Don Iohn at Messina. induced to depart. Souranza departed from Corfou with twenty fiue Galleys, hauing foule weather all the way: at last arriuing at Messina, hee was honorably entertained by Marc-Antonio Colonna, excusing himselfe and imputing it to the tempest, that he had not met him farther at sea: they both went to Don Iohns Pallace, and at the gates were receiued by the Count of Piega his chiefe Steward, and principall Gentlemen of his houshold, conducting them into the Princes,His Remonstrance to D. Iohn. presence, who with all honorable curtesie welcomed him, seeming highly contented with his comming: Soranza began to acquaint him with the cause of his arriuall, together with the state of matters, and incredible desire of all men to see him at Corfou: he informed him of the great number of Galleys, soldiers, abondance of victuals and munitions, where with two and twenty ships were loden: that they onely wanted the conuention of the fleets, which they all desired in so important an action: in regard whereof hee was sent to acquaint him with the stare of the Venetians nauy, and to waite vpon him to Corfou. That the Venetian Captains, who had a long time bin in readinesse, would attempt nothing without his presence, notwithstanding that they had beene often inuited therevnto by report of the enemies weaknesse, and by their wrongs and spoiles committed in the Islands vnder their dominion: That the Senate, and euery particular man, desired to haue the glory and honor of all enterprises bestowed vpon him: for which cause especially they had hitherto kept their whole fleet in harbor, being wel assured that his arriuall at Corfou would be no longer deferred, and that his own present comming to Messina, was rather to honor then hasten his departure: saying that nothing would be more dangerous to the league, then continuation of delay. Marc-Antonie Colonna, did in the Popes name second Soranza, telling him how much his Holinesse  desired the prosperity of the league, and conuention of the fleetes.
Don Iohn seemed not to distaste this motion, excusing his delay by sundry impediments hapned, promising euer after to vse all possible speed, and to take order for the present rigging of an hundred Galleys which should bee man'd withThe Spanish delayes. forty thousand footemen of seuerall nations. But the effects were not answerable to his words, for at that time there were but three score Galleys in the hauen of Messina: and of those which the Duke of Sessa was to bring from Spain, there was no newes at all: Besides, the old soldiers refused to go any farther, vnlesse they might receiue certaine moneths pay which was due vnto them for their former seruice. Yet they dayly fed the Venetian Prouidator with sundry hopes  and faire promises: and the better to beguile him, they imbarked three thousand Italian foot in thirty Galleis vnder the conduct of the General of Naples, giuing it forth that they were to goe before to Corfou, there to expect the remainder of the fleete.
In these delayes did they waste time, and halfe Iune was spent without any exploit vpon the enemy, or any certaine hope or resolution what to do: his Holinesse so licitations being therein of no more force then that of the Venetians: for the Pope hauing often by letters, and lately by his expresse messenger the Bishop of Odiscalca hastned Don Iohn: he went about to satisfie him with good words, and faire promises, so far, as the nauy was blest by his Holinesse Nuncio, processions The true cause of Don Iohns delay. and prayers appointed to be made, and a day prefixt taken for their departure.
In the end, D. Iohn knowing no more how to excuse his delay, beeing on euery side solicited to depart, the Marquis of Santa Cruz, arriuing with the Galleys of Naples, and Don Iuan de Cardona with those of Sicill, his owne Admirall Galley

beeing likewise ready, was constrained to discouer the truth of the mattetr, which was, that hee had receiued expresse commandement from Spaine, not ^o carry the fleete into the Leuant, by reason of the Kings doubt of the Fren^h, which had restrayned his commission and forces in a place from whence hee might easily depart (if need should be) to defend the territories of the Spanish King.
Souranza vnderstanding the true cause of D. Iohns delay, and perceiuing his own earnest soliciting to be in vaine thought it fit before his departure, at leastwise to trye if for the honour of the league he would lend him part of his nauy, which being ioyned to the Venetians at Corfou, might preserue the glory and reputation which it had formerly wonne: yet because he would not bee seene in it himselfe, he caused Collonna to demand it, wherevppon the Councell beeing often assembled, they at last resolued to lend him 22. Gallies and 5000. foot: but because many of them were to be drawn from the Garrisons of Calabria; their departure was yet longer delayed. G^lles Andrada Knight of Malta had command of the Gallies as Generall to the King, and Vincento Tuttauila Count of Sarna comman^dedD. John leadett the Venetians 22. Gallies. the soldiers.
With these Gallies and those of the Church, 13. in number, eleuen of the Duke of Florence, and two of Michaele Bonello brother to Cardinall Alexandrine, the Prouidator Souranza returned to Corfou, and by the way Marc-Antonio Collonna, displayed the enseigne of the league, and held the place of Generall.
The Intention of the Spaniards published, it was euery where reported that the whole force of the league would not for that yeare make any expedition into the Leuant: and yet the Spanish Ambassador at Rome had intelligence that notwithstanding the affaires of Flanders a iourney might be made into the east, and therfore that his Kings Gallies should direct their course to Affrike, and likewise to releeue Sicily- Muleassen King of Tunis his pursute with D. Iohn to excite him to this enterprize, was caufe that al men beleeued this report: and yet mens discourses were different for though the warre of Flanders was not new, the accidents were so, which enforced the Catholick King to haue a care of the preseruation of  those Contries where the enemies forces and disorders were very much augmented For Count Nassau hauing at the beginning of the yeare taken Mons in Henault, and not long after the Citty of Valenciennes, his whole forces consisting of forraine soldiers and for the most part French, this bred great distrust and iealouzie betwixt the two mighty Kings of France and Spayne, so as the Duke of Alua, then Gouernour of the Low-Contries, did speedily aduertize his maister thereof, the like did he to the Pope and Venetians, amplifiing the matter more then needed, wherewith Cardinall Granuell and the Spannish Ambassador that were at Rome, wrote speedily to D Iohn, willing him not to depart from Messina, all Spaine beeing in alarme, which did likewise put some iealous distrust in the  French, least the Spaniards with their nauy should inuade Prouence, wherevppon they beganne to fortifie Marseilles, and other important places, placing in them strong Garrisons.
Vppon a rumor spred abroad that the Duke of Alua should publiquely say, that hee accounted warre to beee open betwixt Spaine and France, the most Christian King was mooued thereat, and made many complaints by his Ambassadors not onely at Rome and Venice, but in Spaine also, beeing partly greeued that his cheefe officers did affirme so important a matter; the which as himselfe detested, hee supposed others would doe the like: in part like-wise going about to iustifie his owne actions, from which it seemed that the Duke of Aluas suspition  proceeded, causing him to vse such speech.
The Christian King affirmed, that those French which had followed the Count Nassau at the taking of Valenciennes, were indeed his subiects, but all of them of

the Protestant faction, and by consequent disobedient rebels to the Crowne of France: that hee had euer beene greatly greeued for the troubles in Flanders, as one that in his owne kingdome had too much experience of subiects rebellion, and whose part it was to roote out, and not by such examples to cherish the boldnesse of vass^ls against their Prince; beeing as desirous of the wealth of Christendome as any other liuing, although his owne particular troubles would not at that time permit him to shew it in effect: and seeing with his owne forces hee could not assist them, his meaning was not to hinder the good intent of others: that he had some armed vessels ready, not to assaile or offend any one, but onely for the safety of his owne seas infested by Pyrates: the number of his vessels being  insufficient for any great action.
These or such like discourses did the French Kings Ambassadors by their maistersThe French King ^orhideth his subi^cts to goe into Flan^ers. commandement vse in Spaine, Rome, and Venice: and to giue the greater credit vnto them, they were by Edict euery where published, with a prohibition to all French men, on greeuous penalties, not to passe with their armes into Flanders: and not satisfied here-with, his most Christian Maiesty, seemed at the same time to incline to the league, wherevpon, the Cardinall Lorraine, by his commandement, did often conferre with the Venetian Ambassador, resident in his Court concerning that businesse, whom hee went about to perswade, that the French King was wholy bent to procure the peace of Christendome, with a  singular affection toward the Crowne of Spaine.
All this notwithstanding, the Spaniards were no better satsfied then before, saying, That the French did but this to coulor their practises, and to open themselues a way to assaile the Catholick Kings territories in sundry places: ThatR^asont alleadged by the Protestants to moou^ the French King to warre. they had certaine notice, how that the King of Nauarre, and the Admirall Coligni, did openly vrge the most Christian King to vndertake that warre, whom hee must needs please, in regarde of his owne particularinterest, the chiefe Lords and Princes of his Court, mainteining that France would neuer bee at quiet, vnlesse the King did resolue vpon some forraine enterprise, wherein to employ both Catholicks and Protestants, and among others, that of Flanders seemed the easiest  for many respects: That he might make that warre with some coulor, by reason of the claime of the Crowne of France to those Countries: in which warreThe Spaniards are iealous of the French mens actions. without all question the Queene of England would willingly haue a share, in regard of her distast of the Catholik King: That the marshall ot Montmorency went into England to none other end, then to conclude the League with the English, and that both of them together beeing freed from other troubles, might the easlier enuade the Netherlands: Besides, that the French Kings league with the Turke, made them to suspect, that hee went about to procure the Turkes Army to enuade the Catholick King, as they had done in former times, especially seeing it was reported that the Turke had giuen the citty of Tunis to the French  King, and promised with his forces to defend it against the Spaniards.
The Pope beeing greatly mooued at these delayes, as well for the common interest of Christendome, as his owne reputation, which hee accounted to bee much blemished, in that hee at his first comming to the Papacy hauing freely confirmed the league, the Nauy should now become idle and vnprofitable, or else be imployed to any other end, which the King of Spaine could not doe, it beeing set forth at the Clergies cost, by permission and authority of the Sea Apostolick, onely against the Turkes. This caused his Holinesse to send new messengers to D. Iohn, to command him speedily to depart and ioyne with the Venetians fleet: and on the other, he councelled the Venetians to dispatch speedy Ambassadors to the  French and Spanish courts, to root out all suspitious doubts, and distrusts betwixt those Kings, and particularly to incite the Catholick Maiesty, to send away his fleet without any more delay, according to the articles of the league.
His Holinesse sent his Nuncios for that purpose, Antonio Maria Saluiati Bishop of Saint Peposito the French King, and Nicolo Ormaneti Bishop of Padua to the King of Spaine. The Emperor likewise vsed meanes to attone these two Kings, being mooued therevnto by sundry particular respects of his owne: but the Venetians more then any shewed themselues earnest and ready in this businesse as well in regard of their owne interest, as for that they were loath to giue the Pope any cause to suspect, that by not stirring in so important a deseigne, their mindes were turned to peace, and thereby to distaste him of the league.
They then according to his commandement chose two Ambassadors, namely,Ambassadors (...) from Venice, to France and Spaine. Giouan Micaele for France, and Antonio Tepulo for Spaine, who made hast to those  Courts. Michaele being come into France did briefly acquaint the King with the Senates desire to see a firme and assured peace established betwixt Christian Princes, that being afterwards vnited, they might turne their forces vpon the common enemy: he told him that the Venetians were much discontented with the rebellions of Flanders, and with the iealozies which therevpon arose betwixt his Maiesty and the Catholike King, which if they should haue lasted, could not but haue procured great hurt to Christendome: but by how much the matter was great and important of it selfe, by so much the lesse could the Senate be inducedThe Venetian Ambassadors discourse to the French Kin^ to beleeue it, being well acquainted with his Maiesties discreet loue and affection to the common good: And because the perswations of those, who are enemies to  peace, and who for their owne particular interest, are wont to diuert Princes from their good and honourable deseignes, the Senate would not be wanting (therein following the custome of their ancestors) to imploy in that businesse, the fauour which it particularly presumed to haue with his Maiesty, to exhort him to stop his eares to such inducements, and if peraduenture he had already entertained them, that it might please him in the behalfe of Christendome, and for his particular loue to their Commonwealth to cassier them, to the end that the Catholike King freed from that doubt, might freely harken to the enterprises of the Leuant, and obserue the Articles of the league.
The King gaue a willing eare to this discourse, saying that the Senate was in no The French Kings answere to the Venetian Ambassador. sort deceiued of his exceeding loue towards their Commonweale, and least of all, in beleening that he was desirous of the wealth and aduancement of Christendome: that the troubles of Flanders had neuer pleased him, that he had vsed all possible meanes, to keepe his subiects from being adherents or supporters of those Rebels: but that the condition of those times, and the present wretched estate of his Kingdome would not permit him to tame the insolency of some that loued innouation; who were not to be wondered at, if after they had raised troubles in his owne Realme, went about to doe the like in his neighbours Dominions: that it had neuer beene by his consent; for that would haue hurt the Catholike King, and done no good to France, but on the contrary, would haue procured new  troubles which might easily incite the Catholike King to an agreement with the Flemings, and afterwards to make warre vpon him in Daulphine, or in the Kingdome of Nauar, by which meanes, in seeking to carry the war into a forraine country, he might be enforced to bring it into his owne, at such a time when the forces of his Realme were wasted and diuided by long ciuil wars. The Queene mother being present at this discourse, who at that time had great authority in managingThe mother Queene of France write^ to the Pope. the affaires of the Kingdome, desirous to preserue peace, would needs with her owne hand write to his Holinesse to assure him of her willingnesse in all things to follow his aduise and councell* and that if her sonne the King had raised forces, it was not don with an intent to hurt any but only to serue and defend himself from  the Spaniards who were reported vpon no iust cause to haue taken armes.
The Catholike King on the other side, before Tepulo his arriuall at his Court, resolued to write to Don Iohn, That all other respects laied aside, hee should make hast with his Gallies to ioyne with the Venetians and with them to saile

into the Leuant, being herevnto moued by intelligence of the French Kings affection towards him, or else, for that he did not much feare his power, hauing recouered Valenciennes, or because he would not so much honor the French, as to haue it said, that for feare of them he had giuen ouer so important an enterprise, as thatThe Catholick King^s resolution before the Ambassadors ariual. against the Turkes, or (that which is most like to be true) because, as became a wise and vertuous Prince, he would in no sort omit that wherevnto he was obliged by the league: but whatsoeuer it were that caused this resolution it is certaine that it proceeded from his owne proper motion, and that he did write so to Don Iohn, before he acquainted his councell therewith, fearing least they should propound some difficulties, which might haue diuerted him from it as in former times.
Antonio Tepulo in the meane time being come into Spaine and aduertized ofTepulo his sute to the Kinge of Spaine. the Kings determination, did not speake any thing of the French iealozies or vniting of the Nauies, but only intreated the King to permit D. Iohn, in regard the time of yeere was almost past for sea-affaires to winter in the Leuant, mooued therevnto by sundry reasons which much imported the Venetian Commonwealth. The King neuerthelesse alleadging many reasons to the contrary, would not grant his request, either of his owne proper motion as being vnwilling to hazard too much on fortune, or else being so aduised by such as were not greatly affected to the league. Now, whilest the confederate fleet went slowly forward, the great and mighty Turkish nauy scoured the sea. For Vluzzali being made Generall  thereof, besides the gallies which he had receiued of Carazzati, had with great speed rig'd and man'd an hundred others, with al which, departing in great pompe and magnificence from Constantinople, he had already past the Streight of Gallipolis and came forward intending to wast and spoile the Isle of Candy, and other places belonging to the Venetians, according as he should haue intelligence of the progression of the Christian fleet: certaine newes being at that time brought to Venice of the stay and delaies of the Spanish fleet, which did much discontent them, and made them wonder that the Spaniards, who at first had been so desirous of the league, should after such a fortunate and vnhoped for successe (fearing some vncertaine and remote dangers) wholy depriue themselues of the present and assured  beauty thereof. The Senate not being able to discouer wherevnto those delaies tended, thinking it vaine to expect their assistance any longer, determined toThe senates resolution when they perceiued the Spanish delaies: write to Generall. Foscaren that without any longer expectation of the conuention of the fleets, so soone as the Prouidator Souranza should returne to Corfou, he should put to sea, to encourage their subiects, and assure their owne territories, and proceeding warily, to embrace such occasions as God shold offer him, for the honor and profit of the Commonwealth. Foscarin receiuing this commandement and tired with his idle aboad there, so soon as the Prouidator Souranza and Colonna came to Corfou, propounded the departure of the nauy into the Leuant, wherevnto allColonna his ^duice. men consenting, they began to consult about their iourney. But Antonio Colonna did freely and with great affection vtter his good meaning towards the affaires of the league, and in particular to the profit and aduancement of the Venetian Commonwealth, much bewayling the time lost and the diminution of their forces: neuerthelesse he willed them to hope well, assuring them that the Spanish Kings intention was honorable, and the Pope very earnest in soliciting him, and that Don Iohn with the residue of the fleet would shortly meet them: yet though the Popes subiect, and seruant to the King of Spaine, he was resolued to spend his life in that enterprise, it importing the Venetians particular seruice, whom hee knew were more interessed in that warre then any other.
Generall Foscarani replied, that the State was well acquainted with the Pope General Foscarini his answer to Colonna. and Catholike Kings loue, and they of the States affection and inclination to the league, as the proceeding herein testified: but Colonnas vertue, zeale to the common good of Christendome, and particular affection to the Venetian Commonwealth, was not only manifested to themselues, but to the whole world, by

so many noble seruices in aduancement of the league: yet himselfe could not choose but lament, that so many fayre occasions presented, they had not imbraced them as they deserued. But since it was fruitlesse to call backe time past, and they not able to remoue the impediments detayning D. Iohn in Sicely, the onely remedy hereof is to redeeme delayes past with present expedition, and to set forward against the enemy inferior to themselues both in number and vallor. And seeing it hath pleased the diuine prouidence (conducting humaine actions in bywayes to vs vnknowne) that the confederate fleeet should bee thus disioyned, let vs see if wee can set vpon them diuided, which they would shunne if we were vnited: If wee can enforce them to retire, it will bee much to vs to haue in this sort  mainetayned the reputation of the league and confirmed our owne estates without the Spanish ayde. Colonna approued the opinion of Foscarin, confirmingColonna's opinion concerning the setting forward towards the ^mies. G^l. Andrada his opinion. it by many arguments: not-with-standing he aduised him to conduct the Galies and Galeots altogether, the Ponents then seruing them fitly for their course.
Gil Andrada stood newtrall betwixt these opinions, onely saying they ought to proceede circumspectly, and not without necessity or aduantage hazard so important an attempt, adding that further inteligence was requisite, by which they were to direct their proceeding but highly commended the councell of Colonna for carrying all their force vnited and well furnished, not exposing themselues  to casualty, concluding that their opinions should sway his.
Thus resoluing to leaue Corfou, the fleet consisted of six score and six Galies, six Galliasses and twenty shippes, and in euery Galley an hundred and twenty Souldiers; it was diuided into three battailes; in the mayne lay the three Generalls with fiue and forty Gallies: the rest were equaly distributed into two wings, the Prouidator Souranza conducting the right, and Canalis the left, reseruing place in the vantguard for the Gallies of Candy hourely expected, each squadron towed two Galeasses, and part of the shipping, so disposed, that when need required they might aff^ont the Galleis, yet not to fight without those vessells. TheDon Iohn certifies the Venetians that bee will shortly bee with them. fleet beeing ready to depart, a Fregate from Palermo came to the Venetian Generall, sent by Placido Ragazz^n, certifiyng him that a Galley from Spaine was come to D. Iohn at Messina, bringing commandatory letters from the King that hee should without any more delay ioyne his whole fleet with that of the Venetians: This was afterwards confirmed by D. Iohns owne letters, written to MarcAntony Collonna. Although these newes were pleasing to euery man, yet did theyThe fleet departeth notwithstanding. not hinder the resolued departure of the fleet: For vpon the 28. of Iuly the three Generalls left the Gamonisses, where they had tarried for the Prouidator Canalis who was gonne to Ottranto with sixteene Gallies, to take in three thousand foot, vnder the command of Collonell Horatio Aquanina, sonne to the Duke of Atria: which at their arriuall were distributed among the fleet. Before their departure  from the Gamonisses, Giouan Mocenig^ with his Galley was despatch't to Candy to acquaint them with the comming of the Christian fleet, and to make discouery of the enemies, of whom no newes could bee heard. The fleet then vnder sayle, the Prouidator Quirini returning from Candy with 30. Galleis, came to it at the entrance of the Channell Viscarda, from whence with a fayre winde (though the towing of the greater vessels did hinder the way) they held on their course to Zant, where hauing no newes of the enemies, and enforced to spend two dayes there, in raking in fresh water, they sent forth 3 other Gallies to discouer. vidz. those of Angelo (...), Philipo Leone, Venetians, and that of Romegas a  knight of Malta.
Vluzzali at that time an^ored vnder the Castle of Maluesia with 200* Gallies, and many other lesser Vessels, hauing intelligence that the Christian fleet ^ought him, which dis-vnited he thought durst not haue departed fro^ Corfou, and therefore had sent certaine Gallies towards the Promontory of Mal^a, whom hee (...)

called back, and stayed in this place to receiue more certaine newes of the enemies.
And beeing truly aduertized that it made towards him, and that already it was come as farre as Cerigo in number of small vessells it was inferior to his, but superiour in greater, he determined to put to sea and encounter them. And calling vnto him the cheefe Commanders of his fleet, he encouraged them to battaile, telling them how faire an occasion was offered to purchase immortall glory and credit with their great Lord by breaking the Christian small fleet, which was so audacious to come and seek them, thinking thereby to auoid the spoile of Candy: that his meaning was to leaue the hauen, to order his nauy, and to fight with the daring Christians: this said, he confirmed his words with shew of performance, and presently prepared all necessaries for the fight, directing his course towards the Cape of Malea. In the meane time the two Gallies of Suriana and Romegas returned to the fleet at Cerigo, bringing certaine newes that Vluzzali lay in the hauen of Maluesia with 200, saile: Heerevppon, the three Generalls considering that it would redound to their dishonour not to fight with the enemies being so neere, determined with one consent to saile to the Cape of Malea, and to offer the enemies battaile. According to this resolution the whole fleet went to the head of Cerigo called Dragoniera, (...) the neerest place to the Cape of Malea, from whence they might view the enemies countenance, and entertaine any offered occasion. There early in a morning on the seauenth of August the watch discouered The Christians descry the Tur kish fleet. the Turkish nauy, sailing towards the Channell of Cerigo, which being but tenne miles from our fleet they verily supposed that it was comming directly to vs ward to fight: the three Generalls commanded the enseignes to be displayed, trompets sounded and disposed all things in readinesse for the fight: the fleet beeing thus arranged left the Dragonieras, and made towards the Cape of Malea, to be in a more commodious place to offer battaile to the enemies, who at first made shew to accept it, but when the Turks came neerer they alterd their course and went to the Har^es Island which is a rocke neere to the Promontory from whence they came I know not whether they did it for feare or else because Vluzzali had no, commission nor intent to fight, but only made a shew thereof to  maintaine his owne reputation: Some thought that Vluzzali like a skilfull Seaman made that retreat to get a westerly wind, which at that time of yeare is wont to blow in those quarters, that he might afterwards by the aduantage thereof inuest our nauy: which beeing preuented by the Christian Captaines, and a southeast wind arrising Vluzzali was enforced to alter his determination, and beeing come to the point of the Isse of Cerigo towards the west, he thwarted the Channell which lies betwixt the Harts Island, and that of Cerigo, and shut in that large space of Sea of ten miles, and turning his prowes, towards the Christian fleet, he diuided his nauy into three great squadrons, consisting of equall number of vessells, and there attended them. Both fleets were resolued, the one not to fight  without the Galeasses, and the other not to come neere those hot vessells, who the yeare before had done them such mischeefe. This stay of the enemies did profit our men, who thereby had time to order the fleet in better forme; and within ^ while after, the wind proouing fauorable to them, they set foreward and came so neere to one another, that the shotte flew from both sides: but our men being sca^ted of wind, could not come forewards without deuiding the great (...) from the lesse. The Turkish fleet consisted of 200, saile among which were 160*The number of the Christian and (...) (...). well armed Gallies, the rest were lesser vessells (...) among them. That of the Christians exceeded not the number of 127. light Gallies, but they had six Galeasses, and 22. shippes of warre excellently armed. Both these fleets for many respects  were thought to be in a manner equall, Vluzzali meaning nothing lesse then to fight, yet fearing by open flight to dishonour his great maister, and (...) (...) encrease the Christian glory* like a polli^que captaine, made shew of that (...) (...), for seeming (...) to (...) he did (...) the (...)

and still keeping the prowes of his Gallies vpon them by little and little he gaue back; and by the approach of night, and by a warlike stratagem which hee vsedUl^zzalies policy. (for hee sent one Galley bearing a lanthorne a contrary way, to make them think that he followed with the rest) he escaped at his pleasure. About the sameThe death of Sigismond King of Poland. time Sigismond King of Poland dyed without issue male, wherevppon Charles the French King desirous to procure that Crowne for his brother the Duke of Anio^, sent his Ambassadors thither. But to returne to the enemies. They were descried the next morning sailing towards the arme of Meina. Our men hauing kept at Sea al night sailed to Cerigo, enforced to take in fresh water, and to refresh their tired rowers, where continuing all that day and a pecce of the next, spies The Christians fl^et des^rieth that of the Turkes. brought word that they had discouered the enemies not farre from thence, whervppon they speedily imbarked their soldiers and went to meet them: but their labour beeing fruitlesse, they lay all night at Sea in order of battaile, and the next day which was the tenth of August by day breake they discried them at the Cape of Matapan, lying with the poopes of their Gallies to land-ward. Vluzzali perceiuing that the Christians had discouered him, shot off certaine warning peeces to call his men aboord, and ordered all things for battaile. The Christians approching the Turks came forth of the Hauen with their fleet diuided into three battailes, whereof the lest wing was a great way extended to the Sea, the right  wing kept neere to the maine, wherein was Vluzzali him-selfe, comming on faire and softly, somtime purposely stearing his course to draw the Christian Gall^es from the Galeasses and shipps. The Turke fearing nothing more then the Galeasses, commanded both his wings to fetch a great compasse about, the one towards the right, and the other towards the left, aloof from the Galeasses and shipps, which being preuented by the Christians, by turning their wings likewise in manner of a Crescent, their mayne battaile fronted that of the Turkes. The wings of the Turkes fleet being thus diuided from their battaile seemed very aduantageous for the Christians: which Generall Foscarini (ready to lay hold on any faire occasion) perceiuing, requested Collonna and Andrada, that not tarrying for the shippes and Galeasses, they would with him vpon the sodaine assaile the  enemies battaile, depriued of the wings, hoping to breake it ere they could arriue to rescue it, and with couragious speeches entreated them to follow his councell. The Generalls encouragement and aduice was ioyfully receiued by all the hearers, but Collonna and Andrada said, that it was dangerous so to doe, for feare of drawing the enemies three battailes vpon them at once, being not able to resist them without the help of the Galeasses and shippes, and that therefore without those vessells they would by no meanes hazard the fortune of the battaile. The wings of the Christians in turning about to confront those of the enemy, were somwhat disordred, which the Turkes perceiuing went about with certaine  Gallies to circumuent the stragglers, which Souranza noting, went against them with foure Gallies, and made a fierce fight, in the midst whereof, fearing to be enclosed with forty of their Gallies making towards him, he was presently relieued by 20. Gallies and two of the Galeasses, whose murthering shot made such hauock among them, as in a small time 18. of their Gallies were rent and torne,The Turkes retire from the Christian fleet. whereat the Turks being amazed returned as though they had rather fled then retreated. One of Souranzaes Gallies was shot through in this fight, himselfe returning againe to his Squadron. The Christians had determined not to ioyne battaile without their Galeasses and tall shipps, which Vluzzali well vnderstood, as well by the fugitiues and his owne spies, as by their manner of sayling. And he  him selfe though he were willing to fight, yet the better to frustrate the Christians deseignes, who drew with them their Galeasses and other greater vessells; he sent his vessels of burthen to Maluesia, wherby he freed himselfe of a great burthen, and made him-selfe apt to take or leaue fight at his owne pleasure The day growing to an end, Vluzzali perceiuing that he had done enough for that

time, both for the allaying of the Christian heate, and encouragement of his own soldiers, in seemely order as one not afraid, sailed with his whole fleet together to Corona. And the Christians retired to Cerigo.
The end of the first Booke of the seuenth Decade.




The Contents of the second Booke of the seuenth Decad.
VLVZZALI determineth to assaill Don Iohn ere hee should come to the fleet. Difficulties made by those of the Christian Nauy to meet with Don Iohn to free him from that incounter. Don Iohn with the Spanish forces comes to Corfou. The resolution of the Confederate Captaines. Vluzzali resolues not to fight with the Confederats. Those of the league resolue to assaill the towne and Castle of Modon. The Confederate  fleet staies in the Hauen of Nauarin. Nauarin is beseeged. The Confederates raise their campe from before Nauarin, and determine to returne into the West. Vluzzali after the retreat of the Christian fleet returneth to Constantinople. Don Iohn returnes to Naples, and Collonna goeth into Spain. The Venetians complaine to te Pope of the meane proceeding of the Spanish fleet. The State of Dalmatia during the warre. A fort builded by the Turkes at Catharr a is raized by the Venetians. Conference of peace with the Venetian Bayly at Constantinople. Peace or warre is propounded in the councell of Tenne. The Princes  of Christendome hauing intelligence of the Venetians practises of peace with the Turke goe about by their offers to interrupt it. Of what efficacy the or ation of Prince Mocenigo was concerning that subiect. The causes mouing the Senate to condescend to peace. Peace is made betwixt the Venetians and Turkes. And lastly the Articles thereof.




 The second Booke of the seuenth Decade of the History of Uenice.
WHILEST the Christian fleete remained at Cerigo, it had intelligenceVluzzali determineth to assai^ls D. Iohn. that Vluzzali had taken one of our F^egats which had acquainted him how that Don Iohn was comming to the fleete, where-vpon hee prepared to meete him. Colonna and  Gly Andrada being moued at these newes, propounded, that all other matters being laid aside, they were to depart thence with^ proposition made (...) (...) wit^ and secur^ D. Iohn. the greatest number of Gallies to meet with Don Iohn and free him from that danger. This councell was reiected by the Venetian Captaines, saying, that to eschew an vncertaine danger, they exposed the fleet, and all the force of the confederats to a manifest perill; seeing that the great vessells could not saile from Cerigo by reason of a contrary winde, nor yet remaine there in safety, the Gallies being reduced to a smaler number with sundry other alegations, which were not alowed by Colonna nor Andrada: for they thought that they might safely carry away an hundred Gallies with them to Zant, and at one time  secure Don Iohns arriuall, and yet send the great vessells to Candy which was an easie matter to be done, they saying that this was the best adui^e for the easie conuention of the confederate fleet.
Whilest this important businesse was vnresolued, a Fregat opportunely arriued from Don Iohn aduertizing them that hee could not depart from Messina till the first of August. Though this newes did cleere the former difficulties among the Captaines, yet did it not wipe out discontent from their mindes: for they like-wise vnderstood, that Don Iohn had no meaning when he should arriue to goDifficultie^ arising about the meeting of Don Iohn. farre with his Gallies, but by letters expresly commanded the Admirall^, to come and meete him; which by reason of contrary winds especially, they being to carry  along with them so many great vessells, could not be done without much losse of time, danger and distast to those Islanders subiect to the Venetians, forsaking them at such a time when the enemy was so strong at Sea and at their doores. Not-with-standing, they generally resolued to obey Don Iohns command: but it being an impossibillity to carry the great vessells with them, they determined first to leaue them safely in Candy, and from thence to direct their course to Zant. Neuer-the-lesse this resolution was not afterwards affected, by reason of new intelligence of the enemies fleet, which was descried not farre from the Cape of Malea, which verily perswaded them that they were going to intercept D. Iohn, whervpon the Christian fleet dislodged, and went to the arme of Meina from whence Vluzzali was newly departed. From thence being fauored with a faire South-East wind, within three daies they arriued at Zant, where contrary to their hope not (...) with Don Iohn but receiuing a new commandement to come to him to Cephalonia, they were enforced to leaue the great vessells there, though in great danger to bee taken by the enemies, who vpon the least inckling thereof would

not haue failed to returne to seaze on them: which being likely to happen, some of the cheefe of the Spanish fleet were of opinion, that seeing it was an hard matterQuirini sale conducts the great vessels to the fleet. to secure them, to send backe to haue them burnt; But Generall Foscarin detesting this councell, sent the Prouidator Quirini thither with fiue and twenty Gailies to saf^-conduct them to the fleet.
From Cephalonia they went to Corfou, whither Don Iohn was come on the ninth of August with fifty fiue Gallies, thirty three shippes, and fifteene thousand foot-men, who though at first he could hardly dissemble his discontent, for that they had not waited his comming, but had like to haue inforced him for want of sufficient forces to haue gone alone into the leuant, and to remayne idle at Corfou, to the derogation (as he said) of his reputation and greatnesse, was neuer-thelesse at last content to forget what was past, and seemed very carefull and desirous to enterprize any honorable or important action, for the profit and seruice of the league, much amplifiing it in words, because it was publikely reported thorow the army, thnt he came but onely for a shew, and not with intent or commission to exploit any thing, and that he had euer vsed delaies and excuses, eschewing all occasions of assailing the enemy, or of imploying him-selfe in any certaine enterprize; which suspitions did dayly more and more encrease, all men perceiuing, after so many delaies, that he referred all resolutions to the arriuall of the Duke of Sessa and his Gallies from Spaine. But the Venetians told him that their forces The number of the confederate fleet. there, were more then sufficient, for, vnited, they amounted to the number of a hundred ninty foure Gallies, eight Galleasses, besides forty fiue ships, to weet thirty Spanish and fifteene Venetians. All these Vessells before their departure from the Gomenisses were drawne into forme of battaile: The three GenerallsThe order of the Confederates fleet. lay in the maine with 62. Gallies; the Marquis Santa Cruz conducted the right wing, and the Prouidator Souranza the left, and in each wing were fifty two Gallies: Petro Iustiniano Generall of Malta commanded the vantgard with sixe Galeasses, Iuan de Cardona and Nicolo Donato led the rereward with twenty two Gallies: Don Rodrigo de Mendoca, and Adriano Bragadino had charge of the shippes, determining neuer-the-lesse to carry them to Zant, and there to  leaue them, intending to vse some of them for the transportation of victuall and munition. In this order the fleete departed from Paxu on the eleuenth of September, vncertaine as yet what course to hold, vnlese it were to set forwards to incounter with the enemy, who, by their Gallies sent to discouer, were reported to li^ at Modon and Nauarine, diuided and in great want of all necessaries, espetially of men, most of whome were dead, and gone away, wherevpon they remained safely there till the arriuall of new supplies.
These newes did greatly reioyce the whole fleet: thinking that a fit occasion was offered to ouerthrow the enemies, presuming that the Turkes hauing inteligence of the conuention of the Confederate fleet, much superior to theirs in  strength, would according to their custome returne to Constantinople to winter in the streight, hauing gotten honor by twice confronting the Christian Nauy, and making shew to fight. Some of Don Iohns Councellors did afterwards make vse of these reasons to impaire the credit of their former intelligence, confirmed by many euident signes: where vpon by giuing too great authority to thoseThe Confederates error. men, their departure was delaied, to the great preiudice of the enterprize, and yet euery man consest, that the onely hope of happinesse consisted in the speedy execution thereof, not giuing the enemies any time to flie or vnite themselues because a suddaine and vnlook't for assault would more terrifie and disorder them.
The Captaines then presently determined to set forward, and sayling on their  course vndescryed from Zant, to fall sodainely on the Isle Sapienza, seated betwixt Nauarin and Modon, to shutte vp the enemies passage, and keepe them from helping one another. But the execution of this deseigne was

so long delaied, and the fleet went so slowly for ward, as when by day breake it should haue beene at Sapienza it was (...) come to Prodaua, where being discried by those of the Castle of Nauarin, the Turkes that were their had time toThe enemies (...) to Modon. retire in safety to Modon, passing along in the view of our Nauie, which seeing them come forth, and doubting that Vluzzali would offer them battaile, ordred all their squadrons, and after some small stay, our vant-gard set forward, and comming neere to the enemies, discharged their ordnance vpon them, to draw them to fight: but the Turkes hauing noe such intent, and finding no aduantage, retired vnder the protection of the Castle of Modon. After the enemies retreat ther arose  great (...) and difficulties among the Captaines concerning, their proceeding, thinking it a dangerous and impossible matter to enter into the Channell of Modon to fight with the enemies fleet, the entrance whereof, narrow of it selfe,Ul^zzali in^ not to fight. was flanqued with great store of ordnance, where vpon the Generall knowing that the enemy could not be enforced to fight, determined to retire to Sapienza and to enter the Hauen, the two wings being gone afore. Vluzzali perceiuing the Confederates retreate, came forth with fifty Galleis to assaile our Vantgard which lag'd behind; but so soone as Don Iohn espied him, giuing signall to the fight hee (...) his prowes towards the enemies: Vluzzali who came not forth to fight, perceauing our battailes ranged, on a sodaine returned from whence hee came doing it very adui^edly, as well because night approached, as by reason of a  great fogge that arose, which enforced our men to keepe aloofe to sea ward, the shores on both sides belonging to the enemy.
The next morrow the sea being calme, the Confederate fleet went to the Gulph of Coron to take in water at the mouth of the riuer Pamisus, some foure miles from Coron, and to conuoy those that went for water (it being in the enemies country,) they landed certaine foote-men, conducted by Francisco Andriana campe Maister, to intercept whome, and for the gard of Coron Vluzzali had sent thither a thousand fiue hundred Ianizars, and two hundred horse, with whom they often (...), among whome the valor and prowesse of Charles of LorraineCharles of Lorraine Duke of Mayen in the (...) fleete. Duke of Mayenne, did shew it selfe, who at that time accompanied with diuers  French Gentlemen was in the army as a Voluntary.
Our men hauing warred returned to the Gallies, and before their departure bestowed certaine cannon shot vpon the forte of Coron, and sailing neere to the Isle of Cuprare passed along in the enemies view, diuided into three battaillons one after another, because the place was very narrow, and came againe to the South-East side of Sapienza, comming to an anko^ right ouer against Modon. But all men perceiuing that to tarry long in that place, hoping to draw the enemies forth to fight, was but lost time, and very dangerous, the Venetian Generall made a proposition to land tenne thousand foote, to seaze on the hill at the point of the Channell, from whence it was most likely to annoy the enemy  for that the place was weakely garded, which would not be defended by Vluzzali; who would not vnman his Gallies for feare of greater danger, the enemy being so neere him.
The Spaniards reiected this proposition, saying, that they ought not to weaken the fleet by vnshipping such multitudes, espetially the enimy bing so neere, wherevpon Foscare^ perceiuing all his propositions to be crost, and considering that ere long the fleet would be dissolued without any notable exploit, resolued, that in a matter of so great consequence, where hope of good successe was greater then the danger, to hazard the entring of the Channell of Modon, and thereto assail the enemies: this being by him like-wise propounded, hee offered to expose himselfe  formost to the danger, and to leade the way to others: though at first all men allowed this and some straue to haue the honor of the first charge, yet it tooke none effect so as the fleet without doing ought at al departed thence and went into the (...) and spatious Hauen of Nauarin, free from the danger of the Castle

shot, seated on an high place farre from thence: our men lying there, the enemies fleet was as it were beseeged beneath Modon, so as it could not returne to Constantinople, but indured much scarcity, and was in danger of shipwrack, and that which was worse, it could not come forth but our men might at their pleasure(...) of the Turkish fleet. fight with it.
The Turkes in the meane time sent diuers Harquebusiers that knew the wayes, who comming vp by the mountaines neere to Nauarin, attempted to anoy and hinder our men from taking in water. Heerevppon wee landed fiue thousand foot vnder the command of Paul Iordano Vrsino, who repulsing the enemies secured the Contrey, whereby matters were brought to such a passe, as there was  no doubt made but that the Victory would ere long fall to the Confederates: This was rumord ouer Christendome, and al men reioyced thereat, not as a thing hoped for, but already effected. In the end, the enterprize vppon Nauarin was propounded: but considering afterwards that if it should succeed prosperously, it would not greatly profit the common cause, they turned to that of Modon, on whose conquest depended their cheefe hope; because that the enemies fleet beeing driuen from thence could not auoid fight: therefore they determined to assaile the Towne and Castle of Modon, assaulting it at one time by land and sea, and to the end that the soldiers which lay in the shippes might bee imployed in that enterprize, Giouan Moceniga was presently sent vnto Zant to fetch them to  the fleet.
In the meane time Ioseffo Bonello the Florentine made an engin, by ioyning foure Gallies together, on which were planted tenne Cannons, fortified with Parapets, wherewith to approach and batter the Castle of Modon, and at the same time to secure the passage of the other Gallies, which beeing by this engin defendedA vayne and vnprofitable engin from the enemies ordnance, might enter the Channell and come to the assault. But so soone as it was finished, they perceiued many defaults in it, which made it vnseruiceable: for first, they could not guide it on the water, next, thewaight of the burthen and ordnance was likely to sinke it, neither could they make it ankorable by reason of the Seas great depth: but the greatest difficulty  was to bring it to the place appointed, whether it was to bee towed by the Gal lies, which beeing not able to make way, were exposed to the mercy of the enemies ordnance, planted at the mouth of the Channell, which would easily haue sunke them: so that dispairing of the seruiceablenesse thereof, and hauing intelligence that the Beglarbey of Grecia was comming thither with a thousand horse to frustrate their deseigne, they gaue ouer the worke.
That which most tormented the Venetians, and frustrated their hope, was a rumor spred through the fleet that the Spaniards victuals would not long hold out, who said, that in regard thereof, it behooued them to prouide for their departure and beeing desirous to leaue some token of victory behind them, which might encourage  the inhabitants of Morea, and put them in hope of better successe, they determined to beseege Nauarin, so often before propounded, and still reiected, in regard of the small reward of the conquest.
The Castle of Nauarin in old time called Pila, is seated on a mountaine toppe,The situation of the Castle of Nauarine. which extending towards the South-east, makes the Hauen like to a semicircle, and is stronger by situation, then art: This, the Turkes carefully garded, for the commodiousnesse of the hauen, lying in the very hart of Morea. There are two wayes leading to the Castle, that on the left hand, is not farre from the Sea, the other behind it towards the firme land, lies by a lake not farre from thence, and is very narrow and hidden.
The Prince of Parma had charge of this enterprize, who landing two thousand Spanish and Italian foot and tenne peeces of battery, took the open, and plaine way to cut off supplies from the enemies: but he either neglected or knew not the other narrow secret way: Iuan di (...), and Morett^ the Calabrois went

afterwards to make good the passage: but they were on a suddaine assailed by great number of enemies, and with great difficulty came off.
By this meanes aboue two thousand Turkes came to releeue the Castle, who beeing maisters of that narrow passage, did at their pleasures, not onely put inThe Turkes comming to releeue t^e castle doe much anoy the Christians. what supplies they thought good, but had leisure to seaze on certaine high places, commanding the wayes, from whence with their small shotte they still annoyed our men, busied in planting the Ordnance, lying open also at the same time to the Castles shot, so that in three dayes they could hardly plant two Canons, and the danger more and more increased, the soldiers wanting rampiers to defend themselues; and the enemies numbers still augmented, with whom to their owne great  disaduantage they were daily enforced to skirmish. This did greatly trouble the confederate Generals, who knew, that to quit the enterprise, would blemish their reputation, and to continue the siege, would not much auaile them; but their greatest difficulty was want of bread, which Don Iohn and his faction dayly amplifying, said, That of necessity they were to depart.
And yet it seemed strange and incredible to most men, that the Spanish Nauy comming lately from Sicily with so many ships, which is the Magazin or Granary of Italy, should in so short time want bread: or if it were true, that scarcity might easily haue beene supplied, by sending to Tarento for certaine vessels laden with Bisket, which the Spaniards themselues reported they had left there.
The Venetian Generall, that he might cut of all occasion of the Spaniards departure, offered Don Iohn part of his owne Store, earnestly entreating him to accept his offer, telling him that the rest of his Nauie might bee easily supplyed by those vessels before mentioned. It is not certainly knowne why the Spaniard refused this curtesie, who stopped their eares against all reasonable perswasions which might delay their departure: which they onely intending, discamped from before Nauarin, leauing a safe and open way for Vluzzali to conduct his fleete to Constantinople, and the Honor to bee accounted a skillfull and valiant Captaine.The Confederats discamp^ from before Nauarin. Yet Don Iohn did what he could to cause Generall Foscarin and the Venetians to consent and be well pleased with his departure, assuring him of his earnest desire  to purchase honor and reputation, whereof Fortune had bereft him, by taking from him the meanes to fight with the enemy; yet, if by the way he did chance to meet with those ships of supplies, he would then willingly embrace any occasion whatsoeuer, to doe some notable seruice to the league, ere hee returned with hisDon Iohns excuses. fleet into the West: and that though he now wanted opportunity, hee hoped the next yeare to recompence that, which necessity had enforced him to loose.
The Venetian Generall perceiuing his resolution, consented therevnto, because hee would not giue an occasion to the enemies to thinke that the league was broken, as also for that hee knew himselfe alone too weake to attempt any great matter. Yet, when our men thought least of it, they were more likely then  euer, to giue the enemy battaile: for at the very instant, when the confederats were vpon departure, they had intelligence that a Spanish ship come from Corfou, was in fight with certaine Turkish Galleys, not farre from Sapienza, wherevpon all things beeing put in order, the fleete speedily left the Hauen of Nauarin, to rescue the shippe, and to fight with the enemies. Ere our men could get out of the Hauen Vluzzali with three score of his Gallyes, came forth of the channell of Modon, to rescue those that were in fight, and to secure others which hee had sent to scoure the seas. So soone as Don Iohn saw Vluzzali, hee commanded the Prouidator Souranza, to meete him with a certaine number of Galleys, to hinder his comming on any farther, and the Marquis of Santa Cruz, and the Prouidator Canalis with their Squadrons, to charge the enemies with fiue and twenty Galleys, who discrying our fleete, left the ship, and betooke themselues to flight.
When Vluzzali saw the Prouidator comming towards him he made a stand, but at last turning his prowes, without any farther delay, he retired vnder the Castle of Modon, being still pursued by our Gallies, who beeing come neere to the towne, bestowed diuers Cannon bullets on it.
The Gallies, which fought with the shippe, beeing light and able to make way, escaped with ease, one excepted, commanded by the Sanzach of Mitelene, nephew to the famous Barbarossa, who fighting longer then any of the rest, and his slaues in hope of liberty rowing slowly, was taken by the Marquis of Sancta Crux: but night approaching, they gaue ouer farther pursute.
Then D. Iohn sounded the retreat and commanded euery one to returne into  the hauen of Nauarin, beeing vnwilling to leaue the engin behind, that the enemies might not terme his departure a flight: then the greater vessells beeing forth of the Hauen, and a faire southeast wind blowing he willed them presently to saile to Zant, and himselfe the next morning directed his course thither with the whole fleet, being so desirous to returne home as going a neerer way through the Channell of Giscarda, contrary to the aduise of the skilfullest Marriners, who councelled him to goe to Cephalonia, he escaped a great danger neere to the Gulph of Larta, and there lost one of the Popes Gallies, which was broken to peeces vpon the Rocks of Paxu.
Vluzzali after the Confederates departure, freed from all hinderances in his iourney, did without any order put to Sea and came vnto the Cape of Mal^a,Tluzzali returnes to Constantinople. where by reason of a contrary northerne wind he was enforced to continue certaine dayes: but in the end hauing a faire Gale, he sailed to Constantinople with an hundred Gallies, where he was with all honour entertained, the Turkes openly term ing themselues Conquerors, for that they had defended Morea and their other territories, dared (as they said) the Christians oftentimes to battaile, and lastly driuen them forth of their dominions, secured the Sea, and made it nauigable.
The Confederates in the meane time arriued at Corfou the twentith day of October, who though their fleet were augmented with thirteene Gallies, andThe Cousede rate fleet coms to Corfou. certaine shipps loden with wheat brought by the Duke of Sessa and Iohn Andrew Doria, did neuerthelesse continue their former difficulties, and delayes: for diuers enterprizes were daily propounded in the Councel, without any resolution at al, and among others that of Saint Maura, wherevnto D. Iohn* seemed to incline: but the Duke of Sessa by his authority dasht it, saying that the time of yeare wasThe Spaniards desirous to returne into the west. vnfit to beseege townes, or to be at Sea with fleets in an enemies Contrey. The Spaniards in this manner reiected all enterprizes, determining to returne into the west after that the Confederates Fleetes had beene vnited for the space of fifty dayes.
D. Iohn first went to Messina and there lest part of his Gallies he carried the rest to Naples where he dismissed his Italian footmen, and sent the Spaniards and Almaines Don Iohn goes to Naples. to Garrison. Collonna by the Kings commandement went into Spaine; to yeeld an account to his Maiesty of mataers past, and with him to consult on the next yeares war, where he so wisely and nobly behaued himselfe as he got much(...) to paine. honor and reputation. The Gallies of the Pope, King of Spaine, and Venetians, remained idle at Corfou, lying rigg'd all winter, that they might be ready at the spring to set forward against the enemies.
This was the successe of the yeare 1572. nothing answerable to the great hope which all men had conceiued of abating the pride and insolency of the Ottoman Empire, wherevppon so soone as the Confederates were gone home the inhabitants of Morea who had made insurrections in the Christians behalfe, and expected  the successe of the fleet, hauing neither forces in the field, nor strong places for defense, running into the mountaines for feare of the Turkish violence, were enforced to yeeld themselues to their mercy, and againe to submit their necks vnder the yoake of a cruel bondage, which they could neuer since shake off.
The Venetians made great complaints to the Pope of the Spaniards delaies,The Venetians complaine to the Pope. and slow resolutions, but especially of their vnseasonable departure from before Nauarin: they were made by a sollemne Ambassade; sent, according to their custome, to offer their obedience to his Holinesse in the States name. The Pope in their behalfe presently sent Giouan Claudio Gonzaga his Chamberlaine to D. Iohn, to perswade him to tarry there where he was and to expect a Commission from Spaine to returne to winter in the Leuant, the Pope hoping easily to obtaine so much of the King of Spaine, seeing that the troubles of Flanders were brought to some good passe: wherevppon his Holinesse did expresly send the Lord of Lansan into Spaine, whose labour was fruitlesse, for the Catholick King, hauing already flatly answered the Popes and Venetians Ambassadors, that hee would no more send his fleet so farre from home, would by no meanes alter his resolution, and D. Iohn, not-with-standing the Popes entreaties, well acquainted with the Kings pleasure, pursued his iourney into the West.
In the meane time Generall Venieri, old and sickely, by reason of his formerVenieri his ho^ noroble entertainment and welcome at Uenice. trauailes, obtaining leaue of the Senate, returned to Venice, with same and glory great numbers of Senators going to meet him with the Bucentauro as farre as Saint Anthonies Church, which is the very farthest part of the Citty, where hee was honorably entertained and welcomed according vnto his merrit.
During the enterprizes in the Leuant, Dalmatia was not altogether freed from warre: for though there was no forme of an army there, yet the Turkish Cauallery,(...) of the neighbor Gouernments, wasted and spoiled the Cuntrey doing much hurt to the Venetians subiects, wherevppon the Stradiots and foot troops of the Garrisons did often sally to stop their incursions: yet the Turkes and Venetians were of one opinion, that to make any great warre in Dalmatia would not bee to much purpose, the Turkes fearing if they should send any great Army into that Prouince, they might giue the Emperor occasion of suspition, and cause him to embrace the Confederates party, and to make warre in Hungary.
The Venetians of the other side bending all their deseignes on the Leuant, thought that the successe of the affaires of Dalmatia and Albania depended wholly on the warre, knowing very well they could doe little good there, by reason of the strong Garrisons which the enemy ordinarily kept in those Contries: as also for that they hauing, by the industry of Lodouico Grimani, and Iulio Pompeio, wonne the towne of Macarsca of some importance, by reason of the trade of Marchants, and fortefied it, had beene within a while after enforced to abandon the same, beeing to weake to defend it against such huge numbers of enemies. The like successe had the conquest of the fort of Clissa.
Neuerthelesse the Turks omitted no opportunity to anoy the Venetians: and  being not then strong enough to take Citties, they inuented other meanes to hurt them as that enterprize vpon the Citty of Catharra, which they resolued to get by long seege, keeping victualls from it by land did testifie: They often likewise atttempted to shut them from the passage to the Sea, by building a fort atThe Turkes build a fort against Catarin. the mouth of the Channell, but the Venetians did still hinder their worke, till the arriuall of a Turkish Sanzach with great forces, who finished it within three miles of Castel-nouo. The Senate aduertized thereof, and mooued with the danger, threatning the Citty of Catarra, wrote to Generall Foscarini that he should send forces to raze that fort. He, though it were in the midst of winter, did neuerthelesse send the Prouidator Souranza thither with two and twenty Gallies and  six Galeasses, with whom went Paulo Vrsino, Pompeo Collonna, Moretta the Calabrois and other famous Captaines with 4000. foot, with whom Nicholo Suriana Captaine of the Gulph ioyned by the way with foure Gallies. All these vessells arriuing at Ianissa, they landed the soldiers; part of them went with Pompeo Colonna

to seaze on a hill not far off, to stop the passage of those which should come from Castelnouo to releeue the Fort, and the rest went with Nicholo Gambara, to a certaine place neere at hand, whither some companies of soldiers of the Garrison of Catarra were to come, with other forces assembled by Zacharia Salmone Prouidator of the Citty: After this Souranza entring the Channell with 18. of his best Gallies, his Squadron going formost, passed along beyond the fort, from whence though they made many shot vppon the fleet, yet did they no great hurt to it, which went and lay in a safe and commodious place to batter it by land and Sea.
It was 150 paces square euery way, without any flankers, but so built, as  on the one side it battered the Gallies entring into the Channel, and on the other plaid vppon them beeing entred, it was well prouided with ordnance, and mand with two hundred soldiers. The Venetians resolued to batter it at one time by land and sea. The morrow after their arriuall early by day breake they beganneThe Uenetians take the sort. their battery, and within a while the soldiers went to the assault with ladders, which the enemies for a time defended, but beeing at last enforced to quit the place, the Venetians tooke it.
There were found in it diuers small peeces of ordnance and 18. great peeces, which the Prouidator presently sent to Venice, and by a mine ouerthrew the fortThey ruine it by a myne. to the foundations, which beeing speedily done, and leauing a sufficient Garrison  in Cattarra, hee returned with his Gallies to Corfou where the fleet remained. Diuers consultations were made at Rome that winter, concerning preparations for warre against the next Summer, knowing what time they had giuen the enemies to repaire their losse receiued at the battell of Lepanto: therfore they concluded to augment the Confederates force, to the number of 300. Gallies and 60000. footmen: there was likewise a proposition made to send a hundred Gallies betimes into the Leuant, not staying till all the fleet were vnited, which should be at Sea before the enemies, who as it was reported, did intend to keepe all supplies from Candy, and to wast the Venetians Sea-coasts: But all these propositions vanisht into aire.
The Venetians, not meaning wholly to depend on fortune, did speedily place strong Garrisons in the Castles and forts of the Island, and sent many foot-companies thither, in the meane time earnestly soliciting the Pope to augment the force of the league, and that it would please him to assist them with certaine summes of money toward their great expense, putting him in mind how that his Predecessors, had in former times vpon lesse occasion giuen leaue to sell Churchpossessions. His Holinesse not altogether granting their demands, did permit 100000. Ducats belonging vnto the tenthes of the Clergie vnder their Dominions.
At the same time diuers Conferences had beene held at Constantinople concerning  peace: for the Turkes hauing intelligence of the vniting of the Christian fleet, and doubting the successe of warre, had oftentimes motioned peace to theMotion of Peace at Constantinople with the Vene tian Baily. Venetian Baily there: the Visier Bascha seemed then, more then euer, desirous of it, whose authority and reputation had beene much augmented since the battell; wherevpon contrary to the opinion of others, he disswaded the great Lord from warre. He thought it then a fit time to motion it, whilst Selim danted with the vnlookt for losse of the battaile seemed to incline to peace: and that the Venetians likwise vpon some aduantage might wish for it.
This inclination of Mahomet once knowne, the people, who by reason of the discomodities of war did greatly desire it, bruted it abroad ouer the Citty, that  the force of the Confederate Princes was great: These rumors being entertained as true and worthy credit, by those who wisht for peace, and beeing related to Selim, induced him to permit it for to bee motioned vnto the Baily Mahomet

therevpon, began freely to conferre with him, making vse therein of the helpe of Ori^bey the chiefe Dragoman, and Rabi Salomon a Iewish Phisition, who beeing familiar in the house of the Visier Bascha, were often imployed in affaires of great importance.
The Bayly hauing aduertised the Senate heereof, it seemed not greatly to likeThe Senate at first makes no great account of peace. of the motion, desiring rather to continue warre; prouoked therevnto on hope of better successe, making account that their late victory would giue greater reputation to the Confederate forces: Yet when they considered how many notable opportunities they had lost, and spent much time vnprofitably, they were willing to change their opinions, and wi^h new resolution to lend an eare to these  motions of peace, the better to secure their owne, exposed to the vncertaine euents of fortune. This was propounded in the Councell of Tenne, that it might with more secrecy and greater speed bee effected.
In this Councell the Senators were at first of various opinions. For many ofPeace is propounded in the Councell of Tenne. them were possest with their former hotte inclination to warre, by reason of the promises of Christian Princes, who doubting this treaty, did then more then euer, promise to assist the league: Wherevpon Lorenzo de Priuli sent Ambassador into Spaine insteed of Leonardo Donato, Secretary Perez, and Doctor Velasco, who at that time managed the most important affaires of that Court, visited himThe Spaniards conference with the Venetian Ambassador. more then ordinary, making such impression in the new Ambassador, as themselues  desired, and vsed all their skill to perswade him, that their King had euer stood affected to the league, and at that instant more resolute then euer to pursue the warre, affirming that his Maiesty had written to his officers in Italy, to make speedy preparations, and to auoyde the long delayes of the precedent yeare: and that Don Iohn on the other side had promised to ioyne with the Venetians, with the onely force of Italy, not tarrying for that of Spaine. The Emperor likewise,The Emperor seekes to hinder peace. who by no offers could till then be diuerted from his resolution, suspecting only that the Venetians had an intent to make peace with the Turke, told the Venetian Ambassador resident in his Court, that he would ioyne with the league. These new offers caused the Venetians to proceed slowly in the treaty of peace already  propounded, but Prince Mocenigo, euer inclining more to peace then to the league, assembling on a time the Councell of Ten, spake to them in this manner.Prince Mocenigo his oration to the councell of Tenne.

When at first we determined to take armes for our own defence, and with a generous courage imbraced warre against Selim, I do not thinke it was done with intent to continue it long, but onely to make proofe of fortune, to manifest the valour of our own Common-wealth, the strength of Christian Princes, and to purchace to our owne State and all Christendome greater safety against the power of that insolent common enemy. It is certaine that war is ordained for peace, and that the end of our dangerous trauailes is quiet and safety. I now suppose that experience of matters hapned at that time, may more then sufficiently instruct vs  what our condition will be, if wee continue warre any longer, what end wee may hope thereof, and what recompence for so great expences, and trauailes. The first yeare, vainly presuming to ioyne our force with strangers, for the releefe of the Kingdome of Cyprus, we lost the famous citty of Nicosia: neuerthelesse without declining from our former resolution, wee continued our warlike preparations, drawne to it by hope of entring into a strict confederacy with Christian Princes, thereby to recouer our late losse. God, miraculously gaue vs such a victorie ouer our enemies, as wee could not haue desired a greater; and yet I know not by what fault or misfortune of our owne, the citty of Famagosta was taken, and we enforced to quit the entire possession of that kingdome, to the vanquished enemy: but  the ioy and contentation of winning the battaile, tooke from vs the feeling of a greater and more certaine losse: Wherevpon with like speed and earnestnesse, we made great preparations the third yeare, augmented our Army, and spared for no cost* Wee may now perceiue what good all this hath done vs.
Our Galleys haue beene a long time idle at Corfou, expecting the Confederate supplies: and then when we hoped most, that all difficulties being taken away, our forces would ioyne, and set forwards against the enemy, we were enforced to leaue our Islands as their prey, and to call home our fleet, with greater blemish to our reputation, and expence of lost time, then the vniting of our forces would haue profited vs: and lastly, when fortune hath offered vs many vnhoped for faire occasions, to ouer-throw our enemies, wee haue beene constrained to omit them, beeing forsaken by our friends, who vnseasonably dislodged from the Hauen of Nauarin, with no honorable, but a very preiudicious resolution. But what need  I to rehearse things so lately done? Wee are reduced to such extremity, as wee are not able alone to maintaine warre against the Turkes, and wee know by experience, that the company of others, who should ayde and assist vs, is rather a burthen and impediment to vs: at first, it promiseth much, but afterwards it growes cold, and in deed, doth rather encrease, then diuert our dangers. Wee were perswaded that there would not onely be a sure correspondency, betwixt the Pope, Catholick King and vs, but that the confederacie of these three Potentates, would haue incited all other Christian Princes to take armes with vs against the common enemy, especially after that notable victory, which all men thought would haue procured the Turkes finall ruine, but beeing now confirmed by  sundry proofes wee may perceiue, that this opinion was rather conceiued according to our owne desire, then the certainty of the matter.
Shall wee still then continue in the same error, and ground the conseruation of the State, and the whole fortune of our affaires, on vncertaine foundations, and hopes which haue so often deceiued vs? Questionlesse, it was a generous resolution, not to grant the insolent demands of Selim, constantly to maintaine the cause of Christendome, in no sort to degenerate from our Ancestors, who haue euer brauely pursued those enterprises, by which they hoped to purchase greatnesse and glory to their Common-wealth* but now, when wee haue couragiously taken armes, and with fortunate successe wonne the battaile, hoping  for greater matters, (I know not by what disaster) wee can reape no fruite thereof, and in fighting wee hazard all, and by winning gaine nothing: to continue still the same deseignes and dangers without any profit, after that the opportunity, which together with the victory offered it selfe for the execution of some great enterprise, hath already escaped vs, will bee rather thought obstinate rashnesse, then any zeale to Christian piety, or desire of true honour.
If wee consider the quality of our forces and State, wee shall easily perceiue, that there is nothing more hurtfull or ill beseeming it, then to draw the warre out in length. Because that our affaires doe still impaire, the leagues forces depending on sundry councels, and many times on contrary respects, and although  they are great, doe neuerthelesse become vaine and vnprofitable: and then the discommodity of maintaining them for our part, is very great, by reason of the excessiue expences wee are to bee at for want of men, and especially Rowers. Most part of whom the late warre hath exhaust, not to bee supplyed but with great cost, and vncertaine whether with any: But if wee shall view our owne estate, in a true, not flattering glasse, wee shall discerne it to bee rather great then strong, at least not equiualent to such an enemy. An other maine consideration, is the distraction and remotenesse of our territory, neerer danger then succour, requiring diuerse Armies to secure so diuerse places. How then is it probable continuance of this warrre shall not more weaken vs, then the enemy? prosecution of the late victory in deed gaue vs some hope, for so wee  might haue dispatcht it? But how this opportunity is lost, and the effects of loosing it ate, experience doth teach vs. Now our hope is fledde to the enemy. Can then any man doubt, but that wee should welcome peace offering hir selfe to vs?

Since we cannot protect our State by warre, why should we not by peace; wee know that the Bascha Mahomet, alwaies inclining to amity, hath vsed their late ouerthrowes as inducements to draw his master to entertaine milder conditions. Yf we now reiect his offer, he may perhaps reiect vs heereafter. Who could haue immagined that the Turks out of the wracks and ashes of their last Fleet, could so sodainly haue raised another, and with it not only secure themselues, but inuade vs? what cleerer demonstration can we haue of their Potency, or more insallible prediction of the warres euent? if after ouerthrow they could doe all this, what might we expect after victory? I would entreat those which stand for war  to satisfie me if domestick occasions imploy the aid of Spaine at home, or any priuate respect diuert it to Affrick, our props then failing, how are wee able of our selues to stand? Dependance vppon others may make vs neglect our owne strength, and when danger is at our doore, it will bee to late to call for helpe from Spaine, Portugall or Germany: or for them to preuent those Mischeefs which wee already suffer.
These infirmities the enemy discouering, he will grow more insolent, and bee so farre from offering that he will not accept any conditions of peace. It is pollicy therefore, my noble Lords, since we haue not reaped the fruit of victory, to prouide that we vndergoe not the calamities of ouerthrow, that the expence of so  much blood, time and treasure, may purchace safety, hough not conquest. Wee must not to confidently rely vppon the hazard of battaile, whose euent is euer vncertaine, som-times not greatly profitable. Let vs rather trust to the cleernesse of reason then blindnesse of fortune, alwayes an enemy to great actions. Peace may perhaps set open some fairer breach to warre heereafter. The world can make no dishonourable construction heereof, nor our Consederates condemne vs, but themselues, wee hauing alwaies beene as foreward in the warre as they backward. Who can tax vs beeing neglected by others if we secure our selues? We follow but the president of the Spaniards, and end the warre as they shunne it. Nay one of the Catholick Kings cheefe Councelors hath made our Apologie heerein, who suspecting this treaty, affirmed, his maister had no cause to censure  ill, if the Venetians without violating his, entertained the Turkes freindship vpon honorable termes. If this peace should soone breake, yet we should get breath; a thing necessary to the weaker and wearied party: All things vnder the Moone are infected with her mutability, mens councells and actions altring like themselues.
Let vs then imbrace this meanes of our safety; God in whose protection this State hath euer beene, hath vsed this scourge of war to discipline, not wound vs, and will at his leisure open some vnexpected way of farther happinesse.

The Princes speech together with his authority was of great force: wherevponThe Senates resolution to peace. the Senate sent presently a new commission to the Baily to reuiue the treaty  of peace with ample power to conclude it on the aboue mentioned conditions. The great and sundry difficulties arising about the renewing of the fleet did much farther this resolution, in respect of the great numbers that were dead: the likeCauses moouing the Senate to imbrace peace. did newes from Flanders, where by reason of new rebellions, and aid, which the Germaines were ready to send them, all places were in vprore, in regard whereof the Spaniards had turned all their deseignes thither: moreouer, the Senate at the same time had intelligence that a Chiaus from Constantinople arriued at the Emperors Court, whom, (though it was afterward knowne that his comming was Concerning Moldauia) they suspected came to craue passage for the Turkish army which was said to be comming into Frioul.The Bishop of Aix Ambassador for the French King at Constantinople.
These aduertizements did coole their heate who were yet willing to continue the league, so as with generall consent euery one inclined to the treaty of peace: The Bishop of Aix, Ambassador for the French King, was presently accquainted with this determination, he was lately returned from Constantinople to Venice,

where he receiued a new Commission from his King, to returne to the great Lords Porte, and in his name to further this treaty, wherevnto his Maister had often aduised the Venetians to hearken.
The Bayly hauing intelligence of the Senates determination, was commanded so soone as the French Ambassador should arriue at Constantinople, to conferre with him concerning the treaty of peace, and as occasion should bee offered, to make vse of his Kings mediation and authority. The Turke in the meane time hauing notice, that the Bishop was to returne to Constantinople, presently suspected that hee brought new conditions of peace more aduantagious for them, wherevpon, their former treaties with the Baily were by little and little neglected, cunningly going about to temporize, concealing their owne intentions. This delay did greatly preiudice the businesse: for they who for their owne particular interest, were desirous to hinder it, alleadged sundry difficulties, especially to Selim, telling him that all things were ready; that it was neither profitable nor honorable at that time, to speake of any accord; whereby the state of the treaty grew euery day from bad to worse, the Turkes propounding very vnreasonable conditions, thereby manifesting how carelesse they were of peace: Therefore theyThe Turkes deale roughly with the Venetian Bayly. committed the Bayly to straighter keeping, muring vp the windows of his house, placing strong guards about it, handling him very roughly, thinking thereby to  enforce him to reueale his latest and most secret Commission, or else, the treaty of peace being broken, to hinder him from aduertising the Senate of their warlike prouisions; or rather, (which is most likely to bee true) to barre his conference with the Bishop, thinking by this meanes more easily to draw from the French Ambassador, ignorant of what was past, the new conditions which they supposed hee brought with him. So soone as the Bishop arriued, they confer'd with him, and found that he had no other then a generall Commission: but the Visier Basha suspecting that the French for their owne particular interest, would haue an hand in this treaty, and by this good office, bind the Turkes to fauour and assist the Duke of Aniou, the French Kings brother, in the election to the crowne of Poland, would in no sort vse him as an instrument, but effect it by the former  meanes and mediation of those whom hee had first imployed, namely Orimber and Salomon, therefore he renued his treaty with the Bayly, and afterPeace concluded betwixt the Turkes and Venetians. sundry propositions and answeres from both sides, peace at last was concluded about mid March, whereby confirming all articles contained in the old Commission, sauing that the castle of Siponto, which the Venetians yet held, should be surrendred to the Turkes.
As for other townes of Albania and Sclauonia with their confines and territories possest before the warre, should remaine vnto those, who then held them: that all marchants goods should bee restored on both sides; and that the Venetians beside should be bound for three yeares space, to send an 100000. Ducats  yearely to Constantinople, which the Turkes for their owne greatnesse and reputationArticles of peace. made most account of. Peace in this sort beeing concluded and signed by Selim, the Bayly dispatched his sonne Francesco to Venice, who arriued there on the fifteenth of Aprill, where it was presently published.
The end of the second Booke of the seuenth Decade.




The Contents of the third Booke of the  seuenth Decade.
POpe Gregory is displeased for that the Venetians made peace with the Turke. The King of Spaine is highly pleased therewith: The Pope beeing satisfied by an Ambassador sent  of purpose from Venice, in open consistory doth approue what they had done: The Venetians and Turkes are iealous of each other. Peace is ratified with the Turke. Henry Duke of Aniou is chosen King of Poland, and goes thither: Don Iohns voyage into Affrike where he takes Tunis. The death of Selim the Turkish Emperor. The death of Charles the ninth French King. The King of Polands secret departure towards France. Great triumphs made at Venice at the reception of Henry King of France and Poland. Amurath the Turkish Emperor enuades the Empires territories: Amurath confirmes peace with the Venetians. A great plague at Venice, with the Prince and Senates vow to appease Gods wrath: Great charity of Cardinall Borromeo. The lawes of Venice are reformed, and a new order taken for the gouernment of matters. The Pope sends a golden Rose to the Venetian Duke: The Venetians decree concerning the Citizens particular expences. The Venetians solicited by the Persians against the Turke will not agree to it. Contention betwixt the Venetians and knights of Malta. The death of Pope Gregory the thirteenth, and creation of Sixtus the fifth: A Dutchesse is  cruelly murthered in Padua.

The third Booke of the seuenth Decad of the Historie of Uenice.
PEACE beeing published, men did differently censure thereof, measuring it by their owne particular affection: Many, had regard to their owne interest, and others, perseuering in their former hope, that warre would haue procured much good to Christendome, did taxe the Venetians for making peace:Sundry opinions concerning the Venetians peace. but grauer and more iudicious spirits, measured future things by  experience of matters past, saying that therein they were to be approoued, at least not condemned requiring it for the conseruation of the State, which without this only remedy (Peace) was exposed to very dangerous hazards. But the Pope more then any seemed to be displeased, therewith, and at such time as the Venetian Ambassador came to acquaint him with it, commanded him forth of his presence, and would for that time admit no excuse. The Cardinals and others of his Court following his President discoursed thereof after their owne various passions.
The Catholike King, knowing by experience how much it importeth PrincesThe King of Spaine i^ not discontented with the Venetians. to desire the preseruation of their owne States, did with great iudgement  and modesty seeme for his part to bee well pleased therewith, saying, that hee doubted not, but that the occasions which mooued the Venetians to doe so were of great importance, hoping that as himselfe had freely imploied his forces for the seruice of Christendome and particular profit of the Venetian State, they likewise in acknowledgement of his loue would be ready to doe the like for him when need should bee: and generally all Spaniards as well at Rome as in Spaine approued it.
Many discoursing why the Spaniards did so modestly carry themselues therein, said, that in accusing the Venetians, they feared to vrge them to iustifie their owne cause, and to taxe the actions of some of the confederates the precedent  yeere: others said, that though the league were broken, they would not for all that wholly forsake the Venetians friendship, whom in other matters they might neede. But I thinke they did it of their owne proude nature beeing willing to let the world see that they did not greatly care for the breach of league, accounting themselues strong enough without it to make head against the Turkish force.
Now the Pope continuing his displeasure, the Venetians did not shew themseluesThe Venetians send an expresse Ambassador to the Pope. stubborne, but determined to send an expresse Ambassadour to Rome, honorably and reuerently to appease and dispose him to receiue their iustifications. Nicolo de Ponte was chosen, a man of great yeeres and authority, and at that time Procurator of Saint Marke. Hee beeing arriued at Rome and hauing audience, acquainted his Holinesse with the iust occasions which hadThe Ambassadors excuses to the Pope. mooued the Signory to accept the Turkes offered peace: Hee told him that all their sea-coasts were in very great daunger by reason of the enemies mightie preparations, the Venetians friends and Confederates delaying their aide,

that the burthen and expence of that warre had for three yeeres space beene very greeuous to them and their subiects, who were able to vndergoe it no longer: That the Venetians so long as hope of happy successe did comfort them in their miseries, had contributed more then they were tied towards the expense of warre, but all faire occasions being omitted, they saw no reason to continue it any longer: And seeing that the Common-wealth perceiued by many experiences, that it could not preserue it selfe by any better meanes then peace, his Holinesse ought not to take it in bad part, if fitting it selfe to time, it sought meanes to temporize with so potent an enemy, thereby to imploy the remainder of her forces in some more prosperous action for the aduancement of Christendome, and seruice of  the Church, as it had often done in former time. That Pope Paul the third, perceiuing that they had in vaine taken armes against Soliman, did himselfe aduise the Venetians to peace, the league beeing then as now. That the Senate for diuers reasons did not impart this their deseigne to any of the confederates, proceeding therein by the rule of State, and by the same which the Catholike King, a very wise Prince, had vsed: who at that time when he detained his fleet did not acquaint the Venetians with the cause.
These reasons did somewhat satisfie the Pope, who beganne more mildly to treat with the Venetian Ambassadors. The Senate in the meane time had speedily dispatched Francesco Barbaro to Constantinople, to carry newes of their consent  and confirmation of peace, till that Andrea Badoario, appointed to goe thither as Ambassador, should be ready to depart to Selim for the sollemn confirmation of the Articles, and with the vsuall presents.
Barbaro made great hast as befitted the importancy of the businesse, and in 14. daies arriued at Constantinople which was at the beginning of May: his arriuall was very gratefull, because that the Turkes hauing daily intelligence of the warlike preparations made at Messina, beganne to suspect that the Venetians had cunningly made this treaty to delay their warlike prouisions, that they might with more ease surprize them vnawares, and that which confirmed them in this opinion was, because they had no notice of the comming of a Venetian Ambassador. This sodainely caused them to prepare the fleet which had beene disarmed, notwithstanding that the time was too farre spent for such actions, Mahomet with sundry difficulties hauing till then deferred it to take away all occasions that might frustrate peace.
At last toward mid Iune, the Bashas Vluzzali and Piali went to sea with an hundredThe Turkish fleet depa^teth from Constantinople. and fifty Gallies, thirty Foists, and ten Mahonnes, and sailed to Negropont, where they made some aboad, expecting the issue of the treaty of peace: and Piali hauing intelligence from the Sanzhac of Chersega that the Ambassador and the new Baily were arriued in Dalmatia and on their way towards Constantinople, did with the whole fleet saile to Modon, and hearing that peace was established  with the Venetians, he turned his forces vpon the Catholike King, scouring the sea coasts of Puglia, where he burnt the city of Castres.
The Venetians being aduertized that the Turkish fleet was abroad, and that they intended not to obserue the peace, and what themselues had done was interpreted as a collour to deceiue, were possessed with the same iealozies as the Turks; wherevpon notwithstanding the Ambassador was already in Dalmatia, the euent of his Ambassage was held very doubtfull; and a decree being made that Generall Foscar^ni leauing sixe Gallies at Corfou should bring the rest of the fleet to Zara, and vnrig it, they neuerthelesse deferred the execution thereof, and sent him word to disarme only tenne of the worst, and to re-enforce the rest, which  being done there remained with him foure score and twelue seruiceable Gallies: But this did farther encrease the Turkes iealouzies. All these shaddowes of false suspition being vanished, and the Senate supposing that the Commonwealth was out of danger, being vnwilling any longer to continue so great a

charge, sent word to the Generall, that he should vnrigge his Gallies, and returne home to Venice. By this time the Ambassador Badoario arriued at Constantinople, where in few words he told Selim,, That by how much the Prince and VenetianThe Ambassadors speech to Selim. Senate had beene greeued with the breach of friendship betwixt the State and the O^toman family; by so much more was their ioy then compleate, because all controuersies ended, they were now revnited as before, their subiects enioying peace, quiet and free traffick: hoping that peace and friendship now renued, would be of long continuance, which the Venetians for their parts would be very carefull to obserue, intreating Selim to doe the like for his part, as became a vertuous and iust Prince.
Selim made no other answer, but briefly seemed to allow that which the Ambassador had spoken, and ratified and confirmed the Articles before concluded with the Baylie. In this sort, after that warre had continued foure yeeres, peace was established with the Turke.
The same yeere 1573. in March, Henry Duke of Aniou, brother to Charles theAn. 1573. ninth French King, was elected King of Poland, that Kingdome being voide by the death of Sigismund Augustus the last of the noble family of the Ia^elons, who had worne that crowne for the space of two hundred yeeres; and because successionHenry Duke of Aniou chosen king of Poland. hath no place in that Realme, being an electiue Kingdome, after Sigismunds death, which happened in Iuly in the yeere 1572. The Lords and Barons of Poland proclaimed a generall assembly at Varsouia in Aprill next ensuing, there to proceed to election of a new King. After this election posts were dispatched into France to giue Henry notice thereof, whilest Ambassadors were making ready, to receiue and conduct him into Poland.
Italy being now freed from the dreadfull Turkish warre was like to haue ba^chedTroubles in the Dutchy of Vrbin. an other in her owne bowels, for the Duke of Vrbin going about to lay some new impositions vpon his subiects, they denied to pay any thing but that which they had granted to Duke Francesco Maria when he entred into the State, and therevpon tooke armes, protesting neuerthelesse that they did it not against their Prince, but onely to defend their ancient priuiledges: The Duke on the other  side raised an army to enforce them, and the matter would haue proceeded to battaile, had not the Pope quenched this flame, making them friends: but the Duke entring afterwards with a power into Vrbin, beheaded some of the chiefe of the sedition, and banished others, consiscating their goods, and then built a Cittadell at the Cities charge, the better afterwards to conteine them in their obedience. Don Iohn of Austria being at the same time in Sicily with a gallantDon Iohn goes into Affrick. Nauy, and vnderstanding that the Venetians had made peace with the Turkes, did by King Philips permission passe ouer with his forces into Affrick, to ^eate the sonne of Muleassem in the Kingdome of Tunis, who for his intelligence with Christians had beene expulsed by the Turkes, and had honorable entertainment  giuen him by the King of Spaine in Goletta.
Being come into Affrick he landed his souldiers and in order of battaile marched to assault the City of Tunis, where no resistance being made the Christians without any slaughter entred and sacked it: then Don Iohn causing a fort to be built nere to the City, placed Gabriele Serbellone the Milanois in it with three hundred Italians, and himselfe with the fleet returned into Sicily.
About the beginning of the yeere 1574. the Venetians hauing intelligence that Selim armed at Constantinople, fearing that he would not obserue peace, suspected that hee ment to enterprise vpon Candy, wherevpon they leauied 12000. foot-men to guard it, and rigged their fleet, making Iacomo Souranza their  Generall: but these preparations were needlesse, for Selim turning his deseignes vpon Affrike to bee reuenged on Don Iohn, ratified the peace, and tooke from them all suspition of being inuaded by him, sent Sinan Basha with a mighty army into Affrike to recouer Tunis and raze Goletta, the which in one month

he did. Selim perceiuing all things to succeed according to his desire, intended to breake his word and oth with the Venetians, and to inuade the (...) of Candy; but whilest he made his preparations, death ouerthrew his vniust and proud deseignes, God so prouiding for the quiet and safety of Christendome: Amurath his eldest sonne succeeded him in the Empire.
In the meane time Henry of Aniou entring Poland, did vpon the confines inThe death of Selim Emperor of Turkes. great power and magnificence meet with the chiefe of the Kingdome, who conducted him to Cracouia, where with royal solemnity he was crowned: and whilest he busied himselfe with enquiring of their manner of gouernment, beginning by  little and little to order the affaires of State, the Queene his mother sent a speedy messenger to him from France to aduertize him of the death of his brother King Charles, and to aduise him to returne into France with all possible speed, to receiue the crowne, and to remoue those troubles wherewith by his brothers death she was entangled.
The King accquainted the Polanders with these newes, telling them that hee was of necessity to returne into France to order the affaires of that Kingdome which were much embroiled. But the Lords which were then with him at Cracouia, answered that his departure could not be treated of but in the Generall Councell of the whole Realme, who would send him so well accompanied, as he  should terrifie those that durst make any resistance. The Generall Estates of the Kingdome were to the same end summoned to Cracouia: but the King againe solicited by his mother to make hast, and on the other side perceiuing that theThe King of Poland returnes secretly into France. Polanders did not proceed with such celerity as his affaires required, and that they were vnwilling to let him goe, resolued in secret manner to depart, and in disguise by night leaping on horse-back, him-selfe, with three more, went from Cracouia, and with great speed hasted towards the confines of the Empire.
His departure was not long concealed, for the Earle of Tericenia the Kings Chamberlaine, with other Lords, comming to his chamber and finding him not there, did presently take horse, pursuing the same way that hee had taken, meaning to stay him and bring him backe, but the King made such speed as they  could not ouer-take him till he arriued in the Empires territories, where they earnestly entreated him to returne with them, which he not granting, they went back againe to Cracouia.
The King in the meane time pursuing his iourney came to Vienna where theThe entertainment giuen to the French King at Vienna in Austii^. Emperors sonnes met him, and within a while after, the Emperor himselfe, who very magnificently entertained him.
From thence he sent word to the Venetians that he determined to come and see their Citty. Archduke Charles accompanied him through his Cuntrey; vpon the Venetians confines, he met with a gallant troope of Noblemen who came to waite vpon him with eight hundred souldiers; the next day foure of the chiefest  Senators of Venice came to him as Ambassadors, and intreated him to come and view their city, where all men with great desire expected him; which he pro mising to doe, the Duke of Neuers who was then in Italy came likewise to him, and so altogether arriued at Maguera, the farthest place of the firme land on the lakes, where hee met with threescore Venetian gentlemen which came to waiteThe Dukes of Ferrara and Neuers come with King Henry to Venice. vpon him, and entring into a Gondola, prepared for him, together with the Dukes of Ferrara and Neuers, attended by infinite numbers of Gondolas, hee came to Murana, where the next day hee was visited by the Prince and Senate with foureteene Gallies, then beeing conducted to Lia, hee went into the Bucentauro, and with him the Prince and Senate, from thence with great magnificence  he was brought to Venice, all that Channell betwixt Lia and the city beeing full of boates made in fashion of sea monsters, wherein were all the youth of Venice,The French Kings magnificent reception at Uenice. ritchly attired, with infinite numbers of Gondolas who rowed before and on euery side of the Bucentaure, which was gently towed to Venice, where the

King remayning certaine daies the Signory shewed him all pleasures and delights that could be imagined: and at his departure, the Prince and Senate accompanied him three miles from the city, where taking leaue of each other, the King embraced the Prince, giuing him great thankes for his royall entertainment, which hee promised neuer to forget, and in so saying gaue him a diamond of great valew entreating him to weare it for his sake.
After his departure, whilest with his friends the Prince celebrated the day of his election, ^ire by negligence had like to haue consumed the dukes pallace, who was enforced to with-draw himselfe to the house of Giouan de Legge, knight, and Procurator of Saint Marke: this fire besides the present great hurt it did was by some  interpreted as a bad presage.
The same yeere died Cosmo de Medicis the first great Duke of Tuscany, a PrinceThe death of Cosmo de Medicis first great Duke of Tuscany. of rare and excellent iudgment: Francesco his eldest sonne succeeded him. There arose likewise great troubles in Genoa, betwixt the antient and moderne nobillity, which continued the remainder of that yeere, and most part of next 1575. till that the Pope, Emperor, and King of Spaine, whom they had made vmpiers of theirTroubles in Genoa appeased. controuersies, made them friends.
So soone as Amurath had possest himselfe of his fathers Empire, following the president of his Ancestors, hee murthered all his brethren: and to let the An. 1575. world see that he was a souldier, commanded Vluzzali to prepare a mighty fleet: This did greatly trouble all Christian Princes, especially the Venetians, who fortified all their sea-coasts against the fury of this barbarous enemy: but they were soone freed from this feare, by a great plague and dearth at that time in Constantinople,The Venetians scare. which enforced the new Emperor to abandon his warlike deseignes, and to seeke meanes to redresse the miserie and calamity of the chiefe citie of his Empire yet, to confirme mens opinions, conceiued of his new enterprises, he commanded (truce beeing not yet ratified with the Emperor) that his Garrisons neere to Hungary, should enter into the Empires territories to waste and burne the country, where the Turkes did not only execute many hostile and bloudy actions, but tooke diuers castles of the Empire, carrying away with them many  Christian prisoners: whereof the Emperors Ambassador complayning to Amurath,The Turkish army in the Empires confines. he willed him to write to his Master, that if he ment to haue truce with him, he should resolue to pay him tribute for all his dominions, otherwise, hee would in person come into his country to ruine him.
Amurath was incensed against Maximillian, because that the Polanders, determyning to elect a new King by reason of King, Henries departure, he was one that laied claime to that crowne: and because the house of Austria and the OttomanThe cause why Amurath hated the Emperor. family had of a long time hated each other, Amurath would by no meanes haue him for his neigbour, and therefore inuaded him, to diuert him from those thoughts, sending word likewise at the same time to the Polanders, that if they  could not agree about the election of their King, they should choose Stefano Battori Prince of Transiluania, threatning if they did not so, to waste and spoile their country.
Whilest the Turke stood on these termes with the Emperor and Polanders,Amurath confirmes peace with the Uenetians. he sent one of his Chiaus to Venice to promise and ratifie both by word and writing perpetual peace with them: This Ambassage was entertained with wonderful ioy, they being thereby freed from great care and expense. At the same time an exchange of prisoners, taken at the battaile of Lepanto (which were now at Rome) was granted, for Christian prisoners held by the Turke, among whom was Serbolone, and many others of note.
Toward the latter end of this yeere, the pestilence which had much afflicted the city of Trent, bewraied it selfe in Venice, where by reason of cold weather, it brake not forth much that winter: but the spring following the yeere 1576. it beganne to rage, and with the heate so encreased, as there died that yeere

aboue three score and ten thousand persons: and no humaine remedy appearing, the Prince and Senate had recourse to God, and meeting altogether in Saint Markes Church, the Prince in all their names made a sollemne vow to God to build a Church and dedicate it to the worlds Redeemer, beseeching him withThe Prince and Se^ates vow to God. heart and mouth, that it might please him of his infinite mercy to heare them, and to appease his wrath, by restoring them to their former health. This gracious God heard their humble and deuout praiers, and from that time the sicknesse beganne to decrease, so that the City in March following was wholly freed from that scourge: wherevpon, a goodly Church was builded at La Zuecca, and dedicated to the Redeemer, where now the Capuchins abide: whither the Signory  and Clergy doe yeerely goe in precession euery third sunday in Iuly to giue thankes vnto God, for his mercy and fauor shewed vnto them.
The city of Venice was not alone infected, but diuers other townes of the Marches of Treuiso and Lumbardy, but especially the city of Milan, where CardinallGreat charity of a Prelat. Borromeo, Archbishop of the place, a Prelate of holy life, spared neither his means nor life for the releefe of his flock, exposing himselfe without feare to all dangers that were offered.
Things thus variably changing, Lodonico Mocenigo Duke of Venice deceassed, in Iune, the yeere 1577. hauing gouerned eight yeeres, hee was honorably buried in the Church of Saint Iohn and Paul, vnder the great Gate, neere to Loredana Marcello his wife.
His funeralls ended, all men were desirous to acknowledge the vertue and deserts of Sebastiano Venieri, who when he was Generall had renouned the Christian Commonwealth by so notable a victory; and though hee had competitors, did neuerthelesse merit to be preferred before them all: wherevpon the forty one being assembled (of which number himselfe was one) they without any contradiction chose him Prince.



SEBASTIANO VENIERI  the 86. Duke.





THIS election published, the people were very ioyfull of it. But that which seemed most strange, and therewithall pleasing, was, that amongst such multitude of all sorts of people as went to congratulate his new dignity, ten Turkes who were then in Venice, came and kissed his feet, saying aloude, This is that inuincible Generall, who by defeating our fleet and vs, hath iustly purchased to himselfe this deserued crowne, vnto whom we wish a long and happy life. The Prince thanked them and with a liberall hand rewarded them.
Not long after, fiue correctors of the lawes were created, who had authority  to order the affaires of iustice. For sundry corruptions by long continuance crept into pleas, did much confound mens sutes, to the preiudices of iustice: These fiue were Giouan Donato, Iacomo Gussone, Francesco Venieri, Iustinian Iustinians, and Lodouico Micaele, all Senators of great reputation. Then vpon intelligence that the Turke rigged certaine Gallies at Narento to send into the Hadriattick Gulph (contrary to the treaty of peace made with the Venetians) to defend his owne subiects trafficking on those seas, whom the Vscoques of Segna robbed, the Venetians sent foure well armed Gallies thither, who cleered and defended those seas from their thefts and robberies, whereof the Turke hauing  notice called home his owne Gallies forth of the Gulph and freed the Venetians from all feare and suspition.
The Senate perceiuing that the prices of all things were excessiue in Venice, either by reason of the late sicknesse, or vpon some other occasion; a decree wasPrice set vpon all wares. made to reduce all wares to the old price appointed by the lawes; and to see it effected, fiue Senators were appointed, namely Marco Iustiniano, Lorenzo Bernardo, Sebastiano Barbarico, Nicolo Quirini, and Lodouico Contareni.
Three Senators were afterwards deputed to take order for the discharge and payment of the States debts, occasioned by the last warres: the Senat was desirous (it hauing beene propounded by Giouan Francesco Priuli, a wise and vertuous Senator) to pay euery man his due, and to that end, they appointed the said  Francesco Priuli, Antonio Bragadini, and Iacomo Gussone.
At the same time, Haniball of Capua elected Archbishop of Ottranto came to Venice as the Popes Nuncio, whose arriuall was pleasing to the Senate, for the memory of his dead vncle, who in former time had beene Legat there, as also because that by his comming the passage towards Romagnia was opened, which till then had beene shut vp by reason of the late sicknesse, his presence likewise brought content with it; for hee presented the Prince with a rose of gold from his Holinesse, which is a guift which Popes are wont to bestow vpon Princes which are their greatest friends and fauorites: Pope Alexander the third in the yeere 1177. honoured Prince Sebastian Ciani with the like guift, and the ceremony The Pope sends a golden rose to the Venetian Prince. of presenting it was magnificently performed in Saint Markes Church, fifteene daies after, vpon the one and twentith day of Iuly, a publike proclamation was made, wherein the City was declared to bee cleere and sound from all infection: At which publication the Prince and Senate went to visit the new Church built in honor of our Sauiour at La Zuecca.
Not long after, Ormanetta Bishop of Padua beeing dead, the Pope bestowed that ritch Bishoprick on Frederico Cornare the Bishop of Bergamo, and that of Bergamo vpon Ieronimo Ragazzone Bishop of Nouara: it did highly content the Senate to see one of those Churches restored to the family of Cornares, who for a long time had gouerned it, and the other to a house so well deseruing of the Common-wealth, for Ragazzone was brother to Iacomo and Placido Ragazzoni, beloued of the Signory for their good seruice done to the State.
This ioy, the fate of Brescia did greatly lessen, where the plague dayly consumed

multitudes: wherevpon in Iuly the Prince and Senate for three daies made sollemne precessions, praying vnto God for their health.Brescia afflicted with the plague.
The same yeere sundry prodigies were seene, a great Comet ouer all Europe, and at Rome a globe of fire in the ayre like to a great tunne which, arising ouerSundry prodigies seene in the ayre. the gate del populo, vanished ouer Castle Angelo: besides a cleere light was seene in Romagnia at midnight, which notwithstanding the darkenesse shined so bright as that men did as easily see to read as at noone day, these were interpreted signes of future misery.
Not long after, newes was brought to Venice of the death of D. Iohn of Austria  who deceassed at Namur in the beginning of the yeere 1578. at which time likewise Prince Venieri opprest with old age, and surprised with sicknesse (then when he thought to celebrate the birth day of Princesse Cecilia Contareni his wife, for which Francesco Morosini his sonne in law a noble Gentleman prepared great triumphs) departed this mortall life on the third of March, being generally bewailed of the whole City hauing gouerned the Commonwealth eight months and twenty daies. The ceremonies which were wont to bee made in the Church of Saint Iohn and Paul, were by reason of the great raine performed in Saint Markes, his body was afterwards buried in the Church of Maran. The Archduke of Austria craued his picture of the Senate, together with his coate armour which hee wore vpon the day of the battaile of Lepanto, which the Senate willingly  granted.
The funerall ceremonies ended, and the Senators after the vsuall manner proceeding to a new election, Nicolo de Ponte a very graue and noble Senator, foure score and eight yeeres old, and Procurator of Saint Marke, being a learned man which in his youth had read publikely at Venice, was chosen. In his time the Commonwealth was peaceable, the Turke turning his force vpon the Persian.




NICOLO DE PONTE  the 87. Duke.








THE same yeere the great Duke of Tuscany discouered a conspiracy against himselfe and his brethren made by certaine Florentine Gentlemen, who were apprehended and publikely executed, and not long after I^ne of Austria his wife died in child-bed, a very vertuous Princesse. The yeere following 1580. though there were fierce wars both in the East, and Netherlands, men fearing that it would likewise renue in France, the Venetians were quiet ouer their whole dominions.
The second yeere of Prince Ponte his soueraignty, an accident happened at Venice very pleasing to the Senate. Francesco de Medicis great Duke of Tuscany a very potent Prince was desirous to marry for his second wife Bianca daughter to Bartilmeo Capello a Venetian Gentleman, and to that end sent Mario Sforza to Venice to acquaint the Senate and her father therewith. The Senate sent for Barthelmeo and his sonne Vittorio whom they knighted, then adopted the great Dutchesse Bianca daughter to the Venetian Signory, in the same manner as in former time they had done Catherina Cornare Queene of Cyprus: the State then and afterwards shewing great signes of ioy, but chiefly vpon the arriuall of Don Iohn de Medicis the great Dukes brother, sent to Venice to conduct her to  Florence, and Giouan Micaele and Antonio Tepulo were sent Ambassadors to the great Duke in the Senates name to congratulate his marriage, and to be present at Florence at the great Dutchesse coronation.
They likewise sent Marco Iustiniano Ambassador to Charles Philibert the new Duke of Sauoy, to bewaile with him the death of Emanuell his father, a great friend to the Venetian State. And because Philip had obteined the crowne of Portugall by the death of the Cardinall King, the Senate appointed Vincento Troni, and Ieronimo Lippomano both Knights and noble Senators, AmbassadoursAmbassadors s^nt to the King of Spain. to his Maiesty, to reioyce with him in the Senates name for his happy fortune.
Now because peace had in Venice begotten excesse in the expense of priuate Cittizens which commonly carrieth sundry mischiefes along with it (for there where frugality and parcimony hath place, religion, vertue, and modesty doe flourish) a decree was made, that superfluous expence in garments, feasts and womens lying in, should be moderated.
They abolished the vse of all sorts of pearle, true or counterfeit, onely womenDecrces against the Venetians superfluous expences. were permitted to weare a small carkanet of them about their neckes: costly skinnes, and furres were wholly forbidden to bee worne, together with the vse of any gold or siluer lace vpon garments: Moreouer, it was not lawfull for any Curtezan to weare any precious iem, iewels of gold or siluer, or to vse any tapistry: Great penalties were imposed not onely vpon the transgressors of this decree, but on workmen which should make or sell any of these prohibited things: and excessiue expense was not onely forbidden in womens lying in, but likewise the vsuall visitation of friends, vnlesse they were neere kinsfolke, and to preuent all deceit herein, the mid wiues were enioyned within three daies after any woman was deliuered of child to aduertize the Magistrate thereof. An other decreeA Decree against superfluous dyet. was made against superfluous diet, restrayning it within the bounds of modesty: peacocks, partridge, feasant, and all dainty fish were bannished from the tables of delicious Epicures, Iesters and Buffons from their houses. It was likewise forbidden not to serue double messe of fish or flesh into any banquet, and  a commandement to all Cookes to giue in the names of such to the Magistrate as had hired them to dresse any, together with the order therein obserued.
All Gouernors of townes, and Iudges of Prouinces were likewise enioyned,

not to bestow any excessiue cost in garments, houshold-stuffe or seruants, because that modesty and proportion in gouernors, is an assured bridle to hold back subiects from doing euill. For, where euery man is suffered to liue after his owne pleasure without order of law, there of necessity must all mischiefe and riot abound: for this cause the State enacted great and greeuous penalties vpon the transgressors of these so holy and wholesome decrees: For it auailes not a Commonwealth to haue good lawes, vnlesse subiects doe obey them, and Magistrates see them seuerely executed.
Whilest the Senate were making these wholesome lawes, the Persian perceiuing that he had to doe with so potent an enemy as the Turke sought to weaken A Persia^ Ambassador (...) to Veni^e. him by busying him in more places then one, and to that end did the same winter send an Ambassador to the Venetians, requiring that of them which they had propounded vnto him, for during the warre against Ottoman, hee intreated them to enuade the Turke now that hee was busied in Persia, promising so streightly to enclose them as they should neuer escape from thence, thereby hoping wholly to roote out the tyrannous memory of the Ottomans who went about to make themselues absolute monarkes of the whole world.
The Venetians dismissed this Ambassador with an ambiguous answere, as men that had no intent to entangle themselues in a new warre, without likelihood of great aduantage, and assured hope of victory. In this manner ended the  yeere 1580.
The yeere following 1581. Pope Gregory the thirteenth perceiuing that becauseVpon what occasion the Pope caused tenne daies to be taken from the yeere. the course of the sunne had not beene rightly obserued, the Equinoctiall of the spring had gotten tenne daies before the course of the sunne, whereby the feast of Easter (on which all other mouable feasts depend) was not celebrated at the iust time appointed in the primitiue Church by the councell of Nice, which in congruity if it were not reformed, the holy daies of winter would bee kept in summer, and those of summer in winter, he sent for the skilfullest Astrologians of Europe to come to Rome, and commanded them after exact calculating the course of the planets, to referre the Equinoctiall of the spring to the 21. day of March, as it had beene in old time decreed by the fathers of the said councell of Nice, and to finde out some meanes and rule, that the same inconuenient might for euer be remooued: These learned men did what the Pope commanded, by referring the Equinoctiall to it true place, and by taking away for once, tenne daies from October: His Holinesse assured that this was the onely true remedy, approued it, and by his iniunction commanded it to be obserued ouer all Christendome: only the Greekes and some other nations would not entertaine this reformation, which was diuised by Lodouicus Lilius a very famous Mathematician, and divulged ouer all Christendome by his Holinesse command.
The same yeere there arose some contention betwixt the Venetians and Contention betwixt the Ven^tians and Knights of Malta. knights of Malta, because that those knights scoured the seas to surprise the Turkes, whom sometimes they tooke in the Venetians seas, whereat Amurath being incensed, sent them word that if they would not take order that his subiects might safely passe through their seas, himselfe would send a mighty fleet to secure them. The Venetians complained to the great Master of Malta, intreating him not to permit his vessels any more to trouble the Turkes on their seas: but the Malteses making no account hereof, the Venetians tooke from them a ship of warre which they sent into Candy, and not long after tooke two Gallies from them, which being brought to Corfou, all the Turkish slaues in them were set at liberty, and the empty Gallies restored to the knights. The Venetians the  same yeere to satisfie the Turke did publikely behead Gabriele Heme a Venetian Gentleman.A Uenotian Gentleman is ex^cuted to satisfie the Turke.
This Heme in a Galley of his owne had in the Archipelago fought with a Turkish Galeot which was going from Argier to Constantinople with the

vice-queene of the same Kingdome, and a sonne and daughter of hers, which carried rit^h presents to Amurath, all the Turkes both men and women in it he put to the sword setting all the Christian slaues at liberty.
Beside the execution of this gentleman, the Venetians, to appease the Turke, were enforced to send home foure hundred Turkish slaues in stead of so many Christians which the said Heme had set at liberty, and to pay him in ready money the sum of 800000. Ducats.
But to giue this yeere a more pleasing farewell, the Prince of Mantua did with great solemnity and magnificence marry one of the daughters of Francesco great Duke of Tuscany: and Catherina Infanta of Spaine was by King Philip her father  promised in marriage to the Duke of Sauoy.
Not long after, Pope Gregory the thirteenth died in the foure score and third yeere of his age: his funeralls ended in Saint Peters Church, where he was buried in a chappel which himselfe had built, the Cardinals entred into the Conclaue, where after twelue daies, they elected Cardinall Falix Perreti of Montalto a CastleThe creation of Pope Sixtus the fifth. in the marches of Ancona, a Monke of Saint Francis order who tooke vpon him the name of Sixtus the fifth.
The same yeere on the fourth of Iune, Nicolo de Ponte the Venetian Prince, died, beeing ninty foure yeeres of age, hauing gouerned seuen yeeres and odde  months, he lies buried in Saint Maries Church; his funeralls ended, and the forty one proceeding to a new election, Pascale Cigogna, Procurator of Saint Marke, was chosen Duke on the eighteenth of August of the same yeere.




PASCALE CICOGNA  the 88. Duke.





IN his time there happened a tragicall act in Padua a towne vnder the Venetian Signory, into whose territories presently vpon A Dutchesse i^ cruelly murthered in Padu^. the election of Pope Sixtus the fifth, Paulo Iordano Vrsino Duke of Brasciano retired himself (iealous of the Pope who suspected that the Duke had put a kinsman of his to death before his Papacy, hauing married his widdow Victoria Corembona a beautifull

Lady) and there dyed, not without suspition of beeing poysoned, for which losse the Dutchesse beeing extreamly greeued, retired with two of her bretheren to Padua, vnder the protection of the State of Venice, till such time as shee pleased to returne home to her father at Eugubia. Lodouico Vrsino kinsman to the deceased Duke, lay at that time in Padua, for whose sake the Senate gaue him imployment in a iourney into the Leuant: this man, either of himselfe, or prouoked by others, did on a night with diuerse armed men, go to the Dutchesse house, whom hee cruelly murthered, together with one of her bretheren.
The report of this murther beeing carried to Venice, the Senate sent Commissioners to punish the Author and complices of this homicide. Vrsino hauing  notice heereof, and certaine of his letters intercepted, which discouered the fact, so as hee could not deny it, resolued to defend himselfe in his house with fifty of his owne followers, determining to hold out till the last man: but the Magistrates enuironing the house with their gardes, and perceiuing that hee would not yeeld, caused a Cannon to bee brought, wherewith they battered and beat downe part of the house, killing some of the defendants. Lodouico at last perceiuingThe murtherers are put to death. longer resistance to be vaine, yeelded himselfe, who beeing imprisoned, together with some of his complices, and found guilty of the Dutchesse murther, himselfe was strangled in prison, and his adherents publickly executed.

The end of the third Booke of the seuenth Decade.




The Contents of the fourth Booke of the  seuenth Decade.
HEnry the third, French King, is slaine by a Monke. Henry of Bourbon King of Nauar is proclaimed King of France, Foure Popes dye in lesse then a yeare. The Venetians are iealous of the Turkes and Milaneses. The building of the Bridge of Rialto. The conuersion of Henry of Bourbon French King, hee sends a sollemne Ambassage to Rome, where Pope Clement the eight refuseth to giue him his blessing. All the Citties of France yeeld to Henry the fourth. The Venetians send Ambassadors to him. Pope Clement blesseth the French King. Peace betwixt the French and Catholick Kings. The French King marrieth the Lady Mary of Medicis Princesse of  Florence. Peace betwixt the French King and Duke of Sauoy. The Venetians cleere the Adriattick Seas from Pirates. A decree of the Venetian Senate against the Clergies purchasing of lands. An other Decree concerning building of Churches. The creation of Pope Paul the fifth Hee complaines to the Venetian Ambassador against the Senates law, forbidding the Clergie to purchace lands, or to build Churches without licence. The Popes resolution vpon the Venetians refusall. Hee sends two Iniunctions to them concerning that businesse, with the Senates answer. Excommunication against the Venetians  is published at Rome. They make two Declarations vpon the Popes excommunication. The Pope and Venetians warlike preparations against each other. The French King is a Mediator for Peace betwixt the Pope and Venetians, and to that end sends the Cardinall Ioyeuse to Rome. The Pope after sundry difficulties condiscends to reuoke his censures, and to giue the Cardinall Ioyeuse ample Commission to doe it. The substance of the Articles whereby the Censures were reuoked. And lastly the reuocation of them by the said Cardinall in Venice.

The fourth Booke of the seuenth Decad of the Historie of Uenice.
WHILEST the Venetians, and generally all Italy enioyed peace, France and the Netherlands were afflicted with warre: And Henry the third French King beeing treacherously slain^ by a Monke, the cheefe of the Army as well Catholicks as Protestants, proclaimed Henry of Bourbon, King of France and Nauarre, as first Prince of the bloud, and next heire to the Crowne.
But to returne to the Venetians vnto whom our History doth cheefly belong. The yeare following 1590. there was a great dearth of Corne ouer all Italy, but  the Venetian Senate made such speedy prouision of graine from England and Poland, as during that time of scarcity, Bakers stalls and markets were better stored with bread, and the price thereof cheaper then in any other Citty of Italy, where men could not buy as much as they pleased, though in Venice no man was limited. The same yeare on the 27. of August, Pope Sixtus the fifth dyed, hauingPope Sixtus death, with the creation of Pope Vrban the 7. held the Papacie fiue yeares, foure moneths, and three dayes: Twenty dayes after, Cardinall Giouan Baptista Castagna a Romaine, was created Pope, intitling himselfe Vrban the seuenth, putting all men in hope of an happy gouernment: but he enioyed the Papacie onely twelue dayes. After his death the Sea was vacant aboue two moneths; in which interim, more then seuen hundred Bandetti spoiled  the countrey round about Rome: against them the colledge of Cardinals, and great Duke of Tuscany sent forces. At last the Conclaue chose Cardinall NicoloCreation of Pope Gregory the 14. Sfondrato of Milan Pope, intitling himselfe Gregory the foureteenth.
Toward the latter end of this yeare, there was in Venice a Greeke called Marto Bragadino Mamagna, one that had beene a Monke famous for opinion men had of him, that he could transmute quick-siluer into gold, the people were not alone bewitched with this golden dreame, but the Nobility, and some Princes of Italy,The deceit of a Greeke. sought his friendship, hoping by his meanes to turne mountaines into gold: but this Impostor beeing no longer able to conceale his deceit, fled from Venice into Bauaria, where the Duke discouering his cousenage, imprisoned and condemned  him to be hanged, but the prisoner making sute to bee beheaded, the Duke grantedThe Venetians are iealous of Turke^ and (...). his request. The Venetians hauing carefully prouided for the famine (as hath beene said) were the yeare following 1591* much perplexed, hauing intelligence that the Turke made great preparation for warre. They sent forces into Candy and to other places, confronting the enemie: but they were soone freed fromThe building of the bridge of Rialto. that feare, being aduertised that the Turke did it at the request of the French King, to infest the Spaniard, they did afterwards fortifie Bressia and Bergamo, suspecting the great forces which were in the state of Milan: they did likewise build that goodly bridge ouer the great Canall of the Citty, called the bridge of Rialto.
In the meane time Pope Gregory the fourteenth dyed, the tenth moneth and The death of Pope Gregory the 14. tenth day of his Papacie, hee was a great fauourer of the French league, to whose ayde he sent forces vnder the command of his Nephew Hercole Sfondrato Duke of Mont marcian at the charge of the Sea Apostolick; but after the Popes death their pay beeing no more currant, those troopes by little and little disbanded.

The Sea was vacant thirteen dayes, at the end of which Cardinall Giouan AntonioThe Creation and death of Pope Innocent the 9. Faschinetta the Bolognesse was created Pope, assuming the name of Innocent the 9. at first he seemed to fauour the league of France, but his deseigns were vain for he liued but two monethes and one day after he was made Pope.
The Cardinalls went into the Conclaue at the beginning of the yeare 1592. and elected Hipolito Cardinall Aldobrandino nominated Clement the 7. who seemed willing to aid the French league with men and money.The Creation of Pope Clement the 7.
At the same time Candy was miserably aflicted with the Pestilence, where in a short space dyed twenty thousand persons: one thing is worthy to be noted, that toward the latter end of August, when the sicknesse beganne to decrease, there  was seene in a night on the easi side of the Island a great cloude of fire which giuing light for an houres space as if it had beene noone dayes, did to the greatA Prodigie. terror of the beholders runne through the ayre as farre as Spina longa, and there fell into the Sea, where for a long time it burnt in the water, and at last it vanished.
Now the Citty of Venice hauing beene (as all men know and as wee haue declared in the first booke of this History) builded by those, who flying from the fury and incursions of barbarous nations, retired into those lakes where it now standeth; and in the same manner as it beganne, hath still daily augmented and encreased, so as till this day many famous men, learned in all arts haue come thither  from all parts of Christendome as to the Sanctuary of the Muses, where those which are excellent in any art whatsoeuer are so honored and cherished by the nobility, as they presently forget their natiue Contrey, making their perpetuall abode there: where vppon it came to passe the same yeare that certaine fauorers of learning hauing honorable command in the Citty propounded the building of an Academy there, where by turnes they would meeet, and read publicke lecturesThe Institution of the Uenetian Academy. in that art which euery man profest, and to this end nine gallant spirrits ioyned together (Pompeo Limpia de Bari, Lucius Scarannus de Brindiz, Fabio Paulino de Vdina, Giouan Baptista Leone, Georgio Contaren of Venice, Guido Cassono de Serauall, Theodore Angelucio de Bella forte in la Marca, Vnicentio Galieno the Roman, and Giouan Paulo Gallucio de Salles) and laid the foundation of this vertuous work, choosing a fit place for the purpose, where continuing their ordinary lectures the glory and reputation of this Venetian Academy extended so farre, as diuers notable men haue since then come thither, whereby it is daily much beautified and augmented.
Thus ended this yeare. At the beginning of the next which was 1593. though the Venetians sought to satisfie the Turke, by keeping the Vscoques of Segna from scouring the Adriattick Seas, yet, not relying on their perfidious promises, beeing aduertised that they made great preparations by land and Sea, they re-enforced the Garrisons of Candy, which were much weakened by the late pestilence: then perceiuing that the Turkish Army, which came from Constantinople, made incursions through Croatia and approached the Contry of Frioul, belonging to their state, resolued to build a fort vpon the Confines thereof, at al times to defend the Contry from the Turkes incursions, they committed the building thereof to skilfull Ingeniers, and to some of the cheefest Senators which for that it is seated in a goodly soyle tenne miles from Vdina, and within halfe a mile of the Emperors territories, was called Noua Palma.
The same yeare, Henry King of France and Nauarre, after sondry battailes and ouerthrowes of his enemies did through the instruction* of the Arch-bishop of Bourges and sundry Doctos of Paris require to bee reconciled  vnto the Roman Church, and on the fiue and twentith day of Iuly made publick profession thereof, in Saint Denis Abbey, before the said Archbishop, accompanied by the Cardinall Bourbon Archbishop of Rouen, nine Bishops, and

diuerse other Prelates and Religious men, protesting to liue and dye in the sayd Catholick religion, and to maintaine it with, and against all men: hee made profession of his faith, accomplished all ceremonies requisite in so solemne an acte, and then receiued absolution, to the wonderfull ioy and applause of the people.
Not long after this publick conuersion, the King sent the Duke of Neuers andA soll^mne Am^assage from F^ance to Rome. other Prelates to Rome, by them to present his obedience to the Pope, and to witnesse his desire to imitate the example of the Kings his Predecessors, and by his actions, like them, to merit the title and grade of the Churches eldest sonne, and to intreate his Holynesse to approoue his conuersion, and to honor him with his blessing.
The Pope after sundry honors done to the Duke of Neuers, would not at first endure to heare tell of the King, notwithstanding that the Duke and Prelates, which accompanied him, assured him that his conuersion was true and vnfeigned, and therefore humbly besought his Holynesse to beleeue it, which hee refusing to doe, would neither absolue the King, nor ratifie that which had beene done at Saint Denis. The French in the meane time perceiuing that the King had abiured his former errors, and was become a Catholick, and afterwards crowned and annoynted at Chartres with the holy oyle, according to the ancient custome of the French Kings: all rebellious citties, one after another, returned vnder his obedience. The Venetians sent Ambassadors to the French King,The Venetians send Ambassadors to the French King. to congratulate his conuersion, and to reioyce with his Maiesty for his happy successe, in recouering the greatest part of his kingdome.
At the beginning of the yeare following 1595. Amurath the Turkish Emperor dyed, Mahomet his eldest sonne succeeded him, who calling all his brethren into his chamber, caused them to bee strangled in his presence.
The Pope beeing aduertised of the French Kings good successe, who still humbled himselfe to the Sea Apostolick, and had againe sent Dauid du Perron Bishop of Eureux to Rome, to procure his absolution, was willing to grant his request, notwithstanding many were of contrary opinions: Wherevpon, comming oneThe Pope bl^sseth and absolu^th the ^rench King. Sunday morning beeing the eighteene of September, in his Pontificalibus into  Saint Peters Hall, hee approoued King Henries abiuration, with all ceremonies therein requisite, receiuing him to fauour, and into the bosome of the Church, with his blessing Apostolicall, inioyning him due penance: which done, Drums and Trumpets sounded in signe of ioy, and Cannons thundred from Castle Angelo, all men reioycing at his good fortune, (the Spanish Ambassador excepted) who in his Maisters behalfe protested, that the same act could not preiudice his Kings titles.
During these solemnities at Rome, Pascale Cicogna Duke of Venice dyed, beeing foure score and fiue yeares old, hauing gouerned the Common-wealth nine yeares, one moneth, and fifteene dayes, hee lyes buryed in the Church of Santa Maria de Cruciferi.




MARIN GRIMANI the 89. Duke.








MARIN GRIMANI Knight and Procurator of Saint Marke, succeeded him, beeing beloued of all men for his rare vertueThe Cardinall of Florence Legat in France. and charitie to the poore. The Pope in the meane time to confirme what hee had done to the most Christian King, sent the Cardinall of Florence his Legate into France, who was honorably entertained at Paris, where hee made some aboade;  for open warre beeing denounced betwixt France and Spaine, the Pope became a Mediator of peace* and to that end sent the Generall of the Fryers, a Sicillian, with ample Commission, together with the Legat, to treate of peace betwixt those two great Kings; hee had receiued the like authority from the King of Spaine; and in the end, after sundry goings too and fro, peace (which all men desired) ensued, the yeare 1598.
The Venetians perceiuing that the Vsicoques did not giue ouer their robbing the Dalmatian and Histrian seas, sent certaine Galleys thither, vnder the command of Giouan Bembo their Generall, assisted by Colonell Piercente Gabutio and his troopes, who defeated these theeues, and cleered the seas. Heerein, during peace  did the Venetians busie themselues, whilest the Turke enuaded Hungary and Transiluania. But the Vsicoques in the yeare 1599. continuing their incursions,The Venetians defeat the Vsicoques. the Venetians sent Nicolo Donato, who succeded Bembo, against them, together with the same Colonell Pierconte Gibutio and his Regiment, who entred and wasted their countrey, tooke diuerse of theirs Castles, and slew many of them.
Henry the fourth French King, vpon diuerse iust and reasonable causes, hauingHenry the 4. motioneth a marriage with the Princ^sse of Florence. obtained the Popes dispensation, to repudiate his wife the Lady Marguerite of France, sister to the late King, and to marry an other by whom hee might haue issue, craued the Lady Ma^y of Medicis, Princesse of Florence, daughter to the late Francisco great Duke of Tuscany, and Neece to Ferdinand de Medicis, now great Duke, a Princesse beside her youth, endowed with rare beauty, wisdome, and many  excellent parts. The great Duke perceiuing how honorable this match would bee to himselfe and the whole family of Medicis, did willingly consent therevnto,The Kings mariage celebrated at Florence. wherevpon so soone as it was determined and concluded, a great Lord of France was sent thither, who in the Kings name married her at Florence, honoring her

as his maisters wife: Then all things prepared for the iourney of so great a Princesse towards the latter end of the yeare she embarked hir selfe and traine in the great Dukes Gallies, sailing to Marseilles, where arriuing, she remained for certaine daies, receauing magnificent entertainment, till she might fa^ther know the pleasure of the King her husband, who at that time made warre vpon the Duke of Sauoy, for recouery of the Marquisat of Salusses, which that Duke had seazed on during the ciuill warres of France: His Maiestie hauing intelligence that the Queene his wife was arriued at Marseilles, sent word that shee should come to Lyons, whither himselfe came in post, and consummated the marriage begun at Florence.
Italy in the meane time was in all arme, because the Count Fuentes being by King Philip sent Lieutenant Generall to Milan, made great leuies of soldiers bothItaly zealou^ of the Spaniard^. Spaniards, Italians, Swisses and Almaines, vnder collour of aiding the Duke of Sauoy against the French King, if peace betwixt those Prines, t^eated of at the Popes command by his Nephew the Cardinall Aldobrandini, tooke not effect.
This troubled all Italy, and especially the Venetians in regard of their townes in Lombardy. The great Duke likwise grew iealous: whervpon, each of them armd,Peace betwixt the French King and Duke of Sauoy and gaue order to fortifie their frontiers: the l^ke did Francisco Maria Duke of Vrbin Peace in the meane time being proclaimed at Lyons betwixt the Christian  King and duke of Sauoy at the beginning of the yeare 1601. and Count Fuentes for all that not disarming, but on the contrary encreasing his forces, made the French King to renew his league with the Swisses, and to leuy new troupes, that if the Spaniard should enuade any of his friends, or Confederats in Italy, him selfe might speedily be able to succor him.
King Philip, aduertized of this iealozy commanded Count Fuentes to disarme, whereby al these suspitions ceased.
Not-with-standing, the Venetians sent the Colonell Pier-conte with other Captaines into Lombardy; whither like-wise by their commandement the Generall Leonardo Donato was gone, together with Giouan Baptista, Generall of their fantery, to fortifie their frontier townes, hauing discouered a plot laid to surprize  one of their cheefest Citties; and although Count Fuentes, by his masters commandement, had deuided his Army at Milan into sundry parts, namely into Flanders, Croatia, and to Prince Doria, yet he still retained such great numbers at Milan as might iustly cause his neighbors to feare and suspect: The Venetians likewise armed certaine Gallies and two Galeasses.The ca^se of t^e Venetian^ icalou si^.
Diuers causes mooued the Venetians to doe so, but cheefly, because Prince Doria, by King Phillips commandement, hauing rigged a mighty fleet houered vp and downe the mediterranean, no man knowing his deseigne: in the end he cleered this doubt, for he sailed to Argier in Barbary, making an attempt there, which by reason of sundry difficulties had no good successe.
In the yeare 1602. the fort called Palma Noua by the Venetians was ended, and is thought to be one of the goodliest in all Italy, which beeing inhabited, they there beganne to build faire houses, and goodly Pallaces, so as in a short time they hope it will prooue as populus as strong. The Senate afterwards perceiuing that one of the mouthes of Po, would in time choake vp with aboundance of earth, the Hauens of Chioggia and Malamoc, to the great preiudice and hinderance of the Citty of Venice, which by that meanes would loose the ordinary trafficke and commerce of those Hauens, caused a great trench to bee made, through which they diuerted that mouth of the Riuer another way, making it to fall into the Sea at a place whereas it could doe noe more hurt.
At the same time Philippo Pascalic arriued at Venice returning from his iourney against the Vsicoques, hee was sent by the Senate as Prouidator*

Generall of Dalmatia, wherein hee got great commendation, hauing defeated those theeues who were afterwards wholy rooted out by the Archduke. Theodoro Balbi likewise Prouidator of the Gulphe, did put the Pirates of Barbary to flight, who scou^ed the seas almost to Venice, from whom hauing taken three Galeots,Diuers Pirates are defeated. and set many Christian slaues at liberty, hee did so terrifie them, as they durst no more come into those seas: The great Dukes Galleys had the like good hap, which according to their custome sailing in the Archipelago to meet with Turkish Foists, and to spoile their sea coasts, incountred the Galleys of Rhodes, which they fought with, tooke some of them, and carried a rich booty to Florence.
But not to stray farre from the Venetians, the Clergie of Prague hauing vehemently  contested against Doctor Francisco Zabarello, for the ^ute prefer'd toThe Senates D^cree aga^nst the Clergie. sell certaine antient Church lands; The Senate made a decree, that the Church should not appropriate vnto it selfe rents possessed by the Layety, grounding that decree vpon a prohibition made by the Senate, in the yeare 1333. that no lands should bee giuen or bequeathed in perpetuity to Churches within the Citty and Dutchy of Venice: and if any were left vnto them, they should bee sold by a certaine time prefixt, and the money alone to be theirs: alledging for reason, that the Clergie, who pretend themselues and goods to bee exempt from all necessary charges belonging to the Common-wealth, the number of them dayly increasing, and on the contrary, that of the Citizens still decreasing, who serue, and  busie themselues in the ciuill gouernment, and the quantity of their goods wheron the publick reuenew depends, beginning to faile, in the end all wealth would of necessity fall to the Clergie.
This law was variously obserued till the yeare 1536. when it was reduced to this forme, That none of what quality soeuer, should giue lands to the Church, but onely for two yeares space, in which time they should be sold: and if the sale were not made by the Clergie, a ciuill Magistrate should bee appointed to doe it. This beeing considered by the Senate, hath euer since beene generally practised ouer the whole Venetian state.
The yeare 1603. the Councell of the Preguays at Venice, decreed, that no A decree concerning building of Churches. Venetian cittizen, of what degree or quality soeuer, should in the Citty, without the Senates consent, build any new Church, Hospitall, or Monastery, not that the Senate would wholy prohibit such buildings, but because the Prince and Senate as Superiours would consider whether it were needfull or not, there beeing in the citty one hundred and fifty Churches, Monasteries, Hospitalls, and other like places of deuotion. The yeare following 1604. the Venetians inioying peace, warre remooued it selfe to other places, as Germany, the Leuant, and Flanders.
In the yeare 1605. Pope Clement the eight falling sick on the twelfth of February, dyed on the third of March following, hauing gouerned the sea of RomeThe death of Pope Clement the viii. thirteene yeares, his body was carried to Saint Peters Church, and buried in the  Clementine chappell which himselfe had built: Then the Cardinalls entring into the Conclaue, elected Alessandro de Medicis Cardinall of Florence, sonne to the illustrious Octauio, who beeing Archbishop of Florence, was made Cardinall by Pope Gregory the thirteenth, and beeing chosen Pope, tooke vpon him theThe election of Pope Leo the 10. and his sodaine death. name of Leo the tenth. The Romaines were very glad of his election, but their ioy lasted not long, for hee dyed of a Feuer, the twenty sixth day after hee was made Pope: Some thought hee was poysoned, but his body beeing opened in the presence of diuerse Physitions, they found it otherwise, hee lyes buryed in Saint Peters Church.
The Cardinals proceeding to a new election, and desirous to make haste, the  Cardinalls Farnese and Montalto went to Cardinall Aldobrandini, intreating him to name three among the whole Colledge of Cardinalls (Tuscus and Baronius excepted) and they would choose one of the three: Wherevpon,

the Cardinals Clement, Arragon, and Borgesius beeing named, Borgesius as bestThe creation of Pope Paul the fift. beloued, was presently saluted Pope by way of adoration, intitling himselfe Paul the fift. This Pope descended from an ancient family in Syenna, was sonne to a Romaine Gentlewoman, his Father comming to dwell at Rome.
But the Venetian Clergie, notwithstanding the Senates decree, did dayly more and more augment their reuenues and possessions, as well within the Citty as abroad: the Senate for reducing their whole State to one conformable custome, had before (as hath beene said) diuulged their law ouer all their dominions, and added therevnto a prohibition, that none within their Citty or Signory, vnder what coullor soeuer, should sell, giue, or in any sort alienate lands to the Clergie  without the Senates permission which should not be granted, but with the same solemnities, vsuall at the alienation of the publick reuenue, and all alienations made otherwise, to bee declared voide, the lands confiscate, and Notaries punished. The Pope at the beginning of his Papacie, hauing notice of this law, did duly examine it, and would in no sort approoue it: but toward the end of October the same yeare, complained thereof to the Venetian Ambassador, at the time of publick audience* saying, That whilest the Sea of Rome was vacant, the VenetiansThe Pope complaineth to the Venetian Ambassador. had made a lawe, which prohibited the Clergie to purchase lands; adding (though it were made vpon important occasion, and by vertue of a former dedree) yet the Cannons disanulled them both; therefore his pleasure was to haue  them reuoked, inioyning the Ambassador in his name, to signifie as much to the Signory.
The Ambassador did what the Pope commanded, and within a while after receiued instruction and Commission from the Senate, to acquaint his Holynesse with the equity of their cause, and iustice of their law, together with the Signories power, and authority to make such decrees. The Pope, confident in his owne opinion, said aloud, That he gaue him audience, onely to content the Venetians, and not to admit any of his propounded reasons or excuses: then made an other* complaint, about the detaining of a Channon of Vincenza, and the Abbot of Nerueze, both of them accused of notorious crimes: and within a while after  another, concerning the law, forbidding to build Churches without permission: beeing resolute to haue those two lawes reuoked, and the prisoners deliuered to his Nuncio residing in Venice. And on the tenth day of September, making two Iniunctions, one concerning the two lawes, and the other about sentencing the Clergie, hee sent a Commission to his Nuncio to present them, resoluing vpon their answer and refusall, to proceed to excommunication. But the Nuncio beeing peraduenture mooued with pitty, because the Senate at that time had chosenThe Popes resolution vpon the Venetians refusall. an extraordinary Ambassador, by humble meanes to seeke to diuert his Holinesse from his resolution, and to induce him better to consider of the matter, delaied the presentation of those iniunctions, which the Pope tooke in bad part: wherevpon, in all hast he sent him an expresse commandement to present them without farther delay. In regard whereof, vpon Christmasse day, when Duke Grimani lay at point of death, and that the Signory and Senators were assembled, some of whom had receiued the holy Sacrament, and others were ready to receiue, the Nuncio craued audience, and presented the two iniunctions, which, notwithstanding the Dukes death happened the day following, were not opened till after the election of the new Duke.
Prince Grimani hauing gouerned nine yeares and odde moneths, departed this mortall life in the Christmasse holy-dayes, in the yeare 1605. his funerals ended, Leonardo Donato Knight, and Procurator of Saint Marke, was after the (...) manner  chosen in his steed, on the tenth day of February 1606.





LEONARDO DONATO the 90. Duke.








AFter his election, the two iniunctions beeing opened, were both of one substance, containing that his Holynesse was aduertised, that the Venetian Senate had decreed diuerse things contrary to the liberty of the Church, and authority of the Sea Apostolick, and diuulged ouer all their Signories certaine lawes particular to the Citty of Venice, forbidding to build Churches and Monasteries, and to allienate secular possessions to the Clergie, without the Senates  permission: which as repugnant to the Churches liberty, his Holynesse declared to bee of no force; and they who had made them, to haue incurred Ecclesiasticall censures, commanding them on paine of excommunication, presently to reuoke and breake those lawes; threatning to proceed farther, if they obeyed him not.
To this, the Senate answered on the 28. of Ianuary, the same yeare 1606. That with greefe and amazement it vnderstood by his Holynesse letters, that hee disliked the lawes of the Venetian common-wealth, prosperously obserued forThe Senates answer to the Pope. many ages, and neuer till then taxed by any of his predecessors, the reuocation whereof would ouer-throw the foundation of their State; that hee accounted  those lawes to be contrary to the authority of the Sea Apostolick, blaming those which made them, as infringers of the Churches liberty, notwithstanding that they had beene men of singular piety, done good seruice to the Sea of Rome, and were now in heauen: That the Senate according to his Holinesse aduertisement, had examined both the old and new lawes, and could find nothing in t^em, but what might be decreed by a Soueraigne Prince; concluding, that the Venetians did not thinke that they had incur'd any censures, nor that his Holynesse, repleate with piety and religion, would without considering the cause, continue his menaces. This answer did much ^isplease the Pope^, who presently thundred an excommunication against them, which on the seuenteenth day of Aprill the The censures against the Venetians are publish^d. same yeare, was published ouer all Rome, and hung vp in the vsuall places, namely on the great gates of Saint Peters Church, Chancery, and Market place of Campo de Fiore, by Christofero Fondut^, and Giouan Dominico de Pace, the Popes Pursuiuant*
The Prince and Senate hauing intelligence what was done at Rome, to preuent popular troubles and commotions, which might thereby arise in the townes and cities of their iurisdiction, were desirous to acquaint all their subiects therewith,The Venetians make a declaration vpon the Popes excommunication. and to this end, made two declarations, the one directed to all the Clergy of their dominions, and the other to the Magistrates and officers of the State, to stop and restraine all disorders that might arise: wherevpon all that yeere diuers bookes were written on both sides, some condemning the Venetians, others the Pope, euery man according to his owne passion.
But at last this contention had like to haue beene decided by the sword, both sides making great preparations for warre: for the Venetians hauing intelligence  that great numbers of horse and foot were already leuied at Ferrara, and that the Romans had offered to aide the Pope in that warre with men and money, they likewise for their parts raised forces, fortifying their townes with men and necessary munition, because they would not be taken vnprouided, so that there was great likelihood of a bloudy warre: But our good God, who with an eye of pitty lookes vpon his children, and takes no pleasure to see their bloud spilt, raised vp a Mediator, by whose meanes this schisme and controuersie betwixt Christians was appeased.
It was Henry the fourth French King, who to preuent the danger and skandallThe French King mediates peace betwixt the Pope and Uenetians. which might arise by this warre, did speedily send the Cardinall Ioyeuse to the  Pope and Venetians, from him and in his name to mediate peace betwixt them; which had good successe. For Cardinall Ioyeuse being in hast dispatched from France with instructions from the King, necessary for his negociation, arriued at Rome on a Thursday night the three and twentith of March 1607. and the same euening conferred with the Cardinals and French Ambassador about propounding this businesse to the Pope, the next day after dinner, himselfe and the Ambassador went to see his Holinesse, vnto whom the Cardinall did at large reueale the cause of his comming: But because the Pope seemed inexorable to any entreaty of agreement with the Venetians, till the Clergy and Iesuits were first restored to their Churches and Colledge (the Venetians still oppugning the Iesuits) the Cardinal at this first audience would not altogether put him out of hope of their restitution, but only told him that he did not despaire of reconciling the Iesuits to the Venetians, hauing bethought himselfe of a fit meanes by which hee hoped if his Holinesse would make vse thereof to preuaile, which the next day he promised to propound.
The Pope, desirous to know his deuise, did early the next day send for them, and then the Cardinall Ioyeuse told him, that to hope by any expresse treaty to obtaine of the Venetian Senate the restauration of the Fathers Iesuits, were but to lose time, and to no purpose, but if his Holinesse would giue him ample commission and authority to reuoke the censures, and with it send him to Venice; he shewing  this commission to the Senate, and saying vnto them, ^oe, I haue here power and authority to take away the interdiction, but vpon this condition, that you restore the Iesuits, happily the sight thereof will make some impression in them.
The Pope made shew that hee neither would nor could approoue this motion, saying, that he had engaged his promise not to abandon the Iesuits, who had beene expulsed for fauoring his interdiction, vnto whom hee had giuen his word neuer to be reconciled to the Venetians till they were restored, and after sundry other allegations this second conference was to no purpose, euery man perceiuing by his Holinesse countenance that he was much perplexed.
The French Cardinalls and other of the Kings seruants, meeting to consult  vpon some meanes to remooue these difficulties, entreated the Cardinall Perron to goe the next day after dinner to get expresse audience of the Pope, and if it were possible, to induct him, to grant certaine points for the furtherance of the businesse.
Cardinall Perron at their intreaty, vndertooke the matter, and for a while disputedCardin^ll Perron (...) with the Pope. with his Holinesse about the restauration of the Iesuits, shewing him the danger wherevnto he exposed the Church and Christian Religion for one particular order, whose restoring was to be hoped for, though for a time deferred: he told him that his Holinesse should first re-establish his owne authority in Venice, and that once done, there was no doubt but that the Iesuits would ere long bee restored; and after many other important reasons, he at last obtained of his Holinesse, that seeing for that present he could not preuaile in the Iesuits behalfe, hee should let it passe and insert some clause in the Articles, whereby it might appeare to the world that he had not neglected their restauration.
Then the Cardinall speaking of the Commission, the Pope would hardly bee drawne therevnto, supposing it to be dishonorable for the sea Apostolike, sayingThe Pope grants a commission to the Ca^dinal Ioy^use. that the re^ocation of the censures ought to bee done at Rome, and not sent to Venice; notwithstanding, the Cardinall alleadging diuers reasons to the contrary, the Pope at last consented to giue the Cardinall Ioyeuse a commission to (...) the censures, which he should carry with him to Venice, but on this condition, to do his best for the restauration of the Iesuits, before he disanulled the interdiction. Hee did also (though with some difficulty) induce his Holinesse to bee pleased* that the French Ambassador resident at Rome, and not he which lay at Venice should in the French King and Venetian Signories name craue of him  the reuocation of the censures in writing, for the Pope told him that the Spanish Ambassador resident at Venice, had craued it in the name of his Master and the Signory.
In a word, his Holinesse granted all his demands, onely he seemed vnwilling to declare his intent to the Consistory, saying he supposed that he ought not to doe it publikely, because he had not yet acquainted the Cardinals therewith, neuerthelesse hee would resolue vpon it, and the next day in the consistory would impart it to some particular Cardinals, and the same after-noone, call them one after an other into his chamber to take their vowes in secret.
According to his resolution his Holinesse hauing in the consistory declared his  intention to some particular Cardinals, he did the same after*noone call the rest into his chamber, secretly to take their vowes, and in that businesse spent the week. The Spaniards being iealous and malcontent that they were not imployed in that negociation, and desirous to frustrate the matter, divulged certaine rumors, contrary to the Popes will and meaning, and among others a cunning letter written from Venice by D. Francesco de Castro, by which he certified the Pope, that if hee stood fast for the restoring of the Iesuits, he should obtaine it, and that the Venetians determined to make protestation, by surrending the prisoners, contrary to that which had beene concluded, and which his Holinesse had promised to himselfe. These false rumors did somewhat trouble the Pope who therevpon made The Commission is giuen to Cardinal Ioy^use to reuoke the censures at Venice. some difficulty to proceed any fa^ther; but Cardinall Perron soliciting and assuring him of the contrary, hee deliuered (according to his former resolution) the commission to Cardinall Ioyeuse willing him to make hast to Venice.
The Spaniards being not able to crosse this resolution, made sute to haue Cardinall Zapala to bee ioyned in commission with Cardinall Ioyeuse, but their labor was lost; and yet in other solemnities Zapala and the Spanish Ambassador had in apparence some e^uality which the French Kings Ministers, because in their Kings name they were sureties for the Venetian Signory, as were Cardinal Ioyeuse and the French Ambassador for the Christian King: yet the world accounted it but a vai^e and idle fable, for they had no such authority from the Signory of  Venice, as had the French, who executed their commission to their Kings great fame and glory.
Cardinall Ioyeuse, together with the (...), receiued from his Holinesse the conditions on which the censures were to be reuoked, being in number sixe,

the effect whereof is thus: That the two Church men prisoners, namely the Abbot(...) Articles on which the i^terdiction was reuok^d. of Nerueze, and the Channon of Vincenza, shall bee freely giuen to the Pope: That his Holinesse shall reuoke his censures, making a declaration thereof to the Colledge: That the Venetian Signory shall within a while after send an Ambassage to the Pope: That the Duke by a declaration shall certifie the Clergy of his State, that the first declaration is reuoked: That the three Decrees mentioned in the Popes interdiction, and other lawes of the Signory shall continue in their full force and power, with this prouiso, that the Senate shall promise the French and Catholike Kings not to execute them before the businesse be fully ended betwixt  his Holinesse and the State of Venice, hauing first better and more amply informed the Pope of the iustice and equity of those lawes: And lastly that all Churchmen and Religious orders which are banished and expulsed from Venice, or the iurisdiction thereof, by reason of these troubles, may returne home to their houses and couents. But concerning the returne of the Iesuits, his Holinesse is content to deferre it, till an Ambassador from the Signory haue treated particularly with him concerning that point, certifying him that their expulsion proceeds from certaine causes and reasons which haue no community with the interdiction, and if it shall be found otherwise, then as easily to admit the restauration of the Iesuits, as that of other Clergy men.
Now Cardinall Ioyeuse departed from Rome with commission and Articles,The Cardinals reception at Uenice. and arriued at Venice, where hee was honorably receiued and entertained, many Senators going to meet him in the Bucentaure: Then the next day, beeing the twentith of Aprill, one of the States Secretaries, accompanied with the captaineAfter what manner the prisoners were deliuered. and other officers of the prison, and for greater solemnity, with a publike Notary, brought the two prisoners to the house of the Sieur de Fresne, Ambassador to the French King, and deliuered them to him, as granted to the Pope at the intreaty of the King his Master, without preiudice to the States iurisdiction in such like cases, and the French Ambassador did presently consigne them into the hands of the Cardinall Ioyeuse who was in the same house, in the presence of the Secretary, with these words, These are the prisoners which the Signory hath granted to his Holinesse, not adding at whose entreaty, and so the Cardinall receiued them as the Popes prisoners; wherevnto the Secretary at that time made no reply: In this manner by this omission on the one part, and silence on the other, it seemeth that some doubt, not well vnderstood, remayned betwixt the Pope and Signory, which neuerthelesse holds it honor preserued by the forme of the consignation inregestred by a publike Notary: and the Cardinall supposeth that the Pope ought to rest satisfied with the words of the Sieur de Fresne, or rather with his casuall or voluntary omission.
Then the next morning, which was the day appointed by the Senate, the CardinallThe manner of (...) the censures. comming to the Colledge, after some circumstances of the Popes fatherly  goodnesse, did assure them that the censures were reuoked, and hauing giuen them his blessing went to celebrate masse in the Patriarkes Church.
The Dukes first declaration was likewise reuoked in this manner. Leonardo Donato by the grace of God Duke of Venice etc. To the reuerend Patriarkes Archbishops,The Duke reuok^th his first declaration. and Bishops of our State and iurisdiction of Venice, and to the Vickars, Abbots, Priors, Rectors of parrish Churches, and all other Ecclesiasticall Prelats, greeting. Seeing it hath pleased our good God to finde out a way whereby our holy Father Pope Paul the fifth hath beene daylie informed as well of our good meaning, as integrity of our actions and continuall honour and  reuerence which wee beare to the Sea of Rome, and thereby to take away all cause of strife, Wee, as wee haue euer desired and procured vnity, and good correspondence with the said Sea, of which wee are louing and obedient children, receiue likewise this contentation, to haue at last obtained the accomplishment of our holy desire.
Therefore we thought good by our declaration to aduertise you hereof, giuing you besides to vnderstand, that whatsoeuer did belong herevnto, hauing beene faithfully performed on both parts, and the censures and interdiction remoued; the protestation likewise, which we made against them, hath beene and is reuoked: we being desirous that herein, and in all other our actions, the piety and religion of our State may still more and more appeare, the which we will carefully obserue, as our Predeoessors haue euer done. Giuen in our Ducall pallace the one and twentith of Aprill 1607. signed Marco Ottobo^ Secretary.
The Duke hauing published this declaration, and by deliuery of the prisoners satisfied for his part the conditions mentioned in the accord, the Senate was perplex^,The Senats doubt. with a doubt of no meane consequence, which was, that the Pope for his part hauing made no mention at all concerning bookes and writings, published in behalfe of the said decrees, nor of the authors of the said bookes, which are two very important points, and which did wholly seeme to breake of this reconciliation, the State doubting that the Pope by this silence and omission had an intent to proceed afterwards against the Authors of the said bookes by the ordinary way of Ecclesiasticall iustice; and thinking it a matter against all reason to abandon those that had done them such good and faithfull seruice, after mature consultation, the Senate made a very notable and honorable decree that the Signory  should protect them against all men, and assigne them a perpetuall pention. In this manner, is the Commonwealth by Gods goodnesse, and reuocation of the censures, restored to her former ancient peace and glory.

The end of the fourth and last Booke of the seuenth Decade of the History of Uenice.


FINIS.

